The prologe of this reuelacion
The reuelacion that follows here in this book tretyth how a certain deuowt
person the wiche was a monk in the abbey of Euishamme was rapte in spirit by
the will of god and ladde by the hand of seint Nycholas the space of. ii. days
and. ii. nyghtes to see and know the peynys of purgatory and the iowys of
paradyse and in what state the sowlis ware that ware in purgatory and also in
paradyse. Sothly in both this placis he saw and knew many persons both men
and women the which he knew well before when they lyuyd in this world and
spoke with hem there mowthe to mowth in both the placys as he found hem as
hit folowth well aftir in this book. This reuelacion was not showed to him only
for him butte also for the confort and profetyng of all cristyn pepulle that
none man should dowte or mystruste of anothir life and world the which every
man and woman most go to and like as they deserve here in this world by here
living so there to be rewardyd. And as for the trowthe of this reuelacyon no
man another woman ought to dowte in any wise. For and a man well read and
vndirstonde the beginning with the ending he shall so largely see hit approuyd
in great myraclis by almighty god showed unto the same person that same time
that all resons and mocyons of infydelite the which risith often times of
ma^nis sensualite shall vtwardly be excludyd and quenchid and gretely shall
cause all christian pepulle that herith hit to dread god and love him and also
to preyse him in his werkys. For seche anothir reuela cion and so opyn y now
was never shewid in this land ne in no nothir that we read of

Here endyth this prologge
Here begin the chapitres of this reuelacyon
How this monk fyl in to a sore and greuys sekenes and gave him to confession
and prayur and compunccion of teeris Chapitur I How he lay also prostrate in
the chaptur house as thaugh he had been dedde i^ How the fegure of our lordys
cross that he worshipte was fond blody iii How he was come again to him
self iiii How he sought aftyr his staff and his shewys and how devoutly he
worshipte the cross v How he told to a brother that he louyd well a part of
seche things a^ he had seyne vi How he was desired of his brethren to ete
su^ what aftyr so long afaste vii How he told to ii of his confessors a part
of thoes things that he had seyne viii what was his peticion specially and
how a cer teyn person a^eryth to him ix How he was wantyd in his sleep to
worshi^e the cross of (...) lord (...) How the sa^ (...) bledd don to him at
the right side and at the right foot and of the. ii. lyghtys xi How he came
into the chaptur house and ^ke dyscyplynys and ^we he was rapte xii How he
felt him self here rapte first xiii How he folowd his leder sent Nicholas w^n
he was rapte x^ii How sent Nycholas brought him to the first place of
purgatory ^v Of the great diversity of peynys that he saw xvi Of the secunde
place of peynys i^ purgat^e x^i How sent Margaret ^lyuerde a soul of (...)
fulle woman from the deuyllys x^i Of a gol^ith that was sa^ yd by sent (...)
las (...) How this monk knew the^ (...) ^ent ny cholas was his le^r xx How
the same goldsmith told the monk in pur gatorie how he did suddenly and was
sauyd xxi How the goldsmith told the monk a reme^ agenste soden death xxii
How the sone of this goldsmith told the monk aftyr he was comme to him self
again that his fadir had apperid iii to his modyr aftyr his death xx^i Of the
third place of peynys i^ purgatory xxi^i Of the foul vice and sin of (...)
xx^ Of a doctor a law that was a (...) xx^i Of thoes persons that this monk
saw and spoke within the first place of peynys and first with a prior xxvii Of
an ancres that he saw and knew in the same place xxviii Of a certain bisshoppe
there also xxix Of a certain woman a pore ma^nys wife xxx Of relygyous men what
peynys they sofryd for diverse certain fawtys xxxi Of a certain knight that brake
a vow xxxii Of a nothir knight xxxiii Of thoes persons that he saw in the ^i
placys of peynys xxxiiij Of three bysshoppis that were there xxxv Of an
archbisshoppe of canturbery xxxvi A certain descripcion that the monk made of
diverse kyndys of synful people and of her peynys xxxvii Of poysynners that he
saw xxxviii Of vserers also xxxix Of fugytyuys of relygyon xl Of a certain king
of England xli Of a bsshoppe that was in peynys of purgatory and ette god
showed for him miracles in this world xlii Of a certain abbot xliii Of an
abbasse also xliiii Of two nonnys that were lep^ xlv Of a knight that offendyd
in symo^ye xlvi Of a monk a sextene xlvii Of a clerk that leuyd boly ly^
xlviii Of paradyse and of the multitude of pepulle that he fownde there xlix
How he saw a certain abboth there l Of a certain Priour that lyuyd deuoutely
and did holylye li Of a certain young monk of his lii Of a certain worshipful
priste liii How ow^e lordys passion was representyd among the holy sowlys
that ware in paradyse liiii Of the entryng at the gate of paradyse and of the
joy that apperyd wythinforthe lv How this monk came again throw the gate of
paradyse lvi Of the sweet melodye of bellys that he herd i^ pa radyse and how
he came to him self again lvii Approfe how this reuelacyon is of god and
most nedys be true for the great myraclys that god she wyd on him that same
time lviii
Expliciunt capitula
Here begynnyth a merua^lous reuelacion that was showed of almighty god by sent
Nycholas to a monk of E^yshamme in the days of king Rychard the first And the
year of our lord. M C^. Lxxxxvi Ca primum
Na Monasterye called Euyssham there was a cer ten young man turnyd with
feythfull devotion fro this worldys vanyte to the life of a Monk the which
abowte the beginning of his conversion fy^e in to a great and a gre^ys sekenes
and by the space of xv monthis was sore labouryd with great febulnes and
wekenes of body. Also his stoma ke abhortyde so greatly mete and drink that sum
time by the space of. ix. days or more he might rescey^e noothyng but a little
wanne watyr. And what sum e^yr thing of leche craft or fesyke any ma^ne dedde
^o him for his conforte or his amendyment no thing him helpyd but al turnyd
contrary. Therefore he lay* seek in his bed greatly destitute of bodily
strenght. so that he might not move him self fro one place to anothyr butte by
help of servants. Alsoo in three the last monethys of his sickness he was
more sorer diseasyd and feblyd thanne ever he was before. Nevertheless than
com myng on the feste of estur. suddenly he began sum what to amend in his
bodily myghtys and with his staff walked about the fermorye. Sothly on these
even of sherethursoaye in the which night the office and ^ernyce of our lord
thesu criste is tradycyon and passion was solenly song with great devotion
(...) went with his staff to the church with his brethere^ the which by
cause of seknesse rested him also with him in the fermorye where the covent
nygh^y service and lands offered up to owre lord And there by the respect of
heuynly grace so great compunccion and sweetness he resceyued that his holy
deno cyon excedyd mesure. wherefore he might not con teyne him fro weeping and
laudyng god fro myd night till sex of the belle in the morning. what for
remembryng with worship and joy the merceis of owre lord. the which he has
done for mankin de. And alsoo remembryng with sore weeping his offenses and
synnys done by fore time. and the hurt and the state of his present
imperfeccyon. And abowte sex of the belle in the morning he made to be called
to him ii of his brethren one aftyr anothyr. which hadd power to here
confessyons and give to penytentys absolucyon and to them both made purely and
holly as mekyll as he cowde his confession of al his sennys and of the leest
offense of his religyon or of the co^mawndementis of god and with great
contricio^ of heart and effusion of ^eris desired his absolucion and had hi^
Than on of hem askid him why he sorowde and wept so i^mode rately for all they
had went that he should feel him self sone to pass owte of this world Than
he seide he felt him self no thing so Sothly tha^ he toolde to his brother yt
diligently enquyryde this of him and seide Sir e* shall vndirstonde and know
that this last night whenne we were togedyr in chaptur house. y resceyuyd so
great swrtenesse of heart and gladness of soul. that onnethis y might hoolde
or bear my self. He asked also and hit we re by the relygion that the prio^rs
should gene that night to the brethren dyscyplynys in holy vesture and a^bys.
And whenne he herd him inquire this he had went that he had said hit of
great febulnesse of his hedde. or by alyenacion of his mind. the which
perauenture he had fall in by his infirmyte and inmoder^e weping or fasting
how be hit that he with him ^ ad marvelous wisda^ and discrecion all the time
of his sickness. wherefore he co^ mendyd him to our lord no thing else en
quyring of him and so went his weye The seek brother spendyd all that day in
landyng and presyng god And the next night following after he had^e slepte a
lityll while rose up of his bed And when the chaptur was ro^ge as the time
required to call the conent to mate^s. he went than to cherche as he did the
day before Sothely how he behauyd him then^e in the church. and when he went
thens hit shall be schewyd in his wordys foloyng

How he lay prostrate al his body in the chaptur how^ as he had be dedde Ca ii
oN the morrow next foloyng that is good fredaye whenne the co^ent rose to cum
to church to seye prime. as they ede before the chaptur house they saw the same
seek brother lie p^o strate and bare foot before the abbot is sete h^is face
was flate to the ground as thaugh he should by the ordyr ask mercy of every
presydent. Than the bre theren seeing this meruelyd and ra^ne thedir and willing
to take him up. they found him as a man lyfeles without any mocyon of any
membre of his body. Trewly his yes ware fall down deep into his h^ ed and tho
yes and nose of him ware blody or as a man had o^yr leyde hem with mekyl
blood. wherefore they seyde all that he was deed. His feet ware full coolde
but in the remuande of his body was found a lytyl warmenes No moving of his
pypys might be known long time And a^ the last onnethis bit was perseyuyd in
him a litill thynne breath and amonyng of his heart. Then they weshid his
h^edde breast. handys and feet with cold watyr And than first they saw al
his body a lityl to tremyl and quake. but a^oon he sesyd and was insensybulle
So long time they musyd and dowtyd what they might do to him. while they saw
him not verily dedde. nothyr any thing amendyng. At the last by conselle they
had him to his bed and there to be kept with great attendans of kepers

Of the blody figure of the cross Ca iii
tHe mean while the brehetren merueled and wondered on such a soden hap and
being of the seek brother and more they wo^ drid. how hit (...). and in what
wise without any help he ^yght come thedir to that place. wh^the (...) was
Sothely other things that now folo^ the which (...) tell of with o^e any
comp^rsone ben more to be dred feiy^ and worshipte than any thing above said.
They h^e (...) aftyr and that not with owte great me^elle. that the fegu^e of
owre lordys body (...) on a cross which figure and cross. erely is wonce full
deuowtly to be kyssyd^ and wors^ipte of the co^ent in remembra^^e of o^e lordys
passion was found fresh ^ledyng and new abowte the place of the g^ete wound
in the right side and alsoo at the right foot. Trewly (...) the se^tensse of
the ch^che. (...) let do^e the same cro^e to the grownd (...) so ^yl good f^
day they ^de left hit (...) the (...) ^ d the ^alle And for a more wondy^ the
staff and shew^ of the same (...) ware fondyn by the sa me pla^ So^ (...) a^
the brethren came to ge dyr into the (...) greatly a^onyd upon these things
that (...). and (...) takyn all that were the with great ^cion of heart ^ke
discyply ^ys of ^oddys and (...) ^ate in the chir^ seyden wepyngly the (...) o^
(...). for to ge te owre lordys mere^e. Trewely this (...) brother at ye day
which was good friday with the night folowi^g and the next day aftyr all
most till the son set. (...) in one state. Alsoo the (...) with ^trength of
handys opynde his mowth and (...) in hit ^stys of diverse spy^ys and (...) or
his releuyng. but anon after he went owte again. what sum ever was put
in to his mowthe as thaugh his throat had been stopped. Emplasters alsoo to
his breast and armies they ^on de but all was vain They prickyd with neldys
and scrapyd the solys of his fete. but no thing might be perceived in him of a
lyuys manne. save a lityll rednes of chekys and a litil warmenes of body. The
colowre of his face oftyn times was changed to ashis and again meruaylously
the colowre of his face was re^ ynyd and well showed Alsoo they made a great
horn to beblowyn there but no thing hit botyd

How he came ageyn to him self on estur even abowte complen time Ca iiii
Then on the morrow that is estur even and the same owre that the covent came
to gedyr to the collacion and to complenne the briys of his ye lyddys began
first a lytil to move and so they semyd as they had been sode in boylyng
watyr And at last there came don fro his yes on his chekys a yelowe humor
of watyr in manner of terys. Thanne they that were with him seeing this. called
anon for the brethe ren. supposyng that he should have sone passed fro this
world. They saw also a lytyl before this ty me his lyppys a lytyl to move with
his chekys com pressyd as he had resceyued or swelowde su^ sweet thing fallyn
in to his mowth. And after that a flowyng owte of terys as hit is said here
before. Alsoo he was seyn often and many diverse tymys sykyng allow in his breast
as a man slepyng had wept. And anon after as hit semyd he reuoluyd certain
wordys benethe in his throat butte he might not speak them owte save only in a
voice onethys audybille and no thing intelligibille. Sothely thanne his
spyrite began a little and a lytill to comme again and these wordys and
voice he first sownyd that might be vndyrstond. O sancta Maria O sancta Maria:
And again O my lady sancta Maria O my lady sancta Ma ria I shall seye tho
wordys as I herd them no thing addyng thereto O he seyde my lady Sancta
Maria. These words often tymys he rehearsed. For what sin he seyde lose y so
great joy. And again he seyde my Lady Sancta Maria. when shall I recouere so
great joy that y lose now. These things and many other often times he
rehearsed / yet as a man ware a sleep and his yes ever closyd / the which I
wot not of what great joy he sorowde and wept him self departed fro Sothely
aftyrward suddenly like as a man had awaked fro a great sleep. he lift up his
head and fulbitterly began to weep and with re^ nyng terys sorofully sobbyd as
weeping does and ioynyng his handys and fyngers to gedur reysid him self and
sat up Then he put down his head in his handys on his kneys And as he began
before full lamen tably to wayle and sorrow so sesyd not long time aftyr Thanne
one of his brethren that was with him asked what caused him so sore to weep
and how he felt him self. Than he restid a litil while and at the last
softely seyde to him well well and verily well y was hedir to / but now evil
and verily evil y am and feel my self And again more grettur he wept and
sorowd than he did be fore And by cause that hit is over long and also as
i^possible to remember al thing that he seyde tha^ and how mekil he wept we
leave noweand purpo se to draw shortly to gedir thoes thi^gys which we herd
him tell of in great contricion of heart and of mind aftyrward that he was
fully comme to him self again

How he sought after his showis and how reverently he worshipped the cross
lOthl^ among his lamentacions and sykynges that the had he asayde with great
strenght onys or twies or thries to opene his yes that were closid and at
last they opened Thanne he began with both his handys al abou te to secht
aftyr his staff that he left in the chirce And when hit kowd not be fownde
he said. Sechith here owre staff and take owr s^ys by the pillar and go we
again in to the fermorye A fermorye among religious men is called a place or
an house ordende to keep seek brethren Thanne ^hanne hit was seyde of some of
his brethren. behoolde brother now and see you in the fermorye and set in
your bed and lo yowre staff and showys been here ready. Thanne he said O how
came we hedyr and when. were not we right now in the church to gedyr at
matens. Thanne his brethren told him that he had be there now ii days and to
morrow will be estur day And when he herd this. more grettyr he began to
weep and seydr. O should we not brethren have worshypte on good freday owre
lordys cross. And yet we have not in comonne worshipte hit Then whenne he
herd of his brethren. that owre lordys cross was worshipte the day before.
and he might not be cause of sekenes. he seyde to hem. Aftyr that I came into
the church y felt no disese But y pray you that y may go to worshipe the
cross. Thanne there was brought to him a cross of seluyr the which reverently
he clyppyd to him. and with cossis and terys watryd the fete of the cross. and
unto the tedusnes of some stondyng by / he thankyd owr lord and redemer and the
fadyr and the holy gooste for innumerabulle benefetis. of the why che he
rehersyd money synglerly. For him self and universally for all holy church. and
also for all degreys and condycyons of all crystyn pepulle and more attente for
his enmyes. yef any there ware or for the enmyes of his frendys he made meruail
prayers and obsecracyons. And as y suppose xxx times or more he inclynde his
head done to the fete of the cross with terys and sobbyng that often times
his voice sesid of prayng Thoes wordys the which he made in his supplicacions
ware so ready and prompte and also repletyd with great reason and hyenesse of
wit that hit semyd rathir he read hem thanne seyde hem. Ho is sweet seeing
steryd money than that herd him to weping and devotion and ever while we
remember them causyn us to have a great inward cumpunctyon. and also love and
devotion to our lord to our brethren and to all men And of the great humylyte
and goodness of our redemer. he put between certain great thingis at every
synguler short prayer

How he told to one of his brethren that he louyd famylyarly such thingys as
he had seyn vi
tHe mean while as the time requyryd. hit range to the collacyon and the
brethren the which had brought to him the cross went thense And then he
seyde. Now y know verily that this is the holy time of estur. And for what
cause he seyde so. hit shall be declared aftyrward. Trewely than bode with him a
certain brother that louyd him famyliarly in holy purpose of relygyon and mouyd
him sum what by a wise and a meke instans et being hold in a certain stupour
and wo^dyr of mind of such things that he had seyne. both of tho things
the which befyll him before ye he was rapte / and of tho things that he had
seyn spiritually in anothir world in all placis And as y have seyde or may sey.
synglerly and perticula^y he told and remembrid money things the which the
fors^ id brother that herd him bare hem al in his herre. telling him also of
too things that he knew opyniy betyd him And so aftirward by leyser and great
dyly gens lernyd and knew an ordir of every thing synglerly. more opynner and
fullyor than he knew afo re. Nevertheless as for all thing that he saw in so
long space that is to seye ii days and ii nightys he would not tell to no
man. And among in his tellyng he made me^cyon of some sisyons but anon as he
had begone. sesid the process of them And no their et for any prayur might be
inducyd to tell any more there of But nethir we at this time be suffi cient to
tell al things the which sothely we knew by his own seeing that he had
told before to afew persons of witness on whois deuocyons he had taken a
specyalle trust Nethir in any wise we may or can reuele and show so opynly
the proprite of his sisio^s nether by writing nether by telling as he could and
did Also among other things he was askid and he hoped to escape his seknes
or should leave any leng^ in this bodily life And then he seide I shall leave lo^
g ynow and of my seknes y am fully recoueryd

How he was desired of his brethren to take su^ mete after so long afaste Ca
vii
tHan after this at even he was greatly desired to take some mete after so long
a fast And than he seyde Settith before ^s the bred and a litil honey that was
left the tothir time And when hit was so done with a full litil refeccion
there of he bra ke his fast Ande so he bode waking in prayor and terys til the
bower of night that they range to matens Sothely when the brethren rose to
matens he went with hem and as he had rose with our lord the which sum time
that same bower rose fro death unto life And so came to church. not withowte
joyful merueling of them that saw him and without sustentation or help of any
thing entrid into the o^re and so he did not a xi monthis before. And their in
great devotion and terys bode and ^ tynewid til matens was done and till the
re^urreccion of our lord the whi che yearly in the same church is wont to be
shewid vy sybly and how the angel apperid and spoke to the women at the
sep^ture of the victoriose isurreccion of there king and also that they should
tell to his disciplys his glorious resurreccion and at the last til our lord a
peryd to his welbelouyd mary mawdelen and named her maria in the figure of a
gardner and til the messys ware done and had resceyuid the holy comyning of
christian men

How he told to ii of his confessorys a part of such things as he had seyne
Ca viii
after this now that he had resceyued our lordys precious body joyful and
light he was and brought of his brethren i^to the colloke the which is a place
where they may speak to geder and there copynily they came abowte him desiring
him to tell hem of sec^e things as befylle him and as he had seyn forther
goostly edifiyng and comfort For all they vndyrstode that herd his wordys the
day before when he was fully cumme to him self and saw his contynuall weping
that by money things great thingis and meruelus had be shewde him. And when
they with great instans askid him. he dissymylyd all thing a lytyl while At
the last unto his ii confesso rys to whom he was confessed on shrethursoay as
hit is said before to hem both separatly. he told thees things the which here
after be digestyd and wre ten with great weping and syking the which sum time
ses^ d him of his telling And sum things he told to hem both and sum things
only unto the thoon / and sum other: only to the tothir and that not without a
consyderacion of a certain meke and a good auisement And this he gone to tell as
hit now folowethe

what was his peticion specially and how a certain person apperyd to him in his
sleep Ca ix
sOthely he seyde when y was laborid as ye saw me with greuys and long
wekenes of body and evermore with heite and soul y blessed our lord and
thankid him that he would white safe to chaste me onworthy in a fadyrly
chastme^t And than al hope put aside as for any recoueryng of bo^ly health y
began thaugh hit were slowly nevertheless y disposed me as y cowde and might to
make me ready. how y might the sandyr and lygh ter escape the peyngs and sorows
of the world that is to cu^me and how y might find the rest of everlasting
life when y should be callid out of my body. And when as y reme^ brid these
things after my po were besely. than after a litil while past a thought fyl to
my mind that y should pray our lord god that he would white safe to reuele
and sh^we to me in some manner of wise. the state of the world that i^ to come
and the ^icion of the soulys that been past her bodies after this life and
thanne this opynly known y might the bettyr vndirstonde what within short
space as y supposyd were to be dred. and what y might hope after when y should
pass fro this world to that world and so by this to stabylle my self in the
dread and love of god as long as I should leave in this dowtefulle life. And so
on a certain night in the beginning of lent that is last past. apperyd to me
in my sleep a certain worshipful person sto^dyng by me and seeing to me. O sone
he seyde great is thy deuocyo^ in praying and mekyl is thy perseueres wherefore
thy contynual prayer and meke demening may not be onspedeful before the presens
and goodness of god Nevertheless fro hens forth be of good con forte and ^tynew
devoutly in prayur and for more strenght seche the help of prayers of some
religions p^ons. and of you so do doutles you shalt know yt sone you shalt
opteyne and get thy peticion Sothely than he named to me some persons and the
namys of there offices seeing this / Know well that mekil yt will the profete.
of you may have the prayers of such persons. the which the goodness of god is
wont right gladly to here. Send also to the monastery of nonnys here by. that
you knowyst well and named her / besechyng hem to pray for the. Me kyl god is
pleasid in her holy purpose and laudable conversation. wherefore his goodness
greatly fauerth their wills and desires And when this was said to me. both the
sleep that y was in and the person that spoke to me went away. Than suddenly y
wakyd and steadfastly kept in mind this vysyon. and as soon as y might y
desired the same persons to pray for me / not uttering to them the cause
wherefore they should pray for me Than vi wekis pass. i^ the night that was
next before sherethursday as e can remember. when y had taken of you and of
your fellow discyplynys in the chaptur hows. that is to seye vi of you and vi
of him for that day. and v other for the sexte feriis of lent paste. fro the
which y was compellyd that time to absteyne by cause of sekenes so great
abundans of grace of terys and sweetness of heart / y felt me repletyd there
in the resceyuyng of tho discyplynys that y can not show it in telling by no
wordys. wherefore the next day af ter hit was to me full sweet often times to
weep. And than the next night after great sykynges being than the hour to rise
to matens y fylle in to a plesaunt sleep

How he was waried in his sleep to worshipe the cross of our lord Ca x.
sOthely than as y was a sleep y perceived a voice. but y wist not fro whens
her came. seeing to me in this wise. Arise up and go i^ to the chapel. and
to the awter that to dedifyed and halowd in the worschipe of seynte laurence
and of all martyrs. And there behynd that awter you shalt find a cross
and an image of thy redemer affixed to the same cross. redemyng the world by
his death. And that same cross. meke ly and deuowtly go to and kys in
remembrance of thy sauyur and offir to him with meke heart. a sacrifice of
prayers knowing well. hit to be accept of god. and to the an holsum devotion.
in the whi che you shalt full abundantly delight. Than after this y wakyd and
with the brethren y came to the church to here matens And when the brethren
had begu^ne matens y met with a senyor that e know well in the church porch
and was on of him that y to ke disciplinis in the night before Than when y saw
him y made a sign to him. to discyplyne me in ly ke wise again as he did
before. And so lightely we went both to gedyr into the chaptur house and with
one assent gladly we came again And there also met with us another senyor in
the same place where y met the first. to whom y made alsoo a sign for to
have a disciplyne. And he beckid with his hand that y should tarry a lityl
while. Thanne left y my brethren / that y came with to church / the which
were sekelew sittyng a part. and alone y went forth to the awter that was
notyd to me in my sleep And whenne y was nygh the awter y put of my showys and
knelyd on my kneys upon the pament and often tymys inclyned my heed done to the
grownd And so went behind the awter to seche the cross that y herd of before
Trewly y knew not before in any wise by any mannys telling that any cross was
let done there Nevertheless y found hit as hit was told me before And anon y
was re soluyd al into terys of devotion and lyyng prostrate al my body full
denowtly y worshipte that holy cross seeing many devout prayers And than after
y came knelyng on my kneys to the same cross and aftyr said lengur devout
supplicacions and thankynges to god / kyssing often times the fete of the
crucyfyxe / and besily with the terys of my nyes watrid hem

How he saw the right side of the crucifixe bledyng don to him and the right
foot also and of the. ii. lightys that apperid there xi
tHe mean while as y lift up my nyes that were sore of weping to the face of
the cruci fyxe y felt some dropys falling don to me I put there to my
fyngerys and y we^e perceived and knew by the rednes that hit was blood Also y
behylde the right side of the image of our lordis body and hit wellid out of
blood as a mannys flesh is wont to blede. whenne hit is cuppid True ly the
place that y saw this in was derke. for hit was behind the auter about
mydnighte. But I saw there ii lyghtis shynyng at both the sides of the
cross. as hit had be ii tapers well brenning I lokyd fro whens that light
should cumme and y cowde see no place fro whens hit came. Trewly than y took in
my hopynne hand: y wot nere how money dropis of that precious blood and there
with diligently y anoyntid my nyes. my neris and my nose thrillys And at the
last y put one drope of yt blessed blood in to my lippys and of the great
desire and devotion of mine heart. y s^ elowd hit done And whether y offendyd
god in that point or no y wot nere The re^ nand there of y hild in my hand
purposyng to have kept hit. Also y behilde and saw the right foot of the same
crucifiye blood Sothely isterday when y was restoryd to my self again and
found no thing of that precious blood in my handys. sore and greatly y sorowde
and eu shall for the loss of so great and precious tresowre

How he came in to the chaptur house and took discyplynys and how he was there
rauesht Ca xii
fOrthermore to satisfye you y shall now tell of other things. The. ii.
lyghtes that y saw shynyng abowte the crucyfyxe a fore seyde. suddenly paste
thens. to the sowthe part of the awter. Thanne y that was knelyng in the north
side of the auter: at the right side of the crucyfyxe seeing hit paste and go^
to the the other side folowde after hopyng that y should see there sum spiritualle
thing. And when y came thedir y herd the sown of a voice behind me of the
same old fadyr that y met with last before in the chirch porch of whom y
desired to be discyplynede and he bade me tarry a litil while Than left y all
that y saw there and y not how. nether in what wise anoon y came in to the
chaptur house And when y had said my confiteor as the use is. and he had prayde
for me and assoyled me with this beneson. In nomine patris and filii and
spiritus sancti amen. he gave me disciplynys vi. times as he did before Often
times y desired him that y might rehearse my confession and to take dyscyplynys
of him. for at every stroke that he gave me in the stydde of sorrow and pain.
they were turnid to me. an inestymable and incredibulle swetenes of joyful
conforte. But he would give me no more and so y rose up. Sothely thanne he
went in his albys and sat done in the abbotis sete. that was there in the
chaptur hows: And thanne y came and lay prostate before him. askyng my beny and
rehersyde again my Confiteor etc. and he seyde over me Misereatur tui
omnipotens deus etc. and so assoyled me again with this blessyng In nomine
patris and filii and spiritus sancti And whenne he had answarde Amen Anoon there
came to me a certain worshipful fadyr a senyor that had a face and a chere as
an angelle. c^ othid in white brightyr and whittir thanne the snow: The here
of his head (...) was whore and his stature of medy heyth. He to ke me up and
seyde allonly to me these wordys. Follow you me. Trewly than he hylde me by the
right hand so sewerly as softly and so clippid my hand in his

How he felt him self here first rapte Ca xiii
hEre y felt my self first tapte in spyryte. Than his brother that was his
confessor to whom he told all these things before seyde asked him and seyde
And trowiste et brother that y or the the other senyor gave discyplynis yt night
as thou seyste. or went in to the chaptur house in all bys Than he wondrede at
his asking and seyde. Know not e that this is trowth that y have to you here
seyde Than seyde his confessor again. in no wise there was no seche things
done of us nether might be done. For the ordyr will not that we should have gone
that time of the night in to the chaptur house to give discyplynys Than he said
to him: Dowtheles y had went hither to. that tho discyply nys and other things
had be done of you to me Fulwele y know withowtyn dowte. that y resceyued
thoes dyscyplynys above rehersyd in the chaptur house: of men that showed yo^
persons and liknes wakyngly and bodily and with hole mind for y fell te and
herd the strokys of hem and also y well vndyr stood and dyscernyd the voice of
them that prayde for ^e and assoyled me: as y should have know of you both
Trewly the first night when y went owte of the chaptur hows y thought to have
byddyn there in the same place till the morning in the great gladness of heart and
devotion that y had resceyued there but y was sum what troubulde and disesyd by
the noy se of the covent when they went out of the church af ter matens And
lest y should have been reprouyd of psumpcion / of y had taride there al night y
went with our brethren home to our bed And when^e y went out of the
chaptur hows y met with brother marten And that night bode y waking in great
lightness of soul / till matens of the next night Thanne the next night after
when y was at matens about the beginning of the third ^octurne y was callid
fro the awter where as y was praying with a sown made like as a man had
smytte the stony pament with his foot and so went in to the chaptur ^owse.
Alsoo hit was the same owre / in the which the last night. at the last time
we went thedyr for the same cause. And all other things like as y have told
you befylle me. This only y can not remember in any wise how y came at the
last time fro the chapel that y was inn to the chaptur hows. For withowte a
staff y might not go thedyr: and abowte the sacrarye of the same au ter y
know well y left my self And how y paste over the way that lyth between the
chaptur hows* and the place that y was in. and also the lettynges of gricis and
other obstaclis iiii or v y can not remember For when y was cumme to my self
again. (...) things the which y had experiens of bodily about the awter and
the cross. ware so fressh in my mine de that y wend y had be found rather
there than in the chaptur house And this he told of tho thingis above rehersid
Adigression

Now as touching tho personsof whom he was brought in to the chaptur house and
to whom he said isconfiteor the which prayde for him assoylyd him and gave
him also disciplynys i^ the liknes of his own brethren and he knew no nothir
wise that time but they had be his brethren. they were douteles holy angellys
that so apperyd and did to him by the will of god And as towching that
worshipful old fadyr whois face was like an angel and his clothing whittir
than the snow. that took him by the hand when he lay prostrate in the chaptur
house and seyde to him follow thou me: was the holy and blessid bishop sent
Nicholas whom specially he louid and worshipte daily as hit shall be
aftirward more opynnor declarid And now after this adigression go we again to
the narracion

How this monk was rapte and foloude his lede^ sent Nicholas Ca xiiij
gladly than seide this monk went y with that worshipful old fader the
which by ^ma^dement of moth and leding of hand had take me up to be a fellow
with him of his wey. and all the while that y lay destitute of my bodily wittis.
we went both to geder hand in hand Sothly this was fro mydnight of
sherethursday the which endith in the morning of good fredaye i^ which time y
was rauyshte in spirit as y lay in the chaptur hows till the euetyde of
saturday foloyng: in the which eve tide as e saw y was put out fro that
secret rest and spiritualle sightis that y had before to this opyn and
worldly ^uersacion

How sent Nicholas brought this monk to the first place of peynes Ca xv
Then went we estewarde by a pleyn weye in a right path til we came to a
certain regy on. that w^ full wide and broad and over horabulle and gastfull in
sight. foul and myry of thick cley Trewly there we saw an infenyte nom bre
of men and w^men that no man might nombre put forth to the gretnes of diverse
and inenarrabulle peynes There was a company innumerabulle of men and women of
every condition of every pro fession and of every ordyr There were the doers of
al synnys ordente to diverse kinds of peynes after the diversity of sins and
qualite of persons I herd and saw by the opyn and broad space of that filde
who is endys no ye might see. the wrechid companyes of men and women over
wrechidful bounden to gedyr flockemel. in there equalyte of synnys and in
likeness of profession equaly to soffyr and like wise to cry in here great
and greuys peynes And who sum ever y saw there to be made ready in that
peynefull place to heuyn ward opynly y knew and vndy^stode. for what sins
they were ponysht and the kind of the sin and the mesure and qualite of there
satisfaccion. the which they deseruyd owther by contricion and cofession of
her offensis* or by the remediis and helpinges of other benefetis done for hem
Trewly al tho that y saw put there s^m what y knew hem confortyd for the hope
of everlasting bliss the which they hopid sum time to cu^ to And some y saw
patiently sofyrre right great peynes and for the good w^rkys the which they
had done of there ^sciens. that was reseruyd and put up i^ mede for them and
also for the great trust that they had to have eulasting bliss evermore
countid lyghly i^ her soul the horrabulle peynes that they bare Treuly they
wept and sorowde and cried out / for grefe of pei nys and among this as they
went forth farthir evermore her peynys were lessid and to hem more esyur Also y
behilde money of them that suddenly scapyd out of the place that they were
torment in and sander hastid hem self thanne other. to go the weye that was
before hem. But anon fro benethe like as the grownde had be broken. there
brake up a flame of fire that inuoluyde hem and the deuyls yt met with hem.
sore beat hem with scorgis and forkis and other diverse kinds of tormentyng*
and so again returned upon hem all her wodenesse. Nevertheless they being so
be^yn and brokyn and inwardly br^it et* they scapyd again and in like
condition as her is said before. the ferther they went / the lessur was there
peynys and the esyur Sothely in this pas sage some did gretely profet. some but
lytyl and some al most never a dele. To some there going was no profetyng but a
myserabulle failing / for they went fro full cruel peynes to wers. And each of
them aftyr there old merytys and de^uynges. owthir were bolpe in her weye or
lettyd or else releuyd and that was by the present benefetys done and showed for
hem of their frendys in this world. Sothely thoes things the which y
conseyued in mind. or was enfourmed and taught by comyning and spekyng with
some of them there. anon aftyr y will opynly show hem as hit is benethe i^
this present wry ting declared

Of the great diuersitees of peynes Ca xvi
Nfynyte kinds and diuersytees of peynys where there that y saw Some of hem
were rostyd at the fire Some were fried in a pa^ne / Some were al to rasyd with
fyry naylys unto the bonys and to the lowsing of her ioyntys Some were soden in
bathis of pyche and brymstonne with an horabul ste^ che and other thingis
melted by heete as led brass and other diverse metellys And some were g^awyn
with the venummys teth of wondyrfull wormys. Some also were cast done thick
on arowe and smy^ throw. with sharp stakys and palys who is endys (...) all
fyrye And while some were (...) on galows. odyr were al^o drawyn with hokys and
some were beryn sore with scurgys: and so in hard example they were al to
toryn. Trewly of tho persons money were bisshoppis and abbotys and other were of
other dignitees. Sothely some floweyd in prosperity in the spyrytualte. Some in
the temporalte and some in relygyon: ^he which were seyn ponisht in dowbulle
sorrow above other persons ^ory saw them that were clerkys / Monkys / Noonys /
lay men and lay women so mekyl less ordende and put to peynys how mekyl the
less they had before of worl dely dygnyte and prosperyte. In trowthe y saw
hem grenyd in a more specyal bittirnesse of peynys above other. the which y
knew in my time were Iu gys and Prelatys of other. And by cause hit is over
long to tell singlerly of every person: what they soffryd and wherefore they
soffryd* some thyn ges y will gedur to gedur. of some certain persons what
they sofryd before there death and after there death. For that was opyn to me of
every person Neuerthe less there is no mannys tongue that may suffycyent ly
tell the lyghtys peynys of that place nethyr by es tymacyon conceue him in
mind Also the dyuersyte and multyplycyte of peynys. to the which they be
cast vndyr / ever among fro one to a another verily y knowledge no man may
noumbre. I take god to witness. that and there were any man. the whi che had
done to me: or to my frendys all the hur tys and iniuriis. that may be done of
any man in greatly abas^ ^r ynwardly supposyng verily (...) thou hadyste ^e
dampde. and by cause also thou hadyste no help ne remedy by fore they death of
the holy* ^mentys of the church. Sothly by cause y fy^ ^thyr wise than (...)
^de y am glade (...) would here ^ow ^n what wise (...) so and scapydyste ^ernal
damnaycio^ (...). ^ladly what sum ever thou desire (...) the tell

(...) goldsmyth told the ^o^ke in pu^ (...) ^ dyed suddenly (...) sa^ yd (...)

(...) ^ syd me in my (...) ^orlde as the (...) gys (...) opyn (...) ^eghte.
Also y contynwyde (...) the foul ^e of dronkynnes. un to my last (...) ^f an
evil custom. Nevertheless hit (...) no^ (...) greatly hit dysplesyd ^e (...) y
kowde (...) ^eue that (...) times y rose against my self se^ ^ng ^e and cast
awey the foul vy^ (...) But ano^ ^ ^dryn ke af^ ^ cus^ome. wherb^ was ^er ^me.
and dr^ again bo^ (...) and custom of the same sin. that was (...) kine
own omne^abulle taking and appetite (...) among this this life or else he
had flayne us y sey and y ^ ad so great an enmy put into peynys that y saw
there to be torment long time a thousand times and hit were possybylle y would
sofyr temporal death for his delyuerans. For all thing there ben so peynfull of
sorrow and anguy^she byttyrnes and wrechydnes that they excede mesure and mod.
let us now that be it in this world alive see and considere by this how gre
tely we ought to give us in chaystyng our wekyd condycyons and to amend our
leuyng and also how mekyl we schulde labur to excercyse us to kep^ the co^
mawndementys of god and to do good werkys by the which and the mercy of god we
may deser ue to be delyuerd before of so great euyllys. And also that owre dear
frendys as fadyr and mother sys tyr an^ brother and othyr that were sum time owre
lovers there sore ponysht for her offenses might be delyuerd the sooner fro thens
by good dedys and werkys of mercy and pety deuowtly done of us for there
redemption and helpyng And before ere y ma ke any special mention by writing of
the fore peynys and tormentys of sum persons that y fownde and knew there and
they also knew me y will schort ly write in here the placys of peynys that y
beheld as y went abowte with heavy compassion aftyr we were paste the first
peynful place and region Sothly to owre semyng the length of this first place
afo re seyde was on goyngable. but we that is to seye my leder and y went on
the to side ageynste hit as (...) did othyr peynful ^oostys of tormentys but
among them we came not how be hit as hit semyd to me we might have done
wythowt any fere or hurt or harm

Of the secunde place of purgatory Ca xii
Therefore after that we were paste the first place of purgatory we came to
the second place of purgatory and tormentys in the which was an hye hylle
up al most to the clowdys and was divided fro the forseyde first place of
purga torye. And then lyghtely and swyftely we went on this same hye-hylle.
And there was vndyr the farthyr side of this hell a full deep valeye and a
derke. set with bocis and brackys on every side han gyng owte who is lenthe no
man might see. And in the lower part of the seyde valeye was a full bro de
ponde of borrabull blake watyr. And owte of that same foul ponde bysyly brake
a myste of an indycybylle stenche. Trewely the toon side of that same hye hylle
which hangyd toward the ponde cast out fro him an horrabulle brennyng fire
up on to the heuyn. And alsoo on tothyr side of the forseyde her hylle was so
great and inestymable co^lde that is to seye of snow and Hayle with many other
cruel stormys that me thowghte and semyd that y saw no thing so peynefull and
cruel as yt cold was The lenthe of that valey before (...) by the mercy of god
the which will that no man perysh in my most blessed lord sent Nycholas who
me now ye follow graciusly and presently. and whoys pareshon also y was. seche
devotion y had to him. that for any occasion y never left but what sum ever y
might do to his worschippe y did hit full devoutly And how mekyl every gave me
toward even to dronkynnes y vsyd ever more to be at matens. for anon as they
ran(...)ulde be there. and (...) times before the parysh (...) Also y fown^
contynwaly a lamp of (...) cost. in sent (...) chapelle And thoo (...) that
were nece^ ornamentys of all the church. as in light is or any othyr thyngys.
y would dylygently order therefore as y had be his famylyar seruante and
mawncypyll(...) (...) where y had not sufficy^ mine own goodys to do hit y would
move (...) ^f the parysh to help a^ hit semyd nedefulle (...) the yftys that
men or women gave. y took (...). and to be honable B^. full treuly y spend
(...) that is at cristynmas (...) me of al my synnys (...) as y bowde to owre
parysh pryste. taking (...) or hem and in ^arte y did fulfille hem dilligent
(...) keep tho thingys that (...) ^ maundyd o^ (...) gostely fathyr. for oftyn
^ymes y left sum thy (...) that y schulde have do and thoo thingys that y sc^
(...) have beware of. And of the ^mawndement of (...) gostely fadyr y fastyd
the days of aduent as (...) the lent sesyne To seyde and both the sydys of
the hylle the which had in hem that horabulle fire and coold was so full of
sowlys. as hynes swarmyn full of bees To the which sowlys this was a comynne
and a generalle tormente that now they were drownde in the forseyde ponde and
fro thens takyn up and cast in to fiere. and so at the last they ware bore
up an ^y by the great vyolente flamys of fire as sparclys been of a brennyng
fornece. and so let down on the torher side of the hylle to the horrabulle
coolde of snow hayle and sharpness of stormys and af terward cast down
hedlonge in to the greuys sten che of the ponde above seyde and again takyn up
and cast in to the brennyng fire. And some of hem were lengur ponysht in fire
then other and some in coolde And some ware taryde lengur in the greuys
stenche of the ponde. than other. And some y saw ware bound and compressid in
the myddys of flamys of fire that marvelous hit is to speak: and as grapys be
compressy d in a pressure True ly the condition of all that ware there torment
and peyn de in that secunde place was this. All the space of the ponde above
seyde. they were compellyd to go throw. fro the beginning to the endyng. for
to fulfylle her purgacion. Nevertheless full great and monyfold was the
distinccyon and dyuersyte of her peynys and tormentys. For some had lighter
ponyshment than some. and some was grauntyd a more swyfter passage thens. then
to some other and that was for the qualite of her merytys and de^uingya before
done and also for the quantite of (...) helpys done of her frendys for hem
after her death. And they that were of grettur offensys and synnis and seldyn
or slowly holpyn long time and sore there holdyn in peynys. And sothely the
more nere they al came to the end of the place the more esyor and softyr wared
their peynys. The most cruel peynys were in the beginning how be hit as y
seyde before not al equaly Sothely the peynys and tormen tys of this second
place were mekyl more harder and scharper than the peynys and tormentys that we
saw in the first place. wherefore hit was so that money that ware in the
secunde place ware sorer ponysht than they that ware in the first place. ^ere
trewly fownde y and knew money mo some time of my^e aquentans than y did in the
first place Not wythstondyng in both the placys y spoke not some. The mesure
of there statur apperyd not suffici ently as y knew hem before in this world.
For the stature and form of some of them was as hit had be lessed or thynnyde
by tormentys. And some had left no thing of there quantite. Nevertheless this
dyuersiteys of her shappys in no thing lettyd my knowledge. For there knowledge
was to me so promp te so ready and so opyn as hit was that time ^en they leuyd
with us in this world

how sent margaret delivered a soul of a synful woman fro the deuyls ^a xviij
hEre now hit lykyth me to tell a certain fair deed and work of great pete
and mercy the which that time was to me a beholding of henynes and also of
consolacion the which may be to all the world a nobylle document and techyng
why the people schulde have god and his holy seyntys both of men and women in
worschuppe and in reverence. Truly while y behylde meruelyng thoo thyngys above
seyde and money other And hylde long talkyng there with hem that y knew before
y hard a far a great noise and a cry as hit had be theuys that had takyn a
pray or else as they had over cum their ennemy with foul mockys and scornys.
and lo after that noise and creye folowde a cursyd company of wicked spyrytys
and a mighty ledyng with hem anon as they hopyde to h^lle a soul of a woman
late departed fro her body. O good god what peynys and torme^tys tho cruel
enmyes leyde upon her. And the more they knew her without help the more
wodder were they on her. what man heryng ever would believe to any creature
tellyng how tho wekyd spyrytys and tyrandys of the deuylle castyd that soul
among hem. as a tenyse balle with fyrye instrumentys now fro on to another.
But hoo may in any wise tell or schewe to any man beleuyng how her mawe and
inward bowellys were smytte through with the fyrye dartys of tho cruel
tormentours. And as god is my wytnes y behylde and saw her sofyrre so great
and horrabulle peynys and torme^tys verily as they leyde hem on her cruelly
Nowther these thyngys ware unto my syghte as naturaly a man seyth with bodily
yes that is to say the vtwarde peynys that a man so fryth in body. but also
what they felt ynwardly good or euylle and with what heaviness or with what
gladness they were smytte wythinforthe in her sowllys all was to me that time
plain and opyn So therefore this unhappy soul what for the present sorrow or
dolor that sche sofryd and had and the fere of everlasting dampuacyon. was
in great anguys and sorrow of peynys and tormentys. For there was no hope that
confortyd her to escape desolate and destytute of all help and socoure O
byttyrnesse of all bytternesse most byttyrste whom no trust or help
releuyth or helpyth and des peracyon of the end encresythe. The day before
she left her mortalle body in the which sche leuyd strom petly and vycyusle
and now sche is ^ euerd with the vesture of schame and vellonye. And with in
sche is byttyn with the conscyens of schameful de dys done wyckydlye and
wythoutforth sche is mo nyd with mockyng and scornyng of deuelys henely.
Sothely sche felt thanne in her fulfilled the wordys of the holy man Ibo
seying this wise of such persons. Ducunt in bo^s dies ^os and in punc to ad
inferna descendunt. That (...) to seye they led her days in goodys after their
pleasure and in the ^yn ^eling of an ye they fall done to hell Therefore wh^ le
this onhappy soul by the vyctoryse pompys of her enmyes was going to be
brought into hell for the sin and onleful lustys of her body. Lo sondenly
anon came done an hye fro heuyn a great light by the which bryghtnes and bemys.
the forseyde wykyd spiritys and minystrys of the devil. ware dullyd and made
onmyghty and fyl done to the gronde with the soul that they had Sothly than in
the same light came done a multitude of virgenys schynyng in clothys. white as
the snow and set abowte with gold and precius stonys. the grace and joy that
was in the beholding of her facys and there y make no mension of for hit was so
great and ynestymable that y can not remember my self that saw hit. how y might
wordly speak of hit. Among the which on that was most feyryste well y knew
and seche was the blessed vir gynne and martyr sent margaret. And anon as the
forseid soul saw her the which was more thral^ for her synnys than of the
deuyllys began myse rably to cry and seyde. O blessed and prec^ spow se of
christ have mercy on me and help me that for mine nowne propyr synnys am in
desperacyon and ryghtfully put to peynys and tormente. I knowledge and verily
knowledge that in al my life y dyspysyd the co^mawndementys of god and gave my
body to al onciene lenyng. And nothyr god. ne any of his sentys of men or women
that y louyd affectualy or did any worship to hem in deed. The only of the
nowmbre of the holy sentis in heuin ever more hertely y have louyd and every
saturday of mine own goodys before thine anter y offerde up ca^delys And the
custom of my foul leuyng now late. be yng hoolle of my mind and body for thy
love and worship vtwardly y left I believed also that by the remedy of
confession al my synnys hade beweshte awey. But alas for sorrow my confession
was not sufficient to weshte and do awey so great and so money foul synnys and
old by cause, y lackyd befo re the feruor of contricion and did not for my syn
nys euyuworthy penans. Therefore my synnys cleuyn fast to me not et forgeuyn the
which y slowthyd too wype awey by goo werkys. Lo there fo re my lady and my
swetnes and comfort schalle my yftys of deuocyons peryshe the which y have
done feytfully to the and schalle y this peryshe now also not only to my self
but also to the to whom only y have studyd besely and thowght. not for to
peryshe and now y peryshe to my self and to al thyngys These thyngys and many
othyr in this wise sche seyde with sore and byttur weeping and crying more thau
a man may believe. For y take god to record and to my wytnes that y saw the
terys break owte of her yes as they hade be hayle stonys. And this while sche
sorowde the glory virgyn and martyr sent magaret turnyd her to her felows
virgyns that were there with her and seyde O sche seyde ye most sweet systers
ye see now the perelle of this woman sum time my servant and ye knew a^o the
in portune malice of the deuyls the which pretendyn by money weys of reason to
have her to hem. And therefore let us now do that thing the which only is left
of remedy and help for her. Pray we now to the everlasting judge and meke
redemer that he the which al thing may do will wythsaue as he kno with
best. of his goodness. and at owre desire su^ what to help this wrechyd soul.
sum time redemyd by his preci^ blood fro the cruelle power and venu^mys tethe.
of these wekyd spiritys. And when this blessed virgyn and martyr sent margaret
had seide these wordys anon whytowtyn any taryng. al thoo virgyns bowde down
to the grownd on herkneys and lyftyd up her handys prayng for that synful
woman to her ynmortalle spowse. owre bles syd lord and sauyur ^hesu christ. And
anon as they had of god there peticion grantyd they rose up to gedyr fro
preyer Than anon this blessed virgen saint margaret with stabylle contynawnse
of face and soul gastfulle and thretyng the wekyd spiritys came nere and made
of her sleue a manner of a schorge and lift hit up as sche would have smitte
he^ Then they anon as hit had be flies in a whyrle wind fleyd away hethur and
thedur leuyng alone her bownde soul. and suddenly yt in the farthir side
apperyd a dyke full of boylyng watyr up to the brymmys Therefore in this dyke y
saw her put in And then seyde to her that blessed and mercyfulle helper sent
margaret Here now thou must fulfylle they penan se the which thou schuldyst
have done before in they life. and by my prayur thou schalt have mekylle help
and releuyng of thy peynys. and aftyrwarde when thy synnys be fully purgyd and
clensyd by me thou schalt be admytted to reserve eu^lastyng joy and bliss
Treuly hit can not be seyde how ioifully this synful woman took tho wordys
seyde to her in the which sche knew an end of her due penanse and afterward
might feel the goodness and mercy of god So than this vyctoryose deed done yt
glorius sight of vyrgy nys ascendyt up to heuyn

How a goldsmyth was sauyd by sent Nycholas Ca xix
here now folowyth also another like miracle of full great mercy and pety of the
excellent might and pour of the blessed byshope sent nycholas Therfo re now y
will tell a nobyl deed and work late done i^ a certain ^ua^t of his the
which not long a go well y knew and famylyarly louyd for some good thingys
yt was seyne of him the which therefore the more gladlyur y wiltelle. for this
man yt y now speak of the which by his occupacio^ was a goldsmith told and
declared to me first the merit and the name of my leder with whom y went
hand in hand. and thaugh y beseyn here now su^ what to break out for the
order of the narracion because y seyde before that ere y ma de any mencyon of
the torme^tis and peynys of any persons specially First y wulde shortly tell
of the peynful placys that were schewyd to me But let that be takyn of tho
persons the which afterward y will opin ly declare to the profet of hem yt
list to here or read this reuelacion Therefore as y suppose e remember how a
certain person a goldsmith and a cytso^ of this place was hastly prevent of
death and suddenly dyed. Of whom al so hit was opynly noysyd that hit so be
fylle him for over mekylle drynkyng wine. And therefore how might a man sey to
whom ^hys man schulde be sortyd but among them that sent johan the apos tylle
specially spekyth in his pystylle. Est peccatum ad mortem. non pro illo dico vt
oret quis. That is to sey. There is sin contynewde un to death y sey no man
pray for him that contynewyth his syn ne to his death who so absolute may be
seyde that co^ tynewyth his sin to his death. as he that contynewyth in dedly
sin and so lesyth life and takyth death. Sothly this man bode not only in the
sin of dronkynnes to his death but also he fylle in to death doing that same
sin the which is the seed and cause of al euylle And as a certain wise man
seith dronki^nes excusith no vise Therefore this man whoys sine and perelle we
speak of now yt hit schulde be feryd and dredde in his would days was over
prone and ready to dro^kenes for the last three days yt e^ he saw in this world
he ^tinewyde daily almost in the sa me sin And if y had know for certain a
day befo re yt he had dyed of seche a cause as hit is aforesey de what schulde
y think or feel of him more worthior than not for to pray for him. left my
prayur before the ryghtwes judge schulde be void and no thing helpyng him
Nevertheless y vsyd to pray for him thawghe yt ware slowly. not verily certifide
of so soroful a fame and hap Sothely hit was so. by the provision of god that
this goldesmyth was in the secunde place of peynys. and also y saw and behylde
him by me. whom anon y knew and great ly meruelde. seeing him before money
other that y be hylde. in good hope and lightly sofryng his pey nys. Trewly
thanne my leder lokyd on me how stid fastly y behylde him and asnyd me and y
knew him And y seyde full well. Than he seyde. and you know him. speak to him
Sothly then this goldsmyth lohid on us both: and knowing us with an
enarrabulle gestur and behauing of gladness ioyde to my leder and with both his
handys spread opyn often bowde done al his body worshippyng and greti^g him with
innumerable thankys for his benefetys and goodness showed to him And the mean
while y salute him. and he joyfully salute me again. Than y enqueryd of him
how hit was. that so sone he was paste the horable peynys. the which y knew
by his sight he had sofryd Then he answarde this

Here this monk knew first that sent Nicholas was his leder Ca xx
my dear frynde he seyde. al e to gedur in the world have me as lost and
dampde. not kno wyng the goodness and mercy here of my (...) sent lord sent
Nicholas. the which had not so^ me an onhappy and an on pfetable servant of
his to be dampde and lost euerlastyngly. Than seyde y to him. Trewly as thou
seyste. all we that ware thy frendys sorowde that thou did so suddenly and
this life or else he had flayne us y sey and y had so great an enmy put into
peynys that y saw there to be torment long time a thousand times and hit were
possybylle (...) would sofyr temporal death for his delyuerans. For all thing
there ben so peynfull of sorrow and anguysshe byttyrnes and wrechydnes that they
excede mesure and mode. let us now that be it in this world alive see and
considere by this how gre tely we ought to gene us in chaystyng ou^e wekyd
condycyons and to amend our leuyng and also how mekyl we schulde labur to
excercyse us to keep the co^ ma^dementys of god and to do good were by the
which and the mercy of god we may deser ue to be delyuerd before of so great
euyllys. And also that owre dear frrndys as fady and mode sys tyr and brother
and othyr that were sum time othre lovers there sore ponysht for her offenses
might be delyuerd the sooner fro thens by good dedys and werkys of mercy and
pety deuowtly done of us for there redemption and helpyng And before ere y ma ke
any special mention by writing of the fore peynys and tormentys of sum persons
that y fownde and knew there and they also knew me y will schort ly write you here
the placys of peynys (...) as y went awwie with heavy compassion aftyr we were
paste the first peynful place and region Sothiy to owre semyng the length of
this first place afo re seyde was on goyngable. but we that is to seye my
leder and y went on the to side ageynste hit as we did othyr peynful coostys of
tormentys but (...) greatly abashed ynwardly supposyng vetely that thou hadyste
be dampde. and by cause also thou hadyste no help ne remedy by fore they death
of the holy sacramentys of the church. Sothly by cause y find the othyr wise
than we wend y am glade and feign y would here how and in what wise thou
deydyst so and scapydyste eternal damnapcio^ Tha^ne he seyde. Gladly what sum
ever thou desire y will the tell

How the same goldsmyth told the monk in pur gatory how he dyed suddenly and
et was sauyd Capitulum xxi
y^knew well how y dysposyd me in my lenynge when y was in the world as two
thin gys that were opyn to ma^nys syghte. Also y contynwyde in the foul sin
of dronkynnes. un to my last end. of an evil custom. Nevertheless hit was not
my will. For greatly hit dysplesyd me and mekyl y sorowyde that y kowde not
leave that vyse. Sothly oftyn times y rose against my self sew^rly purposyng*
to leave and cast awey the foul vyse of dronkynnes that y was wholde in But
ano^ what for the lust of drynkyng and the i^portunyte of feleshyipe that y
drank with y was ^straynde to dryn ke aftyr the mesure of mine old custom.
whereby y was over cu^me. and drawyn again bond in to lust and custom of the
same sin. that was in mine own onme^abulle taking and appetite Treuly among
this by the mercy of god the which will that no man perysh in my most
blessed lord sent Nycholas who me now ye follow graciusly and presently. and
whoys paresoon also y was. seche deuociou y had to him. that for any occasion y
never left but what sum ever y might do to his worschippe y did hit full
deuowtly And how mekyl ever y gave me toward even to dronkynnes y vsyd ever
more to be at matens. for anon a^ they range y wulde be there. and oftyn times
before the parysh pryste. Also y fownde contynwaly a lamp of mine own cost.
in sent Nycholas chapelle And thoo thyngys that were ne cessarye to the
ornamentys of all the church. as in light is or any othyr thyngys. y would
dylygent ly orden therefore as y had be his famylyar seruan te and mawncypylle
And (...) y had not sufficyent of mine own goodys to do hit y would move othyr
of the parysh to help as hit semyd nedefulle Sothly the yftys that men or
women gave. y took hem. and to be honable vsus. full treuly y spend hem. Also
twyes in the year that is at cristynmas and at estyr would clean confess me of
al my synnys as well as y bowde to owre parysh pryste. taking penanse for hem
and in part y did fulfille hem dilligent ly Treuly y did not observe and keep
tho thingys that y was ^ maundyd of my gostely fathyr. for oftyn times y left
sum thyngys that y schulde have do and thoo thingys that y schulde have beware
of. And of the ^mawndement of my gostely fadyr y fastyd the days of aduent as
y did the lent sesyne To the whythe days of aduent. y addyd of mine own fre
will. as money days before aduente as would make up the noumbre of the days of
lent And so on crystenmas day y would be hosylde and resceyue the holy
sacrament of owre lordys precions body and blood. But alas for sorrow when
that y should have be / that holy days of owre lordys birth. more holyur and
deuowtur in my living then other times. y turnyd me contrary unto other werkys
and besynesses of a worldly custom. where fore hit happyd unto me also in mine
last end that the wekyd angelle of that devil Sathanas. the which is causer
and kendler of all eny^ scornyd me. And also he had browghte plesaunte word
and tytyngys of my dampnacyon to his fa there the devil. effe the mercy and
goodness of my lord sent Nycholas had not wythstonde him there fore evermore to
him be thankyngys of al his true seruawntys. for my delyneraunce. for he had
low syd and delyneryd me. And as ryghtwesly as y was to be damp^e and cruelly
to be ponyshte as me kely and as mercyfully he has noryshte and kept me:
Sothely on crystynmas day after that y had resceyuyd the good lord that y can
not remember withowte great horror and heaviness. y was drawyn of an evil custom
as y said before by ouermo ^he drynkyng the same day in to dronkynnesse again
to the great ^rye and ronge of seche a lord who^e y had resceyuyd a sytyll
before in to my ^owle And on the morrow y went to church as y vsid to do sore
waylyng the foul vice the which y did the day before purposyng to be ware
of hit and to do no more / but hit was as void and vain For by the occasion
that y had of drinkyng and the deuylys steryng me thereto / y was destitute and
lost the stabulnes of virtue and the mighty purpos of soburnes that y had
conceuyd: and so y fulfill deuot my purpose in deed. but foul as y did
ysterdaye so y did to day and by delectacion of over mekyl drynkyng fyl down
again to dronkinnes. Sothely the next day after following the which is the
third day after crystynmas day I left not mine old custom of drinkyng.
whereby y had lost the virtue of soburnes and al^ my wyttys also. Then whenne
hit was derke night y went out of the place where y drank / and came home
and went to bed as y wss clothyd and sc^ and a lytyl y slepte And anon y woke
and wol^ have resyn and said as y had went that then yt had ronge to matens
But my wife told me nay and so y laid my down again. Trewly tha^ne first y
took a sleep and anon after y took my death And how y felt death suddenly
cumme apone me y will tell you. A certain devil that tempted and steryd me to
the vice of dronkynnes thowghte to him self that and y deyed in seche a
peril whytowte any contradiccion he would medrawe to he^e presumyng also to
have then power on me to do what sum ever he would. for mine obedyens and
consentyng in that vice to him But again ful^ mekyl he dread. lest by the
merytys of my patron sent Nicholas. y schulde any time prevail agenst him by
amendment of my living: if y lyned any lengur and so by his presumptuous power
cruelly me strangulde. Trewly y felt him like an owl goo in to my mowthe the
which oftyn ty mes full euylle y opynd to drink and so through my throat flyly
came down to my heart. And anon y knew that hit was the devil.
Notwithstondyng y was et myndfull of the merc^s of god and also of mine own
wrechydnes and with stabulle purpose ^ owyd in my mind to god that y would
purely and holy confess me of all my synnys. and vtwardly for ever forsake
the wise of dronkennes And to this y called as inwardly as y kowde. on sent
Nicholas to be my borowe. Sothely to this auysement onnethe was granted me the
space of a moment. Trewely thanne the wekyd spirit sat down anon upon my
heart. and clypte hit with his cur^ yd armies on every side. Also he drew out of
his mowthe an horrable ^oment of ^enyne and cast hit al abroad and so in the
space of a twynbe lyng of an ye he expellyd and cast me out of my body And
anon after that y was hade forth through dark placys by the cruelle and
incredible wodnes of wykyd spirytys the which al to beat me discerpte me
stekyd me drew me and al to brend me and carried me with them y wot not wheder
/ but as they would to everlasting tormentys. Than anon my most meke and dear
aduocatour saint Nicholas to whom y called with all mine heart at my last
end. and whom ever in my life y have worschipte thawghe y were a sinner. came
thanne and mightily took and deliueryd me out of her handys. and here has
set me in this place of pgatorye for my purgacion. And how be yt that y sofre
here sore and hard peynys y cownte hit lightly while y have no dread of the
wekyd spyrytys and also that her tyrannny and inportable cruelnes is se syd and
gone fro me / And sothely after this for certain y am and trust to have rest
and everlasting joy be my lord sent Nicholas And now also and evermore / sen
the time that y was put here to this peynys by the which whenne y ame over
sore greuyd and disesyd et by his meke and most meke and blessed visitacyon. y
am well confortid and releuyd again In my graste also by the whi che y gate to
me and to mine owre leuyng in the worl^ often times in my beginning y begylde
and dysceyued the pepulle for the fere of pouerte And now for that y am full
bitturly ponyshte. and the todyr day before mekyl more harder therefore y
sofryd pey nes Trewly often time y have been cast down head long into a great
hepe of brennyning money amon ge the which y burnt full intolerably. And tho
fie rye pensys y was compellyd to devour with an opyn mowthe that y felt all
my bowellys to bre^e in me And hethir to often times y am compellyd to tell
hem and of the towchyng of hem mine handys and fyngers ben sore peynde. Also by
over great brennyng and hete of thirst my inward bowels with heart throwte and
chekys waxen wan and besyly be gynne to fail These and many other things y
herd of him as opynly as hit might be told of any man leuyng in his body

How the goldsmyth also told to the monk a remedy agenst soden death Ca xxii
(...) vm thing there is the which he told me among other that y will not
hyde fro the reder here of. I saw there mnumerable pepulle that did suddenly
in this world the which were ponyscht al most out of mesure And of many this
y knew that they the which were put in delyberacyon and auysement for to
sin And whenne they came to the deed doing of what sum ever sin hit was
and each one of them seyde in his mind lo now y will do and fulfille that
the wyche y have greatly desired. he was takyn by the will of god to the vtmest
peynys and ponissement of death as thawgh he had herd of this text in the
gospelle. Stulte en amma tua reperitur a te / ad quid cogitasti aduers^ deu^
immo ^tra ip^m te nequissima. That is to say. Fool lo they soul is takyn fro
the. whereto haste thou thowghte agenst god and alsoo agay nest thy self full
wekyd things. Nevertheless as we have knowyn by him self the which told
this. that whenne they were put in that byttyr scharpenesse of death
coueytyng and purposyng to correct and amend her fautes of they had any
space of penance granted unto hem. and in her swyfte and hasty departing
sekyd after the mercy of god and alsoo after the help of his holy seyntys.
Therefore of the great mercy of god her byttyr death was to hem a great clensyng
of her synnys. the which they schuld have sofryd afterward fully in placys of
peynys and tormentys. Forthermore y inquired and as^ yd of this goldsmyth of
whom y have now told and seyde many thingys effe hit were possible by any
thing that the folk might schonne and eschew soden death. Then he answarde
and seyde in this wise unto me. O he sey de Sothely and if y had knowyn
whenne that y was in the world leuyng such thyngys as y know now y wulde
have taught and defend all the world fro that great hurt and damage. how
the pepulle and folk might be sewre and safe fro the falling of soden death.
Trewly and verily and the crystyn pepulle would write daily on her forhedys and
about the placys of her heart with her fyn gur of in any other wise. these.
li. wordys that co^ teynyth the mysterye of the health and salvation of
mankind that is to wit and to say Ihesus nazarenus wythowtyn dowte the
true pepulle of our sauyur thesu christ schuld be harmeles and preserved for
such a great peril and hurt And alsoo they schalle have after her death the
same letters and wordys wretyn full opynly and clearly at her hertys and also
in her forhedys in tokyn and in sig ne of great worschype. I know also that my
mey ny kept me. il. days onberyde after my death. ho pyng that y schulde have
reuyuyd for the redness and hete the which was in my face and in my bo dye
the which douteles was of the fervent replecy on of wine dronkyn before. For
my departing of this world was so hastye and zwifte: that mine soul was gonne
and paste out of my body. year my wife understood or knew hit or send to
call for the pryste. These thyngys y knew full trewly there of this goldsmyth

How the sone of the same goldsmyth told unto the monk aftyr that he was cu^
to him self agey ne that his fadyr had aperyd thries to his mother aftyr his
death Ca xxiii
sothely aftyr. xv. days seth y saw and her de this the sone of the forseyd
goldesmyth a certain young man came to me with great weeping and told me that his
father had apperyd. iij. nyghtis to gedy^ to his moeder wakyngly as sche was in
her prayers at home in her chambyr and bade her that sche schulde send to me
to know how hit was full ly with him and of his state that this knowyn. sche
might be the more confortyd and feythfullir and deuowter to help him And also
that she by the same tellyng may the bettyr be ware gyde to her self and her
meyny to god ward: And the same young man wytnesyd with great sweryng that the
third night of his fatherrs apperyng he herd his mother talkyng and spekyng
long time with him. and sum time enquyryng and also sum time answeryng
him. and then afterward sche told unto my his wordys the which he had
told and seyde unto her. Trewely he seyde that he herd / no manner wordys of
him talkyng or spekyng unto her but pacyently taryde till they had done. So
thely his mother told him that sche had hard of her husbond twyes before.
And as sche knowleged and seyde sche seyde that he was full of Ire and wrath
and much blamed her because that he was forgoten and put owte of mind fro
her which was warnyd by him self after his death to do a little thing for
him and that sche wulde not do so much for him. but excused her that for the
on certente of vysyous sche dyfferde hit lest that hit sculd have been
supposyd that sche had be dysceyued and begylde. And then he answerde and
seyde Send wythoutyn taryyng thedyr as y command and tell and say to him
how of ten times for the same thing y have apperyd to the and alsoo seye apone
these tokynys. that the last time the whi che he saw me y was in great pain
And among othyr thyngys that he herd of me y told him how mekyl the holy
confessor saint Nycholas had hol pe me. Trewly he prayde me with great
instaunce that I schulde stere and alsoo move both his wife and his sone: and
on his behalf comman de hem that the service and worschyppe the which he was
wont to do in his life and they also by exam ple to sent Nycholas. for no
cause nethyr for any occasyon schulde be left but daily more and more with
amendment of her living dylygently schewe and do her deuocyons and seruys to
his patron and aduocatour sent Nycholas. Also this foreseyde man and goldsmyth
of whom y have now told and spokyn as hit is seyde before did about a xv
monthys agone the which trewely by the merytys of the holy confessor sent
Nycholas his patron in a short time was speed out of mekyl sorrow that
onethe y might see any. that profette so mekyl there as he deed m so lytyl
time. wherefore full expedyente hit is to all men while they leuyn in this world
deuoutely to serve the holy seyntys of god by the which they may have m her
great need the grace and mercy of almighty god as hit is schewyd and prouyd
often times

Of the third place of the peynys and tormentys that been in the purgatory Ca
xxiiij
bUt now let us schewe as we may thoes things that remaynyn of the third
place the which we saw and behylde. For above all thing that may be
conceived of any ma^nys mind. hit excedeth of cruelnes and dedly tormenting
For verily y knouleche as for the qua^tyte of evil yt is there no man may
suffyse to express or tell the left peynys of that place. The great
horrabulnes of yt place so mekylle. the seurer y might see and behold that y
knew him. to be with me. and was also my gyde and leder at that same time the
holy bysscho^ and confessor sent Nycholas whom y have ever specially
worschipped and loved+ True ly the more famylyare that y had him in worship
the more surer was y made of his felysschippe and company. to see and behold
the horrabulle peynys and tormentys. the which now being absent ca^ not
remembur without great horror and gastfulnesse of mind but y was made of
every side full stabulle and sure. for the felysshyppe and knowleche the which
y had of my gyde and leder the holy confessor sent Nycholas. Therefore leuyng
the forseide secunde place. that we were at. as hit is above rehersyd wecame to
a full great fylde. and as hit semyd hit was set in a low grownde sequestrate
and departed from al other that no manner per sone might dedyr come. except tho
that were there ponyschte or schuld be ponyschte Trewly the over pert of that
fylde was keneryde with a full horrable clow de. in the which was myxte and
medylde to gedir a fume of brymstone with amyste a great ste^che and a flame
black as pycche was medylde with hem the which brake owte on every side like
hyllys and so spredyd all abroad. And the playnnes of that place was so
repleiyd and fulfylde with worcester mys as flowrys be wont to be strawyn with
russhys. And they were above all estymacyon horrabulle wundyrfull and
vnshappely the which with a gastfull opyn mouth brethyd out cursyd fire at
her nosys. And with an onspekable denowryng al to tore the wrechyd companyse of
folk that there were. the which right now so wastyd and consumydde. deuylys
ran over all like as mad men and were also full cruel and wodde apone tho
wrechys. Trewely thanne the deuylys ponyshte hem with fyry instrumentys
synglerly by every me^ bre of her body: and thanne afterward they rasyd and al
to teryd their flesh vtwardly unto the bonys. and then after this whenne
they had so done they cast them into the fire and there they were made
lyquyd as hit were metalle. and also took hem out again as brennyng fire.
Lytyl yt is y take god to record. and as no thing what sum ever y be about
to tell of the peynys and tormentys of that place. For in a full schorte space
of time by all manner dyuersytees of an hondyrdfolde peynys and tormentys or
more y behylde and saw how theywere consumed and wasted to naught and then
anon restoryd again And again almost they were with peynys brought to
naught and a none made hole again the which in that same place the lost life
of hem was compellyd to sofre. And of these alteracyons of times in the which
by great peynys and tormentys they were brought to naught anon restoryd again
there was non end no mark ne term. Also the hete and bren nyng of that fire
was so fervent and devouring that what sum ever hit brent hit wulde be like as
a thing that ware al most consumyd or wastyd. And then the worm^s that were
there warded and brokyn and made small unto pecys and then they were gedyrd on
great hepys to gedyr and leyde un there the unhappy synful wrechys that were
there. wherefore they so fulfilled all thing with so great stenche that hit
excedyd all the tormentys and peynis before said. And et remains one thing
the wy che they that were in that place were compellyd to sofre the which is
more hatfull peynful and scha meful than any thing above seyde

Of the unclean and foul vice and sin of sodemytys Ca xxv
sOthely all thoo that were there ponyssht and peynde were in this world
while they leuyd doers of that foul sin the which ought not be named not
only of a crystyn man but also of none hethyn man. Certain great monstrus that
is to seye great bestys onnaturally schapyne schewyd hem self in a fyrye
likeness horrabulle and gastfulle to sight and oftyn times vyolently came a
pone hem and also in a foul damnable abusion compellyd hem to medylle with
hem. how be hit that they refusyd and wulde hit not. I abhor and ame
asschamed to speak of the fowlnesse and uncleanness of that same sin. Thanne
between her peynfull and cursyd clepynges they roryd and ellyd and cry ed owte
and afterward they fylle done to gedyr like as if they had been gonne and ded
and anon takyn up again and so forth put unto new peynys. Trewely y
remembryd not well at that same time the seyyng of the holy postre sent powelle
in his pystylle of seche persons. where he condempnyth the foul vice and sin
agaynest nature both of men and women. And effe y had seen and consyderyd
the cause namely now in time of crystendame. cowde not in any wise have be
leuyd that such a foul sin and vyse might have be p^ sumed and done
specially of women. the which naturelly schuld be more schamfull then other.
I neuyr herd before nether had any suspycyon hethir to that the kind of
women had be deprauyd and defoyled by such a foul sin. And alas for so
row. for there was found a company of such so innumerabulle as they were
miserable. Many of tho personys that were there in that place y knew not
nethyr well behylde hem by cause that the qualy te of her foul sin. and the
great stenche and tor mentys that was there smytte me with full great horror
and tedusnes. Full greuys hit was unto me and more thanne a man may believe to
be there in that place a moment while. or to behold such things as were
there. Nevertheless y felt ^o sten che by experyence whylys y was there as y
did no nothir hirte of peynys. For my thought and if I had felt hit y
might no lengur have leuyd. Notwithstondyng y consyderyd and perceived
sufficyently in mind the intolerable gretnes of a^e thing. Trewely thoo
wrechys that were there sencybly had experyence and felt all these peynys
and other mo infynyte. that no man may tell of And among her sorowfulle
lamentacyons of co^playnyng while euerychon of hem cried Alas alas why did y so
sin. alas why did not y penans for my synnys and amend my living. they felt
and remembrydr her greuys peynys. Sothely their voycys of weeping and sorowyng
was exaltyd and lift up with so great a cry that a man would have wend hit
schulde have be herd through all the world

Of a doctor a law that was a sodemyte Ca xxvi
trewly thawgh y refusyd as mekyll as y might to see and behold tho thm^ghes
that were done in that place y cowde not avoid the kno weleg of on clerk the
wyche y saw and knew sum time This clerk in his days was a doct of law and
also among other that were docturs of law he was had in that sciens full
excellent. Full many lerners of that faculte he orde^de in scolez whereby he
gatte to him great famyliarite of worshippeful men This clerk was largely
posseste with beneficys and rentys of the church and et that not withstonding
daily he coueytyd to have more and more where fore by the will of god the
which would have all men to be turn to pena^s. he fell in to great sekenes
by the whcihe he was sore vexid and desesid about a. ix. monthys. Sothely hit
was done of a meke dispe^sacio^ of our sayur that he should by the schorge of
sekeues and sorrow. dispose to corect and amend his synful leuyng. the which
whene he was in good health of body foul and dedly trespast of tyn times to
god. Bur he contrary wise was over carkefulle of his bodily help. the which
he louydr oue^ mekyl. and so vaynely presumyd and thowght to have hit again.
wherefore he neuyr would dyspose him to be confessed of his synys and specialy of
his foul and onclene leuyng for the health of his soul the which is the
first and chief deed of almys that a man schuld do nethyr had any compassion
on power pepul to give hem any almys nethir any thing did to the sentys of god.
as in offering to him mekely his seruys. for the redemption of his synys nethir
studyd or karyd to do any almys of his erthely and tra^sitory godys as long as
he leuyde Than the heuynly leche our seeing sauyur that he was never in his
days the bettyr for the sickness the which he had for his warnyng the
which he schoyd and gave unto him for a gostely medeson. nethir went owte of
his onclene leuing in the which unclean leuing he was in by the affliccyon of
his great sickness. Therefore the evil and wekid faites and dedys. that cowde
not be clensyd, and purged in his young aage our lord ihesu crist mercefully
put and end of hem in his death what more mercy might be done unto hem the
which after their hardness and inpenytente heart. tresur to hem fro day to
day the wrath of owre sauyur ihesu christ. in the day of his wrath and also
of schewyng his ryghtfull iuggement. and alsoo to be resceyued in to the night
of death in the which night of death no man may help him self. for thanne
no man may labure any thing for to deserve. thanne that sone her life of this
world be schor tyd and alsoo fro hem takyn aweye. in the which her synnys and
mysdedys encresyn and growyn to her perdycyon and destruccyon: And what thing
might be more holsummur to them the which by her folusnesse and madenesse with
a scharpe sword koneyten and desyren to add strokys to her own propre
wowndys thanne that they be bound and also her wepynys takyn aweye / the
which they mysusyd to her own propre hurt and damage. This forseyde clarke
the which y knew su^ time in my chyldhode and young aage. y vndyrstode nor y
knew not that he was dysceste and ded. For that same time in the which y
knew him he removed fro that prouynce or place there as he was wont to dwell
in before unto a nothir puynce or place. Neuertelesse in all such peynys and
tormentys as hit is above said y saw and fownde him and y merueyled of hit For
y had went he had be yet a live and also an honest person Than y spoke to him
and asked whethyr he hopyd any time to have the mercy of god And than he seyde
Alas alas y know and know that athishalfe domys day y schall have algate no
mercy And when their y schalle have any thanne y am not certain So thely
evermore sethe y was put here to these peynys they encresyn more and more
Then y seyde to him And why were you not confeste of thy synnys at thy last
end and dydyst no penance for hem Than he seyde by cause y hopyd to have
recovered and al so by the disceyte of the devil my gostely ennemy y was
aschamed to confess so foul a sin, lest y should have be of les reputacyon
and despised a monge them the which y semyd glorious and fair y confeste me
of lytyl and small synys to seche an honest person and a worschipfull pryste
that you knowyst well And when he asked me of y had any other things to be
confeste of y bade him go his way and told him that of any other thing cumme
afterward to my mind y would send for him again and tell him. And when he
was gonne and onethis came to his church y begun to deye Then anon he was
called for again and whenne he was cumme / he fownde me ded and go^ne Trewly
there is no thing of a thousand peynys that y sofyr daily so greuys to me as is
the unhap py presentacion of my foul and unclean leuyng that y ^ yd in the
world and now being here am compellyd to do actually the same foul passion.
And beside the horrabulle gretnesse of peynys that y am in. y am more
confounded of schame while dat y am by the same sin made cursyd and
abhomynable in the sight of al men. Alas alas who ever would have wend that
the worschyppe and favor the which y had among men sculde be turned to
seche confusyon and despe^ion as it is now wherefore full gretely y am
confowndyd and assha med. for now to every creature y appear foul and
abhomynable. the which before apperyd to every man glorious and honorabulle.
And this he said with full sore and great cryyng and weeping And while y
meruelde the wrechidnes and peynys of so great a man sum time. y saw how he
was ponysshte in innumerabulle wysys. and by two tormentys he was brought as to
naught and dyssoluyd by strenthe and here of fire and so ma de lyquyd as ledys
whenne hit is multe. Sothely thanne y asked sent Nycholas my leder if this man
nys peynys might be remedyde or help by any mean. And thanne he seyde when
the day of dome is cumme then (...) crystys will be fulfylle d He only
knowyth the hertys of all men And then he wole do to every man ryghtfully.
Therefore I could know no thing for certain of this ma^nys de lyberacyon.
Therefore thoo thyngys the which we have spokyn of here before may well be
consyderyd as the scripture seyth in this wise. Non est ei been qui assiduus
est in malis and elemosmam non danti. that is to say hit is not well with him
that is be sye in evil Nethir with him that does non almys See now and
consydre how gretely they be help in placys of peynys by the doing of almys
dedys. as our lord spekyth in the gospelle the which did hem in her life.
This clerk in his life was wise and wyttye in his own conceyte and trusting
to him self set full lytyl to seche help of other by almis deed and good
werkys for his synnys. that has wrought now to him damnacyon. Loo so sone
and suddenly he is found onwyse and mad. Con ceyne now what is here now
seyde of this clarke and a lytyl before what was seyde of a goldsmyth and
opynly hit confermethe the sentence of the scryp ture seeing in this wise
Potenter potentes tormenta sustinebunt and exiguo conceditur misericordia. yt
is to seye. Mighty men myghtyly schalle sofyr tormentys. and to a meke man is
granted mer cye. That goldsmyth and though he were a syner et was in his own
syghte meke and lytyl the whi che nethir by his connyng nerhyr of any other ver
tue presumyd but countyd him self evermore on wise and onstable by cause of
his synnys Therfo re by the mean of almys dedys. and serves as he might do.
gate to him the help and soffragys of his great and mighty aduocatour and
patro^ saint Nycholas and so in time of need he had ^elpe and mercy as he
desired And also even contrary wise this clarke of the excellent connyng
riches and worschippe that he had ^ cedyd forth his wekednesse. And by cause
he thought him self except in this world. fro the common labur of men. Lo in
so cruel and byttur example he is not now ponysshte with othyr men. Also y
saw there his tongue having forth out of his head and be syly brennyng as hit
were abronde of fire and yt verily he sofryd by cause that often times he
peruted ryghtwesnes as a man mighty in wordys taking eftys and mennys persons.
For he vsyd not only to iangyl idyle wordys. but also froward ly in wordys
contrary to wroth over mekyl he had excedyd. Therefore no meruelle though he
were po nyshte this wise for such excessys and fawtys. whenne our lord
spekyth in the gospelle of the rich man the which for his light speking and
iangelyng at mete was sore ponyshte in his tongue in a flame of fire. Sorthely
after this came to me that worschyppefull pryste to home this clerk was
confeste of his small synnys as hit is rehearsed before And among other thyngys
the which this worschipful pryste herd of me y told how this clarke before
seyde whenne he was confeste bade him goo his way as for that time. and so
anon did as hit is seyde before And when y had told him this he wept full
bytturly and took god to record that hit was very truth as y seyde and knew
well. that the forseyde clerk seyde so to him Therefore on ly of that multitude
of wrechys y knew this clerk that this seyde to me

sOthely thanne sone after that we were paste this third place we came to a
regyon where the soulys the which hadd done her purgacyon in purgatory
joyfully restyd. in the which place many y knew well and found hem there in
great felycyte and conforte. Trewely as touching the ioys of that place and the
^ocundnes and gladness of them that were there as our lord will eve us grace
we schall afterward schewe and declare. but first let us turn again this
narracyon to thoes things the which we have left out of the peynys and
merytys of some personys in especyalle. the which y saw and found in tho
placys of purga torye as hit is seyde before

Of. ii. personys that this monk saw and spoke with in the first place of
purgatory and first with a prior Ca xxvii
Therefore a prior that was father of a relygy ous place the which y knew full
well sum time dysce^e and deyde this same year. And of his manners and
condycyons y knew many thyngys the which y leave out at this time by cause of
schortenes. This man and prior y saw and knew among the first that were in
peynys of the first place of purgatory that we came to. Trewly he was in full
great and sore tormentys and sofryd full greuys peynys. sum time in fire and sum
time in stinkyng bathys of brimston and pyche medild to gedyr hoys face and
there was over wrechyd and dedful And as soon as he saw me he began mekely to
call me and great me whom with compassyon of heart y great also and spoke to
him many thyngys. And y enquyryd of him whethir he so freyd so great peynys for
the fawtys the which he did in youth by cause perauenture he neglygently
kept his order that he took to him in his chyldho de And he seyde nay But
nevertheless full sore and byttyr peynys y sofre here not only for mine own
synnys and excessys the which y did in mine own person how be yt that y
offendyth in many thingys but also for the wekydnes and mysgouernaunce of tho
personys the which a lytyl before y had char ge and cure of. For as touching
mine own syn nys y wulde sofyr as y might bear / thoes peynys the which be
dew for hem. For y vsyd to redeem and schast mine own synnys by often
confession and taking discyplynys and besy prayers And al so by diverse other
weyes. Sothely of these thingis full sore greuyth me now the carnal affection
and love that y had to my frendys. as fadyr and mother and other of my kynne
of the which to sum of hem y gate benefycys of chyrchys. whenne they we re full
onworthy to have hem and toothir y gave right ondyscretely many eftys of the
godys of the monasterye that y was prior of and they now full lytyl remember me
or do any thing for me in my need. Trewlye the fauyr of pepulle and the love
of worschippe that y had me prinspaly noythe And alas alas for sorrow. for and
god take not mer cy on me as y am now in peynys out of mesure. so schalle y
be without end. The couetyse ambycy on that y had to keep my worschippe.
and the fe re that y had to leave hit. so blyndyd the syghte of my soul that
y lowsyd the brydyl of correccyon to the willys of my sogettys and sofryd hem
to do and follow her desyrys and lustys as my yes had be closyd. lest happily
of y had correct hem and refraynde hem from her lyghtnes they wulle have be to
me as enemies to labure and to have me out of my worcester schippe and prelacyon that
y was in. Forthermore they that were good relygyous men and had zele and love
to keep the ordyr. y no thing helpyd or faueryd in conseruacyon of the
relygyon. but full inordenatly and contrary to virtue y would with other that
loved hem not speak evil of hem and de tracte hem and cherysshe other that were
full evil di sposyd and brekerys of her holy professyon and order And all this
y did a part of mine own light nes and a part be cause y would defend my
prelacyon And for hem to pleye lewd gamys and to speak and clathyr tryfullys
iapys and other lewdness and also to goo and wandyr among secler folkys in
ydelnes. hit was leful to hem. as hit was to me. Therefore some of hem by this
cruel lyghtnes of me and that they saw in me presumyd and said to do many
full cursyd thyngys. wherefore here y am ponysshte without ho^e. how be yt
that y approuyd not her wykyd dedys Notwithsto^ding y knew hem. and of a vain
dread. made like as if y had not know hit. wherefore many of hem bo de stylle
in her foul abusyons. going fro evil to wars. And some of hem continued in
evil unto her death while y leuyd in the world. and now they be everlasting
dampde. Also some other of hem et hethir to leuyn contynualy wars and wars in
great synnys and dedly dedys. wherefore to hem and to me as y am agaste
succedyth inextynguyble fire. Also fro the hour that y paste fro my body. y
ame put to onspekehabule tormentys the which were as me semyth now full
light in comparyson of the peynys that y now sofyr. Sothely the first day
after my death was to me more es^er thanne all the days that y had setthe
And of all the synnys and fautes that now they done after my death of an evil
custom that they had before the which they be seyne to have take by my
neglygens. my peynys therefore ben evermore encresyd And by cause that y knew
sum of hem that be ded and sum other the which ette leuyn. that have flyd and
fall beside other synnys. to that foul and abhomynable syn ne that ought not
to be named and therefore put to hem no correccyon. no thing y dread so
mekyll. as the encresyng of my peynys so largely till y be co^ pellyd to sofyr
the foul and abhomynable stenche the which they sofre and have now the
which did the same foul and abhomynable sin for y know well that the greuys
pain of that same stenche is more intolerable and peynfull than any other
peynys that sinners sofryn: And as often as they the which y left alive
dampnably offendyd. anon the deuyls ran to me with great scorns and vpbray
dys and evermore and more with new peynys en cresyng my tormentys. Also he
told me what day what place and what time after that he was paste out of
this world and what person of him hit was and what sin he had done. And he
told my many thyngys that they did and seyde anon as they done any evil the
which y had sum time cu re of* the mynystrys and wykyd angellys of the deuylle
vpbraydyn me with the same and anon they encresyn my peynys Sothely there was
sum of the bre theren of that place the which this man aforeseyde was prior
and father to that were accendyd by e le of rightwysnes and feruor of relygyon
and did also great labur and dylygens that all inordinate favors put a side
the puryte and honest of her or dre might be kept And this y knew was
truth wherefore y seyde to him. How than was hit noysyd fer and broad that
many thyngys were well re formyd and amendyd before your end in the pla ce
where ye were prior if hit be now schewyd you so mekyl evil of hem that dwell
there ette. And thanne he seyde True hit is as ye say that mekyll thing was
correct and amend more than yt was wont to be before Nevertheless of her
amendment have y no fruit ne mede but also my peyuys encresyng because y was
over mekyl agenst her correccio^s and lest y schulde be correct or tho
thingys amendyd that be amendyd full mekyl y lettyd Sothely y was asschamyd of
her opyn correccyon. but less y bashyd to here hem over all schamfully
dyffamyd. Trewly her condycyons were so froward and obsty nate that vtwardly y
had wend they had be incor rygyble and what sum ever is believed to be done
there fore amendment. but if the meruaylous power and might of god help. hit
will be brought done again to naught Alas alas why did y believe eu^ to seche
consels. Alas that ever y fauyrde and mag nyfyde feche persons by the which y
did so offend the mageste of god so to let hem have her will to do what they
would. Sothely four persons there been and told me her namys that y schuld
seye to he^. but if they sone do to god. euynworthy penance for her cursyd
dedys and consels. by the which they have lost hem self and other also the
which have do ne after hem they schalle have the indycyble and euerla styng
tormentys of hell And trewly if they did penauns and satisfaccion till domys
day they schulde think hit but lytyl in to the recompensacyon and expyacyon
of the great and long schrewdenes and cursydnes by the which they have
brought me to this peynys that y am in now and with her wyckydnes they have
al most enfecte and cu^ brid all the house. Sothely onethys or litil any time
tho four persons y wulde displese but y was inclynyd and bowyd to let hem do
what they would Also few there ben of all the covent that for me and for mine
helping. Fully have done and seyde the messys and psalmys with other soffragys
and prayers. the which of dewt^ they schulde seye and do for me according to
our relygyon And many of hem for whom y am now in sore pey nys have done none
of these thingys et for me. there fore what for sorrow and dread that y have of
the se present tormentys. y am peynde on every side Se che thinhys saw y
about this prior and this wise he spoke to me as hit is above rehersyd

Of an ancres that he saw and knew in the same place Ca xxviii
yKnewe also a certain ancresse the which was of a good and honest
conuersacyon whom gretely y louyd and y saw her there: as sche had come late
fro the world + Trewly sche was stable and steadfast in contynauns and feyre of
beholding. home the laborus weye that sche had gone a lytyl had weryde. and with
the peynys of fire that other were inuoluyd here and there sche was often times
tochyd and sum what burnt. But she full lytyl counted hit and hastyd her spedly
greatly profeti^g on the journey that goyth to paradyse. and this when y saw y
take god to record y had wend hit had be sum fantesy and as hit had be a dreme
for y believed in no wise that sche was ded Than said y unto my self. Y trow
that the merytorye leuyng of this an cres and servant of christ so is schewde
to me by ymagynacyon. for trewly sche that is ette alyne in her body may not
be here. Sothely the third day after that y was cum to my self again a cer
ten neybur of herns was here that y spoke with and prayde him to great her well
on my word. and al so that sche will whytsafe to pray for me. Than he seyde
Pray ye also for her our good friend for ye scalle vndyrstande that sche is
disceste and pas^e to god. Ueryly y merueylyd greatly at his seying And than
first y believed that hit was true that y saw of her in the first place of
purgatory Forthermore this general condicyon of all folk that deyon. y know
there opynly. that all pepule the which be ordende to perceue rest and
bliss before the day of dome. had evermore fro the first how re of her
death her peynys less and less. But if hit were so. that any of hem had left
to other that leuyd after by evil exampulle occasyon of syn^e the which
ryghtwysly they might wit hit hem that did so before. and while they deed no
satisfaccio^ to god for hit before her death. whereby seche occasy on of synning
left to other schulde have be forgenyn he^ also they yt greuysly offendyd by
the which they de^ uyd eu^lasting dampnacion begu^ne to goo fro full bittyr
peynys to wars and so by succedi^g of her peynys daily her tormetys besyly
encresyn yt e^y day foloing is more greuossor to hem then was the day before

Of a certain bishop that was there also xxix
acerten bishop y knew there in peynys the whi che onys y saw and he was bore
i^ this ground of inglonde and had his byshopriche be yonde see. Trewely he
deyed this same year abowte the feste of saint Myghel the a^changel. For than y
knew opynly the day of his passing but now hit is fall lyn out of my mind
the which that time was occu pyed about many thingys that y saw. Sothely
innumerabulle thyngys there were the which y did not well note nether cowde
well keep in my mind all thyngys that y had notyd. Trewely the same man the
which told me of the passing of the ancres as hit is seyde in the next
chaptur before told me also of the passing of this bishop but he knew not
what time. Trewely anothyr young man. the which was cosyn and alye to the same
bishop, and also in service with him whenne he leuyd came home ageyn'to his
country of inglonde and brought certain word to the todyr man that told me
that the forseyde bishop was deed Trewly y saw this bys shop al most
contynualy brennyng in flamys of fire and most be cae^ of his vycyus leuing
that he lenyd i^ his youth also he was torment in other innume rabble wysys and
be cause y saw sum specyal thing about him y thought to remember and
specially to speak of him Sothely as he brende besyly in fire he had eu^ more a
full honest clothe upon him there the which not only was hurt by the fire but
also yt was yldyn and made by the fire more feyrer and semlyor than hit was
before Than^e sent Nycholas declared to me the reason of this meruaylous thing
and seyde This preuylege he gate to him whenne he leuyd. by a good deed the
which he vsyd to do And this hit was. Evermore he had compassion on power
pepulle that were nakyd and full lyberally he vsyd to releue hem of that need
wherefore his clothyng schalle never lack feyernes. till that he have fulfilled
his penauns and take of god the stole of everlasting joy and bliss

Of a certain woman the which was a pore ma^nys wife Ca xxx
awoman also that was a pour mannys wife did this last year with her husbond
the whi che was well condicionde and in money thyngys full well dysposyd. Sche
was sum time right famylyarly beloved of me. home full gladle y behylde there in
light peynys. in comparyson of other swif tely going forth to the great mede
and worschippe of heuynly joys. Trewely in this that sche vsyd in pacyently to
stolde and vpbrayde hem that did her wrong and enmyte and in her heart hylde
raucour and sowernes agenste hem. sche gretely offendyd and therefore sche had
sofryd peynys. Nevertheless this vyse was to her inuyncyble by cause of her
inperfeccyon and ever sche hatyd hit and often times wept that sche could not
overcome hit. wherefore sche had the sooner forgeuenes of that sin. So thely
sche was in her prayers full devout and well disposyd to almys dedys and
hospytalte more then sche might well do of her own godys And before her death
by long sekenes that sche had sche was prouid and clensyd as gold is in a
fornes by the which al most sche had cast fro her the scurfe and the
hardenes of her synnys. Forthirmore fulfeldyn hit is in this days in the
which. al most the condicio^s of all men gone out of kind. for the pure
and clear symplycyte and innocentnes of the very chirce of god. that any man
leuyng in this life kepyth or rekeuerythe fully the equity and puryte of the
holy gospelle. the which tyle a man fulfylle he may not dwell in heuynly
placys nethyr schalle rest in the mownte and hille of paradyse of joy and
bliss. wherefore what sum ever thing of sin and vnclenesse contrary to
equite and ryghtwysnes cleuyth and restyth on the sowlys that passyn hens out
of this world hit shall be purged in a nothir world and so by her penauns the
weye and pathe of a joyful restyng shall be schewyd to hem that be purged and
clensyd. and so then in placys of rest the entri^g of heuyn and eu^lasting
bliss full largely shall be opynd to tho soulys for the perfette desire that they
shall have there to se god Sothly this only must be takyn of tho syn^ys which by
her light q^lite or else by confession and satisfaccion don for hem be granted
of god to be cha^ gyd and contyd among venyal syn^ys. For as touching tho
syn^ys yt be dedly and were not i^ this world by the remedy of confession and
pena^s made light and venial hit is withoutyn doubt yt he shall so be p^sentyd
to his in geme^t in the world yt is to cu^ as he is fond in his leuyng when he
passyth out of this world

what peynys relygyous men sofryd for certain fawtes Ca xxxi
^Othely y saw all relygyous folk both of men and women how they sofryd
certain peynys as well for lytyl offenses as for great syn^ys and as hit were
propyr peynes for synguler synnys And full sore as hit semyd to me were the least peynys that they sofryd for right lytyl offenses as for inmoderate
lawghyng and ydyl wordys spekyng and that they sofryd her mind neglygently
ouyr mekyl to wandyr about in vain thoughtys or else for light brekyng the
rulys and form of her relygyon as in light and nyce behauing of ge stur and
in multyplyyng sygnys to mekyl and so for going and wandryng out of her
cloister and cellys on profetabully and also for many other thyngys in like
wise. For some y saw full myserabully weeping and rowlling hoote brennyng colys
in their mouthys for eting frutys and herbys out of dew pla cys and time not
for any medsyn or need. but for lust and appetyte And for imoderate lawghing
they had betingys For ydyl speech strokys in her face. and for vain thoughtys
they sofryd greuys and vary ante trowbulnes of the air. And they that offen
dyth in dissolucyon of gestur and behauyng were bon de with scharpe bondys and
many with fyry boundys and for superfluyte of signys by the which they had
to gedyr lewd pleys and ydyl gamys. sum of hem had her flyngers feign and some
had hem by kn^ckyng sore broysyd. They also that were o^sta bule wandryng here
and there were greuysly cast and throw fro one place to anothir by the which
her lymmys were sore hurt among hem self Also they that spoke wordis of
reboudye the which soun ned onclenesse or other wise agenst the honest of
relygyon were ponyss^te there almost as sore as for dedly synnys. Alsoo w^o
sum ever brake any ^owys made to god or to his seyntys specially in ty me of
dread and peril for her help and delyuera^s And afterward suerte takyn of
the same vow sofryd inestymable tormentys

Of a certain knight that brake a vow xxxii
Among hem that brake her vowys y saw a young knight brennyng in the myddys of
fire whom y knew sumtyme full well And as y inquired of him why he was put
in so great peynes. this he told me. My life he said that y leuyd was but
baren and vain and also vycyous For y was insolent and nyse in pride and
elacyon and foul and unclean by the vice of lecherye. not withstonding for
this y am now specially ponysht by cause y cast aweye fro me the sign of the
holy cross the which y had takyn apone me in a vow that y made to goo to
the holy land how be yt that y took the cross not for deuocy^n but for vain
glo rye the which y loved to have had of the lord yt y served. Trewely
every night y labur in going as mekyl as y may to make an end of that pilgre
mage. But what for febulnes of strenthe and co^ traryusnes of the wedyr and
also scharpnes of the way y am lettyd greatly that onethe y may goo at on time
a full lytyl days journey Sothely whenne the morning begynnyth. f^eyn to me
wykyd spirytys being wodde in al cruelnes. and drawyn me a geyne. to the place
of my peynys. where ever more all the days time y am greatly peynde in fire.
Nevertheless with a certain amendment of lessur dyssese thawght hit be lyt^l.
And again when night comythe. y. am restoryd to the place where y left last
my journey. and so y go forth on my pylgri mage. and when the morning is cu^me
y am drawyn again and cast to peynys. And all that ha ue vowyd to go to the
holy land. and aftyr d^d cast fro hem her cross. and whent not dedyr. in
like wise as y go. they be compellyd todo her pilgrimage, so if they may have
the grace of god in her last end to repent hem. as y had to repent me for
brekyng of my vow. and than by the hols^ ^me die of confession this sin yt
was dedly sin may be changyd to a venyal sin Other wise all that break that
same vow. be put to eternalle dampna cion

Also of another knyh^t Ca xxxiii
aNother knight also the which well did and paste to god a x ere a gone y
saw and knew there. This ^yght that time the which y saw ^ynr had overcome
all his great peynys that he had sofryd before And therefore y sey he did well
For by that space of penans he went well toward the ioys of paradyse. Sothely
he bare there on his fyste a lyty^ byrdde like a sparhauke. Also in his life
above all men that were of that country the wh^che he dwelled in gave gladly
and lyberally to all pore pepul that came to him hospytalyte. Trewely his wife
did before him almost a xxx wyntyr after hoys death he leuyd continent and
chaste + in a wydwardys life ready and benyuolente to all men whi lys he leuyd
And gretely merueylde why he yt was so honest of leuyng and well condycyonde
in his demening had not ette perceiuyd fully rest and joy. Than he seyde to
me that hit was not too be mer ueylyde. For why whenne he leuyd he might often
offend in many wysys. specialy by cause that i^ his youth and childhode. he
was norishte and brought ^pe delycately. and what for felishy^pe and his
yowthe. was drawyn to many noysful thyngys of the which he kowde not fully be
purgyd and made clean in worldly conuersacyon. where he must conform him to
the manners and behauyng of hem yt he dwelled among. Sothely he complaynde that
the hawk the which he bare on his fyste. paynful ly ^are his hand with her
^ylle and scharpe cleys This ^edeusnes of pain. he sofryd as he seyde by cawse
that in hankyng the which he vsyd all the time of his life. gretely delytyd
to see the hankys whenne they flow how they took other byrddys. The whi che
haukyng he left not in his aage + nethyr there of had any compunccyon. For he
knew not that seche a thing were any sin. Many other thingis also y saw and
behylde in this first place of purga torye. e. as well abo^te hem that y
knew. as about other both of men and women of all degreys and professyons
of the which eueryche on of hem were po nyshte in peynys innumerable. full
scharpe and byt terly. as y have schortely above seyde. under a certain
generalyte. wherefore these few thingys seyde now of many thingys. be
suffycyaunt here at this time

Of tho persons that he saw in the secund place of purgatory Ca xxxiiij
Now of tho thingys the which y saw and notyd in the second place of
purgatory su^ what y will schewe and declare to you Sothely i^ this secund
place y saw and knew many mo that we re sum time of mine aquentanse. than y
did in a ny other place sore weeping and sorowyng i^ her pey nys her synnys by
the which they had brokyn owre lordys ^maundmentys wherefore they were alyenate
and made far fro his famylyare knowledge

Of. iii. byssho^pys yt y fond there Ca xxxv
Three byssho^pys that y knew well sum time I saw th^re straytely bownde with
fyrye thayny^ oftyn times. turnyng and walowyng full myserabully. now in great
fire. and now in scharpe stormys of hayle and snow and whyrle wyndys. and
aftyrward in a foul stynkyng ponde of black watyr. Trewly they were ponysht
dyuersly. not fer from othyr. And on of hem was more byttly torment than tothyr
were and that was by cause he vsyd in his life to sytte among secler ingys. in
place and time of pledyng and there in. he took a great pleasure and delight and
of tyn times he was. to many that pledyd her causis of god co^sciens a vyolent
oppressu^ agenst right wesenes. and therefore he compleynyd. whyt an o pyn
mowthe that his tongue contynually brende in flamys of fire. And as he was now
bre^nyng in fire and now wete. And styftely froryn in snow and froste. and now
in a stynkyng ponde. and now foul ouerkeuryde in fenne and plutte. his tongue
evermore conteynuyd in brennyng fire. The tothyr of hem othyr whiles
neglygently brake his chastyte. the which de^e specialy in a bishop. was
ouerfowle and abhomynable. and therefore was he drownde oftyn times in the foul
and stynking ponde. that lythe between the great hete and cold as hit is seyde
be fore Sothly a fore his death he left the honowre and dignyte of his
byshoprye. and took upon him the meke habette of a monk. the which greatly
helpyd him. among othyr dedys of satysfaccion. And all that so done. great good
and profette there of cu^myth to hem For all they specialy be holpyn by the
meritys and prayers of the holy seyn tys. the which vsid before the same
habette and also ben knowyn and markid to rise up again in the ordyr of hem
the which when they leuyd here vtward ly left this world or else at her last
end in full devotion forsook this world The third of these bysho pys greatly
delyted i^ worldly worschippe and vain glo rye. For the which sin he was
often tymys bore up an hye in fu^hye spyrytys of flamys of fire. and by cause he
fille fro the love of god by seche sin unto the coolde of worldly slowfulnes.
he was let done brenning to the grenys coolde that was on the todyr side of
the fire. and be cause of the common evil and peynys that these three ware in. was
for the neglygens of soulys the which they had cure of and for the great carke
that they had of her riches and despexion of pore pepul for flatering of
princys and imoderate carke of her kyn^efolke. and as y may shortly ^clude many
thy gys in few wordys eu^ych on of hem sought safter tho thingys that was to
him self and not tho thi^gys that longyth to our lord thesu criste And the
gen^al evil of these and many other p^latys that y saw was the neglige^s of
her office delectacion of worldly worcester schippe and dyssymulacyon of her charge.
and i^ all these thingys full heuely they sorowyd by cause they mysu syd her
power that they had vndyr god to the great hurt of hem self and to the
perdicion of her sogettys and therefore the peynys of al seche prelatys were
daily encresyd more and more as y have told before of a cer ten prior that
what su^ eu^ her frendys that leuyd in the world did for he^ as in messys
almysdede and seche other thingis by the which her peynys should be lessyd
daily her greuys peynys were encresyd for the synful leuyng of hem the which
they dedly fauerd and brought up i^ her vicys orels be cause they did not
correct hem in dew form as yt longs to her offy ce wherefore al they yt for
seche causys sofrid peynys greatly douted of her salvation and were almost i^
despacion Sothly there is no thing so greuys to he that be in peynys as the
oncertente of her pelyuerans and also there is no thing that so mekyl swagyth
the peynys and sorowys of other as does a very hope and feythefull trust the
wyiche they knew^ and have by our lordys mercy to be delyueryd. and they that
were certain to have an end of her peynys and were not bond to the certente
of dampnacio^. yt same certente was to hem a full great solace and conforte For
as touching the evil and hurt of desperacion as mekyl as y can consider and re
membre me after tho thingys that y saw there hit greuyth disesyth and
tormentyth tho soulys that have hit more than al other peynys done

Of an archebysshoppe of canturbery Ca xxxvi
y saw also beside these above seyde a certain person that sumtyme was of great
name and fame the which after the meke conu^sacion of mo^kys relygy on that he
leuyd in before in the which he had leuid full deuoutely as in bodily penauns
in holy medytaci ons and many other virtues right excellently and at the last
he was promotyd and made archebishope of canturbery and primate of inglonde But
alas for sorrow for trewly the more thereby he grew in the sight of the pe pull
so mekyl he had fall and decresyd i^ the sight of god the which behilde him
inwardly and the sander had en did his life of he had not be help by the mercy
of god and the merytys of his good leuyng before by the which when he was in
relygyon a monk full well i^ good purpose and labor acceptable to god he had
ple syd our lord Sothely when he was bisshope of can turbery and also
specyaly full excellent in co^ning full lityl head he t^ke to his cure. and to
the gostely health of the people For he onwysyly promoted full onworthy persons
to beneficys of the church. and also he dredde and was aschamyd to execute the
law for displeasing the king by hoys favor hit semyd he ca^ to that dignite
Also he studyd and thought by a colur of symulacyon odyr wise then he schulde
to troble hem the which he ^knew were agenste his promoting of the byshoprye
and dignite that he had In these thingys and seche other. he had greatly
offendyd. Also in this he was more to be blamid and more offendyd yt he hyd and
kept close full on profetably the auctorite of relygyon and wysdo^ that he had
fro hem of home he was full excelle^tly named and to home he might full greatly
have profet and ho su^ eu^ so do they be ordende to full great peynis. for they
be a s^launder to the church of god while they pluck not up and distrey the
wekyd leuing and rotyd wysys the which be sowyn in the hertys and ^u^sacron of
the people of god yt they have cure and charge of ne their be about by her
office to edify and pla^te i^ her so gettys the nobulnes and ^dicions of virtue
and honest no more than other that lack both holiness and good understanding
Ne^theles our lord sechyth as well of hem that had no co^ning in seche thigis as
they should have had for to be hedys of the people as of other the which had
co^nyng and vndersto^ding how be it yt they had hit but barenly and turmth hit
to the more torme^ ty^ and peynys of hem both Also for the opyn and foul
onchaste leuing of pristys and clarkys bishoppis now a dayis full greatly
perish be cause they correct not so great a sin the which is a full great
i^urye and wrong to the heuynly sacram^tys of holy church. For i^ thoo blessed
sacramentys all the life and help of crysiyn people is ^ teynyd the which as
mekyl as is in hem. be not aschamyd to defoule when they be right foul and
pollutyd Sothly of the negligens of denis of arche dekons and of other officers
money thingis y saw the which y leave out to tell and how by her ^senting and
simu lacyon and for taking eftys and me^nys pso^s all the state of crystyndome
almost is o^co^me and subutyd For this is opynly showed in the werkys and
^dicions of hem that now leuyn Also the dissolucyon and ^loufulnes of seche
^so^s yt should have a zele and a love to the people of god reqryth and askyth
etnal da^pnacio^ as well to the clergy as to the lay folk and most to he self
and to her auctors Trewly for these thigis and many other inumerable in this
wise the forseyde arche bishop la board in great peynys under greuys ^playning
Sothly he was well helped there by the gloryus martyr and arche bishop of
england sent thomas of ca^turbery home he had gotten to him there a special
patron and helper be cause when he went to the holy land a p^grymage in his
life time he hordende there an hospitalle for pil grimys and intytylde hit in
the name of sent thomas to the great sokyr and conforte of crystyn pylgryms Tree
wely this deed y knew first in purgatory when y saw the forseyd bishop i^ sore
peynys but esterday y en^ red thereof if hit were true. and a certain person a
religius man told me how yt was ordende and begu^ue Forthyr more greatly hit,
pfet him the labur yt he had when he went on pilgremage to Jerusalem where he
made yt place Also many prystys that by the grace of god left her vycyus
leuing of onchastyte i^ very contricio^ of heart with confession of mouth when
they leuyd and be cau se they had not do pena^s sufficiently y saw he^ torment
i^ inumerable peynys Trewly then y thought to my self yt full few prystys were
there fo^de of the great no^ bre yt is of he^ i^ all the world. that had de^uyd
peynis after her death for breking her chastyte. and to this hit was so answard
Therefore full few ben here torment of the no^bre of seche persons for onethe it
is seldyn^e sey yt a ny man of he^ were very penitent and contrite while they
le uyd for her syn^ys. wherefore hit is no doubt but yt the great multitude of
hem been vtwardly da^pde Sothly in all this visyon y saw no man that vtwardly
hadd lost hope of salvation nethir yt was i^ certe^te of etnal da^pnacio^
Neutheles some yt were in greuys peynys had no knoulege when they should be
sauyd and yt was most peynful to hem. And some that were in peynys knew a
certente of her delyuerans and that was to he^ a great solace as hit is here
seyde above

A certain descripcion of diverse kind of sinful people and of her peynys Ca
xxxvij
h yt were to long and out of mesure yeffe y schulde rehearse by name al tho
persons the whi che y saw and knew there of all ^dicions of all degreys and of
all orders Also of y schulde sey or be about to schew and declare synglerly
the peynys and tormentys of every syngler crime like as hit was sche wde to me
at that time hit wulde be over teduse and weriful to the redder thereof For there
is no syn^e wre tyn in holy scripture but there is ordende in tho placys certain
peynis to all that be doers of hem Trefore y leave out and pas by menfleers
auowtres fornicators. liars and forswerers glotyners trayturs couety se folk.
proud pepul enuyus pepul. sclaunderers hate full people and a thousand mo of
this wise to ^ome all is ordende there synglerly full great peynes and greuys And
ho may tell of al these thingys when they yt were good relygyus men sofred full
sore and greuys peynys only by cause they delyted and took a pleasure of the
feyernes of her handys and long fingers Also weyfaring men yt were slain of
theuys in her iornay y saw he^ ponyshte for her syn^ys in an esy wise Theuys
also of home hit is not to be left out in no wise that were for her syn^ys
ingit to ha^ uing i^ this world and were only confeste so a priste orels opynly
yt most helpith of her wykydnes and evil dedys in very true contricio^ of
heart and so anon took her death patiently forgeuing with heart al her enemies
and al manner wrongys and trespassys done to hem and alsoo her death in
remyssyon of al her synnys y saw al seche with a special certain worschipfulnes p^
to full soft and esy peynys Also other that were ponyshte and hangyd like wife
for the ste and other mysdedys and wulde not o pynly confess her synnys i^
time of her death but hopi^g by fraud and disceyte of her gostely enmy the
devil to escape harmles at that time for the denying and excusi^g her synnys how
be hit that they purposyd i^ her heart to be confeste to a priste of hem
afterward and to do for hem condign penans and also vtwardly to leave hem of
they could have and opteyne space thereto as they hopid and et could not have
hit but schulde deye and than in the last end of her life mekely besought god
and his ho ly seyntys of mercy and help. al seche were full greuysly torment in
peynys for her synnys Not wtstondi^g nethir these had lost hope of mercy and
forgeuenes. Neu^theles they were gynyd in fyry feturs and ha^gyd up in the
myddys of fire on gybbettis home the cru el tormentours and fyndys alto beat
and brake with scorgys and forkys and vpbrayde hem of crymys and sennys with great
scornys and mockys

Of posynners that he saw there Ca xxxviij
they that were posynners and poynsyd folk and also women that had cast
awey and forsake her babys the which they had bore or had slain he^ or else
by her cursyd craft had caused hem to be bore before her time. I saw such
persons by full often betyngys and ab^asyng of naylys alto toryn TNO T197 And
also they were ^pellyd to drink dy^s metals as bras and led multyn by fire
and medylde with full stinkinge thingys the which burnt her inward bowels and
so went greuysly through he^. and when it was out hit was brought to hem to
drink again. Trewly ^ten great mo^sturs of creping bestis with horrabul and
gastful harmys cleppyd seche women: and stykyd her naylys full deep in her
neckys and sydys and having at her brestys sokyd her pappys with her venu^mys
mouth and alto gnew hem with her cursyd tethe

Of usurers also Ca xxxix
Usurers also y saw how they were dround in great hepys like hyllys of
bre^ning money complaining with great sorrow and wayling by cawse they quenchyd
not in hem when they leuyd in this world the evil flame and syn^e of couetyse

Of fygytyuys out of religion Ca xl
r^ligyous persons that were fugytyuys that is to sey that ra^ne out of her
order by the which they had bond he^ self to the ^uice of god and after
turnid again to the world and gave hem to wordely leuing. as a dog yt
turuith ageyn to his vomet so gretely they were there smyt with peynys yt y can
i^ no wise tell nethir declare her torme^tic. and onethe full bitt repe^ta^s and
confession at her last end sauyd seche persons otherwhile fro e^lasting
da^pnacio^. Ne^theles her apostasye was full long time and greuysly ponyshte

Of a certain king of Inglond Ca xli
bUt what schal y sey of a certain prince and sum time king of englo^ d yt y
saw the which in his life was full mighty among all the princys of this world.
Sothely he was on every side pressyd and peynyd. that a man might sey of hem as
seit johan the euangelyste seythe in his apocalypse this wise Quantum se
dilatauit. et in delic^s fuit. tan tum datur ei tormentum et luctum. That is to
sey how mekyl he did extend and magnifyde hem self and was i^onleful^
lustys and delytys. so mekyl give e to him torment and henynes. how is that may
concede in mind what great peynys al his body and lymmys were smytte with He
sat upon an horse. that blewe owte of her mowthe and no se a flame black as
pycche. medylde whyt a smoke and stenche of hell. in to the greuys torment of
him that sat above. the which was armyd at al pecys as he schulde have gone
to batelle Trewly the armyr that he were. was to him intollerabul pain for
they were as bright brennyng irne is. when hit is betyn whyt hamers and smytyth
owte fyry sparclys bythe which he was with ynforthe al to bread and whyt owte
forth the same armyr brende in full great hete. and ladyd him that ware him with
full sore ^orhtyn. Also as tochyng his helm his shylde. and his haburgyn. and
his leg harnes y leave owte. for by the brennyng hete and pey se of hem al.
how mekyl he was peynyd no man cast tell Sothely he wulde have geuyn all the
world if hit might have be so that he might have be delyue ryd fro on spur with
the which he was compellid to stere his wrechid horse to re^ne whereby oftyn
times he fylle down hedlong Also the sadyle yt he sat in was stekyd through on
both the sydys with fyrye brochys and naylis the which was a gasteful sight for
any man to behold and the maw and iwarde bowels of him yt sat in the sadelle
were sore smyt through by the scharpnes of tho brochys and naylys. and this
cruelly was he ponyshte for the onrightful scheding of me^nys blood and for the
foul sin of auowtrye yt he vsyd In this too thingys he dedly offendyd often
tymys and tho cru el torme^tours wykyd fyndis full greatly with derisions and
scornys vpbraydyd him because he wuld be aue^gid on me^ yt flew his venery as
heart and hynde ^ocke and do and seche other the which by the law of kind
ought to be slain to eu^y man and therefore su^ of he^ he put to death or else
cruelly wulde mayme him. and for all this he did never but lytyl penance as long
as he leuyd Also full myserably he ^playnde yt nethir his sonnys nethir his
fre^dys the which he left alive and to home he had gotyn mekyl temporal godys
did or schewyd for him any thing after his death for his help and rele uyng No
thing he seyde my so^nys and frendys have done for me i^ these peynys Alas lo y
have lost all my labur and be^nes that y have done ydylly to make mine hesers
rich and mighty Alas for the false and dece nabul flatring of pepul and now
what have they bro ught or done for me unhappy to home y gate and gedirde so
mekyl tresur and riches and to whom y gave so many re^tys and possessions and
for home so greatly y offen did god while y leuyd and now y am dedde non of he^
doyth any thing for me Trewly y saw him su^what e syd and releuyd of his peynys
only by the prayers of religious men. to home in his life for god he was full
benyuolent oftyn times. and thereby y vndirstode specially that he hopyd to be
sauyd. Forthermore be side al these thingys above seyde full greuysly he sorowyd
and was peynde. for by cause he opp^ssyd diu^s times the pepul with ondue taxys

Of a bishop yt was there i^ peynys and et god shewid miraclys for him after
his death Ca xlii
^Owe as y remember a iiii ere agon a certain biss^oppe was chose to be an arche
bysshope but he was than hastily p^^ente of death and so disceste and left
both Trewly this byss^oppe was inwardly in his leuing full well disposyd and
religyusly. for he was pure and devout in heart and clean of body that by the
use and weryng of a scharpe herre and other die uers penauns. tamyd well his
own flesche. He conformyd his face and chere as hit semyd mekyl after the
behauing of secler pepul. and to eschew and refuse the fauer of vain glory
the which is eu pro uyd an enmy to virtue he shewid alwey i^ wordys and
contena^s gladness and iocu^dnes when he was with inforth contrite ^f heart and i^
his affeccio^s Also this bishop vsyd as it is said before to ponyssh as well
his daily fautys by the which in great curys and hard thi^ngys he had
offendyd as he did other synnys the which he had done in his young age by
diverse chastmen tys and often wepyngys. Also in his office of bys shoppery. he
had offendyd greuysly in money thingys by his neglygens as other bysshoppys did
of home y have made mencyon above. Of this Bishop y hard now opynly by the
seeing of many folk. that by him myraclys were schewed and d^ne after his death
on seek pepull and febull. And (...) suppose hit is truth that our lord did
worschy pe his servant with seche benefettys te give other example and
vndyrstondyng. that he herd and cle ne leuyng the which he leuyd ynwardly.
plesyd^ owre lord full well. the why he beholdyth only me nys hertys. Sothely et
fownde y hem in peynys re man yng to him wythowtyn dowte. full great mede and
rewardys in the everlasting bliss of heuene And he that be seuythe not them
the which been in the peynys of purgatory. sum time to do myraclys in this
world. let hem read the iiii book of the die a oge of saint gregery. and there he
schal see fullyur an example of this thing. schewyd and done at Rome of an holy
man yt was called pascasius adeco^

Of a certain ababotte Ca xliij
aCerten abbot that was well and religyous dys posyd and a man of great sobirnes
deyde a (...) e re a goo. the which be quethyd at his last end to one of his
brethren mekyl money for to dele to the power folk for the help of his soul.
Then this monk wysyly and deuoutely fulfilled the ab bottys will and gave
all that money to (...) p^re pepul and nedy And where he knew any yt were
cold and hungery or smytte with sekenes and we re bore of honest folk and
well condicyonde and were fallyn to pouerte whereby they had not to bye her
leuyng. and to beg they were aschamyd to seche he wulde opyn his hand hfter
his power and releue hem with mete and drink schoys and clothys Also to ancrys
and to wedowys to would folk and to power scolers he gave mekyl commanding
hem al to pray deuoutely for the soul of him for whom that money was geuyn
And also they did full spedly And whenne this true and feythfull monk had
geuyn to pore people all that was be takyn him he fylle in to sekenes / by the
which long time he was well prouyd and purgyd and dys ceste a four ere a go
and made a blessed end. And both the forseyde abbotte and the monk y for de
there in purgatory. Trewely the abbot was holdyn ette in scharpe peynys and
most by cause that full carnaly and over mekyl he louyd his kynnys folk and
also was to hem over large in eftys of the goodys of his monasterye and spend
on hem mekyl more than was conuenyent to do. Plainly that same vyse that is to
seye carnalle love to kynred more thanne right requyryth. full sore grenyth al
most all manner of people that were profeste to holy relygyon in her life. and
also al them that were dyspensours of holy church goodys as byssho pys been and
such other the which spend hem probably in other vysys than they schulde.
And as y cese of hem the^ which wastyn the godys of the ho ly church whereby
they were made rychr in dyssolu cyon of clothyng in voluptuous metys and pompys
of the world so schalle they that vsyn scarsly to her need the godys that they
have thaugh no thing of hit be spe^de (...) vanyte. full straytely give aco^ ty^
of such godys as they have and keep and remeynyth above her yede Sothely they
schnld first give of here goodys more largely to the pore pepulle of her paris
house and afterward by discrecyon help her fader^ and moders as they need all
superfluyte put aside and also releue other pore folk and so deserve mede of
god without any offense. For there in purgato ryr y knew first this rewle
ordende to bysshoppys and abbottys persons and vicars of the church the why
che can not be brokyn without great vengns. And ere y saw these thyngys so
ordend. full fer y thoughtr odyr wise of hem. For y knew before that the manners
and condycyons of seche prelatys were far fro hit and odyr wise demenyd And
all that keep and fulfille this law and ordenans as right and reason
requyryth schalle so be rewar did of god for hem as they had geuyn all such
godys of her own propre patrymonye. There fore this Abbot before seyde among
sore and gre uys peynys and tormentys hastyd him toward the rest of paradyse.
And as he saw and behylde the forseyde monk his brother the which was there
in a certain part beside removed fro the greuys pey nys and tormentys that were
there. and fullyght ly peynde in comparyson of him bowde him self of tyn times
to the same monk and thankyd him with both his handys for the great charity
that he schewyd for him in the dystrybucyon and delyng of the forseyde money
that he delyueryd to him And the monk schewyd him self to the abbot that
behylde him full gracyous of syghte and gladsum of chere For he was right feyre
and sembly in white clothyng thawghe they were resperste and had on hem a few
spottys And whenne y saw this y mer ueyled in my self. Then sent Nycholas
yt hyl de me by the hand told me this of him. Knowyst this monk that thou
seyst. he served and pleasyd god full well in his life with great clennes of her
te and chastyte of body. and mekyl evil the whi che schulde have be done in
the place were he was he lettyd and was agenste hit. For he was fervent in zele
of ryghtwysnes and hatyng evil of heart wherefore many reproues oftyn times
pacyentely he sofryd for the defense and honest of his religion and specyaly
of hem the which ware the habet of religyo^ upon hem for that intent that they
might dystroye the vertuus leuing and ^uersacion of relygyo^ full besyly p^uyng
not her spirit but the wrechidnes of her fles^ and the world i^ the
monaster^s of spyritual and gostely leuing. And alas for sorrow for now by seche
persons the specyal worschyppe and honor that holy church was of before is
almost brought to naught while the multitude of carnal and worldly men encresyn
above noumbre. home the fewnes of spyrytuall men sofryn chesyng rather to
dyssymylle and not to know her evil and so to rest hem self tha^ by her
blamyng and resysting stere and move agenste hem the wrath and trowbullus
hastynes of such evil dys^ syd persons And thaught they so do ette they can
not be fewer fro the spies and frau dys of hem And as sum tym ysmael that was
bore carnaly pursewyd ys^at that was bore spyrytua ly that ya to seye by a
spyrytual promise of almigh ty god. like wise hit is now. For carnal folk ben
full greuys to spyrytuall pepul. be cause they can not peruerte hem to her
frawardnes Also many there been that gretely hit is to sorrow the which in her
leuyng begun spyrytualy. but by process of time owther they be ouercumme by
onstabulnes or else ben dysceyuyd by sempylnes. and also they fall done fro her
purpose and beginning unto the myserabul and wrechyd corrupcyon and slow fulness
of this world. entysyd and drawyn by the examplys and councelys of evil
desposyd persons. Trewly these great hirtys of relygyous leuyng the which
before in the time of faders. full nobly flowryd and schone as an heuynly light.
full gretely beholdyth the ^re latys of holy church in this days. that known
this and despysen hit. m so mekyl that they vndyr stand not hem self. that
hit is so with hem They knew verily what thing they be cum to. but they what
thing they schulde have cum to. be cause yt they be cum to the lust and
pleasure of this world but they schulde have cum to the following of crystys
pouerte. and to the karke and dilygente keeping of her cure. that is the pepul
of god co^ mytted to hem. And therefore that they seche and that they care. For
that they be cum to and that they ha ue. The pepul of god they feed not but
distroye and hem perauenture that they have turnyd fro ryhhtwysnes they fleyn
spirytually and lesyn. for her co^ formyng to hem not showing hem self faders
and pa stors. but woluys and theuys. Trewely the promo tyng of such persons
kyngys and bysshoppys and other great men procuron and get. and her soget tys
full mekyll look there aftur not being rectors and faders. but peruersours and
destroyers of her sow lys the which thynkyn that all thing that is under hem
that lykyth. is leuefulle. why by the right was judgment of god been remys
trowbuld and chyrchys confowndyd and the state of erthely for he vtwardly
subuertyd And for seche demenyng they be acursyd of god the which schulde be
deuowt and meke intercessours to god both for him that been a live. and for him
that been deed by hoys me ritys and prayers. specialy the welfare of al crystyn
dome might be preseruyd and encresyd and al evil fer put awey fro the pepul of
god And while sent Nycholas conplaynyd of seche thynghes and of many othyr you
this wise. and remembryd also so me thyngys that were of great co^mendacyon and
laud of certain persons. the which in her time sto de full manly in seche
perels. and strenthyd othyr so to do y saw full many on every side me the
which y knew be fore sore holdyn in full greuys peynys and tormentys Trewly y
lokyd most upon hem that y knew a lytyl be fore and louyd right spe cialy

Of an abasse also Ca xliiij
oF the which a certain worschipful abbas was there that blessedly paste this
same ere owte fro this world tawarde the everlasting life and ioys of heuyn.
Sothely sche told me many thyngys both of her state that sche was paste and
of her state that sche was in. also sche seyde many thigys to me the which y
schulde tell to her own natural sisters that were under de tytyl of v^gynyte
among othyr holy virgenis in the same monasterye. that sche was abbas of by
some certain tokyns of the which some y would tell that schulde be to the
herers of hem full gracius and good but that sche bade me tell hit to no
nothyr. ^aue to hem that sche commawndyd me Sche seyde also that sche has
resceuyd mekyl releuyng and help of her peynys by the deuowte prayers and
psalmys of her systers the seruantis of god tho home be fore sche was a
spiritual modere. And sche co^mawndyd me to thank hem for money good dedys the
which they have done for her and for the sofragys of messys and othyr holy
prayers that they have gotyn for her as they might of certain re ligious
persons. And more over they have made and ordende to be offered to our lord
daily without any cesyng for me messys and other devout prayers And therefore
let him know withouten doubt that they schalle have therefore full great mede
and y also have scapyd full scarpe peynys. And if they persevere as they have
begun. sone y hope to escape the renande of my peynys. Sche told my also that
gre tely hit helped her that before she was made abbas sche schewyd and behauyd
her self with great co^ passion full mekely to some of her systers that were
sore vexed with great sickness or temptacyon and full often did all manner of
service deuowtely that were right foul and absecte in the monasterye

Of. ii. young nonnys that were lepurs xlv
tHere were sche seyde on a time in owre place. it. young vyrgyns the which
were full sore infecte with the great plage of lepur. And for asmoche that in
many placys of her bodies. the fle sche was fall down to the bonys and the
skin above. oftyn times horrably blyster owte of bleynys. And all my systers
of owre monasterye lothyd all most. to see or vysyte hem or to teache he^ but
to me me thought and semyd full sweet. to have and opteyne hem in my lap or
hold hem in my harmys. and forthermore alsoo to we^e hem in bathys. and also
to wype her sores with my ste nys. and they full well and gladly sofryd that
plage of lepur and tankyde god of that chasteme^t and dys sese And so dely tyd
hem in hit as they had rescey uyd of him gracius yftys of diverse ornamentys And
where alytyl while agon. they were peyryd in the world by a long martyrdom.
now full bles sydly they folowyn the heavenly lamb her spowse ihesu christ
wyhtowtyn any spotte where sum ever he goo And for the pety and charity that y
had and sche wyd to hem in her need y have evermore had in al my peynys. a
swyfte refreschyng and releuyng of help. Also many othyr things the same
abbas tol de me among the which sche complaynyd that for on thing that she
did she had sofryd sore peynys and that was by cause. neglygently sche left a
cer ten child a young scoler. that was destitute of al his frendys. and was
comyttyd to her of a certain bishop for to be browght up. and therefore the
child leuyd long time in great dyscomforte and heaviness Also y saw and knew
sum of her systers that were noonys of her monastery there in that place of
purgatory in light peynys

Of a knight that sinnyd in simony Ca xlvi
aCerten knight that was patron of a church sold on a time a personage to a
certain clerk for. xxvij. mark Sothely aftyrwarde he repe^te him of that deed.
and for the satysfaccion of so great a sin he took the cross to go the holy
land. and to vyset owre lordys scepulcur of he might. and for his offensys
there to ask god forgeuenes and mer cy Trewly that time. the hethyn folk had
put thens crystin pepul and so occupied the holy land Then were christian pepul
gedyrde of al coostys of the worl de to fight agenste hem. and to drive hem
away and so this knight yoynde him self to goo among hem And aftyrwarde he
was smytte with sekenes. and endyd his life in that yourney Soth ly y fownde
this knight there et in mean peynys And he told me that for the sin of
symony that he did* as hit is a fore seyde he had sofryd full greuys peynys and
great And more over he seyde. if y had not be prevent by the mercy of god to
repent me full sore before my death for that sin of symony in no wise schulde
have escape eternal dampnacyon. And the labur of the pylgrymmage that y to he
for god tawarde the holy land. greatly esyd me of thoo peynys. that were due
for the same sin Also hit was grawntyd me by the goodness of god that y
schulde send to her that was my wife. by a feythful clerk warnyd in his sleep
of me. that sche schulde orden to be seyde for me. v. tricennar^s of messys
with the offycys of placebo and dirige as the church had ordende for hem that
been deed and of seche prystys that were of honest and chaste living. of the
which. some y told by name. Than sche made these messis with othyr thyngys a
fore sey de. to be trewly done for him. and aftyrwarde sche rewardyd hem as
they were worthy by the which he seyde his peynys were full greatly abatyd. For
a bowte the beginning after my death oftyn times y was compellyd daily to
devour tho pensys hoote and brennyng that y had takyn of the pryste and person
before said. And now by the mercy of god y am delyueryd fro that great
tormente. and that was most for the suffragiis the which was done for me. And
ette y am constrained full sore to sofyr the scarpnes of cold. by cause whenne
y leuyd y had not compassyon on power and nedeful people that were clothles and
coolde. And oftyn times whenne y gave hem mete and drink y wuld be right well
war by the vice of hardness to spen de no money upon hem. Thanne seyde y to
him. what and there were done et again messys for you schuld ye not trow ye
resceyue perfetly rest. Thanne he seyde. ^ys and there were done for me. vii.
tricennariis with the officys longyng to hem this is placebo and dirige. y hope
that anon as they were done for me. y schuld be delyueryd fro peynys to
everlasting rest. Here now hit is to be vndyrstonde that this same knight
after his death as y know hit now without any doubt. apperyd in a vysyon to
the same clarke before said. and assygned him. v. full chaste prystys and chosyn
by name. that schuld seye these messys and other thin gys like as hit is seyde
above. Hoys persons and namys and the placys of her dwellynges the why che
dylygentely he expressyd were to him self whi le he leuyd in his body. and to
y clarke that he apperyd to. and also to his wife that did for him vtwardly
onknowen

Of a certain young monk that sum time in his days was sexten of the church
Ca xlvij
aCerten y^onge man a monk that so^me time y had seyne the which in many
thyngys be hauyd him relygyously and he was also sexten of the church where he
dwelled. Sothely there were in this same church. iii. or. iiii. ymagys of our
blessed lady saint marye having in her lappys the image of our sauyur ihesu
christ in form of a ly till babe and they were set at every auter on right
well peynted and feyre arrayed with gold and di uers other colors. the whycde
sch^ wyd to the people that behylde him great devotion. And before every image
hynge a lamp. the which after the custom of that same church. were wont to
be lyghted at every pryncypale feste through all the year. both by night and
by day enduryng fro the first ensonge unto the second ensonge before the
forseyde images of owre blessed lady seynte Ma rye. And alsoo thylke lampys
lyghtnyd all the church abowte. Trewely hit happonde upon a time in the
forseyde Sextenys days. that great scars nesse of oil was in that countreye
that same time. and also there was no man that there had any oil thanne to
selle. and seldyn hit was that any stran ger at that sesyn put forth any
such chafer for to selle. where fore the forseyde sexten. by cause he wyste
not. where he might get oil for necessary vsys the mean while he withdrew the
light fro the forseyde lampys. as him thowghte he might lefully do how be
hit that he had some in store. but he dread lest hit would not suffyce till he
hade more. so that on ascensyon day and wythssonday he put no light to him. the
which in these festis specialy were won te to brenne But he went not
onponyshte. Sothely the third day in whytsson weke when he was sey en in al
thyngys right hole and sownde suddenly he was smite with a full scharpe axces.
and so a vexid there of that he was mad and owte of his mind and on the
wysday the next weke aftir he did And on saturday by fore his death. when he
was almos te at his last end. he saw in auysyon the queen of heuyn owre
blessed lady sent mary. stondyng on a grice of a certain wyndyng steyer in the
church that was by on of the same ymagys of owre blessed lady aforeseyde And
when he saw her he cryde to her remembryng his sekenes and perelle and seyde. O
holy and blessed mary. have mercy on me. Than sche and s^erde him scharply
both in word and in chere seying this wise. Thou haste take fro me the
worship of my light in earth. and y schal ageyn take fro the the light of
this present life. Sothely whenne he herd and understood this thretyng he was
sore aferd and abasshid and no mer uelle: and cast him self done at her fete
with gre te weeping and sorowyng and askyng foreuenes of his trespass and
promised amendment The^e our blessed lady hoys thretyng is wont to be of
mercy mekely behylde him and made a sign with her hand schewyng him the grice
that sche stood upon and seyde. Sytte done here Thanne he begun as him
thought to sytte done full sore aferd at her fete. whenne sche suddenly vanyshte
awey. And whenne he was cumme to him self again called for his brethren and
told him this vysyon that he had seyne and prayde hem and also bade hem with
great instaunce and wothys that the next night with the dayr following. the
lampys before said schuld be lyghtynde and brenne. as the custom was before
Also he made a vow that and he might have his health again he would contynally
ke pe forth and encrese the forseyde lampys to worschyppe and lawde of the
glorious vyrgyn and mother of god our blessed Lady saint marye. But he cowde
not call again the word and sentence that sche seyde to him And so he did
the tewsday after trynyte sunday and as for the restoryng of the for seyde
lampys some satysfaccyon he did for his of fense and trespass. Trewly ette
hethir to was he holdyn in peynys and tormentys by cause often times he had
offendyd in keeping of his relygyon and in seying of dyuyne service And also he
was light of behauyng and ondyscrete as in etyng and drynkyng. lawghyng
spekyng. ^ apyng and in many other mo

Of a certain clerk that leuyd holyly Ca xlviij
fOrthermore a certain clerk that paste onte of this world in his yowthe y saw
there i^ the same place the which by the inspyracyon of the holy ghost both
in connyng of dyuynyte as in other^ly be rals facultee^ passyd al most all
other that were his felawys. Sothely he was there peynde i^ a light and amene
wise gladly going forth by the testy money and witness of a good conscience that
he had toward the ioys and rest of paradyse Trewely he was full well dis^ osyd
of manners and conditions and studeyng in scolys pure of chastyte and beny
uolente in charity with other eftys of grace by the which he plesyd our lord
full well. Also he had gotyn to him specyaly the love of the most gloryus
vyrgyne the modyr of god our blessed lady sent marye home he served full
deuoutely in his lyfe^ and full oftyn times wachyd long in prayers before her
auter with a full meke spyryte and a co^tryte her te and for her love gave to
pore pepul mekyl almys wherefore withoutyn doubt thya remaynyd to him of the
same blessed lady in heuyn everlasting joy and great mede And for the hour of
his passing out of this world he had resceyued mekyl refresshyng and by her
contynual solace and help was mercyfully also in his peynys sokyrde and
comforted Sothely whenne he was schewyd to me he was sum what dyssesyd and
peynyd only by the intempera^s of the air as in coolde and in hete Then y
inquired and he had sofrid any other peynys before. And hit was told me that he
had sofryd other whiles among the peynfull hete of thirste. and that was be
cause whenne he abowndyd in temporal goodys he was more harder to the pore
peplu than he schulde have be. or right would And trewely he had great
compassyon of hem. and mekyl he did in his life to help and releue hem. But
nevertheless oftyn ty mes he was weary of hem. and specyaly after that he was
waxin rycher in so mekyl that before when he was powrer and had not so mekyl he
was more lyberale to power folk than he was after whenne his goodys were
encresyd And therefore full sore hit is to dread how streytely they should eve
aco^tys of her dis^nsacyon that have resceyued benefytys and riches of the
church. owre lord yhesus seeing this wise in the gospel. Cui plus commititur ab
^o plus exigetur that is to sey To home more is co^ mytid or be takyn. of him
more shall be asuyd Now soth ly by cause when have here trewly wretyn in words
money thynghes that we fownde and saw in placys of peynys let us here end owre
narracion of hem And aftirward as god will give us grace we will asaye to tell
and declare some thynghys that we saw of the conforte and gladness of the
blessed sowlys the which restyd hem yoyfully in the full me ry and yocunde
place of paradyse

Also of paradyse and of the multitude of pepul that he saw and found there
Ca xlix
Now of the solace and conforte of the blessed sowlys that been scapyd her
peynys an^ be at rest and of her everlasting ioys. sum what y will tell you as
y can and may For no man may sufficiently And whenne we were paste and go^^e
these three placys of peynys as hit is above seyde and had behold the great
peynys and diverse tormentys of synnarys. we went forth farthir And as we
went farther. there begun to appear a lytyl and a lytyl more and more a full
feire light unto us and with all brake out a full plesaunte sweet fauyr And
anon after we came to a fylde the which was full of all manner of feyre and
plesaunte (...) that gave to us an oncredyble and inestymable conforte of joy
and pleasure Sothely in this fylde we saw and found infynyte thousandys of
sowlys full ioc^de and merye in a full sweet rest after her penauns and after
her purgacyon. An^ hem that we found first in the begynuyng of that filde had
upon hem white clothyng. but hit was not very bright nethyr well schynyng.
Notwithstondyng they had no spotte of blacknes or of any other o^clennes on hem
as hit semyd. save this as y said before they were not very bryg^t schynyng
white. Trewely among these many y knew the which sum time y saw and knew
full well whenne they leuyd in this world^. Of the which schortely sum what y
will tell you and of other y purpose to cesse

Of a certain abbas the which he saw and kne we there also Ca. l.
hEre in this place was a certain abbas that was of worschipful conuersacyon.
the why the y knew whenne y was a child. and sche dyed a xiiii year agone.
Sothely sche had great fer uour and zele to chastyte. and to all other honest
Also sche was wise and war and denowte in ke pyng her sisters. to whom sche
was committed This abbas y saw among them that were in the begyunyng of that
joyful place. For sche was but as new cum thedur fro her peynys. and sche had
upon her clean clothyng but not verey white schynyng. And sche semyd by her
chere and dysposycyon as sche had be long time sick or dissesyde and had
cumme late fro bathys. I pass by here to tell of sum light thyngys for the
which sche had sofryd right scarpe peynys. Sothelysche had not ouercumme in
her leuyng the vice and mocyon of vain glory. among the merytys of virtue and
commendacyon of flatryng and of other thing is innumerabulle y pass by* in the
which the febull ignorance of good pepul often times offendythe Trewely sche
told me that sche had sofryd peynys specyaly by cause sche louyd her kynnys
folk ouermekyl carnaly. and to hem gave mekyl goodys of the place that sche
had rule of. whenne sum of her systers to home sche was a spyrytuall mother
lackyd sum times such thyngys as longed to her leuyng and clothyng. And whenne
y hard this of her* gretely y meruelyde. For y know not one the any prelate
in this days. that vsyd so great scarsnes to her kynnys folk as sche me semyd
did to her cosynis. And as tochyng superfluyte as fer as y knew. onethe sche
gave any time to hem that were of her kynne there necessar^s. Also her neue^s
and necys. and othyr that were of her kynne she cowpulde hem not to carnal
matrymony. but be took hem to religyon for to serve god. And so ster ne sche
behauyd her in wordys and in chere. to hem specialy. that when sche was seyne
to othyr strangers frendely and esely. sche was only to her cosynis right
gastful and on mylde. Also sche vsyd to en quyre there fawtys full warly. and
when peraue^ture sche might find hem fawtye. full bytturly therefore sche wolbe
hem ponyshe Also sche would have the ^ones te of manners. and the clennes of
chastyte obseruyd and kept. of al seruantys and persons that sche hade longyng
to the monasterye. but most of hem yt were of her kynne. And there was no
brothyr ne sister that. sche vsyd to fauer* as did othyr that were not of her
kynne And when y had seyde this to her. and also that sche had browghte forth
ma ny that y knew to keep deuowtly her purpose and habet of relygyon that they
had takyn upon hem this wise the same abbas seide to me again. Sothe hit is
sche seyde a^s tie sey. But nevertheless for the carnal affection and love. that
y had ynwardely to my frendys when y was bownde to the due gostely leuyng of
religion. as well by the reason of my pro fessyon. as by the office that y bare.
y kowde find non excuse. be fore the streyte judgment of god in the which y
was examynde to the vtturmaste point of my leuyng. And most by cause that
occasyon of gruggyng. and example of ouermekyl besynes grew to my systers. by
my fawte and negligens for the carke and besynes that they had to her fren dys
Trewly y schulde rather have be war and takyn head of the hurt of her sowlys
of home y had cure and charge. than the superfluyteis and prouysyon of wordly
goodys to my ^frendys the which y left on^s with the world for god. And when
this worschippful abbas had told me this and many othyr thyngys also. we went
forth farther in to the same joyful fylde

Of a certain prior that leuyd denowtly and dyed holyly Ca li
ySaw and knew also in this joyful place a certain worshipful person yt was a
prior of a monaste rye the which dyed a. iii ere ago^ne Trewly y saw him full
blessydly among ye holy spiritys and blessed seyntys in a joyful rest.
exe^pte and delyueryd from al peynys. gladsu^ and merry of yt place yt he was
in but mekyl more gladder and that yncomparable for the certain bydyng that he
boode. to have the sight of god. And he bare evermore while he leuyd in this
world the habet of a monk both on his body and in his heart fro the time of
his chyldhode on to his oolde aage and to his last end. Also he keeps and
hid the flower of his vyrgym^e in the bosum of mekenes and he cowpuld to hem
full suerly the virtue of pacyens. Trewely he vsyd great ab stynence and long
wacchyng. and both too he overcome by holy devotion. And whenne necessete
compellyd him to be about werkys of charity as his office required for the
time. he wulde ever among be seying some salmys or other deuowte pray ers to
god. No man had more compassyon to he^ that were in temptacyon than he* ne no
man was more deuowtur and besyur in service to seek men / than he. Also he
never denied hem her petycyons and asaynges that were dyssesyd al only of too
thyngis that might be had. And for to help hem that were in heaviness. abecke
of warnyng was suffycy ent. And whenne he was of seche holy leuyng and conuer
sacyon. and also laborde contnualy money erys before his death. in great wekenes
of body so that by his febulnes and dissese he had vtwardly lost the sight of
on of his yes a too ere before his obite when other lymmys of his body faylde
him for diverse other dyssesis. and not withstonding all this ette would he
never be fro the conent ne fro the quere ne fro the common table of the frayter
where he was more fed of the refeccyon of his brethyrne. than of his own
Sothely aftyr his young age. he vtwardly absteynide him fro flesche metys
neuthe les he would to his brethirne yt were sickelew and febul besyly and
denowtly profer hem flessche metys for her recoueryng And at the last he fyl
in to a sekenes y^ is ca^yd dissenteria And when he was al most browghte to
his end. he took his gostely comfort and socur the holy and blessed sakyrme^t
of owre lordys preci^ body and blood with his last anoyntyng. and so bode al
most. x. days wtowte any mete intendyng only the benefitys of god and the
exhortacion of his brethyrne Trewly the night before the day yt he paste to
god abowte the owre of divine ^uyce. he saw owre lord ^hesu and owre blessed
lady saint ma ry cu^myng to him. and with a full meke sign they made a tokyn to
him that he schulde follow hem. and anon aftyr called for his brethirne. and
declared to hem the visyon that he had seyne. and told hem before, and yt with a
full glade heart yt he schulde pass hens on the morrow next. and so he did
Long hit were of y schulde tell and remember al thing that he seyde before
his end. how he co^ mendyd him self and his brethirne to god. and exhortyd
hem to co^tynew in good leuyng. hoys wordys and exhortacion was not of man. but
of the holy gooste that spoke in him Sothly then on the morrow aftyr about the
howr of ^yrse lying in ashys and in herre when he had seyde the ^ce of the day.
and of the holy trimite. and of owre blessed lady. the which he vsyd evermore
of a child and when he had herd deuowtly the passion of owre lord after the.
iiii. euangelystys. and other salmys with great compunccyon of heart betwhene
the swhe ^e kyssyngys of our lordys cross and the salutaci ons of our
blessed lady. blessyng his brethyrne deuontely expyryd. Therefore this
worschyfful fa der. with home fro my right young aage y was full well acquentyd
anon as y saw him deuoutely y great him and he great me again full mekely and
told me many thyngys

Of a certain young monk there of his Ca lii
(...) Othely this worschipful fader and Prior schewyd to me there also a certain
adolescente a young man the which in his chyldhode with great fervent devotion
entryd in to relygyon and was a monk in the same place and monasterye yt this
worschypful fader aforeseyde was prior of. and there he lenyd a good while but
no long time. for he was prenent hastily and sone of death and so blessed ly
he passyd out of this world Trewly y never saw him in body Neutheles often y
have hard the brethe ren of the same place tell of his pure and innocent leui^
g and also of his holy passing money thingys Then said the forseyde prior to me
of him This is my son he seyde of home often times thou haste herd. he was
my fellow when y leuyd in the world in holy leui^ g and denocyon. he is now
also my fellow going to heuyn. and schalle be an even heir with me eterna ly
in everlasting joy and bliss and the same young monk also told opinly to his
brethirne before his death the hour of his passing. And also heuynly melody
was hard at his passing as many can tell that were there in the monastery the
same time Treu ly the forseyde prior. what for diverse negligencys of his own
doing and for othyr diverse fawtys of his brethirne. he had sofryd some lytyl
peynys And the same young monk also. as he had offen did in full small and
lytyl thyngys. so he had fell te before sum what of lytyl peynys. not
wythstondyng they were both equale in wythnes and in joy Sothly the forseide
prior as hit semyd had a trust of a more greter reward for the more good
dedys and meritys of virtue the which he had by lengur leuyng deseruyd

Also of a worschipful pryste Ca liij
y Saw also in this same place a certain worschipful priste the which in hes
life did mekyl good to the pepul by his holy preching Treu ly he had grace of
prechyng so ioynyd which the zele of ryghtwesnes and with good example of leuyng.
yt he callid not only the pepul of his own paryshons fro wekyd leuyng and
dedly dedis. but also he enformid and tawghte inumerable pepul of other
parishons far and broad. how they schulde seue her sennys and fulfille owre
lordis ^mandme^tis and how they schulde daily encrese and per^et i^ good and
^tuus leuyng and so to (...) to adieu and a ^uement end And sothly su^me were
so far fallyn in to the deuyls bondys by her evil and wekyd leuyng whom he
called again by prayur and holy prechyng that visibly they might aftyrwarde
understand and know how they had be takyn hem self to the devil and his
service the which he made of our lordys infinite mercy by confession and
satisfaccion and penanse doing. right well and par fet in the feithe and in
good leuyng Nevertheless for what causys he had also sofryd before alytyl while
diverse peynis y leave out here by cause y have seyde a fore many seche like
thyngys. And as we went more ynward and farthir in to yt joyful place of
paradyse. we had evermore a clear light and felt a swetur sauer and hem that
we found and saw there were more whyttur and gladder than were othyr that we
saw before And where to schulde y tarry here now to nowmbre tho persons and her
merytys the which y saw there. that y knew su^me time before in the world. and
hem also that y knew not before For all that were there in that place. were orden
de to be the cy^sonnys of the hye and everlasting ie rusalem and al had paste
the strife and batel of this world and were victurs of deuyls. and so lightly
they went thoro we al peynys. as they were before les comyrd and hold by
wrechyd leuyng and wordely vicys

how owre lordys passion was representyde and showed to the sowlys that were in
peradise Ca* liiij
n owe sothely tho thyngys the which we saw as we went forth farthir in to
the same pla ce nethyr tongue may tell ne mannys mind may worthily consider.
who is he that may worthily tell in word how in the myddys of tho blessed and
ho ly sowlys the holy cross of crystys passion was pre sented and schewed to
hem. of the which infyinte thousandys were there stondyng about hit and as
our lord had be present in his body so they worschyp^e and hallowed his
blessed passion Trewly there was seyne the meke redemer of mankind our sweet
lord and sauyur ihesus criste as he had be done fresche on the cross. For
all his body was blake and blody of scurgys and betyng and cruelly dis figurde
by foul spyttyng crownyd with scarpe ^hornys and smytte throw with great
naylys his fyde was sore persyd with a spear and fro his handys and fete ra^ne
out blood red as purpul and fro his holy side came down blood and water full
largely. and at this great and wo^dyrful spectacul stood his holy mother our
blessed lady sent marye. not now in ^uynes and morning bat right gladsu^ and
ioyng and yt was i^ a full feyre demenyng. and there also stood with herre the
sweet dyscipi^ of criste saint iohn^e the blessed eua^geliste and ho may now
conceue in mind how t^o holy soulys ra^ne thedir on every side gladly and
lightly to see and behold yt blessed sight O what devotion was there of he^
that behilde that glorius vysyo^ O what co^curs was there of worschi^ing and
thanking our lord ihesu criste and how meruelus was her joyful gladness True ly
remembryng thesese thingys in my self y wot not whedir sorrow or devotion or
compassion or gratu lacyon drawyn now mine onhappy soul diverse weyes. For
wondyr and meruel of tho thingis makyn me alyenate fro my self and sum what
absent to my self. who is he that would not full greatly sorrow to see so feire
and so solemly a body to be cast under so great iniuriis and sore peynys. and
who would not with al his heart have ^passion upon his mekenes so mou^d and vexyd
with tormentys and vpbraydys of seche we kyd folk. and what joy and conforte
may now here be thought. that by his passion and meke death hell is foughtyn
agenst. the devil is ou ercome and bound his power and strenthe is destroyed
and man that was lost is restoryd again to grace and takyn out of the
peynful prison of hell and ioynyd blessydly to the holy angelys of heuyn. and
ho would not meruel on the great mercy and goodness of our sauyur christ ihesu
the which now being inmortalle will whytesaue yt his passion and death the
which he sofryd onys i^ this world bodily for the redemption of mankind be
re presentyd and schewde in a vysyon to the holy sowlys that been in paradyse.
that her devotion and lo ue schuld be the more accendyd and incresyd to him.
Many other thig^s y saw and herd there the which y trow at this time is
bettur to leave hem out than to write hem. and than aftyrward suddenly this
blessed syghte and holy vysyon was takyn fro thens Than all that great multitude
of soulys that came thedir to worschippe the holy cross of crystys passion
went again euerichon to her own places with joy and gladness Treuly y
folowyde eu^more my duke and lodisman sent Nicholas that went forth farthir
and farther repletyd now with great joy and gladness among the full brighte and
light mansyons of blessid sowlys. and the whitnes of he^ yt were here i^ this
pl^ ce and the swetnes of sauer and also the melodye of syngig laudys to god
was i^estymable and onethe to man nys understanding credyble

Of the entryng of the gate of paradyse and of the joy that apperyd withinforth
Ca lv
fOrthermore now whenne we were paste al^ these placys and sightys aforeseyde
and had go^ne a good space more inward and ever grew to us more and more joy
and feyernes of placys. also at the last we saw a far a full glorious wall
of crystal hoys heythe no man might see. and lenthe no man might ^sider. and
when we came thedyr y saw within forth a full feyre brighte schynyng gate and
stood opyn save hit was signed and leide over with a cross Treuly theder came
flockemele the multitude of tho blessed sowlys that were next to hit. and would
cum in at that feyre gate The cross was set in the myddys of that gate. and
now sche was lift up an hye and so gave to hem that came thedyr an opyn and
a fre entryng. and afterward sche was le^yn do ne again. and so spared other
out that wuld ha ue co^myn ^n But how joyful they were that went in and how
reverently they taryde that stood without abydyng the lyftyng up of the
cross again y can not tell by no wordys Sothely here sent Nycholas and y
stood stille to geder. and the lyftyngys up of the cross and the lettyngys
done again. whereby sum went in and some taryde without. y behilde long ty
me with great wonder And at the last sent Nycho las and y came thedyr to the
same gate hand in ha^ de. And when we came thedyr the cross was lift up. And
so they that were there went in. Sothely than my fellow sent Nycholas freely
went in and y foloude but suddenly and onauys^ d the cross of the gate came
done upon owre handys and departed me fro my felawe sent Nycholas and when y
saw this. full sore aferde y was Then seyde sent Nycho las to me. Be not aferde
but have only full certain feythe in our lord ihesu criste and doutheles thou
schalt come in And aftyr this my hope and trust came again and the cross was
lift up and so y came in. but what brightness and clerenes of light was there
with in forth al aboutys no man ask ne seche of me for y can not only tell
hit by word but also y ca^ not re membre hit in mind That glorious schynig
light was brighte and smothe and so raueshte a man that behyl de hit that hit
bare a man above him self by the great brightness of light in so mekyl that
what s^ ever y saw before hit was as no thing me thought in comparyson of hit
That bryghtnesse thawghe hit were inestymable. Nevertheless hit dullyde not a
mannys syghte. but rathyr scharpyd hit. Sothly hit schynyd full meruelusly. but
more in estymably hit delytyd a man that behylde hit. and wondirfully cowpulde
ama^nys syghte to se hit And with ynforthe no thing y might see* but light and
the wall of crystalle thr^w the which we came in And also fro the gronde up
to top of that wall were grycis ordende and dysposyd feyre and meruelusly.
by the which the joyful company that was cum in at the forsey^e gate gladly
ascendyd up There was no labur. there was no difficulte there was no taryng in
her ascendyng. and the hier they went the gladder they were. Sothely y stood
benethe on the grunde. and long time y saw and behylde how they that came in
at the gate ascendyd up by the same grycis And atthe last as y lokyd up
hier y saw in a trone of joy sittyng owre blessed lord and sa uyur ihesus
criste in lykenes of man. and abowte him as hit semyd to me were a five hundred
sowlys. the which late had styed up to that glorius trone. and so they came
to owre lord and worschpte him and thankyde him. for his great mercy and grace
schewyd and done to hem And some were seyne on the vppur partys of the wall as
they had walked hethyr and dedyr Trewly y knew for certain that this place. were
y saw owre lord syttyng in a trone. was not the hye heuyn of heuyns where the
blessid spiritis of angels and the holy sowlys of ryghtwys men ioyin in the
seyghte of god seeing him in his mageste as he is. where also innumerable
thowsondis of holy spiritys and angels serve him and assiste him But than fro
thens wythowten any hardness or taryng. they asce^de up to the hey heuin the
which is blessed of the syghte of the everlasting godhed where al only the
holy angels and the sowlys of right was men that been of angels perfeccion seyn
the ynuisibly and inmortalle king of al worldys face to face. the which has
only inmortalite. and dwellyth in light. that is inaccessyble. for no man may
cu^me to hit. the which no mortalle man seithe nethyr may see Sothely he is
seyne only of boly spiritys that been pure and clean. the which be not greuyd
by no corrupcion of body nethir of sow le And in this vision that y saw. so
mekylle y con ceuyd in my soul of joy and gladness that wat sum ever may be
seyde of hit by ma^^ys mowthe. full lytyl hit is. and onsufficient to express
the joy of mine heart. that y had there

how the monk came owte again throw the same gate of paradyse Ca lvi
therefore when y had seyn al these syghtys abo ue seyde and many othyr
innumerable my lor de sent Nycholas that hylde my by the hand seyde schortly
this to me Loo son he seyde now a party aftyr they peticion and great desir
thou haste seyne and behold. the state of the world yt is to cu^me as hit
might be to possible Also the perels of hem that offendyn and erryn the peynys
of sinners. the rest also of hem yt have done her purgacion. the desyrys of
hem that be going to heuynward. and the ioys of hem. that now vyn cu^me to the
court of heuyn and also the joy of crystis reynynge And now thou must go
again to they self and to thine. and to the worldys feyghtyng Treuly thou
schalt have and perceue the ioys that thou haste seyne and me kyl more. effe
thou contynew and persevere in the dread of god. And when he had seyde this to
me he browghte me forth throw the same gate that we came in. wherefore full heavy
and sorry was y and more than a man may suppose. for well y knew that y must
turn again. fro that heuynly bliss to this worldys wrechidnes. And gretely
he exhor tyd me. how y schulde dyspose me. to abide the day of my calling out
of my body in clennes of heart and of body. and mekenes of spirit with
dylygent keeping of my religyon. Dylygently he seyde to me* keep the
commaundementys of god. and dyspose they leuyng aftyr the example of ryghtwes
men. And truly so hit schal be. that aftyr the ter me of they bodily leuyng
thou schal be admyttyd blessydly. to her feleschippe euerlastyngly.

Of the sweet pele and melodye of bellys that he herd in paradyse and also how
he came to him self again Ca. lvii
aNd while the holy confessor sent nycholas this wise spoke et with me suddenly
y hard there a solenne pele and a rynggyng of a meruelu^ swetenes. and as all the bellys in the world or what sumeuer is of sownyng had be rongyn to gedyr
at onys Trewly in this pele and rynging brake owte also a meruelus swetenes.
and a variant medelyng of melody sownyd with all And y wot not when there the
gretnes of melody. or the swetnes of sownnyng of bellys was more to be wondirde
And to so great a noy e y took good head, and full greatly my mind was suspendyd
to here hit Sothly anon as that great and meruelus sownnyng and ncyse was
cessyd suddenly y saw my self departed fro the sweet se leschippe of my duke
and leder sent Nicholas Than was y returnyd to my self again. and anon y
hard the voycis of my brethyrne. that stood abowte our bed also my bodily
stre^the came ageyn to me aly till and alitil and mine yes opide to the use of
seyig as e saw right well. Also my sekenes and febulnes by the which y was
long time fulsore disse^id was viwardly excludyd and gonne fro me. and sat
vipe before you so strong and mighty as y was before by hit soroful and heavy
And y wend that y had be then in the church before the auter. where y
worschipte first the cross And as tochyng the ta ryng that y made in this
vyseon y had wend hit had be noone. but al only the space of on matens while.
and now as y understand. y was teryde. ij. days and more And now as
co^pendensly as y kowde y have here told you of al tho thingys the which y
saw and were sche wyd to me in body or in spirit at the instauns and
commandment of your holiness and devout charity. And now y beseech yon
mekely and that with sore weping that ye will with save to pray to god for me an
unhappy wrecche yt y may escape the great and greuys peynys of sinners the
which y saw. and cum to the ioys of the holy sowlys that y knew. and alsoo
to see euerlastyngly the glorious face of our blessed lord and sauyur thesu
criste and our blessed lady sent marye

A proffe that this reuelacyon is of god and most nedys be true for the great
myraclys that our lord showed on this same monk that same time. Ca lviij
Money instruccyons and opyn examplys been here at the beginning of this
narracyon that euydentely prouyn this vysyon. not to be of ma^nys conceyte but
vtwardely of the will of god the whi che would have hit schewed to crystyn
pepul Never thelesse efe there be so great infydelyte or infyrmyte of any
persons that can not believe to these thyngys aforeseyde let hem consider the
great sickness and febulnes of him that saw hit. so suddenly and so sone helyd
in to a very wytnes and trowthe of this vysyon that he saw. Also let hem
meruelle the great noise that was abowte him. and also how that he was prycked
in his fete with nyldys by the why che he kowde not in any wise be mouyd.
Forthermore let hem take heed to his yes that were so far fallyn done in to
his head and was not seyne onethe to brethe space of. ii. days. and also aftyr
a full lo^ ge space of howris onethe last might be perseuyd in him a full
small meuyng as a thynne dread in his vytalle veynys Also let hem consider his
contynualle weeping and terys the which he had aftyrward many days. And beside
al these thyngys we know also a nothyr certain thing that was a full feyre
miracle and a very tokyn of godys curacyon schewyd on him the same time. and as
mekyl to be merueld. Sothely he had al most the space of an hole ere in his
lift leg a great sore and a full byttur as hit were a cauker large and broad
whereby he was peynyd intollerably. And he was wont to sey. that he had seche a
sorrow and pain there of. as he had bore an hoote plate of yrne bown de fast to
his leg And there was no emplastur no oyntmente nethyr any othyr medicyn how
be hit that he had mekyl of lechis leyde to hit. yt might ese him of his pain
or draw the wownde to ge dyr Trewly in the space of his raueshyng. he was so
fully helyd that he him self meruelyd with us to feel and see the pain and
ache with the wownde so clean agonne. that no tokyn of hit. ne sign of rednes
or of whythnes remaynyd above the meruelus curacion of god. Al only this
differens had his leg that was sore. fro todyr leg that where the forseyde
sore was that place was bare and had none here

Full delectable hit was to him as he seyde fro that time forth. as often as he
hard any solenne pele of ryngyng of bellys. by cause hit would then cum to his
mind again. the full sweet pele and melody the which he herd. when he was
among the blessed sowlys in paradyse. Sothely aftyr that he was cum to him
self and his brethine had told him. that now is the holy time of estyr than
first he believed. when he hard hem ring solenly to complen. for then he knew
certainly. that the pele and melodye. that he herd in paradyse. with so great
joy and gladness. betokynde the same solennyte of estir in the which owre
blessed lord and sauyur thesus criste roso up visibly and bode ly fro death
on to life. to home with the fadyr and the holy gooste be now and evermore
everlasting joy and bliss

Amen

