An Answer to a Romish Rhyme lately printed, and entitled, A proper new
Ballad, wherein are contained Catholic questions to the Protestant.

The which Ballad was put forth without date or day, name of Author or
Printer, Libell-like, scattered and sent abroad, to withdraw the simple from
the faith of Christ, unto the doctrine of Antichrist the Pope of Rome.

Written by that Protestant Catholic, I. R.

They that sit in the gate, speak against me, and the drunkards make songs
upon me,

Psalm. 69.12. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God, or no: for many false prophets are gone out into the
world,

1. John 4.1. Answer a fool according to his foolishnes, lest he be wise in
his own conceyte,

Proverbs 26.5. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford dwelling in Hosier lane,
near Smithfield. 1602.

To the indifferent Readers, be they Protestants, Papists, or neither, I. R.
Catholic Protestant, Professor of Jesus Christ, wishes all wisdom, and all
constancy to hold the truth being found.
GOod Readers whosoever, you shall understand, that not many months ago, I,
together with others in a search, found some good English books, and some two
or three English Pamphlets of another stamp and nature, viz. A Popish Rosary
of prayers, and diverse Popish pictures in it, circled about with the form of
Beads, (as if all were the holyer, that comes within that compass.) We found
there among other things also, a Toy in Rhyme, entitled, A proper new Ballad,
wherein are certain Catholic questions (for so he terms them) to the
Protestant. These two, with an other note book, written of like argument, I
keep by me: and, only of zeal to the truth, and of love to such simple
souls, as might be snared with such petty bayts as this Ballad is, I have
taken a little pains in answering the same as well as I could, being a man of
small skill to meddle in greater matters. A Minister of the City told me of
the same Ballad, before I met with this, and desired me to undertake the
answering of it, and he would help me to it, but could not: and therefore till
now, by this good occasion, I thought no more of it; although I am persuaded,
there are many such Pa^phlets, together with other like Romish wares, that are
sent abroad among the common people, both Protestants and Papists in London and
in the country, and that, by certain women Brokers and Pedlers (as of late in
Staffordshire there was) who with baskets on their arms, shall come and offer
you other wares under a color, and so sell you these, where they see and know
any likelihood to utter them. God grant, that all Magistrates may have the
spirit of Nehemias and Zorobabel, to take and find them out, and finding them,
not to let them go, but to punish them according as the quality of their
offense deserves: for under the habit of such, many young Jesuits, and old
Mass Priests range abroad, and draw disciples after them. But because I
fear I may exceed the bounds of an Epistle, I will draw toward an end: only
I will show you how I have dealt and ordered things in the answering hereof.

First, I found it set to no certain tune: but because it goes most near to
the old tune of Labandalashot, therefore I have made, that all may be sung to
that tune, if need be.

Secondly, the Author of this Ballad, his skill seemed to me, to be as bad in
Poetry, as in Divinity, and therefore I am herein driven sometimes to add and
abbreuiate the Authors particular words, but I fail him not a jot for his
own sense and false meaning: let this be considered of therefore of all men.

Thirdly, this Ballad-monger has divided his work into 9. principal parts or
heads: and I observe them in a sort, as shall appear by the figures set before
every part.

Fourthly, whereas the conclusion of the Ballad is long, I give him leave to
go it through, and then I follow him with mine answer all together, And so
with my Epilogue, and a short song of Popery, made long ago in scorn of
Papists foolery, I end, referring the Readers for further satisfaction in this
point, to M. Crowly his book, which is an answer in prose to the like
questions, printed 1588.

Yours in the Lord, I. R.

A pretty fine Answer to a Romish Rhyme, entitled, A proper new Ballad, etc.
To the Tune of Labandalashot.
1. THE PREFACE.
The Papists request.
I Pray thee, Protestant, bear with me,
to ask thee questions 2. or three:
And if an answer thou can make,
more of thy counsel I will take.
If not, then must thou be content,
that I remain as I am bent, A verse added, to make the matter full in the
Papists speech

A Roman Catholic to be,
which was a Protestant once with thee:
But now am gone away from you,
to those I take for Christians true.
The Protestants answer.
I Am content, Sir Catholic,
to hear and grant the thing you seek:
But how should I assured be,
that you will then be ruled by me,
When in your Law it is set down,
you may break faith with King and Clown?
Well, yet if God and learned men
will give me leave to use my pen,
I answer will (though simply)
your questions drawn from Popery.
2 The Papists complaynt.

Of sects.
now in the world both far and near:
The Protestant, the Puritan,
the Caluanist, and Zwinglian,
the Brownist, and the family of love,
and many mo that I can prove:
Besides the Roman faith truly,
which Protestants call, Papistry.
All these are Christ's true Church, they say:
but now on which shall my soul stay?
The Protestants answer.
1. Cor. 11.19.
STrange sects there are, and so will be,
the Church to try in each degree:
But for the most of them you name,
they are not worthy of that blame.
The Brownist, he is punished:
the Familists from us are fled:
If we were rid of Papists too,
That is, England, and Ireland.
both kingdoms should have less to do.
And you that will of sects complain,
show which by Law we do maintain.
The Papists further complaynt.
ALL these with Rome in very deed,
rehearse all Articles of the Creed:
And every one of them still says,
theirs is the true Catholic faith.
But how should I amongst all these,
know truth from falsehood, God to please?
This is the thing that still I seek,
to know the true Church Catholic,
The fellowship and company
of holy men in unity.
The Protestants answer.
IF these with Rome, and thousands more,
receive our Creed, and yet will go
So many hundred steps a wry,
as Willet does in you descry, In Synopsis Papismi, printed 1600. where 500.
heresies are sound in Popery.

They are not worthy once to bear
the name of Christians any where.
Return again therefore, I say,
to Christ, and to Gods word always.
Then shall you see, that Unity
is nothing without Uerity.
3 The Church of Rome Catholic.
The Papist proceeds.

The Church must through the world be spread,
For Christ he his Apostles sent:
with power and with commandment,
That to all nations they should go,
to preach and to baptize also.
What company then took in hand,
to win and to convert this Land,
With other countries far and near,
but Rome our Mother Church most dear?
The Protestants answer.
OUR Bibles teach all truth in deed,
which every Christian ought to reed:
But Papists thereto will say nay:
because their deeds it does bewray.
Ier. 14.14 Ma. 28.19 20.
Christ he the twelve Apostles sent.
But who gave you commandment,
To win and gather any where,
Jesuits doctrine. Ma. 23.15.
to bind by oath, to vow, and swear
New Proselytes to Popery,
'gaynst truth, our Prince and Country?
The Papist proceeds.
SAint Paul in his Epistle says,
The Romans had the Catholic faith,
And was so far forth renowned,
that none like it was published,
Throughout the world in places all,
to be the truth universal.
If yours in England had been so,
then to your Churches I would go.
But till you prove your faith thus clear,
to yours I will no more come near.
The Protestants answer.
WHen Rome returns to Christ again,
and be as once it did remain: To. 1.7, 8.

I mean, when Paul to them did write,
and when that fifteen Popes in sight, Look the pagent of Popes made by Io.
Studly

Did suffer for the Gospel pure,
England for truth you may be sure,
Will join and joy with Rome again,
with Italy, with France and Spain:
And Antichrist shall be cast down, Reave. 18.

which now does wear yt triple crown.
The Papist proceeds.

there shall be offerings far and nigh,
A clean oblation Sacrifice,
from place where now the Sun does rise,
Unto the setting of the same.
O what is that, I pray thee name?
If this be not the holy Mass,
i will be a Protestant as I was:
Wherefore resolve me speedily,
if thou will have my company.
The Protestants answer.
SAint Jerome and Tertullian,
or any other learned man,
Writing on this short Prophecy,
Mal. 1.11.
preached by Prophet Malachy,
Shall judge in this for us and you,
who gives best sense and meaning true.
We say it speaks of pure prayer,
not of your Mass, but Christ's Supper.
And you to make poor souls your ass,
do say, it is meant of Popish Mass.
The Papist proceeds.
IN th'eighteenth Psalm there it is found,
that the world shall hear their sound,
That is to say, shall understand,
in every Nation, Realm, and Land,
That Rome, and eke the faith of Rome,
is universal without doom.
Go where you will the world throughout,
and Rome is famous without doubt.
And if this mark you do not want,
then presently I will recant.
The Protestants answer.
THe Psalm for number you mistook,
Eighteen for nineteen in your book:
The sense thereof first literal:
is meant of creatures great and small.
And to the Romans for the sound,
is meant Gods word, To. 10.18.
which does abou^d:
And not for Popish doctrine taught,
of which, in that age, no man thought.
Therefore your sound, glory, and fame,
is now naught else but open shame.
The Church of Romes continuance.
The Papist proceeds.

the faith of Christ must still endure:
According as our Savior said,
when for Saint Peter once he prayed.
Simon, thy faith shall never fail:
the gates of hell shall not prevail:
The holy Ghost your Comforter,
he shall remain with you ever:
And my self, your surest friend,
will be with you to the worlds end.
The Protestants answer.
WE grant, the truth must still endure:
but of this one thing let us be sure:
And that is, whether we, or you,
do hold the Faith of Christ most true.
Mat. 15.1, to 10. and 23. to the end.
Your doctrine is a doung-hill heap
of man's traditions, which did creep
Look M. Beacons book, entitled, The relics of Rome.
Into the Church, by some and some,
until you had spoiled Christ's Kingdom.
Christ's words to Peter you abuse:
therefore your sense we do refuse.
The Papist proceeds.
SAint Paul does plainly write and say,
There shall be in the Church always,
Apostles, Prophets, and such like,
that for the flock of Christ shall seek,
And by their preaching bring them home,
of Jews and Gentiles, where they roame.
Our Church have these, and many more,
which labor thus, and bide much woe.
If this be false, and not at Rome,
then will I be converted soon.
The Protestants answer.
SAint Paul in places three does show, Romans 1^.6 1. Cor. 12.2 Ephe. 4.11

what men into the world should go:
And after those, of Pastors all,
that should bring men from Satan's thrall,
In settled Congregation still,
there to be taught Gods word and will. Note well. Act. 20.20

But as for Munks, for Priests, for Friars,
for Jesuits, and common liars,
They have no warrant in Gods word,
although they reign with fire and sword.
5 The Church visible.
The Papist proceeds.

the Church of God must still appear;
And as a City on a hill,
so must we see it flourish still;
This is spoken of the Ministers of ye church, and not of the Church it self.
And as a candle shining bright,
so must Gods Church appear in sight.
Our Savior says, If one offend,
and will not by rebukes amend,
Esteem him as a wicked man,
a Heathen or a Publican.
The Protestants answer.
HOw long will Papists blinded be,
in that which every eye may see?
The Church is called Militant,
Zac. 13.7. 1 Ki. 19.14
and troubles it does never want:
So that sometimes as Sun and Moon,
it is eclip'st and has her doom,
In man's conceit to shine no more:
but God again does her restore,
Mat. 2.16, 17.
To shine and show her beauty bright,
to teach and censure men aright.
6 Of Succession.
The Papist proceeds.
ANd is not that the Church most true,
wherein succeeded still in view, Read for disproofe of this, yt council of
Hippo, and the 3. council of Carthage.

Of Bishops some two hundred three,
as thou in Histories may see?
Saint Peter first, and then the rest,
which have the people taught and blessed?
Show me this mark once amongst you,
and I will say your faith is true.
If not, it is the Church of Rome,
that I will cleave unto for doom.
The Protestants answer.
FOR truth, this your succession
came from false Prophets every one,
From Balaams time unto this day, Numb. 22. and 23.

with high Priests and such like always,
And holy Scripture does describe
the Pope with his condemned pride:
And though you say he does excel,
yet he and you may burn in hell.
John in the Revelation,
writes of Romes desolation.
7 Of their Unity.
The Papist proceeds.

by which the true Church you may know,
And that indeed is Unity,
set out in many a Similie
By Christ our Savior, who foretold,
of one Shepherd, and one sheepefold,
One Spowse, one husband her to love,
one darling dear, and one fair Dove:
One faith, one baptism is here,
and no dissension does appear.
The Protestants answer.
THe name of Church, I know, you seek,
though every way you be unlike.
By these your marks each filth may prove,
themselves to be Christ's Church, and Dove.
Each sin is spread universal,
it is visible to great and small:
Idolaters have Unity,
and hypocrites Antiquity:
Note, I pray you.
But Truth, which every one should bring,
they and you want in every thing.
8 Their Holiness.
The Papist proceeds.
YOu Protestants do daily read,
in Nicen and Apostles Creed,
The Church of God must holy be,
which we perform in each degree: Pro. 27.2. teaches you another lesson.

Most holy men and sacrifice,
sweet service and fine Ceremonies:
Seven Sacraments we have always,
double and treble holy days:
Virgins and Saints, Martyrs and all,
be ours, and you have none at all.
The Protestants answer.
GOds Church, we know, is sanctifide,
by Christ his spirit, who is their guide,
And holy duties still they do,
on Sabbath days and other too.
But your vain service we detest,
your May Game pastimes and the rest: It is no better, if you mark it well.

Your Popish Saints and votaries all,
your traytrous Martyrs great and small.
Nothing in you but Holiness,
when none commit more wickedness.
9 A speech touching heretics, Schismatikes, etc.

Our Savior warnes us to have care,
and of false prophets to beware,
Which in his name to us will come,
not sent by him, and yet they run:
Strong thieves, not entering in aright
by Christ the door, but in the night
They break in at the window hie,
and deal that none may them epsy:
Their coming is not to do good,
but like to Wolves they thirst for blood.

And like vilde Ruffians, Swash bucklers or Cauiliers.
because Gods people should not know,
But that they are his Pastors sure,
which Christ has sent with doctrine pure,
To teach, to preach, to set and sow,
that Christ in the end might reap and mow:
But when their seeds are somewhat sprung,
they prove but tares and darnell young,
Ma. 13.3, 4
Thistles and thorns so are they found,
choking and cumbering the ground.
The Papist holds on his tale.
These live e'ne as they list truly,
their God, we see, is their belly:
Like dogs and foxes so they range,
sects they devise, and schisms strange,
Heaping upon themselves damnation,
for living after such a fashion.
These notes and marks we find in you,
more then in any Turk or Jew,
Who do deny the name of Christ,
and do not make them any Priest.
You say, that your faith did appear,
to be the truth six hundred year:
But tell me then, Sir, if you can,
when Popery at first began?
Where were the servants of the Lord?
durst none of them then speak a word?
Where were the feeders of the sheep?
were they all dead, or fast asleep?
Did none of them defend the truth,
but was controld in age and youth?

and did the gates of hell prevail?
Or did the salt his savor lose?
did Christ some other spouse then choose?
Or was truths pillar overthrown?
by which all truth was to be known?
If this were so, Christ's word so plain,
and promises must be but vain:
Which was, that heaven and earth should quail,
before his word one jot should fail.

and unto whom did your light shine?
Where did your chiefest Pastor sit?
who kept your keys, your helm and ship?
Show us some Churches you have built,
as we can show where you have spilt.
We are not Judges in this matter, we leave them to God.
What, were all damned eternally,
that were not of your company?
How might a man have found you out,
to hear and help in things of doubt?
When Luther, like a lying Friar,
one, whom the devil did inspire,
Did break his vow to wed a Nun,
even then your heresy begun, Note this his impudency and slander.

And favored was in Saxony,
by Dukes that loved liberty:
And in King Edwards time again,
it began to grow and spread amayne*
A thousand years you write and say,
that Papistry did bear the sway.
And during all that time and space,
we say, you durst not show your face.
Who kept the holy Scriptures then, God did preserve his word at all times,
Ier. 37.23.

from hands of vilde and wicked men?
Who had authority to ordain
Bishops, Doctors, and Priests again?
For he that came in without order,
comes as a thief to steal and murder: John. 10.

He is a Wolf, and not a Priest,
an enemy, no friend to Christ.

that our Priests you did not refuse,
To say your service, and to sing
a Psalm of David. Note that thing.
This man a Benefice might have,
if he at any time did crave.
Like Jeroboam, so dealt ye,
and took all sorts of each degree.
A worthy mingle-mangle then
was made of you, for lack of men.

if she be not the Church of Christ?
Answer these questions, if you can,
and I will be a Protestan.
But while your answer you devise,
I counsel all men that are wise,
To hold the faith mayntayned here,
the space of fifteen hundred year,
Or of one thousand at the least:
from which who turns, shall prove a beast.
Saint Austin our Apostle was,
who came from Rome, It is more the^ ever he did challe^ge
and here said Mass:
He first arrived here in Kent,
and so to other places went:
His faith came from Pope Gregory; Faith is ye gift of God, no man can give it,
Ia. 1.17.

which faith was kept successively,
By many Bishops, as we read,
from Peter's time, who was their head,
Who learned his faith of Christ, I say:
to whom be praise now and always.
Amen. Note the line of Amen.
Amend, Papists, amend.
The Protestants answer to the Papists large conclusion.
BY this time you are out of breath.
such periods may breed your death:
But I will set out with such pace,
as shall, and may, I hope, win grace
With God, with Christ, and all good men,
that ever wrote with ink and pen:
The goal I trust to win at last,
and when I have it, hold it fast,
Unto the honor of his name,
that gave me power to win the same.
The most of these I might reuert
upon your selves, which can pervert
Both word and history of times,
to cloak your lewd and open crimes.
But some thing briefly I will say,
for that which you cast in our way,
As stumbling blocks for every one,
to stumble at, where you make moan.
Consider well, that you therefore,
are even those men whom ye abhore.
Mat. 7.15.
You are false prophets, teaching lies,
you wear sheep clothing, to disguise:
Ier. 23.21.
You run and range, not being sent,
for which you ought still to repent.
Ioh. 10.8.
You are those thieves that enter in
to Christ his Church, and never lyn.
Till you have stored your selves with good,
and filled your selves, like wolves, with blood:
Ma. 23.14 2. Tim. 3.6
You enter not by Christ the door,
but by the Pope, that Romish whore.
Joshua. 9.2.
You blind men's eyes with outward shows,
and say that you are no man's foes:
You fast from flesh, Ma. 23.25 Note.
to eat good fish,
with fruits and many a costly dish:
You pray on beads, and prey on men,
you do devour maids and women:
You seldom preach, and that but lies,
the Pope and Popelings to suffice:
Your doctrine comes from the Popes school,
where many a wise man proves a fool.
Your doctrine comes not from Gods book,
but you on lies and Legends look:
On festiuals, and lives of Saints,
which you have made with your own paints:
Gods word you count of little force,
and to the same have small remorse:
Your people from it you dissuade,
because that like two-edged blade,
It does divide, Heb. 4.12.
and eke descry,
man's sin and Popish treachery.
Your doctrine is but darnell sure,
unto this grain, Gods word so pure.
What is the chafe unto the wheat?
what is man's wit to wisdom great?
Your gold is brass, your silver tin,
your teaching dross, your deeds but sin.
Remember what you taught and did,
before that your bad tricks were spied:
That is, when you wallowed in ye sins of Popery.
Remember persons, time and place,
and so repent, and call for grace.
Whereas you charge our lives for bad,
we grieve thereat, we are not glad:
If you did rule, it would be so,
and ten times worse, full well I know.
This Realm is very populous,
and you like night-birds hinder us.
Ma. 24.12.
Christ said, you know, that in each land,
sin it would get the upper hand.
Let all men strive therefore, say I,
against all sin and Popery.
You live at ease, and as you will,
like Epicures your selves you fill,
Lu. 12.19. Phil. 3.19. Am. 6.1, 2.
Your belly is your God in deed,
your puffed cheeks your hands do feed.
The best of all things in each land,
by flights you got into your hand.
Note well.
Thus did you fast, thus did you prey
on men and women night and day.
A thousand ways your gains came in,
through Antichrist that man of sin.
You would no wives, 1. Cor. 7.1, 2 Si non cast, etc. was your doctrine. Look
Bales votaries. Look Bells motives. Look Synopsis Papismi.
for that was ill,
but whoores and harlots at your will:
No woman must come in your sight,
unless it were some Nun by night.
Your common Stews you still maintain:
for why? they bring the Pope much gain.
When Monasteries brake up here,
then did your filthynesse appear:
Thousands of Infants heads were found
in ponds and priuies, which you drowned.
Like dogs and foxes therefore, Cant. 2.15 1. Pe. 2.22
you
did lead your lives; it is your due:
Like swine, like wolves, like satan's brood,
that never did Gods people good:
Like hypocrites in every place, Luke 11.39, 40, 41, 42.

you lived, and do without Gods grace:
You make poor people to believe,
that you can all their sins forgive. As appears by your pardons exta^t.

It were too long to make relation,
how you and yours deserve damnation.
But where you say, that we do write
of this our faith, which you despite,
The Papists would have us say yt our faith was but 600. years old: but we say,
it is from Adams time, and not interrupted till Phocas time.
That it was found, and did appear,
to be the truth six hundred year:
We say, that from Christ his Assension,
for our faith was no such contention,
As Papists make now at this day,
nor in that space of years we say:
But this our faith it ever stood,
even since that Abel lost his blood.
Io. 6.68. and 12.48.
On Gods sweet word we do depend:
for it shall judge us in the end;
It is our wisdom and our joy,
Mat. 23. Psalm. 19.7.
and man's traditions are a toy.
Though some things hard do there appear,
the rest we read in all the year:
2. Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
And find, that it sufficient is,
to guide all men to heavenly bliss.
What would you more, but that you stand,
for Popish trash in every land?
In ye Apostles time, and in Phocas the Emperors time more fully.
Now, where you ask of Popery,
when it began, and to sit hie?
I answer will to your demand,
both readily and out of hand.
It bred in the Apostles time,
and so increaste by many a sign:
Great strife then grew three hundred years, Read the Acts and Monuments, with
other stories.

as in Church stories it appears,
For many things, but chiefly one,
who should be supreme head alone.
All Bishops wrote against this thing: Look Beda, Eusebius, Jewel and Foxes
book

no Emperor would ever bring
Any one Bishop to the same,
till wicked Phocas time, by name:
But he a wicked murderer,
unto this act was furtherer,
That none might check him for that deed,
of killing father, mother, and seed.
Thus did proud Bishop Boniface,
third of that name, set in highest place.
And now the other Bishops three,
that made up four of one degree,
Were first made vassal unto Rome,
from whence all Popish trash does come.
When Boniface was thus aloft,
he played his part, and wonders wrought:
And so did all of Rome beside,
until they grew to their full pride;
And were of late unhorsed again. 2. Tim. 3.9

by Christian Kings that them disdain.
1. Ki. 19.14.
The true Church was eclipsed then,
and had in scorn of carnal men:
The Prophecies fulfilled were,
Dan. 9.1.
of Daniel, who prayed in fear:
Reave. 12.1. Acts. 8.
And those in Revelation,
which God did give unto S. John:
A thousand years this held out so,
that Christ's true flock you could not know,
But by their persecution sharp,
which they endured with willing heart.
Mat. 2.27.
Yet still Christ and his Gospel stood,
in persecution and in blood.
The Popes left off to preach and teach,
and after wordly things to reach.
Acts. 4.
In time they grew so fierce and fell,
that no good man with them could dwell.
The first 10 persecutions and others since.
They put down Kings and Princes hie,
abusing them to slavery;
And what they said or did, was law:
thus every one was kept in awe.
2. The. 2.
In all your Popes, true faith did fail,
and hell it self did much prevail:
Mat. 5.
The salt his savor lost in them:
Christ was in truth rejected then:
Yea, all his death and glorious passion,
was turned into another fashion: Look Beacons book of the Relics of Rome.

Each Pope a new toy did devise,
to blind and bleare the peoples eyes:
Fools, Apes, and Asses still they made,
of Gods poor people, by this trade.
The second question that you make,
I answer will for each man's sake,
That cannot answer readily,
your Arguments and Sophistry.
Where was our Church, you say, that time?
where did the beauty of it shine?
Where did our chiefest Pastor sit?
who kept our keys? who ruled our ship?
You did us show you Churches built,
as you can show those we have spilt.
To these in order as they lie,
I will in few words now reply: The answer is made by another question. Esaias.
9.7. Reave. 2.27 1. Co. 15.25

Where is the Sun, the Moon the Stars,
when clouds and darkness make them wars?
Do they not shine still where they be,
under those clouds? Even so did we.
Our chiefest Pastor he is Christ,
and he sits in the heavens highest:
Ioh. 10.16. Psalm. 2.9.
He has the keys and guides our ship,
and laughs to scorn our little wit.
Papists ca^ burn ye bodies of me^, and yet make complaynt for their
superstitious Temples of lyme and stone. Deuteronomy. 7.5. Lu. 13.34. 2. Kin. 18.4
For Churches, first we answer you,
by Churches of another hiewe.
How many Churches has Christ built,
and you the blood of them have spilt?
Of other Churches that you speak,
God in his judgment does them break,
Even as he did Jerusalem,
for killing of his Prophets then:
And as he did the hill Alters,
and Groves of all Idolaters.
You ask what are become always,
of all that dyed to this day?
We are no Judges in this case,
we leave them to the Throne of grace.
Idolaters may ask you so,
of those that have dyed long ago.
What answer can you make therein,
but this, that God, for all their sin,
May justly damn them, if he will,
or save, where he likes not to kill?
When Abram was with Cera he, Genesis 12.1. Note this ye Papists. We are bound to
praise God for ye light of his truth, whatsoever our fathers did.

his father dear, as children be,
And God called Abraham away,
what, should he not Gods call obey?
Or should he answer as you do,
As my friends did, I will do too?
But you will say you be none such,
when yet you use like things too much:
Try by the Scriptures well, and see,
who comes neer'st Idols, you or we.
You ask how you might find us out, The wolf does ask of the sheep, where he
is, when he has the sheep in his claws.

to answer things that were in doubt?
I say, that even as wolves by kind,
the sheep and lambs in field can find;
So you did find us to our cost,
or else how were our lives so lost?
First, in the persecutions ten,
and in the rest succeeding them.
In England, Scotland, and in France,
and every place you taught that dance.
But when the day of count shall come, Lu. 11.47, 48, to 52. Mat. 25.

that you shall answer all and some,
When Christ the Master of the sheep,
shall reckon us, as it is meet:
Reave. 20. and 2.4, 20. and 6.9, 10. and 3.16, 17, 18, 19.
Then from the blood of Abelstime,
unto the last of such like crime,
You and the rest shall answer all,
unto your sorrow, grief and thrall:
Unless you do repent with speed,
your count will fearful be indeed.
Till Luthers time, you say that we
heard not of Christ: but you shall see,
That we, not you, have heard of him,
as only pardoner of our sin.
Thrice happy Luther and the rest,
(except some faults which we detest)
And ten times happy every land,
that has received with strong hand,
The Gospel pure of Christ on hie,
and have put down all Popery.
God kept ye Scripture, as in Ieremies time, when Iehudi the King burnt it,
Ier. 37.23. 1. Sam. 5.1, 2.
You ask, who kept all Scripture then?
who made our Priests, and all Churchmen?
We answer, that our God, of love,
did save and keep it from above,
As in the time of Jeremy,
when it was burnt by Iehudy.
And as the Arc delivered was,
from Philistims, as came to pass.
And finally, as God can make
all creatures serve his Church and quake.
Now for our Churchmens ordination, Acts. 20. Tit. 1.5. 1. Kin. 2.35 Not by
giving imposition of hands: but by commanding some that were in ye function,
to do it.

we know the Scriptures good relation:
And so were made our Bishops all,
our Ministers both great and small.
Solomon made Sadock he,
Priest in Abiathars room to be:
So in the stead of Popish priests,
our Queen sent Ministers for Christ:
And though a time some were but weak,
yet now a number can well speak.
And where you say, Those that forsook Popery, and were content to labor in ye
Gospel to their powers, they had place only, and not all without respect of
gifts or repentance.
you marvel, how
we did receive such, as did vow
Themselves your Priests of Popish order,
to serve with us in any border?
My answer is, that you might see,
what men of mercy Protestants be,
Which would receive all to salvation,
and not condemn them in your fashion.
You did devise, you know, to keep
all men from feeding of our sheep.
D.W. page 143, and 144 to T. C. in this point. printed 1574.
An ordination may be good,
though some men, guilty of souls blood,
Unworthy be in Church to serve,
for punishment that they deserve.
Some thing took ill in hand also,
at first, may yet in time, we know,
Prove good again, and so may this:
the Church-mens calling is for bliss.
If yours not so, or be not right,
amend your fault, bear us no spite.
Read Jewels reply to H. page 167.
And to conclude, you brag, and say,
that Austin first did here bewray
The truth of Christ: but it is not so,
true histories do name us more:
But grant, that he first taught this land:
were all things good came from his hand?
No, no, he taught much Popery,
but not so much as now does fly:
To. 15.19.
Simon Zelotes and Saint Paul,
are said to teach us first of all.
An admonition to all yt waver and halt between two opinions.
Till you these things do well disprove,
I wish all men in tender love,
To note what I have said herein,
to turn to God, and leave their sin.
To trust no Popish Jesuit,
nor yet in Mass Priests to delight:
For certainly their Hierarchy,
their kingdom and their policy,
Shall, will, and must, of force fall down:
for Christ abhorres the triple Crown.
This Christ in mercy therefore save
our Queen and us, A Prayer necessary for all to use.
with that we have,
Our children and posterity,
and keep us from all Popery:
His holy Gospel grant us still,
and frame us to his holy will:
That we may know and love the same,
unto the glory of his name.
Pray, hear, and read continually,
that from this truth we never fly.
Amen.
The Epilogue.
THus (good Readers) having postingly run over this Romish Rhyme, as a Priest
does his Mass and Mattens, when he has haste another way, I will come to an
end. In this Pamphlet, you have rather seen my love and good will, then my
wisdom or great skill: but (I trust) you that are well minded, will take the
same in good part, (howsoever others do) considering my chiefest purpose
herein was, that the simple and ignorant might have benefit thereby, whom
Papists abuse by sending unto them, such like trumpery, by Popish Pedlers, men
and women. The which Pedlers are as ready to do the Papists service herein, as
the women and merchants were, of whom we read, Ier. 7.16, to 20. and 44.15, to
24. Reave. 18.11, 12, 13. Their Popes wares I call these things: Pardons, Agnus
Deies, Beads, holy Candels, Paxes, Crosses, Crucifixes, with sundry sorts of
books; as Jesus Psalter, Ladies Psalter, Rosaries, etc. which they prefer
before the holy Bible and book of God, and before David's Psalter or Psalms,
when yet these books of theirs, are most blasphemous and wicked, yea, bold and
presumptuous, as is D. Loarts book and others, in leaving out the second
Commandment, and making two of the last, to fill up the number of ten.

But more of this, at some other time, and upon some further occasion, when I
shall have a little leisure to propou^d the Papists some true Catholic
questions. And so I end, beseeching God to bless us, our Queen and Realm,
from all Popery, and Popish government, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A merry song, and a very song.
SOspitati picked our purse with Popish illusio,
Purgatory, scala coeli, pardons cum Iubilio,
Pilgrimage-gate, where Idols sat with all abominatio,
Channons, Friars, common liars, that filthy generatio,
Nuns huling, pretty puling, as Cat in milke-pannio:
See what knauerie was in Monkerie, and what superstitio:
Becking, belling, ducking, yelling, was their whole Religio,
And when women came unto them, few went sine filio.
But Abbeyes all are now down fall, Dei beneficio,
And we do pray day by day, that all abominatio may come to desolatio.
Amen.

