THE TRIVMPHES OF GODS REVENGE Against The Cryinge, and Execrable Sin, of
(Wilful, and premeditated) Murder Expressed In Thirtye Several, Tragical
Historyes (Digested into Six Books) which. contain great variety of
Mournful, and Memorable Accydents Amorous, Moral, and Divine The whole Work
now Compleatlye finished

Written By John Reynolds

LONDON Printed for W. Lee and are to be sold at the Turks head in Fleetstreet
over against Fetter Lane.



THE TRIUMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXECRABLE SIN OF
(Wilful and Premeditated) Murder.

With his Miraculous Discoveries, and severe Punishments thereof.

In Thirty several Tragical Histories (Digested into Six Books) committed
in diverse Countries beyond the Seas, never published, or Imprinted in any other
Language.

Histories which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents,
Historical, Moral, and Divine, very necessary to restrain and deter us
from this bloody Sin, which in these our days makes so ample, and large a
Progression.

With a Table of all the several Letters and Challenges, contained in the
whole six Books.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.

PSALM 9. 16. The Lord is known in executing Judgment, and the wicked is
snared in the work of his own hand. PROVERBS 14. 27. The fear of the Lord is
a wellspring of Life, to avoid the snares of death.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEE; and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks Head, over against Fetter Lane.

1635.

TO MY SACRED SOVEREIGN, CHARLES, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
AS Rivers, though in their passing they fall into many neighbor Currents yet
finally empty themselves into the Sea, so let these my poor Labors (though
formerly Dedicated to diverse Illustrious Peers of this your Realm) be
suffered at last to terminate in the Ocean of your Princely Greatness and
Goodness, whereinto all virtuous endeavors (as so many lines in their Center)
desire to be united.

What private respests might challenge of me toward their Honors, the same
toward your Majesty will claim the public Bond of Common Allegiance,
whereby I am more eminently, and more universally obliged. I am not so over^
weening of my weak Endeavors, as to think them worthy of your Majesty's
view, much less able to add any thing to your Royal Uertues; Rivers add
nothing to the Maine, yet thither they naturally send the Tribute of their
Streams; and if my Loyalty reach me to do the like, it will not (I hope) be
conceived as done out of an opinion of Merit, but only out of a desire to
discharge the Duty of a Subject to your Majesty.

And I am the rather imboldned to this Confidence, because I have formerly
adventured the like, when to your Princely View, being then the Second Hope of
this Kingdom, I (about eleven years since) presented a Translation of a Work
of Monsieur de Refuges, entitled A Treatise of the Court; the Gracious and
Undeserved Acceptance whereof, if it has inspired me with farther Courage, to
present You (now advanced to a greater State) with a greater Increase of mine
own Labor, your Majesty will not (I hope) condemn me of groundless
Presumption.

The former three Books had the Honor and Happiness to be perused by the
Judicious Eye of King JAMES, your Renowned Father, (of happy Memory) In whose
incomparable Judgment they failed not of Approbation, though Dedicated to
Inferior Names; the more am I now encouraged to Inscribe and Entitle the whole
Six to your Sacred Majesty, as being no less Heir of His Uertues, then of
His Crown and Dignity.

And one thing more (arising from the Consideration of the Subject it self)
made me think it a Present not altogether unworthy of your Regal Estate; for
the Contents of it being the Execution of Justice, upon the unnatural Sin of
Murder, where can it be more fitly addressed, then to the Great Patron of
Justice among us (God's immediate Vicegerent) by whose Sword (as the Minister
of Heaven) such odious Crimes are to be chastised, and Innocent Blood justly
expiated with Guilty.

And it may more fitly suit with your Majesty, who as you excel in the
careful Administration of Justice upon all Offenders, so especially upon those
(most heinous of all others) the Violaters of Gods sacred Image, in the
perpetration of wilful Murder, toward whom Clemency even changes her
nature, and becomes Cruelty to the Weal-publicke. Never had any Land less
cause to complain of too much Indulgencie this way, then ours, as may well
appear, both by the rareness of such Occurrences in your Kingdom, and the
severe vindication of them, whenever they happen, or by whom, or howsoever
performed.

These Histories therefore, which may serve as a Lookingglasse to all Nations,
shall to these of Yours be a special Ornament and Mirror of their felicity,
and set forth and publish Your Praise, in the peaceable and quiet Government of
your People, whose Climate (seldom or never) affords such Tragedies; nor will
do, whiles Your Christian resolution shall continue to prevent them in the
Spring, and to punish the lighter degrees of Bloudinesse with due retaliation.
The great Author of Justice (who is Goodness and Justice it self) long
preserve your Majesty to Us, and the Happiness We enjoy in your Sacred
Person, so near resembling Him whose Authority and Image You bear. So prays

Your Majesty's most humbly devoted in all Dutiful Allegiance, JOHN REYNOLDS.

THE AVTHOR HIS PREFACE TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN Reader, we cannot sufficiently bewail the Iniquity of these last
and worst days of the world, in which the crying and scarlet sin of Murder
makes so ample, and so bloody a progression: for we can now searce turn our
ear or eye any where, but we shall be enforced, either to hear with pity
the mournful effects, or to see with grief the lamentable Tragedies thereof:
as if we now so much degenerated from our selves, or our hearts from our
souls, to think that Psalm 23. 1.
Christ were no longer our Shepherd: Psalm. 100. 3.
or we the sheep of his Pasture: or as if we were become such wretched and
execrable Atheists, to believe Mat. 25. 34. 41
There were no Heaven, to reward the Righteous: or Hell, to punish the ungodly.
But if we will divert our hearts from Earth to Heaven, and raise and erect our
souls from Satan to God, we shall then not only see what engendereth this
Diabolical passion in us: but also find the means to detest and root it out
from amongst us.

To which end it is requisite, we first consider, that our enemies, who oppose
our tranquillity in this life, and our felicity in that to come, are neither so
few in number, nor so weak in power, that we should think our selves able to
vanquish, ere we fight with them: for we have to encounter with the bewitching
World, the alluring Flesh, and the enticing Devil: not with three simple
Soldiers or poor Pigmies, but with three valiant and puissant Chief-taines,
subtle to incampe dangerous to assail, and powerful to fight.

The World, that it may bewitch us to its will, assailes us with Wealth,
Riches, Dignities, Honors, Preferments, Sumptuous houses, perfumed Beds,
Vessels of gold and silver, Pompous Apparel, Delicious fare, variety of sweet
Music, Dancing, Maskes and Stage Plays, delicate Horses, rich Coaches, and
infinite Attendants, with a thousand other inticements and allurements.

The Flesh presents us with Youth, Beauty. The 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
lust of the eye, and the pride of life: with Col. 3. 5.
inordinate affection and lascivious desires, with a piercing eye, a vermillion
cheek, golden hair, and a slender waste: and although it discover us not all
these perfections of nature in one personage: yet, he shows us most of them in
diverse, and then if any thing want to captivate our affections, we shall hear
them marry their Siren voices, to their own Lutes and Vialls, or their dancing
feet to those of others: or if this will not suffice, then Perfuming,
Powdering, Crisping, Painting, Amorous kisses, Sweet smiles, Suggered speeches,
Wanton embracings, and Lascivious dalliance, will uudertake to play a World in
love. On the other side, Strength, Nimblenesse, Agility of body, Sloth,
Luxury, Gluttony, Intemperancie, Drunkenness, Voluptuousness and Sensuality
will cast us out so fair (I mean so treacherous) a lure, as if we stoop
thereto, we shall buy our pleasure with repentance, and our delight therein,
will prove our ruin and destruction.

And now, if neither the World, nor the flesh can entangle, or ensnare our
hearts, Then comes the Devil 1 Pet. 5 8.
that roaring Lion, who wa^tes about, seeking whom he may devour, that mortal
enemy, and Revel. 12. 9.
Arch-traytor to our souls, that Ioh 12. 31. Ephesians. 6. 12.
Prince of darkness, whose subtilty is the more dangerous, and malice the
more fatal, in that he transformes himself into (...) 2 Cor. 11. 14.
Angel of light, thereby to make us heirs and slaves of his obscure kingdom:
yea, he will proffer us more, then either our tongues can demand, or our hearts
desire: for all the pomp, treasure and pleasures of the World, yea, all that
is in the World, and Luke 4. 6. 7.
the world it self, he will prostrate and give us, if we will consent to obey
him, and promise to fall down and adore him; and for a pledge of his infernal
bounty and liberality, he will puff us up with Pride, Arrogancy, Ambition,
Vainglory, Ostentation, Disdain, Covetousness, Singularity, Affectation,
Confidence, Security; and if all these allurements will not prevail to subdue
us, he has yet reserved Troops and Forces, and another string to his Bow:
for then exchanging his smiles into frowns, and his calmes to storms, he
will give us Pensiveness, Grief of mind and body, Affliction, Sorrow,
Discontent, Choler, Envy, Indignation, Despair, Revenge, and the like.

Yea, he will watch us at every turn, and wait on us at every occasion: for
are we bent to revenge, he will blow the coals to our choler: are we given
to sorrow and discontent, he will thrust and hale us on to Despair: are we
inclined to Wantonness, and Lasciviousness, he will fit us with means and
opportunity to accomplish our carnal desires: or are we addicted to
covetousness and honors, he will either cause us to break our hearts, or
our necks, to obtain it: for it is indifferent to him, either how or in what
manner we enlarge and fill up the empty rooms of his vast and infernal
kingdom.

Thus we see how powerful our three capital enemies are, yea, what a cloud,
nay, what a world of subordinate means and instruments they have, not only to
ensnare, but to destroy us. yea, not only to conquer our hearts, but which is
worse, to make ship-wracke of our souls? And from hence comes our misery: yea,
from these three fatal trees we gather the bitter fruit of our perdition.

But against all these temptations and dangers, against all these our professed
enemies in general, and each of them in particular: We may swim in the Ocean
of the world without drowning, and pilgrimage upon the face of the earth
without terror or destruction, if we will consider, and in considering
remember that Genesis 1. 27. Psalm. 115. 6.
God is our Creator, Ioh. 10. 21. 11. 25.
Christ our Savior, and the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier and Comforter: that we
are honored with the resemblance of God, whose stamp and character we bear,
and enriched with immortal and Genesis 2. 7.
living souls: which sacred privileges and divine prerogatives lift us up by
many degrees of excellency Genesis 1. 28.
above the rest of all his creatures, whom he has made for our service, and
Isay. 43. 21.
we only to serve and glorify him: That he has made the world for a
thorowfare, and us as Passengers: That Heb. 13. 14.
we have no abiding City here, but must seek one in the World to come: That
the World is ours but for a season, and Heaven our patrimony and inheritance
for ever: That the pomp and pleasures thereof are but transitory and
temporary, and that the vanity thereof passes away as dust or Psalm. 102 3.
Isay 40. 7.
smoke before the wind, whereas those of Heaven are both immortal and
eternal: That Psalm. 39. 5.
our flesh is but like flowers that fade, and grass that withers, but a
mass of corruption, a tabernacle of clay, and a coffin of dust and ashes: that
the best of its beauty is but 1 Cor. (...). (...)
vanity and deformity, and the end of its bravery, but rottenness and
putrefaction: If I say, we spurn at the vanity of the world, contemn the
pleasures of the flesh, and scoff at the temptations of Satan, using the
first, as if we used it not, making the second the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and not the members of a harlot, and that we are so far from fearing, as we
defy the third, Coloss. 3. (...).
Setting our affections on things that are above, and not on things of the
earth: for if we will be heirs of the Church triumphant, we must be first
soldiers of the Militant, and so following the advice and direction of the
Apostle, stand against all these our enemies, Ephesians. 6. (...)
Having the whole spiritual Armor girt about us, as the girdle of Truth, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation,
and the Sword of the spirit, not to catch at these allurements, or to be caught
by them; not to strike sail, or stoop to these afflictions, or to hang down
our heads, as if we gave way to them, or were contented that our weakness
should yield to their strength; or our joys to their afflictions: rather to
stand up courageously, and to expel and resist manfully, considering that we
are not only heirs, but coheires with Jesus Christ, in the participation and
felicity of that heavenly Jerusalem, whose joys are infinite, and glory
eternal.

I deny not but afflictions, and temptations may befall us, yea, I acknowledge
they are subject and incident to the best and dearest of Gods children, whom
he will try in the fire, to see whether they will prove silver, or dross:
yea, he will come with his Fan and winnow them, to see whether they are Wheat
or Chafe, Corn of Darnell: But the Children of God should Romans 5. 3.
rejoice in tribulations, and James 1. 2.
account it exceeding joy, when they are tempted: yea, they must consider Iam.
1. 13, 14.
that God tempts no man with evil: but it is our own concupiscence that
draws and inticeth us to it. In which respect, we may justly say, it is a
folly to hearken to temptation, but a misery and madness to follow and embrace
it.

For why should discontent cast us into despair, except we will resemble the
foolish Saylor, who abandoneth the Helm in a storm, when he has most need
to use it? or the simple fish, that leapes from the pan to the fire; Or those
ignorant fools, who, to shelter themselves from the rain, run into the river?
For are we tempted? Psalm. 73. 23.
The Lord will hold us up by his right hand, yea, Psalm. 9. 10.
he will not fail those that seek him: For he is Psalm. 18. 2.
our Rock and our fortress, our shield and our refuge, yea, Hos. 6. 1.
although he has wounded us, he will bind up our wounds. And that we may
yet see a farther benefit, that accrueth to those that are tempted, let us read
with joy, and retain with comfort, that James 1. 12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, he shall receive the Crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to those that love him: yea Psalm. 125. 1.
they that trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever.

When therefore (amongst other temptations) choler so far prevails with
us, (or rather the Devil with our choler) that we imagine mischief in our
hearts, or life up our hands against our Christian brother; let us then
consider what the Apostle tells us from God: 1. Ioh. 2. 11.
He that hates his brother, walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes: yea, 1 Ioh. 4. 10.
He that loves not his brother, is not of God. Has any one therefore offended
thee? Why, consider he is a man, and no Angel, and as subject to infirmities
as thy self; as also, that he is thy brother by Creation and Adoption, by
Nature and by Grace, and that he bears the same Image and Resemblance of God,
as thy self do: in which regard thou art counseled, Ephesians. 4. 26.
Not to (...) the Sun go down on thy wrath: 1 Pet. 3. 9.
That thou seek after Peace and follow it: Coloss. 3 13.
That we forbear and forgive one another, as Christ forgives us, and q that if
we live in Peace, the God of Peace will be with us.

But some there are (yea alas, too too many) who are so Psalm. 145. 8.
hardened in their hearts and sins, and so resolute in their wilfulness, as
in stead of rellishing, they distaste, and in stead of embracing, reject and
disdain this Christian advice and counsel, opening their thoughts and hearts
to all vanities, or rather drawing up the Sluices and Flood-hatches to let in
all impiety to their souls, they give way to the treacherous baits of the
World, to the alluring pleasures of the Flesh, and to the dangerous and fatal
temptations of the Devil, and so cruelly imbrue their hands in the innocent
blood of their Christian brethren; and although the murders of Genesis 4. 8.
Abel by Cain out of Envy, of 2 Samuel 11. 17.
Vriah by David for Adultery, of 2 Samuel 3. 27.
Abner by Ioab for Ambition, of 1 Kin. 21. 13.
Naboth by Iezabel for Malice, and of 2 Kin. 21. 1.
Iehu his Sons by Athaliah for Revenge (with their several punishments which
God inflicted on them for these their heinous and horrible crimes) are
presidents enough fearful and bloody, to make any Christian heart dissolve
into pity, and regenerate soul melt into tears: yet since new examples
engender and produce fresh effects of sorrow and compassion, and as it were,
leave and imprint a sensible memory thereof in our hearts and understandings,
therefore I thought it a work as worthy of my labor (as that labor of a
Christian) to collect thirty several Tragical Histories, which for thy more
ease, and perfecter memory, I have digested into six several Books; that
observing, and seeing herein, as in a Crystal mirror, the variety of the
Devils temptations, and the allurements of sin, wherewith these weak
Christians (the Authors and Actors hereof) suffered themselves to be carried
away and seduced: Considering, I say, the foulness of their facts in procuring
the deaths of their Christian brethren, some through blood, others through
poison, as also Gods miraculous detection and severe punishment thereof, in
revenging blood for blood, and death for death; yea, many times repaying it
home with interest, and rewarding one death with many, that the consideration
of these bloody and mournful Tragedies, may by their examples, strike
astonishment to our thoughts, and amazement to our senses, that the horror and
terror thereof may hereafter retain and keep us within the lists of Charity
toward men, and the bonds of filial and religious obedience toward God, who
tells us by his Royal Prophet Psa. 7. 14, 15
that Whosoever makes a pit for others, shall fall into it himself: for his
mischief will return upon his own head, and his cruelty fall upon his own
pate. Which we shall see verified in these, who seduced partly by sin, but
chiefly by Satan, who is the Author thereof, forgot the counsel of the
Apostle, Iam. 5. 13.
If any one be afflicted, let him pray: and grived, Psalm. 61. 8.
to powreforth their hearts before God: not considering Exodus 15. 15
the efficacy thereof, nor how Moses made the bitter waters of Marah sweet
thereby: yea they builded not their faiths on God, and his promises, on Christ
and his Church, on his Gospel and his Sacrament, but spurned at all these
Divine comforts, and spiritual blessings: yea, and trampled that
sweet smelling Sacrifice of prayer under their feet, which is the Antidote and
preservative of the soul against sin, and the Bulwark to expel all the fiery
and bloody darts of Satan's temptations: yea, the very ladder whereby both the
aspirations and ejaculations of our souls mount unto God, and his benefits and
mercies descend unto us: and this, and only this, was both the Prologue to
their destruction, and their destruction it self: the which I present unto the
view, not only of thine eyes, but of thy heart and soul: because it is a
Virtue in us to look on other men's Vices with hatred and detestation,
imitating herein the wise and skillful Pilot, who mournes to see the Rocks,
whereon his neighbors have suffered shipwreck: and yet again rejoices, that
by the sight thereof he may avoid his own: which indeed is the true way, both
to secure our safety, and to prevent our destruction, as well of the Temporal
life of our bodies in this World, as the Spiritual of our souls in that to
come.

I must farther advertise thee, that I have purposely fetched these Tragical
Histories from foreign parts: because it grieves me to report and relate
those that are too frequently committed in our own Country, in respect the
misfortune of the dead may perchance either afflict, or scandalize their living
friends; who rather want matter of new consolation, then cause of reviving old
sorrows, or because the iniquity of the times is such, that it is as easy to
procure many enemies, as difficult to purchase one true friend: In which
respect, I know that diverse, both in matters of this, and of other natures,
have been so cautious to disguise and mask their Actors, under the vailes of
other names and sometimes been enforced to lay their Scenes in strange and
unknown Countries.

For mine own part, I have illustrated and polished these Histories, yet not
framed them according to the model of mine own fancies, but of their
passions, who have represented and personated them: and therefore if in some
places they seem too amorous, or in others too bloody, I must justly retort
the imperfection thereof on them, and not thy self on me: since I only
represent what they have acted, and give that to the public, which they
obscurely perp^rated (...) private.

My intent, desire, and prayer is, that if thou art strong in Christ, the
perusing and reading of these Histories may confirm thy faith, and thy
defiance of all sins in general, and of Murder in particular, or if thou
art but weak in the rules of Christian fortitude and piety, that hereby it may
encourage and arm thee against the allurements of the World and the Flesh; but
especially against the snares and inticements of the Devil, which may stir
thee up either to Wrath, Despair, Revenge, or Murder: that by the
contemplation thereof, thou may resemble the Be, and not the Spider, and so
draw honey from all flowers, but poison from none.

It shall be the felicity of my thoughts, and the glory of my content and
labor, if by the sight of these Histories, thou reap any Spiritual comfort
or encouragement in this Christian Warfare against the World, the Flesh and the
Devil, our three professed and fatal enemies: or if thou will be so wilfully
negligent of thine own good, as to ride poast by other men's sins and vices,
yet with leisure take a curious and exact survey of thine own, and in seeing
them, not only endeavor, but strive to reform them.

If this first Book of my Tragical Histories work any good effect in thee,
in causing thee to assume and take on a resolution to hate these sins in thy
self, and to detest them in others; then the five other parts which I owe to
my promise, and the frontispice to thee, shall not be kept back, or withheld
thee, but in due time succeed this their elder sister: having purposely
enlarged thee this my Preface, because this one shall serve for all six
books, at least, if the rest be so happy to see the world, or I so fortunate,
that the World may see them. In the mean time, hoping that thy courtesy and
charity will wincke at some defects and imperfections, which may herein have
slipped either from my Pen, or the Press, and whereof the malice of some, or
peradventure the ignorance of others may accuse themselves, by condemning me; I
recommend these my labors, from their passion, to thy friendship; from their
censure, to thy judgment: and us all to the protection of Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
God, who is our life, and the strength of our days. Psalm. 104. 31
To whom be glory for evermore.

Thy Christian Friend, JOHN REYNOLDS.

THE AVTHOR HIS RE-ADVERTISEMENT to the Judicious Christian READER.
THat my Promise owed six of these Books of Gods Revenge against Murder to
the World, the Title, and my Epistle (to the Reader) of the first Book does
apparently testify; It is now some ten years since that I published the third
thereof, since when, my time and leisure has still been so interrupted, and
(as it were) cut asunder by many different intervening Accidents, that I a long
time both doubted and feared that the three last Books would have absolutely
dyed upon the Design: But I praise and bless God (He has been so favorable
to my desires, and so propitious to my intentions and resolutions) that I have
cleared that doubt, and secured this fear; for now (by His sacred Assistance
and Providence) I have fully and completely finished them, and do here present
all Six Books to thee in one entire Volume. I am not so vain or
presumptuous, to think that they deserve to be seen and read of the more
Judicious; for my thoughts aspire to nothing unproportionable to my mean
abilities. I knew it was a singular great and excellent point of wisdom in
Socrates, who (by the Oracle of Apollo) was doomed the wisest of Men, to
confess and acknowledge to the World, That he knew but one thing, which was,
that he knew nothing.

But here, before I proceed farther, I must let the World know, that I
understand there are a generation of people, who have been so strangely
ignorant, as to give out that these my Histories are not Originalls, but
Translations, either from Italian or French; all which (with equal Truth and
Modesty) I firmly contradict and deny, whether they regard Matter, Manner, or
Method, or Phrase, Place, or Persons; for contrariwise I found out the grounds
of them in my Travells, and (at mine own leisure) composed and penned them,
according to the rule of my weak Fancy and Capacity, they being so far from
Translations, that as I have hitherto refused to imitate any therein, but my
self, so had I been so ambitious or vaineglorious to have given way, or
consent to it, some Friends of mine in Paris, had long since done the three
first Books into French, from my first Original thereof: But knowing Humility
to be the fairest Ornament of a Writer, and Modesty best to beeome Virtuous
Minds, I have hitherto prevented it, and do still resolve so to do.

Now because as Idleness makes some too curious, and Curiosity makes others
too idle, so it has likewise pleased some (not so discreet as forward) to
condemn and tax some of my Histories for being too long, and others for being
too short, as if I were bound to observe and please their Fancy, more then the
Truth, or mine own Judgment, or that in the contriving and penning thereof, I
were obliged to delight and content them before my self. No, no, as long as I
know Men are as different in their Opinions and Censures, as in their
Countenances and Complexions, I shall rather connive, and not regard their
(worthy to be pittyed) Ignorance, and resolve and content my self to contemn
and pass by, rather then to esteem or grieve at it. They will first I hope
read, before they understand; and let me then request them also, that they
will first understand, before they either censure, or tax any part of what
they read, and so I doubt not, but they will both see, and find, that (in the
penning and publishing of these Histories) if I am not worthy of their Love,
yet (at least) their unjust Envy and Detraction is every way unworthy of me;
and that although many Books of these our Times are not particularly approved
and liked of for the present, yet it is not impossible for the future both to
respect and honor them; and so I leave these uncharitable Zoylists to sleep
standing in the simplicity of their Ignorance, if they will not be rectifyed
and reformed by warning: And I will now divert my Pen to the wise and religious
Christian Readers, who well know what singular good effects it works in their
Hearts, first to read with Understanding, and then to apply with Charity and
Prudence, for whose sakes soly I have now added these my three last Books of
Gods Revenge against the Crying Sin of wilful Murder to the three former;
For I send them to the public good, whereunto all our Endeavors should tend,
to the Propagation of Christian Love and Charity among Men, whereat all our
Enterprises should aim, and to the flourishing Advancement of Gods Honor and
Glory, to which all the thoughts of our Hearts, and Faculties of our Souls
should chiefly aspire and level.

And because Sealiger affirms, That nothing so soon allures or draws a
Reader to peruse and read, as a strange Theme and Argument; Therefore this
Path being seldom (if ever) trodden or beaten by any other, I am so far from
despairing, as I am confident, at least, of thy Acceptance, if not of thy
Approbation of these my Labors, and much the sooner, because as thou have
hertofore disburthened my Stationer of the three first of these Books, so he
(in contemplation thereof) has now drawn the three last of them from me to
the Press, with a more then common and usual Importunity; and I shall bear
this content to my Grave, and I hope from thence to Heaven, that in penning of
them all, I shall leave no pernicious Heir behind me, to infect Youth with
Scurrility, or corrupt their Manners and Inclinations with Incentives to
Lewdness and Uanitie; which as it is the shame of this our Age, so it ought to
be the care of every good man, to shun that which so many of our lewd and
lascivious Pamphlets do not. In writing hereof, I have consecrated my Pen
rather to Instruction then Eloquence, and to Charity rather then Curiosity, and
have made it my chiefest Care, Ambition, and Conscience, to profit thy soul,
rather then to please thine Ear, and to savor more of Heaven then Earth; Yea,
I will affirm (with equal Truth and Boldness) that I have written it with so
innocent a Pen, that the purest and most unstayned Uirgin shall not need to
make her beautiful Cheeks guilty of the least Blush in perusing it all over.

It is with no small Cost and Labor, that I first procured, then penned these
Histories, and have now polished and prepared them to the Press, as well for
the extirpating of that Execrable Sin of Murder (which cries so loud to
Heaven for Uengeance) as also to show thee Gods sacred Justice, and righteous
Judgments, in the Vindication of the inhumane Authors thereof; to the end,
that (by the knowledge and reading of them) thou may become more Charitable,
and more hate Cruelty, by their wretched and lamentable Examples, having
herein endeavored (as much as in me lies) to make my Reader a Spectatour,
first of these their foul and bloody Crimes, and then of their condign and
exemplarie Punishments, which (as a dismal Storm and terrible Tempest from
Heaven) fell on them on Earth, when they least dreamt or thought thereof.

And here to conclude this my Readvertisement to thee, I religiously from my
Heart entreat thee to respect the Matter, not the Words, and the Importance
and Consequence, more then the Dressing of these Thirty several Tragical
Histories, whiles I will account and esteem it a far greater Happiness for
my self to learn true Charity, and the true Fear of God in writing them,
then to presume of my Ability to instruct and teach others by reading them,
because I may justly and truly say with Lipsius, That my Aim and Desire in
publishing of them, Is not that I might be made greater, but better thereby,
and (if it please God) others by me.

What Spiritual Fortitude, or Benefit, thou reapest by their Knowledge and
Contemplation, I exhort thee, in steed of giving me any Thanks, to reserve
and give them wholly to God, Who is the Giver of all Good things, yea, the
Father of Mercy, and the God of all Comfort and Consolation, to whose Grace I
commit thee, defiring thee to assist me with thy favorable Opinion, and daily
Prayers to His Throne of Grace, as I shall ever be ready to requite thee with
mine.

Thy Christian Friend, JOHN REYNOLDS.

The PRINTER to the Courteous READER.
THe Author of these Six Books of Gods Revenge against Murder, being absent
from the Press, and the Press running far swifter then my thoughts, it is
no marvel if (unwillingly) I have made my self guilty of some Errors therein,
both of commission and omission; but as I despair of his excuse and pardon for
the same, so yet I nevertheless hope of thine, because thou know that
absolute perfection is not to be found in Angels, and therefore much less to
be expected or hoped for in men, who for the most part are wholly composed of
Errors. Those therefore which are material and capital (whereof I here
present thee a few) I pray thee (for thine own content and satisfaction)
accordingly to correct and reform in thy Book with thy Pen, before thou
attempt the reading thereof: And for the Literal ones, if my judgment fail
me not, I am confident that thine will esteem them to be every way far more
worthy of thy scorn, then of thy care.

Errata.
Page 5. Lin. 19. for, she might, read, how she might. page 36. lin. 2. the
beauty Varina, read, the beauty of Varina. page 60. l. 25. for foreleg, r. his
left foreleg. page 104. l. 49. for constantly, r. consequently. page 132. l. 8.
f. I not owe, r. I not only owe. page 198. l. 42. f. pleaded. r. pleaded
there. p. 206. l. 34. for, That if he for, r. that for. p. 210. l. 42. f.
hands. r. hand. p. 259. l. 22. f. to Benevente. r, to Alcasero. page 282. l.
28. f. Summer of his folly, r. Summer of his youth in folly. p. 312. l. 25. f.
as grief. r. as discontented as grief. p. 356. l. 18. f. my misfortune. r. or
my misfortune. page 397. lin. 28. f. comes to Savona, read, comes to Savona no
more. Hist. 24. for, the parish of S. Aignaw, r. S. Aignan. In the same
History, for, the City of Reimes, r. Rennes. Next to Page 493. Hist. 24. are 45
Pages omitted. Next to the last Page of Hist. 25. which is Page 527. are 190
Pages omitted, Which the Reader is prayed to remember. Page 343. l. 26. f.
Corsu, r. set sail for Corfu. page 345. l. 15. f. and burn, r. and sojourne.
p. 350. l. 10. f. what a crime is, r. not what a crime is. page 366. lin. 49.
for, of glad. r. as glad. page 382. lin. 50. for, fast, r. pass. page 386. l.
5. f. though not enough, r. though not time enough. p. 418. l. 34. f.
repundiate, r. repudiate.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE, Lord Marquis of Buckingham, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
ABout some two years since, I (from beyond the Seas) presumed to send your
Honor two several pregnant testimonies, as well of my affection to your
service, as of my zeal to your prosperity; not that I performed those then,
or remember them now, in regard of your fortunes, but of your virtues; for I
know, that to flatter, is to betray Greatness: a vice most ignoble in it
self, and therefore most improper for your Honors receipt, or acceptance, since
your actions still make it apparent to our Sacred Sovereign, and his most
Excellent Majesty to all the World, that you are truly Honorable, truly
Noble: and now to second my two former acknowledgements of zeal and duty to
your Honor, with this third, I (though in a less serious, yet more public
manner) presume to make you the Worthy and Noble Patron of the first Book of
my Tragical Histories, (some of the mean observations and collections of my
slender Travels,) wherein The Triumphs of Gods Revenge against the crying and
execrable sin of Murder, are so eminent and conspicuous, that (except my
hopes betray my judgment) they are made obvious to the sight, and consequently
profitable to the soul of a Christian; and not to profane either your Honors
ears, or my pen, with the least spark or shadow of an untruth; my
presumption had not been so ambitious, to have committed these Histories to
the Press, except with a desire, that in some sort they might thereby repress
that hellish sin, against which they solely contest and fight, and which in
these our days (with as much pity as grief) makes so bloody and so
lamentable a progression, thereby to serve as stops and preventions, in our
England, in imitation of the Cataracts of Nylus, which keep Egypt from being
submerg'd with her Inundation: nor had I aspired to shelter them under the
wings of your Honors Patronage and protection, but that thereby they might
find the surer passage, in conversing with the different Opinions, and the
safer, in meeting with the selfe-pleasing Censures of the World; and if your
Honor please select some few hours from your more serious and weighty
Affairs, and vouchsafe employ them on the different Accidents these Histories
report and relate, I (with as much humility as confidence) presume, that you
will esteem them, if not profitably lent, yet not prodigally, nor viciously
cast away, in the perusal and contemplation thereof. Howsoever, they proceed
from his Pen, whose Heart not only admires and honors your Virtues, but
rejoices in the Reward thereof, your Fortunes; for I live not, if in the
sincerity and candor of my Soul, I wish not that your Honor may still
remain firm to these, and these eternally fixed and constant to You; and from
your Honor, successively to your Posterity, transcendently to your Name.

Your Honors in all Duty and Service, JOHN REYNOLDS.

A TABLE Of all the Letters (and Challenges) contained in these whole Six
BOOKS; With the Pages where to find them.
BOOK. I.
MErmanda to Betanford. Page 6 Betanford to Mermanda. Page 7 Grand Pre to
Betanford. A Challenge. Page 8 De Malleray to Grand Pre. A Challenge. Page 12
Christeneta to Pisani. Page 19 Pisani to Christeneta. ibid. Christeneta to
Pisani. Page 20 Pisani to Christeneta. ibid. Gasparino to Pisani. A Challenge.
Page 23 Iosselina to Mortaigne. Page 34 Iosselina to Calintha. Page 35 Calintha
to Iosselina. Page 36 Alsemero to Beatrice-Ioana. Page 50 Beatrice-Ioana to
Alsemero. Page 51 Alsemero to Beatrice-Ioana. Page 51 Beatrice-Ioana to
Alsemero. Page 52 Tomaso to Alonso Piracquo. Page 53 Tomaso Piracquo to
Alsemero. A Chal. Page 59
BOOK. II.
Sypontus to Victoryna. Page 91 Sypontus to Victoryna. Page 93 Victoryna to
Sypontus. Page 95 Sypontus to Victoryna. Page 96 Antonio to Berinthia. Page 109
Berinthia to Antonio. Page 110 Antonio to Berinthia. Page 111 Berinthia to
Antonio. Page 114 Antonio to Berinthia. ibid. Vilarezo to Sebastiano. Page 118
Sebastiano to Antonio. A Challenge. Page 119 Poligny to Laurieta. Page 133
Laurieta to Poligny. ibid. Bellvile to Poligny. A Challenge. Page 134 La
Palaisiere to Poligny. Page 136 Poligny to La Palaisiere. ibid. Bellvile to
Laurieta. Page 140 Laurieta to Bellvile. ibid. Perina to Castelnovo. Page 156
Castelnovo to Perina. Page 157 Perina to Castelnovo. Page 158 Castelnovo to
Perina. Page 158 Castelnovo to his Son Castelnovo. Page 160 Brellati to
Be^tolini. A Challenge. Page 171 Sturio to Paulina. Page 174 Paulina to Sturio
Page 175 Sturio to Bertolini. A Challenge. Page 176
BOOK. III.
Vaumartin to De Salez. A Challenge. Page 197 De Salez to Vaumartin. Page 197
Vaumartin to De Salez. Page 198 Argentier to De Salez. Page 201 Baretano to
Clara. Page 220 ^lara to Baretano. ibid. Baretano to Clara. 2^ Page 1 ^lara to
Baretano. ibid. Leonardo to Albemare. Page 231 La Vasselay to De Bremay. Page
249 De Bremay to La Vasselay. Page 250 La Vasselay to De Merson. Page 252 De
Merson to La Vasselay. ibid. La Vasselay to De Merson. Page 253 De Merson to La
Vasselay. ibid. Carpi to Fidelia. Page 265 Fidelia to Carpi. Page 266 Carpi to
Fidelia. Page 268 Alcasero to Carpi. A Challenge. Page 270
BOOK. IV.
Don Iuan to Idiaques. Page 310 Don Iuan to Marsillia. Page 310 Idiaques to Don
Iuan. Page 311 Marsillia to Don Iuan. Page 312 Don Iuan to Marsillia. Page 313
De Perez to Don Iuan. A Challenge. Page 314 Don Iuan to De Perez. Page 315 La
Precoverte to Harcourt. Page 333 La Precoverte to Masserina. Page 334 Harcourt
to La Precoverte. Page 335 Masserina to La Precoverte. ibid. Borlary to
Planeze. A Challenge. Page 354 Planeze to Borlary. Page 356 Borlary to
Fellisanna. Page 359 Fellisanna to Borlary. Page 360 Borlary to Fellisanna.
Page 361 Planeze to Borlary. A Challenge. Page 363 Castruchio to Borlary, Page
370 Blancheville to Beaumarais. Page 377 Champigny to Beaumarais. A Chal. Page
379 Beaumarais to Champigny. Page 380 Fermia to Moron. Page 399 Fermia to
Moron. Page 404 Moron to Fermia. ibid. Fermia to Moron. Page 408 Moron to
Fermia. ibid.
BOOK. V.
Babtistyna and Amarantha to Streni. Page 429 Babtistyna and Amarantha to
Iaquinta. ibid. Streni to Babtistyna and Amarantha. Page 430 Iaquinta to
Babtistyna and Amarantha. Page 431 Amarantha to Streni. Page 436 Amarantha to
Baptistyna. ibid. Catharina to Delrio. Page 455 Martino to Delrio. Page 456
Delrio to Catharina. Page 457 Delrio to Martino. ibid. Delrio to Cecilliana.
Page 458 Cecilliana to Delrio. Page 459 Father Thomas to Cecilliana. Page 469
Cassino to Sophia. Page 474 Sophia to Cassino. Page 475 Sophia to Cassino. Page
476 Cassino to Sophia. Page 479 Cassino to Sophia. ibid. La Pratiere to
Valfontaine. Page 492 Valfoutaine to La Pratiere. Page 493 La Pratiere to
Valfontaine. Page 448 Valfontaine to La Pratiere. ibid. Quatbrisson to
Valfontaine. Page 449 Salyna to Vasti. Page 516 Vasti to Salyna. Page 520
Salyna to Vasti. ibid.
Here, although there be 235 numbers different, and omitted in the Pages, yet
the Reader is prayed to proceed on according as he futurely finds them marked
and observed.

BOOK. VI.
Imperia to Morosini. Page 345 Morosini to Imperia. Page 346 Imperia to
Morosini. Page 349 Morosini to Imperia. Page 351 Bondino to Palmerius. Page 360
De Laurier to Du Pont. Page 377 Hippolito to Roderigo. Page 392 Roderigo to
Hippolito. Page 393 Cervantella to Roderigo. Page 395 Dominica to Roderigo.
ibid. Roderigo to Cervantella. Page 396 Roderigo to Dominica. ibid. Cervantella
to Roderigo. Page 398 Sanctifiore to Ursina. Page 411 Ursina to Sanctifiore
ibid. Sanctifiore to Ursina. ibid. Ursina to Sanctifiore. Page 412 Ursina to
Sanctifiore. Page 419 Placedo to Ursina. Page 424 Bellinda to Palura. Page 446
Palura to Bellinda. Page 447
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS of all the HISTORIES Contained in the whole Six
BOOKS.
The Contents of the First Book.
HISTORY I. HAutefelia causes La Fresnay an Apothecary to poison her Brother
Grand Pre and his Wife Mermanda, and is likewise the cause that her said
Brother kills de Malleray her own Husband in a Duel. La Fresnay condemned to
be hanged for a Rape, on the Ladder confesses his two former Murders, and
says that Hautefelia seduced and hired him to perform them: Hautefelia is
likewise apprehended. And so for these cruel Murders they are both put to
severe and cruel Deaths. page 1. HIST. II. Pisani betrayeth Gasparino of his
Mistrisse Christeneta. Gasparino challenges Pisani for this Disgrace, and
kills him in the Field; He after continues his Suit to Christeneta. She
dissembles her Malice for Pisani his Death. She appoynts Gasparino to meet her
in a Garden; and there causes Bianco and Brindoli to murder him. They are all
three taken, and executed for the same. page 16. HIST. III. Mortaigne, under
promise of Marriage, gets Iosselina with child, and after converting his love
into hatred, causes his Lackey* La Verdure and La Palma to murder both her
and her young son. The Jealousy of I^ella to her Husband La Palma is the
cause of the Discovery hereof. They are all three taken and executed for the
same. page 31. HIST. IV. Beatrice-Ioana, to marry Alsemero, causes de Flores
to murder Alonso Piracquo, who was a suter to her. Alsemero marries her, and
finding de Flores and her in Adultery, kills them both. Tomaso Piracquo
challenges Alsemero for his Brothers death. Alsemero kills him treacherously in
the field, and is beheaded for the same, and his body thrown into the Sea: At
his execution he confesses, that his wife and de Flores murdered Alonso
Piracquo: their bodies are taken up out of their graves, then burn, and their
ashes thrown into the air. page 45. HIST. V. Alibius murthereth his wife
Merilla: he is discovered, first, by Bernardo, then by Emelia his own
Daughter: so he is apprehended and hanged for the fact. page 65.
The Contents of the Second Book.
HIST. VI. Victoryna causes Sypontus to stabbe and murder her first Husband
Souranza, and she her self poysoneth Fassino her second: so they both being
miraculously desected, and convicted of these their cruel murders, he is
beheaded, and she hanged and burnt for the same. page 87. HIST. VII. Catalina
causes her waiting-maid Ansilva, two several times to attempt to poison her
own Sister Berinthia: wherein failing, she afterward makes an Empericke,
termed Sarmiata, poison her said Maid Ansilva: Catalina is killed with a
Thunderbolt, and Sarmiata hanged for poisoning Ansilva. Antonio steals
Berinthia away by her own consent: whereupon her brother Sebastiano fights
with Antonio, and kills him in a Duel: Berinthia, in revenge hereof, afterward
murthereth her brother Sebastiano: she is adjudged to be immured 'twixt two
walls, and there languisheth and dies. page 105. HIST. VIII. Bellvile
treacherously murthereth Poligny in the street. Laurieta, Poligny's Mistress,
betrayeth Bellvile to her Chamber, and there in revenge shoots him through the
body with a Pistol, when assisted by her Waiting-maid Lucilla, they likewise
give him many wounds with a Poniard, and so murder him. Lucilla flying for
this fact, is drowned in a Lake, and Laurieta is taken, and hanged, and burnt
for the same. page 127. HIST. IX. Iacomo de Castelnovo, lustfully falls in love
with his daughter in Law Perina, his own son Francisco de Castelnovo's wife:
whom to enjoy, he causes Ierantha first to poison his own Lady Fidelia, and
then his said son Francisco de Castelnovo; in revenge whereof, Perina
treacherously murthereth him in his bed. Ierantha ready to dye in travel of
child, confesses her two murders, for the which she is hanged and burnt.
Perina has her right hand cut off, and is condemned to perpetual
imprisonment, where she sorrowfully dies. page 147. HIST. X. Bertolini seeks
Paulina in marriage, but she loves Sturio, and not himself: he prays her
Brother Brellati his dear friend, to solicit her for him, which he does, but
cannot prevail: whereupon Bertolini lets fall some disgraceful speeches, both
against her honor and his reputation: for which Brellati challenges the field
of him, where Bertolini kills him, and he flies for the same. Sturio seeks to
marry her, but his Father will not consent thereunto, and conveyes him away
secretly: for which two disasters, Paulina dies for sorrow. Sturio finds out
Bertolini, and sends him a challenge, and having him at his mercy, gives him
his life at his request: he afterward very treacherously kills Sturio with a
Petronell in the street from a window: he is taken for this second murder, his
two hands cut off, then beheaded, and his body thrown into the River. page
167.
The Contents of the third Book.
HIST. XI. De Salez kills Vaumartin in a Duel; La Hay causes Michaelle to
poison* La Frange; De Salez loves La Hay, and because his Father Argentier will
not consent that he marry her, stifleth him in his bed, and then takes her to
his wife; she turns Strumpet, and cuts his throat; as he is dying, he
accuses her of this bloody fact, and himself for murdering his father
Argentier: so his dead body is hanged to the gallows, then burnt; La Hay
confesses this murder, and likewise that she caused Michaelle, to poison La
Frange: she has her right hand cut off, and is then burnt alive; Michaelle is
broken on the wheel, and his dead body thrown into the River. page 187. HIST.
XII. Albemare causes Pedro and Leonardo to murder Baretano, and he after
marries Clara, whom Baretano first sought to marry: He causes his man
Valerio to poison Pedro in prison, and by a letter which Leonardo sent him,
Clara perceives that her husband Albemare had hired and caused Pedro and
Leonardo to murder her first love Baretano: which letter she reveals to the
Judge; so he is hanged; and likewise Valerio and Leonardo for these their
bloody crimes. page 213. HIST. XIII. La Vasselay poysoneth her Waiting-maid
Gratiana, because she is jealous that her husband De Merson is dishonest with
her; whereupon he lives from her: In revenge whereof, she causes his man La
Villete to murder him in a Wood, and then marries him in requital. The said
La Villete a year after riding through the same Wood, his Horse falls with him,
and almost kills him; when he confesses the murder of his master De Merson,
and accuses his wife La Vasselay to be the cause thereof: So for these their
bloody crimes, he is hanged, and she burnt alive. page 237. HIST. XIV. Fidelia
and Caelestina cause Carpi and Monteleone, with their two Lackies, Lorenzo and
Anselmo, to murder their father Captain Benevente, which they perform.
Monteleone and his Lackie Anselmo are drowned, Fidella hangs her self, Lorenzo
is hanged for a robbery, and on the Gallows confesses the murdering of
Benevente; Carpi has his right hand, then his head cut off; Caelestina is
beheaded and her body burnt. HIST. XV. Maurice like a bloody villain, and
damnable son, throws his Mother Christina into a Well, and drownes her: the
same hand and arm of his wherewith he did it, rots away from his body; and
being discrazed of his wi^s in prison, he there conf^h this foul and inhumane
murder, for the which he is hanged. page 277.
The Contents of the fourth Book.
HIST. XVI. Idiaques causes his son Don Ivan to marry Marsillia, and then
commits Adultery and Incest with her; She makes her Father in Law Idiaques to
poison his old wife Honoria, and likewise makes her own Brother De Perez to
kill her Chambermaid Mathurina; Don Ivan afterward kills De Perez, in a Duel;
Marsillia has her brains dashed out by a horse, and her body is afterward
condemned to be burnt; Idiaques is beheaded, his body consumed to ashes, and
thrown into the air. page 303. HIST. XVII. Harcourt steals away his brother
Vimoryes wife, Masserina and keeps her in Adultery; She hireth Tivoly (an
Italian Mountebanke) to poison La Precoverte, who was Harcourts wife; Harcourt
kills his brother V^mory, and then marries his widow Masserina; Tivoly is
hanged for a robbery; and at his execution accuses Masserina for hiring him to
poys^n La Precoverte, for the which she is likewise hanged; Noel (who was
Harcourts man) on his deathbed suspecteth and accuses his said Master for
killing of his brother Vimory, whereof Harcourt being found guilty, he is
broken alive on a wheel for the same. page 325. HIST. XVIII. Romeo (the Laquay
of Borlary) kills Radegonda, the Chamber maid of the Lady Fellisanna in the
street, and is hanged for the same; Borlary afterward hireth Castruchio (an
Apothecary) to poison her Husband Seignior Planeze, for the which Castruchio is
hanged, and his body thrown into the River, and Borlary is beheaded, and then
burnt. page 339. HIST. XIX. Beaumarays, and his brother Montaigne, kill
Champigny, and Marin (his second) in a Duel; Blancheville (the widow of
Champigni) in revenge thereof hireth Le Valley (who was servant to Beaumarays)
to murder his said Master with a Pistol, the which he does, for the which Le
Valley is broken on a wheel, and Blancheville hanged for the same. page 377.
HIST. XX. Lorenzo murthereth his wife Fermia; He some twenty years after (as
altogether unknown) robs his (and her) son Thomaso, who likewise (not
knowing Lorenzo to be his father) does accuse him for that robbery, for the
which he is hanged. page 395
The Contents of the fifth Book.
HISTORY XXI. Babtistyna and Amarantha poison their Eldest Sister Iaquinta,
after which Amarantha causes her servants, Bernardo and Pierya to stifle her
elder Sister Babtistyna in her Bed, Bernardo flying away, breaks his neck
with a fall off his Horse, Pierya is hanged for the same, so likewise is
Amarantha, and her body after burnt; Bernardo being buried, his body is again
taken up, and hanged to the Gallows by his feet, then burnt and his ashes
thrown into the River. page 427. HIST. XXII. Martino poysoneth his Brother
Pedro, and murthereth Monfredo in the street; He afterward grows mad, and in
confession reveals both these his murders to Father Thomas his Ghostly
Father, who afterward dying, reveals it by his Letter to Cecilliana, who was
Widow to Monfredo, and Sister to Pedro and Martino. Martino has first his
right hand cut off, and then is hanged for the same. page 449. HIST. XXIII.
Alphonso poysoneth his own Mother Sophia, and after shoots and kills Cassino
(as he was walking in his Garden) with a short Musket (or Carabyne) from a
Window. He is beheaded for those two murders, then burnt, and his ashes
thrown into the River. page 473. HIST. XXIV. Pont Chausey kills La Roche in a
Duel. Quatbrisson causes Moncallier (an Apothecary) to poison his own
Brother Valfontaine, Moncallier after falls, and breaks his neck from a pair
of stairs. Quatbrisson likewise causes his Fathers Miller to murder, and
strangle Marieta in her Bed, and to throw her body into his Mill-Pond; Pierot
the Miller is broken alive on a wheel, and Quatbrisson first beheaded, then
burnt for the same. page 487. HIST. XXV. Vasti first murthereth his Son
George, and next poysoneth his own Wife Hester, and being afterward almost
killed by a mad Bull in the Fields, he reveals these his two murders, for
the which he is first hanged, and then burnt. page 513.
The Contents of the sixth Book.
HIST. XXVI. Imperia for the love she bears to young Morosini, seduceth and
causes him (with his two Consorts, Astonicus, and Donato) to stifle to death
her old Husband Palmerius in his bed; Morosini misfortunately letting fall his
gloves in Palmerius his Chamber that night which he did it, they are found by
Richardo the Nephew of Palmerius, who knows them to be Morosinies, and does
thereupon accuse him and his Aunt Imperia, for the murder of his Uncle; So
they together with their accessaries Astonicus and Donato, are all four of
them apprehended and hanged for the same. page 337. HIST. XXVII. Father
Justinian a Priest, and Adrian an Inn keeper, poison De Laurier, who was
lodged in his house, and then bury him in his Orchard; where a month after a
Wolf digges him up, and devours a great part of his body; which Father
Justinian and Adrian understanding, they fly upon the same, but are afterward
both of them apprehended and hanged for it. page 369. HIST. XXVIII. Hippolito
murthereth Garcia in the street by night, for the which he is hanged. Dominica
and her Chambermaid Denisa poysoneth her Husband Roderigo; Denisa afterward
strangleth her own newborn Babe, and throws it into a Pond, for the which
she is hanged; on the ladder she confessed that she was accessory, with her
Lady Dominica in the poisoning of her Husband Roderigo; for the which Dominica
is apprehended, and likewise hanged. page 389. HIST. XXIX. Sanctifiore (upon
promise of marriage) gets Vrsina with child, and then afterward very
ingratefully and treacherously rejects her, and marries Bertranna: Vrsina
being sensible of this her disgrace, disguiseth her self in a Friars habit,
and with a case of Pistols kills Sanctifiore as he is walking in the fields,
for the which she is hanged. page 409. HIST. XXX. De Mora treacherously kills
Palura in a Duel with two Pistols: His Lady Bellinda with the aid of her
Gentleman Usher Ferallo, poysoneth her Husband De Mora, and afterward she
marries and murthereth her said Husband Ferallo in his bed; so she i^ burnt
alive for this her last murder, and her ashes thrown into the air for the
first. page 437.
THE TRIVMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING, AND EXECRABLE sin of
Murder.
HISTORY I.
Hautefelia causes La Fresnay an Apothecary, to poison her brother Grand Pre
and his wife Mermanda, and is likewise the cause that her said brother kills de
Malleray her own husband in a Duel: La Fresnay condemned to be hanged for a
rape, on the ladder confesses his two former Murders, and says that
Hautefelia seduced and hired him to perform them: Hautefelia is likewise
apprehended: and so for the cruel Murders, they are both put to severe and
cruel deaths.

IF our contemplation dive into elder times, and our curiosity turn over the
variety of ancient and modern Histories (as well Divine as Humane) we shall
find that Ambition, Revenge, and Murder, have ever prooved fatal crimes to
their undertakers: for they are vices which so eclipse our judgments, and
darken our understandings, as we shall not only see with grief, but find w^h
repentance, that they will bring us shame for glory, affliction for content,
and misery for felicity: Now as they are powerful in men, so they are
(so^etimes) implacable in women, who (with as much vanity as malice) delight in
these sins: as if that could add grace to their bodies, that deformes their
souls, or luster and prosperity to their days, that makes shipwreck both of
their fortunes and lives. It is with grief and pity (yea not with passion, but
compassion) that I instance this in a Gentlewoman, who was borne to honor, and
not to shame, had not these three aforesaid vices (like so many infernal
furies) lain her glory in the dust, and dragged her body to an untimely and
infamous grave. It is a History that has many sorrowful dependances, and
which produces variety of diasasterous and mournful accidents: wherein (by
the just judgment of God) we shall see Ambition bitterly scourged, Revenge
sharply rewarded, and Murder severely punished; by whose example, if all that
profess Religion, become less impious, and more truly religious, we shall
then lead the whole course of our lives in such peaceful and happy
tranquillity, as (arming our selves with resolution to live and die in the
favor of Heaven) we need not fear either what earth, or hell can do unto
us. The History is thus.

Near Auxone (a strong and ancient Town upon the frontiers of Burgundy, and
the free County) dwelt an aged grave Gentleman (nobly descended, and of very
fair demaynes) named Monsieur de Grandmont, who had to his wife a virtuous
Lady, termed Madammoyselle de Carnye, the only daughter of Monsieur de
Buserat, a worthy Gentleman of the City of Dole: this married couple for a
long time lived in the greatest height of content, that either Earth could
afford, or their hearts desire, for as one way they grew opulent in lands and
wealth, so another way they were indewed with three hopeful Sons, Grand Pre,
Vileneufe, and Masseron, and with two daughters, Madamoyselles de Hautefelia,
and de Cressye: a fair posterity: they blessed in their Parents, and their
Parents hoping themselves blessed in them: so as (to the eye of the world) this
one family promised to make many, (especially since the youngest of the five had
already attained its tenth year) but God in his providence ordained the
contrary.

Grand Pre (as the first and chiefest pillar of the house) craves leave of his
Father that he might serve his apprentiship in the wars, under the command of
that incomparable Captain, Grave Maurice then Earl of Nassaw, since Prince of
Orange, Vileneufe delighting in books, his Father thought fit to send to
Pont-au Mousson, and thinking to retain Masseron with him; he for his beauty
was begged a Page by that valorous Marshall of France who so wilfully and
unfortunately lost his head in the Bastile of Paris.

As for their two daughters, Hautefelia lived with her Parents; and de Cressye
they presented to a great Lady of Burgundy, who was long since the most
afflicted and sorrowful Wife and Mother to the Barons of Lux, Father and
Son, who were both slain by that generous and brave Lorayne Prince, the
Knight of Guyse.

But behold the inconstancy of fortune, or rather the power and pleasure of
heaven, which can soon metamorphose our mirth into mourning, our joys into
tears, and our hopes into despair: for within the compass of one whole
year, we shall see three of these five Children laid in their graves, and of
three several deaths, for Vileneufe was drowned at Pont-au Mousson as he
bathed himself in the River: Masseron was killed in a Duel at Fontaine bleau
by Rossat a Gascon, being Page to the Duke of Espernon: and Hautefelia dyed at
home of a burning Fever with her Parents: a triple loss, which does not only
afflict their hearts and souls, but also seems to drown their eyes with a
deluge of mournful and sorrowful tears.

Grandmont and de Carny his Wife, being thus made unfortunate and wretched by
the death of three of their Children, they resolve to call home their other
two, to be comforts and props to their old age, but their hopes may deceive
them. First, from the Baroness of Lux comes de Cressye, who succeeding her
sister, we must now term by the name (or rather by the title) of Hautefelia;
who has a great and bloody part to act upon the Theater of this History: and
after her very shortly comes Grand Pre from Holland, where (in diverse services)
he left many honorable and memorable marks of his prowess and valor behind
him.

Upon his arrival to his Fathers house, the flower of all the nobility and
gentry of the Country, come to condole with him, for the death of his brothers
and sister, as also to congratulate his happy return (an office and complement
which expresses much affection and civility) they find Grand Pre a brave
complete Gentleman, not in outward pride, but in inward generositie and
virtue, not in the vanity of fashions and apparel, but in the perfections and
endowments of his mind and body: he is wholly addicted to the exercise of war,
and not to the art of courting of Ladies, his delights are in the camp of Mars
and Bellona, and not in the Palace of Venus and Cupid, well knowing that the
one will breed him honor and glory, the other shame and repentance; his
pastimes are not crisping and powdering of his hair, quarrelling his tailor
for the fashion of his clothes, dancing in velvet pumps, and tracing the street
in a neat perfumed Boot with jangling Spurs; yea, he resembles not young
spruce Courtiers, who think no heaven to brave Apparel, nor Paradise to that
of their Mistress beauty: for he only practices riding of great Horses,
Tilting, running at Ring, displaying the Colors, tossing the Pike, handling
the Musket, ordering of Rank and File, thereby to make himself capable to
conduct and embattaile an Army, and to environ, fortify, or besiege a City or
Castle, or the like; yea, he spurns at the Lute and Vial, and vows there is
no music to the rattling of the Drum and Trumpet, and to the thundering of
the Musket and Canon: but this warlike and martial humor of his shall not
last long: Wherein we may observe the vanity of our thoughts, the inconstancy
of our delights, and the alteration and mutability of our resolutions; for now
we shall shortly see Grand Pre hate that he loved, and love that he hated; yea,
we shall see him so plunge and drown himself in the beauty of a fair and
sweet Gentlewoman, as he shall leave Holland for Burgundy, War for peace,
Arms for Love, and Enemies for a Mistress: but time must work this alteration
and Metamorphosis.

The old Gentleman his father, seeing Grand Pre's martial disposition, fears
lest this ambitious and generous humor of his will induce him to seek wars
abroad, since he finds none at home; and therefore, desirous of his company and
presence, in that it will sweeten his former afflictions, and give life to his
future hopes and content, he proffers him the choice of many rich and fair
young Gentlewomen for his wife, of the best and most ancient families in and
near Auxone: but Grand Pre is deaf to these requests and motions, and thinks
it a disparagement and blemish to his valor, if he should any way listen, or
give ear thereto, the which his father perceiving and understanding, he
bethinkes himself of a further invention, and so resolves at Winter to leave
the Country, and to reside in the City of Dijon, (famous for the ancient seat
of the Dukes of Burgundy, and for the present Court of Parliament) hoping that
there, amongst the multitude of sweet Ladies and Gentlewomen, wherewith that
City is adorned, his son Grand Pre might at last espy some Paragon of
Nature, whose beauty might have power to subdue and captivate his affections,
and indeed (as the sequel will show) the event answers his expectation.

For on a Sunday morning in Lent, as Grand Pre went to the royal Chapel to
hear Father Justinian (a Capuchin Friar) preach, he opposite to him espies a
most delicat and beautiful young Lady, slender of body, tall of stature, fair of
taynt and complexion, having a quick and gracious eye, with pure and delicate
hair of a flaxen color, being infinitely rich in Apparel, yet far richer
in the perfections and excellencies of a true and perfect beauty; in a word, she
was so amiable and so lovely, so sweet, and so pleasing to his eyes, as at her
very first sight Grand Pre could not refrain from blushing, as being ravished
with the sweetness of so sweet an object, so as his heart panted and beat
within him, as being not accustomed to encounter with such beauties, or with
such sudden passions and alterations.

Now by this time this young gentlewoman (whose name we shall anon know) could
not but perceive with what earnestness and delight Grand Pre beheld her, and
seeing him to be a proper young Gallant, and richly apparelled and followed,
she could not refrain from dying her Lilly cheeks with a Vermillian blush,
which gave such grace to her beauty, and so inflamed our poor Grand Pre, as he
could no longer resist the influence of such amorous assaults; and now it is
that his thoughts strike sail to affection, and his heart does homage to
beauty, so as he revokes his former opinion conceived against the power and
dignity of Love, which he now holds erroneous, and in his heart vows that
there is no such felicity in the world, as to enjoy the Lady of his desires,
whom his eyes and soul chiefly honor and adore: But if he be ensnared and
imprisoned in the fetters of her beauty, no less is she in those of his
personage, only she is more coy and precise in the exterior demonstration there
of: for as he cannot keep his eyes from gazing on her; so she seems but to
look on him by stealth, or if she transgress that Decorum, she immediately,
in outward appearance, checks her eyes from ranging beyond the lists of modesty
and discretion.

But by this time, to the grief of our new Lovers, the Sermon is ended, and
all prepare to depart, so their eyes with much discontent and unwillingnesse,
for that time take leave each of other: and here Grand Pre making a turn or
two in the Church, is doubly tormented and perplexed, first with grief, that
he is deprived of his Mistress sight, and then with sorrow, that he neither
knows her, nor her name: But as Love refines our wits, and gives an edge to
our intentions, so he shows her to his Page, and sends him to make secret
enquiry what she is. His Page speedily returns, and informs him, that she is
Madamoyselle Mermanda, eldest daughter to Mounsieur de Cressonuille, one of the
chiefest Presidents of tthe Court of Parliament. Grand Pre extremely rejoices
to know what she was, and far the more, in respect he sees it no
disparagement either to himself or his house to marry her: and therefore
omitting all other designs and resolutions (and bidding farewell to the
Wars) he resolves to seek her in marriage; to which end, the next day, he
of set purpose, with a Gentleman or two of his ^mate and familiar friends,
insinuates himself into her Fathers house, who being absent, whiles they
entertain the Mother, he (under color of other conference) courts the
Daughter: yea, now his affection to her is by many degrees redoubled, because
he sees the excellency of her mind is answerable to that of her person, and
now she coming likewise to know him, is as it were wrapped up in the
contemplation of a thousand sweet contents, which so work on her affection,
(or rather on her heart) as if he thinks himself happy in seeking such a
Mistress, she esteems her self blessed in finding such a servant.

Grand Pre finds his first entertainment from Mermanda to be respective and
pleasing: and so authorized by her curtesy and advice, he taking time at
advantage, goes to the old President her father, and bewrayes him his affection
to his daughter, and the desire he has to obtain her for his wife: so having
begun his suit, he leaves his father Grandmont to finish it, and continually
frequents the companion of his beautiful Mistress Mermanda.

Her father Cressonville dislikes not this match, but deemes it both agreeable
and honorable; only he knows that Grandmont has likewise one only
daughter, and himself one only son: so he infinitely desires to make this a
double match, thereby to contract a more firm and stricter league betwixt
their two houses; this is proposed and debated, as well between the young
folks, as the old Parents, and at last it takes effect, so as purposely
omitting, first the conference, then the letters sent from Grand Pre to
Mermanda, and from Mermanda to Grand Pre; from De Malleray (Cressonvilles
son) to Hautefelia, and from Hautefelia to De Malleray; because the inserting
thereof would make this brief History swell into an ample volume. These
Marriages, to the joy of the parents, and the sweet content of their sons and
daughters, are pompously solemnized in Dijon, with all variety of feasting,
dancing, and masking, answerable to their degrees and dignities. But these
Marriages shall not prove so fortunate as is hoped, and expected, neither was
Hymenaeus invited thereunto, or if he were, he refused to come; and therefore
Lucina will likewise save her labor, because she knows that neither of these
two young married Gentlewomen shall live to make use of her assistance.

And here before I proceed farther, I wish the event of this History would give
the lie to this ensuing position, that there is no pride nor malice to that of
a woman; but I have more reason to fear then hope to believe the contrary: for
no sooner have our two young couples reaped the fruits of Marriage, and the
felicity of their desires, but we shall see the Sunshine of their joy
overtaken with a difmall storm of grief, sorrow and misfortune; whereby we
may observe and learn, that there is no perfect nor permanent felicity under
the Sun, but that all things in this world, yea, the World it self is
subject to revolution and change. The manner is thus:

Hautefelia envies her sister in Law Mermanda's advancement, and contemnes her
own; she likes not to give the hand to her, whom she knows is by descent her
inferior, and to speak truth, preferres a Scarlet Cloak before a Black, and
a Sword-man before a Penman; these ambitious conceits of hers, proceeding from
hell, will breed bad blood, and produce mournful effects; yea, peradventure
strangle her, who imbraceth and practices them.

Mermanda is of a gracious and mild nature, Hautefelia of an imperious and
revengefull: never any married couple live more contented, nor past more
pleasant days, then did Grand Pre and his fai^e Mermanda for the space of one
whole year; wherein she bore her self so loving and courteous toward him,
and he so kind and pleasant to her, as their sweet carriage, and honorable,
and virtuous behavior, was of all the world (Hautefelia only excepted) highly
praised and applauded. But Hautefelia envying Mermanda's prosperity and glory,
because she could neither parallel the one, nor equal the other, and seeing
with no other eyes then those of ambition and envy, bethinks her self she
might act her disgrace, and eclipse the splendour of her virtues and glory. When
remembering that the Baron of Betanford (dwelling not far from Auxone)
sometimes visited her brother Grand Pre, as also that he very lately had done
her two unkind offices; the one, by buying a Jewel from her, which she was in
price with, of a Goldsmiths at Dijon Fair; and the other, for retayning a
little fine white Frizland dog, which his Page had stolen from her: she thinks
to give two strokes with one stone, and at one time to be revenged both of the
Baron and of her sister in Law Mermanda.

Judge, Christian Reader, what simple reasons and trivial motives this
inconsiderate Gentlewoman has for her malice, but she is resolute therein, and
as she has laid the foundation, so she will perfect the edifice of her malice
and revenge: which to effect, she sends a servant of hers purposely nere
Auxone, to her brother Grand Pre, and writes him a letter to this effect: She
entreats him to come ride over to her, for she has a secret of importance to
reveal him, which she holds not fit to commit to pen, and withal advises
him to frame some excuse toward her husband for his sudden coming.

Grand Pre arrives at Dijon, and is welcomed of his Brother and Sister, but he
discovers her to be more sorrowful then accustomed; he is ignorant what these
clouds of her discontent import, or from whence they arise: but he shall know
too soon, and his curiosity shall pay dear to understand it. Supper ended,
they fetch a walk in the garden, and so he is conducted to his Chamber, where
his brother in Law De Malleray giving him the good night, his sister Hautefelia
with tears in her eyes informs him, that she knows for certain, the Baron
of Betanford is too familiar with his wife Mermanda, yea, beyond the bounds of
honesty, the which she must needs reveal him, because his honor is hers,
which, as she is bound by nature, she will cherish and preserve as her own life.

Grand Pre amazed at this strange and unlooked for news, is like one lunatic,
or rather stark mad, he stamps with his foot, throws away his hat, now casting
himself on the bed, then on the floor; yea, and had not his sister prevented
him, he had killed himself with his own sword: these are the wretched passions
of jealousy, which transport our selves beyond our selves, and our reasons
beyond the limits of reason: and now this vild and malicious sister of his
(more out of policy then charity) uses many prayers and persuasions, brings
him again to himself, and they conclude to keep it secret from all the world,
but withal Grand Pre vows to be sharply revengd both of his wife, and the Baron
of Betanford.

Hautefelia having thus broached her inveterat and implacable malice (laughing
hereat like a Gypsy) betakes her self to her rest, leaving her brother not to
sleep, but to drive out the night in watchfulness and jealousy: who the next
morn (sooner then his accustomed hour) rises, takes his leave of his Brother
and Sister, and so very pensive and sorrowful rides home.

Mermanda finds her husband sad, and enquires the cause thereof: she prays
him, that if any grief or misfortune have befalne him, she may participate
and bear the one half thereof, as she does of his joy and prosperity: and as
she was wont to do, proffereth to kiss him; but he slights her, and with
much unkindnesse and disdain puts her off; whereat she is amazed, as not
acquainted with such discourtesy. After Supper (jealousy being his chiefest
dish; and grief, hers) he makes three or four solitary turns in the Court,
and then sends his Page for his wife, who betwixt comfort and gtiefe, hope and
despair, presently comes to him: He demands of her whether she will walk with
him; she answers, that his pleasure shall ever be hers: and that she will
most joyfully and willingly wayt on him where he pleases: he brings her to a
solitary Grove, and there having choler in his looks, and fire in his tongue,
he charge her of dishonesty with the Baron of Betanford.

Poor Mermanda, as it were pierced to the heart with the thunderbolt of this
news, falls to the ground in a fainting swoone: yea, Grand Pre her husband
has much ado to recover her, when, coming again to her self, she with many
volleyes of sighs, and rivolets of tears, purges her self of that
imputation and scandal; she blames his credulity and jealousy, terms her
accusers devils and witches, invokes heaven and earth to bear witness of her
innocence; and withal cleares the Baron of Betanford, vowing and protesting by
her part and hope of heaven, that he never attempted nor opened his mouth to
make her the least shadow of so unchaste a motion.

Grand Pre, weighing her words, and seeing her bitter and sorrowful tears,
believes his Wife, and so frees both her self and the Baron, prays her to
pardon him, and vows that he will love her dearer then before, and for ever
forget and bury the memory thereof in perpetual oblivion and forgetfulness.

But his wife Mermanda, notwithstanding this submission and reconciliation of
her husband, is still vexed in mind, as finding it easy to admit grief, but
difficult to expel it: she knows not what to do, nor of whom to take advice
how she should bear her self in this straight and perplexity; for well she
knows, that if the Baron of Betanford should come to visit her husband, as
formerly he was accustomed to do, it would revive and confirm his jealousy,
although they were both as innocent as innocence it self. Now she resolves to
write the Baron a Letter to refrain her house: but then she thinks it too
much indiscretion and presumption to attempt it, or that the letter might be
intercepted, or her husband have news thereof; but again fearing his coming,
and encouraged through her innocence, she resolves to write unto him: which
she does to this effect.

IT is not with blushes, but tears, that I presume to write unto you; for
indeed it grieves me to publish my Husbands folly, which by duty I know I am
bound to conceal: neither had I attempted it, but that grief and necessity
throws me on this exigent: for so it is, that my unspotted chastity is not
capable to defend him from jealousy, which makes me as much triumph in mine
own loyalty, as I grieve at his ingratitude: and not content to wrong me, his
folly, or rather his frenzy has reflection on you, whom he takes to be both
the object and cause thereof: but as your innocence can justly warrant and
defend mine honor, and your bonour my innocence from the least shadow of
that crime: so that we may both endeavor, rather to quench then inflame this
his irregular passion: I most humbly beseech you to refrain our house, and
neither to visit me, nor be familiar with him, and so peradventure, time may
wear away from his thoughts, that which at present, truth and reason cannot:
your relucent Virtues and true generosity assure me of this curtesy, the which
I will repay with thanks, and requite with prayers, that your days may be as
infinite as your perfections, and your fame as glorious as your merits.

MERMANDA.


The Baron receives this letter, prayseth Mermanda's discretion, and laughes at
Grand Pre's folly, extolleth her innocence, and condemns his jealousy: he
will be careful to preserve a Ladies honor, especially one so truly chaste
and honorable as Mermanda: he before had a purpose to see Paris, so now this
occasion does both crown and confirm his resolution; he makes ready his
preparatives and baggage, and so takes Coach for that great City, which abounds
with the greatest part of the Nobility of the whole Kingdom; but before his
departure, he returns Mermanda this Answer.

YOur virtues and my conscience, make us as unworthy of your husbands jealousy,
as he of so chaste a wife as Mermanda, and so true a friend as Betanford: but
as your affection to him has still shined in your loyalty, so it must now in
your patience; since he in this base passion of his seeking his own shame, will
at last assuredly find out your glory. Had his folly revealed me so much as
your discreet Letter, I would have exchanged my pen to a sword, and with the
hazard of my life, and loss of my dearest blood, made known as well to him as
to the whole World, the truth, both of your chastity and hanor, and of mine
honor and innocence: in the mean time I will both embrace and obey your
request, and will manage it with such observance to your Husband, such respect
to your virtues, and such regard to mine own reputation, as I hope he shall
rest satisfied of your chastity toward himself, and of mine to you; otherwise
I prize Ladies of your perfections at so high a rate, and set Cavaliers of his
humor and inclination at so low an esteem, that I well know how to answer his
choler with contempt, and to requite your discretion both with admiration and
praise.

BETANFORD.


Mermanda very joyfully receives this Letter: but hers to the Baron producerh
effects, contrary to her hopes; for Grand Pre understanding of the Baron of
Betanfords sudden departure for Paris (as jealousy is full of eyes) he
fears a plot betwixt him and his wife, and so confirms his former suspicion
of her disloyalty: he therefore converts his love into hatred toward her, and
now (to show the fruits and effects of his jealousy) refuses her his bed, then
which, to a chaste and virtuous wife, nothing can be more distasteful.

At this ungrateful discourtesy, poor Mermanda tears her hair, sigheth,
weepeth, mourns, and lamenteth in such pitiful sort, that it seems nothing
in the world is capable to comfort her, but she conceales her grief as
secretly as she may, only he^ pale cheeks and discontented looks, as the
outward heralds of her inward affection, do silently discover and bewray it.

Her husbands father and mother, Grandmont and de Carnye, all this while know
nothing of this discontent between Grand Pre and Mermanda; but their malicious
and wretched daughter Hautefelia (whose malice never sleeps) has spies in
every corner of her fathers house, who advertise her thereof: whereat she
infinitely triumphs and rejoices. But this joy of hers shall be but as
breath on steel, or as smoke before the wind.

Grand Pre this mean time boyles with inveterate rage, and his jealousy
carries him to such extremes, as he vows to be revenged, first of Betanford,
then of his wife, to which effect he pretends business to Chaalons (as what will
malice leave unpretended?) and taking a choice Horse, a Page and two Lackeyes
with him, he passes a contrary way, and comes first to Troy, then to
Brie-count Robert (a days journey from Paris) where being very private in his
Inn, he writes a Challenge, and taking aside his Page, delivers it him, and
commands him, at break of day to poast with all expedition for Paris; where
being arrived, to go to the Crown of France in S. Honories street, and secretly
to deliver i^to the Baron of Betanford, to take his answer, and to return the
same night.

The Page to obey his Masters command, seems rather to fly, then poast; he
fitly finds out the Baron, and very fairly delivers him the Letter, who
breaking up the seal, therein finds these words:

GRAND PRE, to the Baron of BETANFORD.
YOu need no other wit^esse then your self to inform you in how high a
nature you have wronged me, and herein your false glory has made my true
shame so apparent, as I had rather dye then live to digest it: for not to
dissemble you my malice, as you have done me your friendship, I can sooner
forget all other offenses, then pardon this: therefore find it not strange
that I request you to meet me, on thursday morning next, at five or six,
either with your sword, or Rapier on Horseback or a foot at Carency, half a
league from Brie-count Robert, where the Bearer hereof shall expect you, to
conduct you safely to a fair Meadow, where without seconds I will attend you.
It is impossible for me to receive any other satisfaction; for to write you the
truth, nothing but your life, or mine, is capable to decide this difference.

GRAND PRE.


At the reading hereof, the Baron is so far from the least show or
apprehension of fear, as he is pleasant and jocund; yea, he causes Grand
Pre's Page to dine with him, and after dinner, takes him aside, and speaks to
him thus: Tell thy Master, that I will not fail to meet him on Horseback
without a second, at the hour and place appointed. The next morn he dispeeds
away a choice horse, which his Lackey leads, and about ten of the clock,
only with his Surgeon and Page, takes Coach, and comes that night to
Carency, where he lodges.

The next morn being Thurseday (the day appointed to fight) Grand Pre,
pretending to go to the Church, sends away his Page to Carency, to awayt and
attend the Baron, and so only with his Surgeon hies himself to the field;
which he first entered, and immediately (before he had fully made four turns)
in comes Betanford, whom Grand Pre's Page had met at Carency, and now conducted
thither, having only his Surgeon with him, and having left his Coach, Page,
and Lackey a furlong off, with command not to stir, till they heard from him.

The Chirurgions (in stead of two Gentlemen for their Seconds) dispose
themselves according to the order and ceremonies of Duels) to search the
Combatants for Coats of Male, or the like: but they might have eased themselves
of this labor and curisity; for both the Gentlemen were too honorable, to have
their valors tainted with this base point of cowardice, or treachery; yea, in
mere contempt thereof, they both of purpose had left their Dublets behind
them. And now begins a Combat, as memorable as bloody, yea, performed with
such valor, dexterity, and resolution, that as these times infinitely admire
it, so succeeding ages will very difficultly believe it.

They come into the Field with a soft trot, and each having his Enemy in front,
and being near six score paces distant, they give spurs to their horses,
and part like (...) flashes of lightning. At their first meeting, Grand Pre
runs Betanford through ^e left shoulder, and Betanford only wounds Grand Pre
in the right check, close under the eye; and being excellent Horse men, they
turn short, and so again, fall to it with bravery and courage: in which
encounter Betanford receives a wide wound upon the brawne of his right arm,
and Grand Pre another through his left side, which undoubtedly had proved
mortal, and so ended the Combat with his life, had not his sword glanced on a
ribbe, and so ran outward; and now they both retire to take breath,
resolving to advance with more fury: they part again, Betanford runs Grand
Pre through the neck, and he Betanford through the small of the arm, where
meeting with the sinews and arteries, it causes the sword to fall out of his
hand, whereat he is extremely perplexed and amazed.

Here perchance some base fellow (who had never been trained up in the School
of Honor, and therefore not deserved the title of a Gentleman) would have
wrought upon the misfortune of this accident, and desired no better advantage
to dispatch his Adversary: But Grand Pre, whose generosity in this I commend,
as much as I detest his jealousy, does highly disdain to stain his honor and
courage with this infamy, and so puts Betanford out of his apprehension and
fear with these words; Baron, be courageous and cheerful, for I will rather
dye, then disgrace my self so much, to fight with an unarmed man, and so
commands his Surgeon to deliver him his sword again. Betanford is thankful
to him for this courtesy, and vows he will never forget it.

Now although their wounds do rather ingraine then imbroder their shirts with
blood, yet their youth is so vigorous, their courage Io inflamed, and their
hearts so resolute and magnanimous, as they neither can, nor will yet rest
satisfied: in a word, they manage their horses bravely, and act wonders with
their swords; for by this time they having run four several Careres:
Betanford has received seven wounds, and given Grand Pre ten: but the loss of
all this blood, (which now issued from their bodies rather by spowts then
drops) is not capable to cool their courages: and so although with dust,
sweat, blould, and wounds, they rather look like Furies then men, yet they
will not refrain fighting.

And now their Chirurgians grieving and pitying to see them, as it were
drowned in their blood, and well knowing that they had performed more then they
thought possible for men, they both agree, and so running with their hats in
their hands, humbly pray them to desist and rest satisfied, by showing them
that their swords and courages had already acted wonder beyond belief, and
that it was pity their praents, Prince, and Country should be deprived of such
resolute and valorous Cavaliers, then whom, the world (upon so unfortunate an
accident) has seldom seen braver: but they speak to the wind, and receive
no other thanks, but this check from them both, that they are base fellows,
and know not what belongs to their function and duty; and so rating and
commanding them away, they once more divide themselves, and with fresh
resolution and courage, again set spurs to their horses; but this encounter
proves more happy to Betanford, and more dangerous to Grand Pre: for as he
makes a thrust to Betanford, which mist and past under his right arm, without
doing any other harm then piercing and cutting through his shirt, Betanford
(with all the courage and dexterity he had) run Grand Pre through the belly
into the reins, with which unfortunate wound, as also with a false pace, his
horse then mad, he fell from the Saddle to the ground speechless, sprawling
and struggling, as if he were upon the point to take his last farewell of the
world: but he was not so happy, for he shall be cured of his wounds, and
hereafter dye of a more mournful and lamentable end.

Betanford, seeing Grand Pre fall, doubted that his wounds were mortal and so
alights: whereat his Surgeon with a loud voice, cried out. Dispatch him,
Dispatch him: but he calls him villain for his labor, when remembering the
former cour^ he had received of Grand Pre, in regiving him his sword, he like
a true noble Gentleman vows now to requite it, and so throwing it and his
Ha^te awa^ he with out-spred arms ran to embrace and assist him; yea, he
preferres Grand Pre's life before his own, and with all possible speed
commands his Surgeon to bring and have thither his Coach, and to his best
power does assist Betanford, in setting him up, in ordering and binding up his
wounds; his Coach being come, he causes him to be laid in softly, and so he
in one Boot, and the two Chirurgions in the other, their Pages and Lackeyes
attending them, they drive away to the very next country house, where they hush
themselves up privately, and here Betanford resembling himself, conjureth both
the Chirurgions to use their best art and chiefest skill upon Grand Pre, and
before he would have his own wounds looked unto, he causes his to be
opened, they do it, and both concur in opinion, that his last wound is
mortal; he sees them dress him, and vows he will not forsake him in this
extremity, but will be more careful of him then of himself. Reciprocal and
singular demonstrations of courtesy and honor in these two Caveliers, which
will make their memories famous to posterity.

Betanford, seeing Grand Pre committed to sleep, causes his own wounds to be
speedily searched and dressed, which are not found dangerous, and then takes
order in the house, that Grand Pre be furnished with all things necessary, as
Chamber, curious attendance, and the like; yea, he orders matters so, that
all things might be done with great secrecy and silence, nor permitting any of
his own, or Grand Pre's servants to be seen forth the house, to the end that
the news of these their accidents might not be bruted or vented.

About noone, Grand Pre's speech by little and little comes to him, and
likewise his memory, when Betanford absenting all from his Chamber, with his
Hat in his hand came to his bed side, and having courteously saluted and
comforted him, prays and conjures him, as he is a Gentleman of Honor, to
tell him why and wherefore he fought with him. Ah Baron (quoth Grand Pre)
first swear to me on thine honor, thou will deliver me the truth of a
question I will demand of thee, and then I will show thee. By my honor and
fidelity, replies Betanford, and as I hope for heaven, I will. Then Baron
(quoth he) did thou never wrong me and mine honor, in being too familiar
with my wife Mermanda? The Baron with many solemn protestations and religious
oaths, cleares both himself and Mermanda, and vows, that his heart never
thought it much less his tongue ever attempted it. Whereat Grand Pre very
humbly entreats him to excuse and pardon him, since he understood and believed
the contrary, which was the only cause of his discontent and challenge: adding
withal, that he will, till death, esteem him as his most honorable friend,
and, as long as he lives, will affect and love his wife dearer than ever he had
before. It is as great a happiness to repair and reform errors, as a misery
to commit them.

The Baron of Betanford stays very secretly ten days with Grand Pre at the
Country house, when seeing his wounds hopefully cured and recovered, they
resolve to depart. Grand Pre kindly thanks Betanford for his life, and all
other courtesies he has received of him, and he as courteously does the like
to Grand Pre, for giving him his sword wherewith he preserved his own, and so
like honorable and intimate friends, they take leave each of other, the Baron
taking horse for Paris, and freely lending Grand Pre his Coach to return to
Auxone. Thus we see courtesy always returns with interest.

Grand Pre at his coming home, kisseth and fawneth on his wife Mermanda,
acquaints her with the occasion and event of the combat, condemns his own
folly, and extolleth her chastity, prays her to forgive him again this once
for all, and vows, that there lives not a braver Noble man in the world then
the Baron of Betanford: and to speak truth, she deserves this submission and
reconciliation, and he that praise.

At the knowledge here of, I know not whethet Mermanda (like a gracious and
courteous wife) do more grieve at her husbands wounds, then rejoice at his
recovery and life: and now he repenting and detesting his former error,
renewes his love, affection, and friendship to her, the which he confirms
and uniteth with a perpetual and indissoluble Gordion knot: nevertheless the
variety of her afflictions, and the excess of her grief and discontent,
breeds her much weakness and sickness, which withers the Roses and
Lillies of her beauty.

But come we from Mermanda's heavenly Virtues to Hautefelia's devilish Vices,
which cannot be paralleld or compared, except by Antithesis: for as Mermanda
reposeth her self under the shadow of her own innocence, and lives in
perfect love and charity with the whole world, so her wretched Sister in law
Hautefelia, seeing her hopes and purposes prevented, will not sleep in her
malice, but sets her wits and revenge upon the Tenter-hookes, to find out
another expedient, to be rid of Mermanda, who (in her wicked conceit) she
thought was enemy to her content, and an eyesore to her ambition and
greatness.

We no sooner fly from God, but the devil follows us; and it proves always a
miserable folly to be wise in wickedness and sin: Hautefelia is resolute in her
rage, and cannot or rather will not see heaven for hell, she be thinks her
self of another invention to send Mermanda into another world, and so strikes
a bargain with La Fresnay an Apothecary for two hundred crowns to poison her,
who like a limb of the devil does undertake and promise it, the which (Ah
grief to think thereon) he in less then two months performs; and so this
virtuous and harmles young Gentlewoman is most unnaturally and treaherously
bereaved of her life, and brought to a mournful and lamentable end: Which
inhumane murder, we shall see, God in his due time will miraculously detect,
and severely revenge and punish.

Her Husband Grand Pre exceedingly bewayles her death, as also all her parents
and friends; yea, so infinite were her Virtues, and so sweet her behavior and
carriage, as all that knew Mermanda lamented her decease, yet no way suspecting
or knowing the violent and extraordinary cause thereof.

Now, whiles others mourn, Hautefelia exceedingly triumphs and rejoices
hereat: but this bloody victory shall cost her dear. In the mean time,
Mermanda's single death can neither quench her revenge, nor satisfy her
ambition; for as she liked not the Sister, so she (as before we have partly
understood) never loved the Brother, her own husband de Malleray, whom she
observed, very bitterly wept and grieved at his sister Mermanda's death; she
therefore, resolute to add sin to sinnne, resolves to cast the apple of
discord betwixt Grand Pre her brother, and de Malleray her husband, knowing
that if the first were slain, she were sole heir to her father, if the
second, she would have a noble Husband; a policy, whose invention is as
diabolical, as the execution thereof dangerous.

To which effect she informs her husband, that her Brother Grand Pre had
killed his Wife Mermanda with his jealousy, that he held her to be the Baron
of Betanford's strumpet, with whom for the same cause he had fought at
Brie-count Robert, and which was more, it was shrewdly suspected he had
poisoned her, the which she once thought for ever to have concealed, but that
she knew her husband was, and ought to be n^rer to her then her brother. Good
God, how far will the malice of this wretched woman extend, or to what a
monstrous height will it grow?

De Malleray grieved to the heart for this heart-killing news, because he
ever loved his Sister as dearly as his own life, without considering and
weighing whether his wifes words were dross or gold, believes her; and so
resolves very secretly to acqu^ the President his father herewith, thereby
thinking and presuming that he would by order of Law call Grand Pre in
question for the fact.

But old Cressonville (having as well his head in his eyes, as his eyes in his
head:) seeing that this suspicion and accusation had no firm grounds, that it
was an intricate business to find out, that it would breed a scandal to his
family, and especially to his deceased daughters reputation, since it is the
nature of calumny to aim at the most virtuous persons, as Cantharides do at
the fairest flowers; that it would rake up the dust of her tomb, and withal
breed him an infinite number of potent and powerful enemies: Therefore
grounding his judgment upon these reasons, and his resolutions upon this his
judgment, he holds it best to smother it in silence, and so to brook his
daughters death as patiently as he may.

De Malleray seeing his father so cold in this business, began to be all in
fire himself, vowing that he would maintain the honor, and revenge the
death of his only Sister Mermanda; and his wife Hautefelia, with her impetuous
and implacable malice, blows the coals, and sets an edge to this his
resolution: when that very instant understanding his brother Grand Pre was that
Evening arrived at Dijon, he (consulting with Nature, but not with Grace) by a
Gentleman of his familiar acquaintance, sends him this Challenge.

DE MALLERAY to GRAND PRE.
I should degenerate both from my honor and blood, if I were not sensible of
those wrongs and disgraces you have offered your Wife and my Sister; they are
of that nature, that I know not whether her innocence deserve more pity, or
your jealousy contempt and revenge: her death and your conscience make me as
justly challenge you, as you have unjustly done the Baron of Betanford:
Therefore to morrow at five of the clock after dinner, at the foot of Talon
fort, in the meado^ ranked with Wallnut trees, bring either a single Rapier, or
Rapier and Poniard, and I will meet you without Seconds; the equity of my
cause, and the unjustice of yours, make me confident in this hope, that as you
lost your blood near Brie-count Robert, you shall now leave your life in the
sight of Dijon; Judge how earnestly I desire to try the temper of your heart
and sword, since already I not only count hours, but minutes.

DE MALLERAY.


Grand Pre, though newly recovered of his late wounds, accepts this Challenge,
but not without extreme wonder to see De Malleray so passionate and resolute;
he makes choice of single Rapier, and so they meet, where, without any other
ceremony they throw off their dublets, and give them to their Chirurgions, whom
they command to stay without the next hedge, and not stir from thence, till
the death of the one proclaim the other victor.

The Sun (that great and glorious lamp of heaven) swiftly poasts away from
our Horizon to the Antipodes, of purpose not to see, or be accessory to this
bloody Tragedy, when our Champions unsheath their swords, and dispose
themselves to fight both with judgment and resolution; De Malleray comes up
fairly, proffers the first thrust, and gives Grand Pre a wound in his left
thigh, and in exchange receives another from him in the neck, which he aimed
fully at the breast, but that he bore it up with his Rapier. Grand Pre at first
gives back, but seeing de Malleray insult and press on him, he resolutely
advances, and runs him through the side: but the wound was so favorable, as
though it caused much blood, yet it brought no danger. They make a stand and
take breath, and so they very resolutely to it again: de Malleray having
hitherto the worst, does now resolve to manage his business with less violence
and more judgment; when Grand Pre driving home to him, he wards bravely, and
taking time at advantage, thrusts him in the left shoulder with a wide and
deep wound, but himself is hurt in the left arm with a wound, which ran
from his wrest to his elbow.

By this time their shirts are deeply besprinkled and gored with their blood:
but this will not appease their courages, they will try again; for they never
think enough as long as they can stand, and this encounter proves as fortunate
for Grand Pre, as fatal for De Malleray: for he receives a deep wound under
his left pap, which carries his life and soul from this world to another; so
as without speaking one word, he falls dead to the ground.

Grand Pre seeing De Malleray dead, gives thanks to God for his victory, and
so mounts on horseback, and with his Surgeon poasts toward Dole, a
Parliament City of the free County; belonging now to the Arch Duke Albertus,
leaving De Malleray's Surgeon, not to cure, but to bury his Master, or at
least to convey his dead body to Dijon, for President Cressonville his father
to perform that office,

Who is no sooner advertised of his sons death, but with tears he gives the
Parliament to understand thereof, and craves justice for the Murder. The
Parliament decrees a power to apprehend Grand Pre; but he is not desirous to
lose his head on a Scaffold: for by this time he has recovered Dole, where
having stayed some three months his parents and friends (by the favor of that
generous and true noble Gallant, Mounsieur le Grand, his Majesty's Lievetennant
of that Province of Burgundy) procured and sent him his pardon.

But in this mean time come we to his sister Hautefelia (the disgrace of her
sex, and the firebrand of Hell) who no sooner understood the death of her
husband, and the flight of her brother, she having hardly the patience to see
him laid in his grave, and resolving rather to break her neck with malice,
then her heart with sorrow, being sure of her Dowry, packes up her Jewels,
Plate, and chiefest Baggage, and so leaves Dijon, and goes home to her father
near Auxone, where during the age of her father and mother, and the absence of
her brother, she most imperiously swayes and commands all.

But this her authority lasts not long: for now home comes Grand Pre from
Dole, at whose return she finds matters altered, and her greatness and power
diminished, and to her grief sees that she cannot so absolutely domineere as
before; and which was far worse, her brother in his absence at Dole, having
smelt and understood her malice and inveterate hatred, both to Mermanda, the
Baron of Betanford, De Malleray her husband, and likewise to himself (though
nothing suspecting or dreaming of her poisoning humor) he is so far from
acknowledging or respecting her for his sister, as he will neither endure her
company or sight; which she making no show to perceive, but like a Fury of
hell, as she is, dissembling her malice and revenge, she is still constant, and
persevers in her humor of blood and Murder, and has again recourse to her
execrable Apothecary La Fresnay, and to the devil her Doctor likewise, to make
away her brother Grand Pre with poison, as he had already Mermanda his Wife,
and gives him three hundred crowns to effect it. This damnable Apothecary,
loving money well, and (as it seems) the Devil better, does engage himself
speedily to perform it, and, wretched villain as he is, within two months he
accomplisheth and finisheth it; and so as Mermanda ran equal fortune with
him in life, he does the like with her in death; for one deadly Drugge, one
bloody Sister, and one devilish Apothecary gives a miserable and lamentable
end to them both.

And now his blood thirsty sister Hautefelia (the author of these cruel
Murders and Trageedies) thinking her self freed of all her enemies, and of
all those who stood in the way of her advancement and preferment, she (neither
thinking either of her conscience or soul, of heaven or hell) domineeres far
more then before; yea, builds castles in the air, and flatters her self with
this false ambition, that she must now be a Duchess, or at least a Countess:
But she reckons without God.

We have seen, nay we have here glutted our eyes with several Murders,
whereof we have beheld this wretched Gentlewoman Hautefelia to be the horrible
and cruel author, and this execrable La Fresnay to be the bloody actor: these
crimes of theirs, and the smoke of these their impious and displeasing
sacrifices, have pierced the clouds, and ascended the presence of God, to sue
and draw down vengeance and confusion on their heads: for although Murder be
for a time concealed, yet the finger of God will in due time detect and
discover it; for he will make inquisition for blood, and will severely and
sharply revenge the death of his children.

But Gods providence and justice in the discovery thereof, is as different as
miraculous: for sometimes he protracts and deferres it of purpose, either to
mollify or to harden our hearts, as seems best to his inscrutable will, and
divine pleasure; or as may chiefly serve and tend to his glory: yea, sometimes
he makes the Murderer himself as well an instrument to discover, as he has
been an actor to commit murder: yea, and many times he punishes one sin by
and in another, and when the Murderer sits most secure, and thinks least of
it, then he heaps coals of fire on his head, and suddenly cuts him off with
the revenging sword of his fierce wrath and indignation.

And now that great and sovereign Judge of the World, who rides on the Winds
in triumph, and has Heaven for his Throne, and Earth for his foot stool, will
no longer permit Hauteselia and La Fresnay to go unpunished for these their
execrable Murders: for the innocent and dead bodies of Mermanda and her
husband Grand Pre out of their Graves cry to him for revenge, which, like an
impetuous storm, or a terrible Thunder clap, does in this manner suddenly
befall and overtake them.

Some six weeks after Grand Pre's funerals were solemnized, whereat his
Sister Hautefelia (the better to cloak her villainy) wept bitterly, and was
observed to be the chiefest Mourner; this hellish Apothecary La Fresnay,
having gotten his money so easily, thought to spend it as prodigally; and so on
a time, being in his cups at a Tavern at Dijon, and his brains swilling and
swimming with strong Wine (as Drunkenness is the Bawd and Usher to other
sins) he stealing from the rest of his company, committed a Rape upon one
Margaret Pivot, a girl of twelve years old, being the Vintners daughter of
the Tavern wherein he sat tippling.

This young girl, with millions of tears throws her self to the feet of her
Parents, and accuses La Fresnay for the fact, who do the like to those famous
Senators of the Court of Parliament: so he is apprehended; and being examined,
with many vehement and bitter asseverations denies it: he is adjudged to the
Rack, and at the second torment confesses it, and so he is condemned to be
hanged.

Two Capuchin Friars prepare him for his end: they exhort him not to charge and
burden his soul with concealing any other crimes, adding, that if he reveal
and repent them in earth, God will remit them in heaven: these exhortations of
theirs produce good effects; for though he have formerly lived like a devil,
he will now dye like a Christian: and so with many tears reveals, that at
the instigation of Hautefelia, and for the lucre of five hundred crowns (which
at two several times she gave him) he had poisoned Mermanda and her husband
Grand Pre.

All the world is amazed, and the Parliament acquainted herewith, they alter
their first Sentence, and so for his triple villainies condemn La Fresnay to
be broken alive upon the Wheel, and there to languish and dye without being
strangled: which in Dijon is accordingly executed to the full satisfaction of
Justice.

A Provost likewise is forthwith dispatched from Dijon to Grandmonts house, to
apprehend his daughter Hautefelia, and God would have it that she was ignorant
of La Fresnay's apprehension, and more, of his death. The Provost finds her
dancing in her fathers garden, in company of many Gentlemen and Ladies: he sets
hands on her; and so exchangeth her mirth into mourning, and her songs into
tears: she is brought to Dijon, and examined by a President, and two
Counselors of the Parliament. She impudently and boldly denies both Murders;
says La Fresnay is her mortal and professed enemy, and therefore not to be
believed. But the devil, who has so long bewitched and deluded her, either
will not, or rather now cannot save her with this poor evasion: she is
adjudged to the Rack, and at the first torment confesses it.

The Criminal Judges of this great and illustrious Parliament, in detestation
of these her execrable and bloody crimes of Murder, pronounce sentence on her:
so, after she had repented her sins, and prepared her self to dye, her Paps
are seared, and torn off with red hot Pincers, then she is hanged, her body
burnt, and her ashes thrown into the air.

Now to gather some profit by reading this History, or indeed, rather by the
memory of the History it self, let us observe, nay let us imprint in our
hearts and souls how busy the Devil was by ambition, covetousness, malice
and revenge, to seduce and persuade Hautefelia and La Fresnay to commit these
Murders; and also how just God was in the detection and punishment thereof,
that the fear of the one may terrify us from embracing and attempting the
other: to the end, that as they lived in sin, and dyed in shame; so we may
live in righteousness, and dye in peace, thereby to live in eternal felicity
and glory.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY II.
Pisani betrayeth Gasparino of his Mistress Christeneta. Gasparino challenges
Pisani for this disgrace, and kills him in the field: he after continues his
suite to Christeneta: she dissembles her malice for Pisani his death: she
appoynts Gasparino to meet her in a Garden, and there causes Bianco and
Brindoli to murder him: they are all three taken and executed for the same.

WHere Affection has Reason for guide, and Virtue for object, it is approved
of Earth, and applauded of Heaven: but where it exceeds the bounds of Charity,
and the lists of Religion, Men pity it, Angels lament it, and God himself
contemnes it: for if we are crossed in our love, why should discontent make us
desperate? or to what end should we fly Reason to follow Rage, except we
desire to ride poast to Hell, and to end our days on a shameful and infamous
Scaffold here on earth? It is an excellent felicity to grow from Virtue to
Virtue, and a fatal misery to run from Vice to Vice: Love and Charity are
always the true marks of a Christian, and Malice and Revenge, those of an
Infidel, or rather of a Devil: but to imbrue our hands in innocent blood, and
to seek the death of others, is to deprive our selves of our own life, as the
sequel of this History will declare, which I relate with pity and compassion,
since I see the Stage whereon these Tragedies are acted and represented, not
only sprinkled, but goared with great variety and effusion of blood.

In Pavia (the second City of the Duchy of Millan) the very last year that
Count Fuentes (under the King of Spain) was Viceroy of that State, Signior
Thomaso Vituri, a noble Gentleman of that City, had one only child, a daughter
of the age of fifteen years, named Dona Christeneta, who was exceeding fair
and beautiful, and endued with many excellent qualities and perfections,
requisite in a Gentlewoman of her rank: she was sought in marriage by many
Gallants of the City: but a Cavalier of Cremona must bear her away, or at
least her affection: The History is thus.

Signiour Emanuel Gasparino, a noble young Gentleman of Cremona, hearing of
Vituri his wealth, and of his daughter Christeneta's Beauty and Virtues (the
Adamants and Load-stones to draw men's affections) resolves with himself to
seek her for his wife: he acquaints none herewith, but an intimate dear
friend of his, a young Gentleman of the same City, named Signior Ludovicus
Pisani, by descent a Venetian, whom he prays to assist and accompany him to
Pavia, in seeking and courting the fair Christeneta his Mistress. Pisani
terms himself much honored and obliged to Gasparino, and very willingly
grants his request; and so they prepare for their journey.

They come to Pavia: Vituri bids Gasparino welcome, and entertaines him
respectfully and courteously, as also Pisani; he thanks Gasparino for the
honor he does him in seeking his daughter, and like a careful father takes
time to consult hereon: but for Christeneta, she looks not so pleasing nor
pleasantly on him as he expects; he is deeply in love both with her beauty
and other perfections, but he finds her cold in her discourse and answers, and
very melancholy and pensive: he courts her often (and after the Italian
fashion, with variety of Music, Ditties, and airs) but still he finds her
averse, and contrary to his desires, as if her thoughts were otherwise fixed.
Gasparino knows not how to win her affection, nor how to bear himself
herein; he consults with Pisani, and prays him to confer with Christeneta,
and to sound her affection: But it proves often dangerous, still indiscretion,
to trust a friend in this case.

Pisani promises to perform the office of a friend, and to confer
effectually with Christeneta; he seeks opportunity and place, and finds both;
he sets out to her Gasparino's merits, and paints forth his praises, and in a
word, leaves nothing untouched, which he thinks may any way advance his
friends content and affection: but he finds Christeneta's mind perplexed and
troubled; for she often changes colors, now red, then pale, and then pale,
now red again: yet he observes that her eyes are still steadfastly fixed on
him: he prays her that she will return a pleasing answer for him to carry to
his friend, and her lover Gasparino.

Christeneta would willingly speak, but cannot, for her heart and paps beat
and pant, and her fighes very confusedly interrupt her words; but at last,
dying her Lilly cheeks with a Vermillian blush, she tells him that she is not
ignorant of Gasparino's merits, who deserves far her better, but that she
cannot consent to love him, in respect she has fixed, but not engaged her
affection on another. Pisani still extolleth his friend Gasparino to the sky,
and for all honorable parts preferres him before any Gentleman of Lombardy;
and withal, with much industry and insinuation, endeavors to request and draw
Christeneta to name him her servant, which she once thought to have done, had
not Modesty (the sweetest and most precious ornament of a Virgin) for that time
withheld her, when after two or three deep sighs (the outward Heralds of her
inward passions) she told him thus,

Pisani, it is a dear and near friend of yours, who is the first that I have,
and the last that I will affect; but I will not at present name him, only if
you please to meet me secretly to morrow, at eight of the clock in the morn,
in the Nuns garden at Saint Clare, I will there inform you who it is: but in
the mean time, and ever, forbear to solicit me any more for Gasparino, since
he shall not be my servant, nor will I be his Mistress: and so for that time
they part, and he confidently promises to meet her.

Gasparino demands Pisani how he finds his Mistress Christeneta: He
answers faithfully according as she told him; but conceales their appointed
meeting in the Nuns garden: and now because he sees it labor lost to
research Christeneta, he will not be obstinate in his suit, but will give a
law to his passions and affections, rather then they shall prescribe any to
him, and so resolves to take leave of her, because as well by her self, as by
her father and mother, and now chiefly by Pisani, he sees she is otherwise
bent and affected, to which end he leaves Pavia, and returns to Cremona. Leave
we therefore Gasparino to his thoughts, and come we to those of Pisani and
Christeneta, to see what their garden conference will bring forth.

Pisani cannot imagine what friend of his it should be that Christeneta loves,
but she knows enough for them both; and it may be, too much for her self: she
knows it at least an immodest, if not a bold part for her to court Pisani, who
ought rather to court her: but she thinks it both wisdom and duty to give
way to that which she cannot avoid and prevent, and so preferres the zeal of
her affection before the respect of her modesty: but that which makes her so
resolute in the execution of this her amorous attempt is, to see that Gasparino
has found Pisani to solicit for him to her, and she can find none but her
self to solicit for her self to Pisani: therefore bold in this her
resolution, she bears so deep and so dear an affection to Pisani, that she
thinks every moment an hour, and every hour an age, before she see Pisani,
that one person of the World, whom she loves more dear then all the world.
Thus wishing night day, her house the Nunnery, and her chamber the garden: she
with much impatient patiency awayts the hour of eight, which she knows will
bring her her joy or her torment, her felicity or her misery, her life or her
death.

The Clock strikes eight: Christeneta takes her Prayer-booke, and her
Waytingmayd, and so trips away to the Nunnery; but she does now dispense with
her devotion, to give content to her eyes, or rather to her heart, in seeing
and enjoying the desired company of Pisani, whom she esteems the life of her
content, and the content of her life, and so forsakes the Church, to go to the
Garden: Pisani, who never failed of his hour and promise to men, does now
disdain to miss thereof to a Lady: for Christeneta has scarce made three
paces in the walks of the Garden, but ere the fourth be finished, she sees
Pisani enter, she blushes at his sight, and he grows pale at her blushes: he
finds her in a bower of Sycamors, Cypresses, and Vines, decked within with
Roses, Lillies, and Gilly-flowers, he gives her the good morrow and the
salute, the which, with a modest and sweet courtesy, she receives and returns;
he tells her he is come to perform his promise, and if it please her, to
receive hers: she would feign answer him, but her cheeks give blushes, where
her tongue should words; but at last, darting a sweet look on him (which was
the Ambassador and Herald of her heart) she discovers her self to him thus:

The person (Pisani) on whom I have fixed and settled my affection, does
exceedingly resemble you, is of your own blood, and of your nearest and
dearest acquaintance. Pisani presses her to know his name; when after many
glances, sighs, and blushes, she tells him, his name is Pisani, and himself
the man, prays him to pardon her boldness, and to give an honorable
interpretation and construction to her affection, (...) withal, that when she
first saw him, she loved him; and now prays him to be (...), that Christeneta
may be a solicitor for her self to Pisani, and not Pisani to Christeneta for
Gasparino; yea, she confirms her words with many sighs, and again her sighs
with many tears, which trickle down her beautiful cheeks, like pearled
drops of deaw upon blushing damask Roses.

Pisani wonders at this unexpected news, and knows not how to bear himself
in a business of this nature; he sees that her beauty deserves love, and her
descent and virtues respect: but withal, he is not so dishonorable to betray
his friend; he wonders at her affection, and is not ignorant that she deserves
a more noble husband then himself, but seeing her languish for an answer, he
returns her thus: Although I acknowledge my self infinitely bound to you for
that affection of yours, wherewith you please to honor me, yet as honor is
to be preferred before affection, so Christeneta must excuse Pisani, since he
cannot be a servant to her, but he must be a traitor to Gasparino; and that
respect excepted, in requital of your favor, I will esteem my self happy if
I may lose my life for your service.

Yet he is not so unkind, but gives her a kiss or two at farewell which as
much delights Christeneta, as his refusal does afflict her: so they part. The
rest, time must bring forth.

Now although Gasparino have left Pavia, yet he cannot forsake his affection to
Christeneta, but cherishes her memory, and in heart adoreth her Idaea; yea he
loves her deeply and dearly, and indeed her perfections and beauty deserve
love: but such is Christeneta's affection to Pisani, as she can take no truce
of her thoughts: but despite of discretion and modesty (which persuade and
counsel her to the contrary) she within ten days after purposely sends a
confident Messenger to him, to Cremona with this Letter:

CHRISTENETA to PISANI.
Find it not strange, that I second my last speech with this my first Letter,
and think, that, were not my affection entire and constant, I should not thus
attempt to reveal it you in lines, which blush not, as my cheeks do, when I
write them. I should offer too palpable violence and injury to the truth, if I
tell you not that it is impossible for Christeneta to love any but Pisani, whom
I no sooner saw, but deeply admired and dearly affected. Now since my zeal to
you is begun in virtue, and shall be continued in honor, it makes me flatter
my self with hope, that you will not enforce me to despair: for if I am not
so happy to be yours, I must be so unfortunate never to be mine own. Judge
what your absence is to me, since your presence is my chiefest felicity: which
makes me both desire and wish, that either you were in Pavia, or I in Cremona.
I can prefixe and give bounds to my Letter, though not to my affection. Hate
not her who loves you dearly, otherwise, whatsoever you think, I know, your
unkindnesse to me will be mere cruelty.

CHRISTENETA.


(...) Pisani receives this Letter: he wonders at her affection, and now
consults betwixt Christeneta's love to him, and his respect to Gasparino: he
at first holds it incivility not to answer her Letter, and yet is very
unwilling, in doing her right, to wrong his friend: but at last perusing her
Letter, again he finds it so kind, as he deemes it not only ingratitude,
but a degree of inhumanity for him not to return her an answer: and therefote
taking Pen and Paper, he writes to her thus.

PISANI to CHRISTENETA.
YOu discover me as much affection as I should treachery to my friend, either
to accept or ^equite it; and were it not for that consideration, which must
tend as well to mine own honor, as to your content, I would not stick to
say, that Pisani loves Christeneta, because she deserves to be beloved; only
give me leave to inform you, that as you are too fair to be refused, so I am
too honest to betray my friend, especially such a one who is as confident of my
fidelity, as I assured of his. Could time reconcile these difficulties with my
reputation, my heart would i^stantly command my pen (...) signify you, that I
desire to give you hope, and to take away your despair; and withal, that
Pavia is more pleasing to me then Cremona, since Christeneta lives in it, and
Pisani in her. I was never heretofore cruel to any, neither do I resolve to
be unkind to you: for how can I, ^th I as truly vow to honor you, as you
profess to love me? Live you in this assurance, and I will dye in the same.

PISANI.


Time with a swift foot vanishes and passes away; but Christeneta's affection
to Pisani cannot: she in his Letter perceives a glimmering light of hope break
forth through the obscure clouds of her despair; but fear does as soon
eclipse and strangle, as propagate and produce it; only, despite all
apprehension and opposition, her thoughts do still gaze and look on Pisani,
as the Needle of the compass does to the North; so as she can rest in no true
tranquillity of mind, before she writes to him again; the which, some
fifteen days after, she does to this effect.

CHRISTENETA to PISANI.
I May pass the bounds of discretion, but will not exceed those of honor. I
have ever learned to retaiue this Maxim, that affection which receives end had
never beginning. If then I live, I must breath the air of your love, as well
as this of my life, since it is the prime and sole cause thereof, as the Sun
is of the light. Your Letter I find so full of doubts and ambiguities, as I
know not wherefore to hope, or why not to despair: could you dive as deeply
into my heart, as I have into your merits, if nature do not, pity would
inform you, that you ought to prefer the love of a Lady before the respect
of a Gentleman, especially since he may carry his heart from you, and I desire
to bring and present mine to you: and how can your absence either rejoice or
comfort me, since your presence will not? Think what you please, either of me,
or of your self; only give me leave to tell you, that I find doubt a step,
and degree to despair, as despair is to death: I write rather with tears
then Ink. If you will not live my Saint, I must dye your Martyr.

CHRISTENETA.


At the receipt of this second Letter (which was so sweetly pleasing, and
pleasingly sweet to his thoughts) he found the Bulwarks and defenses of his
respect to Gasparino razed and beaten down, and a fair breach made and laid
open for Christeneta to enter and take possession of the Castle of his heart;
so now at one instant he performs two several attempts: for the farther he
flies from his friend Gasparino, the nearer he approaches to his Mistress
Christeneta; and therefore now wholly imparadising his thoughts in the garden
of her pure beauty, and taking the chiefest light of his content and felicity
from the relucent luster of her eyes, he thinks it high time, no longer to
bear out his Flag of defiance, but to strike sail, and do homage to the
sovereign of his thoughts, the which he does in this Letter, that he purposely
sends her in answer of hers by his Page.

PISANI to CHRISTENETA.
YOur virtue and beauty is enough powerful to prevail with me: but your
affection, which adds grace to either, and either to it, makes me forget my
respect to Gasparino, to remember my love to Christeneta: but that which gives
life to this my resolution, is, that it is impossible for him to hate me as
much as you love me; and in this hope I both rejoice and triumph, that you
shall not be my Martyr, but my Mistress, and I will be both your Saint and
your servant: for as you desire to live in my favor, so my chiefest ambition
and zeal is to dye in your affection: that which heaven makes me affirm,
earth shall not enforce me deny. I will shortly follow, and second this my
Letter; till when, you can never so much lament my absence, as I desire your
presence. Let this be your true consolation, since it is my sole delight and
chiefest felicity.

PISANI.


If Pisani his first Letter overthrew Christeneta's despair, this his second
revives and confirms her hopes; so that whereas heretofore she condemned her
presumption in writing to Pisani, she now not only applauds her resolution
therein, but also blesses the hour that she attempted it; yea, she builds
such castles of delight and content in her heart, and her heart in her soul,
to think that she should be his Wife, and he her Husband, that she
anticipateth the hours, and blames the days for not presenting her with the
sight and presence of her sweet Pisani, whom, above all earthly contents, she
chiefly desires.

Now if Christeneta were thus perplexed with the absence of her Pisani, no
less is he with that of his Christeneta: for remembering the freshness of her
youth, and the sweetness of her beauty, he in conceit hates Cremona, which
before he loved, and now loves Pavia, which before he hated: it is as great
a grief to him to be with his other affairs without her, as it would rejoice
him to be with her without them: yea, she runs so deeply in his thoughts,
and they on her beauty, as (if it were not immodesty) he either wishes
himself impaled in her arms, or she incloystered in his. And now to perform
as much as his Letter has promised, he, without thinking or respecting of his
old friend Gasparino, prepares all things ready to go see his new Mistress
Christeneta.

He comes to Pavia, accompanied with three or four of his nearest and dearest
friends, visits Christeneta, whom he saluteth and courteth with all kind of
honorable and amorous complements: She is joyful, yea, ravished with his
arrival: he does assure her of his perpetual affection, and reciprocally
himself of hers; yea, she so infinitely delights in his presence, and he so
extremely in hers, that she now freely gives her self to Pisani, and he in
exchange, as absolutely takes himself from Gasparino, to give himself to
Christeneta: so as she rejoicing in her purchase, and he triumphing in his
victory, they attend the time, wherein heaven and earth has ordained of two
bodies to make them one.

But it is not enough for Pisani to be possessed of Christeneta's favor: for
he must likewise obtain that of her parents, before either he can enjoy his
wishes, or she her desires, and so he goes honorably and secretly to work
with them: but he finds them not so tractable as Christeneta hoped, or
himself desired: for old Vituri her father preferring wealth before honor,
and riches before virtues, dislikes this motion, alleging that Pisani's father
dyed exceedingly in debt, that his chiefest Lands were engaged and morgaged,
that he had many great Legacies to pay to his sisters, but which was worst of
all, that Pisani himself loved the Court better then the Country, and that in
his expenses and apparel he was extremely prodigal, and frugall in neither:
which considerations so swayed the judgment and opinion of Vituri, that
knowing he might every day provide and procure a better match for his daughter,
he gives Pisani to understand, that as yet he has no intent to marry his
daughter, alleging her few years, and the like trivial reasons and excuses,
whereby Pisani might plainly perceive, that he had no intent to give him his
daughter.

This refusal of Vituri does wonderfully grieve Pisani, and afflict
Christeneta, so as they see their hopes nipt in their blossoms, and their
desires not in the way to reap such efffects as they expected. Pisani
distrusting his own power, sets his parents and chiefest friends to draw
Vituri to hearken unto reason: but his age cannot be deceived in that, which
his judgment, and not his passion, suggesteth him: they have diverse
conferences, but every day, in stead of bringing hopes, produces more
difficulties and despair; and now that Pisani may see that his sure and
research is displeasing to Vituri, he looks not on him with so courteous an
eye as accustomed: and which is worse, Christeneta is forbidden his company,
and he her fathers house.

This goes to the hearts of our two lovers, but they brook it as patiently as
they may, and hope that time will give end to these their discontents and
afflictions. In the mean whiles, as fire suppressed does often flame forth
with more violence, so, since they cannot personally visit one the other, they
entertain their affections by their Letters, who are so many in number, as I
hold it fit rather to suppress then divulge them. Thus whiles Pisani comforts
himself, that there are no roses without prickles, and that hopes long
expected are best welcome, but chiefly relying upon the affection and
constancy of his Mistress: he will not stain his valor with this point of
cowardice, to be put off with the first repulse of Vituri, but resolves to
continue as constant in his affection, as he does in his refusal; and so after
he had stayed a month or two in Cremona, he bethinkes himself of an invention,
whereby it is not impossible for him to obtain his Mistress of her father.

Pisani being enriched with the treasure of Christeneta's favor and affection,
writes to her, that if she can obtain her Mothers consent, she peradventure
may easily procure that of her husband; who hearkening and relishing this
advice with much zeal, puts it a foot; and as in few days she gained her
Mother, so a month was not fully past, before she had likewise drawn her
husband to approve and consent to this Match: So now our Lovers are again
revived and comforted; for the rubs being taken away, the difficulties removed,
and the parents of both sides fully satisfied, all things now seem in so fair
a forwardness and preparation, as if our two Lovers were shortly to enjoy each
other in marriage, or to enjoy the fruits of marriage, which so earnestly and
infinitely both affected and desired.

To which end, that their nuptials might be solemnized with the greater pomp
and glory, they provide themselves of variety of rich and sumptuous Apparel,
the day is appointed, and all the Nobility of Pavia and Cremona (as well their
kinsfolks as others) are invited to the Wedding: but their Parents shall come
short of their designs, and these our two Lovers of their hopes: for this
Marriage being not begun in heaven, shall never be finished nor consummated in
earth.

We have here so much spoken of Pisani, that it seems we have quite
forgotten Gasparino, as if he had no farther part to act in this History; but
he is not so fortunate: for this proceeding of Pisani to Christeneta is not so
secretly managed, but he has news thereof, who knowing there can be no
greater treason, after that of a subject to his Sovereign, then for a friend
to betray his friend, he grieves, and is extremely incensed at Pisani, to see
he has betrayed him of his Mistress; the which he takes so bitterly and
passionately, that he vows he will make him repent it. Iealousy and Revenge
are always bad Counselors, and therefore can never prove good Judges: But
such is his love to Christeneta, and so deeply is her beauty imprinted and
engraven in his heart, as shutting his Judgment to Charity, and opening it to
Revenge he is resolved, at what price soever, to call Pisani to a strict
account for this affront and disgrace, and is resolved rather to die, then live
to see himself thus abused, by one whom God and nature has made his inferior.
Were we as apt to do good as evil, we should be Angels, not men; but
resembling our selves (or rather hearkening too much to the Prince of
darkness) we fly reason to follow rage, and many times procure our own
destruction, in seeking that of others.

Gasparino having thus his eyes and senses ore-clouded and vayled with the mis^
of revenge, is transported with such bloody passions and resolutions, as he is
sometimes resolved to pistol Pisani, either in the street, or in his bed, and
other times to hire two or three Ruffians to murder him the next time he
rides into the Country but at last casting his eyes from hell to heaven, and
from Satan to God, he trampleth those execrable resolutions under his feet,
and banisheth them from his heart and thoughts, esteeming them as unworthy of
him, as he were of the world, if he should commit them: and so for that time
enters in a resolution with himself, no more to think on Christeneta, and
less to be revenged of Pisani, for betraying her from him.

Had Gasparino continued in this peaceable and Christian-like mind, he had
not exposed himself to so many dangers and misfortunes, nor given himself as
a prey to feed the malice and revenge of his bloody enemies: but now
understanding that all Cremona and Pavia prattled and laughed at his disgrace,
in seeing him thus baffled and abused by Pisani, he thinks that not only
himself, but his honor is disparaged, and wronged herein, and that he shall
be extremely condemned of cowardice, if in a Duel he call not Pisani to right
him, and give him satisfaction: yea, the only consideration of this point of
honor (which many times is bought and sold at so dear a price, as the peril
and loss both of body and soul) did so violently persuade and prevail with
him, that as revenge admits of no opposition, nor hearkens to any advice, so
enquiring for Pisani, and understanding him to be in Pavia, he the more
encouraged and inflamed hereat, taking with him a resolute and confident
Gentleman, and one only Lackey, sets spurs to his Horse, and so hyes
thither, resolving with himself to gain his Honor in the same City, where
he had received his disgrace.

Being arrived at Pavia, he is assured that Pisani is in the City, and
inquiring more curiously after him, he understands, that, that very instant
he is with his Mistress Christenea, which so galled his thoughts, and
inflamed his heart, as he was once resolved that very instant to send him a
Challenge, and the sooner, because Christeneta might be an eyewitness of the
delivery thereof: but to speak truth, Passion could not find a better
opportunity, nor Judgment a worse, for him to draw his malicious contemplation
into bloody and impious action; and therefore respecting Christeneta, although
she had refused to respect him, and fearing if she had the least notice or
^kling thereof, she loved her Pisani so dearly, as she would hinder and
prevent him from running into so imminent a danger, he all that day hushed
himself up privately in his Inn, deferring the sending thereof till the
morning, when delivering it to his cousin Sebastiano (the Gentleman that came
with him from Cremona) he prays him instantly to find out Pisani, and to
deliver it to him as secretly and as fairly as he could.

Sebastiano being no novice in these occasions and accidents, repaires to
Pisani his Lodging, and finds him as he was issuing forth his Chamber, whom
he salutes, and delivers Gasparino's Challenge fast sealed. Pisani with a
constant carriage, and firm countenance, receives it; and breaking off the
Seals, steps aside and reads these Lines:

GASPARINO to PISANI.
YOu have given the first breach to our friendship: for since you have
treacherously bereave^ me of my Mistress, you must now both in honor and
justice, either take my life, or yield me yours in requital: If you consider
your own ingratitude, you cannot tax, much less con^e this my resolution:
the Place, the West end of the Park; the Hour, four or five after Dinner;
the manner, o^ foot, with Seconds; the Weapon, if you please, two single
Rapiers, whereof bring you one and I the other, and I will be content to take
the refusal, to give you the ^yce. If your courage answer your infidelity, you
will not refuse to meet me.

GASPARINO.


Pisani having received and perused this Challenge (like an Italianated
Gallant, preferring his honor before his life) very cheerfully, without any
motion or show of alteration, either in his speeches or countenance, turns to
Sebastiano, and speaks to him thus; Sir, I pray tell Gasparino from me, that
my self and Second will with single Rapiers meet him and his, at the hour and
place appointed.

Sebastiano returns: and Pisani having accepted the Challenge, bears it so
secretly, as Christeneta (the other half of his heart) understands not hereof:
he finds out his dear and intimate friend Sfondrato, a valiant young
Gentleman, issued of a very noble Family of Millan, who accompanied him from
Cremona, to whom he relates the whole effect of this business, showing him
Gasparino's Challenge, and requesting him to honor him so much as to second
him in this quarrel. Sfondrato very cheerfully and freely offers, and
ingageth himself; and so about noone Sebastiano and himself, like honorable
friendly enemies, meet to provide and match the Rapiers: but bear it so
secretly and discreetly, as none whatsoever could once perceive their intents,
or gather their resolutions. The hour approaching, they all take horse, and
that day Pisani, because he would be no way prevented and hindered, does
purposely refrain to visit his Mistress Christeneta. They poast to the Park
as to a Wedding, being the place of Rendez^vous of their meeting (so famous for
the defeat of the French, and taking Prisoner of their King Francis the Second,
by the Forces of the Emperor Charles the Fifth.)

Gasparino and Sebastiano are first in the Field: but Pisani and Sfondrato are
not long after: so they all tie up their Horses to the hedge, pull off their
Spurs, and cut away the timber-heeles of their Boots, that they might not
trip, but stand firm in their play: But ere they begin, the Seconds search
the Principalls, and they the Seconds; so they throw off their Dublets, and
appear all in their shirts, not as if they feared death, but rather as if they
were resolved to make death fear them.

By this time Gasparino and Pisani draw: they make their approaches, and at the
first encounter Pisani is hurt in the outside of the left arm, and Gasparino
in the right flank, the blood whereof appeared not, but fell into his hose:
they again separate themselves, and now try their fortunes afresh; here
Pisani receives two wounds, the one glancing on his ribs, the other in the
brawne of his right arm, and Gasparin^ one deep one in his left shoulder; but
these slight hurts they only esteem as scarres, not as wounds, and therefore
seeing their shirts but sprinkled, not dyed with their bloods; they
courageously come on again; but this bout proves favorable to them both; for
Gasparino wards Pisani's thrust from him, and only runs Pisani through the
hose, without doing him any other harm: and so they close, which Pisani does
purposely to exchange ground, thereby to have the Sun in his back, which was
be fore in his eyes, and now they conclude to take breath.

Their Seconds withdraw not from their stations, neither can they yet imagine
to whose side fortune will incline, they being well-neare as equal in wounds
as courage; and now Pisani and Gasparino dressing their Rapiers, and wiping off
the blood from them, begin again to make trial on whom Victory is resolved
to smile: but they alter the manner of the fight; for now Gasparino fights with
judgment, and not with fury, and Pisani with fury, and not with judgment,
whereas heretofore they both did the contrary. They traverse their grounds;
Pisani is so violent, as he has almost put himself out of breath, but
Gasparino is so wary and cautelous, as he contents himself to break his
thrusts, and resolves not to make any but to the purpose, and upon manifest
advantage; the issue answers his hopes and expectation: for at the very next
encounter, as Pisani runs Gasparino in the neck, he runs Pisani through
the body, a little below the left pap: and his sword meeting with Cav^ Vena
(which leads directly to the heart) makes a perpetual divorce betwixt his body
and his soul, and so he falls stark dead to the ground. Gasparino knowing
him dispatched, sheathes up his rapier. But Sfondrato and his Surgeon runue
to his assistance, but the affection of the one, and the art of the other were
in vain: for Pisani his life had forsaken his body, and his soul was already
fled from this world to another.

Whiles Sfondrato and the Surgeon were stretching out the dead body of
Pisani, and covering it up with their cloakes; Sebastiano runs to Gasparino,
and congratulates with him for his victory, extolling his valor to the sky:
But Gasparino tells him, that these praises appertain not to him, but to a
higher providence, and withal prays him to be careful, and to manage his
life both with courage and discretion; and for himself, finding his wounds, no
way desperate nor dangerous, he is resolved not to suffer his Surgeon to
bind them up, till he see the issue of the Combat betwixt his faithful
friend Sebastiano and Sfondrato.

By this time Sfondrato thinks it high time to begin: and being no way
daunted with the misfortune and death of his friend Pisani, but rather
encouraged and resolved to sell it dearly on the life of Sebastiano; he
draws, and with his Rapier in his hand comes toward him. Sebastiano meets
him half way with a very fresh and cheerful countenance, and so they
approach one to the other: at their first encounter, Sebastiano gives
Sfrondrato a large and wide wound on his right side, but receives another from
him through the left arm, a little above the elbow; but that of Sfondrato
powered forth more blood; and to be brief, they both give and take diverse
wounds, and perform the parts of valorous Gentlemen.

But in the end, God, who would not give all the victory to one side, but will
make both parties losers, to show that he is displeased with these their bloody
actions, and uncharitable resolutions, which though Honor seem to excuse, yet
religion cannot; after they had three several times taken breath, Sebastiano
advancing a fair thrust to Sfondrato's breast, which only pierced his shirt,
and ravelled his skin: Sfondrato requited him with a mournful interest, for
he ran him through at the small of the belly, and so nailed him to the
ground, bearing away his life on the point of his Rapier.

Thus our four Combatants, being now reduced to the number of two, Sfondrato
expected that Gasparino would have exchanged a thrust or two with him: the
which certainly he had performed: But Gasparino finding that the loss of so
much blood made him then weak, and that it was now more then time for him to
have his wounds bound up, they having taken order for the decent transporting
of their dead friends, that night to Pavia: they, without speaking word one to
the other, committ themselves to their Chirurgions, and so their wounds being
bound up, they take them with them, and, to save themselves from the danger of
the Law, they take horse, and poast away, Gasparino to Parma, and Sfondrato to
Florence, from whence they resolve not to stir, before their friends have
procured and sent them their pardons.

Leave we them there: and to follow the stream of this History, come we to
Cremona and Pavia, which rings with the news of the issues of these lamentable
and tragical combats; Pisani and Sebastiano are infinitely bewailed of their
parents, and lamented of their friends, yea of their very enemies themselves,
and generally of all the world, who either knew them, or heard of their
untimely and unfortunate ends.

But all these tears are nothing, in comparison of those which our fair
Christeneta sheds for the death of her sweet Pisani: For her griefs are so
infinitely bitter, (...) tears her hair, disfigureth her face, weeps,
mournes, howles, and cries so extre^ that sorrow her self would grieve to see
her sorrow; yea, she forsakes and abandoneth all company, throws off all her
rich and glittering garments, and takes on mournful and sad apparel: so as
all the persuasions of the world are not capable to give her the least shadow
of consolation: for as she affirms, she neither will, nor can be comforted;
only amidst her tears, if she admit, or permit any passion to take place in
her heart or thoughts, it is choler and revenge against Gasparino, who had
bereaved her of her only joy, of her dear and sweet Pisani, whom she loved a
thousand times more dear and tenderly then her self, and of him she vows to
be revenged in the highest degree: Whereby we may here in Christeneta see the
old phrase made good, and verifyed; That there is no affection nor hatred to
that of a Woman: for where they love, they love dearly; and where they hate,
hate deadly: But leave we her to her sorrows, and come we again to Gasparino,
who in short time, having obtained his pardon, returns from Parma to Cremona,
where he is joyfully received of his parents and friends.

He is no sooner arrived, but the remembrance of Christeneta's beauty does
flourish and revive in his heart; for although she had loved another, yet he
could affect none but her self: when letting pass some six or eight months,
and hoping that time (which is subject to nothing, and all things to it) might
wipe off her tears, and blow away her sighs for the death of Pisani; he
resolves to renew his old suit to her, to which end he visits her first by
friends, next by letters, and then in person. Christeneta (like a counterfeit
Fury) dissembles her love to Pisani, and her hatred to him, and withal
triumphs and takes a pride to see how discreetly and closely she bears her
malice: But our wisdom in sin proves mere folly in the eyes of God, which
though she will not now acknowledge, yet she shall hereafter be enforced to
do it with repentance, and peradventure when it is too late. So being resolute
in her inveterate indignation, her malice does so out-brave her charity, and
her revenge her religion, as she cannot find any rest in her thoughts, or
tranquillity in her mind, before she see the death of Gasparino make amends
and satisfaction for that of Pisani.

Gasparino having the eyes of his judgment hood-winked, and not foreseeing how
dangerous it is to repose and rely on the favor of an incensed enemy (as our
judgments are never clearest when we approach our ruin) is very importunate
with Christeneta, that he may meet and confer privately with her, which
indeed is the only opportunity that in heart she has so long desired: and now
it is that she conspires his ruin, and plots his destruction, wherein
(perchance) seeking his death, she may procure her own.

Dissembling Wretch as she is, she seems to be vanquished with his
importunity; and therefore to show her self courteous and kind to him, she
appoynts him to meet her in the Nuns Garden at six of the clock in the
morning. But what courtesy, what kindness is this, to have honey in the
tongue, and poison in the heart? For she presently agrees with two wretched
Ruffians, Bianco and Brindoli, for twice fifty Ducats to murder him. See here
the implacable and damnable malice of this young Gentlewoman, who forgetting
her soul and her God, becomes the Author of so execrable and lamentable a
Murder.

Gasparino, drowning his senses and understanding in the contemplation of the
content he should receive in enjoying his Mistress Christeneta's company,
thinks the night long ere the day appear, and although the evening were fair
and clear, yet in the morn, Aurora had no sooner lept from the watery bed of
Neptune, but the Skies were over-cast and vayled with obscure clouds, which
imprison the Sun and his golden beams, purposely not to behold so bloody a
Tragedy, as was then to be acted.

Christeneta (who could not sleep for revenge) is stirring in the morn
betimes, and so is Bianco and Brindoli. They all meet in the Nuns Garden, she
walking in the Alleyes, and they hiding themselves out of sight: At last the
Clock strikes six, and immediately in comes Gasparino, with his Hat in his
hand, and his Rapier by his side; he courts and salutes Christeneta with many
amorous speeches, and sweet Complements; she prepares to receive him: but in
stead of courteous entertainment, gives him a bloody welcome,: Her words (or
rather her watchword) are these: Gasparino (quoth she) this Garden is the
place where I had my first conference with Pisani, and where I purpose to have
my last with you: At which words, Bianco and Brindoli rush forth of a Bower,
and with many wounds kill him dead at their feet; but he had first the leisure
to draw, and for a while very valiantly defended himself, giving each of them
several wounds. Christeneta seeing Gasparino felld to the ground, fearing that
he was not fully dead, and to prevent his crying, she runs to him, thrusts
her Handkercher into his mouth, and to show her self more like a Tygre then a
Woman, and a Devil then a Christian, she with a small Poniard, or Stilleto,
stabs him many times through the body, and spurning him with her feet, utters
this revengefull and bloody speech: This I sacrifice to the memory of my dear
Love Pisani. And so Bianco and Brindoli take this murdered body of Gasparino,
and tying a great stone to it, threw it into the Well of ^he Garden; and the
better to conceal this damnable act, they fly by a Posterne ^oore: and
Christeneta thinking to cover and shroud her sin, under the cloak of Piety
and devotion, forsakes the Garden; and so, unseene of any earthly eye, betakes
her self to the Nuns Church, where she falls an her knees; but with so
profane a devotion, as she did no way repent, but rather triumph at this
Murder: But this her hypocrisy shall cost her dear.

We have here seen this horrible and cruel Murder committed and acted, and
the Murderers themselves by this time all fled, and gotten to their homes:
Yea, Christeneta gloryeth in her revenge, and Bianco and Brindoli in their
money; so as they now ^hinke themselves free, and past all danger: but they
shall be deceived in their hopes; for Divine providence has decreed otherwise.
And here we come to the detection and punishment of this Murder; wherein Gods
mercy and justice, his providence and his glory, do most miraculously shine
and appear.

The Nuns being in their Cells at their Oraisons, hear the flynking of
swords, and so they advertise their Abbess or Governesse thereof, who gives
the Alarm in the house. They descend to the Garden, to see what this rumor
might be: they find the Posterne open, and the Alleyes very much sprinkled and
gored with blood; they suspect Murder, but neither find nor see any, either
living or dead: they send to acquaint the Prefect and Provost of the City
herewith, who repair to the Garden, and (as before) find much blood, but see
nobody: they make strict inquiry and search in the Ditches, hedges, thickets,
and vaults of the Garden, but find nothing, only they forget to search the
Well: Then, to find what those Fighters were, they think of a Policy, as
worthy of them, as they of their office, they give a secret charge to all the
ehirurgions of the city to reveal them, if any having new wounds, came that
night, or the next morning to them, to be cured; whereupon Rhanuti^, one of the
chiefest Chirurgions, informs them, that he, about an hour since, had dressed
Bianco and Brindoli (two soldiers of the city) of nine several wounds, which
they newly received. The Prefect and Provost advertised hereof, cause them to
be brought before them, whom they found both together, where (no doubt) they
had consulted. They enquire who wounded them: They answer, they had a Quarrel
betwixt themselves, and so they fought it out. Being demanded again, where,
and when they fought, they looked each on other, and knowing that Christeneta
was safe at home, and Gasparino close in the well, they instantly replied, It
was in the Nuns Garden at Saint Clayre, and at six of the clock in the
morning, which agreeing to the Nuns relation, gave end to this business, for
that time especially. But though they delude and blind the eyes of men, yet
they cannot, nor shall not those of God: And now, although these murderers
have thus escaped, yet they prepare to forfake and leave Pavia, for fear to be
afterward discovered. But they shall be prevented in their subtleties, for the
hand of God will speedily arrest them.

Now we must observe, that Gasparino being found wanting two whole nights from
his Lodging, and his Lackey gathering no news of him at Vituri's house, where
he usually frequented to visit and court his Mistress Christeneta, he
informs the Host of the house hereof; and he like an honest man, doubting the
worst (after the custom of Italy) acquainted the Prefect and Provost thereof,
who, like judicious and wise Magistrates, examined Gasparino's Lackey when he
last saw his Master, and where. The Lackey answers, He parted from his
Chamber yesterday morning betwixt five and six, with his Prayer-booke in his
hand, as if he were going to Church, but commanded him not to follow him; and
since (he says) he saw him not. And now, by the providence of God, the
Lackeyes relation gives a little glimpse and glimmering light to the discovery
of this Murder: for the Magistrates see, that the hour of Gasparino's
departure from his Chamber, and that of Bianco and Brindoli's fighting do
agree, as also his Book and the Nuns Church bear some show of coherence and
probability.

Whereupon they (guided as it were by the very immediate finger of God) resolve
and determine to apprehend, and forthwith to imprison both Bianco and Brindoli,
who the very next day had thought to have slipped down the River to Ferara, and
so to Venice.

They are examined concerning Gasparino: they vow he is a Gentleman they have
neither known nor seen. The Magistrates hold it fit they should be put to the
Rack; which is as speedily performed: but these stout Villains firmly and
constantly maintain their first speech; and although they make suit to be
freed and released, yet the Prefect holds it necessary to continue them in
prison; and withal, to make a more narrow and exacter search in the Nuns
Garden.

Christeneta, being at the first advertised that Bianco and Brindoli were dead,
is thereat astonished and amazed, and so resolves to fly, but being advertised
they had already suffered torment, and revealed nothing, she again resolves to
stay, which indeed she does: but it is the Justice and mercy of God that keeps
this bloody bird within her nest.

The Prefect and Provost (as being inspired from heaven) continue constant in
their resolutions, to make a second search in the Garden for Murder; which
they do, and very curiously, leaving no place unsearched: at last it pleased
the Lord to put into the Provosts mind to search the Well, which the day
before they had omitted. He acquaints the Prefect herewith, who with much
alacrity approves hereof, and so causing it to be searched, they at last in
their hooks bring up some pieces of wrought black Taffeta: which by the
Lackey was affirmed, and known to be the same his Master Gasparino, wore the
last time he saw him: whereat they were more eagerly encouraged to search
again most exactly: which they do, and at last bring up the dead body of
Gasparino, when stripping off his cloths, they find his body pierced with
thirteen several wonuds: at the mournful sight whereof, the whole assembly,
but especially his Lackey, cannot refrain from tears, and yet all glorify God
for finding of his body, as also for the discovery of the Murderers, who now
they confidently believe are Bianco and Brindoli. But see the farther mercies
of God: for Bianco and Brindoli are but the hands which executed this Murder,
and not the head which plotted it: therefore the Magistrates being sure of
them, do now resolve to hye to Prison, and to give them double torment,
thereby to discover out of what Quiver the first arrow of this Murder came.
But behold the mercy and justice of God! they are eased of this labor, and the
name of the malefactor brought them by a most miraculous and unheard of
accident: for when the Magistrates and whole company had often visited
Gasparino's naked body, and seen nothing but wounds, a little boy standing by
(of some ten years of age) espied a linen cloth in his mouth, which he
showed the company, which the Prefect causing to be pulled out, found it to be
a Cambricke Handkercher, and withal, a name in red silk Letters in one
corner, which was the very true name of Christeneta.

See, see the goodness, O let us stand amazed and wonder at the mercies of
God, to see what means and instruments he ordayneth for the discovery of
Murders.

The Prefect and Provost send away speedily to apprehend her: she is taken in
the midst of her pleasures and pastimes, yea, from the arm of her Mother, and
feet of her Father, to whom she fled for safety, but in vain; for she is
instantly committed close Prisoner, from whence we shall not see her come
forth, till she come to her condign punishment, on a shameful Scaffold, for
this her horrible offense of Murder.

And now the Prefect and Provost go themselves to the prison, where Bianco and
Brindoli are: they accuse them peremptorily for the Murder of Gasparino, whose
body, they inform them, they have taken up out of the Well: but they again
deny it. They give them double torment, and conjure them to reveal this their
Murder; but they are so strong of courage, or rather the devil is so strong
in them, as they deny all, and neither accuse themselves, nor any other.

The Prefect and Provost, although they saw all circumstances concur, that
undoubtedly Christeneta had a deep hand in this Murder, yet they examine her
fairly, and promise her much favor, and their best friendship and assistance,
if she will reveal it: but she, as her two confederates, denies all. They
adjudge her to the Rack, whereunto she very patiently permits her self to be
fastened; but her dainty body and delicate limbs cannot endure the cruelty of
this torment: and so she confesses all, that in revenge of Pisani's death,
she had caused Bianco and Brindoli to murder him in the Nuns garden, as we
have formerly understood.

And now comes Gods sentence from heaven, pronounced against these Murderers,
by the mouth of his Magistrates on earth, who for reparation and expiation of
their horrible crimes of Murder, committed on Gasparino, adjudge Bianco and
Brindoli to have their right hands cut off, then to be hanged, and their
bodies thrown into the River Po: And Christeneta (notwithstanding all the
solicitation which her father and friends made for her) to be first hanged,
then burned, and her ashes thrown into the air: Which to the full
satisfaction of Justice, before an infinite number of Spectators (who assisted
at their mournful ends) was accordingly executed, who yet could not refrain
from tears, but as much approved and applauded Christeneta's affection to
Pisani, as they detested and abhorred her inhumane and bloody revenge to
Gasparino.

Bianco and Brindoli, as they lived unrighteously, so they dyed desperately,
and could not be drawn to repent themselves of this their bloody fact: But as I
have understood, Christeneta was extremely sorrowful for her sins, but
especially for this murder, whereof at her last breath she infinitely and
exceedingly repented her self: yea, I have been informed, that she delivered
a godly and religious speech upon the Ladder, but I was not so fortunate to
recover it. May all true Christians read this History with profit, and profit
in reading it, that so God may receive the glory: and their souls the eternal
comfort and consolation.

Amen.
GODS REVENGE AGAINST, THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY III.
Mortaigne under promise of marriage gets Iosselina with child, and after,
converting his love into hatred, causes his Lackey La Verdure, and La Palma to
murder both her and her young son: the jealousy of Isabella to her husband
La Palma is the cause of the discovery hereof: they are all three taken and
executed for the same.

IT is a just reward for the vanity of our thoughts, and a true recompense for
the errors of our youth, that we buy pleasure with repentance, and the
sweetness of sin with the bitterness of affliction: but if we violate the
Laws of Christianity, and abandon our selves to lust and fornication, then we
shall see with shame, that men will not pity us, and find with grief, that
God will punish us. It is an excellent virtue in Maidens, not to listen to the
lewd temptations of men; and in men, not to hearken to the sugered charms of
the devil* for commonly that folly gives the one shame, and this madness
brings the other destruction: but if we first forget our selves, and then our
God, by adding and heaping sin upon sin, as first, to perpetrate
fornication, and after Murder, then assuredly our estate is so miserably
wretched, and so wretchedly miserable, as we have no hope left for better
fortunes, nor place for worse. And because Example is both pleasing to our
memory, and profitable to our judgment, this mournful ensuing History shall
make good, and confirm it to us: therefore let us shut the door of our
thoughts against the power of sin, and that of our hearts against the malice
of Hell: and we shall not only make our fortunes immovable in this World,
but our felicity eternal in that to come.

In the South-east part of France, within a days journey of the famous City of
Lions, at the foot of the Mountain of Tarara, upon the border and bosom of
that sweet River Lignon, so famoused by the Minion of honor, and the darling
of the Muses, the Marquess of Vrse, in his beautiful and divine Astrea: near
Durency (a certain small Village) there dwelt a poor Country Farmer, named
Andrew Mollard, who of late burying his Wife, had one only child left him by
her, being a very fair young girl, about the age of twelve years old, named
Iosselina, whom he hoped should prove the staff and prop of his age, and
resolved when she grew up in years, and came to woman's estate, to marry her to
some of his neighbors sons, and at his death, to give her all that little
which either his parents, or his own labor and industry had left or procured
him.

Two or three years sliding away, in which time Mollard increasing in wealth,
and his Daughter in years, she was, and was justly reported to be the
fairest Nymph of those parts, and by all the rusticke Swaynes termed, the
fair Iosselina, esteeming themselves happy, if they might see her, much more,
if they might enjoy her presence.

Now within a little League of Mollards house, dwelt an ancient and wealthy
Gentleman, named Mounsieur de Coucie, who had many children: but among the
rest, his eldest son, termed Mounsieur de Mortaigne, was a very hopeful and
brave Gentleman, who was first a Page to that generous Nobleman Mounsieur de la
Guiche, sometimes Governor of Lions, and since his death a chief Gentleman to
Mounsieur de Saint Ierrant, now a Marshall of France.

This Mortaigne having lived some years in Paris with his Lord the Marshall,
where he followed all honorable exercises, as Riding, Fencing, Dancing, and
the like (whereby he purchased himself the honorable title of a most perfect
and accomplished Gentleman) was at last desirous to see his father, partly,
because he understood he was weak and sickely; but especially to be at the
Nuptials of a sister of his, termed Madamoyselle de la Hay, who was then to
be married to a Gentleman of Avergne, termed Mounsieur de Cassalis.

This Marriage being solemnized, Mortaigne having conducted his sister into
Avergne, and now seeing his father strong and lusty, he begins to dislike
the Country, and to wish himsefe again in Paris, where the rattling of
Coaches, and the infinity of fair Ladies did better delight and please him:
he craves leave of his father and mother to return, which (because he is the
chiefest stay and comfort of their age) they unwillingly grant him, and so he
prepares for his return to Paris. But an unlooked for accident shall stop his
journey for the present, and another, but far more fatal, seconding and
succeeding that, shall stop and hinder him from ever seeing it.

For the night before he was to depart, the morning de Coucye his father is
most dangerously taken with a burning Fever, and so neither he nor his mother
will permit him to depart. Living thus in the Country, and few Gentlemen
dwelling near his fathers house, he gives himself to Hunting and Hawking,
Pastimes and exercises, which though before he loved not, yet now he
exceedingly delights in: Now amongst other times, he one day hunting in his
fathers Woods (hollowing for his Dog which he had lost in a Thicket) by chance
sprung a Pheasant, who flying to the next Woods, he sends for his Hawke, with
an intent to fly at him; and so being not so happy as again to set sight of
him, he ranged so far, and withal so fast, that he was very thirsty, but
saw no house near him, that he might call for wine; till at last he happened
on that of Andrew Mollard, of whom we have formerly made mention. Mortaigne,
seeing a man walking in the next Vineyard, demanded if he were the man of the
house, and prayed him to afford him a draught of Wine, alleging that he was
very thirsty; Mollard knowing this young Gentleman by the Model of his face,
presumed to demand him if he were not one of Mounsieur de Coucye's sons: He
answered yes, and that his name was Mortaigne. Mollard presently calling to
mind that he was his fathers heir, very courteously (in his fashion) prays
him to enter his house, and so being set down, he sends his daughter
Iosselina for wine, which she fetched, and they both drink: where honest
Mollard thinking his house blessed with so great (and as he thought, so good) a
Gentleman, very cheerfully proffers him pears, Grapes, Walnuts, and such
homely dainties as his poor cottage could afford. But we shall see Mortaigne
requite this courtesy of Mollard, with an extreme ingratitude.

Mortaigne, whose eye was seldom on Mollard, and never from his daughter,
admires to see so sweet a beauty in so obscure a place: he cannot refrain from
blushing, to behold the delicacy of her pure complexion: for though she were
poor in clothes, yet he saw her rich in beauty, which made not only his
eyes, but his heart conclude, that she was wonderful fair; since it is ever
the sign of a true and perfect beauty, where the face graceth the apparel,
and not the apparel the face. And now comparing Iosselina's taynt to that of
the gallant Ladies of Paris, he finds that the truth of nature exceeds the
falsehood of their Art: for through the Alablaster of her Front, Neck and
Pappes, he might perceive the azure of her veins, which like the windings of
Meanders streams, swiftly range, and sweetly presents it self to his eye. And
for her eyes, or rather the Diamonds and Stars of her face, their splendour was
so clear, and their influence so piercing, as they not only captivate his
thoughts with love, but wound his heart with affection and admiration. But if
Mortaigne gaze on the freshness and sweetness of Iosselina's beauty, no less
does she on the propernesse and perfection of his youth, only his eyes tilt at
hers with more liberty, and hers on him with modesty, respect and secrecy:
which Mortaigne well espying, he vows to obtain her favor, or to lose his
life in research thereof: but the end of such lascivious resolutions seldom
prosper.

But see how all things favor Mortaignes affection, or rather his lust to
Iosselina! for Mollard tells him, he holds a small tenement near adjoining of
his father, who has now put him in suit of Law for two herriots, and therefore
beseeches him for his good word, and favor to his father in his behalf.
Mortaigne glad of this occasion to serve for a pretext and cloak for him, to
have access to his house and daughter, promises him to deal effectually with
his father for him, and the next time he passes that way, to acquaint him what
he has done therein: and so stealing a kiss or two from Iosselina, as her
father went into the Court, and withal swearing to her, that he loved her
dearly, and would come often to see her; he thanking Mollard for his good
cheer, for that time departed.

But the further he goes from Mollards house, the nearer his heart approaches
his daughter Iosselina. So his thoughts being steadfastly and continually fixed
on her, he begins to distaste his fathers house, yea, forsakes all company,
and many times pretending to walk in the Park and Woods, he steals away
privately to see his new Mistress. He visits her often, but especially when
her father is at market, and gives her Gloves, Lawne, and silk girdles, yea
he never comes to her, but brings her some gift and present, thinking thereby
the sooner to obtain his desire* but as yet he is still deceived: for
although she be humble and simple, yet she is chaste, and will not hearken to
his allurements and inticements. Had Iosselina continued constant in this
resolution, her life would have proved more happy, and her death less
mournful.

Mortaigne perceiving Iosselina's coyness and obstinacy, is thereat no way the
less, but rather far the more ensnared and inflamed with her beauty; and now
perceiving, that all his Visits, Gifts, Speeches and prayers work no desired
effect, he has recourse to that old fallacy and subtle invention, whereby so
many silly maids are abused and deceived; he vows, that if she will permit
him to enjoy his desire, he will marry her notwithstanding that their birth
and quallitie were so unequal and different: and this, and only this battery
and allurement, was that which van quished Iosselina's Chastity, who, poor
girl, caught with this snare, in hope to be a Gentlewoman, shook hands with
her may den-head, which she should have prized and esteemed far more
precious then her life: but she shall pay dear for this her folly; for she
shall live Mortaigne's strumpet and never dye his wife.

Mortaigne has now his desire of Iosselina; and for the fruit of this their
unchaste pleasure, in short time her belly swells: Mollard her father discovers
the Pad in the straw: he grieves hereat, tears his white hayres, and vows,
his daughters infamy will shorten his days: he torments her with reprochings
and threatenings, so as she can find no rest, or tranquillity in his house: she
advertiseth Mortaigne hereof, and requests his assistance, in this her
affliction: Mortaigne by night steals her away, and sends her ten leagues off
from Durency, placing her in a poor Kinsmans house of his, where she is
delivered of a young Son: But she shall shortly see (with repentance) what
it is to have a child e're a husband. In the mean time she feeds her self
with hope, that Mortaigne will shortly marry her, but he resolves nothing
less: for the Gallants of these times (who build their triumphs upon the
shipwreck and ruins of maidens honor) will promise any thing, ere they enjoy
their desire, but perform nothing, when they have obtained it, but rather
spurn at those pleasures, as at Nosegaies which they delight in the morn, and
throw away ere night.

Calintha, (Mortaigne's Mother) all this while knows nothing of these
occurrences betwixt her son and Iosselina, and desires to see him married,
that she might have the felicity to see her selfea Grandmother: to which end,
she resolves to seek a wife for him; and makes a motion to Monsieur de Vassy,
the Seneshall of la Palisse, to match her son with Madamoyselle la Varina his
only daughter. De Vassy dislikes not this motion: the young folks see and
love: so as in all humane sense and outward appearance, it seems a short time
will finish and conclude this match: But it was otherwise determined in heaven.

This news does amaze and terrify Iosselina: but as misfortune seldom comes
alone, she likewise that very instant understands that Mollard her father (for
very grief of her foul fact) is dead, and has dis-inherited her, leaving her
nothing but the memory of her shame, for her portion and dowry, and only
repentance to comfort her: And this indeed is the forerunnet of her future
misery: Wherefote now if ever, it is for her to look to her self and well
fare, to which end she resolves to write Mortaigne a Letter, to put him in
mind of his promise, and to take compassion of her poverty, being already
reduced to this misery, that she has not wherewithal to maintain her self
and child: her said Letter (word for word) I thought good to insert here,
because the substance and perusal thereof deserves both pity and compassion.

IOSSELINA to MORTAIGNE.
You have bereaved me of mine honor, the which (had I had as much grace as
vanity) I should have esteemed far dearer and precious then my life. Your
promise to make me your wife, was the only lure, which drew me to consent to
that error and folly, at the remembrance whereof I grieve with shame, and shame
with repentanee, especially since I see you are so far from performing it, as
you hate me, in stead of loving me: let the sweetness of my youth, and the
freshness of my beauty (which with many oaths you protested you both admired
and adored) judge whether I have deserved this discourtesie of you: but it is a
just punishment for my sin and now I find too late, though formerly would
not believe, that the fruits of pleasure are bitter resembling those Pitts that
seem sweet to the Pallat, but prove poison to the stomach: and may all
mardens beware by my example. If you will not advance my fortunes, yet seek
not to make shipwreck of my life, as you have done of my chastity: you know,
my father is dead, and with him all the means which in this World I can either
hope or expect, as well for the maintenance of my self, as of your son,
except from your self, the which with millions of sighs and tears, I beg and
beseech you afford us, and if not love to me, at least for pity to him: if you
will not grant me the honor to be a piece of your self, yet in nature, you
connot deny but your little son is not only your picture, but your image:
therefore if you will not affect me for his sake, at least do him for mine,
and think, that as it will be an extreme ingratitude in you, not to give her
maintenance, who has given you a son, so it will be extreme cruelty, not to
allow that poor babe wherewithal to live: since he has received both his
being and life of you: but I hope you will prove more natural to him, and
more charitable to my self: otherwise rest assured, that such disrespect and
unkindnesse will never go long, either unpittied of men, or unpunished of God.

IOSSELINA.


Iosselina having penned this Letter to Mortaigne, she desirous to draw hope
and assistance from all par^s, thinks it fit likewise to write another to
Calintha his Mother, to the same effect: the which she does, and sends it by a
confident messenger, with express charge to deliver them severally: the tenor
thereof is thus:

IOSSELINA to CALINTHA.
I Know not in what terms either to relate you my misfortune, or reveal you
my misery: especially since mine own folly and undiscretion gave life to the
first, as your son Mortaigne's ingratitude does to the second, had I been as
wise as now sorrowful, or as chaste, as now repentant, or which is more, had I
not then loved him, as much as he now hates me, I need not blush as I do, to
write you, that his promise to make me his wife, has made me the unfortunate
mother of a young son whereof he is the unkind father: I may well term my
self unfortunate, since I no sooner lost mine honor, but my father, who, for
his displeasure of my shame and folly, gave all his means from me, which
before, right and nature had promised me: and I may justly term your son
Mortaigne unkind, since he not only refuses to marry me, but also to allow
maintenance, either for my self, or his child. It is therefore to you, wanting
and despairing of all other means friends and hopes, that with many blushes
and tears, I presume to acquaint you with the poverty of my fortune, and the
richness of my misery, the which I humbly request you both to pity and
relieve: at least if you will not, that your son may, who is the cause
thereof: my love to him has not deserved your hatred to me: and therefore in
excusing my folly, or rather if you please, my youth, I hope you will be so
charitable to the poor babe my son, that I shall not want for his sake, nor he
for his fathers: or if yot will frown, and not smile on me, but rather
triumph to see me languish and faint under the burden of my poverty, yet
vouchsafe to excuse his innocence, though you condemn mine error: and so, if
I must dye miserably, at least let me carry this one content to my grave, that
I may be sure he shall live happy. Nature cannot deny this Charity, and Grace
will not excuse that cruelty.

IOSSELINA.


Whiles Iosselina flatters her self with hope,, that these Letters will
procure her her desire and comfort, Mortaigne and Calintha his mother receive
them. As for Mortaigne he like a base Gentleman (whose curtesy was now turned
into inhumanity) as much triumphs in his own sin, as rejoices in
Iosselina's foolish ambition and poverty. It is a felicity to him to think,
that he has abused her youth, and betrayed her chastity: and therefore he
now respects her so little, or rather dis-respecteth her so much, as her
shame is his glory; her misery, his happiness; and her affliction, his
content; yea he no more thinks of her, but with disdain and envy: for the
beauty Varina has quite defaced and blotted out that of Iosselina, neither
does this cruelty of Mortaigne end in her, but it begins in the pretty babe
his son: for he so far degenerateth from the laws and principles of
Nature, as he not only hates the Mother for the childs sake, but the child
for his mothers sake: yea, he is so far from giving either of them
maintenance, or both content, as he scorns the Mother, and will no way either
own or relieve the child: and so burning his Letter, and forgetting the
contents thereof, he very ingratefully and cruelly resolves to answer it with
silence, and this is the best comfort which Iosselina and the poor young babe
her son receive from Mortaigne. But I fear the worst is to come.

If Iosselina and her babe receive such dis-respect, and inhumanity from
Mortaigne, it is to be feared and doubted, that they will meet with little
better from his Mother Calintha, who no sooner received and read her letter,
but full of wrath and indignation, she in disdain throws it away from her:
yea, her discontent and malice is so inflamed against Iosselina and her child,
as fearing it may prove a blurre and block to Mortaigne's marriage with
Varina: she not only refuses to relieve them, but is so cruel and inhumane,
as she wishes them both in another World, as unworthy to live in this; but
her choler is too passionate, and her passions too unaturall and cruel: for
if she would not relieve Iosselina whom her son Mortaigne had abused, yet in
pity, yea in nature, she should have taken order for the maintenance of the
child whom her son had begotten: for if the Mother had deserved her hatred,
yet this poor babe was innocent thereof, and rather merited her compassion
then her envy: or at least, if there had been any spark of humanity, grace,
or good nature in her, if she would not have been seen courteous and
harbarous to them her self; yet she might dispense with her son, and wink
if he had performed it. But nothing less; for her malice is so great, and her
rage so outrageous and unreasonable, as she refuses it her self, and
commands him to the contrary: so as being once resolute, not to cast away so
much time to return Iosselina an answer, she at last in a humor, wherein
disdain triumphed over pity, and inhumanity over charity, calls for pen and
paper, and returns her this bitter and cruel answer.

CALINTHA to IOSSELINA.
HAving been so graceless to abuse my son, I wonder how thou dare be so
impudent, as to offend me with thy Letter, the which I had once thought rather
to have burnt then read: but I find it not strange, that being defective of
thy body, thou art so of thy judgment to think, that since thine own father
gave all from thee, that I, who am a mere stranger to thee (as I wish thou
had been to my son) should afford or give thee any thing; neither does
this resolution of mine proceed from contempt, but charity; for as thou art a
woman, I pity thee, but as a strumpet, hold it no pity to relieve thee. Now
then, despairing of any hope for thy self, thou pleadest for thy brat; but
since he is the object of thy shame, as thou art that of my son, and withal
the cause, why should I look on the child with compassion, since I neither can,
nor will see the mother but with disdain and envy? Thou complainest of thy
misfortune and misery, without considering that the Stars and Horoscope of
thy base birth never pointed thee out for so high an estate, as of a clownes
daughter, to become a Gentleman's wife: but thou must add ambition to thy
dishonesty, as if one of these two Vices were not enough powerful to make thee
miserable. Thou do likewise tax my son of unkindnesse toward thee,
without considering that hi^ love to thee, has been cruelty to himself: for
as thou art like to buy his familiarity with tears, so, for ought I know, may
he thine with repentance: if thou expect any comfort, thou must hop^ for no
other then this, that as my son disdaines to marry thee, so do I, that
either my self (...) he relieve thee: look then on thy self with shame, on
thy child with repentance, whiles my son and I will remember ye both with
contempt, but neither with pity.

CALINTHA.


Poor Iosselina having received and perused Calintha's Letter, and seeing
withal Mortaigne so in humane, as he disdaines to write to her; for mere
grief, and sorrow, she, with her Babe at her breast, falls to the ground in a
swoone, and had not the noise thereof advertised those in the next room to
come to her assistance, she had then and there ended her misery with her life,
and not afterward lived to see and endure so many sharp afflictions, and
lamentable wants and misfortunes.

Alas, Alas! she has now no power to speak, but to weep: yea, if her tears
are not words, I am sure her words are sighs; for being abandoned of
Mortaigne; and hated of his mother, she is so pierced to the heart with the
consideration of that cruelty, and the remembrance of this disdain, as she
tears her hair, repents her self of her former folly, and curses the hour
that Mortaigne first saw her fathers house, or she him: but this is but one
part of her sorrows and afflictions. Lo, here comes another, that is capable
to turn her discontent into despair, her despair into rage, and her rage
into madness.

For by this time Calintha understanding by her son, where Iosselina resided
and sojourned, she so ordered the matter, as when Iosselina least thought
thereof, she and her Babe in a dark and cold night is most inhumanely turned
out of the house where she was; yea, with so great barbarism and cruelty, as
she was not suffered to rest, either in the Hay-loft, Barn, or Stable, or any
other place within door; but enforced to lie in the open field, where the bare
ground was her bed, a Molehill her Pillow, the cold air her Coverlet, and the
Firmament her Curtains and Canopie. And now it is, and never before, that her
eyes gush forth whole Rivers of tears, and her heart and breast sends forth
many volleyes of deepe-fetched sighs; yea, having no other Tapers but the
Stars of heaven to light her, she looks on her poor Babe for comfort,
whose sight, God knows, does but redouble her sorrows and afflictions,
because it lies crying at her breast for want of Milk, which (poor woman) she
had not to give it; when, being in this miserable case, and accompanied with
none but with the Beasts of the Field, and the Birds of the air, who yet were
far happyer then her self, because they were gone to their rest, and she
could receive none, she after many bitter sighs, groans, and tears, uttered
these speeches to her self.

Alas, alas, poor Iosselina! It is thy folly, and not thy fortune, that has
brought thee to this misery: for had thou had grace to use, and not to abuse
thy beauty, thou might have seen thy self as happy, as now thou art
wretched and miserable: but see what a double loss thou receivest for thy
single pleasure, for the loss of thy chastity to Mortaigne, was that of thy
father to thee: and now being deprived of both, what will thou do, or whither
can thou fly for comfort? But alas, this is not all the misery; for as thy
loss is double, so is thy grief: for now thou must as well sorrow for thy
child, as for thy self; yea Iosselina, forget to grieve for thy self, and
remember to do it for thy Babe, since thou have brought it into the world, and
have not wherewith to maintain it. And then not able to proceed farther, she
takes it up and kisses it, and raines tears on it is cheeks, though she cannot
stream milk in its mouth, when again recovering her speech, she continues
thus:

Ay me, Iosselina, thou art both the Author and the cause of thine own misery,
and therefore thou must not blame heaven, but thank thy self for it: for thy
afflictions are so great, as wheresoever thou turnest thy thoughts or eyes,
thou find nothing but grief, nothing but sorrow: for if thou think on
Mortaigne, he looks on thee with disdain, if on his mother Calintha, she with
envy; yea, thou can not behold the world without shame, thy poor infant
without sorrow, nor thy self without repentance: nay, consider further with
thy self, what thou have gotten by casting (or rather by casting away) thy
affection on Mortaigne: he found thee a Maid, and has left thee a strumpet;
thou have a child, and yet no husband: then thou were so happy as to have a
father, and now thy son is so miserable, as he can find none: yea, then thou
were a friend to many, but now thou find not one that will be so to thee:
and which is worse, thou have not wherewithal to be so to thy self. Alas,
alas, thou have no house to go to, no friend to trust to, no meat for thy
self, nor milk for thy child: therefore poor Iosselina (quoth she) how happy
should we both be, if thou were buried, and he unborne.

She would have finished her speech, but that tears interrupted her words, and
sighs cut her tears in pieces.

By this time her Babe falls asleep, but her griefs are so great, and her
sorrows so infinite, as she cannot close her eyes, nor yet be so much
beholding either to Morpheus or Death to do it for her; which perceiving, as
also that the Moon was inveloped in a cloud, and that the Stars begin to
deny her the comfort and luster of their sight, she fearing to be overtaken
with rain, and perceiving a thick Wood a pretty way off from her, she takes
her Babe, and as fast as her weak and wearyed legs could perform (bitterly
weeping and sighing) hies thither for shelter; but heaven prooves more kind to
her then earth: for lo, both the Moon and Stars assist and comfort her in
this her sorrowful journey. Being come to the Wood (which indeed was farther
off then she thought) she began to be weary, and there making a bed of
leaves (which at that season of the year fell abundantly from the Trees) she
thereon for awhiles rested her self, but sleep she could not: and now if any
thing in the world afforded her comfort, it was to see that her infant slept
prettily, though not soundly: but here if her eyes craved rest, so her stomach
craved meat: for it was now midnight, and she had eaten nothing since noone:
so pulling off her upper coat, she wraps and covers her child as hot as she
could, who being fast asleep, and laying it on the bed of leaves, she goes
from tree to hedge, and gathers Blacke-berries, Slowes, and wild Chessnuts,
wherewith in stead of better Viands, she satisfied her hunger, and now she sees
her self on the top of a Hill, at whose foot she perceived a River, and a
great stony Bridge over it, the which she knew, as also that there was a
little Village near about a mile beyond it, which indeed in the midst of her
miseries afforded her some comfort. So back she hies to her child, which she
finds out by its crying, it wanting not only his nipple but his Nurse, and so
with many kisses takes it up in her arms, and hyes toward the bridge, and
from thence to the Village, which she now remembers is termed Villepont, where
she arrives at five of the clock in the morning, and lodged her self in a
very poor Inn, being extremely glad, and infinitely joyful that she had
recovered so good a harbor.

But money she has none to pay her expenses, and to lie in Innes upon credit,
is to be ill attended, and worse looked on: so she is enforced, yea, feign to
sell away her Quaives, her bands, and her upper coat, to discharge her present
occasions. Poor Iosselina, how happy had thou been, if thou had had as
much wit and chastity, as beauty, or rather more chastity, and less beauty!
But it is now too late to remedy it, though never to repent it.

Iosselina knowing Villepont to be but seven leagues from Durency (the Parish
where she was borne) is irresolute whether to stay here, or to go thither.
Want of means persuades her to the first: but knowing that Mortaigne's love
was turned to hatred, and that it was dangerous for her to be near his
incensed mother, she resolves to stay in Villepont, and to write to her
kinsfolks and friends to assi^t her in this her misery and necessity. In the
mean time she is enforced to content her self with a poor little
out-chamber, where there is neither chimney nor window, but only a small loope
whereinto the Sun scarce ever entered, and yet she is extremely well
contented and glad hereof.

But wealth finds many friends, and poverty none: and yet, since diversity of
fortunes is the true touchstone of friendship, we may therefore more properly
and truly term those our friends, who assist us in our necessity, and not who
seem to pleasure us in our prosperity: for those are real friends, but these
verbal: those will perform more then they promise, and these promise much,
and perform nothing.

But Iosselina is so wretched and unfortunate, as she finds neither the one
nor the other to assist her in this her misery: yea so far she is to receive
either means or promises; as nothing is sent her, nor none will see her; so as
miserable necessity inforceth her to report and divulge the misfortune of her
fortune, and to complain to all the world of Mortaigne's treachery, and of his
Mother Calintha's cruelty; yea she threatens to send him his son, since he
will not afford her wherewith to maintain it.

This is not so secretly carried in Villepont, but De Vassye and Varina his
daughter have news hereof in La Palisse, which occasioneth her to grow cold in
her affection, and he in his respect to Mortaigne, so as all things decline,
and there is little hope or appearance, that this match shall go forward.
Mortaigne is two cleere-sighted, to be blind herein, yea he presently knows,
from what point of the Compass this wind comes, and is fully possessed, that
Iosselina is the cause of these alterations and storms: he is exceedingly
enraged and inflamed hereat, and gives such way to his passion and choler, as
these obstacles must be removed, and he vows to destroy both Iosselina and her
son. A bloody resolution, not beseeming either a Christian, or a Gentleman:
for was it not enough for him to rob Iosselina of her honor, and to put a rape
on her chastity and virtue, but he must likewise bereave her of her life, and
so add Murder to his lust? Alas, what a base Gentleman is this? yea, how
far degenerates he from true Gentility, to be so cruel to her that has
been so kind to him? But the Devil suggesteth to his thoughts, and they to
his heart, that Varina is fair, and that there is no way nor hope left to
obtain her, before Iosselina and her brat be dispatched. Now if grace could
not persuade him from being so cruel to Iosselina: (yet me thinks) nature
should have withheld him from being so inhumane to his own son: but his
faith is so weak toward God, and the devil is so strong with him, that he
cannot be removed or withdrawn from his bloody resolution, only he alters
the manner thereof: for whereas he resolved first to destroy the Mother, then
the child, now he will first dispatch the child, then the Mother. O Heavens,
why should earth produce so bloody and prodigious a monster!

Now the better to dissemble his malice, he thinks to reclaim and pacify
Iosselina, and so gives order that she and her child be lodged in a better
Inn in the same village of Villepont, and signifies her that he has gotten a
Nurse, and has provided maintenance for his son, and that shortly he will
send his Lackey for him, but withal, that she must keep this very secret,
because he will not have his mother Calintha acquainted therewith. Iosselina
rejoices, and seems to be revived at this pleasing news: yea, she begins
to forget her former misery, and flatters her self with this hope, that
fortune will again smile on her. So within three days, Mortaigne sends his
Lackey, La Verdure to her for the babe: the which with many kisses and ^eares
she delivers him, hoping that Mortaigne his father would be careful of his
maintenance, and not so much as once dreaming, or conceiving that he had any
intent to murder it. But she shall find the contrary; for henceforth she shall
never see her babe, nor her babe her.

La Verdure (the Lackey) following his Masters command, is not four Leagues
from Villepont, before, like a damnable miscreant, he strangles it, and
wrapping it in a Linen cloth (which he had purposely brought with him)
throws it into the River Lignon; but he shall pay dear for Murdering of
this sweet and innocent babe.

But it is not enough: for Mortaigne's divellish malice and revenge will not be
quenched or satisfied, till he see the Mother follow the fortune of the son:
to which end he agrees with her Oast La Palma, and his aforesaid Lackey La
Verdure, to stifle her in her bed. The which, for two hundred frankes they
perform, and bury her in his garden, she being soundly sleeping, and poor
soul, not so much as once dreaming of this her mournful and lamentable end.
What Tigers or monsters of nature are these; to commit so damnable a Murder,
as if there were no God in heaven to detect them, nor earth nor hell to punish
them?

But we shall see the contrary: yea, we shall see both the Murder, and the
Murderers revealed and discovered by an extraordinary means; wherein Gods
providence and glory will most miraculously resplend and shine.

As soon as La Verdure and La Palma had Murdered our harmless Iosselina,
they both poast away to Durency, as well to acquaint Mortaigne herewith, as also
to receive their money (whereof the one half was paid them, and the other
due.) This news is so pleasing to him, as he cheerfully lays down his
promise: and so they both frollike it in the village, La Verdure making no have
home to his Master Mortaigne, not La Palma to his old wife Isabella.

In the mean time (a month being past away) Mortaigne, hoping the way clear,
and all the rubs removed, that hindered him from obtaining his fair mistres
Varina; he procures his father De Coucye, and other of his friends to ride to
La Palisse: hoping to finish the match betwixt La Varina and himself: But he
and they are enforced to see themselves deceived of their hopes. For De Vassy
and his daughter having heard that Iosselina and her son were conveyed away,
and could no more be heard of, they (suspecting, and fearing that which indeed
was fallen out) in plain terms, give Mortaigne the refusal, who galled to
the heart herewith, does now hang down his head, and see his former bloody
errors and crimes; but it is two late, for the Lord has bent his bow, and his
Arrow is ready to Revenge them.

La Palma understanding of Mortaigne's arrival from La Palisse, thinks it
high time for him to leave Durency, and to return home to Villepont to his
wife Isabella, who being an old woman, and he a young man; was not only
impatient, but jealous of his long stay (which was well near five weeks) and
the rather for that he departed, as she thought, in company of Iosselina: who
because she was young and fair, she vehemently suspected, he had since
entertained and stayed with But this jealousy of hers, God makes his
instrument to discover this execrable Murder.

For La Palma coming home, his wife Isabella (as we have heard) being incensed
with anger, and inflamed with jealousy, gives him this bitter entertainment
and welcome: La Palma (quoth she) you were very unkind, so soon to forsake
your Whore Iosselina. La Palma being pierced to the quick with this bitter
speech of his wife, like a lewd fellow, gave her first the lie, and then
termed her whore in speaking it. She has fire in her looks, and he thunder
in his speeches. So after many bitter and scandalous injuries banded one to the
other, she adds rage to her words, and he a box on the ear to his choler,
where with he felled her as dead to the ground; yea, the servants, and all that
beheld it, cry out amain, as if her soul had already taken her last farewell
of her body. At this tumult the neighbors assemble, and deeming Isabella dead,
they lay hands on La Palma her husband, and carry him before the Procurer,
Fiscall of La Palisse, who was then in their Village of Villepont, who without
further examination commits him to prison, and so goes in person to visit
Isabella, who by this time is a little recovered, but not freed from the danger
of death: She relates him all that had past betwixt her husband and her self:
as also of his departure with Iosselina, and of his long stay in Durency;
adding withal, that he has heretofore many times beaten her, and now she
hopes, that this blow will not go unpunished: yea, her rage, or rather Gods
providence carries her so fatre, as she constantly averres to the Magistrate,
that if Iosselina be not her husbands strumpet, she constantly believes he is
her Murderer: and to conclude, says, that her servantmayd Iaqueta can say
more.

Iaqueta examined, says, that the night before her Masters departure for
Durency, he was at midnight in Iosselina's Chamber, together with one La
Verdure a Lackey, and that since Iosselina was neither seen nor heard of; and
being farther demanded if she knew whose Lackey La Verdure was, she answered,
he was Mounsieur Mortaignes Lackey, who was son to Mounsieur de Coucy. The
Procurer Fiscall, confidering their several depositions, does shrewdly suspect
there is more in the wind then is yet discovered: he leaves Isabella, and goes
to her husband in prison, and after he had sharply checked him for beating
his wife, he inquires and charge him with these two points; First, why he
and La Verdure were in Iosselina's Chamber at midnight? and secondly, what was
become of her, since since that time she has neither been seen nor heard of.

La Palma is terrifyed and amazed with these demands (and far the more,
because he least expected them) the which apparently appeared in the alteration
of his color and complexion, which commonly bewrayes an inward perturbation of
the mind and heart. He answers not punctually to those points demanded of
him: but runs on with many bitter invectives against the rage and jealousy of
his wife: and then being by the Procurer bid answer to those two points he
formerly demanded of him: he, after many frivolous and extravagant speeches,
denies that either he or La Verdure were in Iosselina's Chamber, and that he
neither saw her departure, nor knew what was become of her, and withal prays
the Proeurer Fiscall to free and release him of his imprisonment: but he shall
not escape at so cheap a rate.

For the Procurer, being very familiar with Mounsieur de Vassye his Colleague
and fellow-Iudge of La Palisse, remembered that he had formerly heard him
speak of this Mounsieur Mortaigne, who lately sought his daughter La Varina in
marriage; as also of his entertaining and rejecting this Iosselina, a Farmers
daughter of Durency, by whom he had a base son: and now considering that at
such an unseasonable hour his Lackey La Verdure should be in her Chamber in La
Palma's house, and La Palma himself in his company, and she never since seen
or heard of, he thinks there is some fire hid and covered in these embers,
and that there is some deeper mystery in this business, which as yet was not
revealed.

Wherefore, like a wise Magistrate, he holds it fit, the same night to send La
Palma privately to La Palisse, as also his wife Isabella and Iaqueta for
witnesses, and rides thither himself, to sit upon his process, with whom the
Lievtennant of that jurisdiction joined; but for Mounsieur de Vassye the
Seneschall, he (for the regard he bore to Mortaigne, because he vehemently
suspected he had a deep and chief hand in this business) would not be
present, but purposely absented himself at a house of his in the Country: the
next morn La Palma is examined, as also the two witnesses, and Iaqueta is
confronted with him, who stands firm to her former disposition: But he slatly
denies all. The Procurer and the Lievtennant adjudge him to the Rack. He
indureth the first torment, but at the second confesses that he and La Verdure
had stifled, and murdered Iosselina in her bed, in his own house, and had
buried her in his Garden, and that they were set a work and hired to do it by
Mounsieur Mortaigne, who gave them two hundred Frankes to effect it.

Lo here by the mercy and providence of God, La Palma's malice to his wife
Isabella, and her jealousy to him, has discovered and brought to light this
cruel and bloody Murder, which was so secretly contrived and so cunningly and
devillishly acted upon the body of Iosselina: But hers being discovered, let us
likewise see how that of her harmless and innocent Babe is likewise brought
to light. The two Judges themselves ride all night to Villepont, they search
the Garden, and find the dead body of Iosselina, having no other Winding Sheet
but her own smock. They send away the Provost to apprehend Mortaigne and his
Lackey for this Murder, who meets La Verdure by the way, and seizes Mortaigne
in his bed.

They are severally brought to La Palisse, and first La Verdure is confronted
with La Palma, who denies all: but they present his feet to the fire, and then
he confesses not only the Mu^ther of Iosselina, but likewise that of her
infant son, whom he first strangled, and then threw into the River Lignon:
and this, said he, he did at the request of his Master Mortaigne, of whom for
his part and labor, he received one hundred Frankes.

We have here found two of these Murderers: and now what rests there, but
that the third, who is the Author, and as it were the capital great wheel of
these bloody Tragedies, be produced and brought to this Arraignement? The
Procurer and Lievtennant repair again to the Prison, and charge Mortaigne
with these two bloody Murders: he knows it is in vain to deny it, since he
is sure his two execrable agents have already revealed it: therefore he ashamed
at the remembrance of his cruel and unnatural crimes, does with many tears
very sorrowfully and penitently confess all.

It is a happiness for him to repent these Murders; but it had been a far
greater, if he had never contrived and committed them: yea, the Judges are
amazed to hear the cruelty hereof, and the people to know it, and both send
their praises and thankfulness to God, that he has thus detected and
brought them to light on earth.

And now comes the Catastrophe of their own Tragedies, wherein every one of
these Malefactors receives condign punishment for their several offenses.

La Palma is condemned to be hanged and burnt: La Verdure to be broken on the
Wheel, and his body to be thrown into the River Lignon: and Mortaigne,
though the last in rank, yet the first in offense, to be broken on the Wheel,
his body burnt, and his ashes thrown into the air: which Sentence, in the
sight of a great multitude of Spectators, was on a Market day accordingly
executed and performed in La Palisse.

And this was the bloody end of Mortaigne, and his two hellish instruments, for
murdering innocent Iosselina, and her silly and tender infant: May all Maidens
learn by her example to preserve their chastities: and men, by La Verdures and
La Palma's, not to be drawn to shed innocent blood for the lucre of wealth and
money; and by Mortaignes, to be less lascivious, inhumane, and bloody:
thereby to prevent so execrable a life, and so infamous a death.

One thing I may not omit: La Palma on the Ladder extremely cursed the malice
of his wife Isabella, who (he said) was the author of his death: and no less
did La Verdure on the Wheel by his Master Mortaigne; but both of them were so
desperately irreligious, as neither of them considered that it was their former
sins, and the malice of the Devil, to whom they gave too much ear, that was
the cause thereof.

And for Mortaigne, after he had informed the world, that he extremely
grieved, that his Judges had not given him the death of a Gentleman, which was
to have been beheaded, he with many tears bewailed his infinite ingratitude,
cruelty, and unnaturalness, both toward Iosselina, as also his and her young
son: yet he prayed the world in general to pray that God would forgive it
him; and likewise requested the Executioner to dispatch him quickly out of
this life; because he confessed he was unworthy to live longer.

Now let us glorify our Creator and Redeemer, who continually makes a strict
inquisition for blood, and a curious and miraculous inquiry for Murder: yea,
let us both fear him with love, and love him with fear, since he is as
impartial in his justice, as in distributing his mercies.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY IV.
Beatrice-Ioana, to marry Alsemero causes de Flores to murder Alonso
Piracquo, who was a sutter to her. Alsemero marries her, and finding de Flores
and her in adultery, kills them both. Tomaso Piracquo Challenges Alsemero for
his Brothers death. Alsemero kills him treacherously in the field, and is
beheaded for the same, and his body thrown into the Sea: At his execution he
confesses, that his wife and de Flores Murdered Alonso Piracquo: their bodies
are taken up out of their graves, then burnt, and their ashes thrown into the
air.

Since in the day of Judgment we shall answer at Gods great Tribunal, for
every lewd thought our hearts conceive, and idle words our tongues utter, how
then shall we dare appear (much less think to escape) when we defile our
bodies with the pollution of adultery, and taint our souls with the innocent
blood of our Christian brethren? when, I say, with beastly lust and adultery,
we unsanctifie our sanctified bodies, who are the receptacles and Temples of
the holy Ghost, and with high and presumptuous hands, stabbe at the Majesty of
God, by Murdering of man, who is his Image? This is not the Ladder to scale
heaven, but the shortest way to ride poast to hell: for how can we give our
selves to God, when in the heat of lust and fume of Revenge, we sell our hearts
to the Devil? But did we ever love God for his Mercy, or fear him for his
Justice, we would then not only hate these sins in our selves, but detest
them in others: for these are crying and capital offenses, seen in heaven,
and by the Sword of his Magistrates brought forth and punished here on earth. A
lamentable and mournful example whereof, I here produce to your view, but not
to your imitation: may we all read it to the reformation of our lives, to the
comfort of our souls, and to the eternal glory of the most Sacred and
Individual Trinity.

IN Valentia (an ancient and famous City of Spain) there dwelt one Don Pedro
de Alsemero, a Noble young Cavallier, whose father (Don Ivan Alsemero) being
slain by the Hollanders in the Sea fight at Gibralter, he resolved to addict
himself to Navall and sea actions, thereby to make himself capeable to
revenge his fathers death: a brave resolution, worthy the affection of a son,
and the Generosity of a Gentleman!

To which end he makes two voyages to the West Indies, from whence he returns
flourishing and rich, which so spread the sails of his Ambition, and hoysted
his fame from top to top gallant, that his courage growing with his years, he
thought no attempt dangerous enough, if honorable, nor no honor enough
glorious, except achieved and purchased by danger. In the actions of Alarache
and Mamora, he showed many noble proofs and testimonies of his valor and
prowess, the which he confirmed and made good by the receipt of eleven several
wounds, which as marks and Trophies of Honor made him famous in Castile.
Boiling thus in the heat of his youthful blood, and contemplating often on
the death of his father, he resolves to go to Validolyd, and to imply some
Grando either to the King or to the Duke of Lerma, his great favorite, to
procure him a Captains place, and a company under the Archduke Albertus, who
at that time made bloody wars against the Netherlanders, thereby to draw them
to obedience: But as he began this suit, a general truce of both sides laid
aside Arms, which (by the mediation of England and France) was shortly
followed by a peace, as a Mother by the daughter: Which was concluded at the
Hage by his Excellency of Nassaw and Marquis Spinola, being chief
Commissioners of either party. Alsemero seeing his hopes frustrated, that the
keys of peace had now shut up the Temple of War, and that Muskets, Pikes,
and corslets, that were wont to grace the fields, where now rusting by the
walls, he is irresolute what course to take, resembling those fishes who
delight to live in cataracts and troubled waters, but die in those that are
still and quiet: For he spurns at the pleasures of the Court, and refuses to
haunt and frequent the companies of Ladies: And so not affecting, but rather
disdaining the pomp, bravery and vanity of Courtiers, he withdrawes himself
from Validolyd to Valentia, with a noble and generous intent to seek wars
abroad, since he could find none at home, where being arived, although he were
often invited into the companies of the most noble and honorable Ladies both of
the City and Country: Yet his thoughts ran still on the wars, in which
Heroike and illustrious profession, he conceived his chiefest delight and
felicity: and so taking order for his lands and affairs, he resolves to see
Malta that inexpugnable Rampire of Mars, the glory of Christendom, and the
terror of Turkey, to see if he could gain any place of command and honor
either in that Island, or in their Galleys; or if not, he would from thence into
Transylvania, Hungary, and Germany, to enrich his judgment and experience, by
remarking the strength of their Castles and Cities, their orders and discipline
in war, the Potency of their Princes, the nature of their Laws and customs,
and all other matters worthy the observation both of a Travellour and a
Soldier: and so building many castles in the air, he comes to Alicant, hoping
to find passage there for Naples, and from thence to ship himself upon the
Neapolitan Galleys for Malta.

There is nothing so vain as our thoughts, nor so uncertain as our hopes: for
commonly they deceive us, or rather we our selves in relying on them, not that
God is any way unjust: (for to think so, were impiety) but that our hopes take
false objects, and have no true foundation, and to imagine the contrary, were
folly: the which Alsemero finds true: for here the wind does oppose him, his
thoughts fight and vanquish themselves, yea the providence of God does cross
him in his intended purposes, and gives way to that he least intends.

For coming one morning to our Ladies Church at Mass, and being on his knees
in his devotion, he espies a young Gentlewoman likewise on hers next to him who
being young, tender and fair, he through her thin veil discovered all the
perfections of a delicate and sweet beauty, she espies him feasting on the
dainties of her pure and fresh cheeks; and tilting with the invisible lances
of his eyes, to hers, he is instantly ravished and vanquished with the pleasing
object of this Angelical countenance, and now he can no more resist either
the power or passion of love.

This Gentlewoman (whose name as yet we know not) is young and fair, and
cannot refrain from blushing, and admiring to see him admire and blush at her.
Alsemero dies in conceit with impatiency, that he cannot enjoy the happiness
and means to speak with her, but he sees it in vain to attempt it, because
she is engaged in the company of many Ladies, and he of many Cavaliers: But
Mass being ended, he enquires of a good fellow Priest, who walked by, what
she was and whether she frequented that Church, and at what hour. The Priest
informs him, that she is Don Diego de Vermandero's daughter: he being
Captain of the Castle of that City, that her name was Dona Beatrice-Ioana,
and that she is every morning in that Church and Place, and near about the
same hour.

Alsemero has the sweetness of her beauty so deeply engraven in his
thoughts, and imprinted in his heart, that he vows Beatrice-Ioana is his
Mistress, and he her servant: yea, here his warlike resolutions have end, and
strike sail. And now he leaves Bellona to adore Venus, and forsakes Mars, to
follow Cupid: yea, so fervent is his flame, and so violent is his passion, as
he can neither give nor take truce of his thoughts, till he be again made
happy with her sight, and blessed with her presence.

The next morn (as Lovers love not much rest) Alsemero is stirring very
timely, and hoping to find his Mistress: no other Church will please him but
our Ladies, nor place, but where he first and last saw her: but she is more
zealous then himself; For she is first in the Church, and on her knees to her
devotion, whom Alsemero gladly espying, he kneeles next to her: and having
hardly the patience to let pass one poor quarter of an hour (he resolving
as yet to conceal his name) like a fond Lover, whose greatest glory is in
complements and Courting his Mistress, he boards her thus:

Fair Lady, it seems, that these two mornings my devotions have been more
powerful and acceptable then heretofore; since I have had the felicity to be
placed next so fair and so sweet a Nymph as your self, whose excellent beauty
has so suddenly captivated mine eyes, and so secretly ravished my heart, that
he which heretofore rejected, cannot now resist the power of love; and
therefore having ended my devotion I beseech you excuse me, if I begin to pray
you to take pity of me: since my flame is so fervent, and my affection is so
passionate, as either I must live yours, or not dye mine own.

Beatrice-Ioana could not refrain from blushing under her veil, to see an
unknown Cavalier board her in these terms in the Church: and as she gave
attentive ear to his speech, so she could not for a while refrain from
glancing her eye upon the sprucenesse of his person, and the sumptuousness of
his apparel: but at last, accusing her own silence, because she would give
him no cause to condemn it, she with a modest grace, and a graceful modesty,
returns him this answer:

Sir, as your devotions can neither be pleasing to God, nor profitable to your
soul, if in this place you account it a felicity to enjoy the sight of so
mean a Gentlewoman as my self, so I cannot repute it to affection but
flattery, that this poor beauty of mine (which you unjustly paint forth in
rich praises) should have power either to captivate the eyes, or which is more,
to ravish the heart of so noble a Cavalier as your self. Such victories are
reserved for those Ladies, who are as much your equal, as I your inferior:
and therefore directing your zeal to them, if they find your affection such as
you profess to me, no doubt but regarding your many virtues and merits, they
will in honor grant you that favor which I in modesty am constrained to deny
you.

Alsemero (though a novice in the art of Love) was not so ignorant and cowardly
to be put off with her first repulse and refusal, but rather seeing that the
perfections of her mind corresponded with those of her beauty, he resolves
now to make trial of his wit and tongue, as heretofore he had done of his
courage and sword: and so joins with her thus:

It is a pretty Ambition in you, sweet Lady, to disparage your beauty, that
thereby it may seem the fairer; as the Sun, who appears brighter by reason
of the nights obscurity: and all things are best, and more perfectly discerned
by their contraries: but I cannot commend, and therefore not excuse your
policy, or rather your disrespect, to slight and poast me over from your self,
whom I love, to those Ladies I neither know nor desire, which in effect is to
give me a cloud for Juno. No, no, it is only to you and to no other that I
present and dedicate my service: and therefore it will be an ingratitude as
unworthy my receiving, as your giving, that I should be the object of your
discourtesie: since you are that of my affection.

To these speeches of Alsemero, Beatrice* Ioana returns this reply:

It is not for poor Gentlewomen of my rank and complexion, either to be
ambitious, or politic, except it be to keep themselves from the snares of
such Caviliers as your self, who (for the most part) under color of
affection, aim to erect the trophies of your desires upon the tombs of our
dishonours: only I so much hate ingratitude, as you being to me a stranger,
charity and common courtesy commands me to thank you for the proffer of your
service: the which I can no other way either deserve or requite, except in my
devotions and prayers to God, for your glory and prosperity on earth.

As she had ended this her speech, the Priest ends his Mass; when Alsemero
arising, advanced to lift her up from kneeling, and so with his hat in his
hand, (sequestring her from the crowd of people, who now began to depart the
Church) he speaks to her to this effect:

Fair Lady, as I know you to be the Lady Beatrice-Ioana, daughter to the
noble Knight Don Diego de Vermanderos, Captain of the Castle of this City: so
I being a stranger to you, I admire that you offer so voluntary an injury to
your judgment and my intents, as to pervert my affection and speeches to a
contrary sense: but my innocence has this consolation, that my heart is
pledge for my tongue, and my deeds shall make my words real. In the mean
time, since you will give me no place in your heart, I beseech you lend me one
in your Coach, and be at least so courteous, as to honor me, in accepting my
company to conduct you home to your fathers Castle.

Beatrice-Ioana, calling to mind the freeness of her speeches, and the
sharpness of his answer, not blushing for joy, but now looking pale for
sorrow, repents her self of her error, the which she salves up the best she
could in this Reply:

Noble Sir, when I am acquainted as well with your heart as with your speeches,
I shall then not only repent, but recant mine error, in judging your self by
others; in the mean time, if I have any way wronged your merits and virtues,
to give you some part of satisfaction, if you please to grace me with your
company to the Castle, (although it be not the custom of Alicant) I do most
kindly and thankfully accept thereof: when Alsemero giving her many thanks, and
kissing his hand, he takes her by the arm, and so conducts her from the
Church to her Coach.

It is both a grief and a scandal to any true Christians heart, that the
Church orordained for thanks giving and prayer unto God, should be made a
Stews, or at least, a place for men to meet and court Ladies: but in all parts
of the Christian world, where the Roman religion reigns, this sinful
custom is frequently practiced, especially in Italy and Spain, where, for the
most part, men love their Curtizans better then their God: and it were a
happiness for France, if her popish Churches were freed of thisabomination,
and her people of this impiety. But again to our History.

We will purposely omit the conference which Alsemero and Beatrice-Ioana had
in the Coach, and allow them by this time arrived to the Castle: where first
her self, then the Captain her father, thank him for his honor and
courtesy: in requital whereof, he showed him the rarities and strength of
his Castle, and after some speeches and complements between them, he was so
happy as to kiss Beatrice-Ioana, but had not the felicity to entertain her:
and so he departs, his Lackey attending him with his Gennet to the
counter-scarfe. So home he rides to his lodging, where, whiles the wind holds
contrary, we will a little leave him to his thoughts, and they to resolve in
what sort he might contrive his suit for the obtaining of his new and fair
Mistress Beatrice Ioana, and likewise her self, to muse upon the speeches and
extraordinary courtesy, which this unknown Cavallier afforded her, and begin
to speak of Don Alonso P^racquo, a rich Cavallier of the City, who unknown
to Alsemero, was his rival and competitor, in likewise seeking and courting
Boatrice-Ioana for his Mistress and wife.

This Piracquo being rich both in lands and money, and descended of one of the
chiefest and noblest Families of Alicant, by Profession a Courtier, and indeed
(to give him his due) a Cavallier endued with many brave qualities and
perfections, was so highly beloved, respected and esteemed in that City, as
the very fairest and noblest young Ladies were, with much respect and
affection, proffered him in marriage by their parents: but there was none
either so precious or pleasing to his eye, as was our Beatrice Ioana, whom he
observed for beauty to excel others, and for Majesty and grace to surpass
her self, and indeed he could not refrain from loving her, nor be persuaded
or drawn to affect any other: so as he settled his resolution either to have
her to his wife, or not to be the husband of any. Yea, he is so earnest in
his suit, as scarce any one day passes, but he is at the Castle.

Vermandero thinks himself much honored of him, in seeking his daughter,
yea, he receives him lovingly, and entertaines him courteously; as knowing it
greatly for her preferment, and advancement: and so gives Piracquo many
testimonies of his favor, and many hopes that he shall prevail and obtain
his Mistress. But Beatrice-Ioana stands not so affected to him, rather she
receives him coldly; and when he begins his suit to her, she turns the deaf
ear, and never answers him, but in general terms: only not peremptorily
to disobey her parents, she seems to be pleased with his company, and yet
secretly in her heart wishes him farther from her.

But Piracquo flattering himself in his hope, and as much doting on
Beatrice-Ioana's beauty, as he relyes on her fathers constant affection to
him, he is so far from giving over his suit to her, as he continues it
with more earnestness and importunity, and vows that he will forsake his
life ere his Mistress: but sometimes we speak true, when we think we
jest: yet he finds her one and the same: for although she were not yet
acquainted with Alsemero, yet she made it the thirteenth Article of her Creed,
that the supreme power had ordained her another husband, and not Piracquo:
yea, at that very instant the remembrance of Alsemero quite defaced that of
Piracquo, so that she wholly refused her heart to the last, of purpose to
reserve and give it to the first: as the sequel will show.

Now by this time Vermandero had notice, and was secretly informed of
Alsemero's affection to his daughter, and withal, that she liked him far
better then Piracquo: which news was indeed very distastefull and displeasing
to him, because he perfectly knew that Piracquo's means far exceed that of
Alsemero. Whereupon considering that he had given his consent, and in a manner
engaged his promise to Piracquo: he, to prevent the hopes, and to frustrate
the attempts of Alsemero, leaves his Castle to the command of Don Hugo de
Valmarino his son, and taking his daughter Beatrice-Ioana with him, he in his
Coach very suddenly and secretly goes to Briamata: a fair house of his, ten
leagues from Alicant: where he means to sojourne, until he had concluded
and solemnized the match betwixt them: But he shall never be so happy, as to
see it effected.

At the news of Beatrice-Ioana's departure, Alsemero is extremely perplexed
and sorrowful, knowing not whether it proceed from her self, her father, or
both; yea, this his grief is augmented, when he thinks on the suddenness
thereof, which he fears may be performed for his respect and consideration:
the small acquaintance and familiari y he has had with her, makes that he
cannot condemn her of unkindnesse: yet since he was not thought worthy to have
notice of her departure, he again has no reason to hope, much less to
assure himself of her affection toward him: he knows not how to resolve
these doubts, nor what to think or do in a matter of this nature and
importance: for thus he reasons with himself; if he ride to Briamata, he
may perchance offend the father; if he stay at Alicant, displease the daughter:
and although he be rather willing to run the hazard of his envy, then of her
affection, yet he holds it safer to be authorized by her pleasure, and to
steer his course by the compass of her commands: He therefore bethinkes
himself of a means to avoid these extremes, and so finds out a Channel to
pass free betwixt that Sylla and this Carybdis; which is, to visit her by
letters: he sees more reason to embrace, then to reject this invention, and so
providing himself of a confident messenger, his heart commands his pen to
signify her these few lines:

ALSEMERO to BEATRICE-IOANA.
AS long as you were in Alicant, I deemed it a beaven upon earth, and being
bound for Malta, a thousand times blessed that contrary wind which kept me
from embarking and sailing from you: yea, so sweetly did I affect, and so
dearly honor your beauty, as I entered into a res^lution with my self, to
end my voyage e're I began it, and to begin another, which I fear will end
me. If you demand, or desire to know what this second voyage is, know, fair
Mistress^, that my thoughts are so honorable, and my affection so religious,
that it is the seeking of your favor, and the obtaining of your self to my
wife, whereon not only my fortunes, but my life depends. But how shall I hope
for this honor, or flatter my self with the obtaining of so great a felicity,
when I see you have not only left me, but which is worse, as I understand,
the City for my sake? F^ire Beatrice-Ioana, if your cruelty will make me thus
miserable, I have no other consolation left me to sweeten the bitterness of my
grief and misfortune, but a confident hope, that death will as speedily
deprive me of my days, as you have of my joys.

ALSEMERO.


I know not whether it more grieved Beatrice-Ioana to leave Alicant, without
taking her leave of Alsemero, then she does now rejoice to receive this his
Letter: for as that plunged her thoughts in the hell of discontent, so this
raises them to the heaven of joy: and as then she had cause to doubt of his
affection, so now she has not not only reason to flatter, but to assure her
self thereof: and therefore, though she will not seem at first to grant him
his desire, yet she is resolved to return him an answer, that may give as
well life to his hopes, as praise to her modesty. Her Letter is thus:

BEATRICE-IOANA to ALSEMERO.
AS I have many reasons to be incredulous, and not one to induce me to
believe, that so poor a beauty of mine, should have power to stop so brave a
Cavallier (as your self) from ending so honorable a Voyage as your first, or
to persuade you to one so simple as your second; so I cannot but admire, that
you in your Letter seek me for your Wife, when in your heart, I presume, you
least desire it: and whereas you allege your life and fortunes depend on my
favor; I think you write it purposely, either to make trial of your own
wit, or of my indiscretion, by endeavoring to see whether I will believe that
which exceeds all belief; now as it true, that I have left Alicant, so it is
as true, that I left it not any way to afflict you, but rather to obey my
father: for this I pray believe, that although I cannot be kind, yet I will
never be cruel to you: Live therefore your own friend, and I will never dye
your enemy.

BEATRICE-IOANA.


This Letter of Beatrice Ioana, gives Alsemero much despair, and little hope:
yet though he have reason to condemn her unkindnesse, he cannot but approve
her modesty and discretion, which does as much comfort as that afflict him: so
his thoughts are irresolute, and withal so variable, as he knows not whether
he should advance his hand, or withdraw his pen again, to write to his
Mistress. But at last, knowing that the excellency of her Beauty, and the
dignity of her Virtues deserve a second Letter: he hoping it may obtain and
effect that which his first could not, calls for paper, and thereon traceth
these few lines:

ALSEMERO to BEATRICE-IOANA.
YOu have as much reason to assure your self of my affection, as I to doubt of
yours: and if Words and Letters, Tears and Vows, are not capable to make you
believe the sincerity of my zeal, and the honor of my affection: what
rests, but that I wish you could dive as deeply into my heart, as my heart
has into your beauty, to the end you might be both Witness and Judge, if
under heaven I desire any thing so much on earth, as to be crowned with the
felicity to see Beatrice-Ioana my wife, and Alsemero her husband? But why
should I strive to persuade that, which you resolve not to believe, or flatter
my self with any hope, since I see I must be so unfortunate to despair? I
will therefore henceforth cease to write, but never to love: and since it is
impossible for me to live, I will prepare my self to die, that the World may
know, I have lost a most fair Mistress in you, and you a most faithful and
constant Servant in me.

ALSEMERO.


Beatrice-Ioana seeing Alsemero's constant affection, holds it now rather
discretion, then immodestie to accept both his service and self, yea, her
heart so delights in the greeablenesse of his person, and triumphs in the
contemplation of his virtues, that she either wishes her self in Alicant
with him, or he in Briamata with her: but considering her affection to
Alsemero by her Fathers hatred, and her hatred to Piracquo, by his affection;
she thinks it high time to inform Alsemero with what impatiencie they both
endeavor to obtain her favor and consent, hoping that his discretion will
interpose and find means to stop the progress of these their importunities,
and to withdraw her fathers inclination from Piracquo, to bestow it on
himself: but all this while she thinks her silence is an injury to Alsemero,
and therefore no longer to be uncourteous to him, who is so kind to her, she
very secretly conveyes him this Letter:

BEATRICE-IOANA to ALSEMERO.
AS it is not for Earth to resist Heaven, nor for our wills to contradict Gods
providence, so I cannot deny, but now acknowledge, that if ever I affected any
man, it is your self: for your Letters, protestations, and vows, but chiefly
your merits, and the hope, or rather the assurance of your fidelity, has won
my heart, from myself to give it you: but there are some important
considerations, and reasons, that enforce me to crave your secrecy herein,
and to request you, as soon as conveniently you may, to come privately hither
to me: for I shall never give content to my thoughts, nor satisfaction to my
mind, till I am made joyful with your sight, and happy with your presence. In
the mean time manage this affection of mine with care and discretion, and
whiles you resolve to make Alicant your Malta, I will expect and attend your
coming with much longing and impatiencie. To Briamata.

BEATRICE-IOANA.


It is for no others but for Lovers to judge how welcome this Letter was to
Alsemero, who a thousand times kissed it, and as often blessed the hand that
wrote it: he had, as we have formerly understood, been twice in the Indies;
but now, in his conceit, he has found a far richer treasure in Spain, I
mean his Beatrice-Ioana, whom he esteems the joy of his life, and the life
of his joy: but she will not prove so. He is so inamoured of her beauty, and so
desirous to have the felicity of her presence, as the Wind coming good, the
Ship sets sail for Malta, and he (to give a color for his stay) feignes
himself sick, fetches back his Trunkes, and remains in Alicant: and so
burning with desire to see his sweetly dear and dearly sweet Mistress, he
dispatched away his confident Messenger to Briamata in the morning, to
advertise her that he will not fail to be with her that night at eleven of
the clock.

Beatrice Ioana is ravished with the joy of this news, and so provides for his
coming. Alsemero takes the benefit of the night, and she gives him the
advantage of a Posterne door, which answers to a Garden, where Diaphanta her
Waytinggentlewoman attends his arrival. He comes: she conducts him secretly
through a private Gallery into Beatrice-Ioana's Chamber; where (richly
apparelled) she very courteously and respectfully receives him. At the
beginning of their meeting they want no kisses; which they second with
complements, and many loving conferences, wherein she relates him Piracquo's
importunate suit to her, and her fathers earnestness, yea, in a manner, his
constraint, to see the Match concluded betwixt them; he being for that purpose
there, in her fathers house: Again, after she has alleged and shown him
the entireness of her affection to himself, with whom she is resolved to live
and dye, she lets fall some dark and ambiguous speeches, tending to this
effect, that before Piracquo be in another world, there is no hope for Alsemero
to enjoy her for his wife in this. Lo here the first plot and design of a
lamentable and execrable murder: which we shall shortly see acted and
committed.

There needs but half a word to a sharp and quick understanding. Alsemero
knows it is the violence of her affection to him, that leads her to this
disrespect and hatred to Piracquo, and because her content is his, yea, rather
it is for his sake, that she will forsake Piracquo, to live and die with him;
Passion and affection blinding his judgment, and beauty triumphing and giving
a law to his Conscience: he freely proffereth himself to his Mistress, vowing,
that he will shortly send him a Challenge, and fight with him; yea, had he a
thousand lives, as he has but one, he is ready, if she please, to expose
and sacrifice them all at her command and service. Beatrice-Ioana thanks him
kindly for his affection and zeal, the which she says she holds redoubled
by the freeness of his proffer: but being loath that he should hazard his
own life, in seeking that of another, she conjures him by all the love he
bears her, neither directly nor indirectly to intermeddle with Piracquo: but
that he repose and build upon her affection and constancy: not doubting, but
she will so prevail with her father, that he shall shortly change his
opinion, and no more persuade her to affect Piracquo, whom she resolutely
affirms, neither life nor death shall enforce her to marry. And to conclude,
although she affirm, his presence is dearer to her then her life; yet the
better and sooner to compass their desires, she prays him to leave Alicant,
and for a while to return to Valentia, not doubting but time may work that,
which perchance haste, or importunity may never. Thus passing over their
kisses, and the rest of their amorous conference, he assured of her love, and
she of his affection, he returns for Alicant, packes up his baggage, which
he sends before, and within less then four days, takes his journey for
Valentia: where we will leave him a while, to relate other accidents and
occurrences: which (like Rivers into the Ocean) fall within the compass of
this History.

This meeting, and part of Alsemero's and Beatrice-Ioana's conference at her
fathers house of Briamata, was not so secretly carried and concealed, but some
curious or treacherous person near him, or her, over-heare and reveal it:
which makes her father Vermandero fume and bite the lip; but he conceales it
from Piracquo: and they still continue their intelligence and familiarity:
Vermandero telling him plainly, that a little more time shall work and finish
his desire; and that since his request cannot prevail with his daughter, his
commands shall. But he shall miss of his aim.

There is not so great distance from Briamata to Alicant, but some of the
noblest of the city are advertised thereof: and one among the rest, in great
zeal and affection to Piracquo, secretly acquaints Don Thomaso Piracquo his
younger brother therewith, being then in the city of Alicant: who hearing of
this news, whereof he imagined his brother was ignorant, loath that he should
any longer persever in his present error, and to prevent his future disgrace,
he like a faithful and honest brother, takes occasion from Alicant to write
him this ensuing letter to Briamata:

THOMASO to ALONSO PIRACQVO.
BEing more jealous of your prosperity, then of mine own; and knowing it many
times falls out, that Lovers lose the clearenesse and soliditie of their
judgment, in gazing and contemplating on the Roses and Lillies of their
Mistresses beauties: I desirous to prevent your disgrace, thought my self
bound to signify you, that I here understand by the report of those, whose
speeches bear their persuasions with them, that your suite to Beatrice-Ioana
is in vain, and she unworthie of your affection, because she has already
contracted her self to Alsemero your Rival: I am as sorry to be the Herald
of this news, as glad and confident, that as she has matched your inferious,
so you are reserved for her better: Wherefore Sir, recall your thoughts, tempt
not impossibilities, but consider that the shortest errors are best; and
though you love her well, yet think that at your pleasure you may find
variety of Beauties, whereunto hers deserves not the honor to do homage. I
could give no truce to my thoughts, till I had advertised you hereof, and I
hope either the name of a brother, or your own generositie, will easily
procure pardon for my presumption.

THOMASO PIRACQVO.


Piracquo, notwithstanding this his Brothers Letter of counsel and advice, is
so far from retyring in his suit, as he rather advances with more violence
and zeal: and as many men's judgments are dazzled and obscured a little before
their danger and misfortune, when indeed they have most need to have them sound
and clear: so he is not capable to be dissuaded from re-searching his
Mistress, but rather resembles those Saylors, who are resolute to endure a
storm, in hope of fair weather: but he had found more security and less
danger, if he had embraced and followed the counsel that his brother gave him.
For Beatrice-Ioana seeing she could not obtain her desire in marying Alsemero,
e're Piracquo were removed, does now confirm that which formerly she had
resolved on, to make him away, in what manner, or at what rate soever. And now,
after she had ruminated, and run over many bloody designs: the devil, who
never flies from those that follow him, proffers her an invention as execrable
as damnable. There is a gallant young Gentleman, of the Garrison of the Castle,
who follows her father, that to her knowledge does deeply honor, and dearly
affect her: yea, she knows, that at her request he will not stick to murder
Piracquo: his name is Signiour Antonio de Flores: she is resolute in her rage,
and approves him to be a fit instrument to execute her will.

Now, as soon as Vermandero understands of Alsemero's departure to Valentia,
he with his daughter and Piracquo returns from Briamata to Alicant: where,
within three days of their arrival, Beatrice-Ioana, boiling still in her
revenge to Piracquo, which neither the air of the Country nor City could
quench or wipe off, she sends for de Flores, and with many flattering smiles,
and sugared speeches, acquaints him with her purpose and desire, making him many
promises of kindness and courtesies, if he will perform it.

De Flores having a long time loved Beatrice-Ioaua, is exceeding glad of this
news, yea, feeding his hopes with the air of her promises, he is so caught
and entangled in the snares of her beauty, that he freely promises to
dispatch Piracquo; and so they first consult, and then agree upon the manner
how, which forthwith we shall see performed: to which end, de Flores
insinuates himself fairly into Piracquo's company and familiarity as he
comes to the castle; where watching his hellish opportunity, he one day
hearing Piracquo commend the thickness and strength of the Walls, told him
that the strength of that Castle consisted not in the Walls, but in the
Casemates that were stored with good Ordnance to scour the ditches. Piracquo
very courteously prays de Flores to be a means that he may go down and see
the Casemates. De Flores like a bloody Faukner, seeing Piracquo already come to
his lure, tells him it is now dinner time, and the bell upon ringing: but if he
please, he himself will after dinner accompany him, and show him all the
strength and rarities of the Castle. He thanks de Flores for this courtesy,
and accepts hereof, with promise to go. So he hies in to dinner, and de
Flores pretending some business, walks in the Court.

Whiles Piracquo is at dinner with Vermandero, de Flores is providing him of a
bloody banquet in the East Casmate, where, of purpose he goes, and hides a
naked sword and poniard behind the door. Now dinner being ended, Piracquo
finds out de Flores, and summons him of his promise: who tells him he is ready
to wayt on him: so away they go from the Walls to the Ravellins, Sconces and
Bulwarks, and from thence by a Posterne to the Ditches: and so in again to
the Casemates, whereof they have already viewed three, and are now going to the
last, which is the Theater, whereon we shall presently see acted a mournful
and bloody Tragedy. At the descent hereof De Flores puts off his Rapier, and
leaves it behind him, treacherously informing Piracquo thar the descent is
narrow and craggy. See here the policy and villainy of this devilish and
treacherous miscreant.

Piracquo, not doubting nor dreaming of any treason, follows his example, and
so casts off his Rapier: De Flores leads the way, and he follows him; but,
alas poor Gentleman, he shall never return with his life: they enter the
Vault of the Casemate; De Flores opens the door, and throws it back, thereby
to hide his sword and Poniard. He stoopes and looks through a Port-hole, and
tells him, that that Piece does thoroughly scowre the Ditch. Piracquo stoopes
likewise down to view it, when (O grief to think thereon!) De Flores steps
for his Weapons, and with his Poniard stabs him through the back, and swiftly
redoubling blow upon blow, kills him dead at his feet, and without going
farther, buries him there, right under the ruins of an old wall, whereof that
Casemate was built. Lo here the first part of this mournful and bloody
Tragedy.

De Flores (like a graceless villain) having dispatched this sorrowful
business, speedily acquaints Beatrice-Ioana herewith, who (miserable wretch)
does hereat infinitely rejoice, and thanks him with many kisses; and the
better to conceal this their vild and bloody Murder, as also to cast a mist
before peoples conceits and judgments, she bids him, by some secret means, to
cause reports to be spread: first, that Piracquo was seen gone forth the
Castle gate; then, that in the City he was seen take boat, and went (as it
was thought) to take the air of the sea. But this wit of theirs shall prove
folly: for though men as yet see not this Murder, yet God in his due time will
both detect and punish it.

By this time Piracquo is found wanting, both in the City and Castle; so these
aforesaid reports run for current, all tongues prattle hereof; Vermandero
knows not what to say, nor Piracquo's brother and friends what to do herein:
they every hour and minute expect news of him, but their hopes bring them no
comfort; and amongst the rest, our devilish Beatrice-Ioana seems exceedingly
to grieve and mourn hereat. Don Thomaso Piracquo with the rest of his friends,
search every corner of the City, and send scouts, both by land and sea, to have
news of him. Vermandero the Captain of the Castle does the like, and vows,
that next his own son, he loved Piracquo before any man of the world: yea,
not only his friends, but generally all those who knew him, exceedingly weep
and bewail the absence and loss of this Cavalier: for they think sure he is
drowned in the sea.

Now in the midst of this sorrow, and of these tears, Beatrice-Ioana does
secretly advertise her Lover Alsemero hereof, but in such palliating terms,
that thereby she may delude and carry away his judgment from imagining that
she had the least shadow or finger herein: and withal prays him to make no
longer stay in Valentia, but to come away to her to Alicant. Alsemero wonders
at this news, and to please his fair Mistress, believes part thereof, but
will never believe all; but he is so inflamed with her beauty, as her
remembrance wipes away that of Piracquo; when letting pass a little time, he
makes his preparations for Alicant: but first he sends the chiefest of his
parents to Vermandero, to demand his daughter Beatrice-Ioana in marriage for
him, and then comes himself in person, and in discreet and honorable manner
courts her Parents privately, and makes show to seek her publicly.

In fine, after many conferences, meetings, and complements, as Alsemero has
heretofore won the affection of Beatrice-Ioana, so now at last he obtaines
likewise the favor and consent of Vermandero her father. And here our two
Lovers, to their exceeding great content, and infinite joy, are united, and by
the bond of marriage, of two persons made one, their Nuptials being solemnized
in the Castle of Alicant with much Pomp, State, and Bravery.

Having heretofore heard the conference that past betwixt Alsemero and
Beatrice-Ioana in the Church; having likewise seen the amorous Letters that
past betwixt them, from Alicant to Briamata, and from Briamata to Alicant; and
now considering the pomp and glory of their Nuptials, who would imagine that
any averse accident could alter the sweetness and tranquillity of their
affections, or that the Sunshine of their joys should so soon be eclipsed,
and overtaken with a storm? But God is as just as secret in his decrees.

For this married couple had scarce lived three months in the pleasures of
Wedlock (which if virtuously observed is the sweetest earthly joy) but
Alsemero, like a fond husband, becomes jealous of his wife; so as he curbes
and restraines her of her liberty, and would hardly permit her to confer or
converse with, yea, far less, to see any man: but this is not the way to
teach a woman chastity: for if fair words, good example, and sweet
admonitions cannot prevail, threatenings and imprisoning in a Chamber will
never; yea, the experience thereof is daily seen, both in England, France, and
Germany, where generally the Women use (but not abuse) their liberty and
freedom, granted them by their husbands, with much civility, affection, and
respect.

Beatrice-Ioana bites the lip at this her husbands discourtesy: she vows she
is as much deceived in his love, as he in his jealousy, and that she is as
unworthy of his suspicion, as he of her affection; he watches her every
where, and sets Spies over her in every corner: yea, his jealousy is become so
violent, as he deemes her unchaste with many, yet knows not with whom: but
this tree of Jealousy never brings forth good fruit. She complains hereof
to her father, and prays him to be a means to appease and calm this tempest,
which threatens the Ship-wracke, not only of her content, but (it may be) of
her life. Vermandero bears himself discreetly herein; but he may as soon
place another Sun in the Firmament, as root out this fearful frenzy out
of Alsemero's head: for this his paternall admonition is so far from drawing
him to hearken to reason, as it produces contrary effects; for now Alsemero,
to prevent his shame, and secure his fear, suddenly provides a Coach, and so
carries home his wife from Alicant to Valentia. This sudden departure grieves
Vermandero, and galls Beatrice-Ioana to the heart, who now looks no longer on
her husband with affection, but with disdain and envy. Many days are not
past, but her father resolves to send to Valentia, to know how matters stand
betwixt his daughter and her husband: he makes choice of De Flores to ride
thither, and sends Letters to them both.

De Flores is extremely joyful of this occasion, to see his old Mistress
Beatrice-Ioana, whom he loves dearer then his life: he comes to Valentia, and
finding Alsemero abroad, and she at home, delivers her her fathers Letter, and
salutes and kisseth her, with many amorous imbracings and dalliances (which
modesty holds unworthy of relation) she acquaints him with her husbands
ingratitude; he rather rejoices then grieves hereat, and now revives his old
suit, and redoubleth his new kisses: she considering what he has done for
her service, and joining therewith her husbands jealousy, not only ingageth
herself to him for the time present, but for the future, and bids him visit
her often. But they both shall pay dear for this familiarity and pleasure.

Alsemero comes home, receives his fathers Letter, sets a pleasing face on his
discontented heart, and bids him welcome: And so the next day writes back to
his father Vermandero, and dispatcheth De Flores; who for that time takes his
leave of them both, and returns for Alicant.

He is no sooner departed, but Alsemero is by one of his Spies, a Waiting
gentlewoman of his Wifes, whom he had corrupted with money, advertised that
there past many amorous kisses, and dalliances between her Mistress and De
Flores: yea, she reveals all that ever she saw or heard: for she past not to
be false to her Lady, so she were true to her Lord and Master. And indeed
this Wayting-gentlewoman was that Diaphanta, of whom we have formerly made
mention, for conducting of Alsemero to her Ladies chamber at Briamata. Alsemero
is all fire at this news, he consults not with judgment, but with passion;
and so rather like a devil then a man, flies to his Wife's chamber, wherein
furiously rushing, he with his sword drawn in his hand, to her great terror
and amazement, delivers her these words.

Minion (quoth he) upon thy life tell me what familiarity there has now past
betwixt De Flores and thy self: whereat she, fetching many sighs, and
shedding many tears, answers him, that by her part of heaven, her thoughts,
speeches, and actions have no way exceeded the bounds of honor and chastity
toward him; and that De Flores never attempted any courtesy, but such as a
brother may show to his own natural sister. Then, quoth he, whence proceeds
this your familiarity? Whereat she grows pale, and withal silent. Which her
husband espying, Dispatch, quoth he, and tell me the truth, or else this sword
of mine shall instantly find a passage to thy heart. When lo, the providence
of God so ordained it, that she is reduced to this exigent and extremity, as
she must be a witness against her self, and in seeking to conceal her
whoredom, must discover her Murder; the which she does in these words:

Know Alsemero, that since thou will enforce me to show thee the true cause of
my chaste familiarity with De Flores, that I am much bound to him, and thy self
more: for he it was, that at my request, dispatched Piracquo, without the which
(as thou well know) I could never have enjoyed thee for my husband, nor thou
me for thy wife: And so she reveals him the whole circumstance of that cruel
Murder, as we have formerly understood; the which she conjures and prays him
to conceal, since no less then De Flores and her own life depended thereon,
and that she will dye a thousand deaths, before consent to defile his bed, or
to violate her oath and promise given him in marriage.

Alsemero both wondering and grieving at this lamentable news, says little,
but thinks the more; and although he had reason and appearance to believe,
that she who commits Murder, will not stick to commit Adultery, yet upon his
Wife's solemn oaths and protestations, he forgets what is past; only he
strictly charge her, no more to see, or admit De Flores into her company; or
if the contrary, he vows he will so sharply be revenged of her, as he
will make her an example to all posterity.

But Beatrice-Ioana, notwithstanding her husbands speeches, continues her
intelligence with De Flores; yea, her husband no sooner rides abroad, but he is
at Valentia with her; and they are become so impudent, as what they did before
secretly, they now in a manner do publicly, or at least, with Chamber-doores
open. Diaphanta knowing this to be a great scandal, as well to her Masters
honor, as house, again informs him thereof; who vows to take a most sharp
revenge of this their infamy and indignity, as indeed he does: for he
bethinkes himself (thereby to effect it) of an invention, as worthy of his
jealousy, as of their first crime of Murder, and of their second of Adultery:
he injoyneth Diaphanta to lay wayt for the very hour that De Flores arrives
from Alicant to Valentia, which she does; when instantly pretending to his
Wife a journey in the Country, he very secretly and silently having his Rapier
and Poniard, and a case of Pistols ready changed in his pocket (seeming to take
Horse) husheth himself up privately in his Study, which was next adjoining,
and within his Bedchamber.

Beatrice-Ioana, thinking her husband two or three Leagues off, sends away for
De Flores, who comes instantly to her: they fall to their kisses and
imbracings, she rejoicing extremely for his arrival, and he for her husband
Alsemero's departure: she relates him the cruelty and indignity her husband
has showed and offered her, the which De Flores understands with much contempt
and choler, as also with many threats. Alsemero hears all, but does neither
speak, cough, neeze, nor spit. So from words they ^all to their beasily
pleasures, when Alsemero no longer able to contain himself, much less to be
accessory to this his shame, and their villainy, throws off the Door, and
violently rusheth forth; when finding them on his Bed, in the midst of their
adultery, he first discharges his Pistols on them, and then with his Sword and
Poniard runs them through, and stabs them with so many deep and wide wounds,
that they have not so much power or time to speak a word, but there lie
weltring and wallowing in their blood, whiles their souls fly to another
world, to relate what horrible and beastly crimes their bodies have committed
in this. Thus by the providence of God, in the second Tragedy of our History,
we see our two Murderers murdered, and Piracquo's innocent blood revenged in
the guiltiness of theirs.

Alsemero, having finished this bloody business, leaves his Pistols on the
Table, as also his Sword and Poniard all bloody as they were; and without
covering or removing the breathless bodies of these two wretched miscreants,
he shuts his Chamber door, and is so far from flying for the fact, as he
takes his Coach, and goes directly to the Criminal Judge himself, and
reveals what he had done; but conceales the Murder of Piracquo. The Judge is
astonished and amazed at the report of this mournful and pitiful accident:
he takes Alsemero with him, returns to his house, and finds those two dead
bodies fresh smoking and reeking in their blood: the news hereof is spread in
all the City. The whole people of Valentia flock thither to be eyewitnesses
of these two murdered persons; where some behold them with pity, others with
joy, but all with astonishment and admiration, and no less do those of
Alicant, where this news is speedily poasted; but all their griefs are
nothing to those of Don Diego de Vermandero's (Beatrice-Ioana's father) who
infinitely and extremely grieves, partly for the death, but specially for the
crime of his daughter.

The Judge presently commits Alsemero prisoner in another of his own Chambers,
and so examining Diaphanta upon her oath, concerning the familiarity betwixt
De Flores and Beatrice-Ioana: she affirms constantly, that now and many times
before, she saw them commit adultery: and that she it was that first
advertised Alsemero her Master hereof. Whereupon, after a second examination
of Alsemero, they, upon mature deliberation, acquit him of this fact: so he
is freed, and the dead bodies carried away and buried.

But although this earthly Judge have acquitted Alsemero of this fact, yet the
Judge of Judges, the great God of Heaven, who sees not only our heart, but
our thoughts, not only our actions, but our intents, has this and something
else to lay to his charge: for he (in his sacred providence, and divine
Justice) does both remember and observe, first how ready and willing Alsemero
was to engage himself to Beatrice-Ioana to kill Piracquo: then, though he
consented not to his Murder, yet how he concealed it, and brought it not to
public arraignement and punishment, whereby the dead body of Piracquo might
receive a more honorable and Christian like Sepulcher: and if these crimes of
his be not capable to deserve revenge and chastisement, Lo, he is entering
into a new, wilful, and premeditated Murder, and does so dishonourably and
treacheroubly perform it, as we shall shortly see him lose his life upon an
infamous Scaffold, where he shall find no heart to pity him, nor eye to
bewail him.

If we would be so ignorant, we cannot be so malicious to forget that loving
and courteous Letter, which Don Thomaso Piracquo wrote his Brother Alonso
Piracquo from Alicant to Briamata, to withdraw himself from his suite to
Beatrice-Ioana; and although his affection and jealousy to prevent his
Brothers disgrace, was then the chief occasion of that his Letter, yet since he
was since disastrously and misfortunately bereaved of him, of that dear and
sweet Brother of his, whom he ever held and esteemed far dearer then his
life, his thoughts, like so many lines, concur in this Center, from whence
he cannot be otherwise conceited or drawn, but that Beatrice-Ioana and
Absemero had a hand, and were at least accessaries, if not authors of his
loss: upon the foundation of which belief he rayseth this resolution, that
he is not worthy to be a Gentleman, nor of the degree and title of a Brother,
if he crave not satisfaction for that irreparable loss which he sustayneth
in that of his Brother; and the sooner is he drawn thereunto, because he
believes, that as Alsemero was ordained of old to chastize Beatrice-Ioana, so
he was by the same Power reserved to be revenged of Alsemero. Whereupon,
although it be not the custom of Spain to fight Duels (as desiring rather
the death of their enemies then of their friends) he resolves to fight with
him; and to that end, understanding Alsemero to be then in Alicant, sends him
this Challenge:

THOMASO PIRACQVO to ALSEMERO.
IT is with too much assurance, that I fear Beatrice-Ioana's vanity, and your
rashness, has bereaved me of a Brother, whom I ever esteemed and prized
far dearer then my self: I were unworthy to converse with the World, much
less to bear the honor and degree of a Gentleman, if I should not seek
satisfaction for his death, with the hazard of mine own life: for if a Friend
be bound to perform the like courtesy and duty to his Friend, how much more
a Brother to his Brother? Your Sword has chastized Beatrice-Ioana's error,
and I must see whether mine be reserved to correct yours. As you are your
self, meet me at the foot of Glisseran hill to morrow at five in the morning
without Seconds, and it shall be at your choice, either to use your Sword on
Horseback, or your Rapier on foot.

THOMASO PIRACQVO.


Alsemero accepts this Challenge, and promises that he and his Rapier will
not fail to meet him; yet as he one way wondereth at Piracquo's valor and
resolution, so another way he considers the great loss he has received in
that of his Brother, and the justness of his quarrel against him; who
although he were not accessory to his Murder, yet he is, in concealing the
cruelty thereof: and indeed this villainy makes him lose his accustomed courage,
and think of a most base cowardice, and treacherous stratagem: But this
dishonorable resolution and design of his shall receive an infamous
recompense, and a reward and punishment as bitter as just.

They meet at the hour and place appointed: Piracquo is first in the Field,
and Alsemero stays not long after; but he has two small Pistols charged in
his pockets, which in killing his enemy shall ruin himself. They draw, and as
they approach, Alsemero throws away his Rapier, and with his hat in his hand
prays Piracquo to hear him in his just defense, and that he is ready to
join with him to revenge his Brothers Murderers. Piracquo being as courteous
as courageous, and as honorable as valiant, likewise throws away his Rapier,
and with his Hat in his hand comes to meet him: but it is a folly to unarme our
selves in our enemies presence; for it is better and fitter that he stand to
our courtesy, then we to his: when Piracquo fearing nothing less then
Treason, Als^mero draws out his Pistols, and discharges then, the first
through his head, and the second through his breast; of which two wounds he
speaking only thus, O Villain, O Traitor! falls down dead at his feet. Lo
here the third bloody part of this History.

It is a lamentable part for any one to commit Murder: but for a Gentleman to
destroy another in this base and cruel manner, this exceedes all baseness and
cruelty it self: yea, it makes him ^s u^worthy of his honor, as worthy of a
Halter.

The news of this bloody ^ct rattles in the streets of Alicant, as Thunder in
the Firmament: Piracquo's Chi^gion being an eyewitness hereof reports the
death of his Master, and the treachery of Alsemero: all Alicant is amazed
hereat, they extol Thomaso Piracquo's valor, and his singular affection to his
dead Brother, and both detest and curse the treachery and mem^ry of Alsemero.
The criminal Judges are advertized hereof, who speedily send poast after him:
but he is mounted on a swift Genner, and like Bellerophon on his winged
Pegasus does rather fly then gallop: but his have is in vain, for the justice
of the Lord will both stop his Horse, and arrest him. He is not recovered half
way from Alicant toward Valentia, but his Horse stumbles and breaks his
foreleg, and Alsemero his right arm; he is amazed, perplexed, and enraged
hereat, and knows not what to do, or whither to fly for safety: for he sees
no bush nor hedge to hide him, nor lane to save him; and now he repents
himself of his fact, but it is too late: his Horse failing him, he trusts to
his legs, and so throwing off his cloak, runs as speedily as he may: but
the foulness of his fact does still so affright him, and terrify his
conscience, as he is afraid of his own shadow, looks still back, imagining
that every stone he sees is a Sergeant come to arrest him; yea, his thoughts,
like so many Bloud-hounds, pursue and follow him, swearing exceedingly, partly
through his labor, but especially through the affliction and perturbation of
his mind; yea, every point of a minute he both expects and fears his
apprehension.

Neither is his fear or expectation vain; for lo, he at last perceives
four come galloping after him as fast as their Horses can drive. So they
finding first his poor Horse, and now espying his miserable self, he sees
he is environed of all sides, and thinks the earth has brought forth Cadmean
men to apprehend him; yet remembering himself a Gentleman, and withal a
Soldier, he resolves rather to sell his life dearly in that place, then to
be made a Spectacle upon an infamous Scaffold: but this courage and resolution
shall neither prevail, or rescue him.

He to this effect draws his Rapier, the which the four Sergeants will him
to yield, and render up to the Kings laws and justice: but he is resolute to
defend himself: They threaten him with their Pistols; but their sight do as
little amaze him, as their report and bullets. So they alight from their
Horses, and environ him with their Swords, and having hurt two of them, and
performed the part of a desperate Gladiator, the third joining with him, they
break his Rapier within a foot of the Hilt, whereat he yields himself.
Alsemero thus taken, is the same night brought back to Alicant, in whose Gates
and Streets a wonderful concourse of people assemble to see him pass, who as
much pity his person, as execrate and condemn his fact.

The Senate is assembled, and Alsemero brought to appear, who considering the
heinousness of his treacherous and bloody fact; which the Devil had caused
him to commit, he stays for no witnesses, but accuses himself of this
Murder, the which from point to point he confesses; and so they adjudge him
to lose his head: but this is too honorable a death for a Gentleman who has
so treacherously and basely dishonored and blemished his Gentility. As he is
on the Scaffold, preparing himself to dye, and seeing no farther hope of life,
but the image of death before his eyes, knowing it no time now, either to
dissemble with God, or to fear the Law, he, to the amazement of all the
world, tells the people, that although he killed Don Thomaso Piracquo, yet he
had no hand in the Murder of his brother Don Alonso, whom (he said) De
Flores, at the instigation of his wicked and wretched wife Beatrice-Ioana, had
murdered and buried in the East Casemate of the Castle; and withal affirmed,
that if he were guilty in any thing concerning that Murder, it was only in
concealing it, which he had done till then, and whereof (he said) he now most
heartily repented himself, as being unwilling any longer to charge his soul
with it, since he was ready to leave this world, and to go to another, and so
besought them all to pray unto God to forgive him, whose sacred Majesty, he
confessed, he had highly and infinitely offended; and wished them all to
beware, and fly the temptations of the Devil, and to become better Christians
by his example.

The Judges advertised hereof, cause his head to be stricken off for murdering
of Don Thomaso Piracquo; and his body to be thrown into the Sea, for
concealing that of Don Alonso; which was accordingly executed: and from the
place of Execution they immediately go to the Castle, and so to the East
Casemate, where causing the stones to be removed, they find the mournful
murdered body of Don Alonso Piracquo, which they give to his kinsfolks to
receive a more honorable Burial, according to his rank and degree: and from
thence they return to the Churches, where the Bodies of De Flores and
Beatrice-Ioana were interred (after they were brought back from Valentia) the
which, for their horrible Murder, they at the common place of Execution cause
to be burned, and their ashes to be thrown into the air, as unworthy to have
any resting place on earth, which they had so cruelly stained and polluted with
innocent blood.

Lo here the just punishment of God against these devilish and bloody
Murderers! at the sight of whose executions, all that infinite number of
people that were Spectatours, universally laud and praise the Majesty of God,
for purging the earth of such unnatural and bloody Monsters.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY V.
Alibius murthereth his Wife Merilla: he is discovered, first by Bernardo,
then by Emilia his own daughter: so he is apprehended and hanged for the Fact.

HOw far are they from having peace with God, and all his creatures, when
they lay violent hands on their own wives: yea, when they murder them in
their beds, in stead of reposing their secrets and affections in their bosoms!
These are hellish resolutions, and infernal stratagems, that nature neither
allows, nor grace approves. For besides the Union betwixt God and his Church,
there is none so absolute and perfect on earth, as is that of Man and Wife: for
as this world has made them two persons, so God has conjoined and made them
one; and therefore what madness, nay what cruelty is it to be so cruel to
those, who (if not our selves) are at least our second selves? Charity (the
daughter of heaven) teaches us to love all the world, but especi^lly those who
are our kinsfolks or friends. Religion (the mother of Charity) steps a degree
farther, and injoyneth us to love those who hate us; yea, these likewise are
not only the rules of nature, but the precepts of grace: therefore to kill
those who love us, and to dep^ive those of life, who (did occasion present) are
ready to sacrifice theirs for the preservation of ours, it must needs proceed
rather from a monster then a man, or rather from a devil then a monster: but
such devils and such monsters are but too rife and common in these our sinful
times. And amongst others, I here produce one for ex^mple, who for that cruel
and inhumane fact of his, by the justice of God, was justly rewarded with a
halter. And may all those, who perpetrate the like crime, partitipate of the
same, or of a worse punishment.

IN the Parish of Spreare, some fifteen miles distant from the beautiful and
noble City of Brescia (in the Territories of the Venetians) there dwelt a poor
country man, termed Alibius, who could vaunt of no other wealth left him by
his deceased parents, but that he was a man of a comely stature and
proportion, and withal, that they were of an honest fame and reputation: so if
his virtues had answered theirs, his poverty had never proved so pernicious and
fatal an enemy to him, as to ruin his fortunes with his life, and his life
with his fortunes: or had the vices of his soul not contaminated or stained
the perfections of his body, my pen had slept in silence, and his History layne
raked up in the dust of his grave: but since his actions have exceeded the
bounds both of nature and grace, yea, since he has learned of the Devil to
imbath his hands in poison, and to imbrue them in innocent blood, I (encouraged
by the connivencie and silence of others) not out of any want of charity to the
memory of dead Alibius, but in detestation of his bloody resolution and
actions, and chiefly and especially to the comfort and instruction of the
living, who may abhor his crime by the sight of his punishment: I have
adventured and resolved to give this a place among the rest of my tragical
Histories, that Italy, as well as Brescia, and Spreare (and peradventure the
whole Christian world with Italy) may understand thereof.

This Alibius, as soon as he had attained the age of five and twenty years,
married an honest Maiden, termed Merilla, being a Farmers daughter of the same
Parish of Spreare, with whom he had but small means, and she (to speak
truth) but little wit, and less beauty; yet she was neither so poor, but that
she deserved a good husband, nor so hard favored, but she might content an
honest one. And indeed, had Alibius his care and industry answered Merilla's
providence and frugality, or his lustful eye not strayed either beyond his vow
given her in marriage, or her indifferent beauty, this Match might have proved
as fortunate, as it has since succeeded miserable and ruinous.

For Alibius, whose thoughts flew a pitch above his birth, rank, and means,
had not lived many years in wedlock, till his prodigality and vanity had
wasted and dissipated the greatest part of that small estate he had; so as
necessity looking now on him, because formerly he disdayned to look on it,
knowing better how to play, then work, or rather not how to work, but play;
and seeing that his present means could not maintain him, nor his future
hopes promise it, he as a true truant, and a perfect prodigal, disdayning to
want when he has it, and when he has it not, sets up this lewd and unthrifty
resolution with himself, to set all at six and seven. But this prodigal
humor of his does as much grieve his Wife, as delight him: for now she sees
that her spinning at home could neither serve nor satisfy his expenses abroad,
and that all her care and labor was by far too little to maintain his
vanity; which she (poor good woman) perceiving, yea, more then so, contrary
to her hopes, now feeling, she with fair words, and secret and sweet
persuasions endeavors to reclaim him from it; but this course of hers
works a contrary effect: for if before he played the prodigal in her
absence, now he plays the Tyrant in her presence: for he not only
rejoices, and stops his ears against her counsel, but rates and reviles her
with vilde and contemptuous speeches, such as indeed are infinitely unfit
either for a husband to give, or a wife to receive. And this, as I have been
informed, was the first distaste betwixt Alibius and Merilla.

But we need not go far for a Second: There is no pestilent Infection, nor
infectious Pestilence to that of haunting and frequenting bad company; for it
is a rock, wherein many have suffered Shipwreck; it is a Fountain that sends
forth many poisoned streams to those that taste or drink thereof; yea, it is
a Tree, whose fruit is by so much the more bitter to the stomach, as it seems
pleasing to the palate, like Pills of poison candy'd in Sugar: and as that
which most delights, most confounds the sense; so use breeding an habit, and
habit a second nature, vicious company, whom we take to be our dearest
friends, do in fine prove our most dangerous enemies, and so much the more
dangerous, since when we would forsake them, we cannot; which our Alibius will
at last find true in himself: yea, we shall see him enforced to acknowledge
it, as having bought and purchased it with a woeful and lamentable experience:
for now he begins to love Swearing, Whoredom, and Drunkenness, that before
he hated; and to hate the Gospel of Christ, and the Professors thereof, that
before he loved. A most wretched exchange, where we take from our souls, to
give to our senses; and a woeful bargain, where we sell God, to buy the
Devil.

Poor Merilla grieving to see that she could not unsee these his ungodly
courses, as also that it not only consumed the small remaynder of his means,
but likewise lost his friends, and darkened and eclipsed his reputation,
thinks it not only a part of her duty, but of her affection to him, to
request some virtuous friend, or godly neighbor of theirs to deal with him
herein, thereby to endeavor to persuade him from these his irregular and
profane courses: But as those who are sick, are so deprived of their taste, as
they cannot discern between sweet and bitter; So Alibius, sick of the
Lethargy of these his enormous and dissolute Vices, was so far from
rellishing this wholesome counsel, as he not only rejected it, but scoffed
and reviled the party who gave it him: and it being not so secretly (or
peradventure not so wisely) managed, but he coming to understand it
proceeded from his wife Merilla, he took it so passionately and outragiously,
to see his follies revealed by her, who was bound to conceal them, as most
uncivilly and inhumanely checking her, he in the heat of his displeasure and
revenge, some months forsakes her company, and many her bed; whereat, such was
her tender affection to him, and his disrespect to her, as I know not whether
she more grieved, or he rejoiced.

The motives of his third distaste to his Wife, were grounded upon her
barrenness and sterility; as if it were in her power to give him a Child, when
Gods pleasure and providence was to give none to her, without considering that
the barrenness and fruitfulness of a woman comes all from the Lord, or
without remembering that some Children are borne for a curse, as others for a
blessing to their parents: or as if his earthly vanity could teach Gods secret
Divinity, what were fittest for him, and yet these reasons cannot prevail
against his unreasonable self; and therefore this, amongst the rest of his
distastes, he, or rather the Devil for him, throws in against his Wife: That
if he had a Child, he should be a good husband, and not before: as if he
desired and sought some pretext and color, though never so unjust and ungodly,
to cover his vices and prodigality; or in the eyes of the World to bolster out
and apologize his iarring and squaring with his Wife: yea, his impudency was
grown to the height of this impiety, that he often affirmed, his Wife was the
cause of his poverty; for if she would give him no Child, God would give him no
prosperity.

Now, as all women by nature generally desire Children; so it is a great
affliction (I will not say a curse) to them, if they have none. But these
unjust speeches of Alibius, do justly and infinitely afflict his Wife Merilla,
who (that no farther discord might trouble the harmony of their wedlock) sends
her tears to earth, and her prayers to heaven, that her Blessed Savior would
be pleased to bless her with a Child; when God, seeing his profane
hypocrisy, which he will revenge, and understanding her religious zeal, which
he will reward, out of the inestimable treasure of his Mercy and providence,
grants her her request, and him his desire: so as in short time she sees her
self the mother, and him the father of a young daughter, termed Emelia.

The fourth reason of his distaste of his Wife, was, that seeing time run on
in his swift cariere, and his prodigality still remaining, as also that his
mask of his Wife's sterilitie was taken away; he that was heretofore so
desirous of a child, now thinks this one to be one too many, because (says
he) he can no way endure the crying and trouble thereof. But is there any
thing so unnatural or ridiculous as this? Now, if he murmr at this his
child, during her infancy, he will much more storm at her, when she comes
up to riper years: and observing that her mother does subtract from his
prodigality, to add to her maintenance, this does again extremely vex and
afflict him: so that his child, whom he pretended should be the cause of his
joy and prosperity, is now that of his grief; and as he thinks, of his
farther poverty and misery: the which, poor Merilla his wife, to her
unspeakeable and ineffable grief, palpably perceives, as well in his
uncharitable and malicious speeches, banded to her for her daughter Emelia's
sake, as to Emelia for her sake: But what know we, whether God has purposely
sent this daughter, to revenge the injuries and wrongs that her father
intends to her Mother?

His fifth, and (as yet) his last distaste against his wife, proceeds from his
observing that her beauty is withered and decayed; not that heretofore he knew
her fair: but that she is not so fair now, as when he first married her: as
if time and age had not power to wither the blossoms of our youth, as the
Sun has to daver the freshest Roses and Lillies. But as all his former
distastes toward his wife, bewray his inclination to prodigality and
profaneness: so this last of his does manifestly discover his addiction to
lust, and his affection to Whoredom: for it is impossible for our wives to
seem foul in our eyes, except there be some other seems fayrer: as
blackness seems blacker when it is compared and paralelled with whiteness:
and this indeed is the Vulture and Viper that sticks so close to his breast,
and so near to his heart, yea, this is his darling and bosom sin that will
strangle him, when it makes greatest show to kiss and embrace him.

Alibius, powerfully solicited by these five several distastes conceived
against his wife Merilla, who poor woman rides at an Anchor in the
tranquillity of her innocence, whiles he (in the heat and height of his
youth) floated in the Ocean of his voluptuousness and sensuality, but
especially provoked by his own poverty and penury; who now began to appear
to him in a lean and miserable shape: he leaves his wife and family, and
betakes himself to the service of Gentlemen; thinking thereby to stop the
current of his prodigality, and to find out the invention and means, futurely
to get that which formerly he had expended: which resolution of his had been
indeed commendable, if the integrity of his heart had been answerable to the
sweetness of his tongue: but we shall see the contrary, and find by his
example, that Snakes always lurk under the fairest and greenest leaves.

During which time, he serves some Gentlemen of worth and quality, but one of
especial account and reputation; not distant above three small miles from the
City of Brescia, who being an excellent Housekeeper, and a good member of the
commonweal, there Alibius (had he had as much Grace as Vanity, or as much
Religion as impiety) might have forgotten his old vices, and have learned new
Virtues: but if he delighted to become excellent in any thing, it was first to
be a perfect Carver and Wayter, then to be decent in his apparel; and last
of all, to be smooth in his speeches, and affable and pleasing in his
complements, without any regard at all, either to reform the vanity of his
thoughts, or to control his disolute and dangerous actions.

Having thus pastaway many years abroad in service, and very seldom or never
either seen Spreare, or visited his Merilla and Emelia: he at last seeing of
the one side, that age began to Snow on his head; and that the greatest
wealth of a Serving-man, was, to have only a new Livery, and a full belly, to
have many verbal, but no real friends, resolved to leave his service, as also
his wife and daughter in Spreare: and so to travel to Venice, hoping there in
some honest place, and employment, to serve the Seigniorie, or at least some
one of the Magnifico's or Clarissimo's: but then considering the charge of the
journey, the weakness of his purse, and the uncertainty of his advancement
and preferment, he resolves for a time to sojourne in Brescia; and to watch if
any occasion or accident presented, whereby he might repair and raise his
fortunes.

He had not long lived in this City (which for antiquity, beauty, situation,
wealth and fidelity (after Venice it self) gives not the hand to any of her
sister Cities of that state:) but his eyes (as the lustful sentynells of his
heart) epsy so many beauties, as he began to loath his own wife Merilla, and
to wish her in another world, that he might have another wife in this. Lo,
here the devil begins with him anew to persuade him to hate his wife.

Abiding thus in Brescia, it fell out that he, who bore the silver rod in
token of honor, and Justice (or rather of honor to Justice) before the
podestate or chief Magistrate of this City dyed: and to this Office Alibius
(because he knew himself a grave and personal man) aspired: and what through
the respect of his gravitie, through his smooth tongue, and fair speeches: but
especially by making many friends to the Podestate and Senators, he at last
obtained it: a place indeed, more honorable then profitable, and yet worth at
least one hundred Zechines, per annum, besides his diet. This preferment makes
Alibius look aloft, and so he scorns his poor wife Merilla, as if there
were no paritie and simpathie betwixt her rags and his robes: yea, he would
not see Spreare, nor suffer her to see Brescia, and the devil was so busy
with him, or he with the devil, that in hope of a richer and fayrer wife, he
resolves to poison her according as he heretofore had many times thought and
premeditated: and that which egged and threw him on, with more violence and
precipitation, was a proud conceit of himself, and of his much dignity and
preferment. But as poverty many times befalls us for our good, so sometimes,
wealth and prosperity bring us misfortune and misery.

Not long after, another accident falls out, which does likewise much rejoice
him: An honest Citizen of Brescia, of his own name, though no way his
kinsman, dies, (and as since it has been shrewdly imagined, not without
vehement suspicion of poison) leaving a rich widdowe, named Philatea: and for
the familiarity and good conceit he had of our Alibius, as also induced
thereunto through his hypocritall show of honesty and piety, makes him sole
overseer of his will: so neatly and smoothly did our Alibius work and
insinuate himself into his favor: But the mask of this his hypocrisy shall
be soon pulled off.

Alibius seeing Philatea young, rich and fair, he looks on her more often
then on her husbands testament: and so wishing his wife Merilla in his adopted
kinsmans grave, and himself in Philatea's bed, he bends his purposes and
intents that way, as so many lines that run to their Center: yea, so strongly
has the devil possessed him with these hellish designs and bloody
resolutions, as his love to Philatea, defacing his respect to Merilla, he sees
her a block in his way, and a stop to his preferment, and so concludes that
she must he remooved and dispatched: to which effect, to draw his sinful
contemplation into bloody action, he rides over to Spreare to her; and under
color of tender love and affection, he in Milk, Wine, and roasted Apples,
gives her poison; when seeing it would not work his desired effect, he after
takes an occasion, purposely to quarrel with her, and so very lamentably (in
presence of their daughter Emelia) reviles and beats her, and returns to
Brescia, still hoping that the poison yet might operate, and disperse it self
in her veins, and that shortly he should hear news of her death. Lo here
Alibius his first attempt in seeking to murder his Wife.

In this mean time he lays close siedge to Philatea's Chastity, who not so
honest as fair, is soon drawn to sin, and prostitutes her self to his
beastly pleasure, and having no regard to her reputation, conscience, or soul,
consents to this bittersweet sin of Adultery; the which lascivious
familiarity is so long continued betwixt them, till at last Philatea's straight
Bodies become too small, and her Apron too short for her; when seeing it high
time to provide for her fame, she acquaints Alibius herewith, and asks his
advice, whether she shall marry with one of her servants: Alibius meaning to
keep the Farm for himself, whereof he had already taken possession, bids
her not to take care for a husband, but to be of good comfort, and that far
within her time, he would provide a place for her to lay down her great
belly; yea, so secret, as her own heart could either wish or desire.

But if our miserable Alibius were before resolved to murder his poor
harmless Wife Merilla, this news, and these speeches of Philatea, sets him
all on fire; and so (having consulted with the Devil) he vows she shall not
live: to which end, he provides himself of stronger poison, and in a dark
night (when as he flatters himself with hope, that the Heavens were so unjust
and inhumane to conspire with him in the Murder of his Wife) he takes horse in
the East Suburb of Brescia, and so rides toward Spreare.

But see the justice, and withal the providence and mercy of our indulgent
God! who vouchsafed, and yet resolved to restrain and divert him from this his
bloody enterprise, by an accident as strange as true: for a mile out of
Brescia, as Alibius rides by the common place of execution, his Horse stumbles,
and falls under him right against it, with which fall his shoulder is out of
joint. Oh what a caveat was this for Alibius, if he had had the least spark
of grace to have made good use hereof! But the Devil had bewitched his
understanding and judgment: for he could see by no other eyes, but by those
of revenge and blood.

Arriving at his house at Spreare, he, contrary to his hopes, finds his
daughter Emelia with her mother (who by this time was married likewise to a
poor Country man of Spreare) whose sight and presence was, for that time, a
stop to the execution of her fathers poisoning design on her mother; for he
feared that she had formerly discovered and suspected this his purpose and
resolution, as indeed she had: wherefore he forbore to administer it, only
because he would not lose all his labor, he again quarrels with his Wife,
and after he had reviled her with many scandalous and contumelious speeches,
he in the presence of his (mournful) daughter, does exceedingly beat her;
who (weeping to see her mother weep) infinitely grieved to be an eyewitness
of this inhumane and barbarous cruelty of her father: And so for that time
Alibius again permitted his Wife to live: But this will prove no pardon, but
only a short reprivall for her.

Returning again to Brescia, it is not long before Philatea does again
importune him to provide for the concealing and salving of her shame,
alleging that her time drew on, and that it was more then time to provide her
a husband. Alibius, at these her second assummons, begins to look about, and
resolves at what rate, or in what manner soever, now to send his Wife into
another world; yet (as I think, or ever understood) conceales his purpose from
Philatea. Miserable wretch! had he not participated more of the nature of a
Tiger, then a man, or of a Devil then a Tiger, he would never have laid
violent hands on his own Wife, whom earth and heaven had made flesh of his
flesh, and of two bodies one; yea, or had he had so much grace to have
considered, that the silver wand he bore before the Podestate, was for the
scourging and punishing of sin: Me thinks it should have made him more
charitable, and not so bloody to attempt it. But what will not lust enterprise,
and Revenge execute, if we neither fear God with our hearts, nor love him
with our souls?

Preseverance in Grace and virtue is excellent, but in sin lamentable.
Alibius has had years and time enough to wipe away his cruelty toward his
wife: but the longer he lives, the deeper root it takes in him, yea, he will
neither give the flower of his youth, nor the branne of his age to God, but
that to pleasure, this to Revenge and Murder, and both to the devil: for now
he is resolute to finish this mournful and bloody Tragedy, that he has so
long desired, and so often attempted: and now indeed the fatal time
approaches, wherein innocent Merilla, by the Murtherous hand of her husband,
must be sent out of this World to see a better.

Alibius having waited on the Podestate to supper, takes horse, a little before
the gates of the City were shut; and having his former poison in his pocket,
away he rides to Spreare: but to act his villainy with the greater secrecy, he
masketh and disguiseth himself: approaching his house, he in the next Meddow
ties up his horse to a tree, and so knockes at door. Poor Merilla his wife
was in bed and a sleep with (a little Girl) her Grandchild, named Pomerea,
the daughter of her daughter Emelia, whom, without a Candle, she sends down
to open the door, assuring her self (as indeed it proved too true for her)
that it was her husband Alibius. Pomere^ opening the door, lets one in, but
whom she knows not: and then for fear retires to the kitchen, which she
shuts fast on her. So Alibius mounts to his wives Chamber, and after some words
gives her a potion (some say of milk) bitterly sugared with poison, and forces
it down her: who poor soul is amazed hereat, and with her weak strength
cries out for help, but in vain. He being divellishly resolved now to make
sure work, takes a billet out of the Chimney, and so dispatcheth and kills her
in her bed (without giving her any time to commend her soul unto God) and so
very hastily rusheth forth the door.

Pomerea, fearing that which was happened, lights a candle, and ascends up the
Chamber, where she sees the lamentable spectacle of her Murdered
Grandmother, hot, reeking and smoking in her bed: whereat she is amazed, and
makes most woeful cries and mournful lamentations: when wringing her hands,
and bitterly sighing and weeping, she knows not what to do, or what not to
do in this her bitter and wretched perplexity, in which mean time Alibius
going for his horse, finds only the halter: for his horse is grazing in the
Meddow: he diligently seeks him, but cannot a long time set sight of him;
which indeed does much astonish and amaze him: but at last he finds him, and
so gallops away to Brescia: where the better to delude the World, and to cast a
mist before their eyes, he is again die six of the Clock in the morning
waiting upon the Podestate, and conducting him to the Domo, or Cathedral
Church of that City. But this policy of his shall not prevent his detection and
punishment.

In this mean time, Pomerea runs to the nearest neighbors, and divulgeth
the Murder of her Grandmother. Many of the neighbors flock thither, to see
this bloody and woeful spectacle: the Corrigadors of Spreare are acquainted
herewith: they send for Chirurgions, who visit the dead body, and report she
is both poisoned and beaten to death: they examine poor Pomerea, who relates
what she sees and knows: the^ send every where to search for the Murderer.
By this time the news hereof comes to Brescia. Alibius (like a counterfeit
miscreant) is all in tears, yea, he shows such living affection to the
memory of his dead wife, as he sends every where to find out the Murderer.
But God will not have him escape, for in due time we shall see him brought
forth and appear to the world in his colors.

Alibius, notwithstanding his tears in his eyes, having still a hell in his
conscience, is afraid, least Emelia his daughter (measuring the subsequent by
the antecedent) hold him to be her mothers Murderer; and because the
Corrigadors of Spreare (suspecting her) have taken sureties for her appearance:
he, the better to insinuate with her, uses her with more then wonted courtesy
and affabillity, imagining, that if her mouth were stopped, he needed not fear
any others tongue: But this politic sleight of his shall not prevail.

Now by little and little, Time, (the consumer of all things) begins to were
away the crying rumor of this Murder: and so Alibius thinking himself secure,
e're three months be fully expired, forgetting Merilla, takes Philatea to his
second wife: which being known in Brescia, many curious heads of that City
(though not upon any substantial ground, but only out of presumptive
circumstances) vehemently suspect that Alibius had a deep hand in the Murder
of his late wife Merilla: but they dare not speak it alowd, because he was
well beloved both of the Podestate himself (for that year being) and
generally of all the Senators.

But as Murder pierces the Clouds, and cries for revenge from Heaven, so we
shall see this of Alibius, miraculously discovered, and e're long, severely
punished: for when he thought the storm past, and saw the Skies clear, when,
I say, he imagined that all rumors and tongues were hushed up in silence, and
that he thought on nothing else, but to pass his time sweetly and
voluptuously with his new and fair wife Philatea, then, when all other means
and instruments wanted, to bring this his obscure and bloody fact to light: Lo,
by the Divine providence of God, we shall see Alibius himself be the cause,
and instrument of his own discovery.

For after he had married Philatea (which I take to be the first light of
suspecting him of his wife Merilla's Murder) (if my information be true, as I
confidently believe it is) this is the second: Alibius under the pretext of
other business, sends for one Bernardo, of the parish of Spreare, to come to
him to Brescia. Now, for our better light and information herein, as also for
the more orderly contriving of this History, we must understand, that this
Bernardo was an old associate and dissolute companion of Alibius: whom (as it
is well known by those who knew them) he had many times used and made his
stickler and agent in many of his former lewd courses and enterprises: not
that I any way think he had any hand in the present Murder of Merilla: for
then (I know) such is the Candor and Wisdom of the Corrigadors of Spreare,
and such is the clear judgment and zeal of the Senators of Brescia to
justice, that he had never escaped, but had been apprehended and brought to
his trial.

We must farther understand, that this Bernardo was likewise a companion of
Emelia's husband: yea, scarce any one day past, but they were known and seen
together in tippling houses, and other such lewd and vicious places, whereas
drink was still a most treacherous and unsecret Secretary.

It may be that what Merilla told her husband privately, he discovered it
publicly to Bernardo: who coming (as we have formerly heard) to Brescia,
after his conference with Alibius, he fell to his old vain of tippling and
carowsing, and there without the North gate of Brescia (which looks toward
Bergamo) having more money then wit, and more wine then money, in the midst
of his cups, told he was a Contadyne, or Countreyman of Spreare: that he knew
Alibius as great as now he bore himself, and that he Murdered his poor
wife in the Country, to have this fine one in the City. Which speeches of his
he reiterated and repeated often: yea, so often, as they fell not to the
ground, but some of his ^ewd companions took notice thereof; and one amongst
the rest, being inwardly acquainted with Alibius, went and secretly advertised
him hereof: who (underhand) sends away for Bernardo where he was, and wrought
so with him, as since that time he was never seen in Brescia. But this report
of his remained behind him.

A second light which Alibius gave to the discovery of this his Murder, was,
that thinking the way clear, and all suspicion vanished, he converted his
affection into contempt, and his courtesy to disrespect and unkindnesse
toward his daughter Emelia, by taking away the greatest part of that small
means he gave her toward her maintenance: which uncharitable and unnatural
part of his, threw this poor woman into so bitter a perplexity, as knowing in
her conscience that her father was her Mothers Murderer, she exceedingly
apprehended and feared, lest he would attempt to dispatch her likewise: the
which she far the more doubted, because her father had bayled her, but not
as yet freed her from her appearance before the Corrigadors of Spreare. But
here, as simple as she was, she enters into many considerations with her
self; that to accuse her father, would be as great a disobedience in her, as
it was a cruelty in him to Murder her mother. She is a long time in esolute,
either to advance or retire in this her purpose and enterprise: and here she
consults betwixt nature and grace, betwixt the Laws of Earth and heaven, what
she should do, or how she should bear her self in a matter of so unnatural
a nature. It grieves her to be the means of her fathers death, of whom she
had received her being: and yet she sorroweth not to reveal the murderer of
her mother, of whom she enjoyed her life. But though sense and nature cannot,
yet Reason and Religion will reconcile, and clear these doubts: yea, evaporate
those mists, and disperse these clouds from our eyes, and makes us see clear,
that Earth may not conceal Murder, since God receives glory both in the
detection and punishment thereof

Some will say, this daughter did ill to accuse her father. But who will not
affirm that he did far worse, to Murder her mother? Neither was it a
delight, but a torment to her, to effect it: for she enters into this
resolution with tears, and persevereth therein with sighs and lamentations:
but if she were at first resolute herein, this resolution of hers is
exceedingly confirmed, when she sees her father so suddenly married, and her
mother in law ready to lay down her great belly, especially when she heare^
the reports of his suspicion bruted in Brescia. So now she can no longer
contain her self, but goes to the next Corrigador, and reveals him, that her
father Alibius was the Murderer of her mother Merilla.

The Corrigador being a wise and grave Gentleman, wondering at this lamentable
news, retains Emelia in his house, and writes away to the Podestate of
Brescia hereof: who receives this news on a Saturday at night. The Sunday
morning he acquaints the Prefect and chiefest Senators thereof: who repair to
his house. The probabilities and circumstances are strong against Alibius. So
they all conclude to imprison him: he is at the door, ruffling in his guarded
gown and velvet cap, with his silver wand in his hand (as if he were fitter to
check others then to be controuled himself:) waiting to conduct the Podestate
to the Domo. Alibius little dreams how near he is to danger, or danger to
him: he is by an Isbiere or Sergeant called in to speak with the Podestate:
and although his conscience inwardly torment him, yet he puts a good (or at
least a brazen) countenance on all, and so very cheerfully comes before him:
at his first arrival, his velvet cap and silver wand (those dignified marks
of honor and justice) are taken from him, and consequently his office:
(because these are rewards only proper to virtue, and not to vice) he is
examined by those worthy Magistrates, who bear gravity in their looks,
wisdom in their speeches, and justice in their actions. Alibius has many
smooth words, for the defense of his crime, which with the aid and varnish of
his graceful gesture, he strives to extenuate and palliate, but in vain: for
he has to do with those Magistrates, who cannot be deluded, or carried
away, either with the sugar of a lie, or the charm of an evasion. So they
commit him close prisoner, where he has both time and leisure to think on
the foulness of his fact, and the unnaturalness and barbarism of his
cruelty.

The Monday following, the Corrigadors of Spreare send Emelia to Brescia,
where, the next day the Podestate, Prefect and Senators examine her: they first
exhort her to consider, that she speaks before God: and although Alibius be
her earthly father, yet he is her heavenly: they conjure and swear her to
speak the truth, and no more: and because they see her a simple illiterated
woman, they inform her what the virtue and nature of an oath is. When Emelia
falling on her knees, wringing her hands, and steadfastly looking up toward
heaven, she (bitterly weeping and sighing) for a pretty while, had not the
power to utter a word: The Prefect with mild exhortations and speeches
encourages her to speak, when with many tears and inrerrupted sighs, she at
last proffereth these words, My father has often beaten my Mother, and even
layne her for dead: and at other times, he has given her poison, and he it
is and no other that has now Murdered her. One of the Senators, (some say it
was the Podestate, who as much favored Alibius, as hated his crime:) bade
Emelia look to her conscience, and her conscience to God, and withal to
consider, that as Merilla was her Mother, so Alibius was her Father. Whereat
she bitterly weeping, again said, that what she had already spoken was true,
as she hoped to enjoy any part of heaven. So they binding her to give evidence
at the great Court of the Province, which some four months after was to be
held in the Castle of their City, they dismiss her.

In which mean time Alibius is visited in prison by diverse of his
acquaintance: yea, some of the chiefest Senators themselves afford him that
honor and charity, they deal with him about his crime: but in vain, for he
takes heaven and earth to witness, that he is innocent, yea, he seems to
be so religious and conscionable in his speeches, as he drew many of
inferior rank and understanding to believe, that his accusation was not true,
and his imprisonment unjust and false. But God will shortly unmaske his
hypocrisy, and to his shame and confusion, lay open and discover to the whole
World, his unnatural and bloody cruelty.

And now the time is come, that the Duke and Seigniory of Venice are used to
depute and send forth Criminal Judges, to descend and pass through the
provinces of their territories and dominions: to sit upon all capital
malefactors, and to punish them according to their deserts. A custom indeed
held famous, not only in the Christian, but in the whole universal world: and
whereby the Venetian Sat does undoubtedly receive both glory, vigor, and
life, since it not only preserves their peace, and propagateth their
tranquillity; but also rooteth out and exterminateth all those that (by their
lewd and dissolute actions) seek to impugn and infringe it.

Thus these high and Honorable Judges (being in number two for every division)
having dispatched their business (or rather that of the Seigniories) in Padua,
Vincensa, Virona and Bergamo, are now arrived in Brescia, in the Castle
whereof, (which is both beautiful and conspicuous to the eye) they keep their
Forum and Tribunal. And because this City is exempted from the Province, as
being particularly endowed with a peculiar jurisdiction, and honored with many
honorable privileges and prerogatives: therefore (Merilla being Murdered in
the Province) Alibius is fetched out of his first prison, and by one of the
chiefest and gravest Senators deputed for that purpose by the Podestate, and
Senate, conducted and conveyed to the Castle, there to be arraigned by those
two great Judges: and although this aforesaid Senator was so wise and
religious, as he seemed to have the art of persuasion in his speeches: yet by
the way, using his best oratory and charity to draw Alibius from denial, to
confession, and from that to contrition and repentance, his heart was still so
perverse and obdurate, as he notwithstanding persevered in his wilful
obstinacy, and peremptorily continued and stood upon the points of his
innocence, and justification. So strong was the Devil yet with him:

But whiles an infinite number of spectators gaze on Alibius as he is in the
Castle: and he cheerfully and carelessly conversed with some of his
acquaintance, as if the innocence of his conscience were such, as his heart
felt no grief nor preturbation: Lo, he is called to his arraignement,
whereunto that World of people, who were then in the Castle, flock and
concur.

His thoughts are so vain, and his vanity so ambitious, as he comes to the
bar in a black beaten Satin suit, with a fair Gown, and a spruce set
Ruff, having both the hair of his head and his long gray beard neately kombed
and cut, yea, with so pleasant a look, and so confident a demeanor, as if he
were to receive, not the sentence of his guiltiness and death, but that of his
innocence and enlargement. These honorable Judges cause his Indictment to be
read, wherein his poisoning and Murdering of his wife, is branched and
depainted out in all its circumstances, whereat his courage and confidence is
yet (notwithstanding) so great, as by his looks he seems no way moved, much
less astonished or afflicted: the witnesses are produced: first, his own
daughter Emelia, who with tears in her eyes stands firm to her former
disposition, that he had often beaten her Mother almost to death, and now had
killed and poisoned her; agreeing in every point with her disposition given to
the Podestate and Prefect of Brescia: which to refell, her father Alibius, with
many plausible and sugared speeches, tells his Judges, that his daughter is
incensed or lunatike; or else that she purposely seeks his life, to enjoy
that small means he has after his death, and so runs on in a most
extravagant and impertinent apology for himself, with many invective and
scandalous speeches against her, and concludes, that he was never owner of any
poison.

His Judges, out of their honorable inclination, and zeal to sacred justice,
permit him to speak without interruption: when having ended, they begin to
show him the foulness of his fact: yea, like heavenly Orators, they paint him
out the devilish nature and monstrous crime of Murder: the which they say he
redoubleth by denying it, not withstanding that they have evidence as clear as
the Sun to convince him thereof: and so they call for two Apothecaries boys,
who severally affirm, they sold him Rattes-bane at two several times.

But the devil is still so strong with Alibius, as though his conscience does
hereat afflict and torment him: yet, there is no change nor sign thereof,
either seen in his countenance, or discerned in his speeches, but still he
persevers in his obstinacy; and in a bravery pretends to wipe off the
Apothecaries boys evidence with this poor evasion, that he bought and used
it only to poison Rattes: And so again with many smooth words, humble
crouches, and hypocritical complements, he uses the prime of his subtilty
and invention to make it appear to his Judges, that he had no way imbrued his
hands in the blood of his wife: But this will not avail him, for he is before
Lynce-eyed Judges, whose integrity and wisdom can pierce through the foggy
mists of excuses, and the obscure Clouds of his far-fetched shifts, and
cunninglycompacted evasions.

And now to close and wind up this History, after the Jury impannelled had
amply heard, as well the witnesses against Alibius, as his defense for himself:
and that all the world could testify that his Judges gave him a fair trial,
they return and report him guilty of Murdering his wife Merilla; whereat he
is put off the bar, and so for that time sent back to his prison: and yet
the heat of his obstinacy being hereat no way cooled, the edge of his deny all
any way rebated, nor the obdurateness of his heart, the least thing mollified:
he, by the way as he passes, beating his breast, and sometimes out-spreading
his arms, says, it is not his crime, but the malice of his Devilish daughter
that has cast him away: yea, although many of his compassionate and Christian
friends do now now again in prison work and persuade him to confession, by
aleadging him, that God is as merciful to the repentant, as severe to the
impenitent and obstinate, yet, all this will not prevail.

The second morn after his conviction, he is brought again from his prison,
to the Castle, and so to the bar, to receive his Judgment, where one of the
two most honorable Judges show him:

That it is his harkening to the Devil, and his forsaking of God, that has
brought him to this misery; paints and points him out his dissolute life, his
frequenting of bad company, his prodigality and adultery: but above all, his
masked hypocrisy, which he says, in thinking to deceive God, has now
deceived himself: yea, in heavenly and religious speeches, informs him how
merciful and indulgent God is to repentant sinners: that he must now cast off
his thoughts from earth, and ascend and mount them to heaven, and no longer to
think of his body, but of his soul; and so after a learned and Christian-like
speech, as well for the instruction of the living as the consolation of
Alibius, who was now to prepare himself to dye: he pronounces, that for his
execrable Murder committed on his own wife Merilla, he should hang till he
were dead: and so besought the Lord to be merciful to his soul.

And now is Alibius again returned to his prison, but still remains
obstinate and perverse, affirming to all the World. that as he has lived, so
he will dye innocently: But God will not suffer him to dye, without confessing
and repenting this his bloody and unnatural Murder.

These his grave and religious Judges, out of an honorable and Christian
charity, send him Divines, to prepare his body to the death of this world, and
his soul to the life of that to come: they deal most effectually, powerfully
and religiously with him in prison: and although they found, that the devil
had strongly ensnared and charmed him, yea, and as it were, hardened his heart
to his perdition: yet God, out of his infinite and ineffable mercies, adds
both power and grace to their speeches, and exhortations, so as his eyes being
opened, and his heart pierced and mollified: they at last so prevail with him,
that being terrified with Gods justice, and encouraged and comforted with his
mercies: he with tears, sighs and groans confesses this murder of his wife,
and not only bitterly repents it, but also does thank these Godly Divines, for
their charity, care, and zeal for the preservation and saving of his soul,
and does upon his knees beseech them to pray unto the Lord to forgive him.

We have seen Alibius Murder his wife Merilla: we have seen his
apprehension, imprisonment, trial, conviction, and condemnation, for this his
execrable and bloody fact: wherein we may observe how the justice of God still
triumphs over the temptation and malice of the Devil, and how Murder,
though never so secretly acted, and concealed, will at last be detected and
punished. What rests there now, but that after we have hereby made good use
of this example, we see Alibius fetched from his prison, and conveyed to the
place of execution: (whereat (as we have heard) he formerly stumbled in jest,
but must now in earnest) where, although it were timely in the morn, (as having
the favor to dye alone, and at least three hours before the other condemned
malefactors) an infinite number of the Citizens of Brescia, (of all ranks and
of both sexes) assembled to see Alibius take his last farewell of this World.

At his ascending up the ladder, his fair gray beard and comely presence drew
pity from the hearts, and tears from the eyes of the greatest part of the
spectators, to see that the Devil had so strongly enchanted and seduced him to
lay violent hands on his wife, and to see so grave and so proper an aged man
thus misfortunately and untimely cast away.

His speech at his end was brief and short; only he freely confessed his
crime, and with infinite sighs and tears besought the world to pray for his
soul: he lamented the Vanity of his youth, and the dissoluteness of his age:
told them, that his neglect of prayer to God, and his too much confidence in
the devil, had brought him to this shameful end; and therefore besought them
again and again to beware by his example: and so having solemnly freed his
second wife Philatea from being any way acquainted or accessory with the
murder of his first wife Merilla: he recommending his soul into the hands of
his Redeemer, dyed as penitently as he had lived dissolutely and profanely.

And thus was the life and death of Alibius: the which I was the more willingly
induced to publish, partly, because I was an eyewitness, both of his
arraignement and death, (as I returned from my travells,) but more especially,
in hope that his example and History may prove to be as great a consolation
to the Godly, as a terror to the unrighteous.

To God be all Glory and praise.
FINIS.
THE TRIUMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.

Expressed In thirty several Tragical Histories, (digested into six Books)
which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents, Amourous,
Moral, and Divine.

Book II.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.

VERITAS TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA
RS

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Mathewes for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks Head, near the Mitre Tavern.

1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVLIE NOBLE, RICHARD Lord Buckhurst, Earl of
Dorset, and Lord Lievtennant of his Majesty's County of Sussex.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
OVt of a resolution, whether more bold or zealous, I know not, I have
adventured this second Book of my Tragical Histories to the World, under your
Honors Patronage and protection: Neither need I go far to yield either
your Honor, or the World, a reason of this my Presumption and Ambition, since
your Uertues innobling your Blood, as much as your Nobility illustrates your
Virtues, was the first motive which drew me hereunto: for whiles many others
endeavor to be great, your Honor (resembling your self) not only
endeavors, but strives to be good; as well knowing that Goodness is the
glory and essence, yea the life, and as I may say, the soul of Greatness; and
that betwixt Greatness and Goodness there is this difference and disparitie*
that, makes us famous, this, immortal; that, beloved of men, this, of God;
that, accompanyeth us only to our Graves, and this, to Heaven. My second
prevayling Motive in this my Dedication proceeded from the respect of my
particular duty, (as my first was solely derived from the consideration of
your own general and generous Uertues) for having the honor to retain to
your Noble Brother, Sir Edward Sackvile Knight, to whom, for many singular
respects, and (immerited) favors (whiles I am my self) Iowe not only my
service, but my self; I therein hold me obliged and bound to proffer and
impart this part of my Labors to your Honor, as the first public testimony
of my zeal and service, eternally devoted and consecrated to the Illustrious
Name and Family of the Sackeviles; whereof Gods Divine providence has made
your Honor chief Heir and Pillar. The drift and scope of these Histories are
to inform the World how Gods Revenge still fights and triumphs against the
crying and execrable sin of (wilful and premeditated) Murder, which in
these our (impure and profane) times, is so fatally and frequently coincident
to unregenerate Christians; which Scarlet and bloody Crime is infallibly met
with, and rewarded by Gods sharp and severe punishments; having purposely
published and divulged them to my dear Country of England, that they may
serve (though not by the way of comparison, yet of application) as the sight of
Julius Caesar's bloody Robe (showed by Marcus Antonius to the Romans in Campo
Martio, when he there pronounced his funeral Oration) thereby to make his
Murder and Murderers in the greater horror and execration with the people.
The Histories of themselves are as different, as their effects and accidents:
their Scenes being wilfully and sinfully laid in diverse parts of Christendom
beyond the seas, and the Tragedies unfortunately perpetrated and personated by
those, who more adhering to impiety, then Grace, and to Satan, then God, made
shipwreck, if not of their souls with their bodies, I am sure of their lives
with their fortunes, and of their fortunes with their lives. They themselves
(or rather their sins) first brought the Materials, I, only the collection,
illustration, and pollishing of these their deplorable Histories, which are
penned in so low a sphaere of speech, and so inelegant a phrase, as they can no
way merit the Honor of your perusal, much less of your judgment, and least
of all, of your Noble protection and Patronage.

Howsoever, my hopes (led and marshalled by the premises) do as it were
flatter me, that your perfections will wink at my imperfections, and your
curiosity at my ignorance and presumption, in daigning permit this my rude
Pamphlet, to salute and pilgrimage the World, under the authentical passe-port
of your Honors favor; who of her self is composed of so poor metal (or
rather dross) as without the pure gold of your Honorable Name, it would run
a hazard, not to pass current with the curious wits, and censures of this our
(too curious and too censorious) age; whereof could I rest assured, I should
then not only rejoice, but triumph in this my happiness, as so richly
exceeding the proportion of my poor Labors and merits, that I could not
aspire to a greater honor, nor desire a sweeter felicity: And so recommending
this my imperfect Pamphlet to your favor, my unworthy self to your pardon,
and your Honor, your Noble Countess, and the sweet young Lady your Daughter,
to Gods best favors and mercies, I will assume the confidence and constancy
to remain

Your Honors in all humility and service. JOHN REYNOLDS.

THE GROUNDS, AND CONTENTS OF these HISTORIES.
HISTORY VI. Victorina causes Sypontus to stabbe and murder her first
Husband Souranza, and she her self poysoneth Fassino her second: so they both
being miraculously detected and convicted of these their cruel Murders, he
is beheaded, and she hanged and burnt for the same. HISTORY VII. Catalina
causes her Waiting Maid Ausilva two several times attempt to poison her own
Sister Berinthia; wherein failing, she afterward makes an Empericke, termed
Sarmiata, poison her said Maid Ansilva: Catalina is killed with a Thunder bolt,
and Sarmiata hanged for poisoning Ansilva. Antonio steals Berinthia away by
her own consent; whereupon her Brother Sebastiano fights with Antonio, and
kills him in a Duel: Berinthia in revenge hereof, afterward murthereth her
Brother Sebastiano; she is adjudged to be immured betwixt two Walls, and there
languisheth and dies. HISTORY VIII. Belluile treacherously murthereth Poligny
in the street. Laurieta, Poligny's Mistress, betrayeth Belluile to her Chamber,
and there in revenge shoots him through the body with ae Pistol, when assisted
by her Wayting-Mayd Lucilla, they likewise give him many wounds with a Poniard,
and so murder him* Lucilla flying for this fact, is drowned in a Lake, and
Laurieta is taken and hanged and burnt for the same. HISTORY IX. Iacomo de
Castelnovo lustfully falls in love with his daughter in law Perina, his own
son Francisco de Castelnovo's Wife; whom to enjoy, he causes Ierantha first
to poison his own Lady Fidelia, and then his said son Francisco de
Castelnovo: in revenge whereof, Perina treacherously murthereth him in his bed.
Ierantha, ready to dye in travel of child, confesses her two Murders; for
the which she is hanged and burnt* Perina has her right hand cut off, and is
condemned to perpetual imprisonment, where she sorrowfully dies. HISTORY X.
Bertolini seeks Paulina in marriage, but she loves Sturio, and not himself:
he prays her Brother Brellati, his dear friend, to solicit her for him,
which he does, but cannot prevail; whereupon Bertolini lets fall some
disgraceful speeches, both against her honor, and his reputation: for which
Brellati challenges the Field of him, where Bertolini kills him, and he flies
for the same. Sturio seeks to marry her, but his father will not consent
there. unto, and conveyes him away secretly: for which two disasters, Paulina
dies for sorrow. Sturio finds out Bertolini, and sends him a Challenge, and
having him at his mercy, gives him his life at his request: he afterward
very treacherously kills Sturio with a Petrone^ in the Street from a Window: he
is taken for this second Murder, his two hands cut off, the^ beheaded, and his
body thrown into the River.
THE TRIVMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING, AND EXECRABLE sin of
Murder.
HISTORY VI.
Victorina causes Sypontus to stabbe and murder her first Husband Souranza,
and she her self poysoneth Fassino her second: so they both being
miraculously detected and convicted of these their cruel Murders, he is
beheaded, and she hanged and burnt for the same.

WHere Lust takes up our desires, and Revenge and Murder seizes on our
resolutions, it is the true way to make us wretched in this life, and our
souls miserable in that to come: for if Chastity and Charity (the two precious
Virtues and ornaments of a Christian) steer not our actions on Earth, how
shall (nay, how can) we hope to arrive to the harbor of Heaven? or if we
aband on these celestial Virtues, to follow and embrace those infernal Vices,
what do we but take our selves from felicity to misery, and consequently give
our selves from God to Satan? But did we seriously (and not trivially)
consider that there is a Heaven to reward the Righteous, and a hell to punish
the ungodly, we would neither defile our hearts, nor pollute our souls with
the thought, much less with the action of such beastly and inhumane crimes:
but in this sinful age of ours, the number is but too great of lascivious
and impious Christians, who delight in the affection and practice thereof:
among whom I here represent the History of an execrable Gentlewoman, and her
wretched and unfortunate Lover, who were both borne to honor, and not to
infamy: had they had as much grace to secure their lives, as vanity and impiety
to ruin them. The History is bloody, and therefore mournful: but if we
detest their crimes, we need not fear their punishments: for God is as
gracious and propitious to protect the innocent, as just and severe to chastise
the guilty.

IN Italy, the beauty of Europe, and in the City of Venice (the glory of Italy,
the Nymph of the Sea, and the pearl and diamond of the world) in the latter
years of the reign of noble Leonardo Donato, who, as Duke, sat to the helm
of that potent and powerful Estate) so famous for banishing the Jesuits, and
for opposing himself against the intrusion and fulminations of Pope Paulus
Quintus, in the just defense and maintenance of the prerogatives and
privileges of the Seignory) There was at that time a gentleman, a younger
brother, yet of well near fifty years old, of the noble Fa mily of the
Beraldi, named Signior Iacomo Beraldi, who dwelt above the Rialto Bridge (that
famous Master piece of Architecture) upon the Canalla Grando, who in the April
of his youth took to Wife the Dona Lucia, daughter to Seignior Lorenzo Bursso,
a Gentleman of Padua, by whom he had seven Children, four Sons, and three
Daughters; so as his Wife and he esteeming themselves happy in their Issue,
past away their time in much content and felicity: but God (for some secret and
sacred reasons to his Divine Majesty best known) converting his smiles into
frowns, within the space of seven years, takes away six of their Children,
so as their eldest daughter only remained living, being a young Gentlewoman of
some eighteen years old; named Dona Victoryna.

This young Gentlewoman, being noble, rich, and fair (three powerful and
attractive Adamants to draw the affections of many Cavaliers) according to her
desert, had diverse Gallants who sought her in Marriage: but she was of nature
proud, chollericke, disdainful, and malicious; Vices enough to ruin both a
beauty and a fortune: but of all her suitors and servants, he whom she best
loved and affected, was one Seignior Sypontus, a Gentleman of the City, who was
more noble then rich, and yet more debosht and vicious then noble; but
otherwise a very proper young Gallant: but the perfections of the body are
nothing to be compared to the excellent qualities and indowments of the mind,
for those are but the varnishes and shadows of a meet men, but these the
perfections and excellencies of a wise man, and therein noble; since indeed
wisdom is one of the truest degrees, and most essential parts of Nobility.
Now if Victoryna love Sypontus, with no less reciprocal flame and zeal does
Sypontus affect Victoryna: for as his eyes behold the delicacie of her
personage, and the sweetness of her beauty; so his heart loves either, and
adores both: yea, so deep an impression has she engraven in his thoughts and
contemplations, that he is never merry till he see her, nor pleased till he
enjoy the felicity of her company; which Victorina rejoices to see, and
observes with infinite content and delectation. Sypontus thus entangled in the
snares of Victorina's beauty, and she likewise in those of his perfections, he
resolves to court her, and seek her in Marriage, which he performs with much
affection, zeal, and constancy, leaving no industry, care, curiosity, or cost
unattempted, to enrich and crown his desires with the precious and inestimable
treasures of her love. I should make this short discourse swell into an ample
History, to particularize, or punctually relate the Letters, Sonnets, Presents,
Meetings, Dancings, Music, and Banquets, which past twixt these two Lovers,
and wherewith Sypontus entertained his dear Mistress Victoryna: I will
therefore purposely omit it, and cover my self with this excuse, which may
satisfy my Reader, to consider that Sypontus (as before) was an Italian, whose
custom and nature rather exceed, then come short, in all amorous ceremonies
and complements: And therefore again to resume my History, I must briefly
declare, that after the protraction and recesse of a years time Victorina
consents to Sypontus, to be his Wife, so far forth as he can obtain
those of her father and mother: a fit and virtuous answer of a daughter,
wherein I know not whether she bewray more modesty and discretion in her self,
or respect and obedience to her parents.

Sypontus infinitely pleased with this sweet news and delightful melody, is
as it were ravished and rapt up into heaven wirh joy, when flattering himself
with this poor hope, that as Victoryna was courteous, so he should find her
parents kind to him; he, with much respect and honor, repaires to Beraldi
and Lucia, and in fair and discreet terms acquaints them with his long
affection to their daughter Victoryna; whom (with as much earnestness as
humility) he prays to bestow her on him for his wife: but this old Couple are
as much displeased at Sypontus his motion, as their Daughter Victoryna
rejoices thereat, and so they return him their denial in stead of their
consent; only in general terms they thank him for his love and honor, and
certify him that they have otherwise disposed of their daughter. Sypontus
bi^es the lip, and Victorina hangs her head at this their bitter and
distasteful answer: but he is too generous and amorous to be put off with
this first repulse. Whereupn he imployes his Parents and kinsfolks (whereof
some were of the chiefest rank of Senators and Magnifico's) to draw Beraldi
and Lucia to consent to this Match; but in vain: for they are deaf to those
requests, and resolute in their denial, grounding their refusal upon Sypontus
his poverty: for they see he is become poor; because in the last trans-marine
Wars, the Turks took from his father and himself most of his Lands and
Possessions near Scuttari in Dalmatia: and therefore they resolve to provide a
richer husband for their Daughter. The iniquity of our times are as strange as
lamentable: for in matters of Marriage, parents, without due regard either to
the natures or affections of their children, still prefer gold before grace,
and many times Riches before Virtue and Nobility, which concur and meet in
one personage: but diverse of these Marriages, in the end, find either shame,
misery, or repentance, and sometimes all.

Sypontus storms as much as Victoryna grieves at his refusal: but to
frustrate that, and provide for this, Beraldi deals with Seignior Iovan
Baptista Souranza to marry his daughter Victorina, who is a Gentleman of a good
house, but far richer then Sypontus; but withal far different in age: for
Sypontus is but twenty eight years old, and Souranza near threescore. So as
gold playing the chiefest part in this contract, Souranza is sure of Victoryna
for his wife, ere he know her, or hardly has seen her. Beraldi advertizeth
his daughter of his will and pleasure herein: so Souranza sees her with
affection and joy, and she him with disdain and grief: and thus this old
Lover the first time entertaines his young Mistress with kisses, and she him
with tears. He is no sooner departed, but Victorina very sorrowfully and
pensively throws her self to her Parent^ feet, and with showers of tears
very earnestly and passionately beseeches them, that they will not enforce her
to marry Souranza, whom (she affirms) she cannot love, much less obey, prays
them to consider what a misery, nay, what a hell it will be to her thoughts and
self, to have him in her bed, and Sypontus in her heart. When she could no
further proceed, because her sighs cut her words in pieces, and so grief
daunting her heart, and her fear to Souranza, and affection to Sypontus,
casting a milke-white Veil over her Vermillian cheeks, she sinkes to the
earth in a faynting cold swoone: when her hard-hearted and cruel parents (more
with astonishment then commiseration and pity) step to her ass^stance, and
again bring her to her senses: who not forgetting where her speeches ended,
she remembers to begin and continue them thus: O my dear Parents, name not
Souranza for my husband, but if you will needs give me one, then by all that
blood of yours, which streameth in all the veins of my body, of two let me
enjoy one, either Sypontus, or my Grave; he the beginner of my joys, or this
the ender of all my miseries and sorrows; neither is it disobedience in me,
but fear of cruelty in your seves, that throws me on the exigent of this
request and resolution: whereon I pray, consider by the bonds of nature, and
not by the rules of avarice and inhumanity. But her father and mother (without
any respect to her youth and tears, or regard to her affection and prayers)
love Souranza's wealth so well, as as they will hate Sypontus his poverty, and
in it himself: and therefore checking Victoryna for her folly, and taxing her
of indiscretion, their command and authority gives a law to her obedience and
desires: And to conclude, they are so bitter, and withal, so cruel to her,
that within few days they violently enforce her to marry Souranza. But this
enforced Match will produce repentance and misery of all sides.

As it is a duty in children to honor and obey their parents, so it is no less
in parents carefully to regard, and tenderly to affect their children: but in
Matches that are concluded with wealth without affection, there Parents ought
proceed with judgment, not with passion, with persuasion, not with force: for
can there be any hell upon earth comparable to that of a discontented bed, or
is it not a grief to Parents, through their cruelty, to see their children
live in despair in stead of hope, in affliction in stead of joy; and to dye
miserably, whereas they might have lived pleasantly and prosperously? It Is true
that young folks affections are not still well grounded, but for want of
advice and counsel many times meet with misery for felicity: yet since Marriage
is a Contract, not for a day, but for ever, not for an hour, but for the
term and lease of our lives; therefore Parents, in matching their children,
should be rather charitable then greedy for the world, and rather compassionate
then ridged: but enough of this, and again to our History.

We have seen Victorina, with an unwilling willingness, enforced to marry
Souranza: we shall not go far^e, before we see what sharp calamities and
bitter afflictions and miseries this Match produces: The argument and cause
briefly is thus; Victorina lies with her husband Souranza, but cannot love
him: from whence (as so many lines from their center) spring forth many
mournsull and disastrous accidents: the little ring of Matrimony incloseth many
great and weighty considerations, and among others this is not one of the
least: disparity in years makes no true harmony in affections; for there is no
affinity twixt January and May, and it is a matter, though not impossible, yet
difficult for youth and age to sympathize: Soranza's best performance of the
rites and duties of Marriage, is but desire; yea, his age cannot sufficiently
estimate, much less reward the daynties of Victorina's youth; for he is more
superstitious then amorous, as delighting rather to kiss an Image in the
Church, then his wife in his bed, and not to betray the truth. I must crave
leave of modesty, to aver that she finds little difference twixt a Maid and
a Wife, so as her lust out-braving her chastity, and sensuality trampling her
virtues and honor under foot, whereas her affection should look from
Sypontus to Souranza, both she and it contrariwise look from Souranza to
Sypontus. Dissembling pleasures, which strangle when they seem to embrace and
kiss us, bitter Pills candide in Sugar, Cordialls to the sense, but Corrosives
to the soul! Yea, Victorina in forgetting her modesty, will not remember her
vow in Marriage; for had she been as virtuous as young, or as chaste as fair,
it had not only been her virtue, but her duty, to have smothered the
defects, and concealed the imperfections and impotencie of her old husband:
Chastity would have persuaded her to this, but incontinencie and lust draw her
to a contrary resolution.

Sypontus likewise storms and grieves at this unwished and unequal Match of
old Souranza with his young and fair Victorina; yea, he hates him so much, and
loves her so tenderly and dearly, as he would, but cannot prevent it: for (as
before) they are married; and he in stead of the Laurel is enforced to wear
the Willow: but his grief finds this comfort, and her discontent this
consolation, that since Victoryna is not his Wife, she is his Mistress; and
since Sypontus is not her Husband, he is her Servant, or (to use the Venetian
phrase) she is his Courtizana, and he her Enamorata: but such leagues and
contracts of vicious affections seldom make happy ends; for as they begin in
lust, so commonly they terminate in infamy and misery. Sypontus often
familiarizeth with Victoryna, yea, their familiarity is such, as I in modesty
will not report, since in chastity I cannot, and although they bear their
affections and pleasures secret, yet custom breeding a habit, and that a
second nature, Souranza is now no sooner abroad, but Sypontus is at home, so as
in effect Souranza is but the shadow, and Sypontus the substance of
Victoryna's husband: but these lascivious Lovers shall pay dear for their
affections; Sypontus for entertaining and keeping another man's Wife, and
Victoryna for breaking her vow in wedlock to her husband, in defiling his bed,
and contaminating her body with the foul sin of Adultery.

It had bin good and safe for them, if they had not begun these their beastly
pleasures, but to give no end to them, must needs prove dangerous and ruinous:
to commit this sin of Adultery is odious, but to persevere therein, is most
abominable before God: the reason hereof is as true as pregnant; for if the
reward of a single sin be death, the redoubling thereof must needs be double
damnation: but as it is the nature of Adultery to be accompanied and waited on
by other sins, so Victoryna is not only content to love Sypontus, but she makes
a farther progression in impiety, and will needs hate her husband Souranza;
who poor honest Gentleman, sick with the Gout, and a Cough of the Lungs, is
now distasteful, and which is worse, odious to her: so that she which should
be a cordial to his age, his age is now a corrosive to her youth, and she so
far forgets both her self and her duty, as she rather contemnes then loves
him, and as he rejoices in her sight, so she delights in nothing so much as in
his absence, and Sypontus presence: she makes her discontents and malice to
her husband known to Sypontus, who does pity, but will not remedy them: all
her speeches tend to wish her self in another world, or her husband not in
this. Sypontus is not ignorant whereat she aims; but although he enjoy the
wife, yet he cannot find in his heart, but is too conscientious to murder the
husband: had he remained in the constancy of this resolution, he had been
happy, and not so miserable and unfortunate to end his days with shame and
infamy. But now behold, an unexpected accident draws and throws him on
headlong to perpetrate this execrable Murder, for (as the Gentry and Nobility
of Venice are for the most part Merchants) so Sypontus receives sudden and
sorrowful news of two great losses befalne him, in the Levant Seas, in two
several ships, the one coming from All^po, taken by the Turkish Pirates of
Rhodes, the other from Alexandria, taken, as is supposed, by one of the Duke of
Ossunas Neopolitan Galleys, scowring the Islands of the Archipelagus, in which
two Vessels he lost at least seventy thousand Zeckynes, it being the two third
parts of his whole estate: and now to maintain his greatness, and bear up
his port and reputation, knowing Souranza to be infinitely rich, and his wife
Victorina young, amorous, and fair, he agrees with the devil, and so resolves
to murder him, and then to marry her; which he knows she above any earthly
matter chiefly desires. Lo here the foundation and project of a Murder, as
lamentable as execrable! Necessity in base spirits may be a powerful, but in
those more virtuous and noble, it should never be a pernicious and prodigious
counselour: for there is as much generosity and fortitude in supporting poverty
with patience, as there is covetousness in being ambitious to purchase wealth
with infamy.

At the next enterview and meeting of Sypontus and Victorina, she like a bad
woman, a wicked wife, and a wreched creature, redoubleth him her complaints and
discontents against her husband; and because Sypontus knows it wisdom to
strike whiles the Iron is hot, as also that Time must be taken by the
forelocke, he like a wretched Politician lays hold of this occasion and
opportunity, and so consents to the Murder of her husband, when from this
bloody resolution, they pass to the manner how to effect it: they consult on
this lamentable business. Victorina (industrious in her malice) proposes to
poison him, and so to bury him in her little garden: but Sypontus dislikes this
project, and profers her to murder him in his Gondola, as he comes from
Luifizina: whereon they agree. So some ten days after, Victorina advertiseth
him, that her husband is to go to his house of pleasure in the Country, near
Padua, on the bank of the River Brenta, where he is only to stay three
days. Sypontus imbraceth this occasion, and continually wantonizing with his
wife in his absence, promises her to meet her husband at his return, and then
to dispatch him; which news with a longing desire this miserable Curtezan
Victorina attends him with as much impatience as impudency. Sypontus in the
mean time (in favor of twice ten Zeckynes) is prepared of two wicked
Gondoliers or Watermen, who deeply vow and swear to conceal this Murder. So
the precise day of Souranza's departure from his Country house being come,
Sypontus, not to fail of his promise to Victorina, in the execution of his
bloody and damnable attempt, takes his Gondola, and hovers in the direct
passage betwixt Lucifizina and Venice, for Souranza his arrival, who, poor
harmless Gentleman, loved his young wife so tenderly and dearly, as he
thought this short time long that he had wanted from her: but he has seen
his last of her, and allasse, alas, he shall see an end of himself: for
about five of the clock in the evening (it being Summer time) his usual hour
of return, he takes Gondola at Lucifizina, for Venice, and near midway twixt
both, Sypontus espies him, and the sooner, because it being hot weather, and no
wind stirring, Souranza had caused his courtaines to be withdrawn. Sypontus
(inflamed with boiling malice and Revenge) with all possible celerity makes
toward his Gondola, the which disguised and masked he enters, and there with
his Poniard very divellishly stabs him three several times at the heart, when
falling down to his feet, he most barbarously cut of his beard, and nose
(that he might not be known) and so throws him into the Sea; as also his
Waterman after him, that they might tell no tales: when having finished these
execrable Murders, he with his Gondola, with all possible speed hyes first to
Murano, and so lands by the Patriarchy, from thence by the Arsenall, and so to
his own house behind Saint Servi's Church, thereby to cast a fayrer varnish on
this villainy, by landing and coming into the City another way, when being
arrived at his house, he that night by a confident servant of his, sends
Victoryna this Letter.

SYPONTVS to VICTORYNA.
Fair and dear Victoryna, I have begun, and ended a business, which
infinitely imports thy good, and my content: the party has drunk his fill of
White and Claret, and is now gone to his eternal rest: so a little time, I
hope, will wipe off thy old tears, and confirm thy new joys: be but as
affectionate, as I secret, and as secret, as till death I will be
affectionate, and thou needst neither fear my fortunes, nor doubt thine own:
judge what I would do to enjoy thee and for thy sake, since I have already
undertaken and acted a business of this nature: we must for a time refrain
each others company, that we may the sooner meet, and embrace, withmore
content, and less danger.

SYPONTVS.


Victoryna infinitely rejoices at this news, and the better to cloak her
malice, under the veil of secrecy, she laments and complains to her father
of her husbands long absence. Souranza's Parents are by Beraldi acquainted
herewith, they begin to find the time of his stay very long, and now resolve
to send his nephew, Scignior Andrea Souranza up the river Brenta, to know the
cause thereof: he passes and repasseth the Sluice of Lucifizina, and brings
word that he departed thence for Venice, in a Gondola, four days since:
Victoryna his wife grieves, and weeps at his absence, so do his own Parents
and friends, who enqui^e of all sides, but find comfort or news from none
what is become of him. And here, Reader, before thy curiosity carry thee
further, I conjure thee to stand astonished and wonder, at the inscrutable and
wonderful judgment of God, in the detection of this Murder. For Fishermen
some eight days casting out their nets betwixt the Islands of La Lazareto and
Saint George Majore, bring up this dead body of Murdered Souranza, being well
apparelled: but chiefly for their own discharge, they bring the dead corpse to
Venice, and lan^ him at Saint Marks stayres; where they extend and expose his
body to be known of passengers: now behold further Gods miraculous
providence, in the discovery and finding out hereof: for amongst the
numberless number of spectators and walkers, who daily and almost hourly
frequent and adorn that famous Burse and incomparable P^lace, it happened that
Andrea Souranza cast his eye on this dead and sea-withered body: on whom he
looks with as much steadfastness as curiosity, as if Nature had made his
living body a part of that dead; or as if his hot blood had some sympathy and
affinity with that of the dead personage, which long since the coldness of the
Sea had congealed and frozen: but at last espying a red spot in his neck
(under his right ear) that he brought into the world with him, and which all
the influence and virtue of the water of the Sea had not power to deface and
wash away: as also observing a wart over his left eyelid, which Nature had
given his birth, and his youth his age: he passionately cries out before the
world, that it is the body of his Uncle, Seig^ior Iovan Baptista Souranza: so
it is visited by his Parents and friends, and known to be the same: so they
carry him to an adjoining house, and there devesting it naked, find that he
has t^ree several wounds in his body, either of a Sword or Poniard, which
gives matter of talk, and administreth cause of admiration in all the City: so
they bury him honorably according to his rank and degree, and all knowing him
to be Murdered, infinitely bewail his untimely, and lament his mournful
death: but especially his wife Victoryna, who having formerly played the
strumpet, then the Murtheresse, now takes on the mask, and assumes the
representation of an Hypocrite; outwardly seeming to dye for sorrow, when God,
and her foul ulcerated conscience knows, that inwardly her heart leapes for
joy, thus to be deprived and freed of her old husband. Yea, and the more to
bleare the eyes, and eclipse the judgment of the world, for casting the least
shadow of suspicion on her for this unnatural Murder: she and her whole
family take on black and mourning Attire, and for her self in two months
after, never goes forth her house, except to the Church where her husband was
buried: where her Hppocrisie is so infinitely feigned, and dissembling, that
she is often observed to bedew and wash his Tomb with her tears: but these
Crocadile tears of hers, and these her false and treacherous sorrows shall
not avail her: for although Gods divine and sacred Majesty be merciful in
his justice, yet he is so just in his mercies, as neither the politic
secrecy of Sypontus, nor the Hypocritical sorrows of Victoryna, for this
cruel Murder, shall go either unmasked or unpunished: but in their due
appointed time, they shall be brought forth in their colors, and made public
examples, as well of infamy, as destruction for the same: the manner is thus:

The deceased Signiour Iovan Souranza has a younger brother, named Signiour
Hi^ronymo Souranza: who having carefully and curiously observed, that his
sister in law Victoryna, never perfectly nor dearly loved his brother her
husband, and that she was neither so familiar, nor dutiful to him, as it
behoov'd her, during the term of her marriage: which partly he attributed to
the disparity of their years, in respect of the frozennesse of his age, and
the heat and freshness of her youth. He began vehemently to suspect her of
this Murder, which he often revolved and ruminated in his mind, as if the
suggestion and persuasion thereof, not only bore probability but truth with
it: to which end, as the affection of a true friend (much more of a brother)
should pass beyond the Grave, and not remain entombed, and buried in the dust
thereof, he is resolved to put his best wits and invention upon the
tenter-hookes, to discover and reveal the same: to which end, he breaks with
Victorina's Gentlewoman, who waited on her in her Chamber, and who indeed was
his own Niece Felicia, to know what Gentlewomen chiefly frequented her Lady.
Felicia informs her Uncle, that Signyor Sypontus is many nights with her, that
there is much affection and familiarity between them, and that he sends her
many Letters. Her Uncle glad-of this glimmering light, which he hopes will
produce a greater and perfecter, conjures her to intercept some of his Letters,
for the more effectual discovery of his brother, and her Uncles death. So
Felicia promises her best care and fidelity herein, and shortly effects it:
for in few days after, being sent by her Lady Victoryna to a Casket of hers,
to fetch her a new pair of Romish Gloves, she opening an Ivory Box, therein
finds a Letter; which she reads, and seeing it signed by Sypontus, she
thinks it no sin to be false to her Lady, and true to her Uncle, and so very
secretly and safely sends it him; which indeed was the very Letter we have
formerly seen and read: and now is his jealousy and suspicion confirmed. So
vowing and Sacrifizing Revenge to his dead and Murdered brother, away he goes
to three chief Judges of the forty, who sit on criminal causes, and very
passionately accuses Sypontus and Victoryna for the Murder, committed on the
person of his Brother Signiour Iovan Baptista Souranza, at Sea: whereupon they
are both committed prisoners, but sequestered in several Chambers. Sypontus is
first examined, then Victoryna: they both very constantly deny the Murder, and
with many sugared words, and subtle evasions, intimate and insinuate, their
innocencies therein: so the next day the Judges produce Sypontus his own
Letter; the sight whereof extremely afflicts and vexes him: but he is
constant in his denial, and resolute in that constancy, and so takes on a
brazen face; and with many asseverations and imprecations, again and again
denies it, averring it is not his hand, but a mere imposture and invention of
his enemies, who have counterfaited it, purposely to procure his ruin and
destruction: yet inwardly to himself he fears all is discovered, and that
there is no means left him to escape death, whose Image and form he now too
apparently and fatally sees before his eyes. So he is sent back to his
prison, and his Judges in the interim consult on his fact; where he is no
sooner arrived, but bolting his Chamber privately to himself, he considering
that either Victoryna, or some for her, had betrayed him by his own Letter,
he in the bitter fury of choler and passion, throws away his Hat, now
crosses his arms, and then beats his breast, and stamping with his feet, at
last very low to himself bandeth forth these speeches:

And is it possible, that I must now lose my life through Victoryna her folly
and treachery, into whose hands I reposed both my secrets and it? Have I done
what I have done for her her sake, and is this the requital she gives me? And
since there is no other witness, must mine own Letter be produced in justice
against me? What will I not do? what have I not done for her sake? Woe is me,
that I should live to be rewarded with this monstrous and inhumane ingratitude;
when for sorrow and indignation, not able to contain himself, he takes Pen
and Paper, and writes Victoryna this ensuing Letter.

SIPONTVS to VICTORYNA.
IS it possible that thy affection to me has been all this while seigned, and
that thou, whom I trusted with all my secrets, art now become the only woman
of the world to betray me? I have hazarded my life for thy sake, and must I
now be so unfortunate and wretched, to lose it through thy treacherrie? When I
bore matters with such care and secrecy, that no witness whatsoever could be
produced against me, ^ust mine own Letter, which was safely delivered thee,
be brought forth to convict me of my crime, and so to incur death, which
otherwise I had avoided? Is this thy reward of my love? Is this thy recompense
of my affection? O Victoryna, Victoryna! Such is my tender esteem of thy sweet
youth and beauty, that had I enjoyed a thousaend lives, I would haeve reputed
my self happy, to have lost them all for thy sake and service: and having but
one, will thou be so cruel to deprive me thereof? But that my loyalty and my
affection may shine in thy malice; take this for thy comfort, that as I have
ever lived, so I will now dye thy true Servant and faithful Lover.

SYPONTVS.


But observe here the error of Sypontus his judgment: for whiles he imputes
i^ to Victoryna's treachery, that this his Letter will occasion his death; he
is so irreligious and impious, as he looks not up to heaven, to consider that
the detection thereof proceeds from Gods immediate finger and providence. No:
No. For the devil yet holds his thoughts so fast captivated and entangled in
the snares of Victoryna's beauty, as he has not yet the grace to look from
his crime, to his repentance; nor consequently from Earth to Heaven: but like a
profane Libertine and unregenerate person, being within a small point of time
near his end, he yet thinks not of his soul, nor of God, but only dallies
away the remainder of his hours, in the miserable contemplation of his fond
affection and beastly sensuality.

By this time Victoryna has received his Letter; at the news and reading
whereof, such is the passion of her frenzy, which she (though unjustly)
terms love: that she is all in tears, sighs, and lamentable exclamations:
she knows it impossible for any other of the world to be the revealer of
Sypontus his Letter, but only her Maid Felicia, whom in her uncharitable
Revenge, she curses to the pit of hell: but that which adds a greater
torment to her torments, and a more sensible degree of affliction to her
miserable sorrows, is, to see that her Sypontus (whom by many degrees she
loves far dearer then her life) finisterly snspecteth her fidelity toward him:
yea so far, as he not only calls her affection but her treachery in
question: and this indeed seems to drown her in her tears. But yet
notwithstanding so fervent is her love toward him, as the fear of his death
draws her to a resolution of her own: so if Sypontus dye, she vows she
will be her own accuser, and so not live, but dye with him. Strange effects
of love, or rather of folly, since love being irregular, and taking false
objects, (in its true character) is not love, but folly: to which end, calling
for ink and paper, she bitterly weeping, indites and sends him these few
lines, in answer of his.

VICTORYNA to SYPONTVS.
I Were the most wretched and ingratefullest Lady of the world; yea a Lady who
should not then deserve either to see or live in the world, if Victoryna should
any way prove treacherous to Sypontus, who has still been so true and kind
to her. But believe me, Dear Sypontus, and I speak it in presence of God,
upon peril of my soul, I am as innocent as that witch, that devil, my maid
Felicia is guilty of the producing of thy Letter; which I fear will prove thy
death, and rejoice that in it, it shall likewise prove mine. For to clear my
self of ingratitude and treachery, as I have lived, so I will dye wiyh thee:
that as we mutually participated the joys of life, so we may the torments of
death: for although thy Letter accuse me not of my Husband Souranza's Murder,
yet that my affection may shine in my loyalty, and that in my affection, I will
not survive, but dye with thee: for I will accuse my self to my Judges, not
only as accessory, but as author of that Murder: and this resolution of mine
I write thee with tears, and will shortly seal it with my blood:

VICTORYNA.


Sypontus, in the midst of his perplexities and sorrows, receives this
Letter from Victoryna, the sweetness of whose affection and constancy, much
revives his joy, and comfort him. For now her innocence defaceth his
suspicion of her ingratitude and treachery: and withal he plainly sees, and
truly believes, that it was Felicia, not Victoryna, who brought this Letter to
Light. But when he descends to the latter part of her Letter, and finds her
resolution to dye with him, then he condemns his former error in taxing her,
and in requital, loves her so tenderly and dearly, that he vows he will be
so far from accusing her, as accessory of her husbands Murder, as both the
Rack, and his death shall clear and proclaim her innocence. Had the ground
of these servent and reciprocal affections of Victoryna and Sypontus, been
laid in virtue, as they were in vice; or in chastely, and not in lust and
adultery, they would have given cause to the whole world, as justly to praise,
as now to dispraise them, and then to have been as ambitious of their
imitation, as now of their contempt and detestation.

So Sypontus (as before) having fully and definitively resolved not to accuse,
but to clear Victoryna of this Murder, as also that he would dye alone, and
leave her youth and beauty to the enjoying of many more earthly pleasures: he
expecting hourly to be sent for before his Judges, to sit upon his torment or
death, thinking himself bound both in affection and honor, to signify
Victoryna his pleasure herein, he craves his ^aylors absence, and with much
affection and passion, writes her this his last Letter:

SIPONTVS to VICTORYNA.
SWeet Victoryna, thy Letter has given me so full satisfaction, as I repent
me of my rash credulity, conceived against thy affection and constancy, and
now lay the fault of the discovery of my Letter, where it is, and ought to be,
on Felicia, not on thy self. It is with a sorrowful, but true presage, that I
foresee, my life hastens to her period: the Rack is already prepared for my
torments, and I hourly expect when I shall be fetched to receive them, which
for thy sake I will embrace and suffer, with as much constancy as patience: I
will deny mine own guiltiness the first time, but not the second: but in my
torments and death I will acquit thee of thine, with as true a resolution, as
Earth expects to lose me, and I hope to find Heaven. Therefore all the by
bonds of love and affection that ever has been between us, I first pray, then
conjure thee to change thy resolution, and to stand on thine innocence. For if
thou will, or desire to gratify me with thy last affection and courtesy at
my death; let me bear this one content and joy to my grave, that Victoryna
will live for Sypontus his sake, though Sypontus dye for hers.

SYPONTVS.


He had no sooner sent away this his Letter to Victoryna, but he himself is
sent for to appear before his Judges, who upon his second examination and
denial, adjudge him to the Rack; which he indures with admirable patience
and constancy. Yea, he cannot be drawn to confess, but stands firm in his
denial, and not only cleares himself, but also acquits Victoryna: Hieronym^
Souranza does notwithstanding earnestly follow and solicit the Judges, and
God, out of his immense mercy and profound providence so ordains, that their
consciences suggest and prompt them, that Sypontus is the actor of this
execrable Murder. Whefore the next day they administer him double torment:
when lo, his resolution and strength failing him, he acknowledges the letter
his, and confesses it was himself that had Murdered Seignior Iovan Baptista
Souranza: but withal protests constantly that Victoryna is innocent, and no
way accessory hereunto. The Judges rejoice at Sypontus his confession, as much
as they grieve at the foulness of his fact: and so, although they were also
desirous to hang him, yet considering he was a Venecian Gentleman, (and
consequently had a great voice in the great Counsel of the Seigniory) they
adjudge him the next day to lose his head, betwixt the two Columes at Saint
Marks Place, and so for that night send him back to his prison, to prepare
himself to dye. Sypontus is no sooner departed from them, but they consult on
Victoryna, whether she were guilty, or innocent of her husband Souranza's
Murder, but they differ in opinion: some would likewise have her Racked: but
others of them more advised and modest, reply that Sypontus his Letter
intimated only his affection to Victoryna, but no way her malice to her dead
husband Souranza, nor that she was any way guilty or accessory to his Murder:
so they resolve to forbear her, and not to put her to the torment, except
Sypontus accuse her at his execution. Now the very night that he was to die
the next morn, he infinitely desires his Iaylor to permit him to confer
with Victoryna, and to take his last leave of her, which is denied him, as
having received command from authority to the contrary; whereat extremely
grieving, he is called away by some Divines, whom the charity of that grave
Senate send him, to prepare and direct his soul, in her passage and
transmigration to Heaven. So passing the night in tears and prayers for the
foulness of his crime, the morn being come, and nine of the clock stricken,
he is brought to the scaffold, where a world of people concur and flock from
all parts of the City, to see this wretched and unfortunate Gentleman act the
last Scene and part of his life upon this infamous Theater. Here Sypontus
freely confesses his foul Murder of Souranza, but is yet so vain and
wretched, as he takes it to his death, that Victoryna is absolutely innocent
hereof: he seems to be very repentant and sorrowful for all his sins in
general, and for this Murder in particular.

For expiation and reward hereof, his head is severed from his body: a just
recompense and punishment for so vicious and bloody a Gentleman, who adhering
to adultery more then chastity, to revenge then charity, and to the devil then
God, forgot himself so far, as to commit this execrable and lamentable
Murder.

Now, the order and Decorum of our History, leads us from dead Sypontus, to
living Victoryna, who, I know not whether more grieve at his death, or rejoice,
that on the Rack and scaffold he has acquitted her of her husbands Murder.
In a word, it is remarkable to behold the vanity and inconstancy of this
female Monster: for contrary to her vows, and repugnant to her Letters and
tears, Sypontus is no sooner dead, but her affection toward him dies with
him: yea, his blood is scarce fo soon cold, as her zeal and friendship: for
she now holds it a pure folly to cast away her youth and life, if she may
preserve the one, and save the other; and therefore resolves to try her best
art and wit, to make her innocence pass current with her Judges: yea, so
desirous and ambitious is she to live, as her female heart has drawn on this
masculine fortitude and generosity, that if occasion present, she will
constantly both out-dare and out-brave the torments of the Rack, thereby to
prevent her death.

Some three days after Sypontus was executed, the Judges again sit and
consult on Victoryna, but finding no evidence nor witness to accuse her, they
at first are of opinion to discharge and free her: only they deem it
requisite to terrify, but not to torment her with the Rack, before they give
her her liberty: whereunto they all agree. So they send for her, and threaten
her with the Rack: but she vows, that all the torments of the world shall
never enforce her to confess an untruth, and that she never had the least
suspicion that Sypontus was guilty of this execrable Murder of her husband:
her Judges will not yet believe her; so they cause her to be carried to the
Rack: whereunto she very cheerfully and patiently permits her self to be
fastened, bidding the Executioner do his worst: which constancy of hers, her
Judges seeing and hearing, they, in pity and commiseration, as well of her
youth and beauty, as to her descent, and the tears and prayers of venerable
old Beraldi her father, cause her to be loosed, and so in open Court acquit
and discharge her.

Here we see this wretched Courtizans Victoryna acquitted of her Judges for
her husbands Murder, so as triumphing more in her good fortune, then her
innocence, she now thinks the storm of her punishment past and ore-blowne,
and that no fu^e can possibly be reserved for her, or she for it: but her
hopes will deceive her: for although she have made her peace with Earth, yet
she has not with Heaven; and although she have deluded the eyes of her
Judges, yet she shall not those of God; but when his appointed hour, and her
due time is come, then her crimes and sins, her adultery and Murder shall draw
down vengeance from heaven to her confusion. In the mean time we shall see
this Monster, and disgrace of her sex, make such bad use of her former danger,
as she will again add blood to blood, and Murder to Murder; but God will
reserve not only the rod of his wrath for her correction, but the full viols
of his indignation for her confusion; as the sequel will show thee.

Six months are scarce past, since the Murder of her husband Souranza, and
the execution of her Enamorata Sypontus, but she has already quite forgotten
these two mournful ard tragical accidents: and which is more, she is so
frolike and youthful, as she has thrown off her mourning attire, and drawn
on her rich apparel and glittering jewels, whereof the curiosity of the nobler
sort of Gentlemen and Ladies of the City take exact observation: and although
Beraldi and Lucia, her father and mother, herein tax her of indiscretion and
immodesty, yet she thinks he^ self exempt of their commands, and therefore
will do it, out of the ambitious privilege of her own uncontrolable
authority and wilfulness. Besides, her thought are so youthful, and her
carriage so light, as notwithstanding she came (as it were but now from
burying of her first husband, yet she is resolved without delay, t^ have a
second: her father and mother check her of levity and incivility in embracing
this resolution: but in vain: for her impudency returns them this immodest
answer, that she will not trifle away her time, but marry. They advize her to
be cautious, and to do nothing rashly in this her second match, that the
misfortune an^ scandal of her first may no more reflect on her. But she will
make choice for he^ self by the eyes of her youth, and not by those of their
age; by those of her own^ fancy, and not by these of their election. Her
husband Souranza dyed rich, both (...) lands and moneys, and his Widow
Victoryna, without any opposition, injoyeth all: (...) she needs not look out
for Suitors, for there are Gallants enough who sue and seek^ her: but of them all,
he whom she best and chiefly affects, is one Seignior Loudvicus Fassino, a
very neat and proper young Gentleman of the City, rich, and we^ descended; his
parents and kinsmen for the most part being Clarissimo's and Senator^ and all
of them Gentlemen of Venice; and him Victoryna desires, and resolves to mak^
her husband, grounding her chiefest reason and affection on this resolution and
foundation, that as Souranza was too old for her, so Fassino was young enough,
and therefore fit to be her husband, and she his wife, measuring him wholly
by his exterio^ personage, and not so much as once prying either into his vices
or virtues. Fassin^ who carried a vicious and pernicious heart under a pleasing
gesture and tongue, an^ loving Victoryna's wealth more then her beauty,
observing her affection and respect t^ him, seeks, courts, and wins her. Her
Parents understanding hereof, as also the Fassino is a vicious and debosht
Gentleman, with all their possible power and authority, they seek to divert
their daughter from him. But she is deaf to their requests, and resolved,
that as she followed the stream of their commands in her first match, so she
will now the current of her own pleasures and affections in this her second:
and so, to the wonder of Venice, and the grief of all her parents and friends,
before she had above ten days conferred with Fassino, she marries him. But
this match shall not succeed according to their desires: for Victoryna shall
shortly repent it, and Fassino as soon rue and smart for it; since it is a
maxim, that sudden affections prove seldom prosperous: for if they have not
time to settle and take root, they are incident as soon to fade as flourish,
especially if they are contracted and grounded more for lust then love, and
more for wealth then virtue.

The first month of this marriage, Fassino keeps good correspondence and
observance with his wife, but thence-foorth he breaks Pale, and rangeth: for
the truth is, although he were but a young Gentleman, yet (which is
lamentable) he was an old whore-master: which lascivious profession of his,
threatens the ruin, not only of his health, but of his fortune and
reputation: so now, when he should be at home, he is abroad: yea, not only
by day, but by night, that upon the whole, Victoryna is more a widow then a
wife: at which unlooked and unwish'd for news, she not only bites the lip,
but very often puts finger in her eye and weeps: for it gripes and grieves her
at heart, to see her self thus slighted, neglected, and abused by Fassino,
whom, of all the Gallants of the City, she had elected and chosen for her
husband: she is infinitely grieved hereat, and yet her grief and sorrow
infinitely exceeds her jealousy: and now as graceless as she is, she thinks
God has purposely sent her this lascivious Fassino for her second husband, as
a just plague and punishment, to revenge her adultery committed against
Souranza her first: so, had she had more grace, and less vanity and
impiety, she would have made better use of this consideration, and not so
^oone forgotten it, and in it, her self.

Now as it is the nature of jealousy, to have more eyes then Argus, and so to
pry and see every where: Victoryna, her curiosity, or rather her malice
herein, finds out, that her Husband Fassino familiarly frequenteth and uses
the company of many Courtezans, especially of the Lady Paleriana, one of the
most famous and reputed beauties of Venice: and this news indeed strikes her
at the very gall with sorrow and ^exation; feign she would reform and remedy
this vice of her husband, but how she knows not, for she sees little or no
hope to reclaim him, since he not only tenderly loves Paleriana, but which is
worse, she apparently sees, that for her sake, he ^ontemnes her self and her
company: for when he comes home, he has no delight (...) her, but only in
his Lute or Books, which is but to pass his melancholy, for his Lady
Paleriana's absence, till he again revisit her: so as wholly neglected, and
as I ^ay truly say, almost forsaken of her husband, she knows not what to
do, nor how (...) bear her self in those furious storms of her grief, and
miserable tempest of her ^ealousie. But of two different courses to reclaim
him from this his sin of whore^ome, she takes the worst: for in stead of
counselling and distwading her Hus^and, she torments him with a thousand
scandalous and injurious speeches: but ^is, in stead of quenching, does but
only bring oil to the flame of his lust: for if ^ee repaired home to her
seldom before, now he scarce at all comes near her: (...) as she is a Wife,
yet no Wife: and has a Husband, yet no Husband: but this is ^ot the way to
reclaim him, for fair speeches and sweet exhortations may prevail, ^hen
choler cannot.

And now it is, that this wretched and execrable Lady again assumes bloody
reso^ions against her second Husband, as she had formerly done against her
first, vowing that he shall die, ere she will live to be thus contemned and
abused of him: yea, her hot love to him is so soon grown cold, and her
servent affection already so frozen, that now she thinks on nothing else but
how to be revenged, and to be rid of him; and is so impious and graceless, as
she cares not how, nor in what manner soever she send him from this world to
another: for the devil has drawn a resolution from her, or rather she from
the devil, that here he shall not much longer live. Good God! what an impious
and wretched fury of hell will Victoryna prove her self here on Earth? for
the blood and life of one husband cannot quench the thirst of her lust and
revenge, but she must and will imbrue her hands in that of two: as if it were
not enough for her to trot, but that she will needs gallop and ride post to
hell. O what pity is it to see a Lady so wretched and execrable! O what an
execrable wretchedness is it, to see a Lady so inhumane, and so devoyd of
pity! But the devil is strong with her, because her faith is weak with God:
therefore she will advance, she will not retire in this her bloody design and
resolution. Wherefore we shall shortly see Fassino his adultery punished with
death, by his wife Victoryna's revenge; and this murder of hers justy rewarded
and revenged with the punishment of her own: the bloodyer our actions are, the
severer Gods judgments, and the sharper his revenge will be.

Of all sorts and degrees of inhumane and violent deaths, this wretched Lady
Victoryna thinks poison the surest, and yet the most secret to dispatch her
husband. This invention came immediately from the devil, and is only
practiced by his members: of which number she will desperately and damnably
make herself one: her lust and revenge, like miserable Advocates, and fatal
Orators, persuade her to this execrable attempt, wherein by cutting off her
husbands life, she shall find that she likewise casts away her own. So
neither Grace nor Nature prevailing, she sends for an Apothecary, named
Augustino; and when she has conjured, and he promised his secrecy, she
acquaints him, that her new husband Fassino keeps Courtisans to her nose, and
daily and hourly offers her many other insupportable abuses and disgraces;
in requital and revenge whereof she is resolved to poison him, and prays him
to undertake and perform it, and that she will reward him with three hundred
Zekynes for his labor.

Of all professions and faculties, there are good and bad: Augustino loves God
too well, herein to obey the devil: he has too much grace, to be so impious and
graceless, and vows, that he will not buy gold at so dear a rate, as the
price of blood; so as a good Christian, and true child of God, he not only
refuses Victoryna's motion and proffer, but in religious terms seeks to
divert and persuade her from this her bloody attempt. But she is resolute in
her malice, and wilful in her revenge, and therefore will perform it her
self, since this Augustino will not: so (by a second hand) she procures poison
from a strange Empericke, whereof the City of Venice, more then other of
Italy, abounds: so she only waits for an opportunity, which very shortly,
though, alas, too too soon, presents it self; the manner thus:

It is impossible that Fassino his dissolute life, and extreme deboshing can
keep him long from sickness; for this punishment is always incident and
hereditary to that sin. He complains thereof to his wife Victoryna, who
receives this news rather with gladness, then commiseration and pity: and so
taking his bed, he prays her to make him some comfortable hot broth for his
stomach: which news she hears, and imbraceth inwardly with joy, outwardly
with disdain. For albeit she lays hold of this opportunity to poison him,
yet she dissembles her malice; and the better to color her villainy, because
she knows it the smoother and shorter way to be revenged in poisoning him,
she will not make the broth herself, but commands her maid Felicia to do
it, (of whom we have formerly spoken, in the discovery of Sypontus his Letter
to her Uncle Hieronymo Souranza:) which treacherous office of hers, our
malicious and devilish Victoryna her Lady and Mistress, has now a plot in
her head, to requite with an execrable and hellish recompense: for whiles
Felicia is boiling of the broth, her Lady Victoryna trips to her chamber and
closet, and fetches out the poison, inveloped in a paper, whereof she takes
two parts and brings down with her, and whiles she had purposely sent Felicia
from the fire, she runs and throws it into the broth, which for the
present no whit altered the color thereof: so Fassino calling for it, this
poor innocent Gentlewoman Felicia, (not suspecting or dreaming of poison)
gives it him, which (as ignorant thereof) he sups up; and this was about nine
or ten of the clock in the morning.

Now whiles Felicia is acting this mournful Tragedy in Fassino his chamber,
her Lady Victoryna is acting another in hers; for she takes the other third
part of the poison, and secretly opening Felicia's trunk, puts it into a
painted box which she found therein, and so locks it again, hoping (though
indeed with a wretched and hellish hope) that her hu^band being dead, his body
opened, and the poison found in her trunk, she would give out that Felicia
had poisoned him with broth that morn, and this found in her chest, would
make her guilty of the murder; for the which she knew she must needs die.
See, see, the devilish double malice of this wretched Lady Victoryna, as well
to her husband Fassino, as her maid Felicia! But as finely as the devil has
taught her to spinne the thread of this her malice and revenge, yet though her
plot have taken effect and hold of her husband, nevertheless she shall in the
end fail of hers to innocent Felicia: in the interim, though to the eyes of
the world it seem at first to succeed according to her desires by the bye, yet
it shall not in the maine: but that murder, and this treason of Victoryna
shall not go long either undetected, or unpunished.

This poison working in Fassino his stomach and body, begins by degrees to cut
off his vital spirits, so as his strength fails him, his red cheeks already
look pale and earthly, and his body infinitely swells: he calls for his wife
Victoryna, who with all haste and expedition tells her secretly, that he
fears, Felicia has poisoned him with the broth she gave him in the morning;
and so requesteth her to send for his Parents and friends to be present at his
death, for live he could not. Victoryna, like a dissembling shee-devill,
tears her hair for anger, and for mere sorrow seems to drown her self in
her tears at this news, kisseth and fawnes on her husband, and in all
possible haste sends away of all sides for his kinsefolkes and friends, who
hastily repair thither, and find Fassino almost dead: so they, with tears,
inquire his sickness; when with open voice his wife Victoryna cries out, that
her wretched maid Felicia had with broth, that morn, poisoned him; which
Fassino his memory and tongue yet serve him to confess and aver, word for
word, as his wife Victoryna had related them: whereat they are all sorrowful,
and weep, and then, and there cause Felicia to be apprehended and shut fast
in a chamber; who (poor harmless young Gentlewoman) is amazed at the terror
and strangeness of this news, and cries out and weeps so bitterly, as she
seems to melt her self into tears, only she knows herself innocent, and
yet fears that this malice and revenge proceeds to her from her Lady
Victoryna. Whiles Felicia is thus under sure keeping, her Master Fassino dies:
which news is soon dispersed and divulged abroad, to the grief and
admiration of the whole City. The next morn the criminal Judges are
advertised hereof, who repair to Fassino his house, who by this time is dead,
and there see his breathles carcass, which they o^daine to be opened: the
poison is apparently found on his stomach, in its natural and pristine color;
when examining first Fassino, then Victoryna's parents, they report Fassino his
own words uttered a little before his death, that Felicia had that morn
poisoned him with broth: which is averred by Victoryna, who says, she saw her
give it him. So they send away poor Felicia to prison, but yet with a vehement
suspicion, that this poisoned arrow came out of Victoryna her own quiver,
which they the sooner believe, in respect of her former troubles, and ^spicion
for the murder of her first husband Souranza: So the Judges return and b^ake
themselves, that very instant, to their Tribunal of Justice, in the Dukes
Palace of Saint Marks: where they send for Felicia, who is brought them,
unaccompanied of any: for as misfortune would, both her Uncle Hieronymo, and
her Cousin Andrea (...), were then at Corfu, employed in some public affairs
for the Seigniory. The Iudge^ examine Felicia, concerning the broth and poison
she gave her Master. She bitterly sighing and weeping, confesses the broth,
but denies the poison; vowing by her part and hope of heaven, she never
touched nor kn^w what poison was, and desired no favor of them, if it were
found or proov^d against he^; withal, she acquaints them, that she fears it
is a trick of malice and revenge, clapped on her by her Lady Victoryna, for the
discovery of Sypontus his letter. And to speak truth, the Judges in their
hearts partly adhere and concur with her in this opinion: they demand her
whether her Lady Victoryna touched this broth, either by the fire, or the bed?
She, according to the truth, answers, that to her knowledge or sight, she
touched it not, nor no other but her self. So they send her again to prison,
and retur^e speedily to Fassino his house; where committing Victoryna to a sure
guard, they ascend her chamber and closet, search all her trunkes, caskets and
boxes, for poison, but find none: and the like they do to Felicia's trunkes,
which they break open, she having the key; and in a box find a quantity of
the same poison, whereby it was apparent she absolutely poisoned her Master
Fassino. The Judges having thus found out and revealed, as they thought, the
true author of this murder, they descend, again examine Victoryna, and so
acquit her. Poor Felicia is advertised hereof; whereat she is amazed and
astonished, and thinks that some witch or devil cast it there for her
destruction. She is again sent for before her Judges, who produce the poison
found in her trunk: she denies both the poison and the murder, with many
sighs and tears: so they adjudge her to the rack, which torment she suffers
with much patience and constancy; notwithstanding, her Judges considering that
she made and gave Fassino the broth, that none touched it but her self, that
he dyed of it, and that they found the remainder of the poison in her trunk,
they think her the murderer; so they pronounce sentence, that the next morn
she shall be hanged at Saint Marks place. She poor soul is returned to
her prison; she bewailes her misfortune thus to die, and be cast away
innocently, taxing her Judges of injustice, as her soul is ready to answer it
to God.

All Venice pratleth of this cruel murder committed by this young Gentlewoman;
but for her Lady Victoryna, she triumphs and laughs like a Gypsey, to see how
with one stone she has given two strokes, and how one poor drug has freed
her this day of her husband Fassino, and will to morrow of Felicia, of whom she
rejoices in her self, that now she has cried quittance for the discovery of
Sypontus his Letter, which procured his death: but her hopes may deceive her,
or rather, the devil will deceive both her and her hopes too. How true or
false, righteous or sinful our actions be, God in his due time will make them
appear in their naked colors, and reward those with glory, and these with
shame.

The next morn, according to the laudable custom of Venice, the mourners of
the Seigniory accompany our sorrowful Felicia to the place of execution, where
she modestly ascends the ladder, with much silence, pensiveness and
affliction: at the sight of whose youth and beauty, most of that great
infinity of Spectators cannot refrain from tears, and commiserating and
pitying, that so sweet a young Gentlewoman should come to so infamous and
untimely a death: when Felicia lifting up her hands, and erecting her eyes and
heart toward heaven, she briefly speaks to this effect: Sheetakes Heaven and
earth to witness, that she is innocent of the poisoning of her Master Fassino,
and ignorant how that poison should be brought into her Trunk; that as her
knowledge cannot accuse, so her Conscience will not acquit her Lady Victorina
of that fact, only she leaves the detection and judgment thereof to God, that
being ready to forsake the world, si^h the world is resolved to forsake her,
she as much triumphs in her innocence, as grieves at her misfortune: and that
she may not only appear in Earth, but be found in Heaven a true Christian,
she first forgives her Lady Victorina, and her Judges, and then beseeches God
to forgive her all her sins, whereunto she humbly and heartily prays all
that are present, to add their prayers to hers: and so she begins to take off
her band, and to prepare her self to die.

Now, Christian Reader, what humane wisdom, or earthly capacity would here
conceive or think, that there were any sublunary means left for this
comfortless Gentlewoman Felicia, either to hope for life, or to flatter her
self that she could avoid death? But lo, as the children of God cannot fall,
because he is the defender of the innocent, and the protector of the righteous,
therefore we shall see to our comforts, and find to Gods glory, that this
innocent young Gentlewoman shall be miraculously freed of her dangers, and
punishment, and her inveterate arch enemy Victoryna brought in her stead, to
receive this shameful death, in expiation of the horrible murders of her two
husbands, which God will now discover, and make apparent to the eyes of the
world: for as the Friars and Nuns prepare Felicia, to take her last farewell
of this world, and so to shut up her life in the direful and mournful
Catastrophe of her death; Behold, by the providence and mercy of God, the
Apothecarie Augustino (of whom this ou^ History has formerly made an honest
and religious mention) arrives from Cape ^stria: and having left his ship at
Malmocco, lands in a Gondola at Saint Marks stayres; when knowing and seeing
an execution toward, he thrusts himself in amongst the crowd of people: where
beholding so young and so fair a Gentlewoman, ready to die: he demands of
those next by him, what she was, and her crime: when being answered, that her
name was Felicia, a waiting Gentlewoman to the Lady ^orina, who had poysoued
her Master Fassino: at the very first report of the (...) Victoryna, and her
husband Fassino, Augustino his blood flasheth up in his face, and his heart
began to beat within him, when demanding if no other were accessory to this
murder: he was informed, that her Lady Victoryna was vehemently suspected
thereof: but she was cleared, and only Felicia, this young Gentlewoman found
guilty thereof: which words were no sooner delivered him, but God putting into
his heart and remembrance, that this Lady Vectorina would have formerly seduced
him for three hundred Zeckynes, to have poisoned her husband Fassino, he
confidently believing this young Gentlewoman innocent hereof, with all
possible speed, as fast as his legs could drive, he runs up to the
Southeast part of the corner of the Gallery of the Dukes Palace, where the
Officers sit to see execution done; the which he requesteth for that time to
stop, because he has something to say concerning the murder of Signiour
Fassino. Whereupon they call out to the Executioner to forbear: which b^ed
inf^ admiration in all the Spectators, as wondering at the cause and reason
thereof, when in constant and discreet terms, Augustino informs the Judges,
that he thinks (...) innocent, and her Lady Victoryna guilty of this murder,
and so (...) ^m ^er, time, and place where Victorina her self seduced him to
poison her (...) F^no, how she proffered him three hundred Zeckynes to perform
it, which he refused, and to the utmost of his power, sought to dissuade her
from thi^ bloody and execrable business. The Judges are astonished at the
strangenes of this news, which they begin confidently to believe, and so
bless the hour of Augustino's arrival, that has withheld them from spilling
the innocent blood of Felicia, when commanding her from the place of execution,
to her prison, they instantly give order for the Lady Victoryna's apprehension,
who already had built trophies and triumphs of joy in her heart, to see that
all her bloody designs so well succeeded. But now is the Lords appointed time
come, wherein al her cruel Murders, whoredom, treachery, and hypocrisy,
shall be brought to light and punished: yea, now it shall no longer be in her
power, or in that of the devil, her Schoolmaster and Seducer, either to
diminish the least part of her punishment, or to add the least moment or point
of time to her life. She is all in tears at her apprehension, but they rather
engender envy, then pity in her Judges: And so from the delights and
pleasures of her house, she is hastily conveyed to prison.

Her Judges, in honor to the sacred dignity of Justice (the Queen of Earth,
and the daughter of Heaven) confront her with Augustino, who averres his former
deposition, as constantly in her face, as she denies it impudently in his. But
this will not prevail her: for now God has made the probabilities, or rather
the sight of her crime too apparent. So without any regard to her prayers,
tears, or exclamations, they adj^dge her to the Rack, where the tenderness
of her limbs, the sharpness of her torments, but especially the griefs and
pinches of her conscience, make her acquit Felicia, acknowledge Augustino his
evidence, and condemn her self to be the author both of her first husbands
stabbing, as also her seconds poisoning: her Judges as much praise God for her
confession, as they detest and are astonished at the falsenesse of these her
horrible crimes. So with much joy they first free innocent Felicia of her
unjust imprisonment; and then knowing it pity that so wretched a Lady as
Victoryna should live any longer, they, for her abominable cruelties and
inhumanities, condemn her the next morn to be hanged and burnt on Saint
Marks Place. At the knowledge and divulging of which news, as her father,
mother, and kinsfolks extremely grieve, so all Venice bless and glorify
God, first, that innocent Felicia is saved, and guilty Victoryna detected and
condemned to the shame and punishment of a deserved death.

The same night the Priests and Friars deal with her about the state of her
soul, and its pilgrimage and transmigration to heaven: they find that her
youth, lust, and revenge has taken a strange possession of the devil, and he
in them: for she still loves the memory of Sypontus, and envies and detests
that of her two husbands, Souranza and Fassino: but they deal effectually with
her, and in their speeches depainting her forth the joys of heaven, and the
torments of hell, they at last happily prevail, and so make her forsake the
vanity and impiety of these her passions, by rellishing the sweet shown of Gods
mercies: so the next morn she is brought to her execution; where the world
expecting to hear much matter from her, she is very pensive and contemplative,
and says little, only she prays Felicia to forgive her; as also all the
Parents of her two Husbands, Souranza and Fassino, and likewise of Sypontus;
but chiefly she invokes God her Savior and Redeemer, to pardon these her
horrible sins of adultery and murder, and beseeches all that are present to
pray for her soul; and so according to her sentence, she is first hanged, then
burnt: whereat all that great affluence and concourse of people praise the
providence and justice of God, in cutting off this female monster and shame of
her sex Victoryna: whose tragical and mournful History may we all read and
remember, with detestation, that the example hereof be our forewarning and
caveat, not to trust in the deceiveable lusts of the flesh, and the treacherous
tentations of the devil, but to rely on the mercies and promises of God which
will never fail his elect, but will assuredly make them happy in their lives,
blessed in their deaths, and constantly glorious in their resurrections.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY VII.
Catalina causes her Waiting Maid Ansilva two several times attempt to poison
her ^wne Sister Berinthia; wherein failing, she afterward makes an Empericke,
termed Sarmiata, poison her said Maid Ansilva: Catalina is killed with a
Thunderbolt, and Sarmiata hanged for poisoning Ansilva. Antonio steals
Berinthia away by her own consent* whereupon her Brother Sebastiano fights
with Antonio, and kills him in a Duel: Berinthia in revenge hereof, afterward
murthereth her Brother Sebastiano; she is adjudged to be immured betwixt two
Walls, and there languisheth and dies.

HOw foolishly and impiously does our malice betray our selves, or the devil
our souls, when we maliciously betray others? for we are as far from Grace
as Wisdom, when we permit either irregular affection, or unlawful passion,
to hale us on to choler, choler to revenge, and revenge to Murder: Nay, how
exempt are we of Religion, and devoyd of all Christian piety and charity, when
our thoughts are so eclipsed, and our judgments darkened, when our consciences
are so defiled, and our souls so polluted with revenge, that the eldest sister
seeks to poison her younger, and this younger afterward murthereth her own
and only brother, because in a Duel he had formerly slain her Lover? Alas,
alas, these are bloody accidents, which not only fight against Grace, but
Nature, not only against earth, but Heaven, and not only against our souls,
but against God; neither are these the only Tragedies that our ensuing History
reports and relates: for we shall therein farther see a wretched
Wayting-gentlewoman poisoned by her more wretched Lady and Mistress, together
with her execrable Agent, a bloody and graceless Empericke: and all justly
revenged, and severely punished by the sword of Gods wrath and indignation.
Wherein the Christian Reader may observe, as well to Gods glory, as his own
consolation, that never pretended or actual Murders were either contrived
more secretly, perpetrated more closely, detected more miraculously, or
punished more strangely and severely: so as if the devil have not fully
possessed our hearts and souls, or if our thoughts and resolutions do yet
retain the least spark of Grace and Christianity, we shall fly their crimes
by the sight and fear of their punishments, refetch our wandering and erroneous
senses, from hell to earth, purposely to erraise them from Earth to Heaven; and
so religiously to give and consecrate, both them, and our selves, and souls,
from sin to righteousness, and consequently (with as much felicity as
glory) from Satan to God.

THere dwelt in the City of Avero in Portugal, an ancient Nobleman, termed
Don Gasper de Vilarezo, rich in either quality of earthly greatness, as well
of blood as revenewes, who was nearly allied to the Marquess of Denia (in
Spain) as marrying a Niece of his named Dona Alphanta, a Lady exquisitely
endued with the ornaments of Nature, and the perfections of Grace: for she was
both fair and virtuous, that adding luster to these, and these returning and
reflecting embellishment to that, which made her infinitely beloved of her
husband Vilarezo, and exceedingly honored of all those who had the honor to
know her; and to crown the felicity of their affections and marriage, they
had three hopeful children, one son, and two daughters: he termed Don
Sebastiano, and they the Donas, Catalina, and Berinthia: He having attained
his fifteenth year, was by his Father made Page to Count Manriques de Lopez,
and continually followed him at Court, and they from their tenth to their
thirteenth years, lived sometimes at Coimbra, otherwhiles at Lisbone, but
commonly at Avero with their Parents, who so carefully trained them up in those
qualities and perfections, requisite for Ladies of their rank, as they were no
sooner seen, but admired of all who saw them.

But before we make a farther progression in this History, (thereby the
better to unfold and anatomize it) I hold it rather necessary then
impertinent, that we take a cursory, though not a curious survey of both these
young Ladies perfections and imperfections, of their vices and virtues, their
beauty and deformity: that as objects are best known by the opposition of
their contraries: so by the way of comparison we may distinguish how to know,
and know how to distinguish of the disparitie of these two sisters, in their
inclinations, affections, and delineations.

Catalina was somewhat short of stature, but corpulent of body: Berinthia tall,
but slender: Catalina was of taint and complexion, more brown then fair:
Berinthia not brown, but sweetly fair, or fairly sweet: Catalina had a
disdainefull, Berinthia a gracious eye: Catalina was proud, Berinthia humble.
In a word, Catalina was of humor extremely imperious, ambitious, and
revengefull, and Berinthia modestly courteous, gracious and religious. So these
two young Ladies growing now to be capable of marriage, many gallant Cavaliers
of Avero become Servants and Suitors to them, as well in respect of their
Fathers Nobility and wealth, as for their own beauties and virtues: yea,
their fame is generally so spread, that from Lisbone, and most of the chiefest
Cities of Portugal, diverse Nobles and Knights resort to their Father Don
Vilarezo's house, to proffer up their affections to the dignity and merits of
his daughters. But his age finding their youth too young to be acquainted with
the secrets and mysteries of marriage* puts them all off, either in general
terms, or honorable excuses, as holding the matching of his daughters of so
eminent and important consideration, as he thinks it fit he should advisedly
consult, and not rashly conclude them: which affection and care of Parents to
their Children, is still as honorable as commendable.

Don Sebastiano their brother, being often both at Madrid, Vallidolyd and
Lisbone, becomes very intimately and singularly acquainted with Don Antonio de
Rivere^, a noble and rich young Cavalier, by birth likewise a Portugal, of the
City of Elvas, who was first and chief Gentleman to the Duke of Bragansa; and
the better to unite and perpetuate their familiarity, he proffers him his
eldest sister in marriage, and prays him at his first conveniencie, to ride
over to Avero to see her, offering himself to accompany him in this journey,
and to second him in that enterprise, as well toward his father as sister. Don
Antonio very kindly and thankfully listeneth to Don Sebastiano's courteous and
affectionate proffer; and knowing it so far from the least disparagement, as
it was a great happiness and honor for him to match himself in so noble a
Family, they assign a day for that journey, against when, Don Antonio makes
ready his preparatives and train in all respects answerable to his rank and
generositie. They arrive at Avero, where Don Gasper de Vilarezo, for his own
worth, and his sons report, receives Don Antonio honorably, and entertaines
him courteously: he visits and saluteth, first the mother, then the two young
Ladies her daughters: and although he cannot dislike Catalina, yet so precious
and amiable is sweet Ber^nthia in (...) eye, as he no sooner sees, but loves
her: yea, her piercing eye, her vermillion ch^ke, and delicate stature, act
such wonders in his heart, as he secretly proclaims himself her Servant, and
publicly she his Mistress: to which end he takes time and opportunity at
advantage, and so reveals her so much in terms, that intimate the servencie
of his zeal, and endeare the zeal of his affection and constancy. Berinthia
entertaines his motion and speeches with many blushes, which now and then cast
a rosiat veil ore the milke-white lillies of her complexion; and to speak
truth, if Antonio be inamoured of Berinthia, no less is she of him: so as
not only their eyes, but their contemp^tions and hearts seem already to
sympathize, and burn in the flame of an equal affection. In a word, by
stealth he courts her often. And not ^o de^aine my Reader in the intricate
Labyrinth of the whole passages of their loves, Antonio for this time finds
Berinthia in this resolution, that as she has not the will to grant, so she
has not the power to deny his suit: the rest, time will produce.

But so powerfully do the beauty and virtues of sweet Berinthia work in
(...) his affections, that impatient of delays, he finds out her father and
mother, and in due terms (requisite for him to give, and they receive)
demands their daughter Berinthia in marriage. Vilarezo thanking Antonio for
this honor, replies, that of his two daughters, he thinks Berinthia his
younger as unworthy of him, as Catalina his eldest worthily bestowed on him.
Antonio answers, that as he cannot deny but Catalina is fair, yet he must
confess that Berinthia is more beautiful to his eye, and more pleasing to his
thoughts. Vilarezo lastly replies, that he will first match Catalina, ere
Berinthia, and that he is as content to give him the first, as not as yet
resolved to dispose of the second: and so for this time, they on these terms
depart, Vilarezo taking Antonio and his son Sebastiano with him to hunt a
Stag, whereof his adjacent Forest has plenty. But whiles Antonio his body
pursues the Stag, his thoughts are flying after the beauty of his dear and
fair Berinthia; who as the Paragon of Beauty and Nature, sits Empress, and
Queene-Regent in the Court of his contemplations and affections: he is wounded
at the heart with Vilarezo his answer, and Berinthia to the gall, when he
certified her of her fathers resolution, only modesty (that sweet companion,
and precious ornament of Virgins) to the extremity of her power, endeavored to
keep A^tonio from perceiving or suspecting so much. Antonio prays his dear
friend Sebastiano to persuade his father to give him his sister Berinthia to
wife: he performs the true part of a true friend and a Gentleman, but in
vain: for his father Vilarezo is resolute, first to marry Catalina; when
Antonio, not of power so soon to leave the sight and presence of his sweet
Berinthia, must invent some matter for his stay. And indeed as Love is the
whetstone of wit to give an edge to Invention; so Antonio, to in^oy the
presence of his fair Berinthia, is enforced to make show that he neglects
her, and affe^teth Catalina: and so converseth often with her; but still in
general terms, wherea^ he builds many castles of hope and content, in the
air of her thoughts. For i^ Berinthia loved Antonio, no less does Catalina;
strange effects of affection, where two sisters deeply and dearly love one
Gentleman, and when but one, and peradventure neither of them shall enjoy him.

But as Catalina is the pretext, so Berinthia is both the sole object and cause
of Antonio's stay, whom he courts and lays close siege to, as often as
opportunity makes him happy in the desired happiness and felicity of her
company: She gives him blushes for his sighs, and sometimes (although a man)
the fervencie of his affection was such, as he cannot refrain from returning
her tears for her blushes: when albeit love persuades him to stay longer in
Avero, yet discretion calls and commands him away to Lisbone: and all the
fruit of his journey that he shall carry thither with him, is this, that for
enjoying of fair Berinthia to his wife, he conceives far more reason to
hope, then to despair. Next death, there is no second affliction so grievous
or bitter to Lovers, as separation and parting: this Berinthia feels, but will
not acknowledge; and this Antonio acknowledges, because feels. After Supper,
taking her to a window, he secretly prays her to honor him with the
acceptance of a poor Scarf, and plain pair of Gloves (which notwithstanding
were infinitely rich, and wonderfully fair) in token of his affection; and
she, the morn of his departure, by Diego his Page, sends him a Handkerchiefe,
curiously wrought with hearts and flames of silk and gold, in sign of her
thankfulness: he promises Berinthia to write, and see her shortly; and
Catalina entreats him to be no stranger to Avero. To Catalina he gives many
words, but few kisses; to Berinthia many kisses, but more tears: His departure
makes Berinthia sad, as grieving at his absence; and Catalina joyful, as
hoping of his return: Catalina triumphs for joy, hoping that Antonio shall be
her husband; and Berinthia now begins to look pale with sorrow, fearing she
shall not be so happy to be his wife. By this time breakfast is served in,
when Sebastiano comes, takes Antonio and his two sisters, and carries them to
the Parlour, where Vilarezo and his wife Alphanta attend Antonio's coming.
They all sit down; and although their fare be curious, yet Antonio's eyes
feed and feast upon more curious dainties; as the sparkling eyes, flaxen hair,
and vermillion cheeks of Berinthia's incomparable beauty, which is observed
of all parts, except of Berinthia, who is so secret and cautious in her
carriage, as although her affection, yet her discretion will not permit her
modesty either to observe or see it. Breakfast ended, Antonio taking Vilarezo,
and his wife Alphanta apart, first gives them infinite thanks for his
honorable and courteous entertainment, and then very earnestly again prays
them not to reject his suit for their daughter Berinthia. Vilarezo and his wife
pray Antonio to excuse his bad reception, which they know comes many ways
short of his deserts and merits, and also request him to embrace their motion
for their daughter Catalina. Thus after many other complements, he takes his
conge of Vilarezo, kisseth his wife and two daughters, first Catalina, then
Berinthia, who though last in years, yet is the first Lady in his desires and
thoughts, and the only Queen of his affections. So they are as it were
enforced to make a virtue of necessity, and to take a short farewell, in stead
of a more solemn, which either of them wished, and both desired; but their
eyes dictate to their hearts, what their tongues cannot express: and so
Antonio and Sebastiano take Coach, and away for Lisbone, Antonio as much
triumphing in the beauty of his fair Berinthia, as his friend Sebastiano
grieves, that of his two Sisters, Antonio would not accept of Catalina, nor his
father consent to give him Berinthia for his wife: notwithstanding, they
confirm their familiarity and friendship with many interchangeable and
reciprocal protestations; that since they cannot be brothers, they will live
and die dear and intimate friends: but I fear the contrary.

Being arrived at Lisbone, Antonio feels strange alterations in his thoughts
and passions. For now he is so entangled in the fetters of Berinthia's beauty
and virtues, that he will see no other object but her Idea, nor (almost)
speak of any Lady, but of her self; and in these his amorous contemplations
he both rejoices and triumphs; but again remembering the assurance of
Vilarezo his refusal, and the incertaintie of Berinthia's affection and
consent, his hopes are nipt in their blossoms, and his joys as soon fade as
flourish; he wishes that Avero were Lisbone, and either himself in Avero with
Berinthia, or she in Lisbone with him. To attempt the one, he holds it as
great a folly, as a vanity to wish the other: But he bethinkes himself of a
remedy for this his perplexity, and reputes himself obliged in the bonds, as
well of respect, as love, to write to his fair Berinthia: and then again he
fears that it will find a difficult passage and access to her, because of her
Fathers distaste, and Sisters jealousy: but the Sun of his affection does
soon dispell and dissipate these doubts, or rather disperse them as clouds
before the wind: and now to prevent those who might attempt to intercept his
Letters, he bethinkes himself of an invention, as worthy, as commendable in a
Lover: he writes Berinthia a letter, and accompanying it with a rich Diamond,
sends it her by Diego his own Page to Avero, whom purposely and feignedly he
causes to arm himself with this pretext and color, that he is in love with
Ansilva the Lady Catalina's waiting Gentlewoman, and has now gotten leave of
his Master to come to Avero to seek her in marriage: where after some fifteen
days he arrives, and very secretly delivers his Masters Ring and Letter to
Berinthia, who (sweet Lady) was then tossed with the wind of fear, and the
waves of sorrow, that in all this time she heard not from Antonio, doubting
indeed lest the change of air, places, and objects might have power to change
his affection, when now blushing for joy, as much as before she looked pale
for sorrow, she takes the Ring and Letter, and kissing both, secretly flies to
her Chamber, when bolting the door, she with as much affection as impatience
breaking up the seals, therein finds these lines:

ANTONIO to BERINTHIA
SWeet Berinthia, were thou as courteous as fair, thou would rest as
confident of my affections, as I do of thy beauty, and then as much rejoice
in that, as I triumph in this: but as my tongue lately wanted power, so now
does my pen art, to inform thee, how dearly I love thy beauty, and honor
thy virtues: so as could thy thoughts pry into mine, or my heart be so happy
to dictate to thine, those should know, and this see, that Antonio is ambitious
of no other earthly felicity, then either to live thy husband, or dye thy
Martyr. Think with thy self, how far thou undervaluest, and unrequitest my
zeal, when I will despair of loving Catalina, and yet cannot hope that
Berinthia will affect me: only therefore in thee (sweet Lady) it remains,
either to crown my joys by thy consent, or to immortalize my torments by thy
refusal: he pleased therefore, fair Berinthia, to signify me thy
resolution, that I may know my doom, and prepare my self, either to wed thee
or my grave.

ANTONIO.


Berinthia having again and again perused and ore-read this Letter, gives it
a thousand kisses for his sake who wrote and sent it her, and so very secretly
locks it up in her Casket, as also the Diamond, and now attends an
opportunity to confer privately with Diego, when he will resolve to return
to his Master at Lisbone, that she may return him an answer, though not so
sweet as he expects, yet not so bitter as he fears: in the mean time Diego
delivers her father Vilarezo his Masters letter, in favor of his (pretended)
suit to Ansilva, as also in thankfulness of his entertainment, without naming
either Catalina, or Berinthia his daughters, or once mentioning his return to
Avero: whereat Vilarezo grieves, and Catalina bites the lip. But Berinthia
cannot but smile to see Antonio his invention, for the safe delivery of his
letters, nor yet refrain from laughing in her self, to see how cunningly his
Page Diego courts Ansilva: for he makes such demonstration of love to her, and
she is so enamoured of him, that Catalina thinks a short time will finish
this match, but he and her sister Berinthia know the contrary. Diego at the
end of three days is desirous to depart, and Berinthia extremely glad of his
resolution to stay no longer: so she takes her self to her chamber, and
writes this letter to her Antonio in answer of his.

BERINTHIA to ANTONIO.
HAd I not been more courteous to thee, then I am fair in my self, thou had
not tasted so much of my affection, nor I so many of my fathers frowns: and
although thy tongue and pen have acquainted me with thy rich zeal intended
and devoted to my poor merits, yet judge with thy self, whether it be fit
for me to requite thee with observance; or him that gave me my being with
disobedience. As I desire not to have thee dye my Martyr, so my father will not
permit thee to live my husband: and yet, as it is out of my power to remedy the
first, so it is not impossible for time to effect and compass the last; not
that I resolve to give thee too much hope; rather that I aim to take away some
of thy despair, to the end that I may find thee as constant in thy affection,
as thou me sincere in my constancy. My sisters jealousy of me, and my
fathers distaste of thee, invite thee to manage this favor of mine with as
much secrecy as circumspection.

BERINTHIA.


Having folded up and sealed her Letter, she finds out Diego, and beckens him
to follow her to the garden; where, in one of the Bowers she delivers him this
letter, together with a Rose of Opales, the which in token of her love, she
conjures him with safety and speed to deliver to his Master Don Antonio. Diego
having his dispatch of Berinthia, soon gives Ansilva hers, promising to
return some three weeks after; at which time he prays her to expect him:
when thanking Vilarezo for his kind entertainment, and he bidding him tell his
Master he would be glad to see him in Avero, he leaps to horse, and so poasts
away for Lisbone.

I cannot relate with what incredible and infinite joy Antonio receives this
Letter and Ring from Berinthia: and to write the truth, I think the letter
scarce contained so many sillables, as he often read it over and kissed it:
he sees Berinthia's modesty resplend and shine in her affection, and her
affection in her modesty toward him, wherein he glories in that, rejoices in
this, and triumphs in both: but although he be sure of her affection, yet he
is not of himself; for he sees her Letter contains many verbal
complements, but all of them not one real promise: and therefore he cannot
repute his tranquillity and felicity complete, ere he be crowned with this
happiness: besides, he fears that his absence and her fathers presence, may
in tract of time by degrees cool the fervencie of Berinthia's affection; and
yet then, he as soon checkes his own timiditie, in conceiving the least
suspicion of her constancy: now he thinks to acquaint his intimate friend
and her dear brother Sebastiano with their affections, but then he condemns
that opinion, and revokes it as erroneous and dangerous, and contrary to the
rules of love, in sailing without the compass of Berinthia's advice and
commands, by the which he holds it both safety and discretion to steer his
course and actions: Again, he so infinitely and earnestly longs to resee his
dear and sweet Mistress, as he resolves to ride over again to Avero: but
the obstinacy of Vilarezo, and the jealousy of Catalina, make him end that
journey ere he began it. In this perplexity and contestation of reasons, he
is irresolute what, or what not to do; but in fine, considering that delays
are dangerous in matters of this nature, he packes up his baggage, and taking
his farewell of Sebastiano, under pretext of his health, leaves Lisbone and the
Duke his Lord and Master, and retires to his own home at Elvas, (where his
father dying some three years before, had left him sole heir to many rich
Manors and Possessions) purposely hereby to be near to Avero, that he
might give order for all things, and let slip no occasion in the process and
prosecution of his affection. The second day after his arrival to Elvas, it
being welneere a month since he sent his first, and till then his last Letter
to Berinthia, he now again dispatcheth his Page Diego with his second Letter
to her, by whom he sends her a chain of rich pearl, and a pair of gold
bracelets richly enammeled. Diego's arrival is pleasing to Ansilva, but
extremely joyful to Berinthia; only it nipt Catalina's hopes, because she
could not understand by him any certain resolution or assurance of his Masters
coming thither. Diego has no sooner saluted his Ansilva, but (as his more
important business) he seeks means to speak with Berinthia, which she her
self proffereth him: he delivers her his Masters tokens and letter, which sh^e
very joyfully receives, and so trips away to her chamber; where opening the
seals, she therein finds these words:

ANTONIO to BERINTHIA
IT is impossible for my pen to express the joys my heart received at the
reading of thy Letter: and as I dispraise not thy obedience to thy Father, so I
infinitely both praise and prize thy affection to me: a thousand times I
kissed thy lines, and as often blessed the hand that wrote them; and although
they gave me hope for despair, yet, not to dissemble, these hopes have
brought me doubt, and that doubt, fear; not that thou love me, for that
were to disparage ^y judgment, in seeking to profane thy affection, but that
thou will not please to accept of my promise, nor to return me thine: wherein
if thou weigh the fervencie of my love, I hope thou will not tax the
incredulity of my fear; for till I am so happy, not only to hope, but to
assure my self that Berinthia will be Antonio's, as Antonio is already
Berinthia's, I must needs fear, and therefore cannot truly rejoice. I have
left Lisbone, to reside at Elvas; therefore fair and dear Lady, I beseech
thee destinate me, dispose my service, and command both. I long to enjoy the
felicity of thy presence: for I take heaven to witness, thy absence is my
hell upon earth.

ANTONIO.


Berinthia having read this Letter, she approoves of Antonio's fear, and
attributes it to the fervencie and sincerity of his affection: she esteems
her self infinitely happy in her good fortune, and choice of so brave a
Cavalier for her servant, whom she hopes a little time will make her husband;
to which end she will no longer feed him with delays, but now resolves, by
his Page Diego at his return to signify him so much: and in a word, to send
him her heart, as she has already received his. But she knows not what the
Interim of this time will bring forth.

Pass we from Berinthia to her Sister Catalina, whose affection is likewise
such to Antonio, as by this time she has persuaded and induced her Father
Vilarezo to write him a Letter in her behalf by Diego, thereby to draw his
resolution, whether he intend to seek her for his wife or no; or at least to
invite him to Avero. And although his affection to her sister Berinthia be kept
from her, yet she not only suspects, but fears it. Glad she is of the
opportunity of Diego his being there, to convey her Fathers Letter to his
Master: and yet that joy of hers is soon dissolved into grief, because all
this time he never vouchsafed to write to her: her affection to him flattreth
her still with hope, and yet her judgment in her self still suggesteth her
despair; for she has always the image of this conceit in her imagination,
that Antonio loves her Sister Berinthia, and not her self: her suspicion makes
her subtle, and so she deals with Ansilva, to draw the truth here of from
Diego, who having learned his lesson, acts his part well, and I know not,
whether with more fidelity or discretion, flatly denies it: but lo, here
betides an accident, which bewrayes the whole mystery and History of their
affections. On a Sunday morning, when Berinthia was descended to the garden to
gather flowers, against her going to Church with her Father and Mother, her
Sister Catalina rusheth into her Chamber, to seek the History of Cervantez,
which the day before she had lent her; and not finding it either on the Table,
or the Window, seeks in the pocket of her gown, that she wore the day
before; and there unwittingly, and unexpectedly finds the last Letter that
Antonio had sent her; whereby she perceived, it was in vain for her to hope
to enjoy Antonio, since she now apparently saw that he was her sister
Berinthia's, and she his. Catalina is hereat both sorrowful and glad;
sorrowful, that she should lose Antonio, and glad that she had found his
Letter. And now to show her affection to him, and her malice to her sister,
she will try her wits, to see whether she can frustrate Berinthia, and so
obtain Antonio for her self. The passions of men may easily be found out and
detected, but the secrets and malice of women difficultly. To which end
Catalina shows this letter to her Father, who exceedingly storms hereat, and
with many checkes and frowns curbes Berinthia of her liberty, and resolves in
his first letter to Antonio, to forbid hi^ his house, and her company, except
he will leave Berinthia, and take Catalina: and suspecting that his Page
Diego's courting of Ansilva, was but only a policy and color, thereby to
convey Letters betwixt his daughter Berinthia and his Master; he once thought
to give him his Conge, and prohibit him his house, had not Catalina prayed the
contrary, who would no way displease her wayting-Gentlewoman Ansilva, because
she was to use her aid and assistance in a matter of great importance: the
unlocking and dilating whereof is thus:

Catalina her affection to Antonio, and consequently her malice to her sister
Berinthi^ is so violent, that as her father has bereaved her of a great part
of her liberty, so she is so bloody and cruel, as she vows to deprive her of
her life: a hellish resolution i^ any woman, but a most unnatural and damnable
attempt of one Sister to another but wanting Faith, which is the foundation and
bulwark; and Religion, which is the preservative and Antidote of our souls,
she runs so wilfully hood-winked from God to the devil, as she will advance,
and disdaines to retire, till her malicious and jealous thirst be quenched with
her sisters blood: to which end she persuades and bribes Ansilva with a hundred
ducats, to poison her sister Berinthia, and promises her so much more, when
she has effected it: whereunto this wretched and execrable young waiting
Gentlewoman consents, and in brief, promises to perform it: But God has
otherwise decreed and ordained. To which end she sends into the City for some
strong poison by an unknown messenger, which is instantly brought her in a
small galley pot. But let us here both admire and wonder at Gods miraculous
discovery and prevention thereof: For that very night, when Ansilva had
determinately resolved to have poisoned the Lady Berinthia, Diego seeks out
his Mistress Ansilva, and finds her solitarily alone in one of the close
over-shadowed Bowers of the garden, whom he salutes and entertain; with many
amorous discourses, and more kisses; in the midst whereof his nose fell
suddenly on bleeding, whereat he admired, and she grie ved; till at last
having bloodied all his own handkerchiefe, Ansilva rusheth hastily t^ her
pocket for hers for him, which suddenly drawing forth, her affection to Diego
having made her quite forget her poison, she with her handkerchiefe draws out
the galley-pot, which falling on the floor of the bower, (that was paved with
square stones) it immediately burst in pieces; when Diego's Spaniell licking up
the poison, instantly sweld, and died before them. Whereat Diego grew amazed,
but far more Ansilva, who blushing with shame, and then growing pale for
fear, could not invent either what to say or do, at the strangeness and
suddenness of this accident. Diego presses her to know for whom this poison
was provided, and of whom she had it, Her answers are variable, and are so
far from agreeing, as they contradict each other, which breeds in her the
more fear, and in him astonishment. He conjures her by all the bonds of their
affection, to discover it, with many millions of protestations professes it
shall dye with him; he adds vows to his requests, oaths to his vows, and
kisses to his oaths, so as mayds can difficultly conceal any thing from their
Lovers; but especially fearing that he might peradventure suspect that this
poison was meant and intended him: she at last vanquished with his
importunacy, and this consideration, discovers (as we have formerly
understood) that her Lady Catalina had won her, therewith to poison her
sister Berinthia, because she suspected she was better beloved of his Master
Don Antonio then her self. Diego is infinitely astonished at the strangeness
of this news, and like a true and faithful Page to his Master, having drawn
this worm from Ansilva's nose, and this news from her tongue, under color to
seek a remedy to stop his blood, giving her many kisses, and promising her his
speedy return, he leaves her in the garden, and so very speedily finds out
Berinthia, to whom (with as much truth as curiosity) he from point to point
reveals it, praying her to be careful not to receive any thing, either from
Catalina, or Ansilva, and withal to write, for the next morn he will hye to
Elvas, to reveal it to his Master. Berinthia trembles at the report of this
strange and unexpected news: so having first thanked God for the discovery of
this poison, and her Sisters malice, she promises him a Letter to his Master,
and heartily thanks him for his fidelity and affection toward her, the which
she voweth to requite; and for a pledge and earnest thereof, draws off a
Diamond from her finger, and gives it him for this good office.

No sooner has Aurora leapt from the watery bed of Thetis, and Phoebus
discovered his golden beams in the azured Firmament of Heaven, but Diego
causes his Horse to be made ready, and tells Ansilva, that his father has
sent for him to meet him at la Secco, and that he will not fail to be back
with her within three days, being ready to depart.

He, under color of giving order for his horse, leaves her, and steals into
Berinthia's Chamber, whom (poor Lady) fear would not permit to take any rest
or sleep that night, the which she had partly worn out and employed in
writing her mind to her dear Antonio, and knowing her self not safe in Avero
with her father and sister, she resolved to commit her honor and her life
into his protection: yea, she had no sooner finished and sealed her Letter to
that effect, but Diego comes and knockes softly at her chamber door. Berinthia
in her night gown and attire is ready for him: she admits him, commends his
care, gives him her Letter to his Master, and prays him to use all possible
diligence in his return: and so having received all her commands, he secretly
descends the stayres; and taking leave of Vilarezo, and lastly, kissing his
Mistress Ansilva, he leapes to horse, rides the first Stage, there leaves his
Gennet, and takes Poast.

Leave we Diego poasting toward Elvas, and come we to Catalina, whose malice
finding no rest, nor her revenge remedy, she that very morn, as soon as
Ansilva came into her chamber, demands whether she be prepared to perform her
own promise, and her hopes? She answers her Lady, that less then three
days shall effect it, and give a period to all her sister Berinthia's. Whereat
she is exceedingly glad, but all this while ignorant what Diego has seen,
and Berinthia knows to this effect. Ansilva presuming on Diego his sidelity,
and building on his secrecy; and therefore less suspecting his journey to
Eluas, remains still so graceless and impious in her bloody resolution, as
she now not only presumes, but assures her self that Berinthia is near the
ebb of her days, and the setting of her life: and therefore like an execrable
Agent of the Devil, she has now made ready and provided her self of a second
poisoned potion, which she no way doubts but shall send her to her last
sleep. But this female Monster, this bloody shee-Empericke may be deceived in
her art.

In the interim of which time Diego arrives at Eluas, and finds out his
Master, to whom he very hastily delivers Berinthia's Letter; the which Antonio
having kissed, breaks off the seals, and there, contrary to his hopes, but
not to his desires, reads these lines:

BERINTHIA to ANTONIO.
MY sister Catalina's malice is so extreme to me, since my affection is such to
thee, as she degenerates not only from Grace, but Nature, and seeks to
bereave me of my life. This bearer, thy Page, who I pray'love for my sake, since
he, under God, has now preserved me for thine, will more fully and
particularly acquaint thee with the manner thereof. So, since there is no
safety for me in my Fathers house, into whose arms and protection shall I
throw my self, but only into thine, of whose true and sincere affection I am
so constant and confident, as I rest assured thou will show thy self thy
self, in preserving my life with mine honor, and mine honor with my life? It
is no point of disobedience in me to my Father, but of dear respect (...)
mine own life; and therefore to thee, for, and by whom I live, that makes me
so earnestly desire both thy assistance and sight, since the first will lead
me from despair, the second to hope and joy, and both to content; till when,
fear and love, with much impatiencie, make m^ think hours years, and
minutes months.

BERINTHIA.


Antonio is amazed at this strange and unexpected news, and curiously gathers
all the circumstances thereof from his Page, when love, fear, hope, sorrow,
and joy act their severalll parts, as well in his heart as countenance; when
prizing Berinthia's life and safety a thousand times before his own, he with
great expedition dispatcheth away Diego the same night to Avero, with this
ensuing letter, which he commands him deliver his Mistress Berinthia, with all
possible speed and secrecy.

ANTONIO to BERINTHIA.
AS the Sun, breaking forth of an obscure cloud, shines the clearer, so
does thy true affection to me, in that damnable malice of thy Sister Caralina
to thy self for my sake, in such sort, as I know not whether I more rejoice at
the one, then detest the other. Having therefore first thanked God for thy
happy and miraculous preservation, I next commend my Page, as the second cause
of the discovery thereof: and this fidelity of his shall neither be forgotten
or unrequited. Think how tedious time is to me, since I blame and envy this
short Letter of mine, for taking up and usurping any part thereof, till I enjoy
the honor to see thee, and the felicity to assist thee. I return it thee
Poast by Diego, who brought me thine; and my Coachman tells me, I shall
rather fly then run toward thee. Let the precise hour, I beseech thee, be
on Monday night at twelve of the clock, when I will awayt thy self, and
expect thy commands at the Posterne of thy Fathers Arbor: where, let the
light of the candle be my signet, and the report of my Pistol shall be
thine. I am throwing away my pen, were it not to signify thee, that my sword
shall protect thy life, and mine honor preserve thine: as also that Antonio
thinks himself the most unfortunate man of the world, till Berinthia be
impaled in his arms, or he encloystered in hers.

ANTONIO.


Whiles Diego is poasting to Avero, Antonio his Master is preparing to follow
him, taking (the next morn) his Coach with six horses, and three resolute
Gentlemen his friends to assist him, with each his Rapier and case of Pistols.
Diego first arrives at Avero, yea, a day and two nights before him. Ansilva
checks him for his long stay; and Berinthia a thousand times thanks him for his
speedy return. He delivers her his Masters Letter, and prays her to prepare
her self against the prefixed hour. She reads her Antonio's Letter with
much joy and comfort, which her looks testify, and her heart proclaims to
her thoughts: she will not be slack or backwards in a matter which so deeply
imports her welfare and content; and so with all possible secrecy packes up
the chiefest of her apparel and jewels in a small trunk, or casket, and
wishes the hour come, that she were either in Antonio's arms, or he in
hers: and for Diego, he casts so subtle a mist and veil before Ansilva's
eyes, as it is impossible either for her, or her Lady Catalina to perceive any
thing. But lo, a second treachery is provided, to effect that which the first
could not: and indeed, which went near to have performed it, had not God
miraculously and indulgently reached forth his hand to prevent it: for Catalina
still persevers in her inveterate and deadly malice toward her sister
Berinthia, as if God had not yet taught her, or rather, that she would not
learn the way from Satan; or Grace instructed and directed her from the
impiety of so foul a sin, as the murdering of her own and only sister.
For the very night that Antonio had promised and assigned to fetch Berinthia,
as she had by times retired her self to her chamber, under color to go to
bed, and ready to put on her night abiliments, in comes Ansilva, sent by her
good and kind (or rather wicked and cruel) sister, with a sweet Posset, (or
rather a deadly poison in her hand, in a silver covered cup) telling her, that
her Lady had drunk the one half, and sent her the other, it being (as she
affirmed) very cold and refreshing for the liver, against the hotnesse of the
weather. But Berinthia being forewarned, is armed by her former danger; yet
she seems joyful thereof, and so accepts it, returning her sister Catalina
thanks, saying, she will drink it ere she go to bed; only she prays
Ansilva first to fetch her prayer book and gloves, which in the morn she had
left in her sisters chamber. So whiles she is wanting, she privately powers
it into a silver basin in her Study, and washing the cup three or four
several times, she fills some Almond milk therein; and Ansilva being
returned, takes the said cup, and prays her to tell her Sister, that she
drinks it to her health, and withal, gives her the good night: and so
likewise does Ansilva to her. But what a good night thought she in her heart
and conscience, when she knew Berinthia should never see day more? So away
she trips to her Lady Catalina, who demands her if the business be
dispatched, and her sister gone to her rest? Who replies, she has drunk her
last, and is gone to her eternal rest. But they are both deceived in their
malicious Arithmaticke: For although Catalina extremely rejoice in the
confident and assured death of her sister, yet God ordains, that their bloody
hopes shall deceive them: as mark the sequel, and you shall see how.

About an hour after Ansilva's departure, by Berinthia's order and
appointment, in wonderful secret sort in comes Diego to her Chamber, to awayt
the hour of his Masters arrival, and to assist her in her escape and
departure. Berinthia acquaints him with the potion her Sister Catalina had
right now sent her by Ansilva: he is astonished at this news, as being
assured it was poison, and humbly prays her to make proof hereof on
Catalina's Parrot, which that afternoon she had brought with her into her
Chamber: and so by her consent Diego takes the Parrot, and with a spoone
forces some down its throat: who poor harmless bird, immediately swells
and dies before them. They both wonder hereat, and Berinthia at one instant
both grieves and rejoices, grieves at her Sister Catalina's malice and
cruelty, and rejoices for her happy deliverance: first praising God as the
Author, then thanking Diego as the instrument thereof: and so they throw the
remainder of the poison out at the window, and lay the dead Parrot on the
table. And now Berinthia attending and awayting the hour of her happiness,
which is that of her Antonio's arrival, and of her own departure, with as
much desire as impatiencie; Diego often looking on the houreglasse, and
Berinthia a thousand times on her Watch. So at last with a longing, longing
desire, the joyful hour of twelve is come, wherein Antonio arrives: he sees
the happy light of her candle, and she hears the sweet music of his
Pistol, which reviveth and ravisheth these two Lovers, in the heaven of
unexpressable joy and content, when all things being hushed up in silence, and
every person of the house soundly sleeping, Diego softly takes up the small
trunk, and Berinthia as secretly follows him: and so they wonderful
privately slip into the first Court, and from thence to the posterne door of
the garden, where Antonio with a thousand kisses receives her in his arms,
having no other light but the luster of her eyes to light them: for the Moon,
that bright Cynthia, had conspired and consented to Berinthia's escape, and
therefore purposely withdrawn her brightness by hiding and invelloping her
self in the darkness of an obscure cloud. Antonio locking this sweet prize,
this his dear and swee^ Berinthia in his arms, he with the three Gentlemen
his friends, conduct her to the end of the street; and Diego following them
with the Casket, where they all privately and silently take Coach, and having
opened the City gate with a silver key, away they speed for Eluas with all
possible celerity; but I write with grief, that as these affections of Antonio
and Berinthia begin in joy, so (I fear) they will end in as much sorrow and
misery.

Leave we them now in their journey for Eluas: and return we to Avero to
bloody Catalina, and wretched Ansilva, who lying remote from Berinthia's
Chamber, could not possibly hear so much as the least step of her descent and
departure: although their malice were so extreme as to write the truth, they
all that night could not sleep for joy that Berinthia was dispatched: so they
prepare themselves against the morn, to hear some pitiful outcries in the
house for Berinthia's death: but seeing it near ten of the clock, and no
rumor nor stir heard, they both (as they were accustomed) went into her
Chamber, thinking to feast their eyes upon the lamentable object of this
breathless Gentlewoman: but contrary to their bloody hopes, they find the
nest, I mean the bed, empty, and Berinthia not dead, but escaped and flowne
away: Only Catalina, in stead of her Sister, finds her own Parrot dead on
the table: they are astonished at this news, and look fearfully and
desperately each on other. Ansilva for her part protests and vows, that she
saw Berinthia drink the poison. But finding Berinthia's small trunk wanting,
and hearing Diego gone, then Catalina knows for certain, that she was
escaped, and her poisoning plot detected and prevented. So they give the alarm
in the house, and she goes directly and acquaints her Father, Mother, and
Brother of her Sister Berinthia's flight, but speaks not a word of the poison,
or of the Parrots death. Vilarezo grieves to see himself robbed of his
daughter, and Sebastiano of his Sister: but when they understand that Diego was
gone with her, then they are confidently assured, that Antonio has carried her
away, which is confirmed them by the Porter of the City, who told them, that
'twixt twelve and one, a Coach with a Lady, and four Cavaliers, and a Page
(drawn by six horses) past the gate very speedily. Vilarezo and his son
Sebastiano storm at this affront and disgrace: they consult what to do
herein: so first they resolve to send one to Elvas, to know yea or no, whether
Berinthia be there with Antonio? The messenger sent, returns, and assures
them thereof, as also, that Antonio is retired from Elvas, to a Castle of his
without the walls of the City, where it is reported he keeps the Lady
Berinthia with much honor and respect. Had old Vilarezo had his health and
strength, he would himself in person have undertaken this journey, but being
sick of the Gowt, he sends his son Sebastiano to Elvas, accompanied with six
resolute Gentlemen, his near allies and friends, to draw reason of Antonio for
this affront and disgrace, and so either by Law, Force, Policy, or persuasion,
to bring back Berinthia. Sebastiano knowing Berinthia to be his Sister, and
Antonio his former ancient and intimate friend, with a kind of unwilling
willingness accepts of this journey: he comes to Elvas, and finds his former
intelligence true, he repayres to Antonio's Castle, accompanied with his six
associates. Antonio admits them all into the first Court, and only two more of
them into the second; where he salutes them kindly, and bids them all welcome
to his Castle. Sebastiano lays before him the foulness of his fact, in
stealing away his Sister in that clandestine and base manner, the scandal
which he has laid upon her, and consequently on all their family and blood,
tells him that his father and himself are resolved to have her again at what
price soever; and therefore conjures him, by the respect of his own honor,
and by the consideration and remembrance of all their former friendship, to
deliver him his Sister Berinthia. Antonio answers Sebastiano, that it was an
honorable affection, and no base respect which led him to assist his Sister
Berinthia in her flight and escape: that he never was nor would be a just
scandal either to her, her family, or blood; that his malicious Sister
Catalina was the author and cause thereof, who by her waiting Gentlewoman
Ansilva had twice sought to poison her: and therefore, since he could not
deliver her with her own safety, and his honor and conscience, he was
resolved to protect her in his Castle, against any whosoever, that should seek
either to enforce or offend her.

Sebastiano is perplexed at this strange news, and wondereth at Antonio's
resolution: so do the two Gentlemen with him: he desires Antonio that he may
see and speak with his Sister Berinthia; the which he freely and honorably
grants: and so taking him by the hand, they enter the Hall: where Berinthia
having notice hereof (accompanied with two of Antonio his Sisters) as soon
comes, and with a cheerful countenance advances toward her Brother: he
salutes her, and she first him, then the other two Gentlemen her Cousins.
Sebastiano prays Antonio, that he may confer apart with his Sister. Antonio
replies, that his Sister Berinthia's pleasure shall ever be his. She
willingly consents hereeunto, when he taking her by the hand, conducts her to
the farthest window, and there shows her her disobedience to her Father, her
dishonor to her self, and grief to her friends, for this her unadvised and
rash flight, and so persuades her to return: and that if she intend to marry
Antonio, this is not the way, but rather a course as irregular as shameful.
His Sister Berithia delivers him at full the cause of her departure, and very
constantly confirms what An^ had formerly told him of her Sister Catalina's
two several attempts to poison her by her waiting Gentlewoman Ansilva, though
with more ample circumstance and dilation: and to testify the truth, Diego is
produced, who vows and protests the same. Sebastiano checkes her of folly and
cruelty, shows her, that in seeking to wrong others, she only wrongs her
self; that in inventing and casting a feigned crime on her Sister Catalina,
she makes her own conspicuous and true; that she has no safety but in her
return: whereunto with many reasons he seeks to persuade and induce her.

His Sister Berinthia again answers him, that there is no safety for her in
Avero, and that she cannot expect greater then she finds in Elvas: she prays
him to think charitably and honorably of her departure: and if ever her
Father will love her, she requests him not to hate, but to love Antonio, whose
Castle she finds a Sanctuary, both for her honor and life; taking God and his
Angels, her conscience and soul to witness, that her Sister Catalina's crime
is true and not feigned. Sebastiano seeing Antonio resolute, and his Sister
wilful and obstinate, begins to take leave, telling her, that he will leave
her to her folly, that to her shame, and her shame to her repentance, and so
concludes to go into the City, to resolve on what he has to do, for her
good and his own honor. Antonio prays him to dine in his Castle with his
Sister: but he refuses it, says he has given the first breach to their
friendship, and his own honor, which he shall repent, if not repair, and so
departs. Being come into the City, he consults this business with the
Gentlemen his associats, and both himself and they are of opinion to send one
poast to acquaint his Father herewith, and so to crave his pleasure and
resolution, how he shall bear himself herein. It is ever an excellent point
both of wisdom and discretion, for a son to steer his actions by the
compass of his Fathers commands. His cousin Villandras undertakes this journey
to Avero. Old Vilarezo is perplexed and grieved at this report, and in stead of
comfort, receives more affliction, his care, curiosity, passion and grief:
severally examineth first Catalina, then Ansilva, who (like thieves in a fair,
or murderers in a Forest) he finds equally constant in their denial, being
so devoyd of grace, and repleat of impiety, as they confirm and maintain
their innocencies with many bitter oaths and asseverations: so he returns
Villandras to Elvas, with this Letter to his son Sebastiano.

VILAREZO to SEBASTIANO.
I Commend thy wisdom, as much as I dispraise Antonio's resolution, and
grieve at thy Sister Berinthia's folly and disobedience: I have carefully and
curiously examined the two parties, whom I find as innocent as constant in the
true denial of their falsely objected crimes: I have consulted with Nature and
Honor, how herein I might be directed by them, and consequently, thou by
me; so they suggest me this advice, and I advise thee this resolution, either
by the Law of the kingdom, or by that of thy sword, with expedition to return
me my Daughter, thy Sister Berinthia, and let not the Oratorie either of
Antonio's tongue, or her tears persuade thee to the contrary: for then as she
is guilty of our dishonours, so we shall be accessory to hers: Let me
understand the proceeding herein, and according as occasion shall present, if
my sickness and weakness will not leave me, I notwithstanding will leave
Avero, to see Elvas.

VILAREZO.


Whiles Sebastiano is consulting how to free his Sister Berinthia from the
power of Antonio, speak we a little of Catalina, who (as skillful in
subtlety as malice) seeing her treachery and bloody intents revealed, thinks
it now high time to make away and poison Ansilva; grounding her resolution on
this maxim, both of policy and estate, That dead folks do neither harm,
nor tell tales. Behold here the justice and providence of God! she, who laid
snares for others, must now be taken in them her self: a punishment which the
sin of this wretched Gentlewoman finds, because deserves: there is no vice
nor malice, but have their pretexts and colors. Catalina finds fault with too
or three red pimples that Ansilva has in her face, which she will have taken
away. She sends for an Empericke, one Pedro Sarmiata, and proffereth him one
hundred Ducats to poison her, which like a limb of the devil he undertakes;
and infusing poison in some potions, he administreth it her: she the very
next day dies: a fit reward and punishment for so graceless and bloody a
Gentlewoman, who (as we have formerly seen) made no religion nor conscience,
to attempt two several times to poison the fair and virtuous Berinthia.

Whiles this Tragedy is acting at Avero, Sebastiano begins to act another in
Elvas, but a thousand times less impious, and more honorable: For having
received his Fathers order by Villandras, he now sends him into the Castle, to
take Antonio's, and Berinthia's last resolution; he is admitted to them:
Villandras directs his speech first to Berinthia, then to Antonio, to whom he
relates his message, and Sebastiano's pleasure. Berinthia returns him this
answer: Cousin Villandras, recommend me courteously to my brother Sebastiano,
and tell him, my first answer and resolution is, and shall be my last. And
(quoth Antonio) I pray ye likewise inform him from me, that Berinthia's will
is my law, and her resolution mine, and that I will be as careful, as willing
and ready, to lose my life in defense and preservation of hers. Villandras
returns, and acquaints Sebastiano with this their last resolutions; from which
he alleges it is impossible for them to be dissuaded or diverted.
Sebastiano is beaten with two contrary and irresolute winds, what to do in a
business of this nature, either to recover his sister by Law, or by Arms: by
Law, he holds it a course both cowardly and prejudicial: by Arms, he sees
he must kill himself or his friend: to undertake the first, would be the
laughter of Antonio; and not to attempt the second, the shame of all Portugal
and Spain: he therefore preferres generositie before reason, and passion
above judgment, and so resolves to fight with Antonio: to which end he makes
choice of his Cousin Villandras for his Second, and the next morn sends him to
the Castle with this Challenge:

SEBASTIANO TO ANTONIO.
I Must either return my Sister Berinthia to Avero, or lose my life here at
Elvas: for I had rather dye, then live to see her dishonor, since hers is mine:
neither do I first infringe or violate the bonds of our familiarity, rather
thy self, since thou art both the author and cause thereof: wherefore of two
things resolve on one: Either before to morrow morning six of the clock
render me my Sister Berinthia, or else at that hour meet me on foot, with
thy Second, in the square green Meadow under thine own Castle, where the
choice of two single Rapiers shall awayt or attend thee. If thou art
honorable, thou will grant my first; if generous, not deny my second request.

SEBASTIANO.


Antonio receives this Challenge, bears it privately, from all the world,
especially from his sweet Berinthia, who (poor Lady) little imagines or
suspects her brother and lover are rushing forth for her sake: He returns
this answer by Villandras, that he cannot grant Sebastiano his first
request, nor will not deny him his second. So he chooses a Cousin-germane of
his, a valiant young Gentleman, termed Don Belasco, who willingly and freely
ingageth himself in this quarrel. So he and Villandras that night (with as
much friendship as secrecy) meet in the City, and resolve on the Rapiers; and
other ceremonies requisite in Duels. The morn appears, when our Combatants
leap from their beds to the field; where, a little before six (being the
appointed hour) all parties appear: the Seconds perform their office in
visiting the Principals, who cast off their doublers and draw, and so
traversing their ground, they, with judgment and generositie, fall to their
business; at the first cloze, Antonio is wounded in the right arm, and
Sebastiano in the left side, which glaunced on a rib: at the second, Sebastiano
wounds Antonio 'twixt the breast and shoulder, a little above his right pap,
and he him clean through the body, of a large and dangerous wound, whence
issued forth abundance of blood: so they divide themselves and take breath:
They again fall to it, and at this third close, Sebastiano repayes Antonio
with a mournful and fatal interest: for he runs him through the body on the
left side, a little below the heart; whereof staggering, he falls, and so
Sebastiano dispatcheth him, and nails him to the ground stark dead.
Villandras congratulates with him for his victory, which Sebastiano with much
modesty, ascribes to the power and providence of God, and not to the weakness
of his own arm. Bellasco is no way daunted with the misfortune and death of
his Principal, but rather like a generous Gentleman and valiant Second,
resolves to sell it dearly to Villandras. They are not long unsheathing of
their Rapiers: for as soon as Bellasco has covered up Antonio with his
cloak, they approach at their very first meeting. Bellasco slightly hurts
Villandras in the right shoulder, and Villandras him through the body and
reins with a fatal wound, wherewith his sword fell from him, and he to the
ground; when fearing and presaging his death, he with a faint language begs his
life of Villandras, who at the sight and hearing hereof, throws away his own
Rapier, and stoupes to assist him. But in vain; for it is not in his power to
give him his life: for by this time he is dead, and his soul departed to
another world. This tragical news is soon known and bruited in Elvas,
whereof the Criminal Judges of that City remit Sebastiano with as much ease,
as Villandras with difficulty (in favor of money and friends) and obtain
their pardons. And now the news hereof likewise flies to Antonio's Castle,
where his dead body, and that of Bellasco, are speedily conveyed and brought,
to the grief and sorrow of all those of the Castle, who bitterly weep for the
disaster of their Lord and Master. But all these tears are nothing to those of
Antonio's two sisters; nor theirs any thing, in comparison of these of our
sweet Berinthia, who is no sooner advertised hereof, but she falls to the
ground with sorrow, and there wrings her hands, beats her breast, and tears
off her hair, in such mournful and pitiful sort, that Cruelty her self
could not refrain from tears, to see the numberless infinity of hers:
Counsel, advice, persuasion cannot persuade her to give a moderation to her
mourning, or limits to her sorrows: for they are so violent, as their
extremity exceeds all excess. She will see the dead body of her dear
Antonio; all those of the Castle are not capable to divert her eyes from this
woeful and pitiful object; at the sight whereof she falls to the ground on
her knees, and gives his breathless body a thousand kisses: yea, she washes
his sweet cheeks with a whole deluge and inundation of her salt tears: she
cannot speak for sighing, nor utter a word for weeping; only wringing her
hands, she at last breathed forth these mournful and passionate speeches: O
my dear Antonio, my sweet and dear Antonio, Antonio, would God my death had
ransomed and preventhine, O my Antonio, my Antonio.

Leave we Berinthia to her passionate sorrows, and sorrowful passions, from
which her brother Sebastiano will soon awake her; who by this time, as Victor
and Conqueror, is come to the Castle gate, and demands her, where he sees
himself refused, and the draw-bridges and approaches drawn up, and rampired
with Barricadoes: he craves aid of the Criminal Judges, who send the Provost
with an armed company of Soldiers: so they force the Castle gate with a
Petard, where sorrowful Berinthia is delivered into the hands of her joyful
and rejoicing brother Sebastiano, who with sweet persuasions and advice seeks
to exhale and dry up her tears: but her affection is so great, as she is not
capable of consolation. In a word, she cannot look on her Brother with the
eye of affection, but of revenge and indignation; yea, she wishes her self
metamorphosed from a Virgin to a man, that she might be revenged of her
Brother for the death of her dear Lover Antonio. Sebastiano leaving the dead
bodies of Antonio and Belasco to their Graves, takes Coach with his incensed
and sorrowful Sister Berinthia; and so leaves Elvs and returns toward Avero:
where his Father Vilarezo and his Mother Alphanta welcome him home with praise,
and their Daughter Berinthia with checkes and frowns, who (the best she may)
smothers her discontents; but yet vows to be revenged of her Brother, for
killing the life of her joy, and joy of her life, Antonio. But all vows of
this bloody nature and quality are better broken then kept, which if Berinthia
had had the grace to have considered, and made good use of, doubtless her hand
had proved more joyful, and not so fatal and miserable.

Come we now to Catalina, who seeing the object of her affection, Antonio,
dead, and her Sister Berinthia returned, who, for his sake, was that of her
living malice, she secretly confesses her fault to her sister, in seeking
formerly twice to have poisoned her by Ansilva, craves pardon of her, vowing
henceforth to convert her malice to affection, and so reconciles her self to
her; whereunto her Sister Berinthia willingly condescendeth. Catalina has made
her peace with her Sister, but she has not contracted and concluded it with
God for Ansilva's death. Earth may forget this Murder, but Heaven will not.
Gods judgments are as just as secret, and as true as wonderful; for he has
a thousand means to punish us, when we think our selves safe and furthest
from punishment: which our wretched Catalina, and her execrable Empericke
Sarmiata shall see verifyed in themselves. For the smoke of this their bloody
Crime of Murder has pierced the Vaultes and Windows of Heaven, and is
ascended to the Nostrells of the Lord, who has now bent his Bow, and made
ready his Arrows to revenge and punish them. The manner is thus:

A Sister of Ansilva's, named Isabella, is to be married in Avero, who invites
the Ladies Catalina and Berinthia to her Wedding. Berinthia is too sorrowful
to be so merry, as desirous rather to go to her own Grave, then to any
others Nuptials: so she stays at home, only her Sister Catalina takes
Coach, with an intent to accompany the Bride-woman to Church: but see the
Providence and Justice of God, how it surpriseth and overtakes this wtetched
Gentlewoman Catalina! for as she was in her way, the Sun is instantly
eclipsed, and the Skies overcast, and so a terrible and fearful Thunderbolt
pierces her through the breast, and lays her near dead in her Coach: her
Wayting-mayds and Coachman having no hurt, are yet amazed at this strange and
dismal accident; so they think it fit to return. Catalina is for a time
speechless, he Parents are as it were dead with grief and sorrow hereat, she
is committed to her bed, and searched, and all her body above her wast is found
coleblacke: the best Physicians and Chirurgians are sent for, they see her
death-strooken with that Planet, and therefore adjudge their skill but vain:
her strength and senses fall from her, which Catalina having the happiness to
perceive, and grace to feel, will no longer be seduced with the devils
temptations. The Divines prepare her soul for Heaven, and now she will no
longer dissemble with man or God; she will not charge her conscience with so
foul a Crime as Murder, the which she knows will prove a stop to the
fruition of her felicity. She confesses, she twice procured her
Wayting-gentlewoman Ansilva to poison her Sister Berinthia; and since that, she
has given Sarmiata one hundred Ducats to poison the said Ansilva, which he
performed, and whereof she humbly begs pardon of all the world, and
religiously of God, whom she beseeches to be merciful to her soul: and so,
though she lived profanely and impiously, yet she dyed repentantly and
religiously. Vilarezo and Alphanta, her old parents, grieve and storm at her
death, but more extremely at the manner thereof, and especially at the
confession of her bloody crimes, as well toward living Berinthia, as dead
Ansilva, only their Daughter Berinthia is silent hereat; glad, that she is
freed of an enemy, sorrowful, to have lost a Sister: they are infinitely vexed
to publish their daughter Catalina's crimes, yet they are enforced to it, that
thereby this Sarmiata, this Agent of Hell, may receive condign punishment for
his bloody offense here on earth. So they acquaint the Criminal Judges hereof,
who decree order and power for his apprehension. Sarmiata is revelling and
feasting at Isabella's wedding; to which he is appointed and requested to
furnish the Sweetmeats for the Banquets: but he little thinks what sour
sauce there is providing for him. We are never nearest danger, then when we
think our selves furthest from it: and although his sinful security was
such, as the Devil had made him forget his murder of Ansilva, yet God will,
and does remember it; and lo, here comes his storm, here his apprehension, and
presently his punishment. By this time the news of Catalina's sudden death
(but not of her secret confession) is published in Avero, and arrived at the
Bride-house, which gives both astonishment and grief to all the world; but
especially to Sarmiata, whose heart and conscience now rings him many
thundering peales of fear, terror, and despair: his bloody thoughts pursue
him like so many bloudhounds, and because he has forsaken God, therefore the
devil will not forsake him; he counsels him to fly, and to provide for his
safety; but what safety so unsecure, dangerous, or miserable for a Christian,
as to throw himself into the Devils protection? Sarmiata hereon fearing that
Catalina had revealed his poisoning of Ansilva, very secretly steals away his
Cloak, and so slips down to a Posterne door of the little Court, hoping to
escape; but he is deceived of his hopes: for the eye of Gods providence finds
him out. The House is beleaguerd for him by Officers, who apprehend him as he
is issuing forth, and so commit him close prisoner. In the afternoon the
Judges examine him upon the poisoning of Ansilva, and the receipt of one
hundred Ducats, to effect it, from Catalina, which she at her death
confessed. He adds sin to sin, and denies it with many impious oaths and
fearful imprecations; but they avail him nothing: his Judges censure him to
the Rack, where, upon the first torment he confesses it, but with so
graceless an impudency, as he rather rejoices then grieves hereat: where we
may observe how strongly the Devil sticks to him, and how closely he is
bewitched to the Devil: so for reparation of this foul crime of his, he is
condemned to be hanged, which the next morn is performed right against
Vilarezo his house, at a Gallows purposely erected; and which is worse then
all the rest, as this lewd villain Sarmiata lived profanely, so he died as
desperately, without repenting his bloody fact, or imploring pardon or mercy of
God for the same. O miserable example! O fearful end! O bloody and damnable
miscreant! We have seen the Theater of this History gored with great variety
of blood, the mournful and lamentable spectacle whereof is capable to make
any Christian heart relent into pity, compassion, and tears. But this is not
all, we shall yet see more, not that it any way increases our terror, but
rather our consolation, since thereby we may observe that Murder comes from
Satan, and its punishment from God.

Catalina's confession and death is not capable to deface or wash away
Berinthia's malice and revenge to her brother Sebastiano, for killing of her
dear and sweet Love Antonio. Other Tragedies are past, but this as yet not
acted, but to come: Lo now at last (though indeed too too soon) it comes on
the Stage. The remembrance of Antonio and his affection is still fresh in her
youthful thoughts and contemplations, yea, his dead Idea is always present
and living in her heart and breast: it is true, Sebastiano is her brother; it is
as true she says, that if he had not killed Antonio, Antonio had been her
husband. Again she considers, that as Antonio's life preserved hers from
death; so her life has been the cause of his: and as he lost his life for
her sake, why should not she likewise leave hers for his? or rather, why should
she permit him to live, who has bereaved her of him? But her living affection
to her dead friend is so violent, and withal so prejudicate and revengefull,
as she neither can, nor will see her Brother, who killed him, but with malice
and indignation. In stead of consulting with nature and grace, she only
converseth with choler and passion; yea, she is so miserably transported in
her rage, and so outragiously wilful in her resolution, as she shuts the door
of her heart to the two former virtues, to whom she should open it, and opens
it to the two latter vices, against whom she should shut it. A misery equally
ominous and fatal, where Reason is not the Mistress of our Passions, and
Religion the Queen of our Reason. She sees this bloody attempt of hers,
whereinto she is entering, is sinful and impious; and yet her faith is so
weak toward God, and the Devil so strong with her, as she is constant to
advance, and resolute not to retire therein. Oh that Berinthia's former Virtues
should be disgraced with so foul a Vice! and oh that a face so sweetly fair
should be accompanied and linked with a heart so cruelly barbarous, so
bloudily inhumane! for what can she hope from this a^mpt in killing her
brother, but likewise to ruin her self? nay, had she had any spark of wit
or grace left her, she should consider, that for this foul offense her body
shall receive punishment in this world, and her soul, without repentance, in
that to come: but she cannot erect her eyes to heaven, she is all set on
revenge; so the Devil has plotted the Murder of her brother Sebastiano, and
she, like a most wretched and inhumane sister, will speedily act it. The
manner is thus; (the which I cannot remember without grief, nor pen without
tears) She provides her self of a long and sharp knife, the which, some ten
days after the death o^ (...) sister Catalina, 'twixt four and five of the
clock in the morning, she hides in o^ of her sleeves; and the better to cover
and overvaile her villainy, she in the same hand takes her Lute, and so enters
her brothers Chamber, and finds him sleeping, being a pretty way distant from
hers, and his Page Philippo in a lower Chamber under him, resolving that if
she had found him waking, she would play on her Lute, and affirm, she came to
give him the good morrow. But Sebastiano his fortune, or rather his misfortune
was such, that he was then soundly sleeping, without dreaming, or once
thinking what should befall him; when his wretched and execrable sister
Berinthia, stalks close to him, and laying her Lute softly on the window,
draws out her devilish knife forth her sleeve, and as a shee-devill
incarnate, cuts his throat, to the end he might neither cry nor speak; and
so, though with a female hand, yet with a masculine courage, she (with as much
malice as have) gives him seven several wounds through the body, and as near
the heart as she could* whereof he twice turning himself in his bed, n^ ver
sprawled more: and then taking up her Lute, and leaving him reeking in his
blood, she after this her hellish fact, hyes her self to her Chamber.

This cruel Murder is not so closely perpetrated and acted, but Philippo,
Sebastiano's page, hears some extraordinary stirring and struggling in his
Masters chamber, and so leaps out of his bed, and taking his cloak on his
shoulders, and his Rapier in his hand, he a^ends the Stay^; where Berinthia
has not made so great speed* but he sees h^ ^ing her Chamber, and throwing
her door after her: whence running to his Masters Chamber, he finds the
door open, and his Master most cruelly murdered in his bed, of eight several
wounds; at which bloody and lamentable spectacle he makes many bitter and
pitiful outcryes, whereat all the house is in allarum, and the folks and
servants repair thither of all sides. By this time Berinthia has shifted her
outward Taffeta gown, sprinkled all with blood, and wrapped her bloody knife
close in it, and for the more secrecy, throws it into her Closestool, and so
awayts the coming up of her Father and Mother, whom the mournful echo and
sorrowful news of their son Sebastiano's cruel m^ther, had with an ocean of
tears wafted to his Chamber, with whom Berinthia likewise, all blubbered with
tears, enters. They are all amazed at the sight of this bloody and breathless
corpse, and wringing their hands, Father, Mother, Daughter, and Servants look
one on another in this calamity, and at this sorrowful disaster. They search
every Chamber, Vault, and Door of the House, and find no body, nor print of
drops of blood whatsoever; when Philippo the Page cries out, that he fears it
is the Lady Berinthia, who has murdered her Brother, and his Master
Sebastiano, for that he saw her flying to her Chamber as he ascended the
Stayres. Vilarezo and Alphanta his wife are doubly amazed at this report, but
graceless Berinthia is no way daunted or astonished hereat, but affirms, she
likewise heard some stirring in her Brothers Chamber, which made her arise and
come to the Stayr^ head, where seeing Philippo, she being in her night attire,
modesty made her retire to her Chamber. They all believe the sugar of her
words, and the circumstance of her excuse; yet they will not proclaim her
innocence, till they have searched her Chamber, and all her Trunks, where they
find no Knife, Stilletto, Dagger, or any other offe^sive Weapon; and so her
Father and Mother acquit her: but God will not. Notwithstanding they must
advertise the Criminal Judges of this lamentable and blo^ die murder of their
son, which they do. So they arrive, visit the dead body, and cause all the
House to be searched: but as soon as they heard Philippo's speeches and
suspicion of Berinthia, then, considering her affection to Antonio, and her
brother Sebastiano's killing of him at Elvas, they attribute this to be her
fact, as proceeding from passionate revenge; when the sequel and circumstances
thereof being apparent in themselves, the^ ^t regarding her Fathers prayers,
her Mothers requests, and her own tears, seiz^ her, and so send and commit
her close Prisoner: where, wretched Gentlewoman, she has a whole night left
and given her, to see and consider the foulness of her fact, and to prepare
her self to her answer: which whether it will breed in her confession or
denial, obstinacy or repentance, as yet I know not. So from her imprisonment,
come we to her answer.

Avero rings with the news of this foul and bloody Murder. All bewail, all
lament the death of Sebastiano, as a Gentleman, who was truly noble, truly
generous: but his Father Vilarezo and Mother Alphanta seem to drown
themselves in their tears, at these mournful accidents, strange crosses, and
unheard of afflictions of theirs* For though they will not believe, yet they
deeply fear, that their daughter Berinthia was the murderer of her brother
Sebastiano: and as affection seems to di^ert them from this opinion, so reason
indeavoureth to persuade and confirm them in the contrary. The next mo^e the
Judges sit, and send for Berinthia, who comes accompanied with her parents, and
many of her kinsfolks: they again examine her, and confront her with
Philippo; she is firm in her denial, and her Judges find circu^tances, but
no probability nor witness against her, sufficient to convict her of this
crime; yet directed by the finger of God, they condemn her to the Rack. One
of her Judges pitying her descent, youth, and beauty, as much as he detests
this Murder, entreats that her Chamber may be first curiously searched, ere
she exposed to the Rack. This advice and request is heard and followed with
approbation. He, and two other Officers, accompanied with some of her friends,
repair to Vilarezo his house, and Berinthia her Chamber; they leave no place,
Trunk, Chest, or Box unsearched: yea, their curiosity, or to say truer,
their zeal and fidelity to Justice descends so low, as to visit her
Close-stoole, which, for want of the key, they break open; and behold the
providence and Justice of God! here they find Berinthia's bloody Gown, and
therein very closely wrapped up that hellish Knife, wherewith she perpetrated
this inhumane murder on her only brother. They praise and glorify God for
the discovery hereof, and so return to their Tribunal of Justice, bringing
these bloody evidences with them, which Berinthia might all this while have
removed, if God, to his glory, and her shame, had not all this time purposely
blinded the eyes of her judgment to the contrary. At the sight hereof she,
without any torment, confesses the Murder, and with many tears repents
herself of it; adding withal, that her affection to Antonio led her to this
revenge on her brother: and therefore beseeches her Judges to have compassion
on her youth. But the foulness of her fact, in those grave and just
personages, wipes off the fairness of her request: So they consult, and
pronounce Sentence against her, That for expiation of this her cruel murder on
the person of her brother, she the next morn shall be hanged in the public
Market place. So all praise God for the detection of this lamentable Murder,
and for the condemnation of this execrable Murtheresse: and those, who before
looked on her youth and beauty with pity, now behold her foul crime with
hatred and detestation; and as they applaud the sincerity of her former
affection to Antonio, so they far more detest and condemn this her inhumane
cruelty to her own brother Sebastiano. But what grief is there comparable to
that of her Father and Mother? whose age, content, and patience is not only
battered, but razed down with the several assaults of affliction; so as they
wish themselves buried, or that their Children had been unborne: for it is
rather a torment then a grief to them, that they, whom they hoped would have
been props and comforts to their age, should now prove instruments and
subjects to shorten their days, and consequently to draw their age to the
miseries of an untimely and sorrowful grave. But although they have tasted a
world of grief and anxiety, first for the death of their Daughter Catalina,
and then of their only Son Sebastiano; yet it pierces them to the h^rt and
gall, that this their last Daughter and Child Berinthia should pass by the
passage of a halter, and end her days upon so ignominious and shameful a
Stage as the Gallows; which would add a blemish to the luster of their blood
and posterity, that time could never have power either to wipe off, or wash
away: which to prevent, Vilarezo and his wife Alphanta use all their friends
and mortal powers, toward the Judges, to convert their Daughters Sentence
into a less shameful and more honorable death. So although the Gallows be
erected, Berinthia prepared to dye, and a world of people, yea, in a manner,
the whole people of Avero concurred and seated to see her now take her last
farewell of the world; yet the importunacie and misery of her parents, her own
descent, youth, and beauty, as also her end^ered affection and servent love to
her Lover Antonio, at last obtain compassion and favor of her Judges. So they
revoke and change their former decree, and sweeten the rigor thereof with one
more honorable and mild, and less sharp, bitter, and shameful, and
definitively adjudge her to be immured up betwixt two walls, and there with a
slender diet to end the remainder of her days. And this Sentence is speedily
put in execution; whereat her parents, friends, and acquaintance, yea, all that
knew her, very bitterly grieve and lament; and far the more, in respect they
cannot be permitted to see or visit her, or she them; only the Physicians and
Divines have admittance and access to her, those, to provide earthly physic
for her body; and these, spiritual for her soul. And in this lamentable
estate she is very penitent and repentant for all her sins in general, and
for this her vile murder of her Brother in particular: yea, a little
imprisonment, or rather the spirit of God has opened the eyes of her faith,
who now defying the Devil who had seduced and drawn her hereunto, she makes
her peace with God, and assures her self, that her true repentance has made
hers with him. So, unaccustomed to be pent up in so strait and dark a Mew,
the yellow Iaundies, and a burning Fever surprise her: and so she ends her
miserable days.

Lo, these are the bitter fruits of Revenge and Murder, which the undertakers
(by the just judgment of God) are enforced to taste and swallow down, when in
the heat of their youth, and height of their impiety they least dream or
think thereof: by the sight of which great effusion of blood, yea, by all
these varieties of mournful and fatal accidents, if we will divorce our
thoughts from Hell to Earth, and wed our contemplations and affections from
Earth to Heaven, we shall then, as true Christians, and sons of the eternal
God, run the race of our mortality in peace in this world, and consequently
be rewarded with a glorious Crown of immortal felicity in that to come.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY VIII.
Belluile treacherously murthereth Poligny in the street. Laurieta, Poligny's
Mistress, betrayeth Belluile to her Chamber, and there in revenge shoots him
through the body with a Pistol, when assisted by her Wayting-Mayd Lucilla, they
likewise give him many wounds with a Poniard, and so murder him. Lucilla
flying for this fact, is drowned in a Lake, and Laurieta is taken, hanged and
burnt for the same.

IT is an infallible Maxim, that if we open our hearts to sin, we shut them
to godliness; for as soon as we follow Satan, God flies from us, because we
first fled from him: but that his mercy may shine in our ingratitude, he by
his servants, his holy Spirit, and himself, seeks all means to reclaim us,
as well from the vanity of our thoughts, as from the profaneness and
impuritie of our actions: but if we become obstinate and obdurate in our
transgressions, and so like Heathens, fall from vice to vice; whereas we
should as Christians, grow up from virtue to virtue; then it is not he, but
our selves that make ship wrack both of our selves and souls; of our selves
in this life, of our souls in that to come; then which no misery can be so
great, none so unfortunate and miserable. It is true, the best of Gods children
are subject to sin; but to delight and persevere therein, is the true way as
well to hell as death. All have not the gift of pure and chaste thoughts,
neither can we so conserve or sanctify our bodies, but that concupiscence
may, and will sometimes assail us (or rather the devil in it) but to pollute
them with fornication, and to transform them from the Temples of the holy
Ghost, to the members of a harlot, this, though corrupt Nature seem to allow
or tolerate, yet Grace does not only deny, but detest. But as one sin is
seldom without another, either at her heels or elbow; so too too often it
falls out, that M^rther accompanies Fornication and Adultery: as if one of
these foul crimes were not enough to make us miserable, but that in stead of
going, we will needs ride poast to hell. A woeful President, and lamentable
and mournful Example whereof, I here produce to the view of the world, in
three unfortunate personages, in a lascivious Lady, and two lewd and debosht
young Gentlemen, who all very lamentably cast themselves away upon the Sylla of
Fornication, and the Charybdis of Murder: for they found the fruits and end of
their beastly pleasures far more bitter, then their beginning was sweet: yea,
and because at first they would not look on repentance, at last shame looks
on them, and they, when it is too late, both on a miserable shame, and a
shameful misery. May we all read it to Gods glory, and consequently to the
reformation of our lives, and the consolation and salvation of our own souls.

IN the beautiful City of Avignion, (seated in the Kingdom of France, and in
the Province of Provence) being the Capital of the Duchy of Venissa,
belonging to the Pope, and wherein for the term of welneere eighty years,
they held their Pontifical See, there dwelt a young Gentlewoman of some
twenty years of age, termed Madamoyselle Laurieta, whose father and mother
being dead, was left alone to her self, their only child and heir, being
richer in beauty then lands, and endued with many excellent qualities and
perfections, which gave grace and luster to her beauty, as her beauty did to
them: For she spoke the Latin and Italian tongue perfect, was very expert and
excellent in singing, dancing, music, painting, and the like, which made her
famous in that City. But as there needs but one vice to eclipse and drown
many virtues; so this fair Laurieta was more beautiful then chaste, and not
half so modest as lascivious. It is as great a happiness for children to
enjoy their Parents, as a misery to want them: For Laurieta's Father and
Mother had been infinitely careful and curious to train her up in the School
of Virtue and Piety, and wherein her youth had (during the term of their
lives) made a happy entrance, and as I may say, a fortunate and glorious
progression: But when God, the great Moderator, and sovereign Judge of the
world, had in his eternal Decree and sacred Providence taken them out of this
world, then Laurieta was left to the wide world, and to the vanity thereof,
without guide or governor, exposed to the variety of the fortunes, or rather
the misfortunes of the times, as a Ship without Pilot ^r Helm, subject to the
mercy of every merciless wind and wave of the Sea: yea, and then it was that
she forgot her former modesty and chastity, and now began to adore the
Shrines of Venus and Cupid, by polluting and prostituting her body to the
beastly pleasures of lust and for^cation, wherein (it grieves me to relate)
she took a great delight and felicity. But she shall pay dear for this
bitter-sweet vice of hers: yea, and though it seem to begin in content and
pleasure, yet we shall assuredly see it end in shame, repentance and misery:
for this sin of Whoredom betrays, when it seems to delight us, and
strangleth, when it makes greatest show to embrace us: so sweet and pure
virtues, are modesty and chastity; so foul and fatal vices* are
concupiscence and lust. But he with whom she was most familiar, and to whom
she imparted the greatest part of her favors, was to one Monsieur de
Belluile, a proper young Gentleman, dwelling near the City of Arles, by birth
and extraction, noble, but otherwise more rich then wise: who coming to
Avignion, no sooner saw Laurieta, but he both gloried in the sight of her
singular, and triumphed in the contemplation of her exquisite and incomparable
beauty, making that his best content, and this his sweetest felicity; that,
his sovereign good; and this, his heaven upon earth: so as losing himself in
the labyrinth of her beauty, and as it were drowning his thoughts in the sea
of his concupiscence and sensuality, he spends not only his whole time, but
a great part of his wealth, in wantonizing and entertaining her: a vicious and
foul fault, not only peculiar to Belluile, but incident and fatal to too
many Gallants, as well of most parts of Christendom in general, as of France
in particular; it being indeed a disasterous and dangerous rock, whereon many
inconsiderate and wretched Gentlemen have suffered shipwreck, not only of their
reputations, healths and estates, but many times of their lives.

In the mean time, Laurieta (more jealous of her same, then careful to
preserve her chastity) is advertised, that Belluile is not content to cull the
dainties of her beauty and youth, but he forgets himself and his discretion
so far, as to vaunt thereof, by letting fall some speeches, tending to the
blemish and disparagement of her honor: so as vain and lascivious as she is,
yet the touching of this string, affords her harsh and distasteful melody: For
she will seek to cover her shame by her hypocrisy and so resolves to make
him know the foulness of his offense, in that of his baseness and
ingratitude. To which end, at her first interview and meeting of him, she not
only checks him for it, but forbids and banisheth him her company: which
indeed had been a just cause and opportunity for him to have converted his
lust into chastity, and his folly into repentance. But he is too dissolute
and vicious, to be so happily reclaimed from Laurieta; and therefore he is
resolved, not only to justify his innocence, but thereby also to persevere
in his sin: He is acquainted with many Gentlemen, who forgetting themselves,
conceive a felicity and glory, to erect the trophies of their vanities upon
the disparagement of Ladies honors: yea, he seems to be so far from being
guilty of this error, as he taxes and condemns others, in being guilty or
accessory thereunto. So, although his Mistress Laurieta remain still coy,
strange and haggard to him, yet he persevereth in his affection to her; who at
last judging of his innocence by his constancy; and of that, by his many
letters and presents which he still sent her; as also observing that she had
no firm grounds, nor could produce any pregnant or valable witnesses of this
report; she again exchangeth her frowns into smiles, and so receives and
intertaines him into her favor, only with this premonition and caution, That
if ever hereafter she heard of his folly or ingratitude in this kind, she
would never look him in the face, except with contempt and detestation. So
these their dis-joynted affections, as well by oaths as protestations, are
again confirmed and cimented: but such lustful contracts, and lascivious
familiarities and sympathies, seldom or never make prosperous ends.

Now to give form and life to this History: Not long after, a brave young
Gentleman of Mompillier, named Monsieur de Poligny, having some occasion, comes
to Avignion, who frequenting their public Balls or Dancings, no sooner saw
our fair and beautiful Laurieta, but he falls in love with her, and salutes
and courts her: and from thencefoorth deemes her so fair, as he uses all
means to become her servant, but not in the way of honor and Marriage, rather
with a purpose to make her his Courtezan then his Wife. But he sees himself
deceived in the irregular passion of his affection: for Laurieta is averse, and
will not be either tractable or flexible to his desires: so as his suite is
vain, and she so deaf to his requests, as neither his prayers, sighs,
Letters, nor Presents are capable to purchase her favor. Poligny infinitely
grieves heereat, which notwithstanding makes the flame of his lust rather
increase then diminish: so as after much pensiveness, he begins to beat his
wits, and to awaken his invention, how he may crown his desires by enjoying
Laurieta, when lo, an occasion presents it self to him unexpected.

Madamoyselle la Palaisiere, a rich young Gentlewoman near Pont Saint Esprit,
living in Avignion, and seeing Poligny at the dancing, does exceedingly fall
in love with him; yea, ^hee so admires the sweetness of his favor, and the
excellency of his personage, as she rejoices in nothing so much; and to
write the truth, in nothing else but in his company: so as, had not modesty
withheld her, she would have prooved her own Advocate, and have informed him
thereof her self. Poligny receives so many secret signs and testimonies of
her affection, by private glances and the like, as he cannot be ignorant
thereof: but his love, or rather his lust to Laurieta, has so absolutely taken
up his heart and thoughts, as it has left no place nor corner for la
Palaisiere: so as here we may observe and remarke a different commixture, and
disparitie of affections. Poligny loves Laurieta, and not she him: la
Palaisiere affects Poligny, and not he her: what these passions and
occurrences will produce, we shall shortly see.

La Palaisiere, having her heart pierced through with the love of Poligny,
knowing him to be Laurieta's servant, and she the Mistress of Belluile,
either out of her affection, or jealousy, or both, resolves at next meeting to
acquaint Poligny with it, thereby purposely to withdraw his affection from her
to her self: The occasion is proffered, and opportunity seems to favor and
second her desires. Some three days after, the Jesuits (who as the
Mountebanks and Panders of Kingdoms and Estates, leave no invention, nor
Ceremony unattempted, to seduce and bewitch the affections of the world) cause
their Scholars to act a Comedy in their College in this City, whereat all
the Nobility and Gentry of the City and adjacent Country assemble and meet.
Thither comes Poligny, hoping to see Laurieta, and la Palaisiere to see
Poligny: but Laurieta that day is sick, and Belluile stays with her to
comfort her. So first comes Poligny, and seeing he could not see his Laurieta,
sits down pensively: then comes la Palaisiere, and seeing Poligny a far off,
prays her brother, who conducted her, to place her near him. Poligny can do
no less then salute her, and she triumphing in her good fortune, takes the
advantage of this occasion, and in sweet and sugered terms (after many pauses,
sighs and blushes) gives him to understand, that she knew his affection to
Laurieta, and withal, that Belluile and no other was her servant and
favorite. This speech of hers strikes Poligny to the quick; so as thereat he
not only bites the lip, but hangs his head: yea, this unexpected news, as
also Be^uile and Laurieta's absence, so nettle him, and frame such a Chymera of
extravagant passions in his heart and thoughts, as he could not have the
patience to sit ou^ the Comedy, but feigning himself sick, departs to his
Chamber: where a thousand jealousies ingendered of his affection, perplexe and
torment him; when remembering la Palaisieres speeches, and being infinitely
desirous to know the truth of Belluile his affection to Laurieta, and of hers
to him, he sees no means, nor person so fit to reveal the same, as Lucilla,
Laurieta's Wayting-mayd. This Lucilla, Poligny winns with gold, in
consideration whereof, she reveals him all, how Belluile was her chiefest
Minion and Favorite: and yet, for some words he the other day in ignorance or
Wine, let fall to the prejudice of her honor, she was like to casheere and
discard him. Lucilla having thus forgotten her own fidelity, in bewraying the
dishonor of her Mistress; Poligny understanding Belluile to be a coward of
his hands, though not of his tongue; and in a word, not to be so complete a
Gallant as he supposed him, he of a subtle and malicious invention resolves
to work on him; and so conceives a plot, which we shall see presently put in
execution and acted: he very politikely puts a good face on all his
discontents and passions: and although Laurieta would not see him, yet he
fairly intrudes himself into Belluile's company, and of purpose becomes
familiar with him. So they very often meet: for they sense, dance, ride, vault
and hunt together: so as at last none are so great Consorts and Cammerades as
they. But Poligny thinking every hour a year, before he had played his
prize, makes a party at Tennis with Belluile for a collation, and beats him;
and so taking two Gentlemen, La Fontaine, and Borelles, his friends with them,
away they go^ all four to a Tavern. Poligny as secret as malicious in this
his plot, in the midst of their mirth speaks thus to Belluile, Sir, quoth
he, I am sorry for your loss of this Collation: but if it please you to
honor me with your company to morrow to Orange, a City which I much desire
to see, I will pay you the dinner in requital thereof. Belluile very readily
and willingly consents hereunto, and La Fontaine and Borell^ vow they will
likewise have their share, both of the journey and dinner. So the next morn
they all take horse for Orange: but first Belluile gives his Mistress Laurieta
the good morrow, and acquaints her with his journey. They view this old City,
the ancient patrimony and Principality of the Illustrious Princes of Orange,
from whence they derive their name: where Poligny having given order for the
dinner, away they go, visit the Castle, and salute the deputed Governor
thereof Monsieur ^osberghe; they see the part of the Amphitheatre yet standing,
the Cathedral Church, the double Wall of the City, and the old Roman Arch
not far off, with all other remarkable objects and monuments; and by this
time the Cook and their stomachs tax them of their long stay. So they
return to their Inn, fall to their Viands, and like frolike Gentlemen, wash
them down with store of Claret: and now Poligny, as mal^cious in heart, as
pleasant in countenance and conversation, here casts forth his lure and snare
to surprise and entangle Belluile. O quoth he, how happy the Gentlemen of
Italy are to us of France, since after dinner every one goes freely to his
Courtizan without controulment! I know not, quoth la Fontaine, what Orange is,
but I think Avignion is not destitute of good fellow W^nches, who make Venus
their queen, and Cupid their god. Surely no, replies Belluile, for I am
confident, that for Jews and Courtizans, for the greatness of it, it may
compare with the best City of Italy: for from the Lady to the Kitchin-mayd I
dare say they will all prove tractable. Nay, quoth Borelles, except still our
holy Sisters the Nunns. Not I faith, quoth he, nor my Mistress neither.
Indeed, replies Poligny, if I knew you had a Mistress of that complexion, I
would adventure a glass of Claret to her health. When Belluile (out of a
fantastic French humor) affirmed he had a Mistress, whose beauty was so
excellent, as he knew he could not receive shame to name her; and if you
please to honor her self and me with her health, I proclaim that
Madamoyselle Laurieta is my Mistress, and my self her servant.

Of wise and Christian Gentlemen, what profane speeches and debosht
table-talke are these they use here, as if their glory consisted in their
shame, or their best virtues were to be discovered in the worst of vices? For
howsoever the Viands they did eat, may preserve the health of their bodies,
yet this dissolute communication of theirs must needs poison and destroy that
of their souls: for as they should praise God in the receipt of the one; so
contrariwise they incense and displease his sacred Majesty in giving him the
other: yea, this is so far from Christianity and heaven, as it is the high
and true way to Atheism and hell: for whores and healths, instead of prayer
and thankesgiving, are the prodigious and certain forerunners of a seared
conscience, and the dangerous and execrable symptoms of a leprous soul.

Birds are taken by their feet, and men by their tongues. Belluile having so
basely and sottishly abused himself in the disparaging of his Mistress
Laurieta, Poligny has his errand, for which he purposely came to Orange. So
dinner ended, they very pleasantly return for Avignion. That night Poligny
cannot sleep for joy, or rather for revenge: For now he presumes to know how
to work himself into Laurieta's favor, by unhorsing Belluile. It is a
dishonest and base part to betray our friend, and under the cloak of
friendship and familiarity, to harbor and retain malice against them: but
this irregular and violent passion of love in young and unstayed judgments,
many times bears down all other respects and considerations. For if Religion
and Conscience be contemned, what hope is there that either honesty be
regarded, or friendship observed, since it is the only ciment and sinews
thereof? But Poligny is as resolute as malicious in his purpose; and therefore
the next morn by his Lackey, sends the Lady Laurieta this Letter:

POLIGNY to LAVRIETA.
IT is out of sincere affection to thee, and not out of premeditated malice to
Belluile, that I pres^me to signify thee, how lately in my presence at Orange
his tongue let fall some words that tended to the prejudice and disparagement
of thine honor: whereof I know it is not only the part, but the duty of a
true Gentleman, to be rather curious in preserving, then any way ingrate^ll in
revealing thereof. Neither do I attempt to send thee this news, thereby to
insi^ate, for draw thee to affect me the more, or him the less: only since it
is contrary to my complexion and nature, to permit any Lady to be wronged in
my presence; how much less thy self, t^ whom I not owe my service, but my
life. If thou will not approve my zeal, yet thou have all the reason of the
world to pardon my presumption: and to make my letter real, what my pen
affirms to Laurieta, my sword is ready to confirm to Belluile.

POLIGNY.


In the extremity and excess of those three different passions, grief,
choler and astonishment, Laurieta receives and reads this Letter, and like a
dissolute Gentlewoman, being more careful of her reputation to the world, then
of her soul toward God, she knows not whether she have more cause and
reason either to approve Poligny's affection, or to condemn Belluiles folly:
it grieves her to the heart to have bestowed her favors on so base and
ungrateful a Gentleman as Belluile; vows she will make him repent it, and is
resolute that this vanity and folly of his, shall cost him dear; yea, she is
so impatient in these her fumes of grief and revenge, that she thought once
with all expedition to have sent for Belluile, to make him as well see the
fruits of his own ingratitude, as to taste the effects of her revenge and
indignation: but she holds it requisite and fit, and her self in a manner
bound first to thank Poligny for his courtesy, by returning him a Letter in
answer of his, which she speedily dispatcheth him by his own Lackey, to this
effect:

LAVRIETA to POLIGNY.
I Know not whether thou have showed me a truer testimony of thy discretion
and affection, then Belluile of his envy and folly. But as I rest infinitely
obliged to thee for thy care of my reputation; so I resolve shortly to make him
know what he deserves in attempting to eclipse and disparage it. Now as I
grieve not, so I must confess I cannot refrain from sorrowing, at this his
undeserved slander: for as mine innocence defends me from the first, so my
sex cannot exempt me from the second; and look what disparity there is betwixt
thy generosity and his baseness, so much there is betwixt the whiteness of my
chastity, and the foulness of h^ aspersion. I rest so confident of the truth
of thy pen, as I desire no confirmation of thy Sword; and I flatter not, rather
assure my self, that since Belluile was so indiscreet to wrong me, he will
neither have the wit or courage to right himself. I return thee many hearty
thanks for this kind office and curtesy of thine; the which though I cannot
requite, yet I will not only endeavor, but strive to deserve.

LAVRIETA.


Whiles Poligny receives Laureta's Letter with much content, and many kisses,
as triumphing to see how he has baffled Belluile by working him out, and
consequently himself into her favor, we will for a while leave him, to
consider whether the end of his treachery to Belluile will prove as fortunate
and pleasing to him, as the beginning promises. And in the mean time we will
a little speak of Laurieta, to see what course and resolution she means to
hold and observe with Belluile. It is not enough that she has written Poligny
a Letter, but her envy and contempt toward Belluile is so implacable, as she
with much have and secrecy sends for him: her requests to him are commands;
yea, he needs no other spurs but those of his lust, and of her beauty, to
make him rather fly, then poast to her presence; when not so much as once
dre^ing of his former foolish speeches delivered against his Mistress
Laurieta, much ^se of Boligny's treason conspired and acted against him, he
thinks to kiss her, ^om so often he has formerly kissed; but his hopes and
her disdain deceive hi^ for she peremptorily slights him; when having fire in
her looks, and thunder in her speeches, she charge him with this scandal
delivered by him at O^nge, in presence of Polig^y, against her honor and
chastity. And is this (quoth she) the reward a Lady shall deserve and receive
by imparting her favors to a Gentleman? and is this the part of a Gentleman,
to erect the Trophies of his glory upon his Mistress disgrace? or are these
the fruits of thy sighs and tears, or the effects of thy requests, oaths, and
Letters? Yea, such was then her furious rage, and devilish revenge, as she
was provided of a Stilletto, to have there stabbed him to the heart in her
Chamber, had not her Waiting maid Lucilla, with her best oratory and
persuasion, powerfully diverted her to the contrary, by alleging her the
imminencie of the danger, which the foulness and haynousnesse of that fact
brought her into. Belluile is amazed at this news, when now proving as profane
to God, as before he was base and ^efull to Laurieta, he, with many oaths and
imprecations, denies these speeches, and this stander; and with much passion
protests of his innocence. But this will not sat^fie Laurieta; for to make
his shame the more notorious in his guiltiness, she prod^ceth him Poligny's
Letter; whereat Belluile hangs the head, and seems to let fall the plumes, not
only of his Pride, but of his courage and justification; yet he bitterly and
vehemently persevereth in his denial: but all this is not capable to appease
or content Laurieta; and which is worst of all, nothing can possibly do it,
except he make good her honor, and his own innocence, by a combat or Duel
against Poligny. So Belluile sees himself driven to a narrow and a shrewd
push: He has wronged Laurieta, and knows not how to right her: Poligny has
wronged him, and there is no way left for him to right himself, but by
challenging and fighting with Poligny. But he loves Laurieta dearly, and
therefore must resolve to fight, or lose her. As for his own part, to give him
his true character and description, he is rather a City swaggerer, then a Field
soldier, loves rather to have a fair Sword, then a good one, and to wear it
only for show, not for use; he is ambitious of nothing more, then to be
reputed rather then found valiant: In a word, for a Tave^e quarrel, or a
Stews brawle he is excellent; but to meet his enemy in the field with a naked
Sword, that does not only daunt, but terrify him. The greatest comfort and
consolation he finds in this his perplexity, is, that he knows he has many
fellows and companions, who are as white-liver'd and as very cowards as
himself: of which numbers, he flattereth himself with this poor base hope,
that it is not impossible for Poligny to be one. But what is this to give
satisfaction to Laurieta, except it may show himself to be Belluile, but not
a Gentleman? But all these considerations notwithstanding, he loves Laurieta
so tenderly and dearly, as not daring see her, till he had met Poligny, he
pluckes up his spirits, and infusing more mettle and courage into his
resolutions then accustomed, resolves to fight with him: to which end, having
at length fitted himself of an excellent Rapier, whose temper (with as much
truth as laughter) I confess was far better then that of his heart, he, by
his Lackey some three days after, sends Poligny this Challenge.

BELLVILE to POLIGNY.
THy malice and treachery to me is as odious as remarkable; for whiles I
sought to che^ thy friendship, it has purposely been thy delight and ambition
to betray mine, in thr^ing the aple of discord betwixt the Lady thou wotest of,
and my self, upon the p^ynt of her ^nour; for whose defense and preservation I
owe not only my service, but my life: which err^, or rather crime of thine,
though thy affection to her may seem to allow, yet my reputation to the world
cannot, and my Rapier will not. Therefore, since I have been the undeserved
object of thy malice, find it not strange, that I justly repute and hold thee
the cause of my envy; which (...) receive no other satisfaction or
reconcilement, but that to morrow at five in the morn thou (...) me without
Seconds, on the Bridge by the iron stumpe (the limits 'twixt the King and the
P^) with thy single Rapier, where I will attend thee with another; of which two
take thou the (...) and give me the refusal. Sleep not too much this night,
for in the morn I doubt not (...) send thee to thine eternal rest.

BELLVILE.


Poligny receives this challenge, and admires to see Belluiles resolution, from
which all former reports could never draw assurance; it is not fear that casts
his head in^ these doubts, or these doubts into his head: for he is too
generous to be a dastard* and too Eagle-bred to turn Craven; for rejoicing in
having made Belluile swallow a Gudgin, and triumphing in presuming himself
seated in the throne of Laurieta's favor, makes him as resolute to receive
this Challenge, as willing and ready to perform it; only the remembrance that
Belluile sent it him by a Lackey, and not by (...) Gentleman, throws him into
as much disdain as choler: but he resembling himself, passes over this
respect without respect, and so bids the Lackey tell his Master* that he will
not fail to meet him at the hour and place appointed.

The night does, or should bring counsel: Belluile wishes his Challenge
unse^* but it being out of his hands, it is out of his power to revoke or
recall it. Poligny is (...) a contrary temper, and glad in his acceptance
thereof, desires that his Sword were (...) action, as well as his courage in
contemplation. So out-passing the night, which B^uile passes over with as much
fear, as Poligny with generosity, the Curtains of the night being
with-drawne, and the day appearing, ere five have stricken, Belluile
notwithstanding is first on the Bridge, and Poligny immediately after him: they
are without Seconds, and therefore they briefly unbrace, but not uncase their
Doubl^s, Belluile will be valorous in words; and so according to his
challenge, and the right of Duells, offers Poligny the sight and choice of
his Rapier. Poligny is too brave to dye in his debt, upon the point of honor
and magnanimity, and therefore gives him his, a^ contented with the refusal. So
(courtesy for a while contending with valor) they both assume and accept of
their own Rapiers; when dividing themselves, they joyn^ with resolution and
fury. At first coming up, Poligny gives Belluile the first wound in his right
Shoulder, without receiving any, whereat he is more affrighted then Poligny
rejoiced; at the second, he receives another wound in the left side, but is
not yet so happy to see, or assure himself, that his Rapier has once touched
Poligny's body, or which is less, his clothes: whereupon, considering
Poligny's generosity, and comparing the bad grounds of his quarrel with the
faintness and baseness of his courage, he throws off his Sword, prays
Poligny to desist; for he holds himself satisfied. When Poligny disdayning to
taint his honor with the least shadow of dishonor, in receiving Belluiles
shame, gives him the happiness and fruition of h^ life: and so they part. Lo
here the first fruits of their foolish and lascivious affections to Laurieta:
but I fear the second will prove more bitter and bloody* Belluile going home
with his shame and repentance, and Poligny with his honor and glory, they hush
themselves up in silence, Poligny at his Chamber, and Belluile at his
Chirurgions house to dress his wounds, hoping that as they in their fight saw
no body, so that none had seen them; but they are deceived: for two Soldiers
from the Castle walls not only espy them fighting, but know them. So they
divulge it in the City, whereof Laurieta being advertised, she sends a
confident Gentleman, a cousin germane of hers, to find out Belluile and to
know the truth and issue of his combat; but indeed his cowardice has
purchased him so much shame, as he will not be seen, much less spoken
withal: which Lauricta understanding, begins conceive that the two Soldiers
report was true, and that undoubtedly he and Poligny had met and fought in her
behalf: whereupon ghessing at the truth, that Poligny had given Belluile the
foil, she was once of opinion to have written to Poligny, to be informed of
the particulars and success of their combat, which so much imported as well
her honor as her content. But Poligny's affection prevents her curiosity: for
as she was calling for pen and paper, he in person ascends the stayres to her
Chamber, where, after a complementall and courteous salute, he informs her (as
we have formerly understood) that he has given Belluile two wounds for her
sake, and now his life for his own. She demands if he himself were not hurt;
he answers, No. At both which good news she infinitely rejoices, and in
token of her thankfulness permits him to gather many kisses, as well from the
roses of her cheeks, as the cherries of her lips: and so from thenceforth he
vows to be her professed servant; and she promises him to be, though not his
Mistress, yet at least his friend. And here they unite and combine their
affections: but that contract, and this familiarity, written only in vice, and
sealed in lust, we shall shortly see cancelled and annihilated, with as much
pity, as infamy and misery, as the sequel of this History will show and
demonstrate.

Whiles thus Laurieta and Poligny are triumphing in Belluiles foil, and their
own familiarity and affection, how is it possible but he must infinitely
grieve for his loss of Laurieta, and la Palaisiere as much sorrow to see her
self deprived and out of hope of her Poligny? But they brook their
afflictions and passions with variable resolutions; for whiles la Palaisiere is
imbathing her self in her tears and discontents, Belluile is resolute to
quench his revenge in Poligny's blood. For forgetting as well his God as his
soul, his honor as himself, he intends to do it by the bye, and not by the
maine, by execrable treachery, not by magnanimous generosity; yea, the devil is
so strong with his faith because that is so weak with his Savior and
Redeemer, as shutting the doors of his humanity and charity, he opens them to
Choler, Revenge, and Murder; yea, and henceforth he is so enraged, and his
looks are so ghastly and distracted* as if his thoughts were conducting and
encouraging his hands to perpetrate some bloody stratagem and design: which is
observed and doubted by his chiefest familiars and intimate friends, as also by
la Palaisiere, whose company he sometimes frequents, not so much out of
affection to her, as for consolation from her to himself, since we are subject
both to hope and believe that our afflictions are partly eased and diminished
by the sight and relation of that of others, as sympathizing and participating
with them; first in their flames of love, then of grief and sorrow, in being
disdayned of those we love. Neither could Belluile so cunningly or closely
rake up the fiery sparks of his malice and revenge, under the embers of
silence and secrecy, but her affection to Poligny, and ^ealousie of his good,
made her so tender* eared, and sharpe-sighted, as she overheard ^ome words
that either in jest o^ earnest ^ell from Belluile's ^ongue, whereby it was
ap^arent to her, that he intended no good, but portended a secret fatal
malice to him, ^ich a little time might too too soon and une^pectedly
discover: whe^upon her love to Poligny was so dear and honorable, although
he were so firmly entangled in the beauty of Laurieta, as he would not
vouchsafe, rather disdayned to love her self, that she thought the discovery
of Belluiles malice to Poligny, so much imported Poligny's good, as she held
her self bound, as well in duty as affection, to reveal and relate it him;
which she does in this Letter:

LA PALAISIERE to POLIGNY.
TO testify thee now the constancy of my affection with ink, as I have
formerly done the fervencie thereof with tears, know, thou have some cause to
fear, and I to doubt, that Belluile has some dangerous project, or bloody
design to put in execution, against his honor, and thy life; and as I reveal
it thee out of my care, so look thou prevent it out of thine own discretion,
lest he bereave thee of thy life, as thou have done him of his Laurieta, if
thou slight this my advice, as thou have already my affection: yet as I remain
witness of the purity of the last, so will these lines bear testimony to the
world of the candor and sincerity of the first. Neither do I presume to send
them thee out of any irregular ambition, to purchase the honor of thy favor,
but only to let thee know that my affection is both powerful and capable to
shine through the clouds of thy disdain, and that the obscurity of that
neither has defaced the luster, nor can eclipse the resplendencie of this.
Regard therefore thine own safety, albeit tho^ wilt not respect my content,
and although thou please not give me the honor to be thy Mistress, yet I will
take the ambition and resolution to live and dye thine hand-mayd.

LA PALAISIERE.


Poligny breaking up the seals of this Letter, laughes to see la Palaisieres
affection, and to understand Belluiles malice; and being besotted with
Laurieta, he lost both his wit and judgment in the sight and contemplation of
her beauty, yea, he is grown so fond in his affection, and respect toward
her, as he is arrived to the Meridian of this simplicity, to deem it a kind
of treason to conceal any secret from her: to which end, he shows her la
Palaisieres Letter, which he makes his pastime, and she her Maygame; yea, so
vain is her folly, and so foolish her vanity, to see the passages and events
of these their passions, as she not only exceedes the decorum of discretion,
but of modesty in her laughter: and which is more, when she again
considers how Belluile loves her self, and not she him, la Palaisiere
Poligny, and not he her, it makes her redouble her mirth and exhilaration in
such sort, as she seems to burst with the violence and excess thereof: but
this mirth of hers shall be shortly waited and attended on with misery and
mourning. But Poligny notwithstanding sees himself doubly obliged to la
Palaisiere, as well for her affection to him, as her care of him, and so holds
himself obliged in either of these respects and considerations, to requite her
with a Letter: the which now unknown to Laurieta, he writes, and sends her to
this effect:

POLIGNY to LA PALAISIERE.
IT is not the least of my joys, that Belluile cannot bear me so much malice,
as thou do affection. It Is true, I have not deserved thy love, it is more true,
I have not merited his hatred* for that proceeds from heaven, as a divine
iufluence, this from hell, as an infernal frenzy* (...) will not feed thee
with hope, neither can he give me despair: for (not to dissemble) it i^
(...) likely I may l^ve ^hee, as impossible I shall fear him: he may have the
will to do (...) hurt, I wish (...) were in my power to do thee good; neither
can he be more malicious to perform me that, then I will be ambitious to
confirm thee this: his malice I entertain with much contempt, thy kind
advice and sincere affection with infinite thanks: for when I consider thy
Letter, I cannot rightly express or define, whether he begin to hate me,
or I to love thee more. I doubt not but to make his deeds prove words to
me, and I beseech thee fear not, but my words shall prove deeds to thee:
for I am as confident shortly to salute fair la Palaisiere, as careless when
I meet foolish Belluile.

POLIGNY.


Having thus dispeeded her his Letter, the vanity of his thoughts, and the
beastliness of his concupiscence and sensuality, not only surpriseth his
reason, but captivates his judgment; so as Laurieta's sight defacing Belluiles
memory, he thinks so much on her affection, as he respects not his malice:
but this Vice and that error shall cost him dear. For whiles he is feasting
his eyes on the daynties and rarities of Laurieta's beauty, Belluiles heart
has agreed with the devil to prepare him a bloody Banquet: Grace cannot
contain him within her limits; therefore Impiety dallies so long with him, and
he with Impiety, that at last this bloody sentence is past in the court of his
hellish resolutions, That Poligny must dye. The devils assistance is never
wanting in such infernal stratagems: for this is an infallible maxim, as
remarkable as ruinous, That he always makes us fertile, not barren to do
evil, never to do good. At first Belluile thinks on poison or Pistol to
dispatch Poligny: but he finds the first too difficult to attempt; the
second, too public to perform. Sometimes he is of opinion to ascend his
Chamber, and murder him in his bed; then to shoot him ou^ at window as he
passes the street: but to conclude, understanding that he often comes very
late in the night from Laurieta, he thinks it best to run him through with his
Rapier, as he issues forth her house. And to make short, hereon he resolves.

Now to put the better color on his villainy, he retires himself from
Avignion, and lives privately some six days in Orange, giving it out, that
he was gone to the City of Aix in Provence, where, at that famous court of
Parliament he had a Process for a title of Land, shortly to be adjudged; and
so in a dark night, taking none but his Lacky with him, he being disguised, in
favor of money, passes the gate of Avignion, and giving his horse to his
Lackey, being secretly informed that Poligny was with Laurieta, he goes
directly to her door, and there at the corner of a little street stands with
his Rapier drawn under his cloak, with a revenging and greedy desire of blood
to awayt Poligny's coming forth. The Clock striking one, the door is opened,
and Poligny secretly issues forth without candle, having purposely sent away
his Lackey, who had then unwittingly carried away his Masters Rapier with him.
He is no sooner in the street, but Bellnile, as a murtherous villain, rusheth
forth, and so like a limb of the Devil, sheathes his Rapier in his breast;
when Poligny more hurt then amazed, and wanting his Sword, but not courage,
indeavoureth by struggling to close with his assassinate; and so cries out for
assi^ance: but the dead of the night favors his butcherly attempt, when
withdrawing his Sword, he redoubleth his cruelty, and so again runs him in
at the small of the belly, through the reins, whereat he presently falls down
dead to his feet, having the power to groan and cry, but not to utter a
word. Which Belluile espying, and knowing him dispatched, runs to his horse,
which his Lackey held ready at the corner of the next street, and so rides to
the same gate he entered, which was kept ready for him; which passing, he with
all expedition drives away for Orange: from whence, the next morn before day,
he takes poast for Aix, the better to conceal and over* veil this damnable
Murder of his. But this policy of his shall deceive his hopes, and return
him a fatal reward and interest. For although he can bleare the eyes of men,
yet he neither can, nor shall those of God, who in his due time will out of his
sacred justice repay and punish him with confusion.

By this time the street and neighbors have taken the allarum of this
tragical accident: so Candles and Torches come from every where, only Laurieta
having played the Whore before, will see me now (though falsely) to play the
honest woman: for she, to cover her shame, will not discover that her self or
any of her house are stirring: and so although she understood this news, and
privately and bytterly wept thereat, yet she keeps fast her doors and, like
an ungrateful strumpet will permit none of her servants for a long time to
descend. The Criminal Judge and President of the Ciiy is advertised of this
Murder. The dead Gentleman is known to be Mounsieur Poligny, and being
beloved, he is exceedingly bewailed of all who knew him, and inquiry and
search is made of all sides, and the Lievtennant Criminal shows himself
wise, because honest, and curious, because wise in the perquisition of this
blo^dy Murder: but as yet time will not, or rather God, who is the Creator and
giver of time, is not as yet pleased to bring it to light; only Laurieta knew,
and la Palasiere suspected, and all those who were of the counsel of the one,
or the acquaintance of the other, do likewise both fear and suspect, that
only Belluile was the bloody and execrable author thereof; but to report or
divulge so much, although they dare, they will not.

As for la Palasiere, her thoughts are taken up and preoccupated with two
several passions: for as she grieves at Poligny's death, so she rejoices
that she has no hand, nor was any way accessory to his Murder; rather, that
if he had sailed by the compass of her advice, he had undoubtedly avoided
the shipwreck of his life, and prevented the misfortune of his death; what to
think of Belluile she knows not, b^ if he were her friend before, he has
now made and proclaimed himself her e^my, by killing her dear and only
friend Poligny: and therefore is resolved, that as she could never perfectly
b^ooke his company, so now this bloody fact shall make her detest both it and
him. But let us a little leave her, and descend to speak of L^rieta, to see
how she brooks the murder of her intimate friend Poligny: for since she^
assuredly knows and believes that this cruel Murder was performed by no
other, b^ by her professed enemy Belluile, or by some of his bloody agents,
love and revenge conspire to act two different Scenes upon the Theater of her
heart: for in memory and deep affection to her Poligny, her pearled tears and
mournful sighs infinitely deplore and bewail his disastrous end; so as
sorrow withering the roses of her cheeks, and grief making her cast off her
glittering, to take on mournful attire, she could not refrain from giving
all Avignion notice how pleasing Poligny's life was to her, by the excess of
her lamentations and afflictions demonstrated for his death; o^ if her sighs
found any consolation, or her tears recesse or truce, it was administered her
by her revenge, which she conceived and intended toward Belluile, for this
his bloody fact. So as consulting with Choler, not with Reason, with Nature,
no^ with Grace, with Satan, not with God, she vows to be sharply revenged
of him, and to make him pay dear for this his base and treacherous Murder;
yea, the fumes and fury of her revenge are so implacable, and transport her
resolutions to so bloody an impetuositie, that resembling her sex and self,
she inhumanely and sacrilegiously darts forth an oath, which her heart sends
to her soul, and her soul from Earth to Hell, that if the means find not
her, she will infallibly find out the means to quench and dry up her tears
for Poligny's death, in the blood of Belluile: which, since she is so devoyd of
reason, religion, and grace, I fear we shall shortly see her attempt and
perform. But leaving her in Avignion, let us find out Belluile in Aix, who is
a Gentleman so profane in his life, and debosht in his actions and
conversations, as in stead of repenting he triumphs at this his Murder; yea,
he is become so impious and impudent, as he grieves not thereat, but only
that he had not sooner dispatched his rival Poligny: but the better to delude
the world, that neither his hand or sword were guilty in sending Poligny from
this world in a bloody winding sheet, his thoughts like so many hounds pursuing
his conscience, and his conscience his soul, he thinks himself not safe in
Aix, where the sharpe-sighted Presidents, and Councillors of that illustrious
Senate of Parliament might at last accuse and find him out for the Author of
this bloody Murder; and therefore leaves both it and Provence, and so rides to
the City of Lions, accompanied with none but his two Lackeyes, who, to write
the truth, act^d no part in Poligny's mournful Tragedy; neither does he yet
think himself safe there: but within a month after the Murder, thinking
directly and securely to fly from the eyes and hands of justice, thereby to
avoid the storm of his punishment, he again takes horse for that great City
and Forest Paris, where he hoped the infinite number of People, Streets,
Coaches, and Horses would not only secure his fear, but prevent his danger,
and that here, as in a secure Sanctuary and safe harbor, he might quietly ride
at anchor in all peace and tranquillity: but (as before) the time is not yet
come of his punishment; for it may be, God, out of his inscrutable will and
Divine providence, will, when he best pleases, return him from whence he
came, and by some extraordinary accident make him there feel the foulness of
his fact, in the sharpness and suddenness of his punishment; which, as a
fierce gust and bitter storm, shall then surprise him, when he least suspects
or dreams thereof. But in this interim of his residence, he forgets his new
fact of Murder, to remember his old sins of Concupiscence and Whoredom; and
so rather like a lascivious Courtier, then a civil moral Christian, he
cannot see the Church for the Stews, nor the Preachers or Priests for Panders
and Strumpets. But this vanity of his shall cost him dear, and he shall be so
miserable to feel the punishment, since he will not be so happy to seek the
means to avoyde it: for now six months having exhausted and dissipated the
greatest part of his gold, and his credit coming short of his hopes, it seems
the air of Paris is displeasing to him, since he cannot be agreeable to it; and
therefore (necessity giving a law to the vanity of his desires) he begins to
loath the I Will of France, to love the Province of Provence, and to leave Paris
to see Avignion. And now it is, that the devil, that subtle and fatal
seducer, steps in, and at one time bewitching both his reason and judgment,
presents him afresh with the freshness and delicacie of Laurieta's beauty,
which so inkindleth and revives the sparks of his affection, that lay raked up
in the ashes of silence, as he vows there is no beauty to hers; and if he
chance epsy any fair Ladies, either at Court, or in the City, he presently
affirms, and infinitely protests, they come far short of his Laurieta's
delicacie, perfection, and grace; so as his purse tyrannizing over his
ambition, and his concupiscence over his judgment, he not so much as once
dreaming of the implacable hatred she formerly bo^e him, and thinking it
impossible for her to conceive, much less to know that he murdered Poligny,
he is constant and resolute to reseeke the felicity to live in her favor and
affection, or to dye in the pursuit thereof; but that will prove as impossible,
as this apparent and feasible. So as absence adding fire to his lust, and
excellency to her beauty, he is resolute to send one of his Lackeyes to
Avignion; partly to return with money, and so to meet him at Lions, Mo^lins,
or Nevers; but more especially, in great secrecy to deliver a Letter to his fa
re and sweet L^urieta, and to bring him back her answer, as if he were still
at Paris, and not in his journey downwards. When meaning as yet to conceal
his Murder of Poligny, he calling for pen and paper, traceth her thereon
these lines:

BELLVILE to LAVRIETA.
IF Poligny had but the thousandth part as truly respected me, as I dearly
loved thee, thou had not so soon cast me out of thy favor, nor God so
suddenly him out of this world: but I know not whether more to bewail my
unfortunacie occasioned by thy cruelty, or his misery engendered through his
own treachery. And indeed, as I grieve at that, so I sorrow at this; for
although ^ee dyed mine enemy, yet in despite of his malice and death, I will
live his friend: and if thou lovedst him, as I think thou did, I wish I
might fight with his Murderer for his own sake, and kill him for thine. I may
say thy affection and beauty deserved his better, though dare not affirm I am
reserved to be made happy in enjoying of either, much less of both, and least
of all, of thy self; and yet I must confess, that if our births and qualities
were known, I should go as near to be thy equal as he infinitely came
short of being mine. What, or what not, I have performed for thy sake, is best
known to myself, since thou disdaynest to know it: but if thou will please to
abandon thy disdain, then my affection and the truth will inform thee, that I
have ever constantly resolved to die thy Servant, though thou have sworn never
to live my Mistress. So that could I but as happily regaine thy affection and
favor, as I have unjustly and unfortunately lost it, Belluile would qu^ckely
forsake Paris to see Avignion, and abandon all the beauties of the world, to
continue his homage and service to that of his only fair and sweet Laurieta.

BELLVILE.


With this his Letter he sends a Diamond Ring from his finger, and so
dispatcheth his Lackey, who is not long before he arrive at Avignion, where
very secretly he delivers Laurieta his Masters Token and Letter; and
treacherous fury as she is, she kisseth both, and breaking off the Seals,
reads the contents, whereat she infinitely seems to rejoice, and so
questioneth with the Lackey about his Masters return; who being taught his
Lesson, told her that that depended on her pleasure, since hers was his, and
withal prays her for an answer; for that two days hence he was again to
return to his Master for Paris: the which she promises. The Lackey gone, she
cannot refrain from laughing, yea, she leaps for joy, to see how Belluile is
again so besotted, to throw himself into her favor and mercy, and to observe
how willing and forward he was to run hoodwinked to his untimely death and
destruction: for the Devil has fortifyed her in her former bloody resolution;
so that hap what will, she vows she will not fail to kill Belluile, because
he had slain her Poligny, and already she wishes him in Avignion, that she
might see an end to this her wished and desired Tragedy. In the mean time she
prepares her hypocritical and treacherous Letter, and a rich Watchet Scarf
imbroydered with flames of silver. So his Lackey repayreth to her, to whom she
delivers both, with remembrance of her best love to his Master, and that she
hoped shortly to see him in Avignion. The Lackey being provided of his Masters
Gold, and this Scarf and Letter, trips away speedily for Lions, where he
finds his Master privately hushed up in a friends house, expecting his return;
he is glad of his own gold, but more of Laurieta's Letter, when thinking every
minute a year before he had read it, he hastily breaking off the seals,
finds these lines therein contained:

LAVRIETA to BELLVILE.
AS I acknowledge I loved Poligny, so I confess I never hated thee; and if his
treacherous insinuation were too prevalent with my credulity, I beseech thee
attribute it to my indiscretion, as being a woman, and not to my inconstancy,
as being thy friend: for if he dyed thine enemy, let it suffice that I live
thine hand-mayd, and that as he was not reserved for me, so I hope I am wholly
for thy self. How far he was my inferior, I will not inquire, only it is
both my content and honor, that thou please vouchsafe to repute me thy
equal. I am so far from disdayning, as I infinitely desire to know what thou
have done for my sake, that I may requite thy love with kisses, and make my
thanks wipe off the conceit of my ingratitude. As for my affection, it was
never lost to thee, nor shall ever be found but of thee. To conclude, I wish
that our little Avignion were thy great Paris, and if ^y love be as unfeigned
as mine is firm, let my Belluile make have to see his Laurieta, who has vowed
to rejoice a thousand times more at his return, then ever she grieved at
Poligny's death.

LAVRIETA.


At the reading of this her Letter he is beyond himself, yea beyond the Moon
for joy; so as he wishes nothing so much, as himself in her arms, or she
in his. So he fits himself with a couple of good horses, puts his Lackeyes
into new Suits, and knowing that time and his absence had washed away the
remembrance of Poligny's murder, he speeds away for Avignion; where the first
night of his arrival he privately visits Laurieta, 'twixt whom there is
nothing but kisses and imbracings; yea, she so treacherously and sweetly
lulles him ^leepe with the Siren melody of her deceiptfull speeches, as she
prays him to visit her often, and that a little time shall crown him with the
fruits of his desire: so for that night they part. The n^xt day he repaires to
her again, when amidst the confluence of many millions of kisses, she prays
and conjures him to discover her what he has done for her sake; when he tying
her by oath to secrecy, and she swearing it, he relates her that it was
hims^fe, that in affection to her had slain Poligny, as he issued forth her
lodging: when having wrested and extorted this mystery from him, it confirms
her malice* and hastneth on her resolution of his death, which his lascivious
thoughts have neither ^he grace to foresee, nor the reason to prevent: she
espyes he has still a Pistol with him, and desires to know why he bears
it; who answers her, it is to defend himself from his enemies* and that he
will never go without it. So again they fall to their kisses, and he to his
requests of a further and sweeter favor of her; which she for that time
again denies him, adding withal, that if he will come to her after dinner to
morrow, she will so dispose of matters, as his pleasure shall be hers, and she
will not be her own, but his. So being surprised and ravish^d with the ecstasy
of a thousand sweet approaching pleasures, he returns to his Chamber, and
she to her malice: where whiles he gluts himself with his hope of delight,
she does no less with her desire of revenge. And now ruminating on the manner
of his death, she thinks nothing so fit or easy to dispatch him, as his own
Pistol: and so thinking she should need her Wayting-mayd Lucilla's assistance
(of whom this our History has formerly made mention) she acquaints her with
her purpose, the next day to murder Belluile in her Chamber: and so with the
lure of gold, and many fair promises, draws her to consent hereunto, and
injoines her to be provided of a good Poniard under her gown for the same
purpose, if need should require; which Lucilla promises. Now this night, as
Belluile could not sleep for joy, so could not Laurieta for revenge, who is so
weighed down to malice and murder, as she wishes the hour come for her to
reduce her devilish contemplation into bloody action. But this hour shall
come too soon for them both: for as Lovers are impatient of delays, so
Belluile has no sooner dined, but taking his horse and two Lackeyes, he says
he will take the air of the fields that afternoon, but will first call in and
see his Mistress Laurieta. So he alights at her door, and without the least
fear of danger or apprehension of death, very joyfully ascends Lauriet^'s
chamber; who, dissembling wretch as she is, very kindly meets and receives
him: and the better to smother and dissemble her murtherous intent, is not
only prodigal in taking but in giving him kisses. Belluile, like a dissolute
and lascivious Gentleman, whispers Laurieta in her ear, that he is come to
receive the fruits of his hopes, and of her promise and courtesy: when
considering that his horse and two Lackyes were at door, she returns him this
in his ear, that she is wholly his, and that it is out of her power to deny
or refuse him any thing, only she prays him to send away his Lackeyes,
because their familiarity needed no witnesses. Thus whiles he calls them up,
to bid them carry away his horse to the gate that leads to Marseilles, and
there to awayt his coming, Laurieta steps to her Wayting-mayd Lucilla, and
bids her make ready her Poniard, and stand close to her: for now (quoth she)
the hour is come that I will be revenged of Belluile for my Poligny's death:
the which she had no sooner spoken, but Belluile returns to her; when
redoubling his kisses, he little, or rather not at all fearing he was so near
death, or death him, being ready to retire himself to a withdrawing Chamber,
which Laurieta treacherously informed him she had purposely provided for him,
he takes his Pistol, and lays it on the Table of the outer Chamber, wherein
they then were; which she espying, as the instrument she infinitely desired to
finger, takes it in her hand, and prays him to show her how to shoot it off:
so taking it from her, he told her, if she pleased, he would discharge it
before her, for her sake. Why (quoth she) is it charged? Yea, replies Belluile,
with a single bullet. Nay then (quoth Laurieta) put in one bullet more, and if
you can espy any Crow out of the window, either on the house or Church top, if
it please you, I will play the man, and shoot at it for your sake: When poor
Belluile, desirous to please her in any thing, looks out the window, and espies
two Crows on the cross of the Augustine Friars Church, which he very joyfully
relates Laurieta; and so at her request claps in a second bullet more: for
(quoth ^he) if I strike not both, I will be sure to pay one; and so prays him
to lean out at window, to see how near she could feather them: which
(miserable Gentleman) he performing, the Pistol being bent, she behind him
discharges it directly in his own reins. Whereat he amazedly staggering,
Lucilla seconding her bloody Mistress, steps to him, and with her Poniard
gives him five or six wounds through the body; so as without speaking or
groaning, he falls dead at their feet. Whereat Laurieta triumphing and leaping
for joy, utters these bloody and profane speeches: O Poligny, whiles thou
art in heaven, thus have I done in earth for thy sake, and in revenge of thy
cruel death! Which having performed, they more cruelly then cruelty her self,
drag his breathless carcass, reeking in his blood, down the stayres, into a
low obscure Cellar, where making a shallow grave, they there bury him in his
clothes, and so pile up a great quantity of Billets on him; as if that wooden
monument had power to conceal their Murder, and his body from the eyes and
suspicion of all the world. Good God! what devils incarnate, and infernal
Furies are these, thus to imbrue their hands in the blood of this Gentleman?
But as close as they act and contrive this their bloody and inhumane Murder on
earth, yet heaven will both detect and revenge it: for when they least dream
thereof, Gods wrath and vengeance will surprise them, to their utter confusion
and destruction, and it may be sooner then they are aware of.

For the two Lackeyes having stayed at the City gate with their Masters horse
till night, they return and seek him at Laurieta's house, where they left
him; Laurieta informs them he stayed not an hour after them, and since she
saw him not; which news does infinitely afflict and vex them. But they
return to his lodging, and like duetifull and faithful servants, betwixt hope
and fear, awayt his return that night, and all the next day; but in vain.
And now they begin to be amazed at his long and unaccustomed absence, and so
consult this important business to some Gentlemen, their Masters confident and
intimate friends; who together with them repair to Laurieta's house, and
again and again demand her for Mounsieur de Belluile: but they find her
constant in her first answer, and yet guided by the finger and providence of
God, they bewray a kind of perturbation in her looks, and discover some
distraction and extavagancie in her speeches: whereupon calling to their minds
her former discourtesie to him for Poligny's sake, and his fighting with him on
the Bridge for hers, as also this sudden and violent suspected murder of him,
they suspect and fear there is more in the wind then as yet they know; and so
acquaint the Criminal Judges herewith, who as wise Senators, having severally
examined both her and her Maid Lucilla, and Belluile's Lackeyes, they conclude
to imprison Laurieta; which is instantly performed: whereat she is extremely
amazed and terrifyed; but howsoever, she is resolute to deny all, and constant
to stand upon her justification and innocence. So her Judges adjudge her to
the torments of the Rack, which (with a masculine, yea, with a hellish
fortitude) she indureth, without revealing the least shadow, either of fear
or guiltiness; but they detain her still prisoner, and hope that God will
make time discover the Murder of Belluile; for eight days being now past,
they are become confident that he is not in this world, but in another. In the
mean time her bloody Wayting-mayd Lucilla has continual recourse to her Lady
Laurieta in prison, where, like impious and profane wretches, they
interchangeably swear secrecy each to other, since on eithers discovery
depends no less then both their deaths.

Whiles this news is generally divulged in Avignion, Provence, Daulphine, and
Langue^k, and no news at all to be had or gathered of Belluile, La Palaisiere,
who shined with as many virtues as L^urieta was obscured with Vices, out of
compassion and Christian charity, some three weeks after visits Laurieta in
prison, although she partly believed and knew, that she never affected or loved
her* when aiming to add consolation to her afflictions, as God would have it,
Laurieta, out of her ignorance or folly, returns la (...) this unlooked for
answer: That her self was as innocent of Belluile's death, as she was of
Poligny's. Which words being overheard by some curious head of the company,
were instantly carried and reported to the Criminal Judges, who instantly
cause la Palaisiere to be apprehended and brought before them, whom they
examine upon Poligny's death; which does no way aff^ight or afflict her,
because her conscience was untainted, and her self as innocent as innocence
her self thereof. They deal further with her, to understand the passages of
former businesses betwixt her self, Po^gny, and Belluile. She gives them a
true and faithful account thereof, yea, and relates them as much and no more,
then this History has formerly related us; and to verify and confirm her
speeches, like a discreet young Gentlewoman, she gives them the keys of a
Trunk of hers, wherein she says is her copy of a Letter she wrote to
Poligny, and his answer again to her, which she prays them to send for, for
her better clearing and discharge. The Judges send speedily away for these
Letters, which are found, produced, and read, directly concurring with the true
circumstance of her former deposition: whereupon with much applause and
commendation they acquit and discharge her. But if la Palaisiers Virtues have
cleared her, Laurieta's Vices (which the Judges begin to smell out by Poligny's
Letter) do the more narrowly and straightly imprison her; and yet knowing that
la Palasiere neither had, nor could any way accuse her, for either of these two
Murders, she sets a good face on her bad heart, and so very bravely frollikes
it in prison, and to speak truth, with far more joy, and less fear then
heretofore: but to check and overthrow these vain triumphs of hers in their
birth, and to ni^ them in their b^ds, news is brought her that her Waiting
maid Lucilla is secretly fled; which her Judges understanding, they now more
vehemently then ever heretofore suspect, that (without doubt) Laurieta was the
author, and her Maid Lucilla the accessory of Belluile's Murder: and so they
set all the city and country for her apprehension. And this news indeed makes
Laurieta fear that she will i^allibly be taken, which does afflict and ama^e
her, and indeed here at she cannot refrain from biting her lip, and hanging
down her head. But see the miraculous and just judgment of the Lord, upon
this wretched and bloody Lucilla! for she, for fear flying, as it is supposed,
that night from Avignion to Orange, to her parents, was there drowned, and the
next morn found and taken up dead in one of the Fenny Lakes betwixt the two
Cities. Which news being reported to Laurieta, she again converts her fear
into hope, and sorrows into joys, as knowing well that dead bodies can tell
no tales. But the wisdom and integrity of the Judges, by the apparencie of
Laurieta's crime in that of her Wayting-mayds flight, again command her to be
racked: but the devil is yet so strong with her, and she with the devil, that
she again indures the cruelty of these torments with a wonderful patience,
with an admirable constancy and resolution, and so courageously and stoutly
denying her crime, and peremptorily maintaining her innocence and
justification, her Judges, led by the consideration of the sharpness and
bitterness of her torments, as also that they could find no direct proof or
substantial evidence against her, begin to conceive and imagine that it
might be the Wayting-mayd, and not the Mistress, that had sent Belluile into
another world; and so resolve, the week following, if they heard nothing in
the mean time to accuse Laurieta, to release and acquit her: which Laurieta
understanding, the torments which her limbs and body feel are nothing in
respect of those contentments and joys her heart and thoughts conceive; and
already building castles and triumphs in her hea^ and contemplations, for the
hope and joy of her speedy enlargement, she, in her appare^ and behavior,
flaunts it out far braver then before. But she has not yet made he^ peace
with her Judges, neither have they pronounced her Quieta est. And alas, how
foolishly and ignorantly does the vanity of her hopes deceive and betray her,
when^ the foulness of her soul, and contamination of her conscience, every
hour and minute prompt her, that God, the Judge of Judges, who has seen,
will in his good time and pleasure both detect and punish as well her whoredom
as her murder, in he^ death! And lo, here comes both the cause and the manner
thereof, wherein Gods providence and justice do miraculously resplend and
shine.

For Laurieta being indebted to her Landlord Mounsieur de Riehcourt, as well
for a whole years rent, as for three hundred Livres in money, which he had
lent her, being impatient of her delays, but more of her disgrace, lets out
that part of his house, which she held of him, to the Deane of Carpentras, who
for his healths sake came to sojourne that Winter in Avignion; and despairing
of her enlargement, and to satisfy himself, begins to sell away her
household-stuffe, yea, to the very Billets which she had in her Cellar, which
he retains for himself; whereof when his servants came to clear the Cellar,
they removing the last Billets, find the earth newly removed and opened in the
length and proportion of a Grave: whereof wondering, they presently inform their
Master, who viewing the same, as God would have it, he instantly apprehended
and believed, that Laurieta had undoubtedly killed Belluile, and there buried
him: when not permitting his servants to remove the least jot of earth, he as a
discreet and honest Citizen, with all possible celeritie trips away to the
Criminal Judges, and acquaints them herewith; who concurring with Richcourt in
his opinion and belief, they dispeed themselves to his house and Cellar, where
causing the new opened earth to be removed, behold, they find the miserable
dead body of Belluile there inhumanely thrown in and buried in his clothes,
which causing to be taken off, thereby to search his body, they find himshot
into the reins with two Pistol bullets, and his body stabd and p^erced with
six several wounds of a Rapier or Poniard: they are amazed at this pitiful
and lamentable spectacle; and so resting confident it could be no other but
Laurieta and her Maid Lucilla, that had committed this cruel Murder, they
very privately and secretly cause Belluiles dead body to be conveyed to the
prison, and there, when Laurieta least dreamt thereof, expose it to her sight,
and in rough terms charge and cry out upon her for this Murder; but this
monster of nature, and shee-devill of her sex, has yet her heart so obdurated
with revenge, and her soul so o're-clouded and benumbed with impiety, as she
is nothing daunted or terrifyed with the sight hereof; but with many fearful
imprecations and asseverations stands peremptorily in her innocence, and out
of the heat of her malice and choler terms them devils or witches, that are
her accusers. But her Judges, who can no longer be deluded with her vows, nor
will no more give ear to her perfidious oaths, command to have her Paps seared
off with hot burning Pincers, thereby to vindicate the truth of her cruel
murder, from the falsehood of her impious and impudent denial thereof.
Whereat amazed and astonished, and seeing this cruel torment ready to be
inflicted and presented her, God was so indulgent to her sins, and so
merciful to her soul, as the devil flying from her, and she from his
temptations, she rayning down many rivolets and showers of tears from her
eyes, and evaporating many volleyes of sighs from her heart, throwing her
self down on her knees to the earth, and lifting up her eyes and hands unto
Heaven, with much bewayling and bitterness, she at last confesses to her
Judges, that she and her Wayting-mayd Lucilla were the murderers of Belluile,
and for the which she said, that through her humble contrition and hearty
repentance, she hoped that God would pardon her soul in the life to come,
though she knew they would not her body in this. Whereupon the Judges, in
horror and execration of her inhumane and bloody crime, pronounce sentence of
death upon her, and condemn her the next day after dinner, first to be hanged,
then burnt in the same street, right against her lodging, Monsieur de
Richcourts house; and likewise, since Lucilla was both an accessory and actour
in this bloody Tragedy, that her body should be taken up out of her Grave, and
likewise burnt with hers in the same fire: which accordingly was executed in
the presence of an infinite number of people both of the Citizens, and adjacent
neighbors of Avignion; Laurieta uttering upon the Ladder a short, but a most
Christian and penitent speech to the people, tending first to dissuade them all
by her example from those foul and crying sins of whoredom, revenge, and
murder; and then to request and persuade them, that they would assist her with
their religious and devout prayers in her souls passage and flight toward
Heaven: yet adding withal, that as her crime, so her grief was redoubled,
because as she had killed Belluile for Poligny's sake, so she was sure that
Belluile had killed Poligny for hers.

And thus, Christian Reader, were the dissolute lives and mournful deaths of
these two unfortunate Gentlemen, Poligny and Belluile, and of this lascivious
and bloody Cur^izan Laurieta, and her Wayting-mayd Lucilla. A tragical
History, worthy both of our observation and detestation; and indeed, these are
the bitter fruits of Lust, Whore^ome, and Revenge, and the inseparable
companions which infallibly awayt and attend them; the very sight and
consideration whereof are capable, not only to administer consolation to the
righteous, but to strike terror to the ungodly. O therefore, that we may all
beware by these their fatal and dangerous sins: for this is the only
perfect and true way to prevent and avoyde their punishments.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY IX.
Iacomo de Castelnovo Iustfully falls in love with his daughter in law Perina,
his own son Francisco de Castelnovo's Wife; whom to enjoy, he causes
Ierantha first to poison his own Lady Fidelia, and then his said son Francisco
de Castelnovo: in revenge whereof, Perina treacherously murthereth him in his
bed. Ierantha, ready to dye in travel of child, confesses her two Murders;
for the which she is banged and burnt. Perina has her right hand cut off, and
is condemned to perpetual imprisonment, where she sorrowfully languisheth and
dies.

We need not send our curiosity (or our curiosity us) to seek Tigers and
Monsters in Africa; for Europe has but too many, who are so cruel and
inhumane, not only to imbrue, but to imbath themselves in the innocent blood of
their Christian brethren. And as Religion prohibites us to kill, and commands
us to love our enemies; with what audacious and profane impiety dare we then
murder our friends, nay those of our own blood, and who are the greatest part
of our selves? And although Italy have lately afforded many tragical
presidents, and fearful Examples of this nature (whe^of I have given some to
my former, and reserved others to my future books) yet in my conceit it has
produced none more bloody and inhumane then this, whether we respect the
Murders or the persons. For here we shall see a wretched and execrable old
man so besotted in lust, and flaming in malice and revenge, as being both a
husband and a father, he by a hellish young Gentlewoman (his strumpet)
poyson^th both his own wife and his own son: It was his vanity which first
inkindled the fire of his lust; it is then his Impiety which gives way to the
Devil to blow the coals thereto, and so to convert it into Murder. O that
Sin should so triumph over Grace, and not Grace over Sin! O that Age and
Nature should not teach us to be less bloody, and more compassionate and
charitable! And alas, alas, by Poison, that drug of the Devil, who first
brought the damnable invention thereof from hell, to be practiced here on earth
only by his agents and members! We shall likewise see him killed by his
daughter in law, for formerly poisoning of her husband: Lust seduced him to
perpetra^e those; Affection, or rather bloody Revenge, drew her on to perform
this, and consequently to her punishment due for the same. Had they had more
Grace and Religion, they would not have been so inhumane; but falling from
that, no marvel if they fell to be so wretched and miserable: for if we die
well, we seldom live ill; if live ill, we usually never die well: for it is
the end that crowns the beginning, not the beginning the end. Therefore if we
will be happy in our lives, and blessed in our deaths, we must follow Virtue,
and fly from Vice, love Chastity and Charity, and hate Lust and Envy,
prefer Heaven before Earth, our Souls before our Bodies, and defy Satan,
with a holy resolution both to fear and love God.

SAvoy is the Country, and Nice the City (seated upon the Mediterrane^m Sea,
being the strongest Bulwark against France; and the best For^resse and Key of
Italy) where the Scene of this ensuing Tragical History is laid: the which to
refetch from the Head-spring and Fountain of its original, it must carry our
curiosity and understanding over those famous Mountains, the Alps, and from
thence to the City of Saint John de Mauriena; where of late and fresh memory
dwelt an aged Gentleman, of rich revenues and great wealth, named Seignior
Antonio de Arconeto, who had newly by his deceased Wife, the Lady Eleanora de
Bibanti, two Children, to wit, a Son, and a Daughter; that, named Seignior
Alexandro, and this, the Lady Perina; a little different in years, for he was
eighteen, and she but fifteen; but more in qualities and conditions, for he was
by nature perverse and chollericke, but she, mild, courteous, and gracious:
Again, they differed much in the lineaments and proportion of their bodies;
for Alexandro, like his Father, was short, crook-backt, and hard-favour'd; and
Perina resembling her mother, tall, straight-wasted, and fair: so as it being
a principle and Maxim in Nature, that parents (for the most part) love those
Children best, who best resemble them; as the mother Eleanora preferred Perina
in her affection before Alexandro, so contrariwise their father Arconeto did
Alexandro before Perina. But as God had called Eleanora out of this life, and
left her husband Arconeto to survive her; so Alexandro's joy proved his sister
Perina's mise^y and affliction for he was so happy to see himself tenderly
cherished and affected, and she so unfortunate to perceive her self slighted
and disrespected of her father: wherein, as I praise Arconeto's intimate love
to his son, so I cannot but discommend, and withal pity his immerited and
unnatural neglect to his daughter: wherein, as Alexandro triumphed in the one,
judge judicious Reader, if Perina had not cause enough to grieve and lament at
the other. But as the drift and scope of this History looks another way, so for
my part, who have u^dertaken to pen it, it is the least of my intent (...)
purpose to give instructions and direction, how parents should bear themselves
in their affections toward their children; only, because I may not here too
palpably bewray mine ignorance in my silence, I hope, nay, I am confident, that
with as much truth a^ safety I may conclude, it is a happiness both for parens
and children, where parents bear their affections equally to their children:
for loving one, and hating another, the joy of the one proves oftentimes the
others sorrow; and in giving that too much hope, we many times administer this
too much cause of despair; or if the inclinations and affections of parents be
more narrowly tied, and strictly linked to prefer and love one child above
the other, yet since they are the equal issue of their loins, and we the
only parents of their youth, we should be as well cautious in the
distribution of our favors, a in the demonstration of our disrespects toward
them. But enough of this digression; and now again to our H^story.

As Alexandro grows up in years, so he does in ambition and ostentation: for
if he play the Brav^sho abroad among Gentlemen and Ladies, so authorizd by his
fathers hatred of his sister, he at home becomes a petty tyrant to her; yea,
his carriage is so stern and imperious toward her, as if she were rather his
slave then his sister, or his laundres and hand-mayd, then any part of
himself, which notwithstanding it was both a daily grief to her heart, and a
continual torment to her thoughts, yet Perina's sweet perfections, and
gracious virtues and behavior, make her digest and brook all with wonderful
constancy, and an admirable patience: for well she knows that if she should
complain (...) her father of her brothers unkindnes toward her, she should
thereby reap no other remedy and redress but this, that the one would laugh,
and the other triumph thereat; and that the issue thereof would prove her
complaints to be the May game of the one, and mocking-stock of the other. But
God has ordained briefly to ease her of a great part of her undeserved
discontents and afflictions: for lo, her brother Alexandro, debauching and
surfeting at a Banquet at Susa, returns home, surprised of a hot pestilent
Fever, which notwithstanding the care of his Father, or the art of his
expertest Physicians, he in three days is taken out of this life.

And now guided by the light of nature, and the instinct of common sense and
reason, who would not surmise or think, but that Arconeto, having buried his
son Alexandro, should now love his only daughter and child Perina far
dearer and tenderer then before. But alas, nothing less: for he is not so
kind, and therefore she cannot be so happy; yea, which is worse, although his
words be her commands, and his pleasure her law, yet he contemnes both her and
her obedience, and never looks on her with love and affection, but still with
disdain and envy: yea, in a word, his distaste is so extreme and bitter
against her, as he is never best pleased, then when she is furthest from him;
so as her absence may delight and content him, but her presence cannot. Which
unnatural disrespect; and unjust cruelty of her father toward her, does so
nip the joys of her youth, and the blossoms of her health and beauty, as,
poor young Gentlewoman, she becomes infinite melancholy, and extreme weak
and sickly; which being observed and pittyed of all her kinsfolks and friends,
as being her Fathers only child, and heir to all his Lands and Riches, an
Aunt of hers, being her mothers sister, and likewise her God-mother, termed the
Lady Dominica, a Widowwoman of the same City; works so with her brother in law
Arconeto, that he is content to permit his daughter Perina to reside and dwell
with her: whereat, as the Aunt is not a little glad, so the Niece beyond
measure infinitely rejoices, and triumphs thereat, both hoping that her
absence may, and will procure her fathers affection, which her presence could
not; and that having more liberty and less bondage, she might again in a
short time recover her former health and content; or else that God, out of his
divine providence, and pleasure in heaven, might call and allot her out some
gallant Husband here on earth, with whom, in the contents and pleasures of
Marriage, she might end her future days in as much tranquillity and felicity,
as she had formerly lived in discontent and affliction: and indeed the events,
though not in the first, yet in the two last points, answers their
expectations.

The Lady Dominica has formerly contracted a Daughter of hers, named Dona
Bertha, to a Cavallier of the City of Nice, termed Seignior Bartholome^
Spelassi, by descent noble, and of good revennues and wealth. And now the
appointed time is come for their Marriage: to which end, up comes Spelassi from
Nice to Saint John de Mauriene, assisted and followed by many gallant young
Gentlemen of his kinsfolks and friends, and, in a word, with a Train well
befitting his rank and quality, where these Nuptials are solemnized with
great variety of pomp and pleasure; as Feasting, Dancing, Masks, Running at
the Ring, and the like: for in these amorous and Court-like Revels, the
Savoyards (as participating both of the French and Italian humors) take a
singular delight and felicity: But as many times one Wedding occasioneth and
produces another, so Fortune, or to speak more properly and truly, God
ordained, that the Lady Dominica appointed her Niece Perina, to conduct the
Bridegroom her Son in law, Spelassi, to the Church; and he had allotted
one of the noblest and eminent Cavalliers that came with him, named Seignior
Francisco de Castelnovo, to perform the same ceremony to his Bride the Dona
Bertha, being a Knight of Malta, native of the City of Nice, and son and heir
to Seignior Iacomo de Castel^o, a very an^ fe^t and rich Baron of Savoy. Now as
Perina was a most beautiful and ^aire young Lady, so was our young Castelnovo
a very proper and gallant Cavallier; and since the occasion of this Marriage,
and the fortunacie and opportunity of their united office, by a kind of
destinated and happy privilege, authorized each to be familiar in the others
company and presence: so, as Lovers begin to court first in jest, then in
earnest, the hearts and breasts of this sweet young couple are in the end
equally surprised with the flame of affection; yea, his personage and dancing,
and her beauty and singing, mutually inkindle this fire of love in their
thoughts and contemplations, which either imagines, and both perceive and
understand, by the dumb Oratorie and silent Rhetoric of their eyes: Which
Castelnovo knowing her descent and quality answerable to his, he intends to
seek her in Marriage. When not any longer to surpresse or conceal their
affections, they after dinner dancing in company of diverse others in the
garden, he singleth the Lady Perina, his new Mistress, apart in a Bower
closely overvail'd with Vines, Cicamores, and Cypres Trees, and there 'twixt
sighs and words, reveals his deep affection to her. But to avoid the
prolixious relation of this their Garden ente^view and conference, although at
first Perina's modesty (the sweetest ornament and virtue of a Lady) was such,
as she not only kept her self, but likewise her affections to her self, yet
her courteous and thankful answers, waited and seconded by many delicious
blushes, and amorous sighs, although not publicly, yet privately informed her
I over Castelnovo, that she likewise loved him: so as during the term of
fifteen days, which Spelassi and he remained in Saint John de Mauriene, he
never l^ft courting her, till he had obtained her affection, and consent to
be his wife; drawn thereunto by these two attractive and seducing reasons:
First, that Castelnovo was a gallant and proper Cavallier, as also her equal
in descent and means; and then that she should live in Nice with a Husband
who dearly loved her, and no longer in Saint John de Mauriene with a Father
who extremely hated her: Neither can these our young Lovers bear their
affections so secret, but the whole company, especially the Lady Dominica her
Aunt perceives it, and deeming it a fit Match for her Niece, rejoices thereat.
Castelnovo secretly acquaints her therewith, and intreates her best assistance
therein toward her brother Arconeto; which she promises, and forthwith
attempteth: when Castelnovo, taking time at advantage, seconds her in his suite
for the Daughter, to her old Father.

Now her Father Arconeto (degenerating from the natural affection of a Father
toward his Daughter) is so willing to depart with her to any Husband, that he
may no more see her, nor be troubled with her presence, as thinking a far
worse Match good enough, he thinks this infinitely too good for her; and so
at the least shadow of the very first motion consents thereunto: which not
only banisheth Perina's old grief, but confirms Castelnovo's new joys; yea
they, like two sweet and virtuous Lovers, so extremely rejoice and triumph
thereat, as he riding home poast to Nice, to acquaint his own Father Seignior
Iacomo de Castelnovo therewith, and swiftly returning again to Saint John de
Mauriene with his consent and approbation, this Marriage of Castelnovo and
Perina is there almost as soon solemnized, as that of Spelassi and Bertha,
though indeed more obscure, and with far less pomp and bravery, in resp^ct
of the perverseness and distaste of her froward old Father Arconeto. So
fifteen days being expired since Spelassi and Castelnovo their first
departure from Nice, they leave Saint John de Mauriene, to return and conduct
their Brides home to Nice, robbing that, to enrich this City with two such
beautiful and gallant Ladies, as were Bertha and Perina.

Now the better to add life and form to this History, or rather to approach
the more material and essential parts thereof, we must here leave to speak
of Spelassi and Bertha, and wholly tie our thoughts and curiosity to Castelnovo
and Perina, two principal and unfortunate Personatours, who both have
mournful parts to act upon the Stage and Theater of Nice: for this Marriage
of theirs is not begun with the tenth part of so many joys, as we shall
shortly see it waited and attended on, yea, dissolved and finished both with
tears and blood.

Castelnovo having brought home his fair and dear Perina to Nice, she is very
honorably welcomed, and courteously received and entertained of his old
Father, Seignior Iacomo de Castelnovo, and of the Lady Fidelia his Mother, and
so are all her kinsfolks and friends who accompany her; yea, there wants no
feasting nor revelling in Nice, to testify how much they congratulate and
rejoice at their sons good fortune and happiness. And for Castelnovo and
Perina themselves, why they are so ravished in the content, and drowned in the
joys and delights of Marriage, as though they have two bodies, yet they have
but o^e heart, desire, and affection; yea, they are so extremely in love each
with other, as they believe there is no Heaven upon earth, to that of each
others presence. But they shall be deceived herein: for there are Tragical
storms arising, to trouble the serenity of this Marriage, and the felicity and
tranquillity of these affections.

For it is both with grief and shame, that I must be so immodest, and
therefore unfortunate to relate, that the old Baron Iacomo de Castelnovo, aged
of some threescore and eight years, has so far forgotten his God and
himself, his conscience and his soul, grace and nature, religion and
humanity, as gazing on the fresh and delicious beauty of our sweet Lady
Perina, his own sons wife, he gives the reigns both of his obscene
desires, and inordinate affections, to lust after her. O how my heart trembles,
to think how he that is white with the snow of a venerable age, should now
lasciviously idolatrize to beauty! how he that has (as it were) one foot in
his grave, should lustfully desire to have the other in his Sons bed! how he
that has his veins dried up and withered, and nothing living in him but
desire, should yet of all the beauties of the world, desire only to enjoy that
of his Sons wife! how he, that has scarce any time left him to be
repentant and sorrowful for his old sins, will now anew make himself
guilty of these foul sins of Adultery, and I may in a manner say of Incest!
how he that has not given the flower of his youth, will yet still
lasciviously and wilfully refuse to bestow the branne of his age on his God!
Alas miserable Castelnovo, wrerched old man, or rather lubritious and beastly
Lecher, thus to drown thy thoughts in the hell of concupiscence and adultery,
when it were far fitter thou should lift them up to heaven, in the
sacrifice of prayer, and other pious and religious contemplations! But all this
will not prevail to stop the current of his voluptuousness, and the
progression of his sensuality: for without respect of his God, or regard of his
soul, he is resolute in his desires to make a strumpet of his Daughter in
Law, and to make his Sons wife his whore: but God will deceive his hopes, and
prevent his villainy.

Now the better, and sooner to draw her to his lascivious desires, he is
wonderful courteous and affable to her, still walking and talking with her,
yea, and many times kissing her, whereof both her Husband and self are
infinitely joyful, but espeally Perina, because she finds a great alteration
in her fortune, in that her Father in Law Castelnovo proves as courteous to
her, as her own Father Arconeto is cruel. But poor innocent soul, and sweet
and chaste Lady, little do thou either dream, o^ think on his lascivious
intent against thine honor and chastity. Old Castelnovo wallowing in the
filthiness, and burning in the fire of his new lust, and losing himself and
his thoughts in the Labyrinth of his Daughter in law Perina's beauty, he
thinks on nothing so much, nay, on nothing else, but how to obtain her to his
lascivious will: but not daring, or rather fearing to acquaint her with his
inordinate and beastly purpose, whiles his son her husband is at home present
with her, he forgeth and frames a plot, both unnatural and treacherous, to
make him embrace and follow the Wars in waiting on the Duke Charles Emanuel, or
the Prince Amadee Victor his son and heir, who with their warlike troops were
resolute to expel the Duke of Feria, Viceroy of Millan, with his Spanish
Regiments out of Vercele, Casall, and the other Towns of Piedmont, to which
end his lustful affection to Perina made him eloquent in persuading, and
powerful in drawing her husband to this Martial action, so full of honor and
glory; adding that his honor, and the service of his Prince and Country,
called him to the Field, and that he should not wholly drown himself in the
beauty of his young Wife, and the pleasures of Marriage. His son Castelnovo
not at all suspecting, or dreaming what a dangerous Snake lay lurking under the
green leaves of his fathers sugered speeches and persuasions, like a noble and
generous Knight as he was, needs no other advocate but his own honor and
Martial disposition to imba^ke him in these Wars: and although the beauty,
requests, and tears of his young Lady were vehement sollicitours to divert
him, yet he is resolute to leave her for three or four months. And so making
ready his arms, train, horses and preparatives, he giving her many kisses,
and she returning him a world of sighs and tears, leaves Nice, and so finds
out the Duke and his Army in Piedmont; where for a little time we will leave
him.

It is a question very disputable, and which by my weak capacity and judgemt
cannot well be decided, whether this departure of young Custelnovo to the
Wars, made his father more glad, or his wife sorrowful: for as she was all
in tears, so was he in mirth and jollity, being so vain in his lust, and s^
lustful in his vanity, as (...) trimmes up his beard, and goes nearer and
withal more youthful in his apparel then accustomed; yea, his lust had so
metamorphosed him, as if it had a profane influence, and secret power to renew
old age in him. But alas, alas, what perfection of chastity can we expect or
hope for in youth, when we see no better signs and fr^s in one of threescore
and eight years? But I will follow the stream of our History, though indeed
the relation of this old lascivious Lechers Lust and Vanity to his daughter in
law Perina, equally afflict me with grief and pity to publish it.

I am then constrained to write and aver, that although mere shame and
unnaturalness do as yet withold this wretched fathers tongue, from vomiting
forth his adulterated lust to his fair and chaste daughter in law Perina, yet
his lust is so immodestly lascivious, as he cannot keep himself out of her
company, nor being in it, refrain from kissing her: but to see the innocence,
and observe the purity of her thoughts, she nevertheless not so much as any
way suspects or dreams of his lascivious intent, although indeed she thinks
this courtesy of his somewhat exceeds the privilege of a Father, and the
duty of a Daughter; but measuring this by the cruelty of her own Father,
she, poor silly soul, thinks her self in this respect now as happy, as
heretofore she was miserable. Only the absence of her dear husband
Castelnovo does both torture and torment her, and the more, for that he is in
the Field at Wars; when, God knows, she desires and wishes he should
be at home with her in peace.

But whiles Perina looks from Savoy to Piedmont, from Nice to Vercelli, and
from her self to her Lord and Husband, her other self, we must not forget,
because o^ History will remember, her Mother in law Fidelia, which now we must
admit and re-conduct to act her part upon the Theater hereof: who observing her
Husbands immodest and unwise familiarity demonstrated to the young Lady Perina,
her sonne^ Wife, as also his alteration in humors and apparel; but chiefly
his unaccustome^ distraction and sighs in his rest and repose; she, more out
of virtuous wisdom then foolish jealousy, ay mes at his vain lust toward
this young Lady her Daughter in law: whereat she both admires with grief, and
wonders with the anxiety of affliction and sorrow, to see her old Husband, in
the winter of his age, so so^ish and beastly to lust after his own sons
young Wife, to see that no respect of heaven, no regard of conscience, nor
apprehension of damnation and hell, had the grace or power, either to kill
these lascivious thoughts in their conception, or to ^rangle them in their
birth, to fee that he who was ready to go to his bed of death, should now
(like the Salamander in the fire) be burning with desire, to go to that of
Lust and Adultery, and to see him fo devoyde of piety, as he must needs join
Incest with Adultery, as if one of these beastly sins alone were not enough
enormous and prodigious to make his life miserable and his death wretched. And
although she have cause enough of sorrow in her self, yet when she thinks of
her Husbands age, and Daughters youth, of his lust, and her chastity, and which
is more, of the most degenerate and unnatural part of a Father, to seek to
pollute and defile his own Sons bed, and consequently his own honor. This
indeed goes near her, and this, and only this makes her look on him, both
with envy and pity: but her age having taught her to love discretion, and to
hate and disdain jealousic, she bears this as patiently as she may, till at
last seeking and finding out a fit opportunity, she both with tears in her
eyes, and grief in her speeches, very secretly checks him for these his
inordinate and lascivious desires toward the young Lady Perina, their Daughter
in law.

But as it is the nature of sin so to betray and inveagle our judgments,
that we flatter our selves with a false conceit, none can perceive it in us;
so this old lecher her Husband, thinking that he had danced in a net, from the
jealousy and suspicion of all the world, in thus affecting his Sons wife,
he like a lewd and wretched old varlet, is so far from rellishing these his
old wifes speeches and exhortations, or from being reclaymed thereby, as he
disdayneth both them and her, and from henceforth is so imperious, and withal
bitter to her, as he never looks on her with affection, but envy: which
nevertheless she (as a modest wife, and grave Matrone) holds it a part not
only of her love, but of her duty, by sweet speeches, and soft means of
persuasion, to divert him from this fond and lascivious humor of his. But
observe the vanity of his lasciviousness, and the impiety of his thoughts and
resolutions: for all her prayers and persuasions serve only rather to set, then
rebate the edge of his lust, and rather bring oil to increase, then water to
quench the flame of his immodest and irregular affection, so as seeing that she
stood in the way of obtaining his beastly pleasures, he, like a profane and
barbarous Husband, terms her no more his wife, but his Medea; and which is
worse, he, out of the heat both of his lust and choler, vows he will soon
remove her from this world to another.

And here the devil, ambitious and desirous of nothing so much, as to fill up
the emyty rooms of his vast and infernal kingdom, by miserable and execrable
degrees takes possession first of his thoughts, then of his heart, and lastly
of his soul; so as being constant in his indignation and choler, and resolute
in this his impious and bloody revenge, he means to dispatch and murder her,
who for the term of forty two years had been his most loving wife, and
faithful bedfellow: but withal he will act it so privately, as not having
as yet discovered his affection to his daughter Perina, he will therefore
conceal both from her and all the world the Murder of this his wife Fidelia,
except only to those graceless and execrable Agents he meant employ in this
mournful and bloody business.

To which end (with a hellish ratiocination) ruminating and revolving on the
manner thereof, he having run over the circumstances of many violent and
tragical deaths, at last resolves to poison her; and deemes none so fit to
undertake it, as her own Wayting-gentlewoman Ierantha: the which authorized by
his former lascivious dalliance with her, as also in favor of five hundred
Ducats, that he will give her, he is confident she will undertake and finish;
neither does he fail in his bloody hopes. For what with the honey of his
flattering speches, and the sugar of his Gold, she, like an infernal Fury, and
a very Monster of her sex, most ingratefully and inhumanely consents
thereunto; so as putting poison into Whitebroth, which some mornings she was
accustomed to make and give her Lady, it spreading into her veins, and
exhaling the radical humor of her life and strength, within eight days
carries this aged and virtuous Matrone to her Grave, and her soul to Heaven.
But her Murderers shall pay dear for this her untimely end.

The Lady Perina, and all the Lady Fidelia's kinsfolks and friends infinitely
lament and bewail her death; and indeed so does the whole City of Nice, where
for her descent and virtues she is infinitely beloved and affected: but all
these tears of theirs are nothing in comparison of those of her wicked and
execrable Husband Castelnovo, who, although he inwardly rejoice, yet he
outwardly seems to be exceedingly afflicted and dejected. But as he has
heretofore acted the part of a Murderer, and now of an hypocrite; yet, have we
but a little patience, and we shall see that detected, this unmasked, and both
panished.

Whiles this mournful Tragedy is acted in Nice, the mediation of the French
King and Pope reconcile the differences, give end to the Wars, and conclude
peace betwixt Spain and Savoy. So home returns the Duke of Feria, to Millan;
the noble Duke of Savoy, and the generous Princes his Sons, to Turin; the
Marshall de Desdiguieres, and the Baron of Terms into France; and consequently
home comes our Knight Castelnovo to Nice: where thinking to rejoice with his
young wife, he is so unfortunate to mourn for the death of his old mother;
but God knows, that neither of them know the least spark or shadow of her
cruel and untimely Murder, and less, the cause thereof. Now for his
lascivious and bloody father, albeit, to cast a veil before his thoughts, and
his intents and actions, he publicly mournes for his wifes death, and
rejoices for his Sons return; yet contrariwise he privately mournes for
this, and rejoices for that. But to leave the remembrance of Fidelia, to
assume that of our Perina; I know not whether she grieved more at her Husbands
absence, or rejoice at his presence, since her affection to him was so tender
and fervent, as in her heart and soul she esteemed that as much her hell, as
this her heaven upon earth: but these joys of hers are but fires of straw, or
flattering Sun-shines, which are suddenly either washed away with a shower, or
eclipsed and banished by a Tempest: for whiles her hopes flatter her belief of
her Husbands continual stay and residence with her, her Father in laws lust
to her, foreseeing and considering that it was impossible to think to obtain
her at home, e're her Husband, his Son, were again employed and sent abroad,
makes all his thoughts aim, and care and industry tend that way, as if time
had no power to make him repent the former murder of his wife, or Grace
influence to renounce the future defiling and dishonouring of his Daughter in
law.

But he is as constant in his lust to her, as resolute in his dispatching and
sending away of him; only he must find out some pregnant, virtuous, and
honorable pretext and color for the effecting of his design and resolution,
because he well knows his Son Castelnovo is as wise and generous in
himself, as amorous of his beautiful young Lady Perina: but his lust, which
is the cause of his resolution, or rather his vanity, which is the author of
his lust, at one time suggests him these two several employments for his
Son: either to send him into France with the Prince Major, who was larely
contracted, and shortly to espouse MadameChristiene the Kings second Sister; or
else under the insinuation of some great Pensions and Offices that were shortly
to be disposed of in Malta, again to send him back thither: and his harping
on these two strings, was the only music and melody which he now gave his
Son; who after he had a month or two at most, recreated himself in the
sweet company of his dear and sweet wife Perina, he least of all aiming
whereat his father aimed, by his absence again gives way, and consents to his
desires of his departure: only the choice of these two different employments
is yet questionable and unresolved of 'twixt the father and the son. For as
the sons curiosity desires to see the Court of France, which as yet he has
not seen; so his fathers lust and malice is to have his return honorably to
Malta, from whence he has formerly received his honor of Knighthood, and
there to obtain a Pension during the term of his life. The son imbrace^h
the pleasures of the journey of France, before the profit and honor of the
Voyage of Malta. But ^he father aiming at other ends, preferres this of Malta
before that of France; so as time working an impression in his thoughts, and
his fathers desire a kind of natural command in his will, and of filial
obedience in his resolution, he at last resolves on Malta. But as neither of
these two enterprises of young Castelnovo is pleasing, but distastefull to his
young and fair Lady Perina; So if her affliction and misery be such, as of
the two her husband must needs attempt and prosecute one, then since he may
go into France by land, and cannot to Malta, but by sea, she at last, with an
enforced willingness (sympathizing with his first inclination) likewise
desires that the object of his journey, and the period of his Voyage be
France, and not Malta; as relying rather in hearing from him to stand at the
speed and fidelity of a Post, then at the inconstancy of the winds, and the
mercy of the seas. So all things prepared and ready for his Voyage, Perina
importunately begging, and her husband Castelnovo confidently promising his
speedy return, she conducting him over the Hill to Villafranca in her Coach,
they there, with many re^ocall kisses, fighes and tears, take leave each of
other; he imbarking himself upon a French Galley, bound from Marseilles to
Malta, (which stopped there accidentally) and she committing him to the
auspicious favor of the wind and sea, very sorrowfully returns for Nice.

Thus leaving the son floating and wasting on the seas, let us again return
to his unnatural and beastly father, who seeing his wife gone to Heaven, and
his son to Malta, and all things hitherto to succeed according to his
lascivious desires, does now assure himself, that either by fair or soul
means he will reap his pleasure of his beautiful daughter in law Perina. To
which end he gives her the sole government and superintendance of his house,
with intent and hope the sooner to govern, and surer to command her: and so
forgetting modesty, and his lust giving a law to his conscience, fifteen days
are scarce past, till finding her in her chamber playing on her Lute, he,
after some pauses, coughes, and kisses, bewrayes and vomitteth her forth his
fervent affection and desire.

But for mine own part, I highly disdain to pollute and vilify this History
with the obscene and lascivious speeches, wherewith this old lecher Castelnovo
courts this young Lady Perina his daughter in law, as holding them as unworthy
of my relation, as of my Readers knowledge; of my modest pen, as of their
chaste ears, only judging of their nature and quality by their effects. The
beastlines and unexpectedness thereof, first made Perina extremely blush for
shame and choler, and then immediately again look pale with grief and
disdain; when not able to brook, or hearken to his lewd speeches, much less
his hateful presence, she, in the defense and preservation of her chastity,
which she preferred before her life, giving him a sharp answer, and a bitter
denial, and grieving to see a father so graceless and impio^s, to s^ke to
defile his own sons bed in her dishonor, she throws away (...) L^; and so
very hastily and chollerickly abandoneth his presence, and her own chamber. At
which he bites his lip for rage, and hangs down his head for indignation. But
at last, sin and the devil reigning in him, makes that he will not take
this her first repulse for his last answer and denial: but resolute to
persevere in his lubricitie, he in every walk, garden and room, frequents
and haunts her as her ghost, as thinking to obtain that from her through his
importunity, which he could not by his persuasion: but this his impudency
shall not prevail.

Now as his sinful motion infinitely grieved her, so his perseverance and
importunacie therein does doubly afflict and torment her: how to appease this
storm, to quench the fire of his lust, and deface the remembrance and feeling
of her grief, she knows not. For alas, alas, she is so unhappy, as her own
father Arconeto, and her Aunt Dominica are at St. John de Mauriene, her sweet
and dear husband in Malta, and her mother in law, the Lady Fidelia in heaven;
so as she has no intimate nor secret familiars, nor any bosom friend to
reveal these her sorrows and afflictions. Once she thought to steal away
from Nice, so to pass the Mountains, and to fly back to Saint John de
Mauriene: but again considering the dishonor, and withal, the danger to
undertake this journey, as also the cold reception and entertainment she
should there find of her own hard hearted father, who would rather deride
then pity her afflictions: she alters this her resolution, and so resolves
a little longer to stay in Nice, hoping and praying, that God would rectify
her father in law Castelnovo's judgment, and reform the errors of his
lascivious thoughts and desires. And so for her part, hating the father as much
as she loved the son her husband, he could not be more prodigal of his
lewd speeches and tentations to her, then she was of her sighs and tears to
understand and repel them. A thousand times she wishes her self in Malta,
with the Knight her husband, or he in Nice with her: and could her body so
soon have flowne or sailed thither as her thoughts, he had long since enjoyed
the happiness of her presence, and she the felicity of his fathers absence.
But (...) she is two miserable to be so fortunate, she has yet this
consolation left her to sweeten the bitterness of her afflictions, and this
hope to revive and comfort her against her despair, that her Letter may
procure his speedy return from Malta to Nice, Whereon resolving, although the
occasion and grounds thereof were as strange as shameful, she secretly
steals to her chamber, and locking her door to her, takes her pen and paper,
and rather with tears then Ink, writes him these few lines:

PERINA to CASTELNOVO.
ALthough mine eyes and heart can better weep and sigh forth mine afflictions,
then my pe^ depaint them, yet I should infinitely wrong thee in my self, and
my self in thee, if I inform thee not by this my Letter (the secret
Ambassador of my heart) that my affection deserves, and mine honor requires
thy speedy return to me; I would unlocke thee this mystery, and make it more
obvious and apparent to the eye of thine understanding, but that mine own
modesty, and another shame commands my pen to silence herein. And again, my
tears so confusedly and mournfully interrupt my sighs, they my tears, and
both my pen, as although I have the will, yet I wan^ the power to enlarge thee.
(...) Only my dear Castelnovo, if ever thy Perina were dear to thee, make
her happy with thy sight, who deemes her self not only miserable, but
accursed in thy absence. For till Nice be thy Malta, Heaven may, Earth cannot
rejoice me.

PERINA.


Having written this her Letter, she finds a confident and intimate friend of
her husbands, a Gentleman named Seignior Benedetto Sabia, who undertakes the
safe conveyance, and secret delivery thereof into Malta to Castelnovo: so
giving it him with store of gold, to defray the charge of his journey, as also
a pair of gold bracelets for a token to her Knight and husband, he imbarkes
for Genoua, so to Naples, and from thence in a Neopolitan Galley, arrives in
short time, to the renowned and famous I Will of Malia, the inexpugnable Bulwark
of Christendom, and the curb and bridle of audacious insulting Turkey, where
finding out the Knight Seignior Francisco de Castelnovo, he effectually and
fairly delivers him his Ladies letter, bracelets, and message, who withdrawing
himself to a window, has no sooner broken up the seals and read the letter,
but he is at first much perplexed at the unexpected news thereof: he reads
it over again and again, and finds it so obscure, as he cannot gather or
conceive her meaning therein, but at last construing it only to be a wile and
fetch of her affection, to re-fetch and call him home to Nice to her: he loath
as yet to lose and abandon his hopes of preferment in that Island, which now the
great Master has promised him, dispatcheth Sabia back for Nice, and plucking
off a rich Emerauld from his finger, delivers it him for his Lady Perina, as a
token of his dear and fervent affection, and with it a letter in answer of
hers.

In the Interim of Sabia his absence to Malta, our old lascivious Baron
Castelnovo is not idle in Nice, in still seeking to draw our Lady Perina to his
adulterous desire, and will, yea, he is become so obscene in his requests and
speeches, as they not only exceed chastity, but civility: so as she (poor
Lady) can find no truce, nor obtain any intermission from these his beastly
solicitations; but resolving still to preserve her honor with her life, her
pure chastity shines cleerer in the midst of these his impure temptations,
then the Sun does, being environed and encompassed with many obs^e clouds:
but she thinks every hour a year, before she see her Knight Cas^ safely
returned from Malta, when lo, Sabia arriving at Villafranca, trips over to Ni^,
and understanding Perina privately bolted up in her Chamber, he repaires to
her, and there delivers her, her Knight Castelnovo's Ring and Letter, although
not himself; when tearing off the Seals, she therein finds these words:

CASTELNOVO to PERINA.
MY fair and dear Perina, the knowledge of thy sighs and tears the more
affliict and grieve me, in respect I am ignorant whence they proceed, or what
occasioned them: it is true, thy affection deserves my return, and the
preservation of thine honor, not only to request, b^ to require and command
it: but I am so assured of that, and so confidem of this, ^s I know the wilt
carry the first to thy grave, and the second to heaven. So, if any one since my
departure have salne in love with thy beauty, thou must not find it strange,
much less grieve thera^, since the excellency thereof has power, not only to
captivate one but many: yea, the considera^on thereof should rather rejoice,
then afflict thee, since whatsoever he be, the sha^ in the end will remain
his, and the glory thine. But dear and sweet Lady, I think thine honor is
only the pretex^, and thy affection the cause, so earnestly to desire my
return: whereunto I would willingly consent, but that the daily expectance of
my prefermen^ must a li^le longer de^aine me here: ^nely this is my
resolution, and I pray let i^ be thy assuraance, I will dispa^ch my affairs
here with all possible expedition, and shall never think ^y self happy, till
I re-i^barke from Malta, and land at Nice.

CASTELNOVO.


Having o're-read her Letter, she, the better to dissemble her secret passions
and griefs, very courteously conferres with Sabia: of whom having for that
time thankfully taken her leave, she for mere sorrow and affliction, throws
her self on her bed, from thence on the floor, to see her hopes deceived of
her husbands return; and now she knows neither what to say or do in this
her misery and perplexity: for she sees that her father in laws obstinacy,
and consequently her sorrows grow from bad to worse, that he is so far from
reclayming, as he is resolute in his lascivious and beastly solicitations: So
that seeing his fair speeches and entreaties cannot prevail with her, he
exchangeth his resolution and former language, and so adds threats to his
requests, and frowns to his smiles, as if force should extort and obtain
that, which fair means could not, yea, and sometimes he intermingleth and
administreth her such heart-killing menaces, as she has now reason not only
to doubt of his lust, but also to fear his revenge: which considering, she,
as well to preserve her honor, as to provide for the safety of her life, will
once again prove the kindness of her own unkind father Arconeto, and so
determines to leave Nice, and to fly unto Sa^nt John de Mauriene: now to
assist her and accompany her in this her secret escape, she thinks none so fit
as Sabia, who for her husbands affection, and her own virtues, willingly
consents to her: so she preparing her apparel, and he her train, they in a
dark night (when pale faced Cynthia inveloped her self in a multitude of
black and obscure clouds, purposely to assist and favor her in this her
laudable and honorable flight) take horse, and so with great expedition pass
the Mountains, and recover Saint John de Mauriene; where though she be not
truly welcome to her own father Arconet^, yet her honor and her life are
truly secured from the lust and revenge of he^ lascivious father in law
Castelnovo: nevertheless the cause and manner of her escape, but chiefly the
consideration of her husbands absence in the passage of this business, does
still so bitterly afflict her, as she is become pale and sickely: whereupon
she is resolute, once again to send back Sabia to Malta to her knight and
husband, with* second letter, in hope it may effect and procure his return,
which her first could not: and so calling for pen and paper, she traceth
thereon these few lines:

PERINA to CASTELNOVO.
Since thou will not leave Malta, to see Nice for my sake, I have left Nice, to
live or rather to dye in Saint John de Mauriene for thine: it is true, my
affection has desired thy return, which thou have not granted me: it is as
true, that one, to whom Nature has given a prime and singular interest in
thee, and thee in him, has sought the defloration of mine honor, which my
heart and duty have denied him. Thou art confident of my affection to thee: if
thi^ had been so faithful and s^rvent to my self, neither sea nor land had
had power to separate (...) If any prefermens be dearer to thee then my life,
stay in Malta: or if my life be dearer the^ it, then return to Saint John de
Mauriene, where thou may find me, for in Nice I will not be found of
thee. Had thou not purposely mistaken the cause for the pretext in my
importunity of thy return, I would have digested it with far more content,
and less affliction: but since neither ^y ^tion, or honor has power to ^ffect
it, at least let the regard of my life, since that will not accompany me, if
thou any longer absent thy self from me: make therefore haste to see thy
Pe^ina, if ever thou think to see her again; and let her bear this one
content to her grave, that she may disclose thee a secret, which, but to thy
self, she will conceal from all the world.

PERINA.


Whiles Sabia is again speeding toward Malta with Perina's second Letter to
her husband Castelnovo, we will a little speak of old Castelnovo the father,
who seeing his daughter in law Perina fled, and consequently his hopes with
her, he is extremely perplexed and afflicted hereat: All the house and City is
sought for her, and he himself breaks off the locks of her Chamber door,
where he finds the nest, but the bird flowne away, her bed, but not her
self: so as his thoughts doubly torment and astonish him, first to be
frustrated of his hopes and desires to enjoy her, then, because she will
bewray his lascivious suite and affection to her Husband his son, which of
all sides will procure him not only shame, but infamy; yea, now it is,
although before he would not, that he sees his error, and vanity, in
attempting to make shipwreck of her honor and chastity, which is the Glory,
and should be the Palladium of Ladies: but it is too late to recover her
again: And therefore although he know how to repent, yet he is ignorant how
to remedy or redeem it, since his attempt and enterprise was not only odious
to God, but infamous to men, opposite to Grace, and repugnant and contradictory
to Nature. Besides, this his lustful folly proceeding from himself, looks
two ways, and has a double reflection, first on Perina the wife, then on
Castelnovo her husband, and his own son, who, he is assured will be all
fire hereat; yea, this crime of his is of so high and so beastly a nature, as
he knows not what to say to him, or how to look him in the face, when he
shall arrive from Malta, which his guilty conscience tells him will be
shortly; neither does the Calculation or Arithmetic of his fear deceive him:
for by this time is Sabia again arrived at Malta, where he delivers
Castelnovo his wife's second Letter; the which does so nettle and sting his
heart to the quick, at the bitter and unexpected news it relates, as he
esteems himself no longer himself, because he is not with his dear wife,
who is the one half, yea, the greatest part of himself. Wherefore, admiring
who in Nice, yea, in his fathers house should be so impudently laseivious, to
seek to blemish his honor, in that of his Ladies, he, making her sighs and
tears his, with all expedition and haste provides for his departure from
Malta; and yet his love, his fear, or both conducing and concurring in one,
makes him instantly resolve to dispatch and return Sabia, as the harbinger to
proclaim his coming: the which he does, and charge him with this Letter to
his fair wife, and dear Lady Perina:

CASTELNOVO to PERINA.
THy sudden departure from Nice to Saint John de Mauriene does equally afflict
and amaze me: I burn with desire, to know as well the Author, as the Cause
thereof, that I ^ay likewise know how to right thee, in revenging my self of
him. I have thought it fit to re^rne Seignior Sabia again to thee, as soon as
he arrived to me, being ready within two days to imbarke as timely as
himself; so that if wind and Sea hate me not too much, in more ^ving and
favoring him, I am confident to bring and deliver thee my self, as soon as
he shall be this my Letter: and judge whether I speak it from my heart and
soul, since the estimation ^f thy love, and the preservation of thine honor
make me already deem minutes months, and hours years, till my presence be
made happy with thine. I come, fair Perina, sweet wife and dear Lady, I come;
and if Heaven prove propitious to my most religious prayers and ^sires here on
Earth, ^ur meeting shall be shortly as sweet and happy, as our parting was
bitter ^d sorrowful.

CASTELNOVO.


So according to this his Letter, as first Sabia imbarkes from Malta to Nice,
before him, so he likewise arrives at Genoua the day after he did at Nice, from
whence poasting over the Mountains, he arrives at Saint John de Mauriene,
where, at his father in law Arconeto's house, he finds his dear and sweet
Lady Perina, who every minute of time, with much impatient longing and desire,
expected his arrival (as having the night before received his second and last
Letter by Sabia, which advertised her thereof) so like true and faithful
Turtle Doves, esteeming each others presence their most sovereign felicity
they fall to their billing and kisses, to inform themselves how sweet this
their happy meeting was each to other. And here our Knight Castelnovo cannot
be so curious or hasty to inquire, as his Lady Perina was to relate the cause
of her sudden departure from Nice to Saint John de Mauriene, occasioned by the
unnatural lust and lasciviousness of his Father (as we have formerly
understood) the which, with many sighs and tears, she depaints forth to him
in all its circumstances and colors. He is amazed at this strange and
unexpected news, and far the more to think that his own father should (in
the winter of his age) attempt or seek to defile his honor and bed, in the
person of this his fair and chaste Lady Perina: he wondereth to see so little
grace in so many years, and that if Nature had not, yet Religion should have
had power to banish these lascivious thoughts from his heart and memory: so
with out-spred arms he tenderly imbraceth and kisseth her, highly extolling
her chastity, and applauding the discreet carriage of her escape: being
himself resolute to stay in Saint I^ de Mauriene with her father Arconeto, and
not to return to Nice to his own father Castelnovo. But he shall as soon
infringe as make this his resolution; for by this time his father understanding
of his Sons return from Malta, to Saint John de Mauri^ and knowing that his
Lady Perina had not failed to bewray him his lascivious suit and desire,
attempted against her honor, as also grieving at the remembrance of his for^er
folly and future shame, in knowing what a foul seandall both it and his sons
absen^ would procure and engender him, he resolves to confess his crime, and
so by the mediation of a persuasive and satisfying Letter, to endeavor to
reclaim them again fr^ Saint John de Mauriene to Nice: when calling for pen
and paper, he writes these se^ ensuing lines, and sends them his Son by a
Gentleman of his:

CASTELNOVO to his Son CASTELNOVO.
I Am as glad of thy arrival from Malta, as sorrowful for thy absence from
Nice: and f^ to deny is to redouble our errors and imperfections, I will not
go further then my self to fi^ the cause thereof, since I know that my
lascivious and graceless attempt against the honor of (...) chaste Lady, has
drawn thee to this resolution: but now I write it to my future comfort, (...)
much as I conceived it to my former shame, that Grace has vanquished Nature,
and (...) gion lust in me: so as I am at present not only sorrowful, but
repentant for that crime of mi^ which I no more remember but with horror, nor
think of, but with detestation. My soul (...) made my peace with God, and my
heart desires to recontract it both with thy self and her; (...) as I hope he
will forget it, so I beseech you both to forgive it me, being ready to
confirm (...) my reconciliation as well with my tongue as pen: Wherefore since
thou art the sole prop of my (...) and comfort of my life, make me not so
unfortunate or miserable, to be taxed with the sca^ of my shame, and thy
absence; but bring back thy Lady with thee: for here I profess be^ Heaven and
Earth, that I will henceforth as much honor her for her chastity, as heretos^
lasciviously sought to betray and violate it.

CASTELNOVO.


This virtuous and religious Letter of the Father prevails with the Son, and
his fair and chaste Lady; so as their secrecies and discretions hush up this
business in silence, and within eight days they both return from Saint John
de Mauriene to Nice: where they are conrteously welcomed, and respectively
received and entertained of their father, whose contrition for his former folly
is outwardly so great, as he has tears in his eyes at the remembrance
thereof: so as making good the promise of his Letter, he very penitently and
sorrowfully implores their pardon and remission; which they instantly grant
him with as much willingness as alacrity. So the report and thought hereof is
obscured and vanished, as if it had never been; and all things and parties so
reconciled, as to common sense nothing in the world is capable to trouble the
tranquillity of this reconciliation and atonement. But alas, alas, we shall
very briefly see the contrary: For old Castelnovo the Father, notwithstanding
all these religious promises, and sincere shows of repentance and tears, is
so far from being the man he seems to be, as although he have made his peace
with his son and Daughter, yet, ay me, I write it with grief, he has not
with his conscience, nor his conscience with God: for although he have a chaste
and religious tongue, yet he still retains a lascivious and adulterate heart;
yea, he is so far from conversion and reformation, as the new sight and
review of the Lady Perina's fresh and delicate beauty does revive those
sparks, and refresh those flames of his lust, which seemed to be raked up in
the embers of her absence. And what is this, but to be a Christian in show, and
a miscreant in effect? to hide a foul soul under a fair face? and to make
Religion and Hypocrisy, a fatal and miserable cloak for his villainy? But
though he dissemble with God, yet we shall see, and he find, that God will
not dissemble with him; and in thinking to b^tray God, Satan in the end will
betray him. The manner is thus:

As he resumes his old suit, and newly burns in love and lustful desire, to
erect the Trophies of his lascivious and incestuous pleasures upon the ruins
of his Daughter in laws chastity and honor; so he likewise sees it impossible
to think to perform, or hope to accomplish it, as long as his son her
husband lives: and therefore, losing his judgment either in the Labyrinth of
her beauty, or in the turbulent Ocean of his own concupiscence and lust, he,
contrary to the rules of Grace, and the laws and principles of nature, swaps a
bargain with the Devil to poison him. To which end, to show himself the
monster of men, and the bloudiest president of a most degenerate Father, which
this, or many precedentages ever produced or afforded, he has again recourse
to his Hellish Agent Ierantha, in favor of five hundred Ducats, to send the
Son into Heaven after the Mother, and to make him equal with her, as in
nature, so in (the dissolution thereof) death: A bloody design, and mournful
project, which we shall presently be enforced to see acted upon the Theater
of this History.

But Ierantha is at first so repentant for the death of the Mother, as she
will not consent to that of the Son. And had she continued in this religious
resolution, she had lived more fortunately, and not dyed so miserably and
shamefully, as we shall briefly see. For our old Lecher Castelnovo, her
Master, seeing his Gold could not this second time prevail with Ierantha,
being equally inflamed as well with lust to Perina, as with malice and revenge
to his Son Castelnovo her husband, he is so implacable therein, as he
promises to marry her, if she will attempt and perform it. So although his
first battery failed, yet his second does not: For the Devil had ^ade her so
ambitious of Greatness and Honor, that of a simple waiting Gentlewoman to
become a great Lady, she consents heereunto; and, which is a thousand pitties
to report, within less then six days performs it; when (God knows) the
innocence of this harmless young Gentleman his son never dreamt or
suspected it.

At the sight of this his sudden death, his Lady Perina is ready to dye for
grief; yea to drown her self in the Ocean and deluge of her tears; tearing
her hair, and striving to deface the excellency of her beauty, with a kind
of careless neglect, as if she were resolute not to survive him. And if the
Lady Perina bewrayed many deplorable demonstrations of sorrow for the death of
her husband, no less, does his father Castelnovo for that of his son; only
their griefs (comformable to their passions) are diametrically different and
opposite: for hers were fervent and true, as proceeding from the sincerity of
her affection; and his hypocritical and feigned, as derived from the
profundity of his malice and revenge toward him. And not to transgress from
the Decorum and truth of our History, old Castelnovo could not so artificially
bear and over-vaile his sorrows for his Sons death, but (the premises
considered) our young afflicted widow and Lady vehemently suspecteth he has
a hand therein; and likewise partly believes that Ierantha is likewise
accessory and engaged therein, in respect she looks more aloft, and is grown
more familiar with her Lord and Master then before. And indeed as her sorrows
increase her jealousy, so her jealousy throws her into a passionate and
violent resolution of Revenge, both against him and her, if she can be
futurely assured that they had Murdered and poisoned the Knight her husband.

Now to be assured hereof, she thus reasons with her self; that if her
Father in law were the Murderer of his Son her husband, his malice and
hatred to him proceeded from his beastly lust to her self; and that he now
dispatched, he would again shortly revive and renew his old lascivious suit
to her: which if he did, she vows to take a sharp and cruel Revenge of
him, which she will limit with no less then his death. And indeed we shall
not go far to see the event and truth answer her suspicion. For within a
month or two after her husband was laid in his untimely grave, his old
lustful and lascivious father does again burst and vomit forth his beastly
solicitations against her chastity and honor: which observing, she somewhat
disdainefully and coyly puts him off, but yet not so passionately nor
chollerickely as before, only of purpose to make him the more eager in his
pursuit, thereby the better to draw him to her lure, that she might perpetrate
her malice, and act her Revenge on him, and so make his death the object of her
rage and indignation, as his lust and malice were the cause of the sorrows of
her life. But unfortunate and miserable Lady, what a bloody and hellish
enterprise do thou engage thy self in, and why has thy affection so blinded
thy conscience and soul, to make thy self the author and actour of so
mournful and bloody a Tragedy? For alas alas, sweet Perina, I know not
whether more to commend thy affection to thy husband, or condemn thy cruel
malice intended to his father. For O grief! O pity! where are thy virtues,
where is thy Religion, where thy conscience, thy soul, thy God, thus to give
thy self over to the hellish tentations of Satan? Thou which heretofore
fled'st from adultery, will thou now follow Murder? or because thy heart would
not be accessory to that, shall thy soul be now so irreligious and impious,
to be guilty of this? But as her father in law is resolute in his lust toward
her, so is she likewise in her revenge toward him, and far the more, in
that she perceives Ierantha's great belly sufficiently proclaims that she
has played the strumpet; and which is worse, she fears, with her execrable
and wretched Father in Law: so as now no longer able to stop the furious and
impetuous current of her revenge, she is so graceless and bloody, as she
vows first to dispatch the Lord and Master, then the Wayting-Gentlewoman, as
her thoughts and soul suggest her they had done first the Mother, then the
Son: so impious are her thoughts, so inhumane and bloody her resolutions.

Now in the interim of this time the old Lecher her father is again become
impudent and importunate in his suit. so our wretched Lady Perina degenerating
from her former virtues, and indeed from her self, she, after many requests
and solicitations, very feignedly seems to yield, and strike sail to his
desire; but indeed with a bloody intent to dispach him out of this world. So
having concluded this sinful fatal Match, there wants nothing but the
finishing and accomplishing thereof: only they differ in the manner and
circumstances: the Father is desirous to go to the Daughter in laws bed, the
Daughter to the Father in laws; but both conclude that the night, and not the
day shall give end to this lascivious and beastly business; his reason is, to
avoid the jealousy and rage of Ierantha, whom now, although she be near her
time of deliverance; he refuses to marry her; but the Lady Perina's if, that
she may pollute and stain his own bed with his blood, and not hers; but
especially, because she may have the fitter means to stab and murder him:
and hereon they conclude. To which end, not only the night, but the hour is
appointed betwixt them: which being come, and Castelnovo in bed, burning with
impatience and desire for her arrival, he thinking on nothing but his beastly
pleasures, nor she, but on her cruel malice and revenge: she softly enters his
chamber, but not in her night, but her day attire, having a Pisa Poniard close
in her fleeve; when having bolted his Chamber door, because none should divert
her from this her bloody design; she approaching his bed, and he lifting
himself up purposely to welcome and kiss her, she seeing his breast open and
naked, like an incensed fury, draws out her Poniard, and uttering these words:
Thou wretched Whore-master and Murderer, this life of mine own honor, and
the death of my dear Knight and husband, thy some. And so stabbing him at the
heart with many blows she kills him stark dead, and leaves him reeking in
his hot blood, without giving him time to speak a word; only he fetched a
screeke and groan or two, as his soul took her last farewell of his body.
Which being overheard of the servants of the house, they ascend his chamber,
and find our inhumane Perina issuing forth, all gored with the effusion of
his blood, having the bloody Poniard, which was the fatal Instrument of this
cruel Murder in her hand. They are amazed at this bloody and mournful
spectacle: so they seize on her, and the report hereof flying through the City,
the Criminal Judges that night cause her to be imprisoned for the fact, which
she is resolved no way to deny, but to acknowledge, as rather glorying then
grieving thereat.

Ierantha, at the very first understanding hereof, vehemently suspects that her
two poisoning Murders will now come to light; and so, as great as her belly
is, she, to provide for her safety, very secretly steals away to a dear
friends house of hers in the City, which now from all parts rattleth and
resoundeth of this cruel and unnatural Murder; yea, it likewise passes the
Alps, and is speedily bruited and known in Saint John de Mauriene, where
although her father Arconeto would never heretofore affect her, yet he now
exceedingly grieves at this her bloody attempt and imminent danger: but her
irregular affection, and inhumane revenge, will not as yet permit her
conscience to inform and show her the haynousnesse of her cruel and bloody
fact. But God will be more merciful to her and her soul.

Some two days after she is arraigned for the same, where she freely
confesseth-it, having nothing to allege for her excuse, but that she
perfectly knew, that her Father in law Castenovo and his Strumpet Ierantha had
at least poisoned the Knight her husband, if not likewise the Lady Fidelia his
mother; the which although they had some reason and ground to suspect, because
of Ierantha's sudden slight, yet since this could no way diminish, or extenuate
her Murder of her Father in law, they condemn our unfortunate Lady Perina to
be hanged, and so re-send her to prison, to prepare her self to dye. But the
advice of some, and the friendship and compassion of others, as pitying her
youth and beauty, and commending her chastity and affection to her Knight and
Husband, counsel and persuade her to appeal from the Sentence of the Court of
Nice, to the Senate of Chambery (which is the Sovereign and Capital of Savoy)
whither we shall shortly see her conducted and brought.

In which mean time let us observe the wonderful justice and providence of
God showed likewise upon this execrable Wayting-gentlewoman Ierantha, for so
cruelly poisoning the Lady Fidelia, and the Knight Castelnovo her Son; who,
although search were every where made for her, yet she having hushed her self
up privately, albeit her bloody thoughts and guilty conscience for the same
continually torture and torment her, yet she is so impious and graceless, as
she no way fears the danger of the law, and much less the severe tempest of
Gods indignation and revenge, which now notwithstanding in the midst of her
security will, according to her bloody deserts and crimes, suddenly surprise
and overtake her: for now this accident of her Lord Castelnovo's Murder, and
of the Lady Perina's imprisonment, or to speak more properly and truly, of
Gods sacred decree and divine Judgment, throws her into the sharp and bitter
pains of travel for child; with whose heart-killing gripes and convulsions,
she is so miserably tortured and tormented, as she her self, her Mid. wife,
and all the women near her, judge and think it impossible for her to escape
death: when seeing no hope of life, and that already her pangs and torments had
made her but as it were the very image and anatomy of death, she begins to
look from Sin to repentance from Earth to Heaven, and from Satan to God; and
so taking on and assuming Christian resolution, she will not charge her soul
with the concealing of this single Adultery, much less of her double Murders;
but very penitently confesses all, a^ well it, as them; and so commits her
self to the unparalleld and merciless mercies of her pains and torments,
hoping they will speedily send her from this world to a better. But her
Adultery and Murders are such odious and execrable crimes in God sight, as he
will free her from these dangers of childbirth, and because worthy, will
reserve her for a shameful and infamous death. So she is fafely delivered of a
young son, who is more fair then happy, as being the offspring of lascivious
parents, and the issue of an adulterous bed; and by Gods providence and her
own confession, she, for these her beastly and bloody crimes, is the second
day committed to prison, and the third hanged and burnt in Nice, and her ashes
thrown into the air. A just reward and punishment for so hellish and inhumane
a Gentlewoman; who, though otherwise she showed many testimonies and signs of
Repentance at her end, yet her crime were so foul and odious to the World, as
at her death she was so miserable as she found not one spectatour, either to
weep for her, or to lament, or condol^ with her.

And now to shut up this History, let us carry our curiosities and expectations
from Nice to Chambery, and from dead Ierantha to our living Perina, where that
grave and illustrious Senate, in consideration of her famous chastity, and
singular affection to the Knight her husband, as also her noble parentage and
tender years, they moderat^ the Sentence of Nice, for murdering her Father in
law Castelnovo, and so in stead of hanging, adjudge her there to have her right
hand cut off, and her self to perpetual imprisonment in Nice; where Gods
sacred Justice for this her bloody Murder, and the remembrance of her dead
husband, and living sorrows, so sharply torment and afflict her, as she
lived not long in Prison, but exceedingly pined away of a languishing
Consumption: and so very sorrowfully and repentantly ended her days, being
exceedingly lamented of her kinsfolks, and pittyed of all her acquaintance;
and, had not her affection been blinded, and her rage and Revenge too much
triumphed over her thoughts and resolutions, she had lived as happy, as she
dyed miserable; and have served for as great a grace and Ornament to her
Country, as Ierantha and old Castelnovo her father in law were a scandal and
shame.

Thus we see how Gods revenging justice still meets with Murder. O that we
may read this History with fear, and profit thereby in reformation, that
dying to sin, and living to righteousness, we may peaceably dye in this
World, and gloriously live and reign in that to come.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXEcrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY X.
Bertolini seeks Paulina in marriage, but she loves Sturio, and not himself:
he prays her Brother Brellati, his dear friend, to solicit her for him,
which he does, but cannot prevail; whereupon Bertolini lets fall some
disgraceful speeches, both against her honor, and his reputation: for which
Brellati challenges the Field of him, where Bertolini kills him, and he flies
for the same. Sturio seeks to marry her, but his father will not consent
thereunto, and so conveyes him away secretly: for which two disasters, Paulina
dies for sorrow. Sturio finds out Bertolini, and sends him a Challenge, and
having him at his mer cie, gives him his life at his request: he afterward
very treacherously kills Sturio with a Petronell in the Street from a Window:
he is taken for this second Murder, his two hands cut off, then beheaded, and
his body thrown into the River.

ALbeit, that Valor be requisite in a Gentleman, (and one of his most
essential virtues and proper ornaments) yet since Charity is the true mark and
character of a Christian, we should not rashly resolve to hazard the loss of
our lives for the preservation of the mere title, and vain point of our
honor, but rather religiously endeavor to save our souls in that of our own
lives, as also of those of our Christian brethren: for in Duells and single
Combats, (which though the heat of youth and revenge seem to allow, yet,
reason will not, and Religion cannot) did we only hazard our bodies, and not
our souls, then our warrant to fight, were in earth as just, as now the
hazzarding of our souls and bodies is odious and distastefull to Heaven, since
in seeking to deface man the creature, we assuredly attempt to strike and
stabbe at the Majesty of God the Creator: but if there be any color or
shadow of honor to kill our adversary, for the preservation of the vain
point of our honor, what an ignoble ingratitude, and damnable impiety is it,
for a Gentleman likewise treacherously to kill another, of whom he has
formerly received his life? yea as Grace fights against this former sort of
fighting, so both Grace and Nature impugn and detest this second sort of
Murder: A woeful and mournful president whereof, I here represent in the
person of a base and wretched Gentleman, whose irregular affection to a Lady,
first slew her brother in the field; and execrable revenge to her lover, next
drew him treacherously to Murder him in the street; and consequently, to his
own condign punishment, and shameful death for the same. May all such bloody
Murderers still meet with such ends, and may his miserable and infamous death
premonish all other Gentlemen, to live and become more charitable, and less
bloody by his example.

THe friendship and familiarity betwixt Seignior John Battista Bertolini, and
Seignior Leonardo Brellati, two noble young Gentlemen, native and resident of
the City of Rome, was (without intermission) so entire and intimate, for the
space of six whole years, which led them from their years of fourteen to
twenty, as it seemed they had but one heart in two bodies, and that it was
impossible for either of them to be truly merry, if the other were absent: and
surely, many were the reasons which laid the foundation of this friendship; for
as they were equal in years, so their ^atures and complexions resembled, and
their humors and inclinations sympathized: likewise they were ancient
schoole-fellows, and near neighbors: for their parents both dwelt betwixt the
Palaces of the too Cardinals, Farnesi and Caponius: or if there were any
disparity in their dignities and worths, it consisted only in this,
Bertolini's parents were richer then Brellati's, but Brellati was more Nobly
descended then Bertolini: which notwithstanding could no way impeach or hinder
the progress of their friendship, but rather it flourished with the time: so
as they increasing in years, they likewise did in affection, as if they were
ambitious of nothing so much in this world, as not only to imitate, but to
surpass the friendship of Orestes and Pillades, and of Damon and P^thias:
whereof, all who knew them and their parents; yea, all that part and division
of Rome, took deep and singular notice: but to show that they were men, and
not Angels, and consequently subject to frailty not inherent to perfection,
that earth was not heaven, nor Rome the shadow thereof; have we but a little
patience, we shall shortly see, the thread of this friendship cut off, the
props and fortifications thereof razed, battered and said level with the
ground, yea, we shall see time, change with time, friendship turned into
enmity, fellows to foes, love to loathing, courtesy to cruelty, and in a
word, life to death: as observe the sequel of this History, and it will
briefly inform ye how.

Bertolini sees that Brellati has a fair and delicate sister, named Dona
Paulina, somewhat younger then himself, and yet not so young, but that the
clock of her age has stricken eighteen, and therefore proclaimed her at
least capeable, if not desirous of marriage, and although he be a novice in
the Art of love, yet Nature has made him so good a Scholar in the principles
and rudiments thereof, as he sees her fair, and therefore must love her; rich
in the excellency and delicacie of beauty, and therefore is resolute to love
her, and only her: for gazing on the influence and splendor of her piercing
eyes, he cannot behold them without wonder, and then prying and contemplating
on the roseat and lilly tincture of her cheeks, he cannot see these without
admiration, nor refrain from admiring them without affection: but again,
remarking the slendernes of her body, and the sweetness of her virtues, and
seeing her as gracious as fair, and that her inward perfections added as much
luster to her exterior beauty, as this reflected ornament and decoration to
these, he, as young as he was, vows himself her servant, and withal swore,
that either she, or his grave, must be his wife and Mistress.

Bertolini thus surprised and netled with the beauty of his dearly sweet, and
sweetly fair, Paulina, he is enforced to neglect a great part of his
accompanying the brother, thereby to court the sister: so he many times
purposely forsakes Brellati to follow Paulina, and delights in nothing so much
as in her presence, and (in that regard) in his absence, not that it was
possible, in his conceit and imagination, for him any way to hate him, in
loving her; rather, that in general terms he must love Brellati for
Paulina's sake; and in particular, only affect her for his own. And as his
wealth and ambition made him confident he should obtain her for his wife: so
he in fair, amorous, and honorable terms, as well by his own
solicitations, Letters, promises, and presents, as by those of his parents,
seeks her in marriage: yea, and when these could not suffice, he, to show
himself as true as fervent a lover, adds sighs, tears, prayers, and oaths.
But all these sollicitours serve only to betray and deceive his hopes: for if
Bertolini were extremely desirous to marry Paulina, she is as resolute not to
match him: which discords in affection, seldom or never make any true harmony
in minds.

His wealth deceiving him, he has recourse to her only brother, and his best
and dearest friend Brellati, to whom he relates the profundity and fervencie of
his affection to his sister Paulina, acquaints him with his suite, and her
denial; his attempt, and her repulse therein; and by the power and bonds of
all their former friendship and familiarity, intreates and conjures him to
become his orator and advocate toward her, in his behalf; whose smiles, he
alleges, are his life, and frowns, his death. Brellati having his generosity
and judgment blinded with the respect of Bertolini his wealth, as also of the
affection he bore him; all other considerations laid apart, like a better
friend to him, then a brother to his sister Paulina, promises him his best
furtherance and assistance in the process of this his affection: and so with
his truest Oratory, best Eloquence, and sweetest Persuasion, begins to deal
effectually with her herein. But as our hopes are subject and incident to
deceive us, so Bertolini and Brellati come far too short of theirs: for
Paulina in absolute and downright terms, prays her brother to inform and
resolve Bertolini, that she has otherways settled and engaged her affection:
and therefore prays him to seek another Mistress, since she has found
another Lover and Servant, with whom she means to live and die. Her bro^er (for
his friends sake) is extremely sorrowful hereat, and prays his sister to name
him her servant: she binds him by oath to secrecy. So he swearing, she
informs him it is Seignior Paulus Sturio, a very ancient Noble man of the
City. He tells her, he is a Gentleman more Noble then rich: and she replies,
that Bertolini is more rich then Noble; and therefore she will refuse him, and
marry Sturio. He is obstinate in his requests, as she resolute in her
denial. So having performed the part of a friend for his friend, and
commending the nobility and virtues of Sturio, as much as he pittyed the
weakness of his estate and wealth, he leaves his sister to her affection and
designs: and so with an unwilling willingness (without any extenuation)
delivers his friend Bertolini her definitive answer; yet performs his promise
to his sister, in concealing Sturio his name.

Bertolini is all in fire and choler at this news, and begins no longer to
look on his friend Brellati with the eyes of affection, but of contempt and
indignation: and so consulting with his passion, not with his Judgment; with
rage, and not with reason; as immoderate anger seldom looks right, commonly
squint-eyed; he in the heat of his wrath, and height of his revenge, very much
neglects and slights him, yea and most uncivilly and abruptly departs from him,
as if he were no longer worthy of the bare complement of farewell. Which
Brellati well observes, and in observing, remembers, and in remembering, grieves
at, since Bertolini was his most intimate and dearest friend; and in whose
behalf, did occasion present, he was ready, not only to sacrifice his best
service, but his best life. Lo here the first breach and violation, which
Bertolini gives to their friendship: but the second is not far behind: For
in the next company he meets, which was some two days after, walking in
Cardinal Farnesi his Galleries in presence of some four or five other
Gentlemen, both of his and of Brellati's acquaintance, he forgot himself so
much, as some demanding for his consort Brellati, he chollerickly replied,
that he was a base and beggarly Gentleman; and therefore henceforth disdained
his company, and that his sister Paulina was a lascivious and dissembling
strumpet. But although the fire of his choler had foolishly banded forth these
speeches in the air, yet they fell not to the ground; but some of the company
then present, that very night report them to Brellati. It is impossible for my
pen to relate how passionately and tenderly he takes it: yea his affliction
and grief herein is far the more redoubled, in that (contrary to his desires
and wishes) he is assured his sister Paulina is likewise acquainted with the
vanity and injustice of these speeches: the conceit and remembrance whereof,
make her enraged and sorrowful eyes power forth many rivolets and rivers of
tears, upon the Roses and Lillies of her beauty. But as she is two impatient
to relish this scandalous affront and disparagement: so her brother Brellati
is too generous and noble to digest it; whereof burning to know the truth, and
resolving, if he found it true, sharply to revenge it on Bertolini, he
passes away the night in restless and distracted slumbers: And so the very
next morn taking his Sword and Lackey with him, he goes to Bertolini his
fathers house, and meeting first with him, demands of him for his son
Seignior John Battista Bertolini. His father informs him, he is in the Garden
very solitarily walking, and prays Brellati to go to him; who needing not many
requests, enters, and with his hat in his hand approaches him. Bertolini does
the like, and meets him half way: when he being pale for anger, and
Bertolini blushing for shame, he prays him to exempt the Garden of his
servants, because he has something to reveal and impart him in secret, which
needs no witnesses: when Bertolini commanding his servants to depart,
Brellati charge him with these disgraceful speeches, vomited forth two days
since, against his honor; as also that of his only dear sister Paulina, in
Cardinal Farnesi his Palace, in presence of Seignior Alessandro Fontani,
Seignior Rhanutio Pluvinio, and Seignior Antonio Voltomari (which words we have
formerly understood.)

Bertolini is no way dismayed or daunted hereat, either in courage or
complexion: and so losing his honor in his indiscretion, or rather burying his
discretion in his dishonor; he with fire in his looks; and thunder in his
speeches, tells Brellati that he confesses these speeches his; adding
withal, that what his tongue has affirmed, his sword shall be ready to make
good and justify; whereon they cover: When Brellati demanding of him if this
were his last resolution, he told him yea. Then (quoth he) I pray expect mine
shortly: and so without giving each other the good morrow, they part; Brellati
still leaving Bertolini in his fathers Garden. His sister Paulina having notice
of her brothers speaking with Bertolini, very curiously and carefully awaits
his return; when rushing into his Chamber, she, with tears, and sighs,
demands him of the issue of his conference with Bertolini, and whether he were
so impudent to deliver these dishonorable and base speeches both of her self
and him. But her brother, like a true noble Roman, is too generous and brave
to acquaint her with his design and resolution: and so in general terms
prays her, not to afflict her self at these speeches, and that this
difference will be very shortly decided and ended, to her honor, and his own
content. Brother (quoth she) if you will not right mine honor, and vindicate
the unspotted purity of my reputation, I am sure that my true Lover Seignior
Paulus Sturio will, though with the hazard and loss of his own life, had he
but the least notice thereof. He shall not need, sister, quoth he: for a day
or two will reconcile and finish this business: and so for that time he
leaves his sister Paulina, and shuts himself up in his chamber; where, not
long able to contain himself against the insolency and baseness of
Bertolini, he calls for pen and paper, and more respecting his honor then his
life, writes him this challeng; the which immediately after dinner he sends
him, by Seignior Valerio, a confident Gentleman his follower.

BRELLATI to BERTOLINI.
THy scandalous reports, like thy self, are so base, and I and my sister so
honorably descended and bred, as I doubt not, but the disgrace and
disparagement, which thou have unjustly offered us, will as justly retort and
fall on thy self. And to the end thou may find, that my Sword is purposely
reserved to correct and chastise thy tongue, as thou art a Roman, and a
Gentleman, meet me single to morrow at five in the morn, without Port Populi,
in the next field behind Cardinal Borromeo's Palace; and there I will give
thee the choice of two good Rapiers and Ponyards, and gladly accept of the
refusal, to draw reason of thee for those wrongs wherewith thou have
injuriously and maliciously traduced us: and to write thee the truth, as I
desire, so I can receive no other satisfaction but this, whereunto thy malice
invites, and my honor obliges me.

BRELLATI.


Valerio performs his part well, and fairly working and screwing himself
into Bertolini's presence, very secretly delivers him his Masters challenge.
Bertolini not ignorant, but conjecturing what it means, breaks off the
Seals: and at the perusal thereof, though his cause be unjust and
dishonorable, yet in his countenance and speeches, he shows much constancy,
fortitude, and resolution; when considering they were to fight single, and that
therefore Valerio could be no second, he deeming his Master had concealed
this secret business from him, contents himself to give him only this
answer: Tell your Master Seignior Brellati from me, that I will not fail to
meet him, according to his desire and appointment. And so Valerio takes his
leave, and departs: when finding out his Master, he reports him Bertolini's
answer: whereat he is so far from being any way appald or daunted, as he
infinitely rejoices thereat. In the mean time, he is curious in preparing
two singular good Rapiers and Ponyards of equal length, hilts, and temper. And
thus with much impatient patience (as Revenge is an enemy to sleep) they not
out-sleepe, but out-watch the night. So the morn and day stealing and breaking
into their windows, they are no sooner out of their beds, but into the field;
their Chirurgions awayting their arrivals by the Pyramides, in the place of
Populi, by which of necessity they were to pass: when, tying up their horses
to the hedges, like resolute Gentlemen, they throw off their doublets,
commanding their Chirurgions not to stir from their stations; when, disdaining
words, they both draw, and fall to deeds thus:

Brellati presents the first thrust, and Bertolini gives him the first wound
in his left shoulder; whereat he is inflamed; and so returns Bertolini the
interest of a most dangerous one, on his right side; but it touched neither his
bowels nor quayse. They cry again: so Brellati again wounds Bertolini in his
left hand, when his Rapier running through his sinews and Arteries, he is no
longer able to hold his Poniard; but despite his resolution and courage, it
falls out of his hand; which unlookt for disaster does much perplexe and afflict
him. But Brellati is two generous and noble, to blemish or taint his honor, by
taking any advantage of this his adversaries misfortune: and so, to clear his
doubts and scruples, very valiantly and bravely throws away his own Poniard
to the hedge, that they might be as equal in weapons, as courage. But
Bertolini will basely requite this courtesy. They retire and take breath; and
so traversing their grounds, thereby to take the benefit of the Sun, they
again join: at the first close of this second meeting Brellati runs
Bertolini into the right flank, when withdrawing his Rapier, and leaping back
to put himself upon his defensive guard and posture, his foot slipping, he
could not prevent falling to the ground; when Bertolini following him close,
and being eager in his pursuit, and bloodthirsty in his revenge, he
forgetting Brellati's former courtesy, and working upon the fortune of his
misfortune, right then and there nailed him to the ground, and so redoubling
his thrust, acted a perpetual divorce betwixt his body and soul: when
Brellati's Chirurgian shedding tears on his dead Master, and beginning to take
order for his decent conveyance into the City, Bertolini takes up his
Chirurgian behind him, and so with all possible speed and celerity (the better
to avoid the danger of the law) poasts over the fields, and comes into Mount
Cavallo Gate, and so husheth himself up privately in a friends house of his,
near his fathers.

All Rome begins to echo forth and resound this Murder, and far the more,
because Bertolini and Brellati were so dear and intimate friends: but as good
news comes always lame, and bad rides poast, so within one hour of
Brellati's Murder, the news thereof is brought first to his Father, then to
his Sister Paulina; whereat he grieves, and she storms, he sorroweth, and
she weeps and laments, and in a word, the Father would, but cannot, and the
Daughter can, but will not be comforted, at this sad and mournful Tragedy.
Neither must we forget, but remember Seignior Paulus Sturio, who loving
Paulina a thousand times dearer then his own life, is no sooner acquainted,
but afflicted with this news of Brellati his death, as being his dear friend,
and which is more, the only brother of his dearest and only Mistress Paulina;
so as Lovers and friends being best known and discerned in calamities and
afflictions, he repaires to her, condoles with her, and uses his chiefest art
and zeal, not only to participate, but wholly to deprive her of her sorrows;
yea, to prove himself a constant friend and a faithful lover to her, he
proffereth her, not only his service, but his life, as well to right her
honor, as to revenge her brothers death on Bertolini: but this affection and
persuasion of Sturio is not capable to wipe off, or exhale his Lady Paulina's
tears.

But again to Bertolini, who is so far from contrition and repentance of
this his bloody fact, as like a profane miscreant, and debausht and dissolute
Gentleman, he triumphs and glories therein; yea, his impudency is become so
ignorant, and his ignorance so sottish, as he began to enter into a
resolution again to court and seek Paulina for his wife, without respecting
or regarding either the public danger of the Law, or that of Paulina's private
revenge; for sure her brothers death had thrown her into such violent passions
of grief, and extremities of sorrow, as if his folly had made her so happy,
doubtless her revenge would have made him more miserable: but God had taught
her rage more reason, and her malice and cruelty not so much impiety; yea, it
pleased his Divine Majesty not so soon to call him to an account, and punish
him for this his bloody fact; but reserving him for a future shame and
punishment, being affrighted with a tumultuous rumor and alarm of a general
search to be made that night for his apprehension, he very subtly, in a
Capuchins habit, passes Saint John de Laterans Gate, and there having
Poast-horses laid for him, he as swift as the wind gallops away for Naples,
and imbarking himself for Sicilie, passes the Pharre of Messina, lands at
that City, and so rides up for Palermo, where he thinks himself safe. But
having not made his peace with God, where ever he fly, God will in due time
find him out, when he least dreams thereof. ^ut although the power and
influence of time be so predominate to deface the actions and accidents of
time; yet (...) can give no truce to her tears, nor will she administer any
consolation to her sorrows for her brothers death: And if ever, now it is that
Sturio resembling himself, begins to make her sorrows his: for having
deeply rooted and settled his affection on Paulina, and naturally engraven her
beauty and picture in the very center of his heart and thoughts, he begins
to make his private affection to her public, and so having already won her
heart from her self, he now endeavors to win her from her friends, and
then to marry her. But old Seignior Sturio his father, is no sooner advertised
of Brellati his death, of Bertolini's flight, and of his sons affection and
intent to take Paulina to wife, but disdayning he should match so low, and
withal so poor, as also fearing that this might likewise engage his son in
some quarrel betwixt him and Bertolini, he resolves privately to convey him
away out of Rome, in some retired or obscure place, from whence he should not
return, till his absence had cooled and extenuated the heat of his affection
to Paulina, and of his malice and Revenge to Bertolini: to which end, three
weeks are scarce past, but taking his son with him in his Coach, under
color to take the air in the fields of Rome, beyond Saint Paul's Church, he
having given the Coach man his lesson, commands him to drive away, and having
two Braves or Ruffians with him, they dispose or rather enforce the humor of
his son Sturio to patience, as despite him self, they carry him to Naples,
where a Brigantine being purposely prepared, he shippeth over his son for
the Island of Capri, or Caprea where long since, Seiar^ his ambition caused
Tiberius to sojourne, whiles he played the petty King, and domineered as
Emperor at Rome in his absence) and gives him to the keeping and guard of
Seignior Alphonsus Drissa, Captain of that Island; with request and charge not
to permit him to return, for the maine, for the term of one whole year,
without his express order to the contrary.

It is for none but for Lovers to Judge, ^ow tenderly Sturio and his sweet Lady
Paulina grieve at the news of this their sudden and unexpected separation:
yea, their sighs and tears are so infinite for this their disaster, as all
the words of the world are not capable to express them. As for Paulina, she
had so long and so bitterly wept for her brothers death, as it was a mere
cruelty of sorrow, to enforce her to play any farther part in sorrow, for the
departure and captivity of her Lover Sturio: but her afflictions falling in,
each on the neck of other (in imitation of the waves of the sea, occasioned by
the breath and blast of Boreas) threaten her not only with present sickness,
but with approaching death. Again she understands of Bertolini's safety and
prosperity in Cicilia, where he triumphs in his victory, for killing her
brother Brellati; and like a base Gentleman, continually erects his Trophies of
detraction upon the ruins and tomb of her honor: and these considerations
(like reserved afflictions) again newly afflict and torment her: so as having
lost her jewel and her joy, her brother and her Lover, Brellati and Sturio,
she begins to be extreme sick, weak, and faint; yea, the Roses of her
cheeks are transformed to Lillies; the relucent luster of her eyes, to
dimnesse and obscurity; and to use but a word, not only her heart, but her
tongue begins to fail, and to strike sail to immoderate sorrow and
disconsolation. Her parents and friends grieve hereat, and far the more, in
respect they know not how to remedy it; and for her self, if she enjoy any
comfort in this life, it is only in hope that she shall shortly leave it, to
enjoy that of a better. Thus whiles sorrow, ^tion and sickness make haste to
sp^ out the thread and web of her life, if her griefs are extreme and
insupportable in Rome, no less are those of her Lover Sturio in Caprea: for it
^rets him to the heart and gall, to see how his father has bereaved and
betrayed him of his Mistress Paulina's presence, the only content and felicity
which this life or earth could afford him; a thousand times he wishes
himself with her, and as often kisseth her remembrance and Idea; and then, as
their affections, so their malice concurring and sympathizing, he again
wishes that he may be so happy to fight with Bertolini for the disgrace of
his Lady Paulina, and she for the death of her brother Brellati, and in that
affection and this revenge, he with much affliction and no comfort, passes
away many bitter days and torments, in the misery of this his enforced exile
and banishment: and although his curiosity, affection, or subtilty could never
crown him with the happiness or felicity to free himself of his guards and
captivity, and so to steal away from that Island in some Foist or Galley for
the maine; yet understanding that two days after there was one bound for the
Port of Civita Vetcha, he, to testify his affection, constancy, and torments
to his dear and fair Paulina, takes occasion to write her a Letter to Rome,
the which, that it might come the safer to her own hands, he incloseth in
another, to an intimate dear friend of his. The tenor of his Letter was thus:

STVRIO to PAVLINA.
I Know not whether I more grieve at my absence from thee, then at the manner
thereof; yet sure I am, that both conjoined, make me in this Island of Caprea
feel the torments, not of a feigned Purgatory, but of a true Hell. It was my
purpose to condole with thee for the untimely death of thy Brother; it is now
not only my resolution, but my practice, to mourn with my self for thy
banishment, or rather with thee for mine; and when my sorrows have most need
of consolation, then again that consolation finds most cause of sorrow: for
thinking of Bertolini, me thinks I see thy false disparagement on his
malicious tongue, and thy Brother Brellati his true death on his bloody Sword;
and yet have neither the honor or happiness to revenge either, and which is
worse, not be permitted to know where he is, that I may revenge them: but I
wish I were only incident and obliged tosupport this affliction, conditionally
then were exempt thereof, or that I might know the limits and period of our
absence, thereby to hope for an end and remedy thereof, which now I can find
no motives to know, nor cause to hope. O that I have often envyed Leanders
happiness! And if Love could make impossibilities possible, the Mediterranean
Sea should long since have been my Hellespont, my Body my Bark, my arms my
^res, to have wafied me from my Abidos, to thy Sestos, from my Caprea, to thy
Rome, to thee sweet Paulina, my only fair and dear Hero. And although the
constancy and fervencie of my love to thee, suggest me many inventions to
escape the misery of my exile, yet the Argus eyes of my Fathers malice, in that
of my Guardians jealousy, cannot be enchanted or lulled asle^e with the
melody of so unfortunate a Mercury as my self: but time shall shortly act and
finish that which impatience cannot, till when, dear and sweet Paulina,
retain me in thy thoughts, as I do thee in my heart and memory; and doubt
not but a few weeks will make us at happy, as we are now miserable.

STVRIO.


Paulina, in the midst of her forrowes and sickness, receives this Letter
from her best and dearest friend Sturio, and although she rejoice to hear of
his health and welfare in Caprea, yet she is more glad, that the extremity of
her-sickenesse and weakness inform her, she shall shortly dye in Rome: for
vanquished with afflictions, and overcome with variety of grief and
discontents, she in conceit already has left this world, and is by this time
half way in her progress and pilgrimage toward Heaven, yet in love to her
dear Sturio, who wrote her this kind Letter, she will not be so unkind, but
will kiss it for his sake that sent it her; and peradventure if she had been
so happy, that he might have been the bearer and deliverer thereof himself,
or that he had borne and delivered himself to her in stead of his Letter, he
might then have given some comfort to her sorrows, and some consolation to her
discontents and afflictions, whereas now seeing him exiled, and mewed up in
Caprea, without any appearance of return, she sees she has more reason to
fly to her old despair, then to any new hope; and so wishes the desired
hour were at last come, wherein she might give her last farewell to this
world: but again perusing and over reading his Letter, she finds it full
fraught with love and affection toward her; and therefore disdayning to prove
ungrateful to any, especially to Sturio, who is so kind and courteous to her,
calls for pen and paper, and by his own conveyance returns him this Answer:

PAVLINA to STVRIO.
I Cannot rightly define whether the receipt of thy Letter made me more glad,
or the contents sorrowful: for as I infinitely rejoiced to understand thou
were living, so I extremely grieved to hear there was no certainty of thy
releasement and return. Whether or no Caprea be thy Purgatory, I know not, but
sure I am, Rome is my Hell, since I cannot be there with thee, nor thou here
with me; and as I lamented with sighs, I could not dye with my Brother so I
grieve with tears, that I cannot live with thee: but why write I of living,
when his mournful Tragedy, and thy disastrous exile has made me more ready
to dye then live, or rather not fit to live, but dye? for despayring of thy
return, how can I hope for comfort, since it only lived in thy presence, as my
heart and joy did in thee? As for Bertolini's folly to me, and crime to my
Brother, if thy Sword punish him not, Gods just revenge will, and wishing this
as a woman, as a Christian, I pardon and forgive him; and so I pray do thou
for my sake, if thou will not that of my dead Brothers. Could prayers or wishes
have effected thy return to me, my tears had long since been thy Hellespont
and Mediterranean Sea, and my sighs had filled the Sails of thy desires and
resolutions, to have past Ostia, floated up Tiber, and landed at Rippa to me:
But alas, alas! here in remembering Hero's felicity and joy, I cannot forget my
sorrows and afflictions: for as Leander lived in her arms, so I cannot be so
fortunate, either to live or dye in my Sturio's; and if now, as a skillful
Mercury, thou could inveagle the eyes both of thy Fathers malice, and
Guardians jealousy, yet that happiness would come too late, and out of season
for me: for before thou shall have plotted thy flight and escape from Caprea
to Rome, I shall have acted and finished mine from Rome to Heaven. I would send
thee more lines, but that my weak hand and feeble fingers have not the power,
though the will, any longer to retain my pen. Heaven will make us happy,
though Earth cannot; therefore my dear Sturio, let this be our last and best
consolation, as these joys are temporary and transitory, so those will be
permanent and eternal.

PAVLINA.


This Letter of Paulina to Sturio meets with a speedy passage from Rome to
Caprea, who receiving it, and thinking to have found her in her true and
perfect health, with much joy and affection breaks up the seals thereof;
when, contrary to his hope and expectation, understanding of her sickness and
approach to death, he tenderly and bitterly weeps at his own misfortune, in
her discontent and disaster; yea, he passionately and sorrowfully bewayles his
Fathers cruelty, in thus banishing him from her sight and presence, from the
contemplation of whose beauty, and from his innate affection to her, the Fates
and Destinies cannot banish him. But alas unfortunate Sturio! the news of thy
Paulina's sickness is but the Prologue to the ensuing sorrows and
afflictions that are ready to befall and surprise thee: for the news of her
death shall shortly follow her Letter; and if that drew tears from thine eyes,
this shall drown thine eyes in the Ocean of thy Tears: neither shall he stay
long to feel the miserable impetuosity (...) ^is mournful Storm. For scarce
twenty days are past, after the writing of her Letter to Sturio, but Paulina,
languishing with Grief, Despair, Sorrow and Sickness, as a female
Love-Martyr, takes her last leave and farewell of this world in Rome; it being
not in the power or affection of her parents, any longer to divert her from
paying this her last due and tribute unto Nature, since we all have our Lives
lent, not given us; and therefore as we receive, so must we repay them to our
Creator and Redeemer, of whom we have first received them.

Old Sturio is as glad in Rome for the death of Paulina, as her Parents grieve
thereat; and now it is that he intends to be as happy and joyful in his Sons
presence, as he has formerly made himself sorrowful in occasioning his
absence: whereupon, with all expedition, he dispatcheth a Servant of his to
Caprea, with a Letter, to signify his Son thereof, and consequently, to recall
him. This news of Paulina's Death-infinitely afflicts and torments our Sturio;
for she being the Queen of his affections, and the sovereign Goddess of his
delights and desires, he resembles himself, and so like a true Lover, as he
is, acts a wonderful mournful part of sorrow for her unwished and
unexpected Death: he is no longer himself; nay, such was his living affection
to Paulina, and such is his immoderate sorrow for her death, as he will not
be himself, because she is gone, who was the greatest and chiefest part of
himself. But as wounds cannot be cured, ere searched; so passion transporting
his thoughts beyond reason, and revenge beyond passion, he, for the time
present, forsakes the effect, to follow the cause, and so has no other object
before his eyes and thoughts, but that of Bertolini's killing of her Brother
Brellati, and this of his Fathers unkind banishing of him from Rome to Caprea:
wherefore, that he may outlive his sorrows, and apply a Lenitive to his
Corrosive, he vows to revenge both. The manner is thus: That, as his Father
deceived his hopes in carrying him from Rome to Caprea; so he will deceive
those of his said Father, in carrying himself from Caprea to Cicily, there to
find out Bertolini, and to fight with him. It is not the point of Honor, much
less, Judgment, and least of all, Religion, that precipitates and throws him
on this bloody, and therefore uncharitable resolution: but it is the vanity of
his thoughts, and his living affection to his dead Mistress Paulina, which gives
life and birth to it: for he (trampling on all disswasion and opposition)
finding a Galley of Naples, bound from Caprea to Cicily, very secretly imbarkes
himself in her, and contemning the impetuosity of the Winds, and the
merciless mercy of the Seas, lands at Palermo, where hushing himself up the
first night privately in his Inn, and informing himself that Bertolini was in
that City, he, the next morn, by his Lackey, sends him this Challenge:

STVRIO to BERTOLINI.
HAving killed my dear Paulina in the scandal of her honor, and the death of
her Brother Brellati, my afflictions and sorrows to survive her, make me
contemn mine own life, to seek thine: to which purpose, I have left Caprea,
to find Cicily, and in it thy self. Wherefore, as thou art Bertolini, fail
not to meet me this Evening 'twixt five and six of the Clock in the next
Meadow, behind the Carthusians Monastery; where my self, assisted only with
a Chirurgian, and the choice of two single Rapiers, will expect and attend
thee. Thy Generosity invites thee, and my Affection and Honor obliges me, to
be the only Guests of this bloody Banquet.

STVRIO.


Bertolini receives and reads this Challenge, which, to write the truth, is
not so pleasing to him, as was that of Brellati: he sees himself and his
Honor engaged to fight, and knows not how to exempt and free himself
thereof. For, first, he considers that the ground of his Defense and Quarrel
is not good, since he knew in his soul and conscience, that Paulina was as
chaste, as fair, and that he had wronged himself, in seeking to wrong and
scandalize her; then, that he perfectly understood Sturio was valiant and
generous, yea, and very expert and skillful in handling his Weapons; and
withal, that single Combats were variable, and only constant in
unconstancie: so that he beg^n not only to doubt, but fear, that as he had
killed Brellati, so Sturio was reserved to kill him: but again, considering
that his birth and blood was noble, it contrariwise so inc^red and animated his
courage, and inflamed, and set an edge on his Generosity, as with a kind of
unwilling willingness he accepts of Sturio's Challenge; and so bade his
Lackey tell his Master from him, that he would not fail to meet him, to give
him his welcome to Palermo. The Clock strikes five, and long before six, our
two young Gentlemen come ride into the Field; where, giving their Horses to
their Chirurgians, with command not to stir, till their due^y and office call
them, they both draw; and so approach each other: but although this fury of
theirs begin in blood, yet it shall not here end in death. At first coming
up, Sturio wards Bertolini's thrust, and runs him into the right Flank, of a
deep wound, at the second, he wounds him again in the neck, which draws much
blood from him neither is the third meetingmore propitious, or less fatal to
him: for Sturio, without receiving any touch or scarre, gives him a third wound
'twixt his small ribs; whereat his courage fears, and his strength faints;
when willing to save his life, though with the loss of his honor, he throws
away his Rapier, and with his Hat in hand, begs his life of Sturio; and with as
much truth as integrity, confesses and voweth that he is infinitely
sorrowful and repentant for the scandal, delivered against the honor of his
most fair and chaste Lady Paulina, for the which he craves pardon and
remission. Sturio is astonished at this unexpected and cowardly act of
Bertolini: whereat he bites his lip, but I know not whether more with disdain
then anger; only at first the remembrance of Brellati and Paulina's deaths, for
the present make him inexorable to his reque^ and submission: but at last,
making reason give a law to choler, and Religion to Revenge, and considering
that he was more then a Man, since a Christian, as also that the luster of his
blood and extraction, had distinguished him from the vulgar, and so made him
honorable and noble, he, not as a cruel Tygre but as a generous Lion,
disdayneth to blemish his reputation and valor, in killing a disarmed man; and
so his honor outbraving his valor and revenge, he as a truly noble
Gentleman, gives Bertolini his life, as holding himself satisfied, by having
righted the honor of his dead Mistress Paulina, in Bertolini's confession and
contrition. So they sheath up their Swords, and like loving fri^nds, return
together into the City: where Sturio prepares for his departure, and Bertolini
betakes himself to have his wounds dressed and cured.

This Combat, or Duel, is not so secretly carried betwixt them and their
Chirurgians, but all Palermo resounds and prattles thereof; and which is more,
this news speedily sails from Cicily to Naples, and from thence rides poast
to Rome, where Sturio and Bertolini likewise in short space arrive; but first
comes Sturio, then Bertolini, whose Father by this time has obtained his
Pardon for killing of Brellati. The Nobility and Gentry of Rome speak
diversely and differently of our two late returned Gallants: some, ^t of
reason, highly applaud Sturio's fighting with Bertolini, occasioned through his
affection to his dead Mistress Paulina; and then his humanity and courtesy
showed and extended him, in giving him his life: others, out of the errors of
youth and vanity, tax and condemn him for not dispatching and killing him:
again, many extol Bertolini's valor in killing Brellati, but all taunt and
tax him for his Cowardice, in not fighting it out with Sturio; and, which is
worse, for disgracefully begging and receiving his life of him. Bertolini
finds this scandal thrown and retorted on him, to be very distastefull and
dishonorable; in so much as he cannot relish it, but with discontent, nor
digest it, but with extreme indignation and choler: which throws him so
violently on the execrable humor of revenge, as he vows to make Sturio pay
dear for giving two much liberty to his tongue, to the prejudice of his honor
and reputation. Puffed up thus with these three execrable humors and vices,
disdain, envy and revenge, whereof the least is great and capable enough to
ruin both a fortune and a life, he, out of a wretched resolution, (unworthy
the generosity of a Gentleman) not only forgets Sturio his singular courtesy
in giving him his life, when it lay in his power and pleasure to take it from
him, but also remembers, and in that remembrance resolves to repay him with
the ungrateful requital, and mournful interest of depriving him of his. O
extreme ingratitude! O uncharitable and base resolution! Yea, he is so devoyd
of reason, and the purity of his soul and conscience so contaminated and
vilified with the contemplation and object of blood, as he gives way thereto,
and resolves thereon; yea, permits it to forsake God, of purpose wilfully to
follow the Devil: yea, his thoughts are so surprised and taken up with this
execrable and hellish resolution of Murder, as he thinks of nothing else but
of the means and manner how to dispatch Sturio; and so to send him in a bloody
winding sheet, from this life to another. To fight with him again in the
field, he dares not, to assassinate and murder him in his bed, he cannot,
since he must pass five or six several chambers, ere he can come at his; and
to pistol him in the open street, though it be less difficult, yet he finds
it most dangerous, since he sees Sturio still went better followed and
accompanied then himself, as indeed being more eminent of birth, and noble of
extraction then himself. But he shall want no invention to accomplish and
bring this his bloody resolution to pass: for if he fail thereof, the Devil
is still at his elbow to prompt and instruct him therein; yea, his impiety is
grown so strong with the Devil, and his faith so weak with God, as now
having turned over the records of his revenge, he at last resolves to shoot
Sturio from a Window, with a Petronell, as he passes the street: and upon the
attempt and finishing of this hellish stratagem and bloody Tragedy, the Devil
and he strike hands, and conclude it; the contriving and perpetrating where of
shall in the end strangle him, because he was so profane and graceless, as he
would not strangle the first conceit thereof in their births and conceptions.

But leave we here Bertolini ruminating on his intended bloody crime of
Murder, and come we a little to speak of poor unfortunate Sturio, who not
dreaming of his malice, much less of his ungrateful and bloody revenge
intended against him, like a mournful and disconsolate constant Lover, is
thinking on nothing so much, as on the living beauty and Idea of his dead
Paulina: and although he knew it as palpable folly to bewray his immoderate
sorrows, as discretion to conceal them; yet their impetuosity and fervencie
give such a predominating law to his resolutions, as he cannot refrain from
often stealing into Sancta Maria de Rotunda's Church, where she was buried,
and there secretly bedewes her Tomb, and washes her Sepulcher with his tears:
an act and ceremony of Lovers, which though affection authorize, yet Religion
does neither justify, nor can approve. All the care of his father and friends
is to seek how to purge his pensiveness, and to wipe off his melancholy
sorrows and sorrowful melancholinesse: to which end they proffer him great
variety of noble and beautiful Ladies in Marriage, hoping that the sight and
presence of a new beauty would deface the memory and absence of an old: but
their policy proves vain; for Sturio will be as constant in his sorrows for
his sweet Paulina's death, as he was in his affection to her whiles she
lived; and therefore, although their power enforce him to see diverse, yet his
will can never be drawn, or enforced to love any, as having inviolably
contracted himself to this definitive resolution, that since he could not be
Paulina's husband, he will never wed himself to any other wife then his Grave.

And here I begin to write rather with tears, then Ink, when I apprehend
and consider how soon our poor and innocent Sturio shall ^ee by the bloody
hand of Bertolini laid in his unfortunate and untimely Grave. Ah Sturio,
Sturio, had thou been more vindictive, and less generous and compassionate,
thou had prevented thy death by killing Bertolini, when thy valor in Caprea
formerly reduced and exposed him to the mercy of thy Sword; or if thou had
believed this Maxim, that dead men can never offend or hurt, thou needst not
have relied and trusted upon the false promises of an incensed and
irreconciliable enemy: but what shall I say? It was not thy honor, but
Bertolini's infamy, which hasteneth and procures thy death. O that thou
should be so true a friend to thine enemy, and he prove so deadly an
enemy to thee his true friend! Sturio gave Bertolini his life, and Bertolini in
requital will give Sturio his death: but such monstrous and bloody ingratitude
will never go unpunished of God; for as it is odious to Earth, so it is
execrable to Heaven: But I must be so unfortunate to bring this deplorable
Tragedy upon the Theater of this History. A misery of miseries, that we are
many times nearest our ends, when we think our selves farthest from them; and
(not to rush into the sacred and secret closet of Gods inscrutable providence)
I can find no other pregnant reason thereof, either in Divinity or Nature, but
that at all times, and in all places, we should be still prepared and ready
for death, e're death for us, and not protracting or procrastinating the hour
thereof; but that whenever it shall please God to call us to him, or himself
to us, that (like good Christians) death may still find us always armed to
meet, never unprovided to encounter it.

But Bertolini is so obstinate in his malice, and so wretchedly implacable in
his revenge, as understanding that Sturio is accustomed to go to his mornings
Mass at the English College, he provides both himself and his Petronell
charged with a brace of Bullets; or rather the Devil provides both the
Bullets, the Petronell, and himself: and so, watching the advantage of his
hour and time, on a Monday morning, a little after the Cardinals, Farnesi and
Caponius, were ridden with their trains to the Consistory, putting himself
into an unknown house betwixt the said English College and the Palace of
Farnesi, he having his Cock bent, and seeing Sturio coming in the street,
upon his prauncing Barbary Horse and Foot-cloth, like a graceless and bloody
villain (having neither the fear of God, nor the salvation or damnation of
his soul before his eyes, nor once imagining that he shootes at the Majesty
of God the Creator, in killing and defacing Man, his Image and Creature) lets
fly at him, and the Devil had made him so curious and expert a Marke-man, as
both the Bullets pierce the trunk of his breast; with which mortal wounds our
innocent Sturio, no longer able to sit his Horse, tumbles down dead to the
ground, without having the power to utter a word, but only to breathe forth
two or three lamentable and deadly groans. And this was the unfortunate and
mournful end of this noble Gentleman Sturio, which I cannot relate without
sighs, nor remember without tears.

This bloody Tragedy acted on so brave a Gallant, in the very bowels and heart
of Rome, does extremely amaze, and draw all the Spectatours to lamentation and
mourning, and his two servants, who walked by his Horse side, are so busy in
lifting him up, and rubbing the temples of their dead Master; as they forget
the research and inquiry for his murderer: but the Assistants, and standers
by, hearing the report of the Piece, and not only seeing the smoke in the
window and air, but this noble Gentleman dead in the street, they ascend the
house, find the Petronell on the Table, (...) fled upon a sw^ Spanish Gennet,
by the back door, they of the house affirming with tears, that they knew not
the Gentleman that did it, neither was it i^ their powers to stop or prevent
his escape.

This Fatal and mournful news dispersed and spread over the City of Rome;
the Serjea^s and Captains guard are busy to find out the Murderer, who by
this time they know to be Seignior Bertolini: but being gallantly mounted, he
speedes away through the stree^s amain, and is so far from despair, as he
makes no doubt but to recover the Lateran Gate, and to escape this his second
danger, as fortunately as he ^id his first, by flying into the Kingdom of
Naples: but his hopes shall deceive him; for if he bought Brellati's Mu^her ^t
an easy rate, God has now ordained and decreed that he shall pay dear for
this his second of Sturio: and ^o, here the impetuous storm of Gods just
revenge and indignation now befalls him, when he least fears or thinks
thereof. The manner thus:

As he was swiftly galloping through Campo de (...) (the public place where
the Pope (that Antichrist of Rome) burns the children of God, for the
profession of his glorious Gospel) and being at the farther end thereof, with
an intent to draw toward the back side of the Capitol, behold, two Brick
layers building of a house upon a Scaffold, two Stories high in the street, as
Bertolini passed, both the Scaffold and the two Brick layers fell down upon
him, and his horse, and so beat them both to the ground: but as yet the news
of Sturio's Murder was not arrived thither; so as danger and fear making
Bertolini forget the hurt of his fall, he again rises up, and calls for his
horse, which was speedily brought him: so leaping into the Saddle, he spurs
away, with as much celerity as his Gennet could possibly drive under him. But
if he have escaped this first judgment of God, he shall not the second; for
having past the Capitol and the Amphitheater, his Gennet ^twixt that and the
Lateran, fell under him, which putting his shoulder out of joint, the poor
afflicted Beast could not r^ with his Master, who by this time is more
afflicted and grieved then the harmless Gennet he rides upon. Whereupon
being amazed, and fearing that the search would instantly follow and surprise
him, he leaving his horse, betakes himself to his ow^ heels: and so with
much terror both of mind and conscience, he knows not whither to go, or
where to hide himself, but at last considering that the greate^ dangers have
need of the least distraction, and most discretion, he thinks to (...) on
his right hand to Horta Farnesi, or the Gardens and Orchards which belong ^o
that illustrious Family: but then again fearing to meet with a wooden face, in
stead of finding an open door, he leaves that resolution, and (as fast as his
legs and feet can bear him) flies on his left hand up toward Nero's Tower (so
famous for that Emperors infamy, in standing thereon, when he delighted to
see all Rome on fire) and here in the ruins and demolitions of an infinite
number of Palaces, Churches, and other stupendous buildings, our murtherous
Bertolini hides and h^sheth up himself, hoping if the day were past, to
escape, and recover some secret friends house by night.

But God is too just to let this his cruel fact pass unrevenged, and this
bloody Murderer unpunished: for he has scarce been there half an hour,
but he is known there, found out, and hemmed in of all sides by the
Captaine's Guard, armed with Partisans and Pistols. Here Bertolini considering
himself a Roman Gentleman, would feign have made some resistance with his
Rapier: but seeing their numbers to increase, and himself alone, as also that
it would f^rther augment his crime, and exasperate his Judges against him; he
at th^r first (...) delivers up his Rapier, and yieldes, and rendereth
himself into their hands, who presently convey him to prison, where he shall
have but little time to think of his heinous and bloody Murders, e're we
shall see him brought forth and arraigned before his Judges: but in the Interim
all Rome is possessed and informed hereof.

So the second morn of Bertolini his imprisonment, he is fetched before his
Judges, where at first the Devil is so strong with him, as he once thought to
have denied this Murder of Sturio: but God proving more merciful to his
soul, he upon his Judges grave and religious remonstrances, with many sighs
and tears freely confesses it, humbly beseeching them to take pity of his
young years, and that it was only the heat of youth, and the vanity of his
ambitious honor, which had thus betrayed and seduced his soul to perpetrate
this cruel and impious Murder, and for the which he extremely and bitterly
repented himself.

But the arrow of Gods wrath and Revenge is now fully bent against Bertolini,
as his bullets were against Sturio: so as his sacred Majesty, causing his
Judges to resemble themselves, they are deaf to his requests, and tell him, it
is not his youth or his ambition, but the Devil that has seduced and drawn
him to perform this bloody Murder: and so for expiation thereof, they, in
consideration he is a Roman Gentleman, nobly descended, will not hang him, but
adjudge his two hands to be cut off before the house where he shot at Sturio,
and then to be beheaded at the common place of execution, at the foot of
Saint Angelos bridge, his head to be set upon a pole, over Saint John de
Laterans gate, and his body to be thrown into Tiber: which the next day was
accordingly executed in presence of many thousand people of both sexes, and of
all ranks, notwithstanding the importunate solicitations which his father made
to Cardinal Borghese (the Pope Paulus Quintus Nephew) to the contray, who was
too noble and generous to assist him in so base and ignoble a Murder.

And these were the lives and deaths of these three unfortunate Roman
Gentlemen, Brellati, Sturio, and Bertolini, and of that beautiful, chaste, and
sorrowful Lady Paulina. And here to conclude and shut up this their mournful
History; I have been informed that the curious wits of Rome made many
exquisite Epitaphs upon the deaths of Sturio and Paulina, as also that
Bertolini made a religious and most Christian speech at his end, of which I
must confess I was not so happy to recover the sight, or copies of either: for
if I had, I would not have failed to have inserted, and placed them at the end
of this their History, to have served as a grace and ornament thereunto, in
interlacing my prose with others verses, for the better delight and recreation
of my Reader. But I must (justly) crave excuse herein: for my curiosity sought
them, though my unfortunacie found them not. And because I wholly aim rather to
profit then please my Reader, let us forget the shadows, to remember the
substance, and so look from the Map, to the Moral of this History: that the
foul example of Bertolini's crime of Murder, and the justness of his
punishment, may make us less bloody, and more compassionate and charitable to
our Christian brethren, and consequently more pious toward God, of whom we all
bear the living Image, and true and lively character.

FINIS.
THE TRIUMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.

Expressed In thirty several Tragical Histories, (digested into six Books)
which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents, Amorous,
Moral, Divine.

Book III.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.



LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks Head, near the Mitre Tavern.

1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND truly worthy of all honor, WILLIAM Earl of
Pembroke, Lo. Chamberlain to his Majesty, Knight of the thrice Noble Order of
the Garter, and one of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT is not your Dignities, but your Virtues; not your Greatness, but your
Goodness which first conjured my affection, then commanded my resolution to
direct these (foreign) Tragical Histories to your Honors protection and
patronage; For whiles others (sailing with the corrupt Tide and Current of the
times) not only admire, but adore the exterior parts of men, their Fortunes,
I, for my part, both honor and reverence their interior qualities and
ornaments, Piety, Fidelity, Generositie, (three Daughters of Heaven,
embleming and personating the three Heavenly Graces on Earth, Faith, Hope,
Charity) who transport and convey our Memories as far as the limits of Time,
and a degree beyond it, and (on the wings of Truth) mount our Fames from Earth
to Heaven, from Envy to Glory, and from Mortality to Eternity. Not but that I
every way respect and honor that blood which is Noble, but that I yet more
dearly honor and deeply affect those Virtues which have a secret, and (as I
may justly say) a sacred power in them to ennoble Nobility, both which
transcendent Privileges, finding hand in hand cheerfully to march, and really
to sympathize in your Ho. (since upon the resplendent luster of your actions,
Envy is not capable to insinuate a blemish, nor Detraction of power to
introduce or enforce a disparagement) was the sole prevailing motive of this my
Zeal and Ambition. And when I consider that the Morality, Ends and
Punishments of these foul and crying sins of Murder, which my two former
Books (of this Nature) have already related and divulged to the world, have
not only been approved, but applauded of our most Excellent and Sacred King,
(as only aiming at Gods glory, and our own reformation and p^ervation) I
rather hope than despair, that this Third (wherein the just revenge of God,
the Great and Supreme King of Kings, is no less apparent and conspicuous) will
be accepted and received of your Ho. Again, it fights against Murder, which
not only seeks to slay Humanity, but therein to murder Religion, which is
the Life and Soul thereof. It denounces war against Nature and Grace, against
the Divine Ordinances of Heaven, and the Coactive and penal Laws of Earth,
whereby they are established and maintained, as being the Cymment and Sinews,
the Veins and Arteries of Monarchies and Commonweals; as also against the
Majesty of God, and the Crowns and Dignities of Sovereign Kings and Princes,
his Royal Deputies and Vicegerents here on earth, since thereby he loses
souls, and these subjects; yea, so general and so prodigious a progression
does this scarlet sin of premeditated and wilful murder make in the
universal World, and with so bloody a deluge and inundation, it not only
washes, but (as it were) drownes the face of the Christian, that we have now
far truer cause to cry out, and juster reason to exclaim, than did Quintus
Catulus (so many centuries of years since) O with whom, or where shall we
live in safety, since in wars we kill those who are armed, and in Peace, who
are unarmed? Yea, your Ho. who (with a happy constancy, and constant
happiness) is still a professed Champion for Charity against Envy, and a
Tutelarie Protector for Virtue against Vice, (whiles diverse great ones of the
World make it not only their practice, but their glory to perform the
contrary) will, I hope, run over these mournful Histories, (and the several
accidents they relate) with your eye of pity, and spirit of compassion; and
therein with a religious joy, and pious insultation, not only admire the
Providence, but applaud and magnify the Justice of God, in so timely curting
off these Monsters of Nature, and bloody Butchers of Mankind, with these their
condign punishments and deserved deaths: In which Hope and Confidence, this
Book is no more mine, but your Honors, and no less is he who collected and
penned it; and that my Name may futurely oblige me to make this present
promise of my pen real; Whiles many others (in a virtuous emulation) contend
to deserve the Honor of your Favor, and strive to purchase the felicity of
your Commands, none shall do it with more Integrity and less Vanity, than

Your Honors truly devoted JOHN REYNOLDS.

The Grounds and Contents of these Histories.
History XI. De Salez kills Vaumarti^ in a Duel; La Hay causes Michaelle to
poison La Frange; De Salez loves La Hay, and because his father Argentier will
not consent that he marry her, stifleth him in his bed, and then takes her to
his wife; she turns Strumpet, and cuts his throat; as he is dying, he
accuses her of this bloody fact, and himself for murdering his father
Argentier: so his dead body is hanged to the Gallows, then burnt; La Hay
confesses this murder, and likewise that she caused Michaelle to poison La
Frange: she has her right hand cut off, and is then burnt alive; Michaelle is
broken on the wheel, and his dead body thrown into the River. History XII.
Albemare causes Pedro and Leonardo to murder Baretano, and he after marries
Clara, whom Baretano first sought to marry: He causes his man Valerio to
poison Pedro in prison, and by a letter which Leonardo sent him, Clara
perceives that her husband Albemare had hired and caused Pedro and Leonardo to
murder her first love Baretano: which letter she reveals to the Judge; so he
is hanged, and likewise Valerio and Leonardo for these their bloody crimes.
History XIII. La Vasselay poysoneth her wayting-maid Gratiana, because she is
jealous that her husband De Merson is dishonest with her; whereupon he lives
from her: In revenge whereof, she causes his man La Villete to murder him in
a Wood, and then marries him in requital. The said La Villete a year after
riding through the same Wood, his Horse falls with him, and almost kills him;
when he confesses the murder of his master De Merson, and accuses his wife
La Vasselay to be the cause thereof: So for these their bloody crimes, he is
hanged, and she burnt alive. History XIV. Fidelia and Caelestina cause Carpi
and Monteleone, with their two Laquayes, Lorenzo and Anselmo, to murder their
father Captain Benevente, which they perform. Monteleone and his Laquay
Anselmo are drowned, Fidelia hangs her self, Lorenzo is hanged for a robbery,
and on the Gallows confesses the murdering of Benevente; Carpi has his
right hand, then his head cut off; Caelestina is beheaded and her body burnt.
History XV. Maurice like a bloody villain, and domnable son, throws his
Mother Christina into a Well, and drownes her: the same hand and arm of his
wherewith he did it, rots away from his body; and being discrazed of his wits
in Prison, he there confesses this foul and inhumane murder, for the which
he is hanged.
GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
History XI.
De Salez kills Vaumartin in a Duel; La Hay causes Michaelle to poison La
Frange; De Salez loves La Hay, and because his father Argentier will not
consent that he marry her, stifleth him in his bed, and then takes her to his
wife; she turns Strumpet, and cuts his throat; as he is dying, he accuses her
of this bloody fact, and himself for murdering his father Argentier: so his
dead body is hanged to the gallows, then burnt; La Hay confesses this
murder, and likewise that she caused Michaelle to poison La Frange: she has
her right hand cut off, and is then burnt alive; Michaelle is broken on the
wheel, and his dead body thrown into the River.

ALthough our perverse Nature, and rebellious thoughts may for a while make us
esteem Envy to be no Vice, and Murder a Virtue; yet if we will erect the eyes
of our Faith, and so look from our selves to our souls, from Earth to Heaven,
and from Satan to God, we shall then assuredly find, that hating our Christian
Brother, we hate Christ who made us Brothers: and murdering him, that we
maliciously and presumptuously attempt to recrucifie Christ, by whom we must,
without whom we cannot be saved. But if we will turn Atheists, and believe
there is a Heaven, but no God; or Devils, and say there is a God, but no
Heaven, then that uncharitable Tenent of Envy may be held lawful, and this
bloody position of Murder, practiced, because privileged, else not. Wherefore
let us who are Christians resend this devilish doctrine, and doctrine of
Devils, to Hell from whence it first came, and to the Devil himself who first
broached and invented it: since we cannot profess it without making our selves
Agents, nor perpetrate it, without becoming his very limbs and members, in
regard they will infallibly prove the woeful forerunners of our misery, and
the wretched Heralds of our perdition: as the bloody Actors of this ensuing
mournful History will make good, and instance to us in themselves when the
severe judgments and punishments of God befell them so suddenly, as it was too
late for them either to revoke or bewail the enormitie of these their foul
and infernal crimes.

Toulouse (as well for greatness as state, the third city and Court of
Parliament of France) is the place wherein we shall understand, there was
lately committed and perpetrated, a tragical History, which has many
mournful and bloody dependances; the which to branch forth, and depaint in
their naked colors, we must understand, that therein lived a Counselor of
that famous Court (being a rich Gentleman well descended) termed Monsieur de
Argentier, whose wife being deceased, left him father only to one hopeful
son, of the age of two and twenty years, termed Monsieur de Salez, who
being wholly addicted to the wars (from which martial Profession it was
impossible for his old father to divert and withdraw him) he procured him an
Ensigns place under Monsieur de Roquelaure, whom he served in the Adriaticke
Sea, under the Noble and Generous Venetians, who then stood rather jealous than
fearful of the power and greatness of Spain; but the Chymera of that war
(after the term of three or four years) being vanished and blown away, and
consequently betwixt those two mighty Estates, a new Peace contracted and
concluded, (although the old had not been actually broken and delacerated)
home returns Monsieur de Roquelaure, for Gascogny, and with him De Salez for
Lang^edoc and Toulouse, where he is received of his father with much content
and joy, not that he was contented to see his son profess these Military
courses (which only affords the smoke of Honor, and not the solidity of
profit) but rather that he exceedingly rejoiced to see him return therefrom;
and from whence, if he cannot hope that his requests will solely divert him,
yet he is resolved and assured that his Commands both will and shall. To which
end, (as any humor is soonest subject to be expelled and defaced by its
contrary) so the old Counselor, having as much Judgment and Providence in
his head, as his son has Vanity in his thoughts, and Rashness in his
resolutions, does both request, and command him to leave the war for Peace,
Arms for Love, the Camp for the City, and his Captain for a Wife, and so no
longer to march and fight under the Banners of Mars and Bellona, but under the
Standarts of Venus and Hymeneus; to which effect, he profers him the choice of
many rich and fair young Gentlewomen of the Country to his wife; but
especially (and with far more earnestness than any other) to an exceeding
rich match in the City, which was a young Gentlewoman termed La Frange, being
the only child of Monsieur de Clugny, one of the most famous and richest
Presidents of that Court, young of years, as being but sixteen, or
seventeene, but withal deformed both in favor and body, for she was of a
brown and sour complexion, and not only a Dwarf in stature, but also
exceedingly crooke-back'd, and yet beyond measure very amorous, and desirous of
a Husband: only the endowments of her mind most richly recompensed, and made
satisfaction for the defects of her body: for she had an active and nimble
wit, a sweet and sugared tongue, a rich Memory, and a powerful and happy
Judgment, and was indeed an excellent Dauncer, and Singer, and withal a most
perfect and exquisite Musician: But as yet De Salez warlike and generous
resolution could not be so soon made flexible, to embrace the motion of a
wife, and so he returns his denial in stead of his consent: but his wise old
father Argentier, being therefore the more curious of his son De Salez his
prosperity and welfare, because he apparently saw he no way regarded, but
every way neglected it himself; (his sons exorbitant resolution
notwithstanding) although he knew that Madamoyselle La Frange had many noble
Suitors, who sought her in marriage: yet relying upon his ancient acquaintance
and familiarity with the President de Clugny, as also that that daughter of
his, and this his Son were of both parties their only children. He taking
time at advantage, breaks with him about this match: whereunto De Clugny
hearkens rather with delight than distaste: for if there were any disparitie in
the dignity of their Offices, he well knows, that Argentiers blood and wealth
did at least equalize, if not exceed his; or if he conceited any scruple in
his thoughts, which impugned or imposed it, it was only because De Salez was a
Soldier, and not a Lawyer, and consequently delighted to use his Sword before
his Pen, and to wear and prefer a Scarlet cloak before a Black. But then
again, these repugnant and averse reasons were as soon buried, as borne, and
defaced, as conceived and engraven in him; when he considered that he
himself in his adolescency was of the same humor and inclination, and
therefore that Experience had made him a President to himself, that Time was
both the reformer and refiner of manners, and that (in all well borne and well
bred spirits) the Precepts of a father, and the sweet conversation and counsel
of a wife, had power to metamorphose the conditions of a young husband;
whereupon the old fathers often meet and consult hereon, and so being fully
agreed on all conditions, they likewise appoint a solemn meeting for their
children, but the effect and issue of this their enterview, will not corespond
and answer their desires.

La Frange (as we have formerly said) being deformed and crook-backt, was no
way agreeable but displeasing to De Salez, but he being a tall, and neat
timbred Gentleman, of a fair and feminine complexion, she instantly most
tenderly affected, and dearly loved him. In a word, I must request the
curiosity of the Reader briefly to be informed and advertised, that as she
beheld him with the eyes of Love and Desire, so did he her with those of
contempt and disdain, she building castles of content in the air of her
thoughts and hopes, that Heaven would make him her husband; and he rasing both
her and her memory out of that of his contemplations, vowing that Earth should
never make her his wife. Thus though the Parents have already shut up the
Contract, yet their children shall never live to celebrate the Nuptials, for we
shall see diversity of tragical accidents which are providing, and almost
ready to oppose and impugn it. Parents think to be the causes, but God will
still be the Author of Marriages: for if his sacred and divine Majesty make
them not first in Heaven, they shall never see them solemnized nor consummated
on Earth.

And here, to make an orderly progression in this History, the Reader must
likewise understand, that of all other of La Franges Suitors, none sought her
with so much importunity and impatiency, as the Baron of Vaumartin, (whose
chiefest house and lands lay betwixt Aigue-mortes and Narbone) a Nobleman of
some thirty years old, who (like many others of his stamp and rank) had
spent the greatest part of his youth and means in Paris, in lasciviously
debaushing and revelling with the Parisian Ladies and Dames: so that the
vanity of his pleasures and expenses making his lands fly away peece-meale,
and the devasting and fall of his trees and woods, making the rest of his
Manors shake, (an example and president for all other debaushed Gallants to
observe and beware of) he leaves Paris with curses, and his bitter-sweet sins
with repentance; and so (to repair his errors, and to redeem his lost time,
and decayed estate) he comes home to Langue^oc, where hearing in Toulouse of
the President de Clugny's great wealth which he must solely leave to his only
child and daughter La Frange, who was now marriageable, he resolves to set all
his other business and designs apart, and so to lay siege and seek her of
her father and self in marriage. Now to take the better direction, and
observation of this History, we must likewise understand that this Baron of
Vaumartin was of a swart complexion, a dwarf of stature, and every way as
crook-backt as La Frange, which the more slattered him in his hopes, and egged
him on in his pursuit, hoping indeed (though with as much Vanity as Ignorance)
that this their corporal resemblance would the sooner induce and draw her to
affect him: but his Arithmetique, or rather his Judgment will deceive him: for
it is conformity of Humors and Inclinations, and not of faces and bodies,
which breeds and inflames a sympathy in affections. But he is resolute in his
research, and so better loving the fathers wealth, than the daughters Beauty,
he well assisted and followed (with a train and equipage worthy of his birth,
and her merits) first seeks the daughter of her father, then her self of her
self. As for the old President de Clugny, he has heard of his debaushed
pranks and ryots in Paris, and therefore vows that his wealth gotten with
wisdom, and purchased with providence, study, and care in his Age, shall
never pay for the obscene pleasures and vicious prodigalities of his Youth: and
so with many verbal complements (resolving that he shall never triumph in the
conquest of his daughter) he in general terms puts him off. As for La Frange
her self, the sweetness of De Salez complexion and personage is so deeply
imprinted in her heart and thoughts, that it is impossible for Vaumartin to
find any admittance or entrance; for she speaks of none but de Salez, thinks
of none but of de Salez, nor wishes her self with any but with de Salez.
Again, she wonders at Vaumartins simplicity, in seeking her for his wife: for
if she hate deformity in her self, how is it either likely or possible that
she can love it in her husband? No, no; though de Salez will not love La
Frange, yet La Frange must and will love de Salez, and none but him; and
therefore since de Salez his sweet feature is a pearl in her eye, needs must
Vaumartin be an eyesore to her; yea, and if modesty will permit me to speak
or write an immodest truth, her heart does so burn and flame in love to de
Salez, that both day and night she many times with sighs, sometimes with
tears, wishes her self either impaled in his arms, or he encloystred in
hers. Now by this time Vaumartin has full notice and advertisement of her
affection devoted to none but to de Salez, as also his sleighting and
disdaining her: Whereupon encouraged by this, and dishartened by that, he
leaves no cost, care, or curiosity (either in gifts, dancing, music, or
bankets) unattempted, to crown his wants, rather than his desires and
pleasures, with this though deformed, yet rich heir La Frange: so leaving him
to his vain suit in courting her, speak we a little of de Salez, that since
he will not affect La Frange, we may yet observe and discover which way he
intends to shape the course of his affections and resolutions.

For albeit he had formerly addicted himself and resolutions to be a professed
Soldier, yet Peace calling him home now to Pleasure, and that to effeminacy, a
fatal and dangerous vice, which in the iniquity of these our times and
depraved manners not only most insensibly creepes into common Soldiers and
Commanders, but also into all Armies, and into many Estates and Kingdoms,
still to the disparagement of their glory, and sometime to the price of their
ruin, and peril of their subversion; he began to let his Colors hang dustie,
and his Pike and Par^zan r^stie by the walls, and to frequent the company of
Ladies, which the old Counselor his father observes with joy, hoping that in
the end he shall draw him to affect and marry La Frange: but these hopes of his
will prove vain, and this hi^ joy will soon be exchanged into sorrow, and
metamorphosed into affliction and misery: for that his son is partly resolved
to marry, it is true, but as true it is, that he is fully resolved never to love,
much less to marry La Frange.

Now we must understand, that in Toulouse there dwelt a Merchant of Silks, or
as we in England say, a Silk-man, termed Monsieur de Soulange, rather reputed
rich of others, than known so of himself; and yet being an old widower, to
the end the sooner to get him a new wife, he puts a good face on his estate,
and maintains himself, family, and house, with great pomp and expenses,
having no son, but three fair daughters, all marriageable; and yet (out of
ambition, and in emulation of the Gentry) severally known and styled by their
titles, not by their names, as Mesdamoyselles de Marsy, La pre Verte, and La
Hay, all famous for their beauties, and indeed for the pureness and
excellency thereof justly reputed and held the prime Birds of the city, and
yet the youngest of them La Hay was the Phoenix of all the three: for she was so
sweetly fair, and fairly sweet of complexion, as she drew all eyes to do
homage to hers; so as it was almost impossible for any man to look on her
without loving her, or to gaze on her without desiring her: for her body was so
strait and slender, and the roses of her cheeks so deliciously gracing the
lilies, and the lilies the roses, that the greatest Gallant either of the City
or Country, held himself not only happy, but honored with the felicity of
her presence and company. But in one word, to give these three sisters their
true characters, de Marsy and la Pre-verte were far more virtuous than La Hay,
though La Hay were far fairer than they: for as Religion and Piety was their
chiefest delight and exercise, as more desirous to embelish their souls than
their bodies; so wanton pleasure and vain lasciviousness was hers, as rather
delighting to please and adorn her body than her soul, they being more
virtuous than fair, she more fair than virtuous, different inclinations and
resolutions; these as happy and blessed, as hers wretched and impious: their
actions might have been a President, yea a Pilot to have conducted her fame as
well to the Temple of Honor, as to the harbor of immortal glory, and of
glorious immortality: but she vows she will prove a President to her self,
and her pleasure shall be a Pilot to her will, although she miss the Temple of
Honor, to find out that of beastly concupiscence; and the harbor of immortal
glory, to suffer shipwreck upon the shelves of inglo^ious infamy, and the
rocks of infamous perdition.

To this Monsieur de Soulanges house, the beauties of his three daughters, but
especially that of La Hay, and withal her pleasing and tractable affability,
invites many young Gentlemen, and the eminentst Citizens, who there pass their
time in courting and conversing, in dancing, singing, and the like, whereunto
the Youth of France more than any other people of the world are most
licentiously addicted; and as things are best discerned and distinguished by
their contraries, so the virtues of De Marsy and La Preverte were made more
apparent by La Hayes vices; and her lust and whoredoms were more palpably
notorious in their chastity. O that so sweet a creature should be subject to
so foul a sin, and that Beauty the best gift (and as I may say the gold) of
Nature, should be thus vilified and pollute^ with the beastly pleasures of
carnal concupiscence and obscene sensuality! For aye me, I write it with as
much grief to my self, as shame to her, she was too prodigal of her favors;
for she imparted them liberally unto some for love, but unto most for money,
not caring to whom she prostituted her body, so they filled her purse, thereby
to support her pride, and maintain the excess and vanity of her braverie;
and yet she was so subtle and cautious therein, that although she were a
professed Courtisan, she would nevertheless publicly seem a pure and
unspotted Virgin; and the better to fortify her fame, and to make the
reputation of her Chastity pass current with the world, she would swear all
those to conceal her favors, on whomsoever she imparted and bestowed them:
but if this lascivious subtlety of hers have power to bleare the eyes of the
world, how can this her beastly sin of fornication be unseene of God, when the
windows, walls, and beams of her chamber, yea her very bed whereon she has
acted her whoredoms, shall one day give in evidence, and serve as witnesses
against her; yea, and be petitioners on earth, that God will requite and reward
them with vengeance and confusion from Heaven.

Now, among the rest of those deboshed Gentlemen, who devoted their lascivious
service, and sacrificed their fond affections to La Hays beauty, in comes our
De Salez to inroule himself one; who, feasting and surfeiting his eyes on the
delicacies of her fresh and sweet complexion, leaves his own fathers house, to
frequent hers; yea his desires are so lustfully inflamed with her beauty, as
with his best art and policy he lies close siege to her chastity, and with
many gifts, requests and oaths, seeks to endeere* her to his desires and
pleasure: But see the subtlety of this lascivious young Courtisan; for knowing
De Salez deeply in love with her, and to be the only child of his father, and
he one of the richest Counselors of Toulouse, she conceives a plot in her
head, to go a fishing to make him her husband, and so bears her self
wonderful modest and coy, casting a cloak and veil of chastity over her
unchaste desires and actions, as if she were now a virgin, yea a Saint to him,
though heretofore she had many times played the Strumpet with others: but her
denial does rather inflame, than quench the fire of his lust, so as making
many assaults to raze down the defenses of her refusal, that he may enter and
take possession of her heart and favor, his best Art and Oratorie proves
vain; for she outwardly retires her affection, thereby the better inwardly to
advance and finish her purposes: so this repulse of hers makes him hang his
head, and become pensive and melancholy; the true signs and symptoms of a
foolish and fantastical lover, as in effect we shall shortly see de Salez
will prove himself: for the colder she is in affection to him, the hotter is
he in lust with her, forgetting the wars, yea, his discretion, himself and
all, to crown his desires in enjoying her: the which she well observing,
begins to triumph in her good fortune, as thinking him already fairly come to
the hook, and so hopes that if the line of his folly and her good fortune and
wit hold, she will soon make him her husband, and her self his wife: For
having formerly met with many knaves in others, she now begins to rest
confident either to find, or make a fool of him, thereby to serve as a veil
to over-veile her whoredoms: He pleads hard to her for love; she replies, it
is impossible to find love in lust: He vows he will die her servant, she
swears she will never live his strumpet: He protests that she shall share
of his estate, she tells him plainly that she had rather live a poor Wife,
than die a rich Courtesan: He replies, that he adores her beauty; she answers,
that she knows no other, but that he only seeks to profane and defile it.
And here, with more facility to make him swallow either a Gull, a Gudgin, or
both, she by stealth permits him to cull some kisses, as well from the cherries
of her lips, as the roses of her cheeks: and in the Interim like an
hypocritical and dissembling queen, reads him many lectures on the pureness
of Chastity, and the foulness of Lust, on the blessedness of Marriage, and
the wretched estate of Fornication: Profane and impious giglet, whose speeches
are perfumed with Virtue, and yet her actions stink, and are polluted and
infected with Vice: dissembling Syrene, who casts forth bitter sweet enchanting
tunes and charms to please the sense, and yet purposely to poison the soul;
pills of worme-wood candid in sugar, honey to the palate, but gall to the
stomach; A fatal rock whereon many inconsiderate and deboshed young Gentlemen
have unfortunately suffered shipwreck, a wretched Gulf and Labyrinth, which
contains all variety of endless miseries and calamities, whereunto whosoever
enters with pleasure, is sure to retire with tears, curses, and repentance; A
plague sent us from heaven in our age, for a just guerdon and recompense of the
sins and folly of our youth. And into this intr^cate Laborinth and
bottomless Gulf of misery and calamity, is our rash and lustful young
Gallant, cheerfully entering and steering his course, without either the Star
of hope, or compass of felicity and saftie, bearing out top and top
Gallant, yea (as I may say) with all the sails of his folly bearing; and with
the Flagge Ensign and Pendants of his obscaene and lacivious desires, playing
and dalying in the Air of La Hayes fatal and infectious beauty; which has
so solely surprised his judgment, captivated his thoughts, and eclipsed his
descretion, as in her abscence and presence he extolls as well her Virtues as
her beauty to the Skies: vowing that she is so fair a Nymph, and so pure a
Virgin, as she deserves rather to be his wife, than his Strumpet, or rather
not his strumpet but his wife: And so two months being past since he first
frequented her, and sought to seduce and obtain her to his lacivious desires;
and seeing (desembling queen as she is) that therein she bore her self
infinitely chaste and modest, and that it was impossible for him to observe or
remarke any other inclination or testimony, either in her word or carriage, his
wits are so besotted and in tangled in the fetters of her beauty, that he
preferres her sweet feature and complexion, a thousand times before La Franges,
deformed; and vows that he had rather die La Hayes slave, than ever live to
be La Franges husband: But this folly of his in the end shall cost him dear,
and so lead him to another, far more unnatural, and as I may justly say,
damnable: But we must proceed orderly in this History, and do therefore
reserve that part till anon.

By this time the sly subtlety, and seeming chaste behavior of La Hay, has
acted wonders in De Salez heart so as she now hopes confidently, and shortly to
play her prise in surprising him, for he is extremely amorous besotted, and as
I may say, drunk with the love of her self and beauty: so on a Sunday, as
she returned from Vespres, he repaires ^o her fathers house to see her, whom
he finds in her chamber alone, waiting and attending him: having porposely
dighted her self in a rich new Gown and Petticote, and trimmed and adorned
her self in her gayest and most curious attier, thereby with more ease and
facility to draw him to her lure: So as her beauty being both seconded, and
graced by her apparel, she so ravished his heart, and delighted his senses, as
he cannot refrain from kissing her; but this honey of her lips, will in the
end prove poison to his heart: And here again he lays close siege to her
chastity, but still she gives him the repulse and refusal, as if she were a
Diana, and no Venus: He vows he does affect, and will ever honor her; And
she, that if he honor her, will still affect him: In the way of Love, quoth
he, I am wholly yours; and quoth she, in that Honor I will not be mine own
but yours: I will quoth he in all affection both live and die your servant;
and replies she, In all chastity, I will live to die your handmaid: He
affirms, he cannot be more hers in heart, than he is; nor I quoth she,
less yours in lust, than I am: It is quoth he my Love which makes me report
so much; and quoth she it is my Fear which makes me affirm no less: Why,
quoth he, should my love procure your Fear? My fear, quoth she, is wholly
engendered and derived from your lust, but not from your Love: I pray express
your self, quoth he; she replies, my blushes may, but my tongue dares not,
Quoth he, did your affection equalize mine, La Hay would accept of De Salez,
and not refuse him, Nay quoth she, did De Salez know how infinite mine exceeds
his, he would not refuse La Hay, but accept of her: Why quoth he, de Salez
desires none but La Hay, Nor quoth she, La Hay any in the world but de Salez:
Whereupon de Salez being provoked with his own lust, and animated and
encouraged by her sweet speeches, he very joyfully (yet falsely) flattering
himself with the conquest of her favor and consent, ^huts the door, and like
amost lacivious and disolute Gentleman, takes her in his arms, and strives to
convey her to the bed, resolving there to enrich himself with more then
kisses, yea, to reap the fruit of his beastly pleasures and obsceane and
brutish desires; but his hopes shall deceive him: For although La Hay be a
Courtisan in heart, yet she will not be so in tongue, especially now, where to
get her self a rich husband, it behooves her to play her prise in Chastity, as
if she were as virtuous, as fair, and as chaste as lovely; Wherefore
exclayming, and storming at this his lacivious attempt and enterprise, levelled
at the defloration and shipwreck of her Honor, she with a violent power, and
an enraged violence, unskrewes her self forth his arms, and with a world of
hypocritical sighs and tears, flies to his Poniard, which he had thrown on
the table, and unsheathing it, vows that she will be a second Lucretia, and
that if she cannot kill him before he have defiled and defloured her, yet that
she will assuredly murder her self after; because she is fully resolved, that
her chastity shall out live her, not she her chastity; A religious and
Honorable resolution of hers, if it had proceeded from a chaste and sanctified
heart, but alas, nothing less; for she speaks it out of subtlety, not out of
Virtue, out of Policy, no way out of Piety: de Salez by this time having
wholly lost his judgment in the sweet and ^o seat garden of her delicious
complexion; vows that he is now as deeply in love with her chastity, as
formerly with her beauty. When seeking to appease her Choler, and to pacify
her Indignation, as also to give truce to his own thoughts, and content to his
defires; he swears he is so far from intending her any dishonor, as he is
resolved to do her all the honor of the world: Yea so far, as if she
please, he is ready to accept her for his wife, protesting, that of all the
maidens of the world, he is desirous to be husband to none but her self, and
that the fault shall be hers, if he make not his words deeds. La Hay having her
thoughts tickled with delight, to hear the pleasant melody of these his sugared
speeches, does thereat presently bury her sighs, and dry up her tears: when
throwing a way the poniard, and making him a most respectfull courtesy, and
grateful reverence, she with extended arms runs to him, and hangs about his
neck, vowing that she loves no man in the world but him self; and in
consenting to be her husband, she will till death yield, not only to be his
faithful wife in attending his pleasures, but his observant handmaid, to
receive and obey his commands: and so they interchangeably greet each other
with thanks and kisses. But yet she knowing that his father Argintier was both
rich and eminent, and her own poor and of a far inferior rank, she is so
politic and subtle in the managing of this her affection, as she is resolved
to make sure work, and to do nothing by halfes: so as knowing that words are
but wind, and what de Salez promises her now, he may either forget or deny to
morrow, she intends to catch at opportunities forelocke, and so with a sweet
and ingenious insinuation, draws him to give her a Diamond Ring in token of
marriage, and she in exchange returns him a small gold bracelet, which she wore
upon her arm next her heart. And yet again considering, that his father would
very difficultly (or never) be drawn to consent to this match, she can give no
true content to her desires, nor satisfaction to her fear, before she have
united and linked him to her, in a more stricter and firmer bond of assurance;
when not only feasting, but as it were surfeiting him with variety of kisses,
she bethinks her self of a Policy, as worthy of her wit for attempting, as of
his folly for performing: for directing him her speech (which she accompanied
with many amorous, yet dissembling smiles) she told him she would futurely
exced him in constancy, and now outbrave him in affection; when taking pen and
paper, she writes him a fair promise, and firm assurance of her self unto
him (in the manner of a Contract) and to make it the more powerful and
authentical, subscribes her name and sign to it, and betwixt sighs and
blushing, she delivers it him; no way doubting, but rather assuring her self,
that he would requite her with the like courtesy and obligation, as indeed the
event answers her desires and wishes: For De Salez having now no power left
him to see by his own eyes, I mean, by those of his judgment, but only by
these of his intemperate passion, and passionat affection, he is so far from
discrying (much less from suspecting) her policy, as very simply and sottishly
he attributes it to the fervency of her affection, the which he interprets and
entertaines, I know not whether with more joy, or delectaion; and so vowing not
to dye her debtor for Courtesy, he very rashly, and inconsideratly writes
another to the same effect, and flies so far from wit or discretion, as to
show himself her superior in affection, as well as in sex, he purposely cuts
his finger, and so firmes his name thereunto with his own blood, and then with
a million of kisses delivers it her, vowing that her pleasure shall be his law
in the accomplishing thereof: only he prays her for a time to be secret and
silent herein, for that he fears he shall hardly draw his Father to consent
hereunto, the which she very courteously graunts him: and so he triumphing in
her beauty, and she in his wealth, he in her youth, and she in his simplicity,
they for that time part, not doubting but they shall shortly reap the fruits
of their matrimonial desires and wishes; for till then, she swears (though
with an equivocating reservation to forswear her self) she will live a most
pure and unspotted Virgin, and that as the least of her affection and
courtesy toward him, shall be smiles, so the most shall be kisses.

But this (affection or rather folly) of De Salez, in contracting himself to
La Hay, is not so secretly borne, but as her former unchastitie was a general
argument of talk to the whole city of Toulouse: so now this of her subtilty
and good fortune, is that of its uniuersall prattling and admiration, occasioned
and redoubled by the opposite considerations of Argentiers known wealth, and
de Soulanges supposed poverty? and again of de Salez supposed chastity, and of
de la Hayes notoriously known whore domes. And as Fame is still so tatling a
goddess, that events and accidents of this nature can hardly be concealed, and
difficulty suppressed and smaothered: so by this time contrary to the
expectations and hopes of our two young Lovers, the old Councellor Argentier
has notice of this unlooked-for news, and of this unwished for familiarity
betwext his son, and that strumpet La Hay, when considering the great
opposition betewixt de Clugny's Nobility and wealth and de Soulanges mean
extraction and poverty; as also by a true and uncontroleable Antithises,
comparing the foul and enormious vices of La Hay with the sweet and
resplendant virtues of La Frange; he (as much disdayning that match, as
desiring this for his son, very hastily sends for him into the Arbor, where
purposely attending him, he with lightning in his looks, and thunder in his
speeches, lays before him the simplicity, and the sottishne sse of his
resolution, in preferring La Hay before La Frange, a strumpet before a virgin,
and a Pedlers brat, before a rich gentleman's only daughter and heir, shows
him the infamy of the first, and the glory of the last match; there his
unavoydable misery, here his assured happiness; in the first his utter ruin
and shipwreck, and in the last, his infallible prosperity and felicity: and so
intermixing threats with tears, with a passionate paternall affection, he
endeavoreth to persuade him to leave La Hay, and to marry La Frange; or if not,
he vows and sweres wholly to disinherit him, and from thence-forth never
repute or esteem him for his son.

But de Salez his foolish vanity, and vain affection in himself toward his
new contracted Love La Hay, is so great, and consequently his filial obedience
to his father so small, as not withstanding this his wholesome advise and
counsel, he is still resolute and constant to prefer La Hay before La
Frange, the beauty of the one, before the deformity of the other, his own
content before his fathers, and Soulanges estate and birth before the great
wealth and noble extraction of De Clugny: but this rashness, indiscretion, and
ingratitude of his will cost him dear.

Now if Argentier have perfect intelligence and curious notice of his sons
familiarity with that fair yet lewd Courtezan La Hay, no less has la Frange,
who poor soul is so deeply enamored of de Salez, as the very first news and
conceyt, that another should enjoy him, and not her self, for very grife and
sorrow, she seems to drown her self in the deluge of her tears. His father
is chollerick thereat, she mournful, he incensed, she afflicted, he enraged,
and she perplexed and tormented, his passions and anger proceeds from
suspicion, that he shall so soon find a daughter in law in la Hay; her sighs
and tears from fear, that she shall so soon loose her Love though not her
Lover, his son de Salez. Again, the argument of his choler, is la Hayes
unchastitie and poverty, and the cause of her disconsolation, de Salez his
wealth and virtues: likewise she sees that Argentier has no reason to hope,
that his son will marry her self, such is her deformity, and again, that
he has all the reasons of the world, as well to doubt, as fear, that he will
wed la Hay, such is her beauty: But since de Salez will bear no more respect to
his father, nor affection to la Frange, leave we therefore his father
Argentiers passions, and la Franges perplexities, to be appeased and qualified
by Time, or rather by God, the Author and giver of Time, who out of his
all-seeing providence and sacred pleasure, only knows in Heaven, how best to
dispose and manage the actions of earth; and so come we to other unexpected
occurrents and events, which like so many enterjecting, and intervening points,
are contained within the circumference of this History.

I have so long insisted on the affections of de Salez and la Hay, as but to
the judicious and temperate Reader it would seem to appear, that the Baron of
Vaumartin, has wholly forgotten to remember his to his Lady La Frange: But to
put that doubt out of question, and this question out of doubt, we shall see
him return too too soon, to act a part not so religious and honorable, as
bloody, upon the Theater of this History: For by this time both his creditors
and his debts are grown so clamorous, and his reputation and lands so near
forfeited, for want of disingaging, as to secure the one, and provide for the
other, he knows no other invention not means but to gain La Frange to his
wife: when as it were, provoked and precipitated on by the necessity of this
exigent, his thoughts leave heaven to fly to hell, and consequently fly from
God to Satan, to consult how either by the bye, or the maine he may obtain
her; yea, though with the peril and hazard of his own life, to cut off
theirs, who seek therein to prevent his desires and designs. In which hellish
ratiocynation, he as devoyd of Reason, as that is exempt either of Grace or
Piety, thus reasons with himself: De Clugny hates me, for seeking to marry
his daughter, and that time may remedy for me; but which is worst of all, she
loves De Salez, and seeks and desires to marry him, and this I must remedy in
time, if I ever expect to obtain or enjoy her; and so resolves to make him
away: but is as yet irresolute how to perpetrate, and in what manner to finish
so execrable a business. But this is not only the voice of his malice, but
the sentence of his revenge, that De Salez must die: wretched Vaumartin,
unworthy to bear the name of a man, much less of a Baron, but least of all of
a Christian, in that because De Salez hates La Frange, and she loves him, that
therefore thou will not love but hate him; or because she loves him, and not
thy self, that therefore thou will kill him, that she may love thee. See, see,
rash and inconsiderate Nobleman, how treacherously the Devil has hood winked,
yea inveigled thy judgment, and besotted thy senses, to kill one that loves
thee, to kill I say, a Gentleman who has not offended thee, but is every way
thy friend, no way thine enemy: or if thou think it wisdom, that
covetousness must redeem thy former prodigality, alas, alas, can thou yet
be so cruel to think it either lawful or religious, that future murder
should either occasion or authorize it: But the Devil has so far prevailed
with his impious resolutions, that again he resolves, De Salez must die: and
yet thou think poison as unworthy of him, as he is worthy of thy sword; so
had thy last resolution been answerable to thy first, assure thy self thou
had made thy self more happy, and not so miserable: for as poisoning was the
invention of the devil, and is practiced by none but his agents; so this
dishonorable point of honor to fight Duels, was never instituted by God, nor
professed by those who really profess his Gospel: yea, it is not only truly
to dishonor God, in seeking falsely to preserve our own Honor and reputation,
but we assuredly stab at the Majesty of the Creator, in seeking to deface man
his creature; and to use but a word, as it is repugnant both to Nature and
Grace, so though it begin in the heat of passion and pleasure, it many times
terminates in Repentance, but still in true Infamy and misery.

But Vaumartins faith being so strong with Satan, and so weak with his
Savior, he will not take a law from Religion to give to his Envy, but rather
takes one from his Envy to give to his Religion; and so very profanely and
rashly by his Lackey La Rose, sends De Salez this Challenge:

VAVMARTIN to DE SALEZ.
IF thou seek the cause of my malice, thou may find it in the Lady La
Franges affection to thee, and hatred to my self: wherefore hold it not
strange, that I now command my pen to invite thee and thy sword to meet me to
morrow on horseback without Seconds, 'twixt five and six in the morning,
behind the Iacobins garden. Love and Valor thou know, are never capable of
much expostulation; as desirous rather to be tried in action, than seen in
words. Could that sweet Lady, (who will not be mine, because thou ar^ hers)
have affected me more, or thee les^e, we might have proved as true friends, as
now our reputations conjure us either to live or dye, Honorable Enemies.

VAVMARTIN.


De Salez having received and read this Challenge, does not a little wonder at
the Baron of Vaumartins strange passion and resolution, in sending it him,
especially, since he knows that the motives and grounds of his malice were so
unjust and frivolous: so, how to answer him, as yet he knows not; for as his
Generosity one way invites him to fight, so his discretion another way
persuades him from it: But considering the poor esteem he makes either of the
Lady La Frange, or her affection, thinking it folly to fight without cause, and
to hazard his life without reason, he calls for pen and paper, and as a wise,
yet valiant Gentleman, by his own Lackey, returns the Baron of Vaumartin this
answer:

DE SALEZ to VAVMARTIN.
I Have seen many Challenges, but none of the Nature of thine now sent me: for
t^ write thee the truth, the grounds and foundations thereof are unjust, false,
or both: for bring but the eyes of thy Judgment, and not of thy passion, to be
Judge and Vmpier betwixt us, and thou shall both see and find, that I not only
disclaim the Lady La Franges affection, but her self; since I appertain to
another, and she shall never to me. I here show thee my love through this true
Prospective of my heart; which if it will not satisfy thy malice, then know
that my weak Valor is neither capable nor desirous of further expostulation
than that my Sword is as willing to bring thee deeds, as thy Pen was to send
me words: for either single, or with Second, either on foot or horseback, I
will still be ready to give reason to those, who will not relish, nor receive
any but their own: and in this resolution of mine, I know I shall either live
with Reputation, or dye with Honor.

DE SALEZ.


Vaumartin having received and perused this letter of refusal from De Salez,
he out of the heat of his passion, and height of his folly, reputes it rather
to cowardice, than discretion in him; and so his courage and revenge the more
insulting and inflamed thereat, he bending his brows (as if Contempt and Envy
sat wreathed in the furrows thereof) very speedily again returns him his
Lackey, with this rash answer:

VAVMARTIN to DE SALEZ.
THy Answer gives me no satisfaction, since I know that to deny thy affection to
the Lady la Frange, is to deny the light of the Sun in his brightest and
hottest Meridian; neither are the grounds or foundations of my Challenge either
unjust or false, as thou in thy false Prospective endeavourest to make me see
or believe: for being ignorant who is thy Mistress, I know thou resolvest to
make no Lady of the world thy wife but La Frange, so as I cannot rightly define
whether thy proceeding with me be more subtle or malicious, or to what end
thou should attempt the one, or practice the other toward me, unless out
of a premeditated resolution and purpose, thereby to make thy glory the more
apparent and conspicuous in my shame: Wherefore since thy friendship is false to
me, I must, nay I will see if thy valor will prove true to thy self, and
whether the effects of thy Sword be as great in substance, as the vanity of
thy Pen depaints them, in show, and ostentation: So my Challenge is still my
Resolution, and the performance thereof must be thine, except thou resolve to
live with as much Infamy, as the conclusion of thy Letter promises thou art
ready to die with reputation and Honor.

VAVMARTIN.


De Salez having received and run over this Letter, and seeing that Vaumartin
was still wilful and resolute to fight, thinks that he should degenerate from
himself, his Blood, and Profession, if he did not now accept and answer this
his Challenge: wherefore calling for Vaumartins Lackey, he rounds him thus in
his ear, Tell thy Master, that if I live, I will not fail to break fast with
him timely in the morning, according to his expectation. Thus we see these two
inconsiderate Gentlemen agreed, their match concluded, and nothing but the
night to hinder them from fighting, as if their glory consisted in their shame,
and as if Nature had never taught them how to preserve their lives, nor Grace,
their souls.

So the Morn peeping forth through the windows of Heaven, as soon as the
Sun with his glistering beams began to salute the woods and mountains, our
two resolute Champions bravely mounted with each his Surgeon, are in the
field at the assignd Rendevo^s, and first comes Vaumartin, and then immediately
De Salez, when their Chirurgions performing the duty and office of Seconds,
being some hundred paces distant, they give spurs to their Steeds, and so
drawing their swords, swiftly part, like two flashes of lightning each toward
other. At their first meeting, de Salez gives Vaumartin the first hurt in the
right shoulder, and he de Salez another in requital, in the right side of the
neck: when being both good Cavaliers, (and well near as equal in years as
courages) they turn short, and then fall to it again with bravery and
resolution, when again Vaumartin runs de Salez through his left arm of a
deep and wide wound, and he only slightly cuts his shirt upon his ribs,
giving him only a raze or scarre, but as yet both free from any danger of
death, so they mutually consent to breath: but their ambitions and courages of
both sides, are so exasperated and inflamed, as although they are all bloody,
yet this will not suffice: so they fall to it again, and in this close de
Salez his horse stumbles with him; whereat Vaumartin, (though a dwarf in
stature, yet not in Valor and Policy) taking the advantage of this accident,
gives him first a lick ore his pate, and then runs him at the short ribs:
but de Salez rayning up his horse, prooved favorable to him; for by that
means Vaumartins sword met and glanced on a rib, without doing him any farther
hurt. De Salez seeing the redoubling of his wounds, begins to redouble his
courage, and disdaining thus to be outbraved and beaten by a Pigmey, he lies
home at Vaumartin, and at their very next close, runs him through the body, of
a deep and mortal wound, a little above his navell: whereat his sword
presently falls out of his hand to the ground, and he immediately likewise
from his horse stark dead, without having the grace or happiness, either to
call on, or to name God. O what pity, what misery is it, that a Christian
should die like a beast, having neither power to pray, nor felicity to repent.
Thus we see the Challenger killed, and he who would have murdered a stranger,
murdered himself by a stranger: a Lesson to teach others to beware, by the
Tragical and mournful end of this rash Nobleman. De Salez seeing Vaumartin
dead, praises God for his victory; and so leaving his breathless corpse to his
sorrowful Surgeon, he gallops away to the next Village, where he causes
his wounds to be dressed, and from thence provides for his safety.

All Toulouse rings and resounds of this disasterous and Tragical accident: De
Clugny is glad, that De Salez has escaped death, yet sorrowful that Vaumartin
is killed, in respect he fears he undertook this quarrel for his daughter
La Franges sake: who hearing that De Salez wounds are no way mortal,
infinitely rejoices, and triumphs thereat, flattering her self (though with
this false hope) that he affected her far more dearer than he made show of,
or else that he would never have fought with Vaumartin for her sake, nor have
killed him but for his own. And thus, though humanity made her grieve for
Vaumartins death, yet that grief of hers was as suddenly converted into joy,
when she saw he received it by the hand of De Salez, whom she respected and
af^cted more dearer than all the Gentlemen of the world. Now, as for his father
Argentier, the life of his son likewise wiped off the remembrance of
Vaumartins death, and yet it grieved him inwardly, that he to whom he gave
life, should give death to another: and far the more, in that this
unfortunate accident must now enforce him to beg pardon from that grave Court
of Parliament, for this murder perpetrated by his son, since he had formerly so
often pleaded for justice against others, for the like crime and offense; But
all these joys of Argent^r, De Clugny, and his daughter L^ Frange, are nothing
to those of La Hay for the life and victory of her dear De Salez: leaping as
it were for mere content and pleasure, that she should shortly see, and enjoy
him for her husband, and that God has both reserved and preserved him to
crown her with the sweetness of this desired felicity.

Thus while La Frange and La Hay triumph and congratulate the return of De
Salez, so Argentier publicly, and D^ Clugny privately, employ there chiefest
power, friends, and authority, to procure his pardon first from the King, then
from the Parliament, whereof they are two famous members. Which ^t l^st, (by
the means and favor of the Duke of Ventadour) they obtain: So this murder
of his, is remitted in Earth, but I f^re me, will not be forgotten in Heaven:
for though men be inconstant in their decrees, yet God will be firm and
upright, as well in the distribution, as execution of his judgments. Men as
they are men may err, but as they are Christians they should not; but God
(either to please or displease them) neither can nor will.

De Salez no sooner has escaped this danger, but forgetting his former
follies, and his fathers advise and house, he again, in a manner voluntarily
imprisoneth himself with his mistress La Hay in hers; whereat as his father
storms, so De Clugny and La, Frange bit the lip: hoping that this good office
in procuring him his pardon, would more strictly have united him to her self,
and consequently sequestered him from La Hay; but nothing less, for he sings
his old tune, and will rather run the hazard of his fathers displea^ure, than
leave La Hay to take La Frange: whereat his father Argentier renews his
choler, and revives his indignation against him, as desiring nothing so much
in this life, as to see him married to La Frange, but he shall never live to
see it; for there are to many disasterous accidents preparing to cross and
prevent it:

Whiles these things happen in Toulouse, there betides an unexpected and
unwished business, which must call away Argentier to Paris: For the Lords of
the Privy counsel of France, having received some informations and grievances
against the body of the Court of Parliament of Toulouse; command them speedily
to send up some Deputies to answer such matters as shall be objected against
them: whereupon, the gravitie and wisdom of that Court, in obedience to their
superiors, elect two Presidents and four Counselors to undertake that
journey and business among whom De Clugny is chosen for one of the
Presidents, and Argentier for one of the Counselors: as inded their
integrity and profound Wisdom and Experience had made them eminent in that
Court. As for de Clugny at his importunate request (made to the Court) he was
dispensed with, from that journey; by alleging that his age and sickness
made him altogether unfit to undertake it: but all the evasions and excuses,
which Argentier could make, could not exempt him, but he must needs see Paris.
But first, before his departure he had a long and serious conference with de
Clugny, how to effect the so long desired match of his son and daughter, the
finishing whereof was referred till his return from Paris, which sweet news
infinitely rejoiced and delighted the young Lady La Frange, and the immediate
night before he was to take Coach, he calls his son de Salez to him, and
with a persuasive and powerful speech, requested him in his absence to love La
Frange, which he in plain terms protested and vowed to his father, he could
not, then he conjures him, never to marry La Hay, which likewise he would not
grant; and to conclude, since his father could not prevail in the two former,
he commanded him upon his blessing, that he would never marry any wife
whatsoever without his consent, the which indeed de Salez could not deny, but
faithfully promised his father; yea, and bound it with an oath, yet still
hoping, that it was as possible for him to draw his father to consent he should
marry La Hay, as it was as impossible for his father ever to persuade him to
marry La Frange: and so that night the father takes leave of the son, and he
the next morning of his father, wishing him a prosperous journey, and a speedy
return: who suspecting, and fearing, that in his absence, contrary to his
requests and prayers, his Son would only abandone La Erange, to frequent La
Hay; he being arived to the City of Tours, thought himself bound in Nature,
as well for his own content, as his sons tranquillity and prosperity;
again, to signify him his mind in some few lines of advise and counsel, and
to send it him by the ordinary Carrier of Toulouse which was then in that
City, bound thither from Paris: his letter spoke thus.

(...) to DE SALEZ.
IT is out of a fatherly, and (as I may say) a religious care of thy good, that
I now send thee these few ensuing lines, for thy Youth cannot see that which my
Age knows, how many miseries are subject, to wait and attend on Vice, and how
many blessings on Virtue; if La Frange be not fair, yet she is comely, not
contemptible: but since her defects of Nature are so richly recompensed with the
Ornaments of Fortune, and the excellencies of Grace; why should thy affection
prefer La Hay before her, who has nothing but a painted face to overvaile
the deformity of her other vices? If thou will leave a Saint to marry a
strumpet, then take La Hay, and forsake La Frange; but if thou will forsake a
strumpet to take a Saint, then marry La Frange and leave La Hay, for look what
difference there is between their births, thou shall find ten times more
between the chastity of the one, and the levity of the other: If thou espouse
the first, thou shall find Content and Honor; if the second shame and
repentance: ^or I know not whether La Frange will bring thee more happiness,
or La Hay misery. This letter shall serve as a witness betwixt God, myself,
and thee; that if thou perform me not thy promise and oath, I will deny thee
my blessing, and deprieve thee of my lands.

ARGENTIER.


De Salez having received this his fathers letter in Toulouse, exceedingly
grieves to see him disgrace his mistress, by the scandalous name of a
strumpet, which he knows she is not, and therefore will never believe it;
yea, he vows, that if it were any other in the world, who had offered him that
intolerable affront, he would revenge it, though with the price and peril of
his life, La Hay perceives this discontent and alteration of mirth in him, but
from what point of the Compass this wind proceeds, she neither knows, nor as
yet can conceive: but withal, determines to make the discovery thereof her
greatest Ambition, and not her least Care; which she now well knows it
behooves her to do, since she finds De Salez less free, and more reserved and
pensive in her speeches than accustomed: But when in vain she had hereunto
used many smiles and fe^ches, lo^ here falls out an unlook't for accident,
which bewrayes her the very pith and quintescence of the Mystery: For on a
time, when he lay slumbering on the table, she as accustomed, diving into his
pockets for sweet meats, or rather for gold (of both which, he many times went
well furnished) she finds his fathers (aforesaid) letter, which she knew by the
direction; and so flying into another chamber, and bolting the door after her,
she there reads it both with grief and choler; when stunge to the quick, and
bitten to the heart and gall, to see her reputation and Honor thus traduced
and scandalized by the father of her pretended husband; she with tears and
interjected sighs and groans, flies back to De Salez, and holding the letter
in her hand, like a dissembling and impious strumpet as she was, there shows
it him, takes Heaven and Earth to bear witness of her innocence, and of the
irreparable and extreme wrong his father has offered her, in seeking to
ecclips the Glory of her chastity, which she swears she will bear pure and
unspotted, not only to his bed, but to her own grave. But Alas, alas, these
are the effects and passions of dissimulation, not of truth; of her
profaneness, not of her piety, which time will make apparent to De Salez;
though now her beauty and tears be so predominate with his judgment and
folly, as he cannot, because he will not see it: So being still as constant in
his ^ottishnesse, as she in her hypocrisy; he gives her many sweet kisses, and
with a Catalogue of sugared words, seeks to appease and comfort her, whom he
has far more reason to excerate and curse. But for her part, her heart is
not so afflicted, for remembering her self, still her ^its are her own, and so
remembering the conclusion of the letter, and fearing that De Sal^z his promise
and oath to his father, might infringe and contradict his to her, she tells him,
that her love is so fervent and infinite toward him, as she can give no
intermission, nor truce to her tears, before he reveal her his oath and
promise, which his fathers letter informed her he had formerly made him.

De Salez seeing himself put to so strict an exigent and push, does both blush
for shame, and again look pale for anger, when for a small time, irresolute
how to bear himself in a matter of this different Nature, wherein he must
either violate his obedience to his father, or infringe his fidelity and honor
to his mistress; he at last (consenting with folly, not with discretion, and
with Vanity, nor with Judgment) does so adore her beauty, and commiserate her
tears, as he sottishly reveals her his oath, given his father (Verbatim as we
have formerly understood it) adding withal, that she has far more reason to
rejoice, than grieve hereat; That a little time shall cancel his said late
promise and oath to his father, and confirm his former to her: For sweet La
Hay (quoth he) come what come will, two months shall never pass, ere I marry
thee, when sealing his speeches with many kisses, our hypocritical afflicted
Gentlewoman is presently again come to her self, and in all outward
appearance, her discontents are removed, her choler pacified, her tears
exhaled, and her sighs evaporated and blown away.

But all this is false, like her self, and treacherous like her beauty; For
this letter of Argentier to his son, and his promise and oath to his father,
has acted such wonders in her heart, and imprinted such extravagancies in her
thoughts, as she cannot easily remove or supplant it, nor difficultly forget or
deface it, whatsoever she speak or make show of to the contrary, for thus she
reasons with her self: That (...) whoredoms are already revealed to
Argentier, and for any thing she knows, ^y likewise be discovered to his son,
how closely soever she either act or conceal them. That La Franges descent,
wealth, and virtues, will in the end overprise and weigh down her mean
extraction, poverty and beauty; and in the end, that the wisdom of the father,
will infallibly triumph ore the folly of the son, except her policy
interpose, and her vigilency prevent it; which to prevent and effect, she sees
no other obstacle to her content, nor bar to her pre^erment, but only La
Frange: for, quoth she, if La Frange shine in the firmament of De Salez
affection, La Hay must set; or if La Hay will shine, La Frange must set:
again, if she fall not, I cannot stand, and if she stand, I must needs fall;
and as the sky is not capable of two suns, so both of us cannot shine in the
Horison of his heart and thoughts at once: except thus, that La Hay may live to
see La Frange his wife, and her self his strumpet, when burning with false
zeal to De Salez, and true inveterate malice to La Frange, she forgetting God,
swaps a bargain with the devil, that La Frange must first go to her grave,
ere La Hay come to his bed, and so resolves to sacrifice her as a Victime to
her malice and jealousy, and to send her out of this world in an untimely and
bloody Coffin, Hellish Aphoris^es, Infernal Pos^ions, odious to Earth, and
execrable to Heaven.

For wretched and impious strumpet, will thou needs not only gallop, but fly
to hell, and so redouble thy crimes purposely to redouble thy torments; as
first of whoredom, then of murder: Wretched, yea thrice wretched woman, how
dare thou see earth, or think of heaven; when thy acted crimes are so
odious, and thy pretended ones so monstrous, as thou deservest to be shut
forth of the one, and spewed out of the other: For alas, consider what this
poor Gentlewoman has done to thee, that thou should do this to her; She
bears the image of God, and will thou therefore bear that of the devil to
destroy her: Ah me, where is thy religion, thy conscience, thy soul; that thou will thus hellishly imbathe thy hands in her blood, and imbrue thy heart in her
murder: If it be not that her virtues cry fie on thy Vices, thou have no
reason in Nature, and less in Grace, to attempt a deed so Tragical, an act so
inhumane and execrable: But rest assured, that if thou proceed and finish this
infernal and bloody stratagem of thine, although thou chance go unpunished of
men; yet the Lord (in his due time) will find thee out, and both severely
scourge and sharply revenge and chastise thee.

The effects of malice, and revenge in men, are finite; in women infinite,
theirs may have bounds and ends, but these none, or at least, seldom and
difficultly: for having once conceived these two monsters in their fantasies
and brains, they long till they are delivered and disburthened of them; and so
to bring their abortive issue to perfection, they (for the most part) are
sharp and severe in their designs, and sudden and malicious in their
executions, hating all delays, so it be not to do evil: So this our bloody and
vi^ious Strumpet La Hay, is resolute to advance, and not to retire in this
dyabolicall business of hers. Of all kind of violent deaths, she thinks none
either so sure and secret as poison; whether she consider the manner, or the
matter: If the Devil himself had not invented this unparaleld cruelty, his
agents and members had never known how to have administered and practiced it.
But having resolved on the drug and ingredient, she now bethinks herself of
some hellish Empericke or Factor of Hell, to apply and give it her, and her
inveterate and implacable hatred making her curious in the research and inquiry
thereof: she is at last advertised, that there is an old Italian Empericke in
Mompellier: termed S. Brnard^ Michaele, who is his Arts master in that
infernal profession, when wholly concealing this mystery and business from De
Salez, she by a second means, (with promise of store of gold) sends away for
Michaele from Mompellier: who in hope thereof, packs up his drugs and trinkets,
and within three days arrives at Toulouse; where she thinks no where so fit
and secret as the Church to consult and resolve on this bloody business, the
hour is eight the next morn, and the place the Cordeliers, (or Gray Fri^s)
Church, appointed and agreed on betwixt them, where they both meet. but she
(the better to disguise her self, and to bleare the eyes of the world) wraps
her self about in a great furred cloak, and muffles her self up with a large
coyfe of velvet, and a rich taffata scarf over it, as if she were some grave
and reverend old Matron: so being brought to each others presence, they being
both on their knees, he to his Book, and she to her Beads, she proposes him
the poisoning of La Frange, daughter to the President de Clugny, for the which
she promises to give him three hundred crowns of the Sun to perform it;
whereof he shall now have one in hand, and the other two when he has
dispatched her. Michaele like a limb of the Devil, being deeply in love, and
allured with this gold, undertakes it; when swearing secrecy, and withal to
perform it within ten days, she gives him the hundred crowns tied up in her
handkercher, and so for that time they part.

Good God, what profane Christians, what monsters of Nature, and Devils
incarnate by profession are these, thus to pollute and defile the Church
ordained for prayer, with the price and sale of innocent blood, a most
prodigious and hellish impiety, since there is no sin so odious or execrable
to God, as that which is masked with piety, and overvayled with the cloak of
sanctity? And what a damnable young strumpet, and old villain are they, in so
holy a place to treat and conclude so hellish a business? But beware, for the
sword and arrow of Gods just revenge, and revenging Justice, threatens ye with
no less, then utter confusion and destruction.

La Hay infinitely glad of this agreement, returns from the Church, and
Michaele as glad of her gold, (being informed of La Franges deformity, and to
lose no time) trips away toward President de Clugny his house, taking that for
a fit occasion to assay to make his daughter become his Patient, and he her
Empericke: who fleeringly insinuating, and skrewing himself into his knowledge
and acquaintance, (in which profession the Empericks and Mountebanks of Italy,
come no way short, but rather exceed all other Nations of the world) he
proffers him his best service and skill, to redress and reform the body of
the young Lady his daughter, adding withal (thereby to add the more belief
and credit to his speeches) that he is so far from dispairing or doubting,
as he is very confident thereof: and in the phraises and mysteries of his
profession, gives him in outward appearance many inward and plausible reasons
to induce him to believe it. The good old President who preferring the cure of
his daughter before any other earthly respect; having heard of Micha^les fame:
begins to relish his reasons, and yet not ignorant that the Mountebankes and
Charletans of Italy, are Cousin Germans to the Alcumists of France, who promise
to make gold of dross, and yet only bring forth dross for gold, he holds it
fit to take a consultation of the learned Physicians, and expert Chirurgions
of the City, whereunto Michaele willingly consents, so they sit, being six in
number, Michaele delivers them his reasons to redress the deformity of this
young Ladies body (the President her father being present) whose reasons are
heard, and controverted of all sides betwixt them, the conclusion is, four are
of opinion that this cure is repugnant to the grounds of Physic, and the
principles of Surgery, and therefore impossible to be effected: the other
two are of a contrary judgment, and held it feasible, and that many times God
blesses the Art and labors of a man, not only beyond expectation, but also
beyond hope and reason: so De Clugny seeing that these two with Michaele were
three against four, he in respect of the tender care and affection he bore
his daughter, resolves to employ him, and gives him an hundred double
Pistollets in hand to attempt it; with promise of as much more when he has
performed it; whereof this miscreant and hellish Empericke Michaele being
exceedingly glad, he betakes himself to this business, visits the young Lady,
who promises him to reduble her fathers sum, if he make her body straight:
when to reduce his impious contemplation, into inf^rnall action, he outwardly
applies playsters and seare-clothes to her body, and inwardly administreth her
pills and potions; and (O grief to write it) therein infuseth deadly poison;
which he knows at the end of ten days will assuredly make a divorce between
her body and soul; and so send that to the death of this world, and this to
the life of that to come: So this sweet and innocent Lady (wishing good to her
self, and hurt to none in the world) first finds a giddiness and swimming in
her head; and within some six days after (in which time the poison had
dispersed it self throughout all the veins and pores of her body) many sharp
gripes, and bitter throws and convulsions, whereat her father grieves, and she
weeps; only that graceless villain her Empericke, bids them be of good
comfort, and that the more pain and grief she suffered, the better and
speedier hope there was of her cure; but yet inwardly in his devilish heart,
knows that the poison effectually operated and wrought with her as he desired
and expected, and that by these infallible signs and simptomes, his patient
drew near toward the period of her end. Whereupon he repaires secretly to La
Hay, and bids her provide the rest of his money; for that La Frange could not
possibly live two days to an end, whereat she triumphing and rejoicing with
much alacrity, againg promises it him: and indeed the hellish Art of this
execrable Empericke does not now deceive him, though in the end the malice of
the devil his Doctor will: For just as the tenth day was expired, this
harmless sweet young Lady dies, to the incomparable and unspeakable grief of
the good old President her father; for that she was the staff of his age, and
the chief and only comfort of his life, who disconsolatly and mournfully
seemed to drown himself in his tears hereat, cursing the hour that he first
saw this accursed Empericke Michaele, who had robbed him of his only joy and
delight, of his dear and sweet daughter La Frange. But this murdrous Michaele
having learnt of the devil to fear no colors, means not to step a foot from
Toulouse, and so sends privately for L^ Hay, of whom he craves the performance
of her promise, for that (quoth he) he had performed his. Why (quoth La Hay) is
that crookbackt dwarf La Frange dead? She is gone (quoth Michaele) to her
eternal rest: when La Hay not able to retain her self for excess of joy,
runs to him, gives him the other hundred crowns, together with many kisses,
which take (quoth she) as a pledge of my continual good will toward thee,
when again swearing secrecy, they both take leave each of other and part.

The news of La Franges death, ratl^th and resoundeth over all Toulouse, her
kinsefolkes grive at it, her frinds lament it, and all who either know her, or
her fame, bewail it, only De Salez, and execrable La Hay excepted, who
knowing her to have been the only stop and hinderance of their marriage, they
are so ravished with joy heereat, as they seem to contest and envy each other,
who shall first bring the news hereof each to other: yea, the excess of De
Salez his joy is as boundless, as that of La Hayes delight, so that he seems
to fly to her to her fathers house, where she with out-spread arms receives
and entertaines him; and there they mutually congratulate each other for this
her death, he affirming and she believing, that La Frange being gone to heaven,
it shall not be long ere the Church make them man and wife on earth. In the
mean time, he being wholly ignorant of her poisoning, and yet the old
President her father, and the rest of her friends suspecting it, they cause her
body to be opened: and although they find no direct poison, yet remarking a
little kind of yellow tincture on her heart and liver, as also some show
thereof through her frozen veins: They cause Michaele to be apprehended and
imprisoned, and so procure a Decree from the Parliament to have him racked: At
the news whereof, La Hay is extremely tormented and perplexed, as well
foreseeing and knowing, that her life lay at the mercy of his tongue: wherefore
to fortify his secrecy, and thereby to secure her own fear and danger, she
by a confident friend of his, sends him a hundred French crowns more, and
promises him to give him a rich Diamond worth as much again; who (as before)
being extremely covetous, and the Devil (resembling himself) still ha^ping
to him on that string which most delights him, his heart is so devillishly
obdurated, and his fortitude so armed and prepared, as his patience and
constancy not only endures, but outbraves the cruelty of his torments; and so
he is acquitted of this his pretended crime: but he has not as yet made his
peace with God.

And now is De Salez resolved to make a Journey to Paris, to draw his fathers
consent that he may marry La Hay, but the wisdom of the father shall
anticipate the folly of the Son, for he having heard in Paris of La Franges
death, and still fearing, that because of his frequent familiarity with that
strumpet La Hay, he will in the end marry her. He in Paris buys a Captains
place for him in the Regiment of the Kings Guard, and likewise dealt with a
very rich Counselor of that Court of Parliament, named Monsieur de Brianson,
that his son may marry his eldest daughter: Madamoyselle de Plessis, a very
sweet and fair young Gentlewoman; and the old folks are already agreed on all
conditions, only it rests, that the young, sees and loves; To which end
Argentier writes away with all speed to Toulouse for his son De Sal^z to come
up to him, who before he had received his fathers letter, (as we have formerly
understood) was ready to undertake that Journey: La Hay infinitely fearful and
jealous to lose her pray, with Crocodile tears in her eyes, and Hyena aspects
in her looks, informs De Salez, that she fears that his father has
provided a wife for him in Paris, but he vows and swears to her, that neither
his father, nor the whole world, shall make him marry any other than her self,
and so after many embraces and kisses, he takes horse and leaves Toulouse.

Being arrived at Paris, his father very joyfully bids him welcome, and
referres to confer with him till the next morning; but such is De Salez
rashness and folly, as he has no sooner supped in company of his father, but
he prays to speak with him. When the servants voyding the chamber, he
earnestly and humbly beseeching him, since that La Frange is dead, he will now
be pleased that he may marry La Hay, whom, quoth he, I only affect and love
before all the maids of the world: His father exceedingly incensed hereat,
vows that he had rather see him fairly buried in his grave, and that of all
the females of the world, he shall not marry La Hay: and so for that night they
betake themselves to their beds, the father grieves with his sons folly, the
son with his fathers averseness: The next morn Argentier calls for his
son. When the doors shut, he bids him shut his eyes to his foolish
familiarity with La Hay: and now to open them to the preferment, he has
purchased him, and so relates him how he has procured him the honor of a
Captains place, in the Regiments of the Kings Guard, as also a very fair
young Gentlewoman for his wife, termed Madamoyselle de Plessis, the eldest
daughter of Monsieur de Brianson, one of the richest Counselors of Paris: But
De Salez having his eyes and thoughts wholly fixed on La Hay, with a
discontented look, returns his father this perverse and disobedient reply.

That he will not accept of the Captains place, nor once see De Plessis, but
that he is constantly resolved, either to wed La Hay, or his grave, whereat
his father is so extremely incensed, as with much passion and choler, he
commands him henceforth, not to dare so much as to name him La Hay, swearing by
his Savior, that if he for his obstinacy and disobedience, he will
disinherite him, as indeed he might, having himself purchased three parts of
his lands and revenewes, through his care and industry in his profession, and
so much discontent and cholle^, leaves in his Coleagues of Toulouse, who are
already waiting and attending his coming.

De Salez is all on fire at this his fathers bitter resolution against him, and
storms and fumes, not only beyond the bonds of reason, religion, and humanity;
but also beyond himself. For since La Hay is his sole delight and joy, and that
his father has vowed he shall never marry her, his affection to her, makes him
resolve to dispatch his father, yea, his head conceives such murtherous
thoughts, and his heart atracts, and assumes such degenerate and devilish
blood against him, that like an execrable wretch, and a hellish son,
disdayning to take Counsel from God, and therefore taking it from the devil
his bloody Tutor and Abettor, he vows he will forthwith rid his hands of his
father, and that he will therefore send him into another world, because he would
give him no content in this.

Oh wretched monster of Nature, Limb of the devil, nay a very devil thy
self, thus to resolve to take his life from him that gave thee thine; Foul
stain of mankind, bloody Paracydious miscreant, can no respect either of thy
natural and filliall obedience to thy kind and dear father, or of his white
hairs, and venerable old age, restrain thee? or no consideration of thy
consceince or thy soul, of heaven or hell deter thee from this bloody
inhumane, and damnable design of thine, in laying violent hands on him? O me,
where are thy thoughts, where thy senses; where thy heart, thy soul, to act so
execrable and infernal a Tragidie, on him with whom thou had not been: on
thy father, whom by the laws of Heaven and Earth, thou ought both to love,
honor, reverence and obey.

But De Salez being resolute in this inhumane rage, and implacable malice and
fury, watches how he may take time at advantage, to effect and finish this
his bloody business, and one a night after supper, hearing his old father
complain that he found himself not well, and commanding his Clarke De
Buissie, very early in the next morning to carry his water to Doctor Salepin,
a famous Physician, whose chamber was far off, in the place Maubert, he
himself lying in Grennelles street: De Salez thinks this a fit opportunity to
dispatch his father, the which, O a thousand griefs and pitties to speak off,
he accordingly performs. For the morn appearing, his father having sent away
his Clarke with his water, and betaking himself to sleep till his return.
His watchful and murtherous son, having purposely made himself ready; and
through the key hole and cranies of his Chamber door, espying his father
sleeping, he intends that this shall be his last sleep: When softly stealing
into his Chamber, he (encouraged and animated by the devil) and approaching
his bed, as exempt of fear or grace without any more delay or circumstance,
stifles his father betwixt tow pillowes; when leaving him breathless in his
bed, his face exposed to the air, and the door shut, goes down, gives the
master of the house, the good morrow, and so trips away as fast as he can, to
the sign of the swan within Saint Honnoryes Gate; and from thence rides away
to Saint Clow, (two leagues distant from Paris) to see Gondyes gardens,
fountains, and house wherein that execrable and damnable Iacabine Friar,
Jacques Clement murdered Henry the third king of France, but with an intent to
return to his fathers lodging immediately after dinner, and to plead ignorance
of the fact, and withal if occasion serve to stand upon his innocence, and
justification, as indeed he did. Now his fathers Clarke De Buissye, returning
in the morning from Doctor Salepin, entering his masters chamber, finds him
stark dead; and almost cold in his bed: whereat he makes many bitter outcries.
and grievous exclamations: the man of the house hereat ascends the chamber,
infinitely laments, grieves at this sorrowful accident and spectacle; Vows to
De ^uissye that he saw none whosoever in his house, much less in his masters
chamber, and that his son Mounsieur De Salez departed as soon as he himself:
they search his body, and find it no way wounded, so they believe and resove
that some angue has carried him away; Yet they hold it rather wisdom than
folly to acquaint the Lieutenant Cryminall therewith; fearing lest he might
after suspect either violence or poison: So he comes, conferres with his son
De Salez, with his Clarke De Buissye, and with the man of the house, he
visites the deadbody, finds only his head somewhat swollen, which his
Physicions affirm, may be his striving and struggling with death. When the
Lieutenant out of his zeal and integrity to Justice: having informed himself
of Doctor Salepin, of De Buissyes being with him, as also from Saint Clou of
his son De Salez, being there timely in the morning, and withal, that his
Trunkes were all safe, and nothing wanting; they banish all suspicion, and
without farther enquiry, of doubt, commend the dead corpse to the grave: Whose
funeral with exterior show of extreme grief and sorrow De Salez performs
in Part, with all Decency and Decorum, answerable in all respects to his
fathers rank and quality. But we shall shortly see this mask of his
devilish hypocrisy pulled off, and this inhumane paraside of his, both
shamefully, and sharply revenged, by the just judgment and finger of God: The
manner is thus.

This harmless and innocent old father Argentier, is no sooner laid in his
untimely grave, but his bloody and execrable son De Salez, within eight days
after leaves Paris, and returns to Toulouse; where already this sorrowful
news is dispersed and divulged, being for his virtues and integrity of life,
generally bewailed of the whole City, only graceless and impudent La Hay
triumphs hereat, and her very heart and thoughts dance for joy hereof: she
welcomes home her De Salez, with a world of sweet and sugared kisses; who as
glad of her presence, returns her them with a plentiful and prodigal
interest; but his lustful love to her is so fervent, and his folly in himself
so perverse and obstinate; as he has scarce the patience, much less the
respect and modesty to wear blackes for his fathers six weeks, but casts them
off; takes on gaudie, and scarlet apparel, and very solemnly marries La Hay:
Whereby in respect of the inequality of their descents and means: but
especially, of her whoorish conditions; he makes himself the laughter and
May Game of all Toulouse.

But good God, what a prodigious and hellish match is this, since man and wife,
and both are Murderers; O execrable and miserable wretches, O bloody and
impious miscreants, for sure if this marriage of yours prove happy, I may
boldly and truly say, there will never any prove unfortunate and miserable:
For Alas, alas, what do those impious and damnable crimes of theirs deserve
and portend, but misery, ruin, and confusion of all sides? neither shall the
curiosity of our enquiry carry us far, before we see it surprise and befall
them.

For before they had been fully married three months, De Salez reaping his
desires, and feasting himself with the pleasures of her youth; he directly,
contrary to his hops and expectation, is in forced to see and know, that which
before he would have thought never to have known or seen: for thinking his
wife to have been a modest and chaste Diana, he now sees she is a deboshed
Layis: ^ea, his misery is so great, as he needs no spectacle to see, that she
daily makes him a Knight of the forked order; and almost every hour, despite
of his care and jelousie, claps a cuckowes feather in his hat: which to prevent
and remedy, he first administreth requests and persuasions, and then
comblaines to her father; But these are too weak reasones and too gentle
motives, to prevail with so insatiable a strumpet; so as he is constrained to
add threats to his requests, and in the end blows to his threats. But as it
is impossible for the Leopard to change his skin, and the Ethiopian his hew,
so de Salez sees it labor lost to think to reclayme his wife from her beastly
sin of adultery, wherein (notwithstanding all that possible he can do) she
takes such a delight and habit, as by this time she is grown so extremely
impudent, as when her husband is at home, she is abroad ranging; and he is no
sooner abroad, but she is instantly at home revelling with her ruffians: Yea,
she is grown to that hight of obscenity, as she contemns and sleights her
husband; that whether he be abroad or at home, she will play the whore before
his face with open doors: which although it be too late for him to remedy,
yet it bites him to the heart, and grieves him to the gall: and now it is that
he a thousand times thinks of his fathers advise and council in forsaking
her; and as often wishes he had followed it. Now it is that his unnatural
murdering of his father, thunders forth horror, terror, and repentance to his
foul and guilty conscience; and now it is that he wishes from his heart and
soul, that he had been blind when he first saw her, and fairly laid in his
grave before he first lay with her in bed. But these his complaints and griefs,
bring him only vexation and misery instead of comfort; for now he utterly
dispaires, and sees no hope of his wives reformation: Whereupon he resolves to
divorce himself from her, and to that end takes counsel thereon: but it is
not so secretly managed by him, but the strumpet his wife has present notice
and inckling thereof, whereupon seeing her husband exceeding rich, both in
lands, coin, plate, and other rich household stuff, she vows not to quite her
great joynter share and interest hereof thus. But before he had enrolled his
suite in the Spiritual Court, or any way vented his own shame, and his wives
infamy in public, she like a true Courtisan, and debaushed strumpet as she
was, vows to prevent him that would prevent her, and to send him to his death,
that would seek to divorce her; and in respect of his jelousie and malice,
that as she had formerly poisoned La Frange for her husbands sake, so she
would now murder him for her own.

But miserable and execrable wretch, Oh to what a monstroues heigh and huge
sum will all these thy beastly sins, and bloody enormities arise and amount
unto? But Lust, malice, and Revenge like three infernal furies, so possess
and preoccupate her senses, as she will not retire, till she has sent her
husband into another world in a bloody winding sheet. To which end, watching
the time when most of her servants were gone abroad to gather in the Vintage,
she softly opening her husbands chamber door, steals in, and finding him
soundly sleeping approaches his bed, when drawing forth a rasor from her
sleeve, which she had purposely provided, she with an implacable and damnable
malice steps to him, and cuts his throat, speaking only these words to her
self: Lo here the reward of thy Jealousy; when throwing the knife, and her
outward Taffata Gown into the house of office, she leaving him weltring in his
blood, very secretly conveyes her self through the Gallery to the Garden,
where her waiting- Gentlewoman attends her, and so hyes away to the Church,
thinking with a wretched impiety to cloak this her second murder, as her
former, under the veil of religion and piety: but her hopes, and the Devil
that gave them her, will now deceive her.

De Salez, her husband striving and struggling for life against the pangs of
death: fear and have (contrary to her intent and mind) had so made his
murtherous wifes hand shake and tremble, as she did not so fully cut his
throat-boale, but he could yet both cry and groan, which he did very
mournfully, and which indeed was soon overheard by a man and a maidservant
of his, who only remained in the house, who hearing their masters voice, and
hastily running up, at these his pitiful and lamentable out cries; steping to
his assistance, they hear him (with his best power) utter these fearful
speeches, That Strumpet my wife has killed me: O that shee-Devill my wife has
murdered me. Whereat they cry out at the windows to the neighbors for
help, alleging that their master is murdered. The neighbors assemble, and
hear him report so much: so they send away for his Confessor, and the
Lieutenant Criminal, to both whom he again confesses, That it is the
Strumpet his wife who has murdered him: And then raising himself up in his
bed (with as much strength as his dying wound would permit him) he taking them
both by the hands, with infinite signs and tears reveals to them, that he it
was, who at the seducing of the Devil, had stifled his father Argentier to
death in Paris, that he did it only to marry this whore his murtherous wife
La Hay; that the killing of his father, yea the very remembrance thereof
infinitely grieves his heart and soul, and for the which he infinitely
repents himself, and beseeches the Lord of mercy, in mercy to forgive it
him; and likewise prayed all that were present to pray unto God for him: and
these were his last words, for now his fleeting and fading breath would permit
him to say no more.

All that were present, are amazed at this lamentable confession of his, to see
that he should murder his father, and his execrable wife, well near
himself; so they all glorified God for the detection and discovery hereof: But
the Lieutenant Criminell, and the Counselors his Associates step to the
window, and consult to have him hanged, whiles he is yet living, for the
murdering of his father. But De Salez saves them that labor: for there and
then he sinkes into his bed, and dies away before them: so they instantly
search the house and City for this wretched Murtheresse La Hay, whom impious
and bloody strumpet they at last find in the Dominican Friars Church at a
Sermon, from whence with much obloquy and indignity they dragge her to prison,
where they charge her with the murder of her husband De Salez, which the
Devil as yet will not permit her to confess; but being adjudged by them to
the Rack, she at the very first torment confesses it.

Upon which several murders, the Criminell Judges of the Tournells proceed to
sentence: so first they adjudge the dead body of De Salez for so inhumanly
murdring his father Argentier, to be half a day hanged by the heels to the
common gallows, and then to be burnt to ashes, which is accordingly executed:
then they adjudge his wife La Hay, for murdering him, the next day to be
strangled, then burnt: so that night some Divines deal with her in prison
about the state of her soul, whom they find infinitely obdurated through the
vanity of her youth, and the temptations of the Devil; but they work
effectually with her, and so at last (by the mercies of God) draw her to
contrition and repentance, when willing her not to charge her soul with the
concealing of any other crime; and showing her the dangers thereof, she very
freely, yet sorrowfully, confesses; how she it was, that for three hundred
crowns had caused the Empericke Michaele to poison La Frange, for the which
she told them she was now exceedingly repentant and sorrowful: Whereof the
Divines (since it was not delivered them under the seal of Confession)
advertising the Judges, they all wonder at Gods providence, to see how all
these murders are discovered and burst forth, one in the neck of the other;
so they alter her sentence and for these her double murders, they condemn her
to have her right hand cut off, and then to be burnt alive: and so they make
curious inquiry and research to apprehend this old bloody varlet Michaele.

In the mean time, that very afternoon, this miserable and murtherous
Curtesan La Hay, though to the grief of her sorrowful father and sisters, yet
to the joy of all Toulouse, is brought and fastened to her stake, where her hand
being first struck off, she with many sighs and tears delivers these few
words: That her crimes were so foul and odious, as she was ashamed to look
either God or man in the face: That she was very sorrowful for causing La
Frange to be poisoned, as also for murdering of her husband De Salez, whose
wealth she only affirmed she loved, but not himself, the which she wholly
attributed to the lust and vanity of her youth, to her neglect of prayer and
forsaking of God; which made the Devil so strong with her, and she with the
Devil: and which was the sole cause and ground of this her miserable ruin and
destruction; she with tears and prayers besought the Lord to be good unto her
soul; and (lifting up her eyes and hands to Heaven) likewise beseech the whole
assembly to pray heartily unto God for her: when recommending her soul into
the hands of her Redeemer, the fire being alighted, her body was soon consumed
to ashes, whose lamentable, yet just end and punishment, caused a number of
spectators to weep, as yet pitying her youth and beauty, as much as they
detested the enormitie of her crimes.

And now for this devilish and murtherous Empericke Michaele, although as
soon as he heard of La Hayes imprisonment, he (to save him self) left
Toulouse, and fled toward Castres, disguised in a Friars habit, with his beard
shaven: yet by the care of the Court of Parliament, or rather by the immediate
finger and providence of God, he is found out, and brought back to Toulouse,
where for poisoning of La Frange, (the which he now without the Rack
confesses) he is adjudged to be broken on the Wheel, there to remain till he
be dead, and then his body to be thrown into the River of Garrone: the which
the same day is accordingly executed and performed, to the infinite joy of all
the spectators: but as he lived an Atheist, so he desperately died a Devil,
without any show at all, either of contrition or repentance; only he vomited
forth this wretched speech, That because the world had so much to say to him,
he would say nothing to the world, but bade the Executioner dispatch him.

Now by the sight of this mournful and bloody History, the Christian Reader
may observe and see how Gods revenge does still triumph against murder, and
how he in his due time and providence does assuredly still detect and punish
it. It is a History which may serve to deter and forwarne all young Gentlemen,
not to frequent the companies of whores and strumpets; and all sons not to
transgress the will of their parents, much less not dare to lay violent hands
on them. It is a glass wherein young Gentlewomen and Wives may at life see,
what bitter fruits and sharp ends ever attend upon Whoredom and Murder: it
is a lively Example for all kind of Empericks and Drugst^rs whatsoever, to
consider how severely God does infallibly revenge and punish the poisoning of
his Saints and children. In a word, it is a Lesson and Caveat for all people,
and for all degrees of people, but especially of Christians, (who profess the
Gospel of Christ) not only to detest these foul sins of Revenge and Murder
in others, but to hate and abhor them in their selves: which that all may
endeavor to practice and perform, grant good God, who indeed art the only
giver of all goodness.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XII.
Albemare causes Pedro and Leonardo to murder Baretano, and he after marriah
Clara, whom Baretano first sought to marry: He causes his man Valereo to
poison Pedro in Prison, and by a letter which Leonardo sent him, Clara
perceives that h^ husband Albemare had hired and caused Pedro and Leonardo to
murder her first Baretano; which letter she reveals to the Judge, so he is
hanged, and likewise Valerio and Leonardo for these their blody crimes.

WIth what face can we presume to tread on the face of Earth, or dare lift up
our eyes to that of Heaven, when our thoughts are so rebellious to conspire,
and our hearts and resolutions so cruel to embrue our hands in the innocent
blood of our harmless and Christian brethren? Thoughts they are, which in
seeming to please our senses, poison our hearts, (and do therefore truly
poison our souls, because they so falsely please our senses,) Resolutions they
are, which we cannot conceive or attempt with more inhumanity, than finish with
misery. Since in thinking to send them to their untimely graves, we assuredly
send our selves to our own miserable and infamous ends; whereof in this
ensuing History, we shall find many woeful Presidents, and mournful examples,
in diverse unfortunate and wretched persons, who were borne to happiness, not
to infamy; to prosperity, not to misery. If they had so much Grace to secure
their lives, as Vanity, and Impiety to ruin them; It is a History purposely
p^duced and penned, for our detestation, not for our imitation: Since it is a
point of (true and happy) wisdom in all men to beware by other men's harms;
Read it then with a full intent to profit thy self thereby, and so thou may
boldly, and safely rest assured, that the sight of their sins and
punishments, will prove the reformation of thine own.

Fruitful, and fair Lombardy is the Country, and the great, populous, and
rich City of Millan (the Capital of that Duchy) the place where the Scene of
this mournful and Tragical History is layen where perpetrated: The which to
refetch from its first spring and Original, thereby the more truly to inform
our curiosity, and instruct our knowledge: We must then understand, that long
since the Duke of Feria succeeded the Count De Fuentes, as Viceroy of that
potent and flourishing Duchy, for King Philip the third of Spain his master:
There was native and resident in that City an ancient Nobleman, termed
Seignior Leonardo Capello, who in his younger years had married a Spanish
Lady, and brought her from Spain to Millan; termed Dona Maria de Castiana: He
exceeding rich and noble, and she as noble and fair; he by his fathers side
allied to Cardinal Charles Barromeo (since Sainted by Pope Paul V.) she by her
mother to the present Duke of Albucurque, he infinitely honored for his
extraction and wealth: she no less beloved and respected for her beauty and
virtues: and although there are but few marriages contracted between the
Millaneses and Spaniards, and those very seldom prove successful and
prosperous, in respect of the antipathy, which (for the most part) is
hereditary betwixt the commands of the Spaniards, and the subjection of the
Millaneses: yet it seemed that this of Capello and Castiana was first
instituted in heaven, ere consummated on earth; for so sweetly did their
years, humors, and affections conjoyne and sympathize, as although thy were
two persons, yet I may truly affirm and say, they had but one heart,
affection and desire, which was mutually to please, and reciprocally to affect
and love each other. And as Marriages cannot be reputed truly happy and
fortunate, if they be not blessed and crowned with the blessings of children,
(which indeed is not only the sweetest life of humane content, but also the
best and sweetest content of our humane life) so they had not been long
married, ere God honored them and their nuptial bed, with a beautiful and
delicate and young daughter, termed Dona Clara, the only child of their
loins, and heir of their lands and virtues; being indeed the true picture of
themselves, and the joyful pledge and seal of their entire and involuable
affections; who having overpast her infancy, and obtained the eighteenth year
of her age; she was so exquisitely adorned with beauty, and so excellently
endued and enriched with virtues; as distinctly for either or jointly for both,
she was, and was truly reputed, the Paragon of Nature, the pride of Beauty,
the wonder of Millan, the glory of her Sex, and the Phoenix of her Time. And
because the purity and perfection of her beauty deserves to be seen through
this dim Perspective, and the dignity of her virtues known of the Reader in
this my impollished relation. For the first, she was of stature indifferently
tall, but exceeding straight and slender: her hair either of a deep Chestnut
color, or rather of a light black, But to which most adhearing and inclyning
fancy might, but curiosity could difficultly distinguish; her complexion and
tincture, rather of an amorous and lovely brown, than of a Roseat and Lilly
die; but yet so sweetly pure, and purely sweet: (and withal rather fat than
lean) that no earthly object could more delight and please the eye, or ravish
the sense. And for her cies, those two relucent lamps and startes of love, they
were so black and piercing, that they had a secret and imperious influence, to
draw all other eyes to gaze and do homage to hers; as if all were bound to
love her, and she so modest, as if purposely framed to love none but her
self: Neither did her Front, Lips, Neck or Paps any way detract, but every
way to add to the perfection of her other excellencies of Nature: For the
first seemed to be the Prom^ntory of the Graces, the second, the Residence of
delight and pleasure; The third the Pyramides of State and Majesty; And the
fourth the Hills and Valley of love. But leave we the dainties of her body, now
to speak of the rarities and excellencies of her mind, which I cannot rightly
define, whether the curiosity and care of her parents in her education, or her
own ingenious and apt inclination to Virtue and Honor, were more predominant
in her: for in either, or rather in both, she was so exquisite and excellent,
that in Languages, Singing, Music, Dancing, Wisdom, Temperance, and
Modesty, she was so fully complete and rare, that to give her her due, and no
more, she could not be paraleld by any young Lady of Lombardy, or Italy, nor
equalliz'd but by her self.

Thus if her noble extraction, and fathers wealth made her surmount others, and
her delicious sweet beauty and virtues excel her self, no marvel if those
Adamants, and these excellencies draw diverse of the best Cavaliers and chiefest
Gallants both of Milan and Lombardy, to effect and seek her in marriage; and
indeed although she be sought by diverse of them with much respect and honor,
answerable in all regard to her rank and quality; yet nether her parents, or
self are so much importuned by any, as by Signior Giouani Albemare, a young
noble Gentleman of the city, who was adorned and fortified whith these humane
privileges, to be well descended, rich, and of some twenty five years old; a
match in the eye and censure of the world, yea, and in all outward appearance
correspondent and equivalent; if his generous persections and virtues had
paralleld hers, or if the candure and sincerity of her affection had not
justly transported her thoughts and heart from him, because she had formerly
fixed and settled them on another Gentleman, younger of years than Albemare,
but in all other respects, as well of Nature, as Fortune, every way his
superior, named Signior Alphonsus Baretano, a young Gentleman of one of the
noblest families of Millan, of some eighteen years old, whose father was
lately deceased, and had left him sole heir to many rich lands and
possessions; but (withal) exceedingly entangled in Law, and engaged in many
debts and morgages, where into the vanity and prodigality of his youth had
deeply precipitated and ingulphed him: which consequently reflecting and
falling on his son, we shall see will prove a hinderance to his marriage, and
an obstacle to his content and preferment. But to observe some order and
decorum in the conduction and delation of this History, we must briefly be
informed, that as of all the Beauties of Lombardy, Albemare only chiefly
affected and loved Clara; so of all the Cavaliers of the world, Clara affected
and loved no other but Baretano; for as conformity of years, manners, and
inclinations, breed a sympathy in affections; so they in their tender youth
often frequented one the others company, sometimes at the Dancing, and Music
Masters, but many times at Weddings, Feasts, and noble assemblies: being well
near as equal in age as in complexion and stature. Again the vicinity of
their residence added much to the combining and inflaming of their affections:
for they were opposite in nothing but in their mansion houses, from whose
galleries and windows many times publicly; but more often by stealth, their
eyes could not refrain to tilt at each other, with the invisible lances of
love and affection, which bred such a habit, and that habit so powerful a
second Nature that it was now become impossible for them not to gaze each on
other: so as if the innocence of their purilitie, made them delight in each
others sight and company with desire; so now their more riper years enforce
them to desire it with delectation: for when as yet they were so young, as they
knew not the instinct and influence of Nature (which cannot be taught by amore
powerful or ingenious Tu^ix then her self) yet they never met but kissed, nor
kissed, but as if their heart and thoughts check their lips for taking such
short farewells each of other: But now when their years had proclaimed them
both very capable to march under the Standard of Hymenaeus: This Venus and that
Adonis, for so her fresh beauty, and his flourishing youth (with as much right
as fame in Milan,) generally entitled them: They felt some pleasure wanting,
which as yet they couldnot find; and therefore no marvel, if they desired to
find that which they wanted: So as burning in affection each to other, Clara
hearing spoken of a husband, infinitely wished that Baretano were hers; and when
he heard of a wife, he ardently longed, and fervently desired that Clara were
his. Neither can I rightly say, whether he were more affectionate in his
constancy to her; or she constant and resolute in her affection to him: so
that as heretofore they hardly knew the way to kiss, now time (running on in
her swift careere) had taught them to desire to marry: and that whereas
formerly Baretano only termed Clara his sweet Maid, and she him her dear
Friend: Now love had suggested and given them new desires, and therefore new
Epithites: for sometimes as well in earnest as in jest, he could not refrain
to term her his sweet wife, nor she him her dear husband; and herein there
tongues were only but the outward Heralds of their inward hearts, as their
hearts were of their more secret and retired desires. And as fervent love, and
true discretion, very seldom concur and meet; so although affection made
them rich in inventing new inventions to meet and kiss: yet they were so
poor, or rather so blind in discretion, as they could not bear their
affections in secrisie and silence: but by this time they are bewrayed to their
Parents, and divulged to their acquaintance: but if any grieve and storm at
this unexpected news, it is first Albemare, then Capello and Castiana, betwixt
whom there was a secret promise, and verbal contract, that he and no other
should marry their daughter.

Thus we see that Albemare and Baretano are become Competitors and Rivalls in
their affections, for either of them affect Clara as the mistress of their
thoughts, and both adore her as the Queen Regent of their desires. But as they
simpathize in their hopes to purchase her to their wife: So they differ in the
means and progress of their resolutions, how to obtain her. For whiles
Baretano sues the daughter before her Parents, so does Albemare the Parents
before their daughter: but what effects and ends, these beginnings will
produce, ye shall shortly see, and they themselves very soon both feel and
find.

Capello and Castiana (as we have formerly said) with much affliction and
grief, understanding of their daughters affection to Baretano, and
reciprocally of his to her, they (with much impatience and passion) relate it
to Albemare, whose affection to Clara has made him so subtle toward them, as
although his heart knows this news, yet he makes his tongue deny the
knowledge thereof; when protesting of his entire and fervent affection to her:
and that he must either wed her or his grave: they consult on their important
business, how they may Dethronize Baretano, and inthronize Albemare in the
chair and choice of Clara's affection: As for Capello and Castiana, they so
highly affect Albemares great and free estate, and so disdainefully hate the
intricate incombrances of Baretano's, as they vow, there resolutions shall
Sail by thecompasse of his desires; and he in exchange, that his affections
and desires, shall still steer their course by that of their resolutions: So
from the matter of their agreement, they proceed to the manner how to effect
it; To which end her father and mother single their daughter apart, and in
mild and fair terms demand her, what has past betwixt her and Baretano,
and whether she be so simple and inconsiderate to take so poor a Gentleman for
her husband, whose estate is so weak and small, as it cannot well maintain
himself, much less her; Clara already prepared and armed by her affection to
receive these, or the like speeches from her Parents, having twice or thrice
metamorphosed the Lillies of her cheeks into Roses, very temperately and
modestly returns them this discreet and respective answer.

That as she must needs affirm she is confident of Baretano's affection to
her, so she must as truly deny, that asyet he had ever motioned her for
marriage; which if he had, considering that his birth, means, and virtues were
such as every way deserved not only her equal but her superior, she is
enforced to reveal them, that she loves him so tenderly and dearly, as if her
will and pleasure be not contradicted by theirs, it will be not only her joy
but her felicity, to accept and take him for her husband, before all others of
the world.

But this modest answer of hers, they hold too peremptory for a child to give,
and Parents to receive; as if it savoured more of irregular zeal to Baretano,
than of due respect and obedience to themselves, yet the sooner to devert her
from her own desires and resolutions to make her flexible to theirs, they as
yet hold it fit, rather to continue mild than imperious toward her, and so by
depraving the deserts and debasing the merits of Baretano, to seek to extol
and magnify those of Albemare, as if the first were only a foil, and the
second a rich Diamond, worthy of her affection and wearing: and indeed so
exquisite and excellent a Cavalier, they depaint him to her in the richest
frame and pomp of all his praises, as well of the endowments of mind, as of
those of Fortune, that they leave no insinuating Oratory unessayed, nor
persuasive attempt unattempted, to make her shake hands with Baretano, and
consequently to extend her arms and heart to receive and retain Albemare: But
although she were young in years and experience; yet love in this fragrant and
flourishing spring of her youth, had so refined her judgment, and
indoctrinated and prompted her tongue, that her thoughts commanded and
marshalled by her heart, and both by her desires and affection to Baretano, she
confusedly intermixing, and interrupting her words with many far fetched broken
sighs, again returns her Parents this reply.

If your age will not, yet my youth or rather my heart informs me, that
Baretano as far exceeds Albemare in the privileges of the mind and body, as
Albemare does him in those of Fortune, but that my resolutions and answers, may
answer and correspond with my obedience, although I love Baretano, yet I will
never hate, rather honor Albemare; but to make him my husband, or myself his
wife, if Earth have, I hope Heaven has not decreed it: And I humbly beseech
ye, that this may ^est your Resolution, as I assuredly think it shall and
will remain mine.

Capello and Castiana (like discreet parents) seeing their daughter Clara
wholly wedded (in a manner) to the singularity of her own will; they yet
conceive it to be far more requisite to revert her reasons by fairre means,
than refute and refell them by force, since love and discretion has still
reference to that, and this relation still to choler, many times to
repentance: whereupon minding her of the blessings which infallibly attend
filial obedience; and the miseries and curses which individually wayt on
contempt and disobedience, hoping that time will effect that which Importunity
cannot, they as then leave her to her thoughts, and she them to their care;
careing for nothing so much, nay, I may well say, for nothing else, than to see
her affection divorced from Baretano, and contracted and wedded to Albemare,
who having curious correspondence and intelligence with them, he is ever and
anon acertained, not only what has, but what does pass betwixt them and
their daughter; and withal, is advised by them, to delay no time, but to
frequent and haunt her as her Ghost and shadow (...) yea, and no more to
conceal his affection and suite from her, but to acquaint Millan therewith,
since it was no disparagement, but rather an equal honor for him to match with
Clara, and Clara with him. Which concluded betwixt Capello and Castiana,
Albemare is so far from rejecting this advise and counsel, as he embraces
it with much joy and delectation, and vows (though with the peril of his
life) to persevere and pursue her in marriage: To which end, authorized as well
by his own affection, as their authority, Clara is neither abroad nor at home,
but he meets her, gives away all time from himself, to give himself to her:
so as it seems to the eye of the world, that Capello's house is now become
his, and that his daughter Clara likewise shortly shall be: yea, he adds such
curiosity to his care, and such care to his affection in courting her, as she
cannot be either at Mass, or Vespres, but he is either with her, or near
her, and when in solemn pomp or zeal she visits the Domo (or Cathedral
Church) of that City, and in it the Shrine of the new Saint Charles, then he
waits and attends on her at the Porch stairs, sometimes with his Coach, but
many times (as the custom of Millan is) on his Foot-cloth, and prancing
Barbary horse, to conduct her home: yea, and not to fail in any Complement of
an accomplished Lover, besides the harmony of his own insinuation and
solicitation, he greets her with rich presents, and salutes her with all
variety of mellodious Music, and mellistuous voices: but all this
notwithstanding, although he every way use his best art and industry, and her
father and mother their best skill to make her flexible to his desires, and
their pleasure; yet she, as having her thoughts fully bent and fixed on her
dear and sweet Baretano, looks haggard and averse on Albemare, giving him
such general answers, and cold entertainment, as he sees he has far more
reason to despair than hope to obtain her. Whereupon doubting of her
affection, he has again recourse to her parents love, who to confirm and
seal it him, seeing fair means will not prevail with their daughter, they
resolve to use force, and so to add threats to their requests, and choler to
their persuasions, to make her abandon Baretano, and embrace Albemare. But if
the first prevail not with her, the second cannot; for she now tells them
plainly, that she neither can not will affect any man for her husband but
Baretano; and yet she is so far from any determinate resolution to marry him,
as she affirms, that their will shall be her law, and their pleasure her
resolution.

Whiles thus Albemare in the way of marriage seeks our fair and sweet Clara
publicly, no less does Baretano privately; and although with less vanity and
ostentation, yet he hopes with far more fortunacie and success; as
grounding his hopes upon these reasons: That in heart and soul Clara is only
his, as both in soul and heart he is hers: so he entertaines her many times
with his Letters, and yet not to show himself a novice in discretion, or a
coward in affection, he makingher content his commands, as she did his
desires her felicity; he in remote Churches and Chapels, (for whose number
Millan exceeds Rome) has both the happiness and honor privately to meet her,
where if they violate the sanctity of the place, in conferring and cherishing
their affections, yet they sanctify their affections, in desiring that some
Church or Chapel might invest and crown them with the religions honor, and
holy dignity of marriage. For having jested of Love heretofore, now like true
Lovers, they henceforth resolve to love, not in jest, but in earnest; and as of
their two hearts they have already made one, so now they mean and intend to
dispose of their bodies, thereby to make one of two: And this is their sole
desire, and this, and only this is their chief delight, and most pleasing'st
desires and wishes.

But as it is the nature of Love, for Lovers to desire to see none but
themselves, and yet are seen of many: so this their familiarity and frequent
meeting is again reported to her father and mother, whereat they murmr with
grief, and grieve with discontent and affliction: and now not to substract,
but to add to their vexation, it is resolved between our two young amorous
Turtle Doves, Baretano, and his fair Clara, that he should publicly motion
them for her in marriage; which he in wonderful fair terms, and orderly
Decorum, (as well by his friends as himself) performs. When contrary to his
wishes, but not his expectation, they give him so cold entertainment, and his
suite such poor and sharp acceptance, as they (in affection and zeal to
Albemare) not only deny him their daughter, but their house: an answer so
incivill, and therefore so injust, as might give a testimony of some way of
their care, yet no way of their discretion to themselves, or affection to their
daughter. And here I must confess, that I can difficultly define, whether this
resolution and answer of Capello and Castiana, more delighted Albemare,
discontented Baretano, or afflicted Clara: who although in the entrance of
their Loves, their hopes seemed to be nipt, and their desires crossed by the
frowns of their parents; yet they love each other so tenderly and dearly; as
these discontents notwithstanding, they will not retire, but are resolute to
advance in the progress of this their chaste and servent affections, and
although their commands endeavor to give a law to her obedience, in not
permitting her to be frequented of Baretano; yet her obedience is so enforced
to take a more stronger of her affection, as dispight her parents malice and
jelosie toward them, when they are sweetly sleeping in their beds, then is
their daughter Clara waking with Baretano, and he with her; oftentimes walking
and talking in the Arboures, and many times kissing and billing in the close
galleries of the garden; which they cannot conceal or bear so closely, but
her father and mother have exact notice and intelligence thereof by some of
their trusty servants, whom they had purposely appointed as Sentinels to epsy
and discover their meetings. Whereupon (as much in hatred to Baretano as in
affection to Albemare) knowing that if the cause be once removed, the effect is
subject soon to follow and ensue; they very suddenly and privately send away
their daughter from Millan to Modena by Coach, there to be mewed and pent up
with the Lady Emelia her Aunt, and besides her waiting Gentlewoman Adriana,
none to accompany and conduct her but only Albemare, hoping that a small time,
his presence and importunate solitations, would deface the memory of Baretano,
to engrave his own in the heart and thoughts of his sweet Clara. Who poor
soul, seeing her self exiled and banished from the society of her Baretano's
sight and company, wherein under heaven she chiefly and only delighted; she
hereat, does as it were drown her self in the Ocean of her tears; storming
as well at the cruelty of her parents, as at her own affliction and
misfortune; and no less does her Baretano for the absence of his sweet Saint
and dear Lady Clara: for as their affection, so their afflictions is equal;
now mourning as much at each others absence, as formerly they rejoiced and
triumphed in their presence. But although the jealousy of Capello and Castiana
were very careful to watch and observe Baretano in Millan; and the zeal and
affection of Albemares safety to guard, and sweetly to attend on Clara and
Modena: Yet as fire surpressed flames forth with more violence, and rivers
stopped, overflow with more impetuosity; so despite of the ones vigilancie,
and the others jealousy, though Baretano cannot be so happy and blessed to
ride over to Modena, to see and salute his Clara: yet love, which is the
refiner of inventions and wit, and the polisher of judgment, cannot yet
deraine him from visiting her with his letters, the which in respect of the
hard access and difficult passage to her, he is enforced to send her by
subtle means, and secret messengers; and the better to overshadow the
curiosity of his Arts, and the Art of his affection herein, he among many
others, makesuse of a Friar and a Hermit, for the conveyance of two letters to
Modena; to his Lady: which (as fit agents for such amorous employments) they
(with more cunning and fidelity, than zeal, and Religion) safely delivered
her, and likewise returned him her answers thereof. And because the servency of
their affections and constancies, each to other, are more lively depainted and
represented in these two, than in any other of their letters; therefore I
thought my self in a manner bound, here to insert them, to the end to give the
better spirit and Grace to their History, and the fuller satisfaction and
content to the curiosity of the Reader: That which Baretano sent Clara upon her
departure from Millan to Modena by the Friar, spoke thus:

BARETANO to CLARA.
HOw justly may I term my self unfortunate, Since I am enforced to be
miserable before I know what belongs to happiness: For if ever I found any
content, or Heaven upon Earth, it was only in thy sweet presence; which thy
sudden abscence and unexpected exile, has now made, at least, my Purgatory, if
not my Hell. Fair Clara judge of thy Baretano by thy self, what a matchless
grief it is to my heart, and a heart-killing terror to my thoughts, to see
thee made captive to my rival, and that the Fates and thy Parents seem to be
so propitious to his desires, and so inexorable and cruel to mine: That I must
live alone in Millan without thee, and he alone in Modena with thee: which
makes that, I know not, whether I more envy his joy, or lament and pity mine
own sorrows and afflictions. But if I have any sense or shadow of comfort in
this my calamity, it only consists in this, that as thou carriedst away my
heart with thee; so thou wile vouchsafe to return me thine in thy letter by a
reciprocal requital and exchange. For if thou neither bring me thy self, nor
send me that; I may be sought in Millan, but found no where but in heaven: were
I privileged by thy consent, much more authorized by thy command; I would
speedily rather fly than post to thee: for Fair and Dear Clara, as thou art
my sole Joy, and Sovereign felicity, so whiles I breath this air of life, thy
will shall be my law, thy command my Compass, and thy pleasure my resolution.

BARETANO.


Her answer returned by the Friar to Baretano at Millan, was to this effect.

CLARA to BARETANO.
IT is for none but our selves to judge how equal we participate and share of
misery, in being deprived of each others presence. Thou tearmest mine abscence
either thy purgatory, ^rthy hell, and my afflictions and torments for thine are
so great, and withal so infinite, as I have all the equity and reason of the
world to repute them not only one, but both: Thou art mistaken in the point of
my thraldom, for whiles Albemare vows himself my captive, I disdain to be
his, and both vow and triumph to be only Baretanos: I know not whether I have
brought thy heart with me to Modena, but sure I am, I left mine with thee in
Millan: If my Parents seem now pleasing and propitious to him, I am yet so far
from despair, as I confidently hope the Fates will not prove cruel or
inexorable to thee, and in thee to myself: but rather that a little time will
change their resolutions and decrees, Since they cannot our affections and
constancy. If Clara be thy sole joy and Sovereign felicity, and no less it
Baretano hers! and albeit, I could wish either thou here with my self in
Modena, or I there with thee in Millan. Yet such is my aunt Emelias care, and
Albemares jelous^ (...), that were thou in this City thou could difficultly
see me, but impossibly speak with me; wherefore refrain a whiles, and let thy
Journey hither to me be ended ere began; ye^ with this proviso and condition,
that the cause thereof, thy affection to me, be began never to be ended: and
think that my stay and exile here shall be as short, as either my best Art in
my self can invent, or truest zeal to thee suggest. In which Interim let us
solace our selves, and visit each other by the Ambassadors of our hearts, I
mean our letters: And this resolve my dear Baretano, that during our abscence
whiles thou do feast on my Idaea, I will not fail to surfeit on thine.

CLARA.


Baretano's other letter sent Clara to Modena by the Pilgrim, was couched and
penned in these terms.

BARETANO to CLARA.
HAd not thy requests (in thy last letter) granted out a Prohibition against my
desires and wishes, I had long since left Millan to have seen Modena, and in
it thy self my sweet and dear Lady; but I speak it to my present comfort,
and future consolation and joy, that it is excess, not want of affection which
infuseth this provident care and careful providence to thy resolutions, to the
end that thy return make us as joyful as thy departure sorrowful, and
consequently that the last prove as sweet unto our hearts and thoughts, as the
first was bitter: And yet believe me dear Clara, that my affection is so
entire and fervent to thee, because I know thine is reciprocally so to my
self: that I deem it not only capable to make difficult things easy, but
which is more, impossibilities possible: For, for thy sake what would I not
attempt? and to enjoy thy sight and presence what would I leave unperformed?
But if thou will not permit me to come to thee to Modena, nor yet speedily
resolve to return to me to Millan: Sorrow will then prevent my Joy, and
Despair my Hope; For if thou hasten not thy arrival and our interview,
sickness will be my death; were thou as kind as fair, or as affectionate as
I am fervent in affection, thou will the rather suffer me to live with thee,
than to die for thee: for in this rest confident, that if thou deny me that
request, I cannot Nature this tribute, my affection this homage, or thy beauty
this sacrifice.

BARETANO.


And Clara her answer hereunto returned to Millan to Baretano; by the foresaid
Pilgrim was traced in these words;

CLARA to BARETANO.
THe last command of my Parents, and the first resolution of my aunt Emelia,
and my suitor Albemare, have now reduced me to so strict a Sequestration (or
rather captivity) as only my thoughts, hardly my pen, has the freedom and
power to signify thee so much. But as calmes ensue tempests, and sunshine
showers, so I beseech thee to brook it with as much patience, as I do with
grief; and not only hope, but resolve, that violence is never permanent, and
all extremes subject to revolution and change. Wherefore my dear Baretano,
consider and think with thy self, that my stay from Millan, and thy
prohibition from Modena, has this twofold excuse, that is in my will, but not
as yet in my power to perform; and this will rather hinder, than any way
advance the accomplishing of our desires; Since a little time may effect that
with my parents, which I fear importunity will never; neither can thy heart so
much long for my sight, or wish for my presence, as my soul does for thine:
Since to give thee but one word for all, thy self, and only thy self, art
both the life of my joy, and the joy of my life. A thousand times a day I wish
Modena were Millan, and again, as often that Albemare were metamorphosed into
Baretano. Therefore, I am so far from preventing thy joy, as though at the
price of my death, I am ready to sacrifice my life for the preservation of
thine; as also for the banishing of thy despair: Write me not then of thy
sickness, least thou as scone hear of my death, and I knew not what request
to deny thee, since I have already granted and given thee my self, which is all
that either I can give, or thou desire; cherish thy self for my sake, and I
will thy remembrance for mine.

CLARA.


By these loving Letters of these our Lovers, the Reader may observe and
remark, what a firm league, and strict and constant friendship there was
contracted and settled betwixt them, and what a hell their abscence was each to
others thoughts and contemplations: In the mean time, whiles Baretano
entertaines Clara with Letters, Albemare does with words, wherein he uses his
best Rhetoric and Oratory, to draw her to his desires; and withal, to listen
and epsy out, if there pass any passages of Letters, or other correspondency
betwixt them. Which although Clara her affection to Baretano vow, and her
discretion to her self resolve to conceal and obscure from Albemare, yet lo
here falls out a sinister and unexpected accident, which will discover and
bewray it; yea, and of all sides, and to all parties produce grief, sorrow,
choler, and repentance, which in effect (briefly) is thus:

Clara had reason in her former Letter sent by the Pilgrim, to term this her
sequestration in Modena a captivity, since the bounds of her aunt Emelias two
small Gardens, and the walls of her little Park, were the limits wherein her
liberty was confined, and her self as it were, immured: for farther she was
not permitted to go, except to the Church with her aunt in her Coach, but
still accompanied by Albemare, who left no minutes nor occasions, as well to
see her, as to be seen of her. Now to give some truce (though not peace) to
her discontents, and thereby somewhat to calm the impetuosity of those
tempests, which love had stirred up in her heart and thoughts for the abscence
of her Baretano, she never better accompanied then when alone, sometime past
away, the irkesomenesse of her time in walking in the Gardens, but many times
in the Park close shut, followed only by her waiting Gentlewoman Adriana: for
in respect of her aunts unkindnesse, and Albemares jelousie, she would neither
accept of her familiarity, nor of his company. Now to the nearest end of the
Park, not far distant from the second Garden, was a curious walk, ranked
about with many rows of Sycamore trees, and at the farther end thereof a close
ore-shadowed Bower; yea, so closely veiled, that the rays of the Sun could
neither peep in, to scortch the pureness of her beauty, or to contend with
the piercing luster and resplendancy of her eyes: and to this Bower, in a fair
and clear day, Clara (about three of the clock after dinner) repaires, having
in her hand to delude the time, the old amourous History of Hero and Leander,
which was very lately illustrated, and newly reprinted in Millan and wherein
indeed for the conformity of their loves with her own, she took a singular
delight to read: but that which gave sweeter music to her thoughts, and
felicity to her heart, and mind, were her Baretano's two Letters, (which we
have formerly seen) and which as then she had purposely brought with her to
survey and peruse; yea, she reads them ore again and again; and to write the
truth, more oftener than there are words, or I think sillables therein
contained: but when she descends to his name, she cannot refrain from kissing
it; yea, and such is her tender love to Baretano, as she bedewes it with her
tears; a thousand times she wished her self with him, or he with her, and
bitterly blames the cruelty of her parents, for separating their bodies, since
she not only hoped, but assured her self, that God had conjoined, and united
their hearts. But whiles she in the midst of these passionate ecstasies seems
to be rapt up into the heaven of joy, at the perusal of these Letters of
Brretano; and then again to be plunged into the hell of sorrow, at the
consideration and remembrance of his absence, she hears a voice, which she
thinks is not far off from her, when looking forth the Bower, and deeming
it to be that of her wayting-Gentlewoman, whom she saw somewhat near her
gathering of Strawberries, and wild Lillies, she within a flight shot from
her, perceives it to be her Lover, (but not her love,) Albemare, who knowing
her there in the Bower, and for want of other talk, speaking to the Echo, she
guessed by his course, (wherein she was not deceived) that he had an intent to
salute and speak with her; which to prevent, because it wholly displeased her,
to be cumbred with the company of so unwelcomed a guest as himself; shehastily
folds up her letters in her handkercher, and clapping them (at least as she
thought) into the pocket of her gown, takes her book in her hand, and calling
Adriana, trips away back toward the garden, by the other side of the Park,
purposely to eschew and avoid him, as indeed she did.

Albemare grieves to see Clara's coyness and cruelty toward him, although she
were departed forth the Park from him, yet his affection is so fervent to
her, as he will needs ascend the Bower, esteeming it not only a kind of
content, but ablessing to his thoughts; since he cannot be where she is, yet to
be where she has been: when thinking to mount the stayers of the bower, he
unexpected at the foot thereof, finds the two letters whereof we have formerly
spoken, which it seems slipped forth of Clara's handkerceh^, as she was putting
it into her pocket: Albemare taking up the letters, and seeing them directed to
his sweet Clara, he betwixt the extremes of love and joy, kisseth them again
and again for her sake: when sitting down in the Bower, he betakes himself
to read and peruse them, verily expecting and hoping to gather and draw
something from them which might tend to advance the process of his affection
toward her: But when he had read the first, he was so extream^ly perplexed and
afflicted, as he had hardly the patience to peruse the second, and yet at
length hastily and passionately running it over, and seeing by all the
circumstances thereof, that it was in vain for him any longer to hope for
Clara, since she was Baretano's, and Baretano hers, he like one Lunaticke,
stampes with his foot, throws away his hat, tears his hair for very grief
and choler, now thinking to tear the letters, and then to offer violence to
himself: But when the fumes and flames of this his folly were over blown, and
that he had again recalled his wits to take place in theproper seat of his
judgment and discretion; then taking up his ^at, and pulling it down his
ears, he leaves the Bower and Park, and so going into the house, shows them
the Lady Emelia her aunt, who prays him not to despair, but that Baretano's
letters notwithstanding, he himself shall shortly marry her Niece Clara;
only she prays him for the two letters, because she affirms, she will to
morrow send them to Millan to her father and mother. Wherein he says, he will
take advise of his pillow; when fasting out his supper, he betakes himself to
his bed, to see whether he can sleep away those his passions and vexations.
And by this time Clara going to lock up these two aforesaid letters in her
trunk, she finds her handkercher, but misseth her letters; whereat blushing
for shame, and then again looking pale for sorrow, grief and anger, she
speedily sends away Adriana to the Bower, to look them; who returns without
them, and then she knows for certain that Albemare has found them: whereupon
for mere grief and anger, feigning herself sick, she withdrawes her self to
her chamber, and there presently betakes her self to her bed.

I may well say that Clara and Albemare betake themselves to their beds; but I
am sure not to their rest: For grief and love so violently act their several
parts in their hearts and thoughts, as sigh they do, but sleep they cannot:
Yea their passionsand sorrows are as different as their desires; for as
Albemare now grives that he has found these letters, so does Clara that she
has lost them; and as he vows not to restore her them, so she neither dares,
and yet disdayneth to demand them of him: Yea again, which is more, as their
sorrows are different, so are their pretended consolations; at least if I may
properly and truly rearme them consolations: For as Clara, although she have
lost her Baretano's letters, does yet rejoice that she still retains the
writer and Author thereof engraven and caractered in her heart: so does
Albemare, that now fully knowing Baretano to be his rival, and who by all
probability is like to bear his mistress from him, he has (as he injustly
conceives, a just reason to be revenged, and a true occasion to fight with him:
but as Clara's comfort and consolation herein proceeds from true affection, so
does the vanity and impiety of this resolution of Albemares from hellish
malice, and devilish indignation: yea, although the night does or should bring
counsel, yet as Clara passes it over only with sighs, so does Albemare with
fumes of reveng against Baretano, vowing that he will in the morn toward
Millan, and there try his fortune, either to kill him, or to be killed of
him, in a Duel; to which end he is no sooner ready, but he acquaints the Lady
Emelia with his intended journey, but not with his resolution to fight with
Baretano, and the same he does to the Empress of his thoughts, and Queen of
his desires) Clara, demanding her if she please to command him any service for
Millan; who both blushing and paling hereat, her affection to Baretano, having
now made her expert in the subtilties of love, she well knows what wind drives
Albemare to Millan: and therefore guided by discretion, and not by passion, she
returns him this answer: That having neither reason nor desire to command him,
she only prays him to remember her humble duty to her Father and mother, and
so wishes his journey prosperous: which answer of hers (being indeed no other
than Albemare expected) he yet advances to kiss her at parting; which her
civility though not her affection granted him; not so much as once dreaming or
suspecting that he conceived the least thought or intent to fight with her
sweet Baretano, and so he takes horse, having only one servant with him.

Albemare being arrived at Saint Remie, a small Town within fifteen miles of
Millan, he resolves to dine there, which he does; and to avoid the heat of the
day, then betakes himself to sleep an hour or two; being awaked, he commands
his man to make ready his horse, and seeing the host of the house in his
chamber, inquires of him if there were any Gentelmenin the house riding for
Millan, who as soon turns him this unlooke for and unexspected answer; that
there was a brave Gentleman in the house named Signior Baretano, who was to
ride thither some two houers hence. Albemare no sooner hears the name of
Baretano, but his very heart blood flasheth up in his face, when demanding him
again what manner of ge^tleman was, he told him he was a tall slender young
Gentleman, with never a hair on his face, and out of this window quoth he, you
may now see him walking in the garden; when Albemare looking forth, sees indeed
that it was his very rival Baretano; when enquiring further of the Host what
followers he had with him, he told him that then he had none, but sometimes
when he came thither, either to take the air, or breath his horse, he was
attendedby two or three, and so the Host leaves him, not once suspecting of
any difference between them. Albemare seeing his enemy (because his rival)
brought to him, whom he formerly resolved to seek and find out, assumes a base
and a bloody resolution to set upon him in the high way disguised, and there to
ve^ his own life, to deprive him of his: which to effect he will have no eye
witnesses of this his ignoble and treacherous business; and therefore purposely
sends away his man to Millan before him, and so slipping into the town,
provides himself of a mask or visard; then takes his horse, and rather like a
thief than a Gentleman, lurkes behind a Grove (some three miles from Saint
Remy) attending Baratano's coming, who poor harmless young Gentleman,
harboring and breathing no other thoughts and wishes than charity to all the
world, and pure and fervent affection to his fare and dear Clara, likewise
takes his horse, and draws home ward toward Millan, when being arrived to the
place where Albemare secretly lay in ambush for him, he furiously and suddenly
rusheth forth, and with his Rapier drawn in his hand; runs Baretano into
his right arm, who feeling the wound almost as soon as he saw his enemy who
gave it him, he is at first as it were amazed hereat; when thinking him by his
mask to be a Bandetti, who were then very busy in Lombardy, but especially in
that Duchy of Millan, he told him that all the coin he had, which was some
ten double Pistolsin gold, and two Ducats in silver, were at his service, but
to fight in his defense he would not: Not quoth he, that he was any way a
Coward, but that he affirmed he was latly affianced and engaged to a young Lady:
so that he perfecty knew that her affection was so dear and tender toward
him, as either the loss or preservation of his life would be that of hers:
Albemare galled and touched to the quick with this his heart killing answer
to him, is wholly inflamed with choler against him, when rushing toward him,
he delivers him these words: Villain it is not thy gold but thy life which I
seek, and then strayning himself to run Baretano through, lo the string of
his Mask breaks, where Boretano apparently sees it is his Rival Albemare:
whereat such is his tender affection to his sweet and fair Clara, that he who
before turned craven, and would not fight for his own sake, is now cheerfully
resolved not only to fight, but if occasion require, to dye for hers: and so
returning the villain to Albemares throat, he instantly draws, and joins
with him: and if Albermare be resolute in fighting, no less valiant and
courageous is Baretano; for the remembrance of his Clara's sweet Idea, and
fresh delicious beauty, infuseth such life to his valor, and such generositie,
and animositie to his courage, as he deals his blows roundly, and his thrusts
freely, making Albemare know, that his Rapier is of an excelent temper, and yet
his heart of a better: And Albemare seeing he must buy his victory dearer than
he expected, and disdaining to be outbraved and beaten by a boy, pluckes up
his best spirits and courage to him, and so likewise behaves himself manfully
and valiantly: in such sort, that within less than a quarter of an hour,
Baretano has given him five wounds, and he Baretano three, when the Count of
Martingue passing that way in his Coach toward Millan, and seeing two
Gentlemen so busily fighting, he cries out to his Coachman, to gallop away
with all celeritie, and so parts them; when seeing them full of blood, sweat,
and dust, having his Chyrurgion still in his train with him, he out of an
honorable courtesy and charity, entreats and accompanies them to the next
house, where he causes their wounds to be dressed and bound up; when by their
apparel seeing them to be Millaneses, is desirous to know their quartell, and
profers his best assistance to reconcile and make them friends: but their
hearts are so great, and their malice so implacable, as they both thank the
Count for his noble courtesy, but beseech him to pardon them, in obs^ring
their names and quarrel; and yet he is so noble and generous, as he will not
so leave them, but seeing them shrewdly wounded (though not he thinks mortally)
he for their greater ease and saftie, causes two of his Gentlemen to mount
their horses, and takes them both up into his Coach with him, and so brings
them within the Gates of Millan, where after they had severally rendered him
many thanks for his Courtesy and Honor, he commends them both to their good
Fortunes, and so leaves them.

Baretano and Albemare being thus arrived at Millan, they conceal their
fighting, and so keep their chambers, till they have secured their wounds;
when Albemare visits Capello and his Lady Castiana, and reports to them the
health and duty of their daughter, as also her averseness toward him, and
withal shows her Baretano's two Letters to her, whereby it is apparent, that
she is so wholly his, as he himself is sure never to obtain or enjoy her. Her
father and mother at the first seem to hang their heads at this news, and the
perusal of the Letters; but at last bid him not despair, but be courageous,
for he and only he shall be their son in law. But Albemare considering that
for the term of at least six months, he Camelion-like had only had been
fed with the air of these their vain promises, and that he perfectly knew
that Clara only intended to marry Baretano, and none but him, his love to her
was so tender and fervent, as he cannot conceive the shadow of any hope how to
obtain her for his wife in this world, before he have sent Baretano to
another; when being constant in his resolution thereof to himself, because he
was resolute in his constancy and affection to Clara: no reason, no Religion,
not his Conscience, not his Soul, can divert him from this bloody design,
from this murtherous and therefore damnable project: Feeding therefore on
Malice, and boiling with Revenge toward Baretano, he not as a Gentleman, but
rather degenerating from the virtue and honor of that honorable degree and
quality, bethinkes himself eitherby pistol or poison, how he may
treacherously dispatch him: whereon ruminating and pondering (as malice and
revenge may perchance slumber, but difficultly sleep) the Devil who is never
absent in such hellish stratagems and occasions, gives him means, (though by a
contrary course) how to dispatch him: For on a day descending the stairs of
the Domo, he sees Pedro, and Leonardo, (two Soldiers, or rather Braves of the
Castle of Pavia) pass by him, with whom he had been formerly acquainted, but
so poorly apparelled, as weighing their bloody humors by their necessity, he
(in favor of money) thinks them very fit Agents and Instruments, to murder
and make away Baretano, to which end, to play the Practique part as well as the
Theorique, and so to reduce this his bloody contemplation into action, he sends
his man Valerio after them, and prays them to repair to him in the Cloisters
of Borromeos Palace, for that he has a business to impart them of great
importance for their profits. Valerio overtakes them, delivers them his masters
pleasure; who netled with this word Profit, they repair to the Rendeuous, and
meet Albemare; when having refreshed their acquaintance, and he sworn them to
secrecy, as he was a wretched and perfidious Gentleman, acquaints them with his
desire, some ten days hence to have them murder Seignior Baretano in the
strect by night, and to give it out, that it was done by some Spaniards of the
Viceroyes Guard, and that he will give them an hundred Duckatons in hand, and
leave them as much more with his man Valerio, which they shall receive of him,
when they have dispatched him; and for his own part, some four or five days
hence he will away for Modena, to cast the better varnish and color that he
was innocent thereof, and had no finger at all in the business.

Pedro and Leonardo seeing that Albemare proffered them gold, which they so
much wanted and desired; like two limbs of the Devils, and as a couple of
hellish Bloodhounds, not only promise, but swear to him punctually, in all
respects to perform his desires, and so they touch their first hundred
Duckatons, which being the pledge and price of innocent blood, it will assuredly
cost them dear, and draw down vengeance, ruin and confusion on their heads
from heaven, when they least think or dream thereof. Albemare having settled
this his bloody and mournful business with Pedro and Leonardo, he is again
solicited by Capello, and Castiana, to return to their daughter in Modena:
whereunto he willingly consehteth; when armed with their Letters to her,
wherein they charge her on their commands and blessing, to dispose her self to
affect and many him, he within foam days departs: But having secretly
revealed his fight with Baretano to some of Capello his chiefest and most
confident servants, they yet love and honor their young Lady Clara so well in
her absence, as they send her the true relation and intelligence thereof, which
is at Modena a little before Albemare, the which being unknown to him, he is
no sooner arrived there, but he salutes first the Aunt Emelia, than her Niece
and his Mistress Clara: to whom having delivered her Parents Letters, she
stepping aside to the window, reads them; and so returning to him again,
gives him this sharp and bitter welcome: My father and mother command me to
love thee; but how can I, since upon the highway, thou basely and treacherously
attemptedst to kill my dear Baretano, whom I love a thousand times dearer than
the whole world? when with tears in her eyes, and choler in her looks, she
very suddenly and passionatly ^ings from him, whereat Emelia wondreth, and he
both storms and grieves; and so they betake themselves to their chambers,
where Albemare throwing himself on his bed, says thus to himself* Unkind and
cruel Clara, if thou take my fighting with Baretano thus tenderly, how will thou brook the news of his death? On the other side, Clara grieves as much at
her Baretano's wounds, as she rejoices at his safety and recovery; yea, so
tender is her affection to him, as she a thousand times wishes, that the blood
he lost, had streamed from her own heart. Again, knowing his wounds free from
danger, she cannot but smile, and delight to see his dear and true affection
to her, in remembering that he would not fight for his own sake, and yet was
ready, yea and valiantly hazarded to loose his life for hers; and in these
amourous conceits and contemplations she pensively drives away the time,
admiring and wondering that all this while she hears not from her Baretano: But
alas, alas! she shall hear too too soon of him, though indeed never more from
him: for these execrable wretches, Pedro and Leonardo, some four days after
Albemares departure to Modena, they according to their promise and oath given
him, like two most bloody and butcherly villains, cruelly assault and murder
this harmless and innocent young Gentleman Baretano, in the streets of Millan
be night, with no less than seven several wounds, whereof four were clean
through his body; and so gives it out (as it was formerly concluded) that he was
murdered by some Spaniards of the Vice-royes Guard: when the same night, they
repair to Valerio, acquaint him therewith, receive their other hundred
Duckatons, and so provide for their safety in the city but that bloody money,
and this cruel murder, will in the end cost them dearer, than either they
imagine, or dream of.

Whiles Millan ratleth with the news of Baretano's bloody and untimely end, as
his own friends infinitely lament and grieve, so Capello and his wife Castiana
cannot refrain from rejoying the reat, as now assuring themselves that
Albemare shall shortly be their son in law: and for Valerio, he with all
possible speed writes away thereof to Modena, to his Master, who entertaines
this news with infinite joy, and delectation, and presently acquaints the Lady
Emelia there with; whereat she rejoices, and he triumphs but they (...)
resolve as yet to conc^le it from Clara, because they know she will even
dissolve and melt into tears thereat. But four days after are not fully
expired, but her father and mother advertise their daughter Clara, their sister
Emelia, and Albemare thereof, by a Gentleman, a servant of theirs, whom they
purposely send to Modena, to bring back Clara, and Albemare to Millan. But it
is for none but Lovers, to conceive or judge, with what extreme excess of
grief and immoderate sorrow our poor Clara understands this heart-piercing
news of her Baretano's mournful and sorrowful death: for she is no sooner
advertised thereof, but she throws off her attire, tears her hair, and twice
following falls to the ground, in a swound, so as Emelia, Albemare, Adriana,
and her fathers Gentleman can hardly referch and keep life in her: but being
come again to her senses, and self; and faintly opening her cloudy eyes to
the beams of the Sun, who enamoured of her beauty (as well in pity as love)
came to comfort and revive her: she wringing her hands, then crossing her
arms, and lastly, looking up toward Heaven, betwixt sighing and speaking,
breaths forth these mournful, passionate, and affectionate speeches:

O my Baretano, my sweet and dear Barenano, and shall thy wretched Clara live
thou being dead? when the violence of her affection and sorrow making her
forget her self, and her God, she secretly unsheathes her knife, and then and
there would have stabbed her self to death, had not Albemare and her Aunt
Emelia speedily stepped to her assistance, and prevented her, by wresting it from
her; when conducting her to the Garden; to take the air, she prays Albemare
to leave her, and in his abscence often again repeating the name of her dear
Baretano, she a thousand times wishes that her life had ransomed his, vowing
that although she were a woman, yet if she knew his murderers, she would fly
to their eyes, and tear out their hearts, in mere revenge of this inhumane
and cruel death: when her sorrows are so infinite, and her grief so
unsupportable, as she cannot long remain in one place, but withdrawes herself
from the garden to her chamber, whither her Aunt Emelia carefully accompanies
her, lies with her that night to comfort her, who poor afflicted young Lady,
neither can nor will be comforted: so as the next morning, had not her Aunt
powerfully prevented and stopped her, she had then undoubtedly entered the
Nunnery of her own name, Saint Clara, and in that retired and obscure life
there ended her days in Modena; resolving in true affection and zeal to her
dead Baretano, never thenceforth either to see her parents, or Millan: but
being diverted and comforted by some Divines, and many Ladies of that City,
she brooking her sorrows as patiently as she may, (with much solicitation)
after ten days, permits herself to be conveyed home to Millan, where although
she were very cheerfully received, and joyfully entertained of her father and
mother, yet she likewise went near to have their mewed her self up a
spiritual sister in the Nunnery of the Annunciation; but that again she was
prevented; whereat grieving, she yet takes on mourning attire, and vows to
wear it a whole year for his sake: when to make her self (as she was) both a
true Lover, and a true mourner to the memory of her dead Baretano, she
oftentimes steals into Saint Euphemias Church, where he was buried, and there
bedewes his tomb with tears, living so pensively, and disconsolately, that
although she live in the world, yet it seems she neither is, nor long will
be of the world.

But as women are but women, and as a Time is a sovereign remedy for all
diseases and sorrows; so about some ten months after, the incessant
importunity of her father and mother, and the continual tender respect and
observant courtesy of Albemare toward her, make her somewhat neglect and
forget the memory of Baretano, and now to look on him with a more pleasing and
favorable eye than before. But here (again) a consideration makes her
afection die toward Albemare, almost as soon as it begins to live: For why
(quoth she) should she affect or love him, who at Saint Remy gave her Baretano
three several wounds? But then Love again steps in, and thus pleads with her
for Albemare: That he received five wounds, and gave Baretano but three, which
made him lose far more blood than Baretano: and yet that this attempt of his
was only occasioned through his affection to her, and only for her sake, as
loving her dearer than his own life; which again gave her thoughts such
satisfaction, as weighed down and vanquished, as well by the power and prayers
of her parents, as also by the endless sighs, letters, and presents of
Albemare: the year is no sooner expired, and her mourning weeds and attire
done away, but to their own hearts content, and the unspeakable joy of their
parents, they in Millan (with great pomp and bravery) are very solemnly
married. But this marriage of theirs shall not prove so prosperous as they
expect and hope: For God in his all-seeing Providence, has decreed to disturb
the tranquillity and serenity thereof, and to make them feel the sharp and
bitter showers of affliction and misery, which briefly does thus surprise and
befall them.

Albemare and Clara have hardly been married together a year and quarter, but
his hot love begins to wax cold and frozen to her; yea, albeit she affected him
truly and tenderly, yet he continually neglecting her, and no longer
delighting in the sweetness of her youth, and the freshness of her beauty,
his lustful eyes and thoughts carry his lascivious self abroad among
Curtezans, when they should be fixed on her, and resident at home with his
chaste and fair Lady: so as his infidelity proving her grief and torments,
and his vanity and ingratitude her unspeakable affliction and vexation; she
with infinite sighs and tears repents her matching him, and a thousand times
wishes she had been so happy and blessed to have died Baretano's Martyr, and
not so unfortunate and accursed to live to see her self Albemares wife: and
yet were there any hope of his reformation, she could then prefixbounds to her
calamities and sorrows: But seeing that his vices grew with his age, and that
every day he became more vicious and unkind to her than other, her hopes are
now wholly turned into despair, her mirth into mourning; yea, her inward
discontents so apparently bewray themselves, in her outward sorrowful
complexion and countenance, that the Roses of her cheeks are metamorphosed
into Lillies, and her heart so wholly taken up with anguish, and surprised with
sorrow, as she wishes that her bed were her grave, and her self in Heaven
with God; because she could find no comfort here on Earth with her husband:
But beyond her expectation, God is providing to redress her grief, and to
remedy her afflictions by a very strange and unlooked for accident.

The Providence and Justice of God does now again refetch bloody Pedro, to act
another part upon the Stage and Theater of this History: For having spent that
money lewdly, which he before got damnably of Albemare, his wants are so great,
and his necessity so urgent, as having played the murderer before, he makes
no conscience nor scruple now to play the thief, and so by night breaks into a
Jewellers shops, named Seignior Fiamata, dwelling in the great place before the
Domo, and there carries away from him a small Trunk or Casket, wherein were
some uncut Saphyrs and Emralds, with some Venice Crystal pendants for Ladies
to wear in their ears, and other rich commodities: but Fiamata lying over his
shop, and hearing it, and locking his door to him for fear of having his
throat cut, gives the outcry and alarm forth the window, which ringing in the
streets, makes some of the neighbors, and also the watch approach and
assemble; where finding Pedro running with a Casket under his arm, he is
presently hemb'd in, apprehended and imprisoned, and the Casket took from him,
and again restored to Fiamata; when knowing that he shall die for this
robbery, as a just punishment and judgment of God, now sent him for formerly
murdering of Baretano, he having no other hope to escape death, but by the
means of Albemare, he sends early the next morning for his man Valerio, to
come to the prison to him, whom he bids to tell his Master Albemare from him,
that being sure to be condemned for this robbery of his, if he procure him not
his pardon, he will not charge his soul any longer with the murder of
Baretano, but will on the ladder reveal, how it was he who hired himself and
Leonardo to perform it; Valerio reporting this to his Master, it affrights his
thoughts, and terrifies his conscience and courage, to see himself reduced to
this misery, that no less than his life must now stand to the mercy of this
wretched Varlet Pedro's tongue. But knowing it impossible to obtain a pardon
for him, and therefore high time to provide for his own safety, by stopping of
Pedro's mouth; he resolves to heave Ossa upon Pelon, or to add murder to
murder, and now to poison him in prison, whom he had formerly caused to
murder Baretano in the street, to the end he might tell no tales on the
ladder, thinking it no ingratitude or sin, but rather a just reward and
recompense for his former bloody service; so to feed Pedro with false hopes,
thereby to charm his tongue to silence, and to lull his malice asleep, he
speedily returns Valerio to prison to him, who bids him fear nothing, for
that his master had vowed to get him his pardon, as he shall more effectually
hear from him that night; whereat Pedro rejoices and triumphs, telling
Valerio that his Master Albemare is the most generous and bravest Cavalier of
Lombardy. But to nip his joys in their untimely blossoms, and to disturb the
harmony of his false content, that very day as soon as he has dined, he is
tried and arraigned before his Judges; and being apparently convicted and found
guilty of this robbery, he is by them adjudged to be hanged the next morn, at
a Gibbet purposely to be erected before Fiamata's house, where he committed his
delict and crime: which just sentence not only makes his joy strike sail to
sorrow, but also his pride and hopes let fall their Peacocks plumes to humility
and fear: But his only trust and comfort, yea, his last hopes and refuge is
in Albemare, who hearing him to be condemned to be executed the next morning;
he is enforced to play his bloody prize that night, and so in the evening sends
Valerio to prison to him, with a Capon, and two Fiascoes (or bottles) of Wine,
for him to make merry, informing him that he has obtained his pardon, and that
it is written, and wants nothing but the Viceroyes sign to it, which he shall
have to morrow at break of day. But the wine of the one of the bottles was
intermixed with strong and deadly poison, which was so cunningly tempered, as
it carried no distastefull, but a pleasing relish to the palate; Valerio like
an execrable villain, proving as true a servant to his Master, as a rebellious
and false one to his God, he punctially performs this fearful and mournful
business; and having made Pedro twice drunk, first with his good news, and
then with his poisoned wine, he takes leave of him that night, and committing
him to his rest, promises to be with him very early in the morning with his
pardon. When this miserable and beastly profane wretch, never thinking of his
danger, or death; of God or his soul; of Heaven or Hell, betakes himself to
his bed, where the poison spreading ore his vitals parts, soon bereave him of
his breath, sending his soul from this life and world to another.

Now the next morning very early as the Jailer came to his chamber, to bid him
prepare to his execution, he finds him dead and cold in his bed; and thus was
the miserable end of this bloody and inhumane murderer (and thief) Pedro: who
yet for example sake was one whole day hanged by the heels in his shirt, at
his appointed place of execution, because his Judges deemed that he had cruelly
poisoned and made away himself. And now does Albemare again rejoice and
triumph to see he has avoided that dangerous shelfe and rock whereon he was
very likely to have suffered shipwreck, yea, and now he thinks himself so
absolutely safe and secure, as he holds it impossible, that either his
murdering of Baretano, or his poisoning of Pedro can any way reflect on him,
or henceforth produce him any further storms or tempests: but his hopes and
joys will deceive him, for God, who is the infallible revenger of innocent
blood, will not so leave him, but ere long, when he least thinks or dreams
thereof, not only in his providence detect these his foul crimes, but in his
justice severely punish them, and the Readers curiosity shall not go far to
see it; for as to a guilty conscience, it is the pleasure of the Lord, that one
misery befall him in the neck and nicke of the other, so Albemare is no sooner
freed of Pedro in Millan, but behold he is afresh entangled and assaulted with
Leonardo (his other hired murderer) in Pavia, who having there prodigally
rioted away his hundred Duckatons, and also run himself far in debt; his
Creditors join together, and so clap him prisoner, where having no other hope
for his freedom and liberty, but to rely on Albemare, he writes him a Letter
to Millan, wherein he acquaints him with his poverty and misery, and prays
him (for the obtaining of his liberty) either to lend or give him fifty
Duckatons: Albemare receives this Letter, but forgetting his former service; as
also thinking it only a fetch of Leonardo, to fetch him over for so many
Duckatons, as God would have it, he very inconsiderately burns this his
Letter, and answers it with silence: but he shall repent it when it will be
too late, and out of his power to remedy this his ingratitude and indiscretion.

Leonardo having at least fifteen days expected an answer from Albemare, and
receiving none, he is extremely incensed and enraged to see himself thus
slighted and forgotten of him, when exasperated by his misery, and animated by
his extreme poverty and indigence, in that he is now enforced to sell away
his apparel, and so to uncloth his back, thereby to feed his belly, he
intends no more to request and pray him, but now resolves to touch him to the
quick, the which he does in these few lines which he sends him to Millan by a
messenger of purpose.

LEONARDO to ALBEMARE.
IF my first letter prevailed not with thee for the loan or gift of fifty
Ducatons, to free me from this my miserable imprisonment, I make no doubt but
this my second will, for being a soldier, I give thee to understand, that I
hold it far more generous to hang than starve; since as a halter is only the
beginning of my friends sorrows; so it will likewise be the end of my own
miseries: yea, if thou speedily furnish and accomplish not my request, although
it cost me my life, I will no longer conceal how thou did hire Pedro and
my self for two hundred Duckatons to give Signior Baretano his death, which at
thy request we performed: Think then how near my secrecy concerns thy
life, since when I suffer death, I know thou have but a short and poor time
left thee to survive me: Therefore thank thy self if thy ingratitude turn
my affection into contempt, and that into revenge and malice.

LEONARDO.


Now although Leonardo mean not as he write, yet this his messenger coming
to Millan, and not finding Albemare at his house, he knows not (and is
resolute) what to do, either to stay his coming in, or to deliver his Letter
to some of his servants: But waiting at his door till late in the evening, and
hearing no news of him, he gives it to Valerio, and (without telling him from
whom, or whence it came) prays him safely to deliver it to his Master, and
that he will repair thither the next morning for an answer. Valerio claps the
Letter into his pocket, awayting his Masters coming: but he is so bad a
husband to himself, and so disloyal, and unkind a one to his chaste and
fair wife, as he was out all night with his Curtizans, which good and
virtuous Lady, even pierces her heart with grief and sorrow. Now Valerio
seeing his Master absent, his coming uncertain, and himself enforced to go
forth about his affairs, he places the Letter upon a Cupboard near his
Masters study, that it might be apparent to his eye when he came in, and so
departs.

But here the mercy and providence of God invites the Christian Reader, to
admire and wonder at the strange discovery and detection of this Letter: for as
Albemare (more for sport than charity) kept a man-foole of some forty years
old in his house, who indeed was so naturally peevish, as not Millan, hardly
Italy could match him for simplicity. It so chanced, that this harmless fool
gate into the room after Valerio, and saw him put up this Letter on the
Cupboard: Now, as Children and Fools may in some sort be termed Cousin
German to Apes, so as soon as Valerio was departed, this fool (no doubt led
wholly by the direction and finger of God, rather than by his own proper
ignorance and simplicity) gets into the chamber, and taking a stool to ascend
the Cupboard, he brings away the Letter, which both in the Hall and yard he
tosses and dandles in his hand, as if this new found play gave delight and
content to his extravagant and simple thoughts: when, behold our sweet and
virtuous Clara coming from Saint Ambrose Church, where she had been to here
Vespres, and seeing a fair Letter fast sealed in the fools hand, she
enquires of him from whence he had it? who singing and hopping, and still
playing with the Letter, she could get no other answer from him, but That it
was his Letter, and that God had sent it him, that God had sent it him: which
speeches of his he often redoubled. When Clara weighing his words, and
considering out of whose mouth they came, her heart instantly began to grow,
and her color to rise, as if God and her soul prompted her, that she had
some interest in that Letter: whereupon snatching it from the fool, whom she
left crying in the Hall for the loss thereof: she seeing it directed to her
Husband, goes to the Parlor, attended by Adriana, and there sitting down in a
chair, and breaking up the seals thereof, she begins to read it; but when
she draws toward the conclusion thereof, and finds that it was her husband
Albemare's who had caused her dear Lover and Friend Baretano to be murdered:
then not able to contain her self for sorrow, she throws her self on the
floor, and weeps and sighs so mournfully, as the most obduratest and
flintiest heart could not choose but relent into pity to see her: for sometimes
she looked up to heaven, and then again dejecting her eyes to earth, now
wringing her hands, and then crossing her arms, in such disconsolate and
afflicted manner, as Adriana could not likewise refrain from tears to behold
her: when after a deep and profound silence, she bandying and evaporating many
volleyes of far fetched sighs into the air, she commanding Adriana forth,
the door shut, with the two extremities of passion and sorrow, she alone
utters these mournful speeches to her self.

And shall Clara live to understand, that her Baretano was murdered for her
sake, and by her unfortunate husband Albemare? and shall she any more lie in
bed with him, who so inhumanely has layen him in his untimely and bloody
grave? And Clara, Clara, will thou prove so ungrateful to his memory, and to
the tender affection he bore thee, as not to lament, not to seek to revenge
this his diastrous and cruel end? when again, her tears interrupting her
words, and her sighs her tears; she entering into a further consultation with
her thoughts and conscience, her heart and her soul at last cotinues her
speech in this manner: O, but unfortunate and wretched Clara, what speak
thou of revenge? for consider with thy self, yea forget not to consider,
Baretano was but thy friend, Albemare is thy husband; the first loved thee in
hope to marry thee, but thou art married to the second, and therefore thou must
love him; and although his ingratitude and infidelity toward thee, make him
unworthy of thy affection; yet ye two are but one flesh, and therefore
consider, that malice is a bad advocate, and revenge a worse Judge: But here
again remembering what a foul and odious crime murder was in the sight of the
Lord, that the discovery thereof infinitely tended to his glory and honor, and
that the poor Fool was doubtless inspired from heaven, to affirm that God
sent the Letter: she knows that her bonds of conscience to her Savior, must
exceed and give a law to those of her duty toward her husband; and therefore
preferring Heaven before Earth, and God before her Husband, she immediately
calls for her Coach, and goes directly to Baretano's Uncle, Seignior Giovan de
Montefiore, and with sighs and tears shows him the letter, who formerly,
though in vain, had most curiously and exactly hunted to discover the
murderers of his Nephew. Montefiore first reads the letter with tears, then
with joy; and then turning toward ^he Lady Clara, he commends her zeal and
Christian fortitude toward God, in showing her how much the discovery of this
murder tended to his glory, and so presently sends away for the President
Criminell; who immediately repairing thither, he acquaints him therewith,
shows him the Letter, and prays him to examine the Lady Clara thereon; which
with much modesty and equity he does, and then return, with her to her house,
and there likewise examineth the Fool where he had the Letter: who out of his
incivilitie and simplicity, takes the President by the hand, and bringing him
to the Cupboard, tells him, Here God sent the Letter, and here I found him: when
Valerio being present, and imagining by his Ladies heavy and sorrowful
countenance, that this Letter had perhaps brought her into some affliction and
danger, he looking on the direction of the Letter, as also on the Seal, he
reveals both to the President and his Lady, that he received that Letter from
one whom he knew not, and that he left it purposely on the Cupboard for his
Master, against his coming. The President being fully satisfied herein,
admires at Gods providence, revealed in the simplicity of this poor harmless
Fool, in bringing this Letter, which brought the murder of Baret^ to light,
(when knowing the God does many times raise up the foolish and weak, to
confound the wise and mighty things of the world) he presently gr^ out a
Commission to apprehend ^lbemare who being then found in bed with M^ina, one of
the most famous. Beauties, and reputed Curtezans of Millan: He, both
astonished and amazed by the just judgments of God, is drawn from his beastly
pleasures and adulteries, to prison: where being charged to have hired Pedro
and (...) to have (...) thered Baretano, he stoutly denies it. But Leonardo's
Letter being read him* (...) the^ adjudged to the Rack, his Soul and
Conscience ringing him any (...) of terror, ^ee there at large (...) it: when
for this (...) and bloody fact of his, he the same afternoon is condemned to
be hanged the next morning, at the common place of Execution, which
administreth matter of talk, and admiration throwout all Millan; when
Sergeants are likewise sent away to Pavia, to bring Leonardo to Millan, who not
so much as once dreamt or thought that ever this his letter would have produced
him this danger and misery.

And now Albemare advertised of the manner how this letter of Leonardo was
brought to light, (without looking up to Heaven from whence this vengeance
justly befell him for his sins) he curses the cruelty of his wife, the
simplicity of the fool, but most bitterly exclaimeth against the remissness
and carelessness of his servant Valerio, in not retaining and keeping that
letter, which is the only cause of his death: yea, he is so far transported
with choler against him, as although he have but a few hours to live, yet he
vows he will assuredly cry quittance with him ere he die.

Now the charity of his Judges send him Divines that night in prison, to
prepare and clear his conscience, and to confirm and fortify his soul
against the morn, in his last conflict with the world, and her flight and
transmigration to heaven; who powerfully and religiously admonishing him, that
if he have committed any other notorious offense or crime, he should now do
well to reveal it: He likewise there and then confesses, how he had caused
his man Valerio to poison Pedro with wine in prison, the verynight before he
was executed: whereupon this bloody and execrable wretch (according to his
hellish deserts) is likewise apprehended and imprisoned.

And now Gods mercy and justice brings this unfortunate (because irreligious)
Gentleman Albemare, to receive condign punishment for those his two horrible
murders, which he had caused to be committed on the persons of Baretano and
Pedro, who ascending the ladder in presence of a world of spectators, who
flocked from all parts of the City to see him take his last farewell of the
world: The sight and remembrance of his foul crimes, having now made him not
only sorrowful, but repentant, he briefly delivered these few words.

He confessed that he had hired Pedro and Leonardo to kill Baretano in the
street, and seduced his servant Valerio to poison Pedro in prison; whereof with
much grief and contrition he heartily repented himself, and besought the Lord
to forgive it him: he likewise besought Leonardo and Valerio to forgive him, in
respect he knew he was the cause of their deaths; because he was sure they
should not long survive him. He likewise forgave his fool, as being assured,
that it was not he in the Letter, but God in him that had revealed the Letter
for his just punishment and confusion. And lastly, he with many tears forgave
his wife and Lady Clara, whom he affirmed from his heart, was by far too
virtuous for so dissolute and vilde a husband as himself. He blamed himself
for neglecting to love her, and cursed his Queans and Curtizans, as being the
chief cause of all his miseries, when requesting all that were present to pray
for his soul, he was turned off.

But his Judges seeing that he had added murder to murder, they held it
Justice to add punishment to his punishment; and so he is no sooner cut down,
but they cause his body to be burnt, and his ashes to be thrown into the air,
which is accordingly performed.

Now because the Lord in his Justice will punish as well the Agents, as the
Authors of murder: whiles Albemare is acting the last Scene and Catastrophe of
his Tragedy. His wretched hireling Leonardo, and his execrable servant Valerio
are likewise a^ed, found guilty, and condemned to be hanged for their several
murders o^ (...) and ^ro; and so the very same afternoon they are brought to
their Executioners, where Leonardo his former life and profession having made
him know better how to sin than repent; he out of a souldier-like bravery,
(or rather vanity) thinks rather to terrify death, than that death should
terrify him; he begging pardon for his sins in general of God and the
world, and then bidding the hangman do his office, he takes his last adieu of
the world.

When immediately Valerio ascends the ladder, who having repentance in his
heart, and grief and sorrow in his looks; as near as could be observed and
gathered, spoke these words:

That being poor both in friends and means, the only hope of preferment under
his master, made him at his request to poison Pedro in prison; That many times
since he has heartily grieved for it, and now from his very soul repents
himself of it, and beseeching the Lord to forgive it him, That he was as
guilty of this murder, as innocent of Baretano's; yea, or of the knowledge
thereof, before his Master was imprisoned for the same, and that as this was
his first Capital crime, so since he must nowdie, he rejoiced it was his last,
and so praying all servants to beware by his miserable example, not to be
seduced to commit murder, either by their masters or the devil; and
beseeching all that were present to pray for his soul, he resigning and
commending it into the hands of his Redeemer, was likewise turned off.

And these were the miserable (yet deserved ends) of these bloody murderers;
and thus did Gods justice and revenge triumph over their crimes, and
themselves, by heaping and reigning down confusion on their heads from heaven,
when the devil (falsely) made them believe they sat secure; yea, when they
least dreamt thereof on earth: Oh that the sight and remembrance of their
punishments may restrain and deter us from conspiring and committing the
like crimes! so shall we live fortunate, and die happy; whereas they died
miserably, because they lived impiously and profanely.

And here fully to conclude and shut up this History, and therein as I think
to give some satisfaction to the curiosity of the Reader, who may perchance
desire to know what became after of the fair and virtuous Clara. Why her
sorrows were so infinite, and her quality and Nature so sorrowful, as being
weary of the world, and as it were weighed down with the incessant vanities,
crosses and afflictions thereof: she (notwithstanding the power and persuasions
of her parents) assumes her former resolution, to retire and sequester her
self from conversing with the world, and so enters into the Nunnery of the
Annuntiation (so famous in Millan) where for ought I know, or can since
understand to the contrary, she yet lives a pensive and solitary sister.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XIII.
La Vasselay poysoneth her waiting maid Gratiana, because she is jealous that
her husband De Merson is dishonest with her; whereupon he lives from her: In
revenge whereof she causes his man La Villete to murder him in a Wood, and
then marries him in requital. The said La Villete a year after riding through
the same Wood, his horse falls with him, and almost kills him, when he confesses
the murder of his master De Merson, and accuses his wife La Vasselay to be
the cause thereof: So for these their bloody crimes, he is hanged, and she
burnt alive.

HOw falsely, nay, how impiously do we term our selves Christians, when
under that glorious and sanctified Title, we seek to profane and deface the
glory of Christ, in cruelly murdering our brethren his members; effects, not
of Zeal, but of Rage; not of Piety, but of Madness, invented by the Devil,
and perpetrated by none but by his Agents, lamentable effects; yea, I say,
bloody and infernal crimes, which still ruin those who contrive, and confound
those who finish them: For let us but look from Earth to Heaven, from Satan to
God, from Nature to Grace, and from our Hearts to our Souls, and we shall
assuredly find it very difficult for us to define, whether Charity be a
sweeter Virtue, or Malice a fouler Vice; whether that be more secure, or this
pernicious, fatal, and dangerous; whether that be a more apparent testimony of
Gods saving Grace toward us, or this of our own inevitable perdition and
reprobation. And as it is an odious sin, and displeasing sacrifice in the
sight of God, for a stranger to kill another: O then how much more execrable
and diabolical must it be, for a Gentlewoman to poison her Waiting-maid, and
for a servant to pistol his master to death, at the instigation of the same
Gentlewoman his wife: for murders, no less ungrateful and cruel, does this
subsequent History report and relate: wherein we shall see, that God in the
Triumphs of his revenging Justice, and out of his sacred and secret providence,
has in all points made their punishments as sharp and severe, as their crimes
were bloody and deplorable: May we then read it to Gods glory, and our own
consolation, which we shall assuredly perform, if we hate the like crimes in
others, and detest them in our selves.

IN the fair and pleasant City of Man's, (being the chief and Capital of the
Province of Maine in France, in the very latter years that the Marshall of
Boys-Daulphin was Governor thereof, under the present King Jews XIII. his
master) there dwelt a Gentlewoman, (aged of threescore and three years) termed
La Vasselay, being well descended, and left very rich, (as well in lands as
movables) by her late deceased husband Monsier Froyset, who was slain in the
behalf of the Queen Mother, in the defense of Pont de Sey, assaulted and
taken by the King her son. Now although this old widow La Vasselay (in
respect of her Age) was far more fit to seek God in the Church, than a new
Husband in her bed; yet she is weary of a single life, although it be not
fully six months since she has buried her second husband; (for the Reader
must understand, she had formerly buried her first at least five and twenty
years before, and is now again resolved to take a third) and albeit she knew
that the civility of the widows in France was such, that they seldom marry,
but almost never within the term of a whole year; yet her conceit and fancy
thinks it not only lawful, but fit to break this too austere custom; and
therefore she peremptorily resolves to live a wife, and not to die a widow.
But this resolution of hers, were she either in the Summer or the Autumn of
her years, had been as excusable and praiseworthy, as now it savoured of
undecencie and inconstancy, since she was in the Winter thereof: For Age
despite of her Youth, and youthful desires, had thrown snow on her head, and
new dyed the color of her hair from black to white; yea, she was so far
from retaining any signs or relics of an indifferent beauty, as the furrows
of her face could not justly show any ruins or demolitions thereof; and yet
(forsooth) she will marry again. Now her Birth and wealth, rather than her
Virtues and personage, invite many old Widdowers, and some rich Gentlemen and
Counselors of the famous Presidiall Court of that City to seek her in
marriage; and indeed both for lands and money, none her inferiors, but all at
least her equals, and some her betters: But in vain, for the vanity of her
thought suggest her, that either she is too young for them, or they too old
for her, and therefore she will have none of them: yea, her lust seems so
youthfully to give a law to her age, and the lie to her years, as she casts
off her mourning attire, decks her self up in gay apparel, powders her hair,
paints her face, with a resolution (forsooth) to have no old Dotard, but a
young Gallant to her husband, as if therein she wholly placed, not only her
content, but her felicity: But we many times see such irregular desires, and
such incontinent designs, met with unexpected misery, and unthought of
repentance.

Now during the time that the vain carriage and deportment of this old
Gentlewoman and widow La Vasselay, made her self the laughter and byword of
all Man's; home comes a young Gentleman of this Country of Maine, termed
Monsier De Merson, from his travel in Italy, whose father dwelt betwixt La
Vall, and Gravelle, termed Monsier De Manfrelle, being a Gentleman well
descended, and rich, and to whom De Merson was second son, who in a years
absence in Italy, being purposely sent thither by his father, to enrich his
experience and capacity, (which is the true essence and glory of a traveller,
thereby to be the more capable to serve his Prince and Country, as also to be
a comfort to his age, and a second prop to his house and lineage) he had made
such poor and unprofitable use of his travels, as forgetting the obtaining of
the language, and all generous exercises, perfections, and qualities, (so
requisite and graceful in Gentlemen) he delighted in nothing so much, nay, in
nothing else, but to pass his time with Curtisans and strumpets, especially in
Venice, Rome, and Naples, where for their sakes, and his lascivious pleasures,
he built up the greatest part of his Residence; where he so prodigally spent
and exceeded his fathers exhibition, as he returns into France, not laden
with Virtues and Experience, but with Vices and Debts; being otherwise ignorant
in all things which he should know, and knowing nothing but that wherein he
should be ignorant. Only to the end he might thereby set the better
counterfeit tincture on himself, and false luster on his Endowments and
Proficiencie, he superficially brought away, or rather borrowed some Italian
Phrases and complements, which he thought would not only pass current with
the Gentlemen and Ladies of France, but also draw them into admiration, as well
of himself as them: When immediately upon his arrival, that he might the
better see and make himself seen of the world, he flaunts it out in brave
apparel, both in L'avall, Angiers, and Man's; Yea, there is scarce any great
feast or marriage in all those parts, but if he be not invited, yet he
purposely invites himself thereat, thereby to make himself the more
conspicuous and apparent to the eyes of the world, especially of the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, in whose acquaintance and favor he not only endeavors to
initiate, but strives to ingraft himself: But his old father Manfrelle
judiciously observing the vain behavior, and light deportment and carriage of
this his son, he exceedingly grieves thereat, because he had well hoped, that
his travels would have returned him as capable and discreet, as now he finds
him ignorant, and which is worse, debosh'd; since he well knew that either of
these two vices was enough sufficient and powerful, not only to ruin his
reputation, but his fortunes.

Again, to add more sorrows to his grief, and more discontent to his
sorrows, for the vanity and levity of this his son, every week, nay, almost
every day, brings him in new bills of his debts; a third falling in upon the
neck of first and second, and a fourth on the third; which being greater than
his estate, or at least his pleasure would permit him to pay, he takes his
son De Merson aside, and very sharply checks him for his old and new
prodigalities; vows that he will neither sell nor morgage his lands to
discharge his foolish debts; and therefore he bids him look to satisfy them,
for that he is resolved not to see, much less to speak with any of his
Creditors, how great or small soever the sums be he owes them. This cooling
card of Manfrelles makes his son De Merson, not only bite his lips for
sorrow, but hang his head for anger and vexation, yea, his folly does so
eclipse and overvaile his judgment herein, as in stead of making good use
hereof, he takes a contrary resolution, and so resolves to embrace and follow
the worst: for whereas he should have made his pride and prodigality strike
sail, and now rather seek to reintegrate himself into his fathers favors,
than any way futurely attempt to incense or exasperate him against him, he
only taking counsel of his Youth, Passions, and Choler, (which as false and
treacherous guides, most commonly lead us to misery and repentance:) again
precipitates and ingulphs himself afresh in new debts, both with his Usurer,
Mercer, and Tailor: and no longer able to digest his fathers checks and
frowns, he very inconsiderately and ra^ly packs up his baggage, leaves his
house, rides to Man's, and there resolves to pass his time that Winter: partly
hoping that his father will discharge his debts in his absence, but more
especially to become acquainted with the beauties of that City, thereby to
obtain some rich young heir, or old widow for his wife, whose estate and
wealth might support his pride, and maintain his excessive prodigality and
voluptuousness: and indeed although the two former of these his hopes deceive
him; yet he shall shortly find and see, that the third and last will not.

Living thus in Man's, the bravery of his apparel and equipage, the freeness
of his expenses, his comely talk, personage, black beard, and sanguine
complexion, makes him as soon acquainted and affected, as known of many
Ladies and Gentlewomen, and far the more, because they know his father De
Manfrelle, to be a very ancient and rich Gentleman of that Country of Maine,
and although he is not his heir, yet in regard he is his second son, as
also a Traveller, he was the more honored and respected of all those he
frequented: so that the very fame and name of Monsier de Merson began to be
already divulged and known in the City; yea, and because he was a great
Balladine, or Dancer, there was no solemn assembly, either public or private,
but still De Merson made one; and there was not a reputed beauty, or supposed
courteous Lady in Man's, or thereabouts, but such was his vanity, as he soon
wrought and insinuated himself into her acquaintance and familiarity, the
which he made not only his delight, but his glory. And although that in a
small time, the wiser sort of the Gentlemen and Ladies of the City found his
wit and experience to come infinitely short of his brave apparel; yet the more
illiterate and ignorant of them, (who esteem all men by their luster, not by
their brave worth) as preferring gay apparel, and the comeliness of the body,
before the exquisite endowments and perfections of the mind; they hold him in
so high a repute and esteem, as they think him to be the most absolute
Gallant, not only of Man's, but of all the Country of Maine; so easy it is to
captivate the conceits and judgments of those who only build their judgments
in their conceits, and not their conceits in judgment.

And of this rank and number was our old widow La Vasselay, who having many
times heard of De Mersons fame, and comely personage, and seen him once at a
Sermon, and twice at two several Nuptial feasts, where his skill and agility
proved him to be one of the prime dancers, she is so far in love with him, as
in her thoughts and heart, she wishes she had given half her estate, and
dowry, conditionally that she were his wife, and he her husband; yea, she is
so ravished with the comeliness of his feature, and the sweetness of his
complexion and countenance, as all the world is not half so dear to her as De
Merson, nor any man whatsoever by many thousand degrees, so delicious to her
eye, and pleasing to her heart and soul, as himself. And although she be in
the frozen Zone of her age, yet her intemperate lust makes her desires so
youthfully intemperate, as forgetting reason and modestle, (that the best
virtue of our soul, and this the chiefest ornament of our body) she a thousand
times wishes, that either De Merson were impalled in her arms, or she
incloystred in his.

But doting (yea I may well near truly say) dying old Gentlewoman, is this a
time for thee to think of a young husband, when one of thy old feet is as it
were in thy grave (...) being in thy (...) year of threescore and three, art
thou yet so fraughted with levity, and exempt of continency, as thou will needs
seek to marry one of five and twenty? Foolish La Vasselay, if it be not now
time, yea high time for thee to sacrifice thy desires to continency, when will
it be, if ever be? Did thou resolve to wed a husband near of thine own age,
and so to end the remainder of thy days with him in chaste and holy wedlock,
that resolution of thine were as excusable, as this in desiring so young a one,
is worthy, not only of blame, but of reprehension, and I may say of pity.
Consider, consider with thy self, what a preposterous attempt and enterprise
is this of thine, that when thou should finish thy days in devotion and
prayer, thou then delightest to begin them in concupiscence and lust. O La
Vasselay, mock at those rebellious and treacherous pleasures of the flesh,
which seem to mock at thee, yea, to betray thee: and if there be yet any
spark of thy youth, which lies burning under the embers of thy age, why if thy
chaste thoughts cannot, yet let modesty, or at least piety extinguish them. God
has already given thee two husbands, is it not now therefore time, yea, more
than time, for thee to prepare to give thy self to God? Hitherto the chastity
of thy youth has made thee happy, and will thou now permit that the lust of
thine age make thee unfortunate, or peradventure miserable? and that the purity
and candeur of that be distained and polluted by the foulness and obscenity of
this? Alas, alas, incontinent and inconsiderate Gentlewoman, of a grave Matron,
become not a youthful Gigglet; or if thou will not suffer the eyes of thy
body, at least permit those of thy soul to look from thy painted cheeks, to
thy snowwhite hair, who can inform and tell thee, that thou art far fitter
for Heaven than earth, since those pleasures are transitory, and these eternal,
for God than a husband, since he only can make thee blessed, whereas (in reward
of thy lascivious lust) this peradventure may be reserved to make thee both
unfortunate and wretched.

But the vanity of this old Gentlewomans thoughts and desires, do so violently
fix and terminate, on the youth and beauty of young, and (as she immodestly
terms him) fair De Merson, as the only consideration of her delight and
pleasure, weighes down all other respects; so that neither reason nor modesty,
advice nor persuasion, can prevail with her resolution, to divert her
affection from him; but love him she does, and (which is repugnant, as well to
the instinct of Nature, as to the influence of modesty, and rules of civility)
seek him for her husband she will: yea, she is already become so sottish in
her affection, and so lasciviously fervent in her desires toward him, that her
heart thinks of him by day, her soul by night; that admires him as the very
life of her felicity, and thus adores him as the only content and glory of her
life: she will not see the greatness of her own estate and wealth, nor
consider the smallness of his means and hopes, in that he is not an heir,
but a second brother; she will not enquire after his debts and vices, to know
what those may be, what these are; she will not think what a preposterous
disparity there is betwixt the fire of his youth, and the ice of her age; nor
what a world of discontents and afflictions are incident to proceed thereof:
she will not consider, that in endowing him with all her wealth, that she
thereby impoverisheth many, as well of her own kindred, as of those of her two
former husbands, to whom in the right of Nature it more justly and properly
belongs; and to conclude and shut up this point, she will not imagine or
dream, to how many laughters and scandals of the world she exposes her self,
who will not only call her discretion, but her modesty in question, for
matching with so young a Gentleman as De Merson, to whom for age, she may not
only well be mother, but (which is more) grandmother: But contrariwise, this
foolish old Gentlewoman having sent her wits a wooll-gathering on his sweet and
comely personage; his youth and her affection, like two impetuous torrents, and
furious inundations, bear down all other respects and considerations before
them: yea, they so submerge her reason, and quite drown her discretion, as she
has no eyes unshut to see the one, nor ears unstopped to hear the other, so
that if she desire any thing in the world, it is (as formerly is observed) that
she live to see De Merson her husband, and her self his wife: which to effect
and accomplish, she knows no better nor fitter Agent to employ herein, than
one Mounseir de Pruneau, an ancient Councellor, of the Presidiall Court of that
City, who was the only Councellor both to her last husband and her self, and
of whose discretion, integrity and fidelity, she had all the reasons of the
world to rest confident and assured.

Now although the Wisdom and Experience of De Pruneau suggested him what an
extreme inequality there was betwixt De Mersons youth, and La Vasselayes age,
which he could not more pertinently parallel and compare, than to Winter and
Summer, the Spring and the Harvest: and therefore how many afflictions and
miseries were subject to attend and wait on such preposterous marriages,
whereof he had formerly seen diverse lamentable examples, and woeful instances,
as well of men as women, who had suffered shipwreck upon that Sylla, and this
Charibdis, he like an honest man, and indeed a truer friend to her than she was
to her self, produces some of the former alleged reasons to her
consideration, thereby to divert the stream of her ill grounded affection from
De Merson, and (in general terms) to convey and conduct it to some elder
personage, whose years (and therefore their dispositions and affections) might
the better agree and sympathize. But when he sees that her love to De Merson
was so firmly and immoveably settled, as that it not only appeared to him to be
her grief, but her torment to be any way crossed or contradicted therein: then
he changes his language, and because she will not hearken to his advice, he
therefore gives way to her resolution, promising her his utmost power, and best
endeavors speedily to effect and compass her desires, when taking leave each
of other, at last La Vasselay remembering she had forgotten something, calls him
again, and prays him that if De Merson be inquisitive to know her direct age,
that he substract away at least ten years thereof: so that whereas she is
sixty three, to affirm that she is very little above fifty: whereunto she her
self blushing, De Pruneau not able likewise to refrain from smiling,
promises her to be very mindful thereof. To which end, he (with the first
conveniencie) finds out De Merson, acquaints him how much he is obliged to
Madamoyselle La Vasselay, for her affection to him, lays before him the
Nobility of her descent and blood, the greatness of her Estate and means, as
also the excellency of her virtues; that fifty years is the most of her age,
and that she is not by far so old, as pleasing and lovely; that she affects
him above all the men in the world, yea, and desires no man of the world for
her husband but himself; and that when he pleases, she desires the honor of
his company to her house, with many other intimations and insinuations
conducing that way.

De Merson having formerly understood of La Vasselayes rich Estate and Dowry,
as also of the truth of her age, he likes the first well, and although he
distaste, yet he will dissemble the second: he thanks De Pruneau for his
pains, and La Vasselay for her love toward him; promises to requite the
first, and if her wealth and virtues correspond with his relation to deserve
the second; alleging further, that although there be a great inequality in
their age, yet since he is no heir but a second brother, that it is rather
likely than impossible for it to be a match betwixt them; and in the mean time
to requite part of her affection, he promises to Sup with her the night
following at her house, where he only desires his company and assistance,
that they may the more effectually and secretly consult of this business,
which he hopes will so much import, as well her good and his content, as her
content and his good; and so for that time they part.

De Pruneau having received this pleasing and discreet answer from De Merson,
he returns with the relation, and repetition thereof to La Vasselay, vows
that his exterior feature is no way answerable, but comes far short of his
interior Virtues and discretion; and that by all which, he either can collect
from his speeches, or gather from his deportment and behavior, he is in his
conceit the most accomplished Gentleman, not only of Maine, but of France; and
so bids her prepare her Supper, and her self to entertain him the next night.
Which answer of De Mersons, and relation of De Pruneau, is so pleasing to her
heart and thoughts, as her age seems to be already ravished with joy at the
conceit of his Youth: when thinking every minute a month, and every hour a
year, before she be made happy, and her house blessed with his presence,
she leaves no cost unspared, or unspent, to make his Entertainment answerable
to his welcome: whereof whiles she is not only careful, but curious in
providing, let us cursorily speak a word or two how De Merson entertaines and
digesteth this unexpected motion and affection of La Vasselay.

He laughes in his sleeue to see her youthful affections so flourishing in
this Atumne, nay, in this Winter of her age, as to desire and seek so young a
Gentleman as himself for her husband, but he understands she is exceeding
rich, and therefore resolves that this virtue is capable to overvalue and
ransom that defect and error of hers. He sees that his father will not pay his
debts, and that he of himself cannot; that they growing more clamorous, will
shortly become scandalous: which will not only directly prevent, but
infallibly ruin his fortunes. He considers how displeasing her age will be
to his youth, as also that there is no hell comparable to that of a
discontented bed, and then again, his debosht and lustful thoughts, suggest
him this remedy: That Man's has beauties enough for him to recreate himself,
and to pass his time with; and that although she have him sometimes in her
bed, yet he may have younger lasses and Ladies in his arms, both when, and
where he pleases: He considers that rich widows are not so soon found, as
sought, not so soon obtained as found; and that if he refuse La Vasselay this
day, he may not only repent it to morrow, but perchance all the days of his
life; and although his will may, his power shall not be able to repair or
redress this error of his, all his life after: He is not ignorant that
Gentlewomen of her age and wealth, are subject to be as soon lost as won in a
humor: and therefore then lost, because not then won. Again that the elder
she is, the sooner she will die, and he then is at liberty to marry as young a
Virgin as he pleases, and that her wealth would then prove a true proppe; and
sweet comfort to his age. And to conclude and finish this consultation of his,
she is without children to molest and trouble him, and therefore to be desired,
she is virtuous, discreet, and of an excellent fame and reputation, and
therefore deserves to be accepted and not refused.

Upon the grounds of which reasons and considerations, he makes good his
promise to De Pruneau, and comes the next night both to visit, and suppe with
La Vasselay; who having purposely decked her self up in her youthful and
gayest apparel; receives him, withal demonstrations of affection and joy. At
his first arrival he affords her two or three kisses, whereat she infinitely
both rejoices and triumphs: and in a word, he finds that his welcome not
only exceeds his deserts, but his expectation; and believe me it was worth the
observation, to see how superficially his youth looked on her age, and how
artificially and ^stfully her age ga^ed on his youth. Now, by this time supper
is served in, wherein her affection was again discovered him in the curiosity
and bounty thereof. Where De Pruneau to give life to their mirth, tells them
both, that he hopes this their first meeting and enterview will produce
effects answerable to both their contents and desires; Whereat De Merson cannot
refrain from blushing, nor La Vasselay from smiling: They are all very
pleasant and jocond at table, and she to give the better edge and relish to his
affection, strives to seem far younger then indeed she is, and then he knows
her to be; yea, she does so cunningly entermixe and dispierce youthful
speeches amidst her aged gravity, as if she were not old, or at least, newly
made young. Now whiles she feasted her eyes on his fresh countenance and fair
complexion, he sends his abread to look on her plate, rich hangings, and
household stuff, wherewith he saw her house was richly and plentifully
furnished: Supper ended, and the cloth taken away, they are no sooner fallen
from their Viands, but they fall to their talk. De Merson kindly and
familiarly taking his new old Mistress in his Arms, as if he had already given
her a place in his heart and affections; which makes her beyond her self, both
merry and joyful. I will not trouble the Reader with the repetition of what
speeches and complements here past betwixt them; because in this, and my future
Histories I will follow the same Method of brevity which I have proposed and
observed in my former. Let then his inquisitive curiosity understand, that
they parted very lovingly and affectionately this first time: and De Merson
although he were a deboshed Gentleman, yet he is not so simple to omit, but
rather so well advised to pry into the true depth, and naked truth of her
estate; and the rather, for that he has known many Gentlemen who have been
fetched over, and gul^d in this nature, and in marryinge one widow have matched
themselves to two thieves, and credulously thinking her rich, have in the end
found her a very beggar: Whereupon he takes three days respite to resolve, and
so with some kisses and many thanks for her affection, and her kind
entertainment and great cheer, he for that night takes his leave of her, whose
fair carriage and discreet resolution in temporizing, La Vasselay applauds,
and De Pruneau approves: So De Merson having spent the first and second day
insurveying the writings of her Dowry, the Leases of her lands and houses, and
the Bonds and Bills of debts due to her, withal her ready Money, Plate, and
other movables: he finds her estate to answer his expectation and her report,
and that she is really worth in land, six thousand Francks yearly, and her
movables worth at least eighteen thousand more, he the third day publicly
contracts himself to her; and having advertised his father thereof, who likes
the wealth better than the widow, within eight days after privately marries
her, which administreth cause of speech and wonder in and about Man's: some
blaming her of indiscretion and levity, to match so young a Gentleman, others
taxing him of folly to marry so old a widow; some extolling and applauding his
judgment, in enriching himself with so great an Estate: which would not
only deface his debts, secure his youth and age from the storms of want, and
the tempests of necessity, but also in the one and the other maintain him
richly, prosperously, and gallantly. And others again believing and presaging,
that this their great inequality and disparity of years, would either of the
one side or other, or both, produce many discontents, and afflictions, instead
of hoped-for joys and prosperities. Thus every one speaks differently of this
preposterous match, according as their passions and fancies dictate them: but
which of all these opinions and judgments speaks truest, we shall not go
far to understand and know.

We have seen the consummation of this marriage, Youth wedded to Age; May to
December, and young De Merson to old La Vasselay; in which contract and
nuptials, either of them are so vain, and both so irreligious, as caring
wholly for the pleasures of their bodies, they have not therein so much as once
thought of their souls, or of heaven: Yea, God is not so much as once
nominated or remembered of them. All the ends of marriages are only two; Gods
glory, and the propagation of children; and because they cannot hope for the
second, must they therefore needs be so impious, as to forget the first. Aye
me, if his youth had attained no more Grace, could her age retain no more
goodness; or how can they flatter themselves with any hope, that this marriage
of theirs can possible prosper, when only her aim and end therein is lust, and
his wealth. If a building can subsist and flourish, which has a rotten and
reeling foundation, then this match of theirs may prosper, otherwise cannot:
for what more rotten than the beastly pleasures of her lustful, and yet
decayed age, and what more reeling and fickle, than the constant inconstancy of
his lacivious youth, which make my thoughts justly fear, and my heart truly
presage and apprehend: that repentance, not pleasure; affliction, not joy;
misery, not prosperity, is at the heels to attend and follow these their
Nuptials: As mark we the sequel and it will briefly inform us how.

De Merson has not been married two whole months to La Vassellay, but he
begins to repent himself that ever he matched her, for he now sees, though
before he would not, that it is imposible for youth to fedge and sympathise
with her age, he sees that she has a discrepit, sickely and decayed body, and
that she is never free of the Cough and Rheum, as also of an Issue in her left
arm, which is not only displeasing, but loathsome to him. Yea, when she has
taken off her ruff and head attier, and dighted her self in her night
habilements, then he vows he is afraid of her Lambe-skin furred cap and
wast-coate; and takes her withered face for a Vizard, or a Commet, which yields
no delight but terror to his eyes: swearing that he serves only for a bed-pan
to heat her frozen body, which of it self is far colder than a Marble
Statue: Yea, he is so far out of love with her, because, to write the truth,
he never truly loved her, that her sight is a plague to him, her presence by
day a Purgatory, and her company by neight a very Hell.

But deboshed and dissolute Gentleman, these vicious and impious conceits of
thine, come immediately from Hell and Satan, and are no way infused in thy
thoughts by Heaven, much less inspired in thy heart by God: Consider, consider
with thy self; that if La Vasselay be old, yet she is now thy wife, and that
whatsoever De Praneau or her self informed thee of fifty years, yet thou
know she could not be less than sixty three, and more she is not. In which
regard marriage (the holy Institution of Heaven) having now made you of two,
one; if thou will not love her age, at least thou should reverence it; or if
thou can not affect her, thou should not hate her. Has she imperfections,
what woman in the world lives without them? or is she Pestered with diseases,
who can be either exempted from them, or prevent them? Thou have vowed in the
Temple of the Lord, and in the presence of him and his people, not only to
love, but to honor her: and is thy inconstancy and impiety already such, as
forgetting that promise and vow of thine, thou do now not only dishonor,
but despise and contemn her; and that thou only made that vow purposely to
break it: O De Merson, if thou art not capable of Counsel, yet do but believe
the truth, and thou will find, that if thou will not love her, because she is
too old to be thy wife; yet thou should respect and regard her, because she
is old enough to be thy Grandmother: for as it is incivility not to reverence
Age; so it is impiety to disdain and malign it: and if in any man toward a
mere stranger, how much more a husband to his own wife? And because it is
easier to espy our wives imperfections, than to find out, or reform our own;
if thy wife La Vasselay be guilty of any fault toward thee, it is because
she loves thee too well, and affects thee too dearly.

We have scene De Mersons distaste of his wife, La Vasselay: Let us now see how
she likes, or rather why she so soon dislikes him: for he bears himself so
strangely, and withal, so unkindly toward her, as her desires of his youth
comes far short both of her expectation and hopes: for if he lie with her one
night, he wants six from her; is still abroad, and seldom or never at home
with her; yea, he is of such a gadding humor, and ranging disposition, as his
thoughts and delights are transported elsewhere, not at home; with other young
Dames of Man's, not with herself: and the vanity of his pleasures do so far
surprise and captivate him, that he is already become so vicious, as he makes
day his night, and night his day, living rather like a volutupous Epicure, than
a temperate or Civil Christian: Neither, quoth she, is it Jealousy, but truth
which makes her pry so narrowly into so lewd and lacivious actions, wherein
the further she wades, the more cause she finds both of grief and vexation,
which makes her wish, that she had been blind when she first saw him; and
either he or her self in Heaven, when they so unfortunately married each other
here upon Earth.

How now fond and foolish old Gentlewoman, are thy joys so soon converted
into sorrows, and thy triumphs into tears? why, thou have just cause to
thank none but thy self, for these thy crosses and afflictions; since thy
lustful and lacivious desires were not only the author, but the procurer of
them: for had thou been more modest, and less wanton, thou might have
apparently seen, and providently foreseen, that De Mersons youth was too
young for thy age, because thy age was too old for his youth; so that had
thou been then but half so stayed and wise, as now thou art sorrowful: thou
need not now grieve for that which thou can not redress, nor repent for
that which is out of thy power to remedy. But rash and inconsiderate woman, how
comes this to pass, that thou art ready to entertain jelousie, when death
stands ready to entertain thee? Could all the course of thy former youth be so
happy, not to be acquainted with this vice, and does now thy frozen age think
it a virtue to admit and embrace it? Ay me, I grieve to see thy folly, and
lament to understand thy madness in this kind: for what is Jealousy, but the
rage of our thoughts, and brains, the disturber of our peace and tranquillity,
the enemy of our peace and happiness, the traitor of our judgment and
undestanding, the plague of our life, the poison of our hearts, and the very
bane and Canker of our souls? Jealousy, why, it is the daughter of frenzy,
and the mother of madness; it is a vice purposely sent from hell, to make
those wretched on earth, who may live fortunate and happy, and yet will not;
yea, it is a vice which I know not whether it be more easy to admit, or
difficult to expel, being admitted. But La Vasselay, expel it thou must, at
least, if thou think to live fortunate, and not to die miserable. Were thou as
young as aged, thy Jealousy might have some color and excuse in meeting with
the censures of the world; whereas now not deserving the one, it cannot receive
the other. And as those women are both wise and happy, who wink at the
youthful escapes of their husbands: so thy Jealousy makes thee both
meritorious, and guilty of thy afflictions, because thou will be so foolish to
espy, and so malicious to remember these of thine. Is De Merson given and
addicted to other women? why pardon him, because he is a young man: and as he
is thy husband, and thou his wife, believe that he is every way more worthy of
thy prayers, than of thine envy.

Thus we see upon what fatal and ominus terms these late married couple now
stand; De Mersons youth scorning and spurning at his wife La Vasselaye's age,
and wholly addicting himself to others; and her age growing infinitely jealous
of his youth: so that for any thing I see or know to the contrary, these
different vices have already taken such deep and dangerous root in them, as
they threaten not only the shipwreck of their content, but of their fortunes,
if not of their lives.

Now for us to find out the particular object of La Vasselayes jealousy, as
her foolish curiosity has already the general cause: we must know, that she
has a very proper young Gentlewoman who atends her, of some eighteen years
of age, termed Gratiana, of a middle stature, somewhat inclining to fatness,
having a fresh sanguine complexion, and bright flaxen hair, she being indeed
every way exceeding lovely and fair; and with this Gratiana, she fears her
Husband is more familiar than either modesty or chastity can permit; and yet
she has only two poor reasons for this, her credulity and jealousy, and God
knows they are poor and weak ones indeed: The first is, that she thinks her
own withered face serves only but as a foil, to make Gratiana's fresh beauty
seem the more precious and amiable in his eyes. The second is, that she once
saw him kiss her in her presence in the garden, when she brought him a
handkercher, which his Page had forgotten to give him. Ridiculous grounds, and
trivial reasons, for her to build her fear, or erect her jealousy on, or to
invent and raise so foul a scandal and calumny: and yet not to suppress, but
to report the whole truth, De Merson was laciviously in love with Gratiana, had
often tempted her deflouration, but could never obtain her consent thereunto:
for she was as chaste as fair, and impregnable, either to be seduced by his
gifts and presents, or to be vanquished and won by his treacherous promises,
protestations, and oaths: for she told him plainly and peremptorily, when she
saw him begin to grow importunate, and impudent in this his folly, That
although she were but a poor Gentleman's daughter, yet she thanked God, that
her parents had so virtuously trained her up in the School of Honor, that she
would rather dye, than live to be a strumpet to any Gentleman or Prince of the
world: which chaste answer, and generous resolution of hers, did then so quench
the flames of his lacivious and inordinate affection to her, as thenceforth he
exchanged his lust into love toward her, and vowed, that he would both respect
and honor her as his sister. Now although they both kept the passage of this
business secret from his wife her Mistress, yet notwithstanding, as it is the
nature of Jealousy, not to hearken to any reason, nor approve of any belief
but of her own: therefore she is confident, that he lies with Gratiana more
oftener than with her self; which she vows she cannot digest, and will no
longer tolerate. To which end, (with a most malicious, and strange kind of
treachery) she makes fair weather with Gratiana; and (thinking to cool her
hot courage, and to allay the heat of her luxurious blood) looking one day
steadfastly in her face, she tells her that she has need to be let blood, to
prevent a Fever: whereunto, although chaste and innocent Gratiana was never
formerly let blood, she notwithstanding willingly consents thereunto; which to
effect, La Vasselay (like a base mistress and a treacherous stepdame) sends for
an Apothecary, named Rennee, gives him a watchword in his ear, to draw at
least sixteen ounces of blood from Gratiana, for that she was strongly entered
into a burning Fever: But he being as honest as she was treacherous and
cruel, told her, that the drawing of so great a quantity of blood from her,
might not only impair her health, but endanger her life. But she replies, it
was so ordered by a Doctor: whereupon he opens her right arm vein; and as he
had near drawn so much from this poor harmless young Gentlewoman, she
faints twice in a chair betwixt their arms, and all the cold water they threw
in her face, could very hardly refetch her, and keep life in her: this old
hard-harted hag still notwithstanding crying out, that it was not blood enough:
having no other reason for this her treachery and cruelty, but that indeed she
thought it not enough, or sufficient to quench the unquenchable thirst and
flame of her jealousy: of which this is the first effect toward this innocent
young Gentlewoman, but we shall not go far to see a second.

Gratiana is so far from dreaming of her mistress jealousy toward her
master, and herself; or from once thinking of this her treacherous letting her
blood, as she thanks her, for her affection and care of her health: and now
the very next day after De Merson dyning at home with his old wife, (which he
had not done in many days before) and seeing Gratiana look so white and pale,
demands her if she be not well, and then questioneth his wife what ails her
Gentlewoman to look so ill, which she seems to put off with a feigned excuse:
but withal (as if this care of her husband toward Gratiana, were a true
confirmation of their dishonesty, and her jealousy) she retaynes the memory
thereof deeply in her heart and thoughts: yea, it is so frequent, and fixed in
her Imaginations, as she cannot, she will not any longer suffer or endure this
affection of her husband to Gratiana; nor that Gratiana's youth shall wrong La
Vasselay's age in the rites and duties of marriage. Wherefore casting sad
aspects on him, and malignant looks on her, she to please and give
satisfaction to her jealousy (which cannot be pleased or satisfied with any
thing but revenge) resolves to make her know what it is, for a waiting maid to
offend and wrong her mistress in this kind: when not to deminish, but rather to
augment and redouble her former cruelty toward her. Her husband riding one day
abroad in company of diverse other Gentlemen of the City, to hunt Wolves which
abound in those vast and spacious woods of Maine: she under pretense of some
other business; calls Gratiana alone into her inner chamber, when bolting the
door after her, she with meager and pale envy in her looks, and implacable
fury and choler in her speeches, charge her of dishonesty with her husband;
calling her whore, strumpet, and baggage: affirming that the time and hour is
now come for her to be revenged of her. Poor Gratiana both amazed and
affrighted at this sudden and furious (both unexpected and undefiled alarm of
her Mistress, seeing her honor, and (as she thinks and fears) her life called
in question; she after a world of sighs and tears, terms her accusers
devils and witches, vows by her part in heaven, and upon the peril of her
own soul, that she is innocent of that crime whereof she accused her, and
that neither indeed or thought, she was ever dishonest, or unchaste with any man
of the world, much less with her Master: But this will not satisfy incensed
La Vasselay, neither are these speeches or tears of Gratiana of power to pass
current with her jealousy; but reputing them false and counterfeit, she calls
in her chambermaid, and cookemaid, when she had purposely led there, and bids
them unstrip Gratiana naked to her wast, and to bind her hand and foot to the
bed post, which with much repyning and pity, they are at last enforced to do.
When commanding them forth the chamber and bolting the door after them, she
not like a woman, but rather as a fury of hell, flies to poor innocent
Gratiana, and with a great burchen rod, does not only raze but scarifie her
arms, back and shoulders: when harmless soul, she (though in vain) having
no other defensive weapons but her tongue, and her innocence, cries aloud to
heaven and earth for succor. But this old hag as full of malice as jealousy,
has no compassion of her cries, nor pity of her sighs: yea, neither the
sight of her tears, or blood, (which trickling down her cheeks and
shoulders, does both bedew, and ingraine her smock) are of power to appease
her fury and envy, until having spent three rods, and tired and wearied both
her arms, she in the heat of her choler, and the height of her revenge;
delivers her these bitter and scoffing words. Minion, this, this is the way,
yea the only way to cool the heat of thy courage, and to quench the fire of
thy lust; When calling in her two maids, she commands them to unbinde Gratiana,
and to help on her clothes. When triumphing in her cruelty, she furiously
departs and leaves them; who cannot refrain from tears, to see how severely
and cruelly their Mistress has handled this her poor Gentlewoman.

Gratiana the better to remedy these her insupportable and cruel wrongs, holds
it discretion to desemble them, and so providing herself secretly of a horse
and man, she the next night steals away; rides to La Ferte, and from thence to
her father at Nogent le Retrou, where he was superintendant of the Prince of
Condes house and Castle in that Town; and where the Princess Dowager his
mother built up the greatest part of her sorrowful residence, whence, whiles
he was detained prisoner in the Castle of Boys de Vincennes near Paris: La
Vasselay grieves at this her sudden, and unexcted departure, the which she
fears her husband De Merson, and her father Mounsieur De Bremay will take in
ill part; wherein she is no way deceived, for the one grieves, and the other
storms thereat: yea, when De Merson (through flattery and threats) had drawn
from the Chambermaid and Cooke-maid, the truth of his wives cruel whipping of
Gratiana, as also the cause thereof, her jealousy: He justly incensed and
enraged, flies to this his sottish and cruel wife, tells her, that jealousy
comes from the devil, whose part he affirms she has acted, in acting this
upon innocent Gratiana, then whom there lives not a chaster maid in the world,
That although she were poor, yet, that she was as well descended as her self.
In which regard, if she did not speedily right and redeem her wrongs, and
seek means to pacify and recall her, that he would forthwith leave her,
yea, and utterly forsake her. which cooling card of his to his wife, makes her
look on her former erroneous cruelty toward Gratiana, rather with outward
grief, than inward repentance. But seeing that her jealousy must now stoop
and strike sail, to her husbands Choler, and that to enjoy his company, she
must not be exempted and deprived of hers: she contrary to her desires and
will, (which still retains the fumes and flames of jealousy as that does of
revenge) is enforced to make a virtue of necessity, and so to bear up with the
time, feigning her self repentant and sorrowful for what she had formerly done
to Gratiana: she to reclaim her, buys her so much wrought black Taffety for a
Gown, and so much Crimson Damask for a Petticoate, and with a bracelet of
Pearl which she accustomed to wear upon her right arm; she sends it to
Nogent to her by La Vilette, a Gentleman of her husbands, and accompanies it
with a letter to her father, Mounsieur de Bremay, which contained these words.

LA VASSELAY to DE BREMAY.
HAving vindicated Truth from Error, and metamorphosed Jealousy into
Judgment, I find that I have wronged thy daughter Gratiana, where at I grieve,
with contrition, and sorrow with repentance, since my husbands vows and oaths
have fully cleared her Honor and Chastity, which my foolish incredulity and
fear, rashly attempted, both to ecclips and disparage: In which regard,
praying her to forgive, and thy self to forget that wrong; I earnestly desire
her speedy return by this bearer, and ye both shall see, that I never
formerly hated her so much, as henceforth I will both love and honor her: I
have now sent her some small tokens of my affection; and ere long she shall
find greater effects and testimonies thereof; for knowing her to be as chaste as
fair; In this De Bremay I request thee to rest confident, that as she is now
thy daughter by Nature, so she shall be henceforth mine by adoption.

LA VASSELAY.


De Bremay having received this letter, and his daughter Gratiana these kind
tokens from her Mistress La Vasselay: his choler, and her grief and sorrow is
soon defaced and blown away: so he well satisfied, and she content and
pleased, he sends her back from Nogent to Man's by La Villette, by whom he
writes this ensuing letter to his Mistress La Vasselay in answer of hers.

DE BREMAY to LA VASSELAY.
THy Letter has given me so much content and satisfaction, as thy undeserved
cruelty to my daughter Gratiana did grief and indignation. And had she been
guilty of that crime, whereof thy fear made thee jealous, I would for ever
have renounced her for my daughter, and deprived her of my sight: for as her
Virtues are her best wealth, and her Honor her chiefest revenew: so if she
had failed in these or faltered in this, I should then have joined with thee to
hate her, as I do now to love her: But her Tears and Oaths have cleared her
innocence, and in hers, thy husbands. In which regard, relying upon her own
merits, and thy professed kindness; she forgetting, and I forgiving things
past, I now return her thee by thy servant La Villette; hoping that if thou will not affect her as thy adopted Daughter, yet that thou will tender her as
thy obedient and observant handmaid.

DE BREMAY.


Gratiana's hopes, and her fathers credulity of La Vasselaye's future affection
toward her, as also her gifts and promises; so far prevail with them, as
she is now returned to her, from Nogent to Man's; But I fear she had done far
better to have still remained with her father; for she might consider, and he
know, what little safety, and apparent danger, there is to rely upon the favor
of an incensed jealousy: La Vasselay (in all outward show) receives and
welcomes Gratiana with many expressions of love, and demonstrations of joy,
thereby to please her husband; who indeed likes so well of her return, as he
likes his wife the better for procuring it. And now to the eye of the world,
and according to humane conceit and sense, all three parties ate reconciled and
satisfied, as if La Vasselay's jealousy had never heretofore offended her
husband, nor her cruelty wronged Gratiana: or as if he had never known the
one, nor she felt the other. But we shall not go far to see this calm
oretaken with a tempest, and this Sunshine surprised with a dismal and
disasterous shower.

For three months were not fully expired, since Gratiana's return to Man's,
but La Vasselayes old jealousy of her, and her husband De Merson, which seemed
to be suppressed and extinguished, does now flash and flame forth anew with
more violence and impetuosity; yea, he cannot look on Gratiana, much less to
speak to her, but presently this old jealous Beldame in her heart and
thoughts, proclaims them guilty of Adultery: whereat she indiscreetly suffers
her self to be so far transported with Indignation and Envy, as she vows
she will no longer tolerate or digest it. And now it is, that like a fury of
hell she first assumes damnable and execrable resolutions, not only against
the Innocence, but against the life of innocent and harmless Gratiana; who
poor soul is the nearer her danger, in respect she holds her self farthest
from it: yea, this jealous old Hagg, this Fury, nay, this she-Devill La
Vasselay, has not only consulted, but determined and concluded with her bloody
thoughts, that she will speedily send Gratiana into another world; because her
youth shall no longer abuse and wrong her age in this. When forgetting
herself, her soul, and her God, thereby purposely to please her senses, her
Jealousy, and her Tutor the Devil, she vows, that no respect of reason nor
Religion, no consideration of Heaven or Hell, shall be capable to divert her
from dispatching her: yea, and as if she not only rejoiced, but glorified in
this her pernicious and bloody design, she thinks every hour a year before
she has performed it: To which end, providing her self of strong poison; and
watching, and catching at the very first opportunity, as soon as ever Gratiana
found her self not well, she under a color of much affection and care to her,
makes her some white broth, wherein infusing and intermixing the aforesaid
poison, she (gracelesly and cruelly) gives it her, the which within six days
fainting and languishing, makes a perpetual divorce and separation betwixt her
soul and her body, leaving this to descend to earth, and that to ascend to
heaven, to draw down vengeance to this hellish and execrable La Vasselay, for
so inhumanly and cruelly murdering this her harmless and innocent waiting
Gentlewoman Gratiana.

De Merson understanding of Gratiana's death, almost as soon as of her
sickness, he very sorrowfully bites the lip thereat: for considering this
accident in its true nature, his thoughts suggest him, and his heart and soul
prompts him, that his wife La Vasselay had undoubtedly occasioned her death,
and so metamorphosed her jealousy into murder; yea, and notwithstanding the
fair and sorrowful show which she puts thereon to the contrary, yet the
premises considered, he is very confident in this his belief and fear: when
grieving at the cruelty of this disaster, and abhorring the author of so
monstrous and bloody a fact; the very sight of this his old wretched wife is
odious, and the remembrance of this her cruel crime, detestable and execrable
unto him. Again, when he considers Gratiana's beauty and chastity, and that
she was sent to her untimely grave for his sake, this does not only redouble
his sorrows, but infinitely augment and increase his afflictions: so that
beginning to fear his wives envy, as much as he hated her jealousy, in that
it was not only possible, but likely, that it might also futurely extend, and
reflect on him, as well as it already had on harmless and innocent Gratiana,
he assumes a resolution to leave and forsake her, the which we shall shortly
see him put in execution; when the better to curb and vex her, he secretly
packes up all her Bills, Bonds, Leafes, and Conveyances, as also, all her
Money, Plate, Jewels, and richest Housholdstuffe; and so giving out a
prohibition to all the Tenants, not to dare to pay her any rent, he allowing
her only a bare maintenance, very suddenly (when she least expected or dreamt
thereof) takes horse, and rides home to his fathers, where he resolves, to make
the greatest part of his residence; and all the reares and prayers of his wife,
are not of power to reclaim or retain him.

La Vasselay seeing the unkindnesse of her Husband De Merson, in making her a
widow, almost as soon as a wife; as also his ingratitude, in depriving her of
the use and fruition of her own estate and means, and leaving her so poor an
allowance, as could scarce warrant her a competent maintenance, she is almost
ready to die for mere grief and sorrow thereof, but how to remedy it, she
knows not: And now she repents her folly and indiscretion, in matching her
aged self to so young a man as De Merson: now she does not only accuse, but
condemn her own jealousy, which drew herto this foul fact of murdering her
harmless, and as she now believes, her innocent Wayting-maid Gratiana; for
which, this ungrateful departure, and hard usage of her husband, is but the
least, and as she terms it, but the forerunner of greater punishments, which
God has ordained and reserved for her: yea, it is not only a grief to her
thoughts, but a vexation to her heart and soul, to see her self made the
mockingstocke and laughter of all Man's, and Maine, who rather excuse her
husbands youth, then any way pity or commiserate herage; and to see that the
friends of her prosperity turn their backs and faces to her, in her
affliction and poverty: and if she have any hope yet left, to assist and
comfort her in these her calamities, it is by endeavoring to reconcile and
reclaim her husband to her by Letters: when taking pen and paper, she within a
month of his departure, sends him these few lines:

LA VASSELAY to DE MERSON.
SInce at thy request I both recanted my Jealousy to thy self, and repented
my cruelty to my maid Gratiana, what have I committed or done, that should
deserve this thy ungrateful, and as I may truly say, Heart killing departure?
for having made a most exact Scruteny in my thoughts and soul, either of them
inform me, and both assure me, that the freeness and fervency of my
affection, toward thee, deserved not so cruel, but a far more courteous
requital. If my Age be any way displeasing to thy youth, yet deprive me not of
the felicity of thy sight and presence, wherein I not only delight, but glory.
And although I can be content that thou surfeit with my wealth, yet make me not
so miserable, as to starve both in and for thy presence. If any have given thee
any sinister or false impressions, either of my self or actions; why if thy
affection to me will not deface them, at least let thy pity: Yea, return my
sweet and dear Husband, and what errors or faults soever thou say I have
committed, I will not only redeem them with kisses, but with tears.

LA VASSELAY.


De Merson having received this his wives Letter, it works such poor effects
in his affection, as he does rather rejoice then commiserate her estate and
sorrows; yea, he so sleights her and her remembrance, as once he hadthought to
have answered her Letter with silence; but at last he (some eight days after)
returns her this answer:

DE MERSON to LA VASSELAY.
What hope can I have of thy Affection, when I see thou art inviolably
constant to thy Jealousy; and if the Scruteny of thy thoughts and soul be as
true as thou pretendest, yet I fear that this Jealousy of thine, is not the
greatest, but the least of thy crimes. Thou writest to me, that I give a cruel
requital to thy affection, but pray God, thou have not given a more sharp and
inhumane one to Gratiana's service and Chastity: Neither is it thy Age, but thy
Imperfections and Vices, which are both displeasing and o dious to my youth:
for I could brook that with as much patience, as I can digest these with
impossibilities. If thou want means, I will grant thee more; but for my
presence, I have many reasons to deny thee. I know none but thy self, which
has given me any impressions of thy actions; and if those were false, they
would prove thy true happiness, as now they do thy misery, which, my
affection does pity, though cannot redress. It is but in vain for thee,
either to expect or hope for my return; and since thy faults and errors are
best known to thy self, let thy repentance redeem them toward God: for
neither thy kisses nor tears, can or shall to me.

DE MERSON.


This Letter of De Merson to his wife La Vasselay, is so far from comforting,
as it does most extremely afflict her: And although his discontents be such,
as she sees it almost impossible to reconcile and reclaim him: yet being
exceedingly perplexed and grieved with this her solitary and discontented life,
she yet hopes that a second Letter may obtain that of him, which her first
could not: when six months time being now slipped away since his departure, she
faigning herself sick, writes unto him again to this effect.

LA VASSELAY to DE MERSON.
THy absence has so deprived my joys, and engendered my sorrows, that
Sickness threatens my life to be near her period: So among a world of
discontents, let me yet bear this one Content to my grave, that I may once
more see thee, whom so tenderly I both desire, and long to see: and if I cannot
be so happy as to live, at the least make me so fortunate, as to dye in thine
Arms: which I know not whether it be a greater Charity for thee to grant, or a
Cruelty to deny me this request of mine: For my Dear De Merson, if thou will
not be pleased to be my Husband, yet be not offended to remember that I am
thy Wife; and withal, that as I desire thy return, so that I have not
deserved thy departure: But if thou will still be inexorable to my requests,
these Lines of mine, which I write thee rather with Tears then Ink, shall
bear witness betwixt thy self and me, of my Kindness, of thy Cruelty, and
how my Life sought thy Affection, though my Death could neither find, nor
obtain it.

LA VASSELAY.


De Merson reads this Letter with laughter; yea, he is so insensible of her
Lines, Requests, and Tears, as if another had sent him news of her Death, as
she her self did of her Sickness, it had been far more pleasing, and
better welcome to him. But thinking how to gall her to the quick, to the end
he might henceforth save her the labor to write him any more Letters, and
himself to receive and peruse them, he returns her this sharp and bitter
answer:

DE MERSON to LA VASSELAY.
IT is thy Error, not my Absence, which has exchanged thy Joys into
Sorrows; and if thy life draw near her period, they cannot be far from
theirs. My sight is a poor content for thee to bear to thy grave, since as a
Christian, thou should delight to see none but thy Savior, nor be
Ambitious to live in any arms but his: and if thou hold not this to be
Charity, I know others cannot repute it Cruelty. That I am thy Husband I
grant, and that thou art my Wife, I not deny: But yet I fear thy heart
knows, though thy Pen affirms the contrary, that I have far more reason for
my departure, then thou to desire my return. And if thou will yet know more,
if the Ink wherewith thou writest thy Letter be Tears, pray God thou did
not bedeawe Gratiana's Winding-sheete and Coffin, both with her Tears, and
Blood: for had thou not been cruel, yea, inhumane to her, I would never
have been unkind to thee: And to conclude, live as happy, as I fear her
death will make thee dye miserable.

DE MERSON.


The receipt and perusal of this Letter does not only grieve but afflict and
torment La Vasselay: for the very remembrance of De Merson his suspicion and
apprehension, that she had a hand in the death of Gratiana, does as it were
pierce her heart, as well with fear as sorrow: for as her poverty lay before
at his mercy, so now she knows does her life; and that since he will not love
her, he may chance so malign und hate her, as to reveal it. Whereupon to
secure her fear, and to warrant the safety of her life, she soon exchangeth
her love into hatred, and her affection and jealousy, into envy toward him;
yea, her enraged and incensed thoughts, engender and imprint such bloody
designs of revenge in her heart, as abandoning the fear and grace of God, she
impiously concludes a match with the Devil, to dispatch and murder him; and
from which bloody and damnable design, no regard of God, or her Soul, nor
respect of Heaven or Hell, can or shall divert her: when overpassing a small
parcel of time, wherein she ruminated and pondered, how she should send him
from this life to another: at last her malicious curiosity makes her thoughts
fall on La Villette, being his Gentleman; who still followed him, as holding
him a fit Agent to attempt, and instrument to finish this bloody business,
which so much imported her content and safety; grounding her reasons upon the
greatness of his heart and mind, and the weakness of his purse and means;
as if poverty were a sufficient cause and privilege to commit so treacherous
and bloody a fact: When knowing him to be then in Man's, receiving up his
Masters Rents, she sends for him; to whom (the door bolted) she tells him she
is to request his secrecy in a business which infinitely tends to his good. He
promises it her: but she will have him swear thereunto, which he does: when
with sighs and tears making a bitter invective, and recapitulation of her
Husband, his master undeserved indignity and cruelty toward her; she then and
there makes a proposition to him, to murder him for her; and that she will
give him a thousand crowns to effect it. La Ville^te s^eing the greatness of
the danger, in that of the crime, seems not only discontented, but amazed
hereat: for although he love gold well, yet he will not purchase it at so dear
a rate, and base and damnable a price, as that of his masters blood: when
seeing she could not prevail, she again puts him in mind of his oath to
secrecy; which he again vows never to infringe or violate: and withal, like
a good servant, seeks to dissuade and divert her from such bloody thoughts and
attempts. Had La Villette remained in the purity and candeur of this his
Religious and Christian Resolution, not to imbrue or distaine his hands in the
innocent blood of his Master, it would have made him as happy, as we shall
shortly see him miserable in attempting and executing the contrary: for as a
propension and resolution to Virtue, breeds not only Honor, but safety; so the
contrary effects thereof, produce not only shame, but misery. To foresee
sin, is a pious wisdom; but to prevent and eschew it, is always a most wise
and blessed piety.

And whereas Time should rather decrease then increase, and rather root out,
then plant Malice in our thoughts, and Envy in our Resolutions; yet directly
contrary, that of La Vasselay to her husband De Merson, does not dye, but live,
will not fade but flourish: for a month or two more being run out, and
expired, and La Villette again in Man's, her malice unto her husband is
soinveterate and implacable, as she again sends for him to her house, where
(in great secrecy and intended affection) she tells him, that if he will
murder his master, she within six months will marry him in requital, and not
only live his faithful wife, but dye his obedient and constant handmaid. Now
although her first proffer of a thousand crowns could not procure of La
Villette, these her sugared speeches, which she intermixeth with kisses, and the
consideration of so many thousands, which her estate not only promises, but
assures, does; so as forgetting his former virtue, to remember his future
vice, he (like a damnable villain) swears to her to effect it: which
wretched Verbal contract; they enterchangeably seal with oaths and kisses,
which (if they had had any fear of God, or care of their salvations) they
should have detested with horror, and abhorred with detestation: neither will
his malice (or the Devil the Author thereof) give him leave to protract or
defer it: for having resolved to murder him as he rides abroad; his master
on a time being invited to a general hunting, by the Baron of Saint Susanna
(son and heir to Mounsieur de Varennes) at his said Town of Susanna, as he
came riding homewards toward his Fathers house of Manfrelle, he in the midst
of a great wood, near unto the small village of Saint Georges, riding behind
his master, discharges his Pistol, laden with a brace of bullets through his
reins, which makes him instantly fall off dead from his horse to the ground.
When this hellish servant La Villette, seeing his master devoyd of breath, and
grovelling and weltring in his blood, he having acted the part of a sinful
Devil in committing this cruel murder, now resolves to assume, and represent
that of a subtle Hypocrite in concealing it: when determining to report that
they were both assaulted, and his master slain by thieves; he to make all his
actions conduce and look that way, charge his Pistol again with another
brace of bullets, and shoots through his own hat, gives himself a cut ore his
left hand, and then breaks his Rapier, takes his own Pistol, and his Masters
Rapier, and throws it into a Pond close adjoining; takes likewise his masters
purse and watch forth his pocket, and hides it secretly: and then the more
cunningly and knavishly to bleare and deceive the eyes of the world thereby to
make this his hypocrisy pass the currenter, he having purposely provided
himself of two small cords; with the one he binds both his own feet, and with
the other (by a pretty slight) slips therein his arms behind his back, and
then setting himself against a tree, he very pitifully weeps, groans, and
cries out upon the thieves and murderers of his Master De Merson: when three
Gentlemen of Britain, traveling that way toward Paris, repair to his
assistance, whom they find out by his cries: to whom he relates that five
thieves had assaulted his master and himself, that he fought in the defense as
long as his sword held; that his master was killed with a Pistol, then robbed, and
himself shot through, and wounded, and bound as they saw. When these three
British Gentlemen, grieving at this mournful accident, and bloody spectacle,
they instantly cut the cords wherewith he was bound, and so having conveyed
the dead corpse to the next Cottage, they run up and down the wood to find
out these thieves and murderers, but in vain: so La Villette having thanked
these Gentlemen for their affection and charity toward his dead master, and
living self: He with a wonderful exterior show of sorrow, takes care for the
speedy and decent transporting home of his breathless Master to Manfrelle:
where his mournful Father receives, and buries him with infinite grief,
lamentation, and tears.

In the mean time, this murtherous La Villette gives private intelligence
thereof to the bloody La Vasselay, who although she inwardly receives this
news with extreme content and joy, to see her self freed of so unkind and
ungrateful a husband; yet publicly to the eye of the world (thereby the
better to delude and deceive the world) she contrariwise takes on blackes,
seeming to be exceedingly mournful, pensive, and sorrowful thereat: but God
will shortly discover the falsehood of these her tears,; and in the triumphs
of his revenge; pull off the mask of this her dissembling and treacherous
Hypocrisy: For as Man's, Lavall, Angiers, and all the adjacent Towns and
Countries, grieve at this lamentable murder of De Merson: so they as much
admire and wonder to see his old widow La Vasselay so shortly married and
espoused to his Gentleman La Villette, whose Nuptials are celebrated and
consummared far within the term of six months after. For the curious wits of
these Cities and Countries, considering what a preposterous course and
resolution thi^ was for her to marry her husbands man, and withal, so soon;
as also that there was none other present but himself, when his Master De
Merson was murdered, it is umbragious; and leaves a spice of fear, and sting
of suspicion in their heads; that there was more in the wind then was yet
known, and therefore knowing no more, they defer the detection thereof, to
the providence and pleasure of God, who best, yea, who only knows in Heaven,
how to conduct and manage the actions here below on Earth: and now indeed the
very time is come, that the Lord will no longer permit these their cruel and
bloody murders to be concealed, but will bring them forth to receive
condign punishment; and for want of other evidence, and witnesses, they
themselves, shall be witnesses against themselves. And although La Va^elay's
poisoning of Gratiana, and La Villette pistolling of his master De Merson, were
cunningly contrived, and secretly perpetrated; yet we shall see the last of
these bloody murders occasion the discovery and detection of the first, and
both of them most severely and sharply punished for these their bloody crimes
and horrible offenses. The manner is thus.

These two execrable wretches, La Villette, and La Vasselay have not lived
married above some seven or eight months, but he being deeply in Law with
Mounsieur De Manfrelle, his Predecessors father, for the detention of some
lands and writings, he takes an occasion to ride home to his house of
Manfrelle to him, to confer of the differences, and by the way falls into the
company of some Merchants of Lavall, and Vittry, who were returning from the
fair of Chartres: when riding together for the space of almost a whole days
journey; the secret providence, and sacred pleasure of God had so ordained,
that La Vi^ettes horse who bore him quietly and safely before, on a Sunday,
first goes back-wards in despite of his spur or swich, and then ^anding an end
on his two hind legs, falls quite back with him, and almost breaks the
bulk and trunk of his body: when having hardly the power to speak, his
breath failing him, and hec seeing no way but death for him, and the hideous
image thereof apparently before his eyes, the Spirit of God does so operate
with his sinnefell soul, as he there confesses how his wicked wife La
Vasselay had caused him to murder his master De Merson, whom he shot to death
with his Pistol; that she first seduced him with a thousand Crowns to
perform it, which he refused; but then her consent to marry him, made him not
only attempt, but finish that bloody business, whereof now from his very
heart and soul he repented himself, and beseeched the Lord to forgive it him.

But here before the Readers curiosity carry him further, let me in the name
and fear of God, both request and conjure him, to stand amazed, and wonder
with me, at his sacred providence, and inscrutable wisdom and judgment, which
most miraculously concurres and shines in this accident, and especially in
three essential and most apparent circumstances thereof: For it was on the
very same horse, the same day twelve month, and in the very same wood, and
place, where this execrable wretch La Villette formerly murdered his master De
Merson: Famous, and notorious circumstances, which deserve to be observed, and
remarked of all the children of God; yea, and to be imprinted and engraven in
their hearts and memories, thereby to deter us from the like crimes of murder.

Now these honest Merchants of Lavall, and Vittry (as much in charity to La
Villettes life, as in execration of that confessed murder of his Master De
Merson) convey him to an Inn in S^int Gorges, when expecting every minute,
that he would dye in their hands, they send away post to advertise the
Presidiall Court of Man's hereof, (within whose Jurisdiction Saint Gorges was)
who speedily command La Villette to (...) ^ght thither to them alive or dead:
But God reserved him from that natural, to (...) more infamous death, and made
him live till he came thither; where again he confesses this his foul
murder of his master De Merson, and likewise accuses La Vasselay to be the
sole instigator thereof, as we have formerly heard and understood. Whereupon he
is no sooner examined, but this bloody old Hagge is likewise imprisoned: who
with many asseverations and tears, denies, and retorts this foul crime from
her self to him. But her Judges are too wise to believe the weakness and
invalidity of this her foolish justification: So whiles they are consulting on
her; De Bre^ having notice of all these accidents, but especially, of La
Vasselay's imprisonment; he (still apprehending and fearing, that she
undoubtedly was the death of his daughter Gratio^a) takes Post from Nogent to
Man's, where he accuses her thereof to the Cryminell Judges, of the Presidiall
Court: who upon these her double accusation, adjudge her to the Rack, when at
the very first torment thereof, she at last (preferring the life of her soul,
before that of her body) confesses her self to be the Actor of her first
crime of Murder, and the Author of the second: when, and whereupon the Judges
(resembling themselves) in detestation, and for expiation of these her foul
crimes, condemn him to be hanged, and she to be burnt alive; which the next
day, at the common place of execution (near the Halles in Man's, is accordingly
executed, in the presence, and to the content of a world of people of that
City, who as much abhor the enormity of these their bloody crimes, as they
rejoice and glorify God, for this their (not so severe, as deserved)
punishments.

As for La Villette he (like an impious Christian) said little else, but that
which he had formerly spoken and delivered in the wood, at the receiving of his
fall: only he said, That he had well hoped, that his great wealth which he
had with La Vasselay, would have sheltred and preserved him from this infamous
death for murdering her Husband, and his master, De Merson.

But as for this bloody Beldam, and wretched old Fury, La Vasselay, she was
content to grieve at Gratiana's death, though not to lament or pity that of her
Husband De Mersons: yea, and although she seemed to blame her jealousy toward
her; yet her age was so wretchedly instructed in piety, as she could not find
in her heart either to make an Apology, or any way to seem repentant for her
inhumane cruelty toward him: For as she demanded pardon of De Bremay for
poisoning his daughterso she spoke not a word tending that way, to Manfrelle,
for causing his son (...) pistoll'd; only in particular terms, she re
quested God to forgive the vanity of her youth; and in general ones, the world
to forget the offenses and crimes of her age: And so conjuring all old Widows
and Wives, to beware by her mournful and execrable example; her flames and
prayers made expiation for the offense of her body, and her soul mounted and
fled to Heaven, to crave remission and pardon of God, who was the only Creator
of the one, and Redeemer of the other.

And such were the deplorable, yet deserved ends of this bloody, and wretched
couple, La Vasselay and La Villette, for so cruelly murdering harmless
Gratiana, and innocent De Merson: And thus did Gods all-seeing, and sacred
Justice, justly triumph ore these their crying and execrable crimes. O that
their examples may engender and propagate our reformation; and that the reading
of this their lamentable History, may teach us, not only how to meditate
thereon, but also how to amend thereby.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XIV.
Fidelia and Caelestina cause Carpi and Monteleone, with their two Laquayes,
Lorenzo and Anselmo, to murder their Father Captain Benevente, which they
perform. Monteleone, and his Laquay Anfelmo are drowned, Fidelia hangs her
self, Lorenzo is hanged for a robbery, and on the gallows confesses the
murdering of Benevente, Carpi has his right hand then his head cut off;
Caelestina is beheade^ and her body burnt.

OUr best parts being our Virtues, and our chief and Sovereign Virtue, the
purity and sanctity of our selves; how can we neglect those, or not regard
this, except we resolve to see our selves miserable in this life, and our
souls wretched in that to come: and as charity is the cyment of our other
virtues, so envy (her opposite) is the subversion of this our charity; from
whence flows rage, revenge, and many times murder, (her frequent (and almost)
her inseparable companions:) but of all degrees of malice and envy, can there
be any so inhumane and diabolical, ^s for two graceless daughters to plot the
death of their own father; and to seduce and obtain their two lovers to act
and perform it: whereof in this ensuing History, we shall see a most barbarous
and bloody president, as also their condign punish^nts afflicted on them for
the same. In the reading whereof, O that we may have the grace by the sight of
these their (...) crimes and punishments, to reform and prevent our own; that
we may look on their cruelty with charity, on their rage with reason, on
their errors with compassion, on their desperation, with pity, and on their
(...) wi^h p^; that the meditation and contemplation thereof, may terrify ou^
(...); qu^ch both the fire of our lust, and the flames of our revenge; so shall
our faiths be fortified, our passions reformed, our affections purified, and
our actions eternally both blessed and sanctified: to which end, I have written
and divulged it. So Christian Reader, if thou make this thy end in perusing it,
thou will then not fail to receive comfort thereby: and therefore fail not to
give God the Glory.

MAny years since the Duke of Ossuna (under the command of Spain) was made
Viceroy of the Noble Kingdom of Naples, the which he governed with much
reputation and honor, although his fortunes or actions (how justly or unjustly
I know not) have since suffered and received an Eclipse. In the City of
Otranto, within the Province of Apulia, there dwelt an ancient rich and valiant
Gentleman, (nobly descended) termed Captain Benevente, who by his deceased
Lady Sophia Elia^ora, (Niece to the Duke of Piombin^,) had left him two
daughters and a son, he termed Seignior Richardo Alcasero, they two, the
Ladies Fidelia and Caelestina, names indeed, which they will no way deserve;
but from whom they will solely dissent and derogate, through their hellish
vices, and inhumane dispositions to blood and murder: we may grace our names,
but our names cannot grace us. Alcasero lives not at home with his father, but
for the most part at Naples, as a chief Gentleman retayning to the Viceroy:
where he profits so well in riding and tilting (a noble virtue and exercise,
(beyond all other Italians) natural and hereditary to the Neopolitans,) that
he purchased the name of a bold and brave Cavalier, but for Fidelia and
Caelestina, the clockes of their youth having stroke twenty, and eighteen, the
Captain their father, (thinking it dangerous to have Ladies of their years
and descent far from him) keeps them at home, that his care might provide
them good husbands, and his eye prevent them from matching with others. It is
as great a blessing in children to have loving Parents, as for them to have
obedient children; and had their obedience answered his affection, and their
duty his providence: we had not seen the Theater of this their History so be
sprinkled, and gored with such great effusion of blood.

This Captain Benevente their father, (for his blood, wealth, and generosity)
was beloved and honored of all the Nobility of Apulia, and for his many
services, both by sea and land, was held in so great esteem in Otranto, that
his house was an Academie, where all the Gallants both of City and Country
resorted to back great Horses, to run at the Ring, and to practice other such
Courtly and Martial Exercises, whereunto this old Captain, as well in his
age, as youth, was exceedingly addicted: so as the beauty of his two daughters,
Fidelia, and Caelestina could not be long, either unseene, or unadmired,: for
they grew so perfectly fair, of so sweet complexions, and proper statures,
that they were justly reputed and held to be the Paragons of Beauty, not only
of Apulia, but of Italy: so as beauty being the Gold and Diamonds of Nature;
this of theirs (so sweet in its influence, and so excellent and delicious in
that sweetness) drew all men's eyes to love them, many men's hearts to adore
them: so had they been as rich in Virtue, as in Beauty, they had lived more
fortunate, and neither their friends nor enemies should have lived to have
seen them die so miserably; for now that proves their ruin, which might have
been their glory. They are both of them sought in marriage, by many Barons and
Caviliers, as well at home as abroad, but the Captain their father will not
give care, nor hearken to any, nor once permit that such motion be moved him:
They are so immodest, as they grieve hereat, and are so extremely sorrowful,
to see that a few years past away, makes their Beauties rather fade than
flourish: where Virtue graceth not Beauty, as well as Beauty, Virtue, it is
often (...) presage and forerunner of a fortune as fatal, as miserable.

But as their thoughts were too impatient and immodest, to give way to such
incontinent and irrigular conceits; so on the other side, the Captain their
father, was too severe, and withal too unkind, I may say, cruel, to hinder
them from Marriage, since their beauty and age had long since made them both
meritorious and capable of it: It was in them immodesty; in him, unkindness,
to propose such ends, to their desires and resolutions: for as he has
authority to exact obedience from them, so have they likewise reason to expect
fatherly affection, and care from him. But he is more affected and addicted to
his wealth and covetousness, then inclined to regard his daughters content;
and therefore is fully resolved, not as yet to marry them, which is a
resolution better left then embraced, and infringed then kept of him; since it
may bring forth effects contrary both to his hopes and desires. It is commonly
dangerous for Parents, to content themselves with their childrens discontents:
for where Nature is crossed, it many times degenerates, and prooves unnatural,
as the Cataracts of Nilu^ make it submerge and wash Egypt with her inundation:
But Fidelia and Caelestina, will make trial of one invention and conclusion
more before they will give way to their distaste, or strike sail to their
choler or revenge. They see their father is resolute, and severe in nipping
their hopes, and crossing their desires of marriage; and yet they hope, that
although they cannot prevail with him, that their brother Alcasero may: to
which end, the sooner to obtain and crown their desires with content, they
consult together, and so by a confident friend of theirs, send him this Letter
to Naples.

FIDELIA and CAELESTINA to (...).
DIspayring of our Fathers resolution to marry us, we have no other refuge or
recourse, but to thy self, and thy affection, in requesting thee powerfully to
solicit him herein that he may not prefer his gold before our content, and
consequently his hopes before our despair: neither could our hearts or
thoughts persuade us, ^ither to employ or acquaint any other but thy self with
these our desires, which Modesty would have suppressed, but that Truth
contradicted and opposed it: for his severity and cruelty is such toward us,
that although we are sought in marriage by diverse Cavaliers our Superiors,
yet he will (...) permit us to be seen, much less to be wedded of any. Join
then thy power to our wishes and prayers, and thy affection to the procuring of
our contents; and we then doubt ^ot, but to be as happy in a Brother, as
otherwise we fear, we shall see our selves unfortunate, yea, miserable in a
Father: and as thou can not forget our descent and Blood; so we zealously
pray and beseech thee to remember, if not our Beauty, our Touth.

FIDELIA. CAELESTINA.



Their Brother receives this their Letter: he is too brave, generous, and
courteous, to be unkind to any, especially to young Ladies, and most especially
to his si^ers, whose content he makes and reputes his own. He comes to
Otranto, deals effectually with the Captain his father herein, who gives them
this answer* That he has provided the Baron of Carpi for Fidelia, and the
Knight Bartholomeo Monte-leon^ for Caelestina* and that within fifteen days
they are to come to Otranto to see them: which news does exceedingly rejoice
first himself, then his sisters: but their joy shall not last long, but be
buried as soon as borne. Within the prefixed time these two Noble men come,
but they are hateful, and not pleasing to Fidelia and Caelestina; for the
Baron of Carpi is crook-backt, and squint-eyed, and Monte-leone is ^ame of one
leg. These Ladies value their beauty at too high a rate, to bestow it on such
deformed husbands; and although Venus accepts of Vulcan, yet they will have
none of these; because they deem no hell to that of a discontented bed:
heretofore they wished for Suitors, and now they wish they were well rid of
these; and so sacrificing to their own contents, they set up this resolution
in their hearts and souls, that they will rather dye maidens, then live to see
themselves wives to such husbands. Their father receives Carpi and Monte-leone
courteously, and entertaines them nobly, according to their rank and merits: he
tells his daughters plainly, that they shall marry these, and none others.
Thus the Bark of these their resolutions, are surprisd and beaten with two
cantrary winds: he will be obeyed of his daughters, and they will be commanded
of their father in all things, but not in this of their Marriage.

It is never good for parents, to force the affections of their children in
their marriages, since it is a business which not only lives, but dies with
them; but withal, their own wills must neither be their law, nor their guide:
for their Parents have, (or at least should have) more experience and judgment
then they, to see who are, and who are not fit matches for them: But where
authority opposes affection, or affection, reason, there such marriages are
still ushered on with discontent, and waited and attended on with misery.
Likewise, there is a great respect and consideration to be observed by Parents,
in the inclinations and natures of their children: for some will be persuaded,
or reproved with a word, whereas others will become more headstrong and
rebellious with menaces and threats. Had this Captain attempted and practiced
the first, and not the second toward these two Ladies his daughters,
peradventure they had never leapt from reason to rage, from obedience to
contempt, nor from hope to despair; yea, I dare presume to aver with truth
and safety, that we should have seen them all as happy, as I now fear we
shall see them miserable.

But to proceed with their History, they are pressed by the Captain their
father, and importuned by the two noble men their Suitors, to finish and
confirm these contracts. But Fidelia and Caelestina with a true semblance of
distaste, and yet a false show of courtesy, give the denial to their father in
particular terms, and to them in general: He storms at their disobedience,
and they impute this excuse of theirs, to modesty, rather than unkindnesse:
They flatter themselves with this hope, that since they are fair, they must be
courteous, and cannot be cruel: or if the contrary, that the Captain their
father will so manage his daughters affections, as all things shall sort to
their desires and expectations; but they shall come too short of their hopes:
for they are neither reserved for the Ladies, nor the Ladies for them: but
whiles thus they are busy in advancing the process of their affections,
Fidelia and Caelestina attempt a contrary enterprise: for they with tears and
prayers, request their brother Alcasero, importunately to solicit their Father
in their behalf: that he will not enforce them to marry those whom they cannot
affect, much less obey: which like a noble and dear brother he performs
with much zeal and persuasion: but he cannot prevail with him, nor bring them
any other answer, then that they must and shall marry them, and only them.

Had this resolution of their father been more courteous and less rigorous
toward his daughters, this History of theirs had not deserved so much pity,
and compassion, nor would have drawn so many sighs from the hearers, or
tears from the Readers: for now seeing their father cruelly resolved to offer
violence to their affections, they begin to hate him, because he will not
better love them. And here (O here) they enter into devilish machinations, and
hellish conspiracies against him: for as he plots their discontents, so do
they his destruction. Fidelia and Caelestina see their blood, and cause one,
and therefore so they pretend shall be their fortunes: they would reveal their
intents and designs each to other; but the fact is so foul and unnatural, as
for a whiles they cannot but they need no other Oratory then their own sullen
and discontented looks, for either of them may read a whole Lecture of grief
and choler in each others eyes, till at length tired with the importunity of
their father, and the impatiency of Carpi, and Monteleone: Fidelia as the more
audacious of the two, first breaks it to her sister Caelestina, in this
manner. That she had rather die, then be compelled to marry one whom she
cannot affect: that the Baron of Carpi is not for her, nor she for him; and
that since her father is resolute in this match, (although she be his
daughter) she had rather see him laid in his grave, then her self in Carpies
bed. There needs not many reasons, to persuade that which we desire, For
Caelestina tells her sister plainly, that she (in all points) joins and
concurres in opinion with her, adding withal, that the sooner their father is
dispatched, the better; because she knows they shall never receive any
content on Earth, till he be in Heaven: and so they conclude he shall dye.

But alas, what hellish and devilish daughters are these, to seek the death
of their father, of whom they have received their lives? who ever read of a
Parracide more inhumanely cruel, or impiously bloody? so if ever murder went
unrevenged, this will not; for we shall see the Authors and Actors thereof
most severely punished for the same. Men and women may be secret in their
sins, but God will be just in his decrees, and sacred in his judgments: what
a religious resolution had it been in them, to have retired, and not advanced
in this their damnable attempt; but they are too profane, to have so much
pity, and too outrageous to hearken to this religious reason: yea, they are
too impious to hearken to Grace, and too revengefull and Bloody minded, to give
ear either to Reason, Duty, or Religion. So now like two incensed and
implacable furies, they consult how and in what manner they may free themselves
of their father: Fidelia proposes diverse degrees and several sorts of
murders; but Caelestina likes none of them; in some she finds too much danger,
in others too little assurance; and therefore as young as she is, she invents,
a plot as strange as subtle, and as malicious and diabolical as strange: she
informs her, that to be rid of her father, there cannot be a securer course
then to engage the Baron of Carpi, and the Knight of Monteleone to murder him:
Fidelia wonders hereat, saying, it will be impossible for them to be drawn to
perform it, since they both know and see, that the Captain their father loves
them so well, as will or nill, they must be their husbands. But Caelestina's
revengefull plot is further fetched, and more cunningly spunne: for she has not
begun it, to leave it raw and unfinished; but is so confident in her devilish
industry, as she affirms she will perfect and make it good. Fidelia demands
how. Caelestina answers, That they both must make a feigned and flattering
show, to change their distaste, and now to affect Carpi, and Monteleone, whom
before they could not: that having in this manner drawn them to their lure,
when they attempt to urge marriage, they shall both agree to inform them, that
it is impossible for them to obtain it, whiles the Captain their father
lives, since albeit in outward appearance he make a fair show to make them
their husbands; yet that he means and intends nothing less; for that he has
given them express charge and command (at any hand) not to love or affect
them; which is the maine and sole cause, that has so long withheld them from
making sooner demonstrations of their affections toward them: and this (quoth
she) will occasion and provoke them to attempt it; adding, that by this
means, they may give two strokes with one stone, and so not only be rid of
our father, but likewise of Carpi and Monteleone, who peradventure may be
apprehended, and executed for the fact; and for our safeguard and security, we
will powerfully conjure and swear them to secrecy.

There is no web finer then that of the Spider, nor treachery subtiller than
that of a woman, especially if she contemn Charity for Revenge, her Soul for
her Body, God for Satan, and consequently Heaven for Hell: how else could this
young Lady lodge so revengefull a heart in so sweet a Body, or shroud such
bloody conceits and inventions under so fair and so beautiful complexion.

But the Panther, though his skin be fair, yet his breath is infectious:
and we many times see, that the foulest Snake lurkes under the greenest and
beautifullest leaves. Fidelia gives an attentive ear to this her sisters
bloody Stratagem and design: she finds it sure, and the probabilities
thereof apparent and easy, and therefore approves of it. So these two
beautiful, yet bloody sisters vow, without delay, to set it on foot, and in
practice. It is the Nature of Revenge, to look forwards, seldom backewards:
but did we measure the beginning by the end, as well as the end by the
beginning, our affections would savor of far more Religion, and of far
less impiety, and we should then rejoice in that which we must now repent, but
cannot remedy. They take time at advantage, and pertinently acquaint Carpi, and
Monteleone with it. The passions of affection prove often more powerful then
those of Reason, they suffer themselves to be vanquished and led away by the
pure beauty and sweet Oratory of these two discontented and treacherous Ladies,
without considering what poison lurkes under their speeches, and danger under
their tongues: They commit a gross and maine error, in relying more on the
daughters youth, then the fathers gravity; on their verbal, then his real
affection; and so they engage themselves to the daughters, in a veryshort time
to free them of the Captain their father. It was a base vice in Gentlemen of
their rank, to violate the Laws of Hospitality, in so high a degree, as to
kill him, who loved them so dearly, and entertained them so courteously; and it
is strange, that both their humors were so strangely vicious, as to concur
and sympathize in the attempt of this execrable murder: But what cannot vice
perform, or Ladies procure of their Lovers, at least if they love Beauty
better then Virtue, and Pleasure, then Piety.

Captain Benevente is many times accustomed after dinner to ride to his
Vineyard, and now and then to Alpiata, a neighbor village, where he is
familiarly (if not too familiarly) acquainted with a Tennants wife of his, whom
he loved in her youth, and cannot forsake in her middle age: perseverance in
vice never makes a good end: a single sin is distastefull; but the redoubling
thereof, is both hateful and odious to God. Carpi and Monteleone take their
two Lacquaies, Lorenzo and Anselmo with rhem, as soon as they know the Captain
to be abroad, only accompanied with his confident Gentleman Fiamento; and
disguising themselves, they watch him at the corner of the wood; where of
necessity he must pass. The event answers their bloody expectations and
desires: they see Benevente and Fiamento approaching, riding a soft trot; when
like so many Fiends and Devils, they all four rush forth the thickets, and
(without any other form) with their Swords and Pistols, (after some
resistance) kill them dead to the ground: but this is not the end of their
hellish malice and envy; neither is the unsatiable thirst of their revenge yet
quenched: for they take these two murdered bodies (who are a fresh reeking and
weltring in their blood) and carry them to a neighbor hill, and so throw them
down into a deep quarry full of thick bushes and brambles, whereas they thought
no mortal eye should ever have seen them more, and then and there they
consult upon their flight. Carpi resolves to take poast for Naples, and there
for a time to shroud himself among the multitude of the Nobility and Coaches,
which grace and adorn that City: And Monte-leone resolves to hye toward
Brundusium, with intent, that i^ these murders were revealed, and himself
detected and accused, he would there embarque himself either for Venice or
Malta: but he has not as yet made his peace and reckoning with God.

Leave we Carpi and his Laquay poasting for Naples, and let us see what
accident will speedily befall Monte-leone. It is impossible for murder to go
long unpunished; Monte-leone and his Laquay Anselmo shall ere they ride far,
see this position verified in themselves: He is provided of two fair Gennets,
one for himself, the other for his Laquay, and having taken his leave of
Carpi, away he goes for Brundusium; but he has not ridden past twelve miles
before his own horse fell down dead under him, which does something afflict
and amaze him; but this is but the least part of his misery, and but the very
beginning of his misfortune; he is enforced to make a virtue of necessity, so
he rides his Laquayes horse, and he follows him on foot. It is impossible for
a guilty conscience to be secured from fear: he rides narrow lanes, and
by-ways, but at last near the Village Blanquettelle he meets with a swift
Ford, which is passable for horse, but not for foot: Here Monte-leone is
constrained to take up his Laquay Anselmo behind him, which he does; but being
in the midst thereof, the horse stumbles, and falls with both of them under him;
which is done so suddenly, that Montel^e had no time to cast off his Laquay,
and so they are both drowned; and have neither the Grace nor power to breathe,
or speak a word more.

Gods judgments are secret and inscrutable: had they had time to repent, they
had only lost their lives, whereas now it is rather to be feared; than
wished, they likewise run the hazard of their souls. But as it is a virtue
to think and censure charitably of the dead, so it must needs be a vice to
do the contrary. Heretofore they thirsted for blood, and (lo) now they have
their fill of water. All Elements are the servants of God, but these two of
fire and water, are the most terrible, the most impetuous. We have but one way
to come into the world, but diverse to go out of it: This is a testimony of our
weakness, and of Gods power.

By this time Captain Benevente, and his man Fiamento are found wanting, and
no news to be heard of them: his house rings and resounds with sorrow, all his
servants and friends mourn and lament for his absence, and his two accursed
daughters, they seem to be all in tears hereat: but we shall shortly see this
their hypocrisy and dissimulation both detected and revenged. They lay all the
Country to purchase news of their father, and speedily by poast advertise
their brother Alcasero hereof at Naples, who amazed hereat, comes away with all
possible speed and expedition: His two sisters and himself wonderfully mourn
and lament for the absence of their father; and now seeing five days past and
no news of him, they begin to suspect and fear, that he is made away and
murdered; and because Fiamento was alone with him, they suspect him of the
fact, which ^hey are the sooner induced to believe, in regard he is fled, and
not to be found: ^ut they shall soon see the contrary, and that as he was a
faithful servant to ^eir father his master, during his life, so he was a true
companion to him in ^is death. And although Alcasero his son use all possible
zeal and industry to ^de out his father, yet since Earth cannot, now Heaven
will reveal the news ^d sight of him. For as some neighboring Gentlemen (his
kinsfolks and ^iends) are hunting of a Stagge near Alpiata; they pursue him
on horseback some five or six hours, and at last being tired, he runs for
refuge and shelter, through the bushes and briars, into the same old Quarry,
where the dead bodies of Captain Benevente, and his man Fiamento were thrown.
The Gentlemen Hunters descend from their horses, and with their Swords drawn,
enter purposely to kill the Stagge, which they perform; when casting aside
their eyes, they see two dead men's bodies, one near the other, whose legs,
hands, and faces, the Crows had pitifully mangled and defaced. They are amazed
at this mournful and unlooked for spectacle, when approaching to discern
them, they by their clothes find, and know them to be Captain Benevente, and
his Gentleman Fiamento. They are astonished and amazed hereat; and so one of
them rides back poast to Otranto, to acquaint Alcasero his son hereof; who
melting into tears, returns with him near to Alpiata, where, to his
unspeakable grief, he sees the dead bodies both of his father and Fiamento,
which before all the Hunters he caused to be searched, and finds that his
father (with a Pistol bullet) was shot through the head in two places, and run
through the body with a Rapier in three; and that Fiamento had five deep wounds
with a Rapier, and once shot through the head. Alcasero, and the whole company
grieve and lament at this sorrowful news; they know well that Fiamento did
not set upon the Captain his father, and that neither of them had Pistols: and
though they might imagine it done by thieves, yet they were quickly cleared of
that jealousy and suspicion, because they find rich Rings on his Masters
fingers, and store of gold in his pockets: So they referring the discovery of
this bloody and damnable murder to Time, and to God, the Author and giver of
Time, Alcasero causes the dead bodies, first of his father, then of Fiamento
to be laid in a Coach, which he had purposely caused to be brought thither;
and so accompanied with all the Gentlemen, returns with it to Otranto, where
all the whole City lament and bewail his tragical disaster: and because these
dead corpse of theirs have received wrong in being so long above ground,
Alcasero that night gives them their due burials, interring Fiamento decently,
and his father honorably, according as the necessity and strictness of the
time would permit him.

It is now Alcasero's curiosity and care to seek out the murderers of his
Father; and for his sisters, they are so irreligious and wretched, as they
think to mock God, and delude the world with their immoderate, yet
counterfeit mourning; but it proceeds not from their hearts, much less from
their souls. The morrow after their Fathers burial, they are all three
informed, that Monte-leone and his Laquay Anselmo are drowned as they past the
River Blanquettelle, whereat he wonders, and his two sisters rejoice and
triumph, especially Caelestina, who now sees herself freed, not only of the
Captain her father whom she hated, but also of the Knight Monte-leone her
Suitor, whom she could not love: She is so impious and graceless, as she does
rejoice, but will neither repent nor pity at these accidents; yea, she so
slightly and trivially passes over the remembrance of her fathers untimely
and bloody death, as if murder were no sin, (...) that God had ordained no
punishment for it: She wears her mourning attire and weeds, more for show
than sorrow: for her father was no sooner laid in hi^ grave, but she builds
many Castles of pleasure in the air of her extravagant an^ ambitious thoughts,
vowing that ere long she will have a Gallant of her own choosing to her husband:
but she may come too short of her hopes, and perchance fin^ a halter for her
neck, before a wedding Ring for her finger. As for her brothe^ Alcasero, his
thoughts are roaving and roaming another way: for he finds it strang^ that the
Baron of Carpi comes not to condole with him for his father, and (...) continue
his suit and affection to his sister Fidelia, whereat he both admires and
wonders, and not only takes it in ill part, but also begins to suspect, and
to cast many doubts and jealousies thereon; and what the issue thereof will
be, or what effects it will produce, we shall shortly see. But a month or
two being blown away, Carpi hearing no suspicion or talk of him, and thinking
all things in a readiness for him to be assured and contracted to his Lady and
Mistress Fidelia; he takes a new Laquay, and apparelling him in a contrary
Livery, sends him secretly to Otranto with this Letter to her:

CARPI to FIDELIA.
THere are some reasons that stay me for not coming to Otranto, to condole
with thee for the death of thy Father, which what they are, none can better
imagine th^n thy self: when thy sorrows are overblowne, I will come to thee,
in hope to be as joyful in thy presence, as thy absence makes me miserable. I
have given thee so true and so real a proof of my affection, as thou
should offer mepalpable injustice, and to thy self extreme injury to doubt
thereof. For what greater testimony can thou futurely expect, than to believe
I will ever prefer thy love before mine own life: if thy constancy answer
mine, Heaven may, but Earth cannot cross our desires. I pray signify me how
thy brother stands affected to our affections; thy answers shall have many
kisses, and I will ever both honor and bless that hand that writ it.

CARPI.


The Laquay comes to Otranto, and finds out Fidelia, to whom (with much care
and secrecy) he delivers his Masters Letter, and commends, and requesteth an
answer. Fidelia receives the one, and promises the other: but she is
perplexed and troubled in mind. Here her thoughts make a stand, and consult
whether she shall open this Letter or no. Her Conscience has heretofore
yielded to the death of her Father; and now Religion begins to work upon the
life of her Conscience, which indeed is that of her Soul. Had she persevered
in this course of piety, her repentance might have pleaded for her
disobedience, and her contrition redeemed her crime; but she forsakes the
Helm that might have steered her to the Port of happiness and safety; and so
fills the sails of her resolutions with the wind of despair, which threaten
no less than to split the Bark of her life on the rocks of her destruction
and death. She now begins to hate company which before she loved, and to
love solitariness, which before she hated; yea, the living picture of her
dead Father does so haunt her thoughts, and frequent her imaginations, that
wheresoever she is, it is present with her. Remorse, as a Vulture gnawes at
her heart and conscience; yea, though nothing do fear her, yet she fears
all things. She sees no man running behind her, but she thinks he purposely
follows her to dragge her to prison: she is afraid of her own shadow, and
thinks, that not only every tower, but every house will fall upon her: she
will not come into any Boat, nor pass any River, Brook, or Well, for fear of
drowning. This despair of hers causes her to be cold in her Religion, and
frozen in her Prayers, which should be both the preservative and Antidote of
the soul: her speeches for the most part are confused and distracted, and her
looks; sullen, fearful, and ghastly (the proper signs and symptoms of
despair.) Carpi's Laquay having stayed two days in Otranto for his answer,
holds it his duty to importune Fidelia to be dispatched, the which that night
she promises him; and now in a sad and melancholy humor she breaks off
Carpi's Letter, and peruseth it; which not only renewes, but revives the
remembrance of her fathers death; whereat she enters into so strange, and so
implacable a passion, as she once had thought to have thrown his Letter into
the fire, and her self after. Now she is resolved to write back to Carpi,
and then presently she changes her resolution, and vows she will answer him
with s^lence. But the Devil is as subtle as malicious; and so she calls for
Pen and Ink, and out of the dregs of discontent, and the gall of despair,
writes and returns him this answer:

FIDELIA to CARPI.
MY Fathers death has altered my disposition; for I am now wholly addicted to
mourning, and not to marriage. I pray trouble not thy self to leave Naples, to
come to condole with me in Otranto: for the best comfort that I can receive, is
that it is impossible for me to receive any: I never doubted of thy affection,
nor will give thee any just cause to suspect, much less to fear mine. If this
will not suffice, rest assured I have resolved, that either my grave, or thy
self shall be my Husband. How my brother stands affected to thee, is a thing
difficult for me to understand or know, since I am only his Sister, not his
Secretary; but in all outward appearance, I think he neither loves thee for my
sake, nor my self for thine. Live thou as happy, as I fear I shall die
miserable.

FIDELIA.


What a fearful Letter is this, either for Fidelia to send, or Carpi to
receive: but her distempered and distracted spirits can afford no other; and
therefore she dispatcheth away the Laquay with this. And now (as if her
thoughts transported her to hell) she cannot be alone, for the Devil is
still with her: he appears to her in the shape of an Angel of Light, and
profers her mountains of Wealth, and Worlds of Honor, if she will fall down
and adore him. To rebel against God is a sin; but to persevere in our
rebellion, is not only a contempt, but a treason in the highest degree against
God. The best of Gods people are commonly tempted; but those are, and prove the
worst, who are overcome with temptation. Fortitude is a principal and
sovereign virtue in Christians; and if we vanquish the Devil, it is good for
us that he assaulted us, since those Victories (as well spiritual as temporal)
are ever most glorious and honorable, which are achieved with greatest
danger. Had Fidelia followed the current of this counsel, and the stream of
this advise, she had never been so weak with God, nor so unfaithful to her
self, as to destroy her self: but forsaking God, and contemning prayer, which
is the true way to the truest felicity, what can she hope for but despair, or
expect but destruction? Her brother Alcasero, and many of her kinsfolks,
neighbors, and friends (with their best zeal, and possible power) endeavor to
persuade and comfort her; they exhort her to read religious books, and
continually to pray: She hearkneth to both these counsels, but neither can, or
will not follow either: Her sleeps are but broken slumbers, and her slumbers
but distracted dreams; and ever and anon it seems (to the eyes of her mind
and body) that the Captain her father does both speak to her and follow her.
In a word, she is weary both of this world, and of her life; yea, despair, or
rather the Devil has reduced her to this extreme misery, and miserable
extremity, that she is ready to kiss that hand that would kill her, or that
Death which would give her death: She never sees a knife in the hands of
another, but she wishes it in her own heart: her Conscience does so terribly
accuse her, and ^r thoughts give in such bloody evidence against her conscience
and self, for occasioning her fathers murder, that she resolves she must die,
and therefore disdaines to live, And now comes her sister Celestina to her, to
persuade and confer with her, but she will prove but a miserable comforter.
Fidelia sees her with hatred and detestation, and when she begins to speak,
very peremptorily and mournfully cuts off her speeches thus; Ah sister, would
we had slipped when we plotted our fathers death, for in seeking his ruin, we
shall assuredly find out our (...): Provide you for your safety, for I am past
hope of mine; and so get you out of my sight. I know not whether the beginning
of this her speech savoured more of Heaven, then the end thereof does of Hell:
for sure If we pass hope we come too short of salvation; and if we forsake
that, this infallibly will forsake us.

This poor, or rather this miserable Gentlewoman, having always her murdered
father before her eyes, (which incessantly haunts her as a ghost, and yet she
enforced to follow it as her shadow) is powerfully allured and provoked by the
instigation of the Devil, in what manner, or at what rate soever, to dispatch
her self, being so wretchedly instructed in faith and piety, and she adds
and believes, that the end of her life will prove not only the end of her
afflictions, but the beginning of her joys. But O poor Fidelia, with a
thousand pities and tears, I both pity and grieve to see thee believe so
infernal an Advocate: for what joys either will he, or can he give thee? Why,
nothing but bondage for liberty, torments for pleasures, and tortures for
delights: or if thou will have me show thee whereat his flattering oratory, or
sugared insinuation tends, it is only to have thee destroy thy body in earth,
that (as a triumph and Trophee to the enlargement of his obscure kingdom) he
may dragge thy body and soul to hell fire. But Fidelia is as constant in her
sin, as impious in her resolution; and so (all delays set apart) she seeks
the means to destroy her self: she procures poison, and takes it, but the
effect and operation thereof answers not her desires. I know not whether she
be more impatient to live, than willing to die. We never want invention,
seldom means to do evil: a little penknife of hers, shall in her conceit
perform that which poison could not: she seeks it, and now remembers it is
with her pair of knives in the pocket of her best gown: she flies to her
Wardrobe, and so to her pocket, but finds not her knives, only she finds her
Naples silk girdle in stead thereof. The Devils instruments are never far to
seek; she thinks it as good to strangle her throat, as to cut it: And here
comes her mournful and deplorable Tragedy, she returns swiftly to her
chamber, bolts the door, and so (which I grieve and tremble to relate) fastens
it to the reaster of her bed, and there hangs her self; and as it is
faithfully reported, at that very instant, and for the space of an hour, it
thundered and lightened so cruelly, as if Heaven and Earth were drawing to an
end, that not only the chamber where she hung, but the whole house shaked
thereat. The thunder being past, and the skies cleared, dinner is served on the
Table, and Alcasero and Caelestina ready to sit, they call for their sister
Fidelia, but she is not to be found. One goes to her chamber, and returns,
that her key is without side, and the door bolted within, and yet she answers
not. They both fly from the Table to her chamber, and call and knock, but no
answer. Alcasero commands his men to break open the door, which they do, and
there sees his sister Fidelia hanging to the bed-steed stark dead. They cry
out as affrighted and amazed at this mournful and pitiful spectacle, and with
all speed take her down; but she is breathless, though not cold; and they see
all her face and body, which were wont to be as white as snow, now to be coal
black, and to stink infinitely. These are the woeful effects, and lamentable
fruits both of Despair and Murder; O, may Christians of all ranks, and of
hoth sexes, take heed by Fidelia's mournful and miserable example, and withal
remember that murder will still be revenged and punished, especially that
which is perpetrated by Children toward their Parents; a sin odious both to
God and man, since it not only opposes Nature, but Grace; Earth, but heaven.

No sooner (with grief and mourning) has Alcasero buried this his natural,
yet unnatural ^ster Fidelia, but as his other sister Caelestina weeps for her
death, so she again, rejoices that her sister has no way revealed the great
business, which so much concerns her, I mean the murder of the Captain her
father. But Time will detect and revenge both it and her. And that we may not
seem extravagant in the narration and unfolding of this History, fly we
from Otranto to Naples, and leave we the fatal and woeful Tragedy of Fidelia;
to speak a little of the Baron of Carpi her Lover, who has yet a great part
to act upon the Theater of this History.

He has no sooner received Fidelia's Letter by his Lacquay, but he much
wonders and grieves at the contents thereof: he sees her cold in her affection
toward him, and hot in despair to her self, and thinks, that as it is in her
power to rejoice him with her affection, so it may be in his to comfort her
with his presence: but her request and his Conscience inform him, that it is
yet too soon to leave Naples to see Otranto; and yet that he may not fail in
the complement and duty of a Lover, he resolves to visit her by Letter, though
not in person, and so writes her these few lines.

CARPI to FIDELIA.
WEre thy request not my Law, I would see Fidelia to comfort her, and comfort
my self to see her: But since I must be so unfortu^, as in one Letter to
receive two different sorrows, my refusal, and thy despair: what remedy (or
Antidote) can I more aptly administer, than Patience to the first, and Prayer
to the second. If thou weigh matters aright, I have more occasion of sorrow
than thy self, and yet I am so far from despairing, as I hope Time will give
thee consolation, and me Content. Endeavor to love thy self, and not to hate
me; so shall thou draw felicity out of affliction, and I security out of
danger. I hope thy brother will not follow thy fathers steps, his affection to
thee, shall be mine to himself: Let thy second Letter give me half so much
joy, as thy first did grief, and I shall then triumph at my good fortune, as
much as I now lament and pity thine, and in that mine own:

CARPI.


He sends this Letter of his to Otranto, by his Lacquay Fiesco, who carried his
first; but he must go into another world if he mean to deliver it to
Fidelia: He comes to Otranto, and repaires to Captain Benevent^ house: whereas
he is walking in the second Court. Alcasero being very sollitary and pensive
at a window, leaning his head on his hand, and deeply and seriously thinking
what two fatal disasters were befallen his house, as the loss of his father
and sister, he by chance espies this Lacquay Fiesco; at whose sight his heart
beats, and his blood very suddenly flasheth up in his face: he exceedingly
wonders hereat, and attributing every extraordinary motion in himself, a step
or degree to the discovery of his fathers murder, whereon his thoughts were
always fixed, and could never be withdrawn: he sends a Gentleman of his
named Plantinus, to enquire whose Lacquay it was, and what was his business.
Plantinus descends and examineth him, but he is close, and will reveal
nothing. He entreats him to enter and taste the Wine, the which he does; when
engaging, and leaving him in the Celler, he trips up to his Master, and
acquaints him with his answer, adding withal, that some fifteen days since
he saw him here before. Alcasero commands this Lacquay to be brought before
him, he examines him, but he will not discover himself; he threatens him with
the whip, and imprisonment, but he cannot prevail. It is a virtue in a servant
to conceal his masters secrets. Alcasero is angry at his silence and
fidelity, yet commends him: he bethinks himself of another course and
subtilty, as well knowing that fair words may obtain that which threats
cannot; he prays him to dine with his servants, and enjoyneth Plantinu^ to
bring him to him in the Garden after dinner, the which he does: Alcasero takes
him apart, and tells him, that some fifteen days past he saw him here: Fiesco
answers him with silence. Alcasero finds much perturbation in his heart, and
distraction in his looks and speech; he thinks this boy can reveal something
which he ought to know, and therefore thinks to surprise him with a silver
hook; he profers him twenty Ducats, and lays it down before him, to
discover himself and his business.

Gold is, but ought not to be a powerful bait to indiscretion and poverty. It
is a small point of small wisdom in Noblemen to commit secrets of importance
to those who have too much folly, and too little judgment to conceal them.
The sight of this gold does not only dazzle Fiesco's eyes, but eclipse his
fidelity; so he holds it no sin toward God, nor treachery toward his master
to reveal it; but takes it, and informs him, that he is the Baron of Carpi
his Lacquay, who sent him from Naples thither, with a letter from him to the
Lady Fidelia his sister. Alcasero grows pale hereat, and is very curious and
hasty to see the Letter: Fiesco delivers it him, who steps aside, and reads it:
whreon he plucks his hat down his forehead, and so making three or four
paces, reads it ore again. He is perplexed to know as much as he sees, and
grieved, not to see and find as much as he desires to know: he now confirms
his former suspicion of Carpi, and believes that he is a chief Actor or Agent
in his fathers Tragedy. But he knows it wisdom to use silence in the
discovery of a crime of this nature; and therefore calls Fiesco to him, bids him
stay that night, and to speak with him in the morning before he depart.

Alcasero withdrawes himself from the Garden to his Closet, and there again
peruseth this Letter of Carpi's: he finds it full of suspicion and ambiguities,
and perceives it has a relation to former letters; yea, there is a mystery in
this Letter, the which he must unlocke and find out ere he be satisfied: for
although Carpi be squint-eyed, yet he fears he has looked too right on his
father. He flies to Fidelia's Closet, Trunk, and Casket, and finds a former
Letter of Carpi's to her, and the copy of one of hers to him; and the perusal
of these two Letters are so far from diminishing his suspicion, as it does
augment and increase it; for now he verily believes that Carpi and his sister
Fidelia have jointly had a great hand in his fathers murder. But all this
while he does not once so much as suspect or imagine that his other sister
Caelestina has played any part in this Tragedy: but Time is the daughter of
Truth, as Truth is that of Heaven. In the morn he calls for Fiesco, to whom he
gave this farewell: Tell the Baron of Carpi thy Master, that my sister Fidelia
is in another world, and not in this, and that shortly I resolve to see him at
Naples, and that in the interim I will reserve his Letter. Fiesco departs, but
knows, he has so highly betrayed and wronged his Master, as he dares not see
him, and so shows him a fair pair of heels. Such Laquayes far better
deserve a halter than a Livery. Carpi wonders at his Laquayes long stay: In
which mean time Alcasero comes to Naples, where he is yet irresolute, whether
to accuse Carpi by the order and course of Law, or to fight with him: but he
resolves to do both; and that if the Law will not right him for the murder of
his father, his sword shall. He goes to the Criminell Judges, and with much
passion and sorrow accuses the Baron of Carpi for murdering of the Captain
Benevente his father; and for proof hereof produces his two Letters to his
sister Fidelia, and the copy of one of hers to him. Whereupon the Judges grant
power to apprehend Carpi, so he is taken and constituted prisoner; and now he
has leisure to think on the baseness and foulness of his fact. But he is
so far from dejecting himself to sorrow, or addicting himself to
repentance, as he puts a brazen face on his looks and speeches, and so
peremptorily intends and resolves to deny all. Had he had more grace, or less
impiety, he would have made better use of this his imprisonment, and have
shown himself at least humble, if not sorrowful, for his offense and crime.
But he holds it wisdom in greatest dangers to show most courage and
resolution, and so makes himself fit to grapple and encounter with all
accidents and occurrences whatsoever.

Men may palliate their sins, but God will find them out, and display them
in their naked colors. Alcasero is an importunate solicitor to the Judges to
draw and hasten on Carpi his arraignment: But they (resembling themselves)
proceed therein modestly and gravely: they consult, and consider the three
Letters: they find conjecturall sentences enough to accuse, but no solid proof
to condemn him: they hold, that their opinions ought not to be swayed with
the wind of every presumption, and that it is not fit so trivially to set the
life of a man at six and seven. Besides, as they approve of Alcasero his
affection to his father, so they dislike of his impetuosity and vehemency
toward Carpi. They all resolve to lay the Sword of Justice in the balance of
Equity, and then ordain that Carpi shall be rackt, to see whether they can
draw more light from his tongue, than from his pen. But he endures these his
tortures and torments with wonderful constancy; and still denies all. Had his
cause been more religious and humane, and not so bloody, this fortitude and
courage of his had been as praiseworthy, as now it is odious and execrable.
The Court by sentence (pronounced in open Senate) acquit and clear Carpi of
this murder; whereat Alcasero exceedingly repines and murmures.

It is not enough that Carpi has now escaped this danger; for Alcasero
remains still constant in his conceit, that he is the murderer of his father,
and therefore vows and resolves to fight with him: He lets pass some six
weeks time, till he be sound of his limbs, and then resolves to send him a
challenge. Had Carpi been innocent, it had been more honorable and
requisite, that he had challenged Alcasero, than Alcasero him: but his cause
being unjust, and his conscience fearful, he dares not run the hazard, to
be desirous or ambitious to fight with Alcasero: the which if he had
attempted, Alcasero will anticipate and prevent him; who making Plantinus his
second, he out of the ashes of his sorrow, and the fire of his revenge, sends
him to Carpi with this Billet of Defiance.

ALCACERO to DE CARPI.
ALthough the Law have cleared thee for the murder of my Father, yet my
Conscience cannot, and my Rapier will not. I should be a monster of Nature, not
to seek revenge for his death, of whom I have received my life. Could I give
peace to my thoughts, or unthinke the cause of my disaster, I would not seek
to bereave thee of thylife, with the hazard of mine own. But finding this not
only difficult, but impossible, pardon me if I request thee to meet me single,
at eight of the clock after supper, at the West end of the Common Vineyard,
where I will attend thee with a couple of Rapiers, the choice whereof shall be
thine, and the refusal mine: or if thou will make use of a second, he shall
not depart without meeting one to exchange a thrust or two with him.

ALCASERO.


Whiles the Baron of Carpi is triumphing to see how he has bleared the eyes
of his Judges, and so freed himself from the fears and danger of death,
behold, Plantinus finds him out, and delivers him Alcasero his Challenge. He
takes it, and with a variable countenance reads it, whereat he finds a
reluctation and combat, not only in his thoughts, but his Conscience; whether
he should accept or refuse it. His Honor bids him do the first; but his
Conscience wills him to perform the second: it were better to be borne a
Clown than a Coward. Besides if he should refuse to fight with Alcasero, he
upon the matter makes himself guilty of the Captain his fathers death. He
knows he has an unjust cause in hand, but he preferres his Honor before his
Li^e, when setting a good face upon his resolution, he adresseth himself to
Plantinus thus:

Sir, I presume you know this business: for I take you to be Alcasero's
Second. He has (replied Plantinus) done me the honor to make choice of me,
in stead of a more worthy. Well (quoth the Baron of Carpi) tell thy master from
me, That although I have not deserved his malice, yet that I accept his
challenge, and will perform it, only I must fight single, because I am at
present unprovided of a Second. Plantinus (as full of Valor as Fidelity)
prays him, that he may not see his hopes and desires frustrated, but that he
may enjoy part of the feast. But Carpi gives him this answer, which he bids him
take for his last resolution: That he will hazard himself, but not his
friend. So Plantinus returns with joy to his master, and discontent to
himself: when nothing proving of power, to quench the fire of these two
Gentlemen's courage and revenge, they meet at the time and place appointed.
Carpi fights with passion and vehemency; Alcasero with judgment and
discretion. Carpi looks red and fiery with choler, and Alcasero pale and
ghastly, not for fear of his cause, but for the remembrance of his sorrows:
and to conclude and shut up this combat in the issue thereof, Justice is not
now pleased to show the effects of her power and influence; nor God that of his
Justice, only it is reserved for another time, and for a more shameful
manner: so Carpi has the best of the day, for he is only hurt in his right
hand, and scarred over both his lips, as if the providence and pleasure of God
had ordained, that that hand which committed the murder, and that mouth which
denied it, should be purposely punished and no part else. As for Alcasero, he
had five several wounds, whereof one being through the body, made Carpi believe
it was mortal, and the rather, for that he fell therewith speechless to the
ground: so leaving him grovelling and weltring in his blood, he departs,
resting very confident, that he was at his very last gasp of life, and point
of death. But Carpi his Surgeon (being more humane and charitable than his
master) leapes over the next hedge, and comes to his assistance: He leanes him
against a bank, binds up his wounds, and wraps him in his cloak, and so
runs to a Litter, which he saw near him, and prays the Lady that was in it,
that she would vouchsafe to take in Don Alcasero, who was there extremely and
dangerously wounded: and this did Carpi his Surgeon perform, in the absence
of Alcasero's own Surgeon; who out of some distaste or forgetfulness, came
not at the hour and place assigned, according to his promise. It was the Lady
Marguerita Esperia, who out of her noble and charitable zeal to wounded
Alcasero, presently descended her Litter, commanding her servants to lay him in
softly, and to convey him to his lodging, and she her self is pleased to stay
in the fields till her servants return it her. It was a courtesy, and a
charity worthy of so Honorable a Lady as her self: and in regard whereof, I
hold it fit, to give her remembrance and name a place in this History. All
Naples, yea, the whole Kingdom rings of this combat; the Baron of Carpi and
Alcasero are (jointly) highly commended and extolled for the same; the last for
his affection and zeal to his dead father; the first, for giving Alcasero his
life, when it was in his power and pleasure to have taken it from him. But God
will not permit Alcasero to die of these wounds, but will rather have him live
to see Carpi die before him, though in a far more ignoble and shameful
manner.

As soon as Alcasero's wounds are cured, and he pretty well recovered, he
leaves Naples, and returns to Otranto, where his sister Caelestina did as much
shake and tremble at the imprisonment of the Baron of Carpi, as she now
rejoices at his liberty; especially, since she is assured, that he has no way
accused her, nor used her name for the death and murder of her father, which
indeed makes her far more pleasant and merry than before, and within six
months after marries with Seignior Alonso Loudovici, whom she ever from her
youth had loved and affected, and with whom she lives in great pleasure,
state, and pomp; and no less does her brother Alcasero, who for the courtesy
which Dona Marguerita Esperia showed him when he was so dangerously wounded, in
requital thereof does now marry the fair Beatina, her only daughter, with
whom he lives in the highest content and felicity, as any Gentleman of Italy,
or of the whole world can either desire or wish.

But this Sunshine of Carpi's prosperity, and Caelestina's happiness and
glory shall not last long: for there is a storm breaking forth, which
threatens no less than the utter ruin, as well of their fortunes as lives.
Where men cannot, God will both detect and punish murders; yea, by such secret
means and instruments, as we least suspect or imagine. They are infallible
Maxims, that we are never less secured, than when we think our selves
secure; nor nearer danger, than when we esteem our selves farthest from it.
And if any be so incredulous, or as I may say, so irreligious, as not to
believe it, have they but a little patience, and they shall instantly see it
verified and made good in the Baron of Carpi, and the Lady Caelestina, who
thinking themselves now safe and free from all adverse fortunes, and fatal
accidents whatsoever, and enjoying all those contents and pleasures, which
their hearts could either desire or wish to enjoy, or which the world could
prostitute or present them; they in a moment shall be bereaved of their
delights and glory, and enforced to end their days on a base scaffold, with
much shame, infamy, and misery. The manner is thus:

God many times beyond our hopes and expectations, does square out the rule of
his Justice, according to that of his will: all men are to be accountable to
him for their actions, but he to none for his decrees and resolutions: it is in
him to order, in us to obey; yea, many times he reprives us, but yet with no
intent to pardon us. Curiosity in matters of Faith and Religion, proves not
only folly but impiety: for as we are men, we must look up to God, but as we
are Christians, we must not look beyond him. He oftentimes makes great
offenders accuse themselves for want of others to accuse them; and when he
pleases, he will punish one sin by another, the which we shall now see
verified in Lorenzo* the Baron of Carpi his Laquay; that wretched and bloody
Lorenzo, who as we have formerly heard, assisted this his Master to murder
Captain Benevente and Fiamento, near Alpiata; who ever since being
countenanced and authorized by his Masters favor, in respect of this his foul
fact, wherein his bloody and murtherous hand was deeply and jointly embrewed
with him; he from that time becomes so debaush'd and dissolute in his service,
as he spends all that possible he can procure or get, yea, and runs likewise
extremely in debt, not only with all his friends, but also with all those whom
he knows will trust him: so as his wants being extremely urgent, and enforced
to see himself reduced to a miserable indigence and poverty. He being one day
sent by the Baron his Master to the Senate house with a Letter to his
Councellor, he there in the throng and crowd of people cut a purse from a
Gentlewomans side, wherein was some five and twenty Ducketons in Gold, was
taken with the manner, and apprehended, and imprisoned for the fact, and the
next morn his Process was made, he found guilty, and condemned to be
hanged: So he is dealt withal by a couple of Friars in prison, who prepare
his soul for Heaven: He sees the foulness of his former life, and repents
it. The Baron of Carpi his Master, no sooner understands this news, but he
shakes and trembles, fearing lest this his Laquay should reveal the murder of
the Captain and his man: whereupon he resolves to fly; but considering
again, that if his Laquay accuse him not, his very flight will proclaim and
make him guilty: he stays, and as he thinks, resolves of a better course.
He goes to the prison, and deals with his Laquay to be secret in the
business he wots of; protesting and promising him, that in consideration
thereof, he will enrich his mother and brothers. Lorenzo tells him, that he
need not fear; for as he has lived, so he will die his faithful servant:
But we shall see him have more grace, than to keep so graceless a promise.
Carpi flattering himself with the fidelity and affection of his Laquay,
resolves to stay in the City: but he shall shortly repent his confidence. He
was formerly betrayed by Fiesco, which me thinks should have made him more
cautious and wise, and not so simple to entrust and repose his life on the
incertaine mercy of Lorenzo's tongue: but Gods Revenge draws near him, and
consequently he near his end; for he neither can nor shall avoid the judgment
of Heaven.

Lorenzo on the gallows, will not charge his soul with this foul and
execrable sin of murder: but Grace now operating with his soul, as much as
formerly Satan did with his heart, he confesses, that he, and the Baron of
Carpi his Master, together with the Knight Monte-leone, and his Laquay Anselmo,
murdered the Captain Benevente, and his man Fiamento, and threw them into the
Quarrie, the which he takes to his death is true: and so using some
Christian-like speeches of repentance and sorrow, he is hanged.

Lorenzo is no sooner turned over, but the Criminal Judges advertised of his
speeches delivered at his death, they command the Baron of Carpi his lodging to
be beleagred, where he is found in his study, and so apprehended, and committed
prisoner, where fear makes him look pale; so as the Peacocks plumes both of
his pride and courage strike sail. He is again put to the Rack, and now the
second time he reveals his foul and bloody murder, and in every point
acknowledges Lorenzoes accusation of him to be true: So he is condemned, first
to have his right hand cut off, and then his head, notwithstanding that many
great friends of his sue to the Viceroy for his pardon. The night before he was
to die the next morn, one of his Judges was sent to him to prison, to persuade
him to discover all his accomplices in that murder, besides Monte-leone and his
Laquay Anselmo; yea, there are likewise some Divines present, who with many
religious exhortations persuade him to it: So Grace prevails with Nature, and
Righteousness with Impiety and sin in him; that he is now no longer
himself, for contrition and repentance has reformed him; he will rather
disrespect Caelestina, than displease God: whereupon he affirms, that she and
her deceased sister Fidelia, drew him and Monte-leone to murder their father,
and his man Fiamento, and that if it had not been for their allurements and
requests, they had never attempted either the beginning or end of so bloody a
business: and thus making himself ready for Heaven, and grieving at nothing
on Earth, but at the remembrance of his foul fact, he in the sight of many
thousand people, does now lose his head.

This Tragedy is no sooner acted and finished in Naples, but the Judges of this
City send away poast to those of Otranto, to seize on the Lady Caelestina, (who
in the absence of her husband for the most part lived there:) A Lady whom I
could pity for her youth and beauty, did not the foulness of her fact so
foulely disparage and blemish it. She is at that instant at a Noblemans house,
at the solemnity of his daughters marriage, where she is apprehended,
imprisoned, and accused to be the author and plotter of the Captain her
fathers death; neither can her tears or prayers exempt her from this
affliction and misery. She was once of opinion to deny it, but understanding
that the Baron of Carpi and his Laquay Lorenzo were already executed for the
same in Naples, she with a world of tears freely confesses it, and confirms
as much as Carpi affirmed: whereupon in expiation of this her inhumane
Paracide, she is condemned to have her head cut off, her body burnt, and her
ashes thrown into the air; for a milder death, and a less punishment the
Lord will not (out of his Justice) inflict upon her, for this her horrible
crime, and barbarous cruelty committed on the person of her own father, or at
least seducing and occasioning it to be committed on him; and it is not in her
husbands possible power to exempt or free her hereof. Being sent back that
night to prison, she passes it over (or in very truth the greatest part
thereof) in prayer, still grieving for her sins, and mourning for this her
bloody offense and crime; and the next morn being brought to her execution,
when she ascended the scaffold, she was very humble, sorrowful, and repentant,
and with many showers of tears requested her brother Alcasero and all her
kinsfolks to forgive her, for occasioning and consenting to her fathers death,
and generally all the world to pray for her; when her sighs and tears so
sorrowfully interrupted and silenced her tongue, as she recommending her soul
into the hands of her Rede^mer, whom she had so heynously offended, she with
great humility and contrition, kneeling on her knees, and lifting up her eyes
and hands toward heaven, the Executioner with his sword made a double divorce
betwixt her head and her body, her body and her soul; and then the fire (as if
incensed at so fiery a spirit) consumed her to ashes, and her ashes were
thrown into the air, to teach her, and all the world by her example, that so
inhumane and bloody a daughter, deserved not either to tread on the face of
this Earth, or to breathe this air of life.

She was lamented of all who either knew or saw her, not that she should die,
but that she should first deserve, then suffer so shameful and wretched a
death: and yet she was far happier than her sister Fidelia, for she
despaired, and this confidently hoped for remission and salvation. Thus albeit
this wretched and execrable young Gentlewoman lived impiously, yet she died
Christianly: wherefore let us think on that with detestation, and on this with
charity. And here we see how severely the murder of Captain Benevente was by
Gods just revenge punished, not only in his two daughters who plotted it, but
also in the two Noblemen and their two Laquayes who acted it. Such attempts and
crimes, deserve such ends and punishments, and infallibly find them. The only
way therefore for Christians to avoid the one, and contemn the other, is with
sanctified hearts, and unpolluted hands, still to pray to God for his Grace,
continually to affect prayer, and incessantly to practice piety in our
thoughts, and godliness in our resolutions and actions, the which if we be
careful and conscionable to perform, God will then shroud us under the wings
of his favor, and so preserve and protect us with his mercy and providence, as
we shall have no cause to fear either Hell or Satan.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XV.
Maurice like a bloody villain, and damnable son, throws his Mother
Christina into a Well and drownes her: the same hand and arm of his wherewith
he did it rots away from his body; aad being discrased of his wits in Prison,
he there confesses his foul and inhumane murder, for the which he is hanged.

IF we did not wilfully make ourselves miserable, God is so indulgent and
merciful to us, as he would make us more happy; but when with high and
presumptuous hands we violate the Laws of Nature and Grace, of Earth and
Heaven, in murdering through Envy those, whom through Duty and affection we
are bound to obey, honor, cherish, and preserve: then it is no marvel,
because we first forsook God, that he after abandoneth us to our selves, and
sins, and to the fruits thereof, Calamity, Misery, Infamy, and Perdition; and
that we may see humane cruelty to be justly met with and punished by Gods
upright and divine Justice, Lo here in this ensuing History we shall see a
wretched son kill his harmless and dear mother. A very fearful and
lamentable Parracide, a most cruel and execrable fact, for the which we shall
see him rewarded with condign punishment, and with a sharp and infamous
death, although not half so deplorable as deserved. It is a bitter and bloody
History, the relation and remembrance whereof, in the most barbarous and flinty
hearts is capable, not only to engender compassion, but compunction; yea, not
only contrition but tears, at least if we have any place left in us for
Pity, or room for Piety; the which if we have, doubtless the end of our
reading will not only bless, but crown the beginning, and the beginning the
end thereof.

Upon the North-east side of the Lake Leman, vulgarly known and called the
Lake of Geneva, (because it pays its full tribute, and makes its chiefest
Rendezvous before that City, whereof it invironeth at least one third part.)
There stands a pretty small and strong town, distant a little days journey
from it, termed Morges, which properly belongs to the jurisdiction of Berne,
one of the chiefest Cantons of that warlike people and Country of Swisserland,
wherein of very late years, and recent memory, there dwelt a rich and honest
Burger, or Burgemaster (for of Gentry those parts and people are not, because
they will not be capable) named Martin Halsenorfe, who by his wife Christina
Snuytsaren, had one only child a son, named Maurice Halsenorfe, now of some
fourteen year old; whose father although he were by profession a soldier,
and enrolled a Lieutenant to one of those Auxiliary Bands of that Country
which are in pay to the French King; yet nevertheless his chiefest ambition
and care was, to make this son of his a scholar, because the Ignorance and
illiterature of his own age, made him to repent it in himself, and therefore
to provide a remedy thereof in his sons youth, since he now knew and saw,
that a man without learning, was either as a body without a soul, or a soul
without knowledge and reason, which are her chiefest virtues, and most sacred
Ornaments and Excellencies: So he brings him up to their own Grammar School
in Morges, where in some three or four years his affection and care to study,
makes him so good a Proficient, as he becomes not only skillful, but perfect
therein, and almost as capable to teach his Schoolmasters, as he was to
instruct him: yea, and to add the better Grace to the Grace of that Art, he
was of so mild and so modest a carriage, and the blossoms of his youth were
so sweetly watered with the Heavenly dew of Virtue and Piety, as if his manners
and himself were wholly composed thereof; so that for Learning and Goodness
he was, and was justly reputed, not only the Mirror, but the Phoenix of all
the youth of Morges; and as he esteemed himself happy in his Parents, so they
reciprocally hold themselves, not only happy, but blessed in this their son;
but because the inherent corruption of our Nature, and the perverseness and
multiplicity of our sins are such, as they cannot promise us any true joy,
much less assured and permanent felicity: so the Sunshine of this their
Temporary content, equally divided in thirds betwixt the Father, Mother, and
Son, will shortly receive a great Eclipse, and a fatal disaster, which will
be to them so much the more bitter and mournful, since both the cause and
effects thereof were of each of them unthought of, of them all unexpected.

For God in his sa^red decree and providence, seeing Martin Halsenorfe the
father, his strength arrived at his full Meridian and height, and his days to
their full number and period: He, as he sat at dinner jocund and merry with
his wife and son, is suddenly taken with a deadly swoone, which presently
deprives his body of this life, and sends his soul to enjoy the sweet felicity
and sacred joy and immortality of the life to come: A Document which may teach
us not to rely upon the rotten privileges and strength of youth, but so to
prepare our lives, that death at all places, and in all times, maystill find
us armed and ready to encounter it. A Document which may teach us with the
erected eyes, as well of our faith as body, so to look from Earth to Heaven,
that our souls be not only ready, but willing to forsake this stinking
Tabernacle and prison of our mortality, to fly and be admitted into Heaven,
that Heavenly Jerusalem, and Celestial City, where they may enjoy the blessed
Communion of the Saints, and the greatest blessings of all joys, and the most
sovereign joy of all blessings, then to see our Creator and Savior, God the
Father, and Christ Jesus his Son face to face, wherein indeed all the joys
and blessings of our souls are comprised and included.

The death of Halsenorfe the father, is not only the Argument, but the cause
of his widow Christin^'s grief, of his son Maurice his sorrow, of her
tears and groans, of his sighs and afflictions; yea, and not to derrogate
from the Truth, I may step a degree farther and say, that this his death is a
fatal herald, and mournful har^inger, which p^rtends and prepares both of
them many disasterous calamities, and woeful miseries, the which in a manner
are almost ready to surprise and befall them.

This sorrowful widow being thus deprived of her dear Husband, who was both
her comfort and her joy, her stay and her Protector, her Head and her glory;
although he left her a good Estate, sufficient enough to warrant her against
the fear of poverty, and to secure herself against the apprehension of
worldly Indigence; and wherewithal to maintain both her and her son, with
somewhat more than an indifferent competency: yet she saw her friends forsake
her, and her Husbands familiar acquaintance abandon her* as if their friendship
died with him, and that their remembrance of him was wholly raked up, and
buried in the dust of his grave. A most ungrateful disease and iniquity of our
time, rather to be pitied than cured, and reproved than reformed, so fading and
inconstant are the unfriendly friendships of the world, who for the most part
are grounded on profit, not on Honor, on avarice, not on Virtue, on their own
gold, not on the want of their Christian neighbors and brethren: But enough of
this, and again to our History.

Now if Christina (for only by that name I will henceforth entitle her) have
any comfort or consolation left her, to sweeten the bitterness of her Husbands
death, it is only to see him survive and live in her son Maurice, in whose
virtues and years, her hopes likewise begin again to bud forth and
flourish; when remembering what an earnest care and desire her husband had to
see him a Scholar, as she inherits his goods, so she will assume and inherit
that resolution of his: and although she love her sons sight, and affect his
presence tenderly and dearly, yet she can give no peace to her thoughts, nor
take any truce of her resolutions, till she send him from Morges to the
University of Losanna, some three leagues distant thence, there to perfect his
studies and learning, the seeds whereof already so hopefully blossomed forth,
and fructified in him. To which end, her deepest affection and care having
hearkened out one Deodatus Varesius, a Bachelor of Divinity of that University,
whom fame (though indeed most falsely) had informed her to be an expert
Scholar, and an excellent Christian, she agrees with him; when allowing her
son an honest exhibition, and furnishing him with Books, a Gown, and all
other necessaries, she sends him away to Losanna, charging him at his
departure to be careful of his Learning, carriage, and actions, and above
all, to make piety and godliness in his life and conversation, the Regent of
all his studies; when with tears of natural affection, they take leave each
of other.

Maurice being arrived at Losanna, finds out his Tutor Varesius, who receives
and welcomes this his Pupil courteously and kindly: but, alas, the hopes of
Christina the mother, are extremely deceived in the virtues of Varesis; because
his Vices will instantly deceive both the merits and expectation of her Son,
or rather change nature and qualities in him, and thereby shortly make him as
vicious in Losanna, as formerly he was virtuous in Morg^: for I write with
grief and pity, that to define the truth aright, it was difficult to say,
whether he were more learned or deboshed, a more perfect Scholar, or profane
Christian: for albeit the dignity of his Bachelorship of Theology, did hide
many of his dissolute pranks, and obscene imperfections, yet his exorbitant
deportment and industry could not so closely overvaile and obscure them, but
his intemperate affection to drinking, and beastly inclination to drunkenness,
began now to become obvious and apparent to the eyes and Heads of his College,
yea, to the whole University: A most pernicious and swinish Vice, indeed too
too much incident and subject to these people the Swissers; but if it had been
immured and confined within these Rocks and Mountains of Germany, it had
proved not only a happiness, but a blessing to the other Western parts of
the Christian world, where it spreads its infection like an uncontrolable and
incurable Gangrene, yea, like a most contagious and fatal pestilence: so as in
Varesius there was nothing more incongruous and different, than his doctrine
and his life, his profession and conversation, his Theorie and his Practice,
his knowledge and his will. But if the head-springs and ^onntaines be corrupted
with this vice and drunkenness, no marvel if the Rivers and Streams of
Commonweals be infected and poisoned therewith; yea, if it be not debarred,
but have admittance and residence in the Schools and Classes of Universities,
from which Nurses and Gardens of the Muses, both the Church and State fetch
their chiefest Ornaments and Members; how can we expect to see it rooted out
from the more illiterate Commons, whose gross ignorance makes them far more
capable to learn Vice, than Virtue; or rather Vice, and not Virtue; since there
is no shorter nor truer art to learn it, than of their Art Masters, because
the example and president of ill doings in our Teachers and Superiors, does
not only plant, but ingraffe and root it, not only privilege, but as it were
authorize it in us, still with a fatal impetvosity, with a dangerous violence,
and pernicious event and issue: for if remedies be not to be found in learned
Phisiti^ns, it is then in vain to seek them in the rude and unlearned people;
and if the Pr^ceptor himself be not sanctified, it is rather to be feared
than doubted, that his Disciple will not. This (yea this) is a most mournful
and fatal rock, whereon diverse virtuous and religious parents have even wept
themselves to death, to see their children suffer shipwreck: yea this beastly
and brutish sin of Drunkenness, is still the Devils Usher and Pander to all
other sins; and therefore how cautious and careful ought the Heads of
Schools and Universities be, to expel and root it out from themselves, and
to hate and detest it in others, since in the remiss winking thereat, I may
(with as much truth as safety) affirm, that toleration is confirmation; and
connivency, cruelty; as we shall not go far to see it made good, and
verified in this ensuing mournful History; the which in exacting Ink from my
Pen, does likewise command blood from my heart, and tears from mine eyes, to
anatomize and unfold it.

Difficultly has Maurice been three months in Losanna with Varesius, but his
virtues are eclipsed and drowned in vice; yea, he not only thinks, but holds
it a virtue to make himself culpable and guilty of this his Tutors Vice of
Drunkenness, wherein within less than three months he proves so expert, or
indeed so execrable a Scholar in his beastly Art, as both day and night, he
makes it not only his practice, but his delight, and not only his delight,
but his glory. He who before was so temperate in his drink and conversation
in Morges, as for the most part he wholly drank water, not wine; now he is
so vitiously metamorphosed in Losanna, as contrariwise, he only drinks wine,
no water; yea, and which is lamentable to remember, and deplorable to observe
in this young ^choller, he drinks (or to write truer, devoures it) so
excessively, as his Cups are become his Books; his Carrowsing, his Learning;
the Tavern, his Study; and Drunkenness the only Art he professes: which
filthy and in^ous disease, spreding from the Praeceptor to the Pupil, from old
Varesius to yo^g Maurice, has so surprised the one, and seizd on the other, as
it threatens the disparagement of the first his reputation, and the shipwreck
of the seconds fortunes, and it may be of his life.

Now Varesius, who will not be ashamed to pity this beastly Vice in himself,
does yet pity it with shame to behold it in his Scholar Maurice, and yet has
neither the Grace to reform it in himself, nor the will or power to reprove
it in him; but in stead of stopping and preventing it, does in all things give
way to the current and torrent of this swinish sin, which inevitably draws
after it these threefold diseases and miseries: The poison of our bodies, the
consumption of our purses, and the Moath and Canker of our reputations; or if
you will, these three not far different from the three former: The bane of
our wits, the enemy of our health and life, and the consumer of our Estates
and friends: And within the compass of one whole year, to all those diseases
and miseries does the drunkenness of our deboshed young Scholar Maurice
subject and reduce him; so as it being the nature of sin (not checked and
vanquished with repentance) rather to grow than wither, to flourish than fade
or decay with our age: the longer Maurice lived in Losanna, the deeper root
this beastly vice of drunkenness took in him, and he the dearer affection to
it, so as that competent exhibition which his mother yearly allowed him,
became incompatible with this his excessive prodigality and intemperancie: Yea,
his extreme superfluity in this kind, was without intermission so frequent,
as three quarters of his years pension could not discharge one of his expenses
and debts, so strong a habit (converted now to a second Nature) had this
bewitching beastly sin of drunkenness exacted and gotten of him, as if this
were his felicity, and that he only triumphed to become a slave to this his
slavish appetite, and swinish profession, which to support and maintain, he
not only feeds, but surfets his mother wirh variety of subtle and insinuating
Letters, thereby to draw diverse sums of moneys from her, as indeed he does;
some under pretext of his necessity to buy new books, which he affirmed he
wanted; others under pretense of his weakness and sickness, and such like
colorable excuses: which unthrifty prodigality of his, does as fast empty her
purse and store, as her industrious frugality can possibly fill them; whereof
having all the reasons of the world to become sensible, she at last making her
judgment consult with her affection, begins now to fear, that her son was
become less virtuous, and more deboshed than she hoped of, and that these his
letters and petitions for money, were but only tricks to deceive the hopes,
and betray the confidence she reposed in his virtuous carriage, and godly
inclination; whereof being in fine informed and certified, from such Students
and Burgers of Losanna, whom she had set as Sentinels, to have Argus, yea,
(...) eyes over his actions and deportments, she at last with few thanks to
his Tutor Varesius, many complaints and exclamations to her son, and
inexpressable grief and sorrow to her self, cal^ and commands him home from
Losanna to Morges, where with much bitterness and secrecy, she taxes and
rates him for his drunkenness and prodigality, in that he had vainly spent in
one year, more than either his father or her self could collect or gather up
in many.

But see the lewd subtilty, and wretched deceit fullness of this dissolute
son toward this his dear and tender mother: for then and there seasoning
his speeches with virtue, and his behavior with obedience and ^iety* he
modestly seems not only to tax her credulity, conceived against the candeur
and integrity of his actions, but also with a kind of ^acite choler, to
malign and tra^ce those who unjustly and falsely had cast so foul an aspersion
on his virtues and innocence; and the better to make those his speeches, and
this his Apologi^ and Justification pass current with his mother, his
discretion now prescribes so fair a Law to his ^ty, and his reason to his
intemper^te and irregular desires, as to the eye of the world, and to her more
curious and observant judgment, he seems to be the very picture and statue of
Virtue, although God and his soul soul and conscience well knows, that he
is the true, essential, and real (...) of Vice* and the better to cloak and
overvaile this his dissimulation from the eyes of God and his mother, although
he continue to take his Cups by night, yet in Morg^ and especially in his
mothers house and sight, he casts them off by day; and the better and more
firmly to reintegrate himself into her approbation and ^aw o^* he mornings and
evenings is seen at his prayers, and spends the greatest part of his time in
hearing and frequenting of Sermons, the which affords such sweet content to her
conceits and thoughts, as she repents herself of her unkindnesse toward him,
and not only acquits him of his drunkenness, prodigality, and dissoluteness,
but also accuses his accusers, whom she now as much condemns for Envy and
Malice toward her Son, as she highly (and as she thinks justly) applaud^ him
for his religious piety toward God.

But since Hypocrisy is worse than Profaneness, as making us rather Devil^
than Saints; or indeed not Saints but Devils; and that no sacrifice is so
odious, nor object so hateful to God, as he who denies and dissembleth it in
his looks, and yet professes and practices it in his heart and soul: so we
shall see to ou^ grief, and this wretched Hypocrit^ find to his misery, that
thinking to deceive God, he shall in the end deceive himself; and in
attempting to betray his mother through his false Virtue, his true Vice will at
last betray him, and make him as miserable, as he flattereth himself it will
make him fortunate.

Now the better to root and confirm this opinion of his temperancy in his
mothers conceits and mind, and so the more secretly to overvaile his excessive
affection and addiction to Drunkenness, he under the pretense of some
necessary and profitable occasions, gets leave of her, sometimes to ride over
to Berne, So^ure, Fribourge, Apensall, and other capital towns of the
Cantons, where he falls afresh to his cups, and there continually both day and
night swils his brains, and stuffes up his belly with wine, as if he took no
other delight or glory, but to drown his wit and learning with his money, and
his health with both; and yet again when he returns to Morges, he makes
such fair weather with his mother, and casts so temperate a cloak and color
on his speeches and actions, as if it were impossible for him to drink more
than would suffice Nature, or to desire more than would merely quench his
thirst. And thus by his hypocritical policy, having again wrought himself
into his mothers good opinion and favor, as also some store of money out of
her purse and coffers; he with a fained show of Humility and discretion, takes
leave of her, and to perfect his studies and learning, returns again to
Losanna, where he is no sooner arrived, but upon his new return, he finds
out his old carrowsing companions, who like so many pestilent Vipers, and
contagious Moaths and Caterpillars, are vitiously, and therefore fatally
resolved, not only to eat out the bottom of his p^se, but also the heart of
his happiness, and as I may justly term it, to devour the very foul of his
felicity: and with these tippling brats of Bacchus, does our lewd and deboshed
Scholar, Maurice, continually drink drunk, not only forgetting his learning
but himself; and which is worse, his God, having neither the power to remember
to repent, or grace to pray, nor to remember any thing but his cups; so beastly
is he inclined, so swinishly and viciously is he affected and addicted; and
what does this either prognosticate, presage, or promise to produce in him, but
inevitable affliction, misery, and ruin of all sides?

As the shortest errors are best, so those Vices which have longest
perseverance and predominance in us, prove still the most pernicious and
dangerous: It is nothing to crush a Serpent in the egg, but if we permit it to
grow to a Serpent, it may then crush us: a plant may be removed with ease, but
an old tree difficultly: To fall from sin to repentance, is as great a
happiness, as it is a misery to fall from repentance to sin; and indeed to
use but one word for the affirmation and confirmation of this truth, there can
no greater misery befall us, than to think our selves happy, when (through our
sins) we are miserable.

Here in Losanna Maurice esteems this his beastly sin of drunkenness to be
a Virtue not a Vice in him; yea, in paying for all shots and reckonings in
Tavernes, he sottishly and foolishly thinks it the shortest and truest way to
be beloved and honored (though indeed to be contemned) of all; and therefore
without fear or wit, yea, without the l^st spark of Grace, or shadow of
consideration, his stomach (like the Devils sponge) and his insatiable throat
(like a bottomless gulf) so devoures his wine, and his wine his money, as
that which should be the Argument of his glory, he makes the cause of his
shame; and his money which should fortify his reputation, he converts and
turns to ruin it. But as poverty (in a just revenge of our Vanity) rejoices
to look on us, because we first disdained, either to look on, or regard it;
so he having spent the fragrant Summer of his folly and prodigality, in wasting
the moneys his mother gave him, in wine; now the deprivation thereof makes him
feel the frosty Winter of that want, which he can better remember than
remedy, rather repent than redress. The Fellows and Students of his College
look on him and his drunkenness, some with the eyes of pity, others with
those of joy, according as their friendship or malice, their Charity or Envy
either conduct their passions, or transport and steer their resolutions and
inclinations. As for his Tutor Varesius, how can he possible seek or reclaim
this his Pupil from Vic^ to virtue, when he is so wretchedly dissolute, as by
the public vote and voice of the University, he himself is already wholly
and solely relapsed from Virtue to Vice.

In which respect this vicious young Student Maurice, having neither Virtue nor
Tutor, money nor credit, discretion nor friend to secure him from the shelves
of Indigence, or the rocks of Poverty and Misery, whereon he is rashly and
wilfully rushing; he like a true deboshed Scholar, or indeed as a Master of
Art in the Art of deboshednesse, first sels away his books, then his gown and
clothes, and next his bed, being desirous to want any thing but wine; and
confidently (though vainly and foolishly) assured, that if he have wine enough,
that then he wants nothing. A miserable consideration and condition, a wretched
estate and resolution, only tending and conducing to direful misery, and to
deplorable poverty and desolation.

But to replenish his purse, to repair his credit and apparel, and to
continue his cups and drunkenness, he has no other hope^ or re^ge, than
again to cast himself on the affection and courtesy of his mother whom he
re-visits with several Letters, which are only so many humble insinuating
petitions, again to draw and wrest moneys from her. But he is deceived in
his hopes and expectation, or at least they distinctly and severally, and his
mother jointly with them conspire to deceive him. For I write it with grief,
because (by an uncontrollable relation of the truth) she dictates it to my
pen with tears; that as well by all those of Morges, who came from Losanna,
as by all those of Losanna who came to Morges, she is most certainly and
sorrowfully advertised of her sons deboshed and dissolute life, of his
neglect of Learning, and too frequent affecting and following of drunkenness,
of the sale of his clothes, bed, and books; of the irreparable loss, both of
his time, moneys, and reputation; and withal, how the dregs and fumes of
wine has metamorphosed his countenance, and not graced, but filthily disgraced
it with many fiery Rubies, and flaming Carbunkles; as also how it has stuffed
and bombasted up his belly and body, as if the dropsy and he contended who
should first seize each on other; and therefore she being (with a mournful
unwillingnesse) enforced, not only to take notice, but sorrowfully to rest
assured and confident of these diasterous premises, the infallible predictions
and Symptoms of her Sons utter ruin and subversion: She peremptorily and
absolutely refuses his requests, answers his Letters with many sharp
complaints, and bitter exclamations against his foul sin of Drunkenness*
which threatens no less than the ruin both of his Reputation, Friends,
Learning, Fortune, and Life, if not of his Soul.

Maurice, seeing himself wholly abandoned of his Mother, he knows not how to
live, nor yet how to provide the means to maintain life, which not only
surpriseth his thoughts, but amazeth and appaleth his cogitations with fear;
yea, he takes this discourtesie of hers so near at heart, and withal is so
extremely impatient to see himself forsaken of her, whom he knows the Laws
of Nature has commanded to affect and cherish: as forgetting himself to be
her Son, and she his Mother; yea forgetting himself to be a man, and which
is more, a Christian; his wants and Vices so far transport him beyond the
bounds of Reason and Religion, of Nature and Grace, as he impiously and
execrably degenerates from them all, and secretly vows to his heart and soul,
or to say truer to the Devil: (who in^hanteth the one, and infecteth and
intoxicateth the other) that he will speedily send her into another world in a
bloody Coffin, if she will no releeve his wants and maintain him as her Son
in this. So alas here it is, that he first gives way to the Devil to take
possession of his thoughts and heart, and here it is, that he first assumes
bad blood, and suggests bloody designs, against the safety and life of his
dear and innocent Mother. When like a miserable wretch, and a wretched and
impious villain, his thoughts and studies (like so many lines running to their
center) are now in continual action and motion* how to finish and bring this
deplorable Tragical business to an end: yea the better to ^eed this his (...)
bloody appetite, and to quench the quenchlesse thirst of his Matracidious
revenge, he forgets all other projects and affairs; to follow and hasten on
this; which (to give one word for all) takes up both his study and his time in
Losanna, casting away his books which would seem to divert him from it, as if
he courted Pluto not Apollo; Proserpina not Pallas; Erynnis not Urania; the
Furies not the Muses: and as afflictions seldom come alone, but many times (as
the waves of the sea) fall one in the neck of another; so to make him rather
advance than retire, in the execution of this his unnatural and damnable
attempt, his excessive and frequent drunkenness makes him so notoriously
apparent to the Heads of the University in general, and of his own College
in particular, that they give him his Conge, and (without lending any ear to
his Apology or Justification) expel him thence. So that being now destitute
of all friends and means, he is enforced to see himself reduced to this point
of misery, that he must either beg or starve, which to prevent (because he
as much disdaines the first, as he is resolved to provide a remedy for the
second) he leaves Losanna (where his vices and debts have made the stones too
hot for him) and on foot goes home to his Mother to Morges, hoping that his
presence may prevail more with her than his absence; and his tongue make that
easy, which his pen (in his Letters) found not only difficult but impossible.

Being arrived at Morges, his loving and indulgent Mother receives him with
tears, not of joy, but of grief, for his drunkenness has so deformed his
face and body, as at the first sight she difficultly knew him to be her
son; and although he take pains to conceal that beastly vice of his, and so
to plaster and varnish it over with a fained show of repentance and
reformation; yet she sees to her affliction, and observes to her misery, that
he loves his Cups better than his life, and that as soon as she once turns
her back from him, he falls close to them, and so tipleth and carouseth from
Morning to Night. Three days are scarce past before he makes two requests to
her, the one for new clothes, the other for money; when to the end that her
wisdom might shine in her affection, as well as her affection in her wisdom,
she cheerfully grants him the first, but peremptorily denies him the second,
because she well knows it would be so much cast away on him, since he would
instantly cast it away on Wine; and to write the truth, the grant of his
apparel does not so much content him, as the refusal of ^er money does both
afflict and inflame him: He is all in choler hereat, and the fumes of revenge
does so implacably take up and seize upon his thoughts, and they on it, as now
without the fear of God, or care of his soul, he like a damnable villain,
and an execrable Son, swaps a bargain with the Devil, to destroy and make
away his mother: Hellish resolutions, and infernal conceits, which will not
only strangle those who embrace, but confound those who follow them: his
impiety made him formerly assume this bloody fact, and now his necessity and
want of money (in that he cannot as it were drown himself in the excess of
drunkenness) enforces him to a resolution to finish it. His faith is so weak
toward God, and so strong with the Devil, as he will not retire with Grace,
but advance with impiety, to see as well the end, as the beginning of this
bloody business: He consults hereon with his delight, not with his reason;
with his will, not with his Conscience; with his heart, not with his soul. He
sees he has no money, and knows, or at least believes, that his mother has
enough, and therefore concludes, that if she were once dead, it were
impossible that his life should want any. So these two wretched Counselors,
Covetousness and Drunkenness, (or rather Covetousness to maintain his
Drunkenness) like two infernal fiends and furies, haule him on headlong to
perpetrate this bloody and mournful murder of his dear and tender Mother,
the end whereof, will bring him as much true misery and infamy, as the
beginning does flatter and promise him false content and happiness; his youth
has no regard to her age, and less to her Life, neither will he vouchsafe to
remember, that he first received his of her: yea, all the blood which flows in
his heart, and streams in his veins and body, cannot any way have the power
to prompt him, that it is derived and descended from hers. And if Morges will
not divert him, Losanna should; if his years cannot instruct him, yet his
books might; and if Nature prevailed not with his heart, yet me thinks Grace
should with his Conscience, to represent him the foulness of this attempt,
and the unnatural cruelty thereof, in resolving to embrew his diabolical
hands in her innocent blood; or if the influence of these earthly
considerations could not allay the heat of his malice, or quench the fire of
his revenge toward her, yet me thinks looking from profaneness to piety,
from Earth to Heaven; from the time present to the future; from the corruption
of his Body, to the immortality of his Soul; from Sin to Righteousness, from
Revenge to Religion, and consequently from Satan to God, he should hate this
bloody design and project of his as much as now he loves it, and seek the
preservation of his Mother, with as much obedience and affection, as now he
contrives and pursues her untimely end with impiety and detestation. But his
Vices will still triumph over his Virtues; and therefore it is rather to be
feared than doubted, that they will in the end make him too miserable, ever to
see himself so happy.

Miserable Maurice therefore, (as the shame of his time, the disgrace of his
sex, and a prodigious monster of Nature) having hellishly resolved on the
matter, now with a devilish fortitude and hellish assurance passes on to the
manner of her Tragedy. He will not give ear to God, who seeks to divert him
from it, but will hearken to the devil, who uses his best Oratory to persuade
and entice him to it. But as the devil is malicious in his subtilty, so should
we be both wise and cautious in our credulity; for if we believe him, he will
betray us; but if we believe God, we shall then betray him: he is impatient of
delays, yea, his malice is so bloody, and his revenge so cruel, as he
thinks every hour a year, till he has sent her from Earth to Heaven. He
proposes unto himself diverse ways to murder her, and the devil who is
never absent, but present in such hellish occasions, makes him as well
industrious as undictive and implacable in the contriving and finishing
thereof. Now he thinks to cut her throat as she is in bed: Then to poison her
at table, either in her meat or drink. Then again he is of opinion to hire
some to kill her as she is walking in her vineyards; or else to cause two
Watermen to drown her, as she is taking the air in a Boat on the Lake, which
twice or thrice weekly she is accustomed to do; but yet still he is
irresolute, either which, or which not to resolve on, till at last after a
weeks dilatory protaction, having with a fatal and infernal ratiotination
banded and rebanded these several bloody projects in his brains and
contemplations, he rejects them all, as more fuller of difficulty and
apparent danger, than of warrantable safety, when considering there was a deep
Well in the outer yard, adjoining to the Garden, he holds it fittest for his
purpose to drown her therein, whereon the devil and he strikes hands, and set
up their rest and period.

Whiles thus this gracious mother Christina endeavors with her best care and
Prayers to divert her graceless son Maurice from this his intemperate and
beastly sin of Drunkenness, he (as if he were no part of her, but rather a
limb of the Devil) with a monstrous and inhumane ingratitude, sets his
inventions and brains on the tenter-hookes, to epsy out the occasion and time
to dispatch her. When burning with a flaming desire, to quench the insatiable
thirst of his revenge in her blood, he (taking time and opportunity at
advantage) seeing all his mothers people abroad to gather in the Vintage, the
Well open, and she with a Prayer book in her hand, walking in the Garden next
adjoining, the Devil infuseth such courage to his heart, his heart such
cruelty and inhumanity to his resolutions, that all things seemed then to
conspire to see an end to this his so long desired and affected business of
murdering and dispatching his mother, he taking on him the part of a madman,
whom it seemed sorrow had suddenly afflicted, and grief distracted, he with
his hat in his hand, hastily and furiously rusheth into the Garden to his
mother, and cries out to her, that there is one of the neighbors children
fallen into the well, which he espied from his chamber window: whereunto
(harmless good woman) she adding belief to his false and perfidious
speeches; and being (beyond her self) afflicted and amazed with this sudden
and sorrowful news, she throws away her Book, and hand in hand with him,
(her sighs interrupting her words, and her tears her sighs) she (as if
pity added wings to her feet) trips away to the well, both to see this
mournful spectacle, and chiefly to know, if it any way lay in her possible
care to assist, or power to preserve the said child from death: when bringing
her to the well, he better like a fury, then a man, and rather resembling a
mere Devil, then a son, fastneth his left hand on the well-post; and as
she looks into the profundity thereof, he with his right hand tips and
throws her in; and so without any more doing, claps down the cover thereof;
when rejoicing in his heart that he had sent her to death, because he sees and
knows it now, not in the power of the whole world to save her life. He (the
better to overvaile this his impious villainy, and to obscure this his barbarous
and bloody fact) ascends her chamber, breaks open her cupbords, trunckes, and
chests, takes away most of her money, and silver plate, which he privately
hides away for his own behoof and use, and so scatters a few pieces of
money, and some of her clothes and apparel in the floor, thereby subtly to
insinuate and intimate to the world, that it were thieves who had robbed and
drowned his mother; when stealing a horse out of the stable, he with much
secrecy gets him out of the back door, which he leaves open, and from thence
rides away to his mothers people in the Vineyards; to whom he relates he has
been all that morn abroad to take the air, and is now come to pass the
remainder of the day with them, and to be merry: to which end (in his mothers
name) he sends for wine from the skirts of the town; and so (as well men as
maids) they carouse and frollike it till toward night, and then they all
return home, where they find both doors open, his mother their Mistress
wanting; and no creature whatsoever in the house, whereat they much admire and
wonder. So the servants and himself seek and call her in the Orchards and
Gardens, but in vain, for they find no news of her; when the maids one way,
and he and the menservants another way, seek her as well in the rooms and
chambers, as in the streets and neighbors houses, where she is accustomed to
frequent, but to no purpose; for they can neither see nor hear of her; till at
length the maidens rushing into her bedchamber, they find her Cupboard, Chests,
and Trunks broken open, and some of her money and apparel strewed here and
there on the floor; whereat amazed, they lamentably cry out at the windows,
that thieves have been there and robbed their Mistress her Chests and Trunkes:
which Maurice and the menservants of the house over-hearing, they ascend, and
admire at the sight thereof; neither does his outward fears, or their inward
apprehensions, stop or stay at the mere loss of the goods, but they jointly
apprehend, and fear the absence of his mother, and their Mistress Christina,
and are already become jealous and umbragious of her safety, and very
fearful, that the thieves have offered her some violence and cruelty.
Whereupon late at night, hearing no news of her, her son (because chiefly
interrested in this disastrous accident) goes and acquaints the Bayliffe of
Morges, and the rest of the Criminal Officers therewith, who on all sides
inquire for her, and make a secret and curious search in the town, to find
out the thieves; and in the mean time (together with Maurice and the servants)
leave not a room nor place of the house unsought for her: but their diligence
proves vain, for they can purchase no news of her, much less of the thieves.
They remain in the house all night, and they all with sorrowful and watchful
eyes, every minute of an hour, expect her, or news of her. Eight of the
clock the next day strikes, but as yet she is not so much as seen or heard
of: So they again, in presence of the Bayliffe, revisite and search all places
and corners both in the House, Gardens, Orchyards, and Yards; but still to no
effect or purpose: when behold the sacred and secret providence of God, in
revealing her to be drowned in the well, not only beyond the expectation, but
also beyond the belief of all that were present: for as they are in the
midst of their doubts and fears, yea in the very depth of their research and
perquisition, lo, one of the servant Maids, named Hester, who was nearest in
the favor, and dearest in the affection of her Mistress, having that very
instant mornng taken a nappe of an hours sleep, or thereabouts in a chair,
starts suddenly out of her sleep and rest, trips to them, and says, she then
and there dreamt, that her Mistress Christina, was cast into the well and
drowned; the which she affirmed with many words, and more sighs, outcries,
and tears; which piercing into the ears and thoughts of the Bayliffe and
Servants, and into the very heart and Conscience of this our execrable Maurice,
they look pale with grief and amazement, and he straineth the highest key of
his Art and policy to keep his cheeks from blushing for shame thereat, and
the better to hood wink their eyes and judgments, from the least spark or
shadow of this his guiltiness herein; he with many showers of hypocritical
tears, prays the Bayliffe that upon Hesters dream and report, the Well may
be searched, adding withal, that it was more probable then impossible; that
those thieves who robbed his Mothers house, might likewise be so devillishly
malicious to murder her and throw her into the Well: which the Bayliffe
seriously considering, as first the maids dream, then the Sons request and
tears, he instantly in presence of all those of the house, as also of many of
the next neighbors whom he had purposely assembled: Caused the Well to be
searched and sounded, where the hook taking hold of her clothes, they
instantly bring up the dead body of his Mother and their Mistress C^ristina: the
skull of whose head, was lamentably broken, and her brains pitifully dashed
out with her fall. All are amazed, her servants greeve, and her hellish Son
Maurice weeps and cries more then all the rest at this mournful spectacle.
The Bayliffe carefully and punctually again examines Hester, if God in her
dream revealed her not, the manner how, and the persons who had thus thrown
her Mistress into the Well; She answers negatively according to the truth, that
she had already delivered as much as she knew of that mournful business.
When Maurice to show his forwardness and zeal, for the detection and finding
out of his Mothers murderers, he pretends that he suspects Hester to be
accessory, and to have a hand herein. But the Bayliffe and common Council of
Morges, having neither passion nor partiality to dazzle and inveagle the eyes of
their judgment, finding no reason or ground of probability to accuse her, or
which might tend or co^duce that way; They free herwithout farther questioning
her, and so (as it has been formerly remembered) they all concurring in
opinion that the thieves who robbed her, had undoubtedly thrown her into the
Well: They give leave to Maurice to bury his breathless mother, which he does
with the greatest pomp and decency, requisite as well to her rank and
quality, as to his affection and duty; and the better to fan off the least
dust or smoke of suspicion, which might any way fall upon the luster of his
Innocence, he at her Funeral (to the eye of the world) sheds many rivolets of
tears. But alas what is this to this his foul and execrable sin of
murdering his mother; for although it bleere the eyes, and inveigle the
judgments of the Bayliffe and his associates, the Criminal Judges of Morges,
yet God the Great and Soveraig^e Judge of Heaven and Earth, will not be thus
deluded, cannot be thus deceived herein. No, no, for albeit he be merciful,
yet his Divine Majesty is too Just to let crimes of this hellish nature go
either undetected or unpunished.

We have seen this execrable son so bloody hearted and handed, as with a
devilish rage, and inhumane and infernal fury, to drown his own dear and
tender Mother; and with as much cruelty as ingratitude, to throw her from the
world into a Well, who with many bitter gripes and torments (to the hazard and
peril of her life) threw him from her womb into the world: and the providence
and Justice of God will not lead the curiosity of the Reader far, before we
see this miserable miscreant overtaken with the impetuous storms of Gods
revenge, and the fiery gusts and tempests of his just indignation for the same,
notwithstanding that his subtle malice, and malicious subtilty, have so
cunningly contrived, and so secretly acted and compacted it with the devil,
that no earthly person, or sublunary eye, can any way accuse, much less
convict him thereof; as mark the sequel, and it will briefly and truly
inform thee how.

As soon as he has buried his Mother, his black mourning apparel does in
his heart and actions work such poor and weak effects of repentance and
sorrow for her untimely death, as where diverse others lament and grieve, he
contrariwise rejoices and triumphs thereat, and by her decease being now
become Lord and Master of all, he like a graceless villain falls again to his
old carrowsing companions, and vein of drunkenness, wherein he takes such
singular delight and glory, as he makes it not only his pastime and exercise
by day, but his practice and recreation by night: And as God has infinite
means and ways to scourge and revenge the enormity of our delicts and crimes,
so we shall shortly see for our instruction, and observe for our reformation,
that this ungodly and beastly vice of drunkenness of his, which is his most
secret bosom and darling sin, will in the end prove a ravenous Vulture to
devour, and a fatal Serpent to eat out the bowels, first of his wealth and
prosperity, and then of his life; for it not only takes up his time, but his
study, in so much as I may as truly aver to my grief, as affirm to his
shame, that he levelleth at nothing more, than to make it his felicity, which
swinish excess and intemperancy, (as a punishment inseparably incident and
infallibly hereditary to that sin) does within three months make him sell away
all his Lands, yea, and the greatest part of his plate and houssholdstuffe; so
his drunkenness first, but then chiefly Gods Justice and revenge pursuing his
foul and inhumane crime of drowning his Mother, makes him of being left rich
by her, within a very short time become very extreme poor and miserable; so
as he runs deeply into debts, yea, his debts are by this time become so
exceedingly urgent and clamorous, as contrary to his hopes and fears, when he
least dreams thereof; he is imprisoned by his Mercer and Draper, for the
blacks of his Mothers Funeral, to both whom he is indebted the sum of three
hundred crowns, which is far more than either his purse can discharge, or
his credit and Estate now satisfy. When abandoned of all his friends, his
means spent and consumed, and nothing left him to exercise his patience in
Prison, but Despair; nor to comfort him, but the ^rrours of his bloody and
guilty Conscience; He is (...) into a stinking Vault or (...), where (in
horror and detestation of his bloody cri^) the glori^ (...) of Heaven, the
Sun, disdaines to send his radiant and glittering beams to comfort him; so as
he who was before accustomed to fa^e deliciously, and as it were to swill and
drown himself in the best and most curious Wines, now he must content
himself only with course bread and water; and yet his misery is so extreme,
and that extremity of his so miserable, as he has hardly enough to maintain
and sustainelife: But we shall see that this first affliction of his, will
instantly be followed and overtaken by a second.

(...) being arrived, he petitioneth his Jailer (for that day) to have the
liberty of the yard, and the freedom of the air, which is granted him, when
at night descending the stairs, again to be pent up in his obscure Dungeon,
his foot slips, and he receives a fearful fall, whereof the bone of his right
arm is broken in two pieces, and having no Surgeon to look to it, it
p^trifies and rots, so as for the preserving of his life, he within fifteen
days is enforced to have it cut off a little below the shoulder; and this was
the very same hand and arm which threw his mother into the Well. A singular
act of Gods revenging Justice, and Just Revenge shown herein. O that it may be
deeply imprinted in out hearts, and engraven in our souls, that the Reader
hereof, of what sex or quality soever, may as it were stand amazed at the
cosideration of Maurice his impious sin toward God, and of Gods due and true
revenge and requital thereof in his just judgment and affliction toward him.

But this is not enough for Maurice to suffer, nor for God to inflict on him
for this his bloody and inhumane crime, in murdering his Mother; nor to say
the truth, it is but the Prologne to the deplorable, yet deserved punishment,
which is immediately ready to surprise and befall him. For to the end, that the
truth may inform our curiosity, and our curiosity us, of the Catastrophe of
this Tragedy, we must understand, that it was the pleasure and providence of
God, that the breaking and cutting away of Maurice his arm, proved the
breake-necke of his patience, and the cutting away of his content and
judgment. The devil caused him most inhumanely to drown his Mother, the
which he might have refused to perpetrate, but would not; and now God in
expiation thereof sends him Rage for Reason, Despair for Comfort, and Madness
for Sobriety, the which he would fly and eschew, but cannot. He has
committed this execrable crime beyond the rules and Laws of Nature; and
therefore God has ordained, that he should feel many degrees of punishments,
and this is not only the Law, but the rule of Grace. Of all degrees of
afflictions, madness is the most to be pitied, and the worst to be cured, since
it makes a man go far beyond reason, and therefore to come far too short
of himself: it is held by some to be a sickness of the Liver, of others, an
over-fuming of the blood, and of others a debility of the brain: But in this
ou^ execrable wre^ched Maurice, it was the infectious (...) of his soul, which
God sent purposely into his brains, to be revenged of his heart, for so
inhumanly drowning his Mother: For although his divine Majesty has infinite
more ways to punish murder, than man has to commit it* ye^hat he might make
the detection of this of wretched Maurice as strange as the complotting and
finishing thereof was c^delly inhumane, and inhumanely cruel, he purposely
sends it him; for although since his imprisonment, hunger had so taken down
his stomach, and q^elled his courage, as his former volubility of speech was
now reduced to a kind of sorrowful and pensive s^lence; yet as soon as his
(...) senses were (...) and captivated with this prodigious Lu^acy, and (...),
then (...) fits were so violent, and that violence so implacable, (...) h^
(...), and his words so many uncouth and unheard of ravings; so that whosoever
either heard or saw him, he might justly conceive and affirm, that he had
thunder in his tongue, and lightning in his eyes: For his crime made this his
affliction and phrens^e of his so miserable, so impetuous, as he spoke
nonsense perfectly, and looked rather like a Fury than a Man; yea, his foul
conscience and polluted soule^ng him so many P^nicke fears and terrors of
despair, as he was afraid of all things, and angry with himself, because he
could be no more afraid of himself; So as that Dungeon which could imprison
his body, was not capable to contain^ his thoughts, much less to immure his
fears; and in this miserable plight and perplexity he remained for the space
of ten days and nights, without any intermission or hope of remedy, which
infinitely disturbed his fellow prisoners, and chiefly his Jailer, whose ears
had never been accustomed to hear such discordant tunes, much less to be
taken up with such distastefull and fearful melody.

He acquaints the common Co^ell of the town hereof, and importunately
^olicites them, that they will remove his distracted prisoner Maurice to some
more fitter and more convenient place. Who remembering what Maurice had been,
and now considering and seeing what he is, they whoheretofore would not be so
charitable to releeve his poverty, are yet now so religiously compassionate, as
they pity his madness, so they command him from a Dungeon to a Chamber, from
his pallat of straw to a featherbed, from his bread and water, to wholesome
meats and broths; but all this will not suffice; and to show themselves not
only good men, but good Christians, they to restore him to his wits and
senses, make yet a further progression in charity. They cause him to be
conferred with by many good Divines, who are not only eloquent, but powerful
to persuade him to pray often, and to practice other Christian duties and
offices; but his cries are ^o outrageous, and his ravings so extravagant, as
he is as incapable to relish their reasons, as they are to understand his
rage: When the very immediate finger and Providence of God, makes them yet so
sensible of his unparrellel'd misery, as they are resolved to remove him from
his Prison to an Hospital, thereby to take the benefit of the air in the
Gardens, Walks, and Fields, hoping that they might prevail with him, to recall
his wits, and re-establish his senses in their proper seats of Understanding,
and stations of Judgment. When here, (oh here) I conjure thee Christian
Reader, to stand am^zed and wonder with me, at the sacred and secret Justice of
the Lord, expressed and demonstrated in this accident: For as his under Jailer
(by the Magistrates command) takes him by the hand, with an (...) to conduct
him forth from the Prison to an Hospital, his bloody crime (like so many
Bloud-hounds) pursuing his guilty Conscience and Soul; his thoughts so
enform'd his knowledge, and his knowledge so confirm his belief* that the
drowning of his Mother is detected, and the they now draw him from his Prison
to the place of execution to suffer death for the same. Which apprehensio^ and
fear, God putting into his conceits and heart, in despite of his madness, he
wanting an accuser, lo^ here he himself both accuses (...) condemns himself
for the same. For the very Image of that conceit (...) his (...)* ^s his fea^
did his frenzy and madness; he in the (...) of those fi^s, a^ the height of
that Agony and Anxietie, dri^ out (...)* (...) my M^ther in the Well, I have
drowned (...) he suffer you to hang me; I speak it on Earth, and by my part of
Heaven, what (...) is true. Which words (...) sooner es^aped his (...), ^ut he
^nstantly ^nes again to his outcries of phre^ and madness* (...) ^d the rest
(...) ^ed at these fearful (...), and (...)* which (...) that they attribute
to madness, yet they lead him to the Hospital, he still raving and crying as
he passes the streets: But oh! Let us here farther, admire with wonder, and
wonder with admiration, at the providence and mercy of God here again
miraculously made apparent and manifested in this execrable wretch Maurice, for
he who outragiously cried in his prison, and licentiously raved in the street,
is no sooner entered into the Hospital, but the pleasure of God had so ordained
it, as his Madness fully falls from him, and he absolutely recovereth again
his wits and senses, in such firm and settled manner, as if he had never
formerly been touched or afflicted therewith.

His Gaolers make report to the Magistrates, first of his confession of
drowning his Mother, and then of his sudden and miraculous recovering of his
perfect memory, judgment and senses, as soon as he set foot within the
Hospital: Whereupon they as much astonished at the one, as wondering at the
other, do instantly repair thither to him, and there arraigne and accuse him,
for that inhumane and bloody fact of his, whereof his own Evidence and
Confession has now made him guilty. But they take him for another, or at
least, he will not be the same man: He denies this horrible and bloody crime
of his, with many oaths and asseverations, which they maintain and affirm he
has confessed, says, that they either heard a dream, or saw a Vision,
whereof he neither dreamt not thought of, and that he was ready to lose all
the blood and life of his body, to find out, and to be revenged of the
murderers of his mother.

But the Magistrates are deaf to his Apology, and considering the violence of
his madness by its sudden abandoning him, as also his free and uninforced
confession of drowning his Mother; they conceive that Gods providence and
Justice does strongly operate in the detection of this foul and inhumane
murder; and therefore contemning his requests and oaths, (in the vindication of
his innocence) they cause him to be refetched from the Hospital to the
Prison, and there adjudge him to the Rack, when although his heart and soul
be terrified and affrighted with his apprehension and accusation: Yet the
devil is so strong with him, as he cannot yet find in his heart to relent,
much less to repent this foul and inhumane crime of his; but considering that
he acted it so secretly, as all the world could not produce a witness against
himself, except himself, he vows he will be so impious and profane in his
fortitude and courage, as to disdain these his torments, and to look on them
and his Tormentor, with an eye rather of contempt than fear: But God will be
as propitious and indulgent to him, as he is rebellious and refractory to God;
for here we shall see both his Conscience and resolutions taught another rule,
and prescribed a contrary Law; yea, here we shall behold and observe in him,
that now Righteousness shall triumph over Si^e, Grace over Nature, his Soul
over his Body, Heaven over Hell, and GOD over Satan; for at the very first
sight of the Rack, the sight and remembrance of his bloody crime makes him
shake and tremble extremely, when his soul being illuminated by the
resplendant Sun beams of Gods mercy, and the foggie mists of Hell and Satan
expelled and banished thence, he falls to the ground on his knees, first beats
his breast, and then erecting his eyes and hands toward Heaven, he (with a
whole deluge of tears) again confesses, that he had drowned his mother in
the Well, from and for the which he humbly craveth remission, both from Earth
and Heaven.

And although there be no doubt but God will forgive his Soul for this his
soul murder, yet the Magistrates of Morges, who have Gravity in their looks,
Religion in their hearts and speeche^, and Justice in their actions, will not
pardon his body; so in detestation of this his fearful crime, and inhumane
parracide, they in the morning condemn him, that very afternoon to be
hanged. At the pronouncing of which sentence, as he has reason to approve the
equity of their Justice in condemning him to die, so he cannot refrain from
grieving at the strictness of the time, which they allot him fot his
preparation to death. But as soon as we forsake the devil, we make our peace
with God.

All Morges and Losanna rings of this mournful and Tragical news, and in
detestation of this mournful, inhumane and bloody crime of our execrable
Maurice, they flock from all parts and streets to the place of execution, to
see him expiate it by his dearh, and so to take his last farewell of his life.

The Divines, who are given him for fortifying and assisting his soul, in this
her flight and transmigration from Earth to Heaven, have religiously prevailed
with him, so as they make him see the foulness of his crime, in the
sharpness of his contrition and repentance for the same; yea, he is become
so humble and withal so sorrowful, for this his bloody and degenerate
offense, as I know not whether he think thereof with more grief, or remember
it wirh detestation and repentance. At his ascending the Ladder, most of his
Spectators cannot refrain from weeping, and the very sight of their tears
prooves the Argument of his; as his remembrance of murdering his Mother, was
the cause.

He tells them he grieves at his very soul, for the foulness of his fact,
in giving his Mother her death, of whom he had received his life. He affirms,
that Drunkenness was not only the root, but the cause of this his beggary
and misery, of his crime and punishment and of his deboshed life and deserved
death, from which with a world of sighs and tears he seeks and endeavors to
divert all those who affect and practice that beastly Vice. He declares, that
his Mother was too virtuous so soon to go out of the world, and himself too
vicious (and wirhall too cruel) any longer to live in it; that the sins of
his life had deserved this his shameful death; and although he could not
prevent the last, yet, that he heartily and sorrowfully repented the first. He
prayed God to be merciful to his soul, and then besought the world to pray
unto God for that mercy; when speaking a few words to himself, and sealing
them with many tears, and far fetched sighs; he lastly bids the world
farewell, when enviting the Executioner to do his Office he is turned over.

And such was the vicious life, and deserved death of this Execrable Son and
bloody Villain Maurice: wherein I must confess, that although his end were
shameful and sharp; yet, it was by far too too mild for the foulness of
his crime, in so cruelly murdering his dear Mother Christina, whom the Laws
both of Nature and Grace commanded him to preserve and cherish: Yea, let all
Sons and Daughters of all ages and ranckes whatsoever look on this bloody
and disasterous example of his, with fear; and fear to commit the like by the
sight of his punishment. It is a History worthy, both of our meditation and
detestation, whether we cast our eyes on his drunkenness, or fix our thoughts
and hearts, on his murder: Those who love and fear God, are happy in their
lives, and fortunate in their deaths; but those who will neither fear nor love
him, very seldom prove fortunate in the one, never happy in the other; and to
the rest of our sins, if we once consent and give way to add that scarlet,
and crying one of Murder; that blood which we untimely send to Earth, will in
Gods due time draw down vengeance on our Heads from Heaven; Charity is the
mark of a Christian, and the shedding of Innocent blood, either that of an
Infidel, an Atheist; or a Devil. O therefore let us affect and strive to hate
it in others, and so we shall the better know how to detest and abhor it in
our selves, which that we may all know to our comforts, and remember to our
consola^itions, direct us O Lord our God, and so we shall be directed.

FINIS.
THE TRIVMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.

Expressed In thirty several Tragical Histories, (digested into six Books)
which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents, Amorous,
Moral, and Divine.

Book IV.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.



LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the TurksHead, near the Mitre Tavern.
1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, PHILIP, EARL OF PEMBROKE and Montgomery, Lo.
Chamberlain to the King, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
HAving formerly dedicated the third Book of these my Tragical Histories (of
Gods Revenge against Murder) to your Incomparable Lord and Brother, William
Earl of Pembroke (who now lives with God) I therefore held my self bound (by
the double obligation of my duty and your own generous merits likewise to
present this Fourth Book to your Protection and Patronage, because as England,
so Europe perfectly knows that you are as true an heir to his Virtues, as to
his Fortunes* and to his Goodness, as to his Greatness, and that therefore it
may properly be said he is not dead, because they (as well as himself) do
still survive and live in you, with equal luster and glory, as having made
either a happy Metamorphosis, or a blessed Transmigration into your Noble
breast and resolutions, and therefore as it was my sincere respects and zeal
to his Honor that then drew me to that ambition; so it is entirely the same
which has now both invited and induced me to this pr^sumption to your
Lordship, having no other ends or object in this my Dedication, but that this
book of mine having the honor to be countenanced by so great a personage, and
the felicity to be protected by so honorable a Mecaenas, may therefore
encounter the more safely with the various humors it shall meet with, and abide
more securely the different censures of this our too fastidious age.

How these Histories (or the memorable accidents which they contain and
relate) will relish with your Lordships palate or judgment, I know not; Only
because you are a Noble Son of Gods Church, and an Excellent Servant to your
Prince and Country, I therefore rather hope than presume, that your Honor will
at least be pleased to see, if not delight to know and consider, how the
Triumphs of Gods Revenge and punishments does herein secretly and providently
meet with this crying and scarlet sin of premeditated Murder, and with the
bloody and inhumane Perpetrators thereof, who hereby (as so many merciless
Butchers, and prodigious Monsters of mankind) do justly make themselves odious
to Men, and execrable to God and his Angels.

God has (deservedly) honored your Lordship with the favor of two great
Earthly Kings your Sovereigns, as first of our royallKing James, the father,
and now of our present most Renowned King Charles his Son, and yet this
external Honor and favor of their^ is no way so glorious to you, as that
(maugre the reigning vices of the world) you serve the true God of heaven, in
the purity of your heart, and fear and adore him in the integrity of your
Soul. And to represent you with naked Truth, and not with Eloquence or
Adulation. This Heavenly Piety of yours I believe is the prime reason, and true
Essential cause of all this your earthly Honor, and sublunary Greatness, and
that this is it likewise which does so rejoice your heart, and enrich and
replenish your House with so numerous and Noble an Issue, of hopeful and
flourishing Children, who (as so many Olive branches of Virtue, and Syents and
Plants of Honor) do both inviron your Bed, and surround your Table, and who
promise no less than futurely to magnify the blood, and to perpetuate and
immortalize the Illustrious Name and Family of the Herberts, to all Posterity.

Go on resolutely and constantly (Noble Lord) in your religious Piety to God,
and in your Candide and unstained Fidelity to your Prince and Country, that
your life may triumph over your death, and your Virtues contend to outshine
your Fortunes, and that hereafter God (of his best favor and mercy) may make
you as blessed and as glorious a Saint in Heaven, as now you are a great Peer
and Noble Pillar here on Earth, which none shall pray for with more true zeal,
nor desire or wish with more real and unfeigned affection, than

Your Honors devoted and Most humble Servant, John Reynolds.

The Grounds and Contents of these Histories.
History XVI. Idiaques causes his son Don Ivan to marry Marsillia, and then
commits Adultery and Incest with her; She makes her Father in Law Idiaques to
poison his old wife Honoria, and likewise makes her own brother De Perez to
kill her Chambermaid Mathurina; Don Ivan afterward kills De Perez in a Duel;
Marsillia has her brai^ dashed out by a horse, and her body is afterward
condemned to be burnt; Idiaques is beheaded; his body consumed to ashes, and
thrown into the air. History XVII. Harcourt steals away his brother Vimoryes
wife Masserina, and keeps her in Adultery; She hireth Tivoly (an Italian
Mountebanke) to poison La Precoverte, who was Harcourts wife; Harcourt kills his
brother Vimory, and then marries his widow Masserina; Tivoly is hanged for a
robbery, and at his execution accuses Masserina for hiring him to poison La
Precoverte, for the which she is likewise hanged; Noel (who was Harcourts man)
on his deathbed suspecteth and accuses his said Master for killing of his
brother Vimory, whereof Harcourt being found guilty, he is broken alive on a
wheel for the same. History XVIII. Romeo (the Laquay of Borlary) kills
Radegonda, the Chamber-m^id of the Lady Fellisanna in the street, and is hanged
for the same; Borlary afterward hireth Castruchio (an Apothecary) to poison
her husband Seignior Planeze, for the which Castruchio is hanged, and his body
thrown into the River, and Borlari is beheaded, and then burnt. History XIX.
Beaumarays, and his brother Montaigne kill Champigny, and Marin (his second) in
a Duel; Blancheville (the widow of Champigni) in revenge thereof hireth Le
Valley (who was servant to Beaumarays) to murder his said Master with a
pistol, the which he does, for the which Le Valley is broken on a wheel, and
Blancheville hanged for the same. History XX. Lorenzo murthereth his wife
Fermia; He some twenty years after (as altogether unknown) robs his (and
her) son Thomaso, who likewise (not knowing Lorenzo to be his father) (...)
him for that robbery, for the which he is hanged.
GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XVI.
Idiaques causes his son Don Ivan to marry Marsillia, and then commits
Adultery and Incest with her; She makes her Father in Law Idiaques to poison
his own old wife Honoria; and likewise makes her own brother De Perez to kill
her Chambermaid Mathurina; Don Ivan afterward kills De Perez in a Duel;
Marsillia has her brains dashed out by a horse, and her body is afterward
condemned to be burnt; Idiaques is beheaded, his body likewise consumed to
ashes, and thrown into the air.

LEt Malice be never so secretly contrived, and the shedding of Innocent blood
never so wretchedly perpetrated, yet as our Conscience is to us a thousand
witnesses, so God is to us a thousand Consciences, first to bring it to light,
and then their Authors to deserved punishments for the same, when they least
dream or think thereof. For as there is no peace to the wicked, so they shall
find no peace or tranquillity here on Earth, either with God, or his creatures,
because if they would conceal it, yet the very Fowls of the air, yea, the
stones and timbers of their chambers will detect it; For the Earth or Air will
give them no breath nor being, but they shall hang between both, because by
these their foul and deplorable facts, they have made themselves unworthy of
either. A powerful example, and a pitiful precedent whereof we shall behold
in this ensuing History, where some wretched miscreants, and graceless
creatures, making themselves guilty of those bloody crimes (by the immediate
Revenge and Justice of God) received exemplary and condign punishments for the
same: May we read it to Gods glory, to the comfort of our hearts, and the
instruction of our souls.

IN the City of Santarem which (by tract of time, and corruption of speech)
some term Saint Aren, and which (after Lisbon) is one of the richest and best
peopled of Portugal; there dwelt a Gentleman of some fifty five years old,
nobly descended, and of a great estate and means, named Don Sebastian
Idiaques, whose wife and Lady being aged, of well near fifty years, was
termed Dona Honoria, and well she deserved that honorable name, for all sorts
of Virtues and honors made her youth famous, and her age glorious to all
Portugal and Spain. They had lived together in the bonds of Matrimony almost
thirty years, with much Honor, content, and felicity, and for the fruits of
their affection and marriage, they had two sons and four daughters; but God
in his pleasure and Providence (for some reserved reasons best known to his
All Divine Majesty) took from Earth to Heaven all their daughters, and one of
their sons, so as now they have left them but one son, named Don Ivan, a
gallant young Gentleman, of some twenty five years old, of disposition brave
and generous, who after his first youthful education under his father, had his
chief breeding under the Duke of Braganza, to whom he was first a Page, and
then a chief Gentleman retaining to him, whom (in regard of the death of his
brother and sisters) his father called home unto him, to be his comfort and
consolation, and the prop and stay of his age, as also of the Lady his mother,
who had formerly acted a great part in grief, and a mournful one in sorrow
for the death of her children; and indeed Don Ivan, this son of theirs, for
all regards of Courtship, was held to be a complete Gallant, and one of the
prime Cavalliers of Portugal.

As for Idiaques the father, though in all the course and progress of his
life, and in all the life and conduction of his actions, he bewrayed many
moral and generous virtues, yet as one discordant string marres the harmony of
the best tuned Instrument, and the concent of the sweetest melody and music;
and as one foul Vice is naturally subject, and fatally incident to eclipse
and drown many rich and fair virtues, so (in this his old age, when time had
honored him with white hairs) he deboshed himself so much, and so sottishly
sacrificed his irregular affections to heart-killing concupiscence, and his
exorbitant desires to souledestroying adultery, that he very often made
himself a false and inconstant husband to his wife, and a true, yea, too true
a friend to Curtisans and Strumpets. His virtuous Lady Honoria extremely
grieves hereat, that now in his later years he should thus lasciviously forget
himself, both toward her, and toward God. She uses all sweet persuasions,
prayers and tears, to diswade and divert him from it, but seeing that all
proves vain, and that he rather prooves worse then better thereat, her
discretion makes her brook it with as much patience as she can, and therefore
she seems not to see, or know that whereof (to her grief and discontent) she
cannot be ignorant; But here comes an accident which will breed both of them,
and their Son Don Ivan misery of all sides.

Some six leagues from Santarem was a wonderful fair young Gentlewoman being
a widow, aged but of Twenty two years, named Dona Marsillia well desended,
but by her late deceased Husband left but small means, yet she bears out her
port bravely, and maintains her self highly and gallantly; and indeed she is
the prime young Lady for beauty in all those parts; Now the base Ambassadors,
and Emysaries of Idiaques his beastly and obscaene lust (the true Vipers and
Cankers of Commonweals) give him notice of her, and of her singular beauty,
as well foreseeing and knowing that it would be sweet and pleasing news unto
him. He visits and courts her, but as young as she is she puts him off with
peremptory refusals, and in virtuous and modest terms checks his age for this
his lascivious suit and motion to her: But he is as constant in his affection
to her, as she is disdainful to him; for his heart is so ensnared and
entangled in the fetters of her fresh and delicate beauty, that although she
refuse him, yet he will not forsake her; but after many pursuits and visits,
she at last well perceiving that he loved her tenderly and dearly, and that he
still most importunately frequented her house and company, she as a subtle and
cunning young Gentlewoman, tells him plainly and privately, that she will
acquaint him with a secret of her heart, and a request of her mind and
affection, which if he will cause to be performed, she then vows she will
for ever be at his disposing and command; Idiaques thinking that she will crave
some sum of money of him, or some yearly pension or annuity; he constantly
promises to grant and perform her request; so she (taking time at advantage)
and first swearing him to secrecy, then (with many smiles and blushes) she
tells him, that if ever he think to enjoy her love and her self, he must use
the means to marry his son Don Ivan to her, which being effected, she with
much pretended show of piety and affection, religiously swears to him, that
she will never have the power or will to deny him any thing, but that his
requests shall be to her as so many commands, and (but only for himself) if
his son Don Ivan be her Husband, she with many imprecations and
asseverations swears, that she will sacrifice her best blood and life, rather
than distaine his bed, or offer him the least shadow of any scandal or
dishonor whatsoever. Idiaques wondreth with admiration, and admires with
wonder at this her strange proposition, the which he finds so knotty and
intricate, as measuring Grace by Nature, his Judgment by his Lust and
Concupiscence, and his Soul by his Affections, he knows not what to say or
do herein; so he answers her with more love than wisdom, and for that time
leaves her in general term. He goes homes, walks pensively in his Garden,
and there consults Pro and Con on this business; feign he would preserve his
sons honor, and keep the honor of his bed immaculate, but then the sweet
Roses and Lillies of Marsillia's youth and beauty act wonders in his heart, and
bears down all other reasons and considerations before it: He visits her
again and again, but he finds her inviolably constant in her former
resolution. All the favor and courtesy which he can gain from her, are a few
extorted kisses, which so inflame and set on fire his aged heart and
affections, as at last like a graceless father, he faithfully promises her
to use his best art and power to procure his son to marry her. To which end
he takes him aside, and in the softest and sweetest terms he can devise,
paints out Marsillia's praises and Virtues to him in the purest and rarest
colors, adding withal, that although she be not exceeding rich, yet that
her personage is so exquisite, and her perfections so excellent, as that she
every way meriteth to be wife to a Prince. Don Ivan (by what fatal fortune I
know not) relisheth this motion of his father, to seek the Lady Marsillia for
his wife, with much delight and joy, and far the more and the sooner, in
regard he (in diverse companies) has formerly heard the fame of her beauty
extolled, and the glory of her Virtues advanced to the Sky, so he takes time
of his father to consider hereof, and rides over sometimes with him to Saint
Estiene to visit her; He finds her wonderful fair and beautiful, and
wonderful coy; of a very sweet and Majesticall carriage, and of a delicate and
curious speech, fit baits to ensnare the heart, and to betray the judgment of
a more solid understanding than that of Don Ivan. She acts her part as wisely
as he does amarously and passionately; For the more she makes show to retire
and conceal her affection from him, the more he is provoked to advance and
discover his to her; but he cannot be so much enamoured of her beauty, as she
is with the great Estate of Lands and Demaines whereunto God and his father
have made him heir.

Whiles thus the father privately, and the son publicly are seeking to make
Marsillia his wife, the old Lady Honoria the mother, by many strong reasons
seeks to divert him from her. She has perfect notice of her husbands long and
often frequenting of Marsillia's house and company, and therefore fearing the
vanity of his age, and doubting the frailty of her youth and chastity, her
jelousie and judgment at last finds out and concludes, that his familiarity
with her is far greater than honor can warrant, or honesty allow of; Upon
which foundation she in her discontented looks and silence, bewrayes unto her
son Don Ivan, her constant and resolute averseness from him to marry her, the
which she peremptorily and religiously forbids him upon her blessing, adding
withal, that if he marry her, there will infallibly more miseries and
calamities attend their nuptials, than as yet it is possible for him either to
know or conceive; the which she prays him to read in her looks and silence,
to remember it when he sees her not, and to take it as the truest advise, and
securest Counsel of a dear Mother to her only Son. Don Ivan ruminates on
these speeches and advise of his Mother, as if there were some deep abstruse
mystery or ambiguous Oracle contained and hidden therein, the which because he
has equal reason as well to fear that this match of his with Marsillia may
prove fatal, as to hope and believe that it may prove fortunate, he makes a
stand thereat, as vowing to proceed therein with advisement, and not with
temeritie and precipitation; and so forbeares for a month or two to visit her:
But the more the Son flies off in his affection from Marsillia, the more does
she do the like from his father in requital, whereat he grieves with
discontent, and she seems to bite her lip with sorrow. Idiaques charge
his son to tell him from whence this his sudden strangeness and unkindnesse
toward Marsillia proceeds; the which he answers with a modest excuse, as
favoring more of discretion than disobedience, but yet wholly concealeth his
Mothets counsel and advise to him from his Father, the which notwithstanding
he vehemently suspecteth it proceeds from her and her Jealousy. Marsillia is
enraged to see her self deprived of Don Ivan, whom in her ambitious thoughts,
hopes, and wishes she had already made her Husband; and howsoever Idiaques his
Father seeks to conceal and palliate this business toward her, yet she
believes it is his fault, and not his Sons. She lays it to his charge, and
knitting her brows, she conjureth him to tell her from whence his Sons
unkindnesse to her proceeds: He tells her, he is confident, that it is his old
Mother who has diverted him from her, whereat she is exceedingly enraged;
When seeing this old Letcher so open and plain with her, she foothing him up
with many kisses, tells him that this old Beldam his wife must first be in
heaven, before he can hope to enjoy her, or she his Son here on Earth; when
(being allured and provoked by the treacherous suggestions and bloody
temptations of the Devil) she proffers him to visit her, and so to poison her,
which he opposes and contradicts; and contrary to all reason and sense, and
repugnant to all Humanity and Christianity, yea, to Nature and Grace, (as a
Husband fitter for the Devil, than for this good old Lady his Wife) he
undertakes and promises her speedily to perform it himself; yea, the Devil
is now so strong with him, and he with the Devil, that because he loves
Marsillia, therefore he must hate his own dear wife, and virtuous Lady
Honoria, and because he hates her, therefore he must poison her; A lewd part of
a man, a fouler one of a Christian, but a most hellish and bloody one of a
Husband to his own wife, who ought to be near and dear unto him, as being
his own flesh and blood, Yea the other half of himself. He cannot content
himself to seek to abuse and betray his Son, but he must also murder the
mother, So wanting the fear of God before his eyes, and repleate with as much
impiety and Cruelty, as he was devoyd of all Grace, he is resolute in this his
hellish rage and malice against her, and so to please his young Strumpet, he
will send this good old Lady his wife to Heaven in a bloody Coffin, so without
thinking of Heaven or Hell, or of God, or his soul, he procures strong
poison, and acting the part of a fury of Hell, and a member of the Devil, he
as a wretched and execrable Husband, administreth it to her in preserved
Barbaries, which he saw her usually to love and eat, whereof within three days
after she dies, to the extreme grief and sorrow of her Son Don Ivan, who
bitterly wept, for this his mothers hasty and unexpected death, but the manner
thereof he knows not, and indeed does no way in the world either doubt or
suspect thereof.

His Father Idiaques makes a counterfeit show of sorrow and mourning to the
world, for the death of his wife, but God in his due time will unmaske this his
wretched hypocrisy, and detect and revenge this his execrable and deplorable
murder. Now as soon as Marsillia is advertised of the Lady Honoria's death,
she not able to contain her Joys, does infinitely triumph therear, and within
less than two months after her burial, Idiaques and Marsillia work so
politiquely with Don Ivan, as he marries Marsillia although his mothers advise
to him in the garden, do still run in his mind and thoughts, and now he
brings home his lustful Spouse and Wife to his lewd and lascivious Fathers
house at Sentarem, where (I write with horror and shame) he most beastly and
inhumanly very often commits Adultery and Incest with her, and they act it so
close that for the first year or two, his Son Don Ivan, has no news or
inkling thereof, and now Marsillia governs and rules all, yea her
incontinency with her Father Idiaques makes her so audacious and impudent, as
she commands not only his house, but himself, and domineeres most proudly
and imperiously over all his Servants. Her waiting maid Mathurina observes and
takes exact and curious notice, of her young Ladies lustful, and unlawful
familiarity, with her Father in Law Idiaques, the which her mistress
understanding, she extremely beats her for the same; and twice whippes her
stark naked in her Chamber, and dragges her about by her hair, although this
poor young Gentlewoman, with a world of tears and prayers, beggs her to
desist and give over.

God has many ways and means to set forth his glory, in detecting of Crimes,
and punishing of offenders, yea he is now pleased to make use of this young
maidens discontent and choler against her insensed Lady and Mistress, for we
shall see her pay dear for this cruelty and tyranny of hers toward her, for
Mathurina, being a Gentlewoman by birth, she takes those blows and severe
usage of her Lady in so ill part, and lodges it so deeply in her heart and
memory, as she vows her revenge shall requite part of that her cruelty and
tyranny toward her; Whereupon (with more haste then discretion, and with more
malice then fidelity) she in her hot blood, goes to Don Ivan her young master,
tells him of this foul business betwixt his young wife and old Father, to the
disgrace and shame of nature; and makes him see and know his own dishonor, in
their brutish and beastly adultery and incest. Don Ivan extremely grieves
hereat, yea he is both amazed and astonished at the report of this unnatural
crime as well of his young wife as aged Father. He cannot refrain from
choler and tears hereat, to see himself thus infinitely abused by her
beauty, and betrayed by his lust; and if it be a beastly, yea a profane part,
for one man, and friend to offer it to another, how much more for a father to
offer it to his own, yea to his only Son. He expected more goodness from
her youth and grace from age, but as his wife has hereby infringed her vow,
and oath of wedlock, so has his wretched father exceeded and broken those
rules and precepts of Nature; yea, he is so netled with the report, and
inflamed with the considetation and memory hereof, that he abhorres her
infidelity, and in his heart and soul detesteth his inhumanitie; so as the
knowledge hereof does so justly incense him against her, and exasperate
himself against him; that resolving to right his own honor, as much as they
have blemished and ruined it, and there in their own, he scorns to be an
Eyewitness, much less an accessory of this his shame and their infamy: So he
here enters into a discreet and generous consultation with himself, how to
bear himself in this strange and dishonorable accident; when perceiving and
finding that both his wife and father, had by this their beastly Adultery and
Incest, made themselves for ever unworthy of his sight and company; he here
for ever disdaining henceforth to see her, or speak with him, very suddenly
(upon a second conference, and examination of Mathurina, who stood firmly and
virtuously to her former deposition and accusation against them) takes horse
and rides away from Santarem to Lisbone, where providing himself of moneys and
other necessaries, he takes poast for Spain, and there builds up his
residence and stay at the Court at Madrid, where we will for a while leave
him, to speak of other accidents which fall out in the course of this History.

Idiaques seeing the sudden departure of his Son, and Marsillia of her
Husband, Don Ivan, and being both assured that he had some secret notice and
intelligence of their lascivious dalliances and affection, he exceedingly
grieves, and she extremely storms thereat, because they know that this foul
scandal will wholly reflect and fall upon them; and now by this his sudden and
discontented departure from them, will be made notorious and apparent to all
the world. But how to remedy it they know not; because he has neither
signified him where he is gone, nor when he will return; the which the more
bewrays his small respect, and discovers his implacable displeasure toward
them. But as there is no malice and revenge to that of a Woman, so Marsillia
assuring herself that it was her Maid Mathurina who (to the prejudice and
scandal of her Honor) had unlocked this mystery to her Husband Don Ivan,
she enters into so furious a rage, and so outrageous a fury against her, as
she provides her self of rods, and intends the next morn e're she be
stirring out of her bed, to wreake her fierce anger and indignation upon her:
But this sharp and severe resolution of hers, is not so closely carried by
her, but Mathurina has perfect notice thereof, and to prevent this intended
correction and cruelty of her incensed Lady and Mistress, she the night before
takes horse, and so rides home to the Town of St. Saviors to her father; and
there, from point to point relates him all which had past betwixt her Lady and
her self, and betwixt her Husband, her self, and her father in Law; and that
now disdaining any more to serve her, as her body, so her tongue is at liberty;
for she is not, and she will not be sparing to publish her Mistress, and her
father in law's shameful familiarity and adultery together. But this
indiscretion, and licentious folly of her tongue will cost her far dearer
than she thinks of, or expects.

For her late Lady and Mistress, Marsillia, being now perfectly certified of
Mathurina's infidelity and treachery toward her in the point of her dishonor
and shame, she (to salve up her reputation, and to provide for her fame (will
not wholly rely upon her own judgment and discretion herein; but resolves to
acquaint Don Alonso De Perez, her own only brother herewith, and to crave his
aid and assistance, as also his advice, betwixt whom and her self there was so
strict a league and simpathy of affection, that (if reports be true) I write it
to their shame, and mine own sorrow, it exceeded the bounds of Nature and
Honor, and of Modesty and Chastity; only the presumption hereof is great and
pregnant, for if there had not been some extraordinary ties and obligations
betwixt them, it is rather to be believed than doubted, that for her sake and
service, he would never have so freely exposed himself to such eminent fears
and dangers, as we shall immediately see him do; and although (of honor and
disposition) he were brave and generous, yet I believe he would not have
undertaken it. For the Reader must understand that to this brother of hers, Don
Perez, Marsillia speedily acquaints the infidelity and treachery of her Maid
Mathurina's tongue against her Fame and Honor, which had so unfortunately
occasioned her Husbands, Don Ivans, discontented departure from her. She
protests most seriously and deeply to him of her and her father in Law
Idiaques innocence in this pretended crime and scandal: Tells him that
Mathurina is the only author and reporter thereof, and therefore till that
base and lewd tongue of hers be eternally stopped and silenced, she shall
never enjoy any true content to her heart, or peace to her thoughts and mind
either in this world, or this life: When his affection to her makes him to
yield such confidence to her speeches, vows, and complaints, that he holds
them to be as true as Scripture; yea, and the undoubted Oracles of Truth and
Innocence; when to please and satisfy her, he bids her be of good cheer and
comfort, and that he will speedily take such order that Mathurina's ^candalous
tongue shall not long eclipse her fame, or any further blemish the luster of
her reputation: When this base and bloody Gentleman, De Perez, to make good
this his promise to his execrable Sister, he secretly rides over to St.
Saviors, and there by night waiting near her fathers door, when Mathurina
would chance to issue forth; he in a dark night espying her (without any more
ceremony or further expostulation) runs her through the body two several
times, whereof poor harmless innocent soul she falls down dead to his feet
without once speaking or crying. So De Perez seeing her dispatched, he
presently takes horse (which his man there led by him) and poasts away to
Santarem, being neither seen nor discovered. And thus this bloody villain most
deplorably embrued his guilty hands in the innocent blood of this virtuous
young Gentlewoman, who never offended him in thought, word, or deed in all her
life; and albeit that her father Signeor Pedro de Castello makes curious
enquiry and research for the Murderer of his Daughter, yet De Perez (mounted
at advantage) has recovered Santarem in safety. But God will in due time find
him out to his shame and confusion; yea, and than when his security and courage
little dreams thereof.

As soon as he comes to Santarem, he acquaints his sister Marsillia of his
dispatching of Mathurina, who is infinitely glad thereof, and extremely thank
full to him for the same, and now her malice and revenge looks wholly on her
Husband Don Ivan, for offering her this unkind and scandalous indignity of his
departure, and for tacitly taxing and condemning her of incontinency with his
father Idiaques, which her adulterous heart, and incestuous soul and
conscience does inwardly confess and acknowledge, though the perfidiousnesse
and hypocrisy of her false tongue do publicly deny it; yea, with her best
art and policy, and with her sweetest smiles and kisses, she has by this time
so exasperated this her bloody brother against him, that (out of his vanity and
folly) he profanely vows unto God, and seriously protests and swears unto
her. That if he knew where he were, he (for the vindication of her honor and
innocence, would ride to him and fight with him, except he would resolve to
give him and her some valuable reparation, and honorable satisfaction to the
contrary, which he seals and confirms to her with many amarous smiles, and
lascivious kisses. But as we are commonly never nearer danger than when we
think our selves farthest from it: So God being as secret in his decrees, as
sacred in his resolutions, we shall shortly see De Perez to verify and
confirm it in himself; for as in the heat of this his sottish affection to
his sister, he is ready to fight with her Husband Don Ivan, if he knew where he
was; lo the news of his residence in Madrid, when he least thinks thereof,
is accidentally brought him by a Servant of his own whom he purposely sends
to Santarem with these two ensuing letters, The one sent and directed from him
to his Father the other to his wife Marsillia That to his Father spoke thus.

DON IVAN to IDIAQVES.
WAs there no other woman of the whole world for you to abuse but my wife, and
was your faith so weak with God, or you so strong with the Devil, that you
must therefore make her your Strumpet, because she was my wife? If Nature
would not inform you that I am your Son, yet you are my Father, and it should
have taught you to have been more natural to ^se, more honorable to the
world, more respectfull to your self, and more religious to God, and not to
have made your self guilty of these foul crimes of Adultery and Incest with
her, the least whereof is so odious to God, and so detestable to men, that I
want terms, not tears to express it. For hereby as you have made my shame
infinite, so likewise you have made your own infamy eternal, the
consideration whereof gives me so much grief, and the remembrance sorrow, that
holding you for ever unworthy of my sight, and she of my company, I have
therefore left Portugal for Spain, and forsaken Santarem, to live and die
here in Madrid. And when hereafter God shall be so merciful to your soul, to
let you see that the Winter of your age makes you fitter for your grave than
for my bed, and for your winding sheet, than for my wife, you will then h^ld
this resolution and proceeding of mine toward you as honorable, as this your
crime to me is unnatural, the which if you henceforth redeem not with an
Ocean of bitter tears, and a world of repentant and religious Prayers to God,
I rather fear than doubt, that his Divine Majestywill make you as miserable,
as you have made me unfortunate.

DON IVAN.


His Letter to his Wife spoke this language.

DON IVAN to MARSILLIA.
WHat Devil possessed thy heart with lust, and thy soul with impiety, to make
thee violate thy vow which thou gave me in marriage, by committing those
dam^able sins of Adultery and Incest with my natural father: And if the
consideration that I was thy Husband could not in Grace deter thee from it,
yet (me thinks) the remembrance that he was my father should in Nature have
made thee both to abhor and detest it. And although my tender affection to
thee, and filial obedience to him, made me expect more goodness from thy
youth, and Grace from his age, yet God is a just Judge, and your hearts are
true witnesses of these your unnatural crimes and foul ingratitude toward
me, which has cast so great a blemish and scandal on mine honor, and dashed
my joys with so many untimely afflictions, and immerited sorrows, that I have
abandoned Portugal and Santarem for thy sake, and betake^ myself to live and
die in Madrid in Spain for mine; where I will strive to make my self as
contented as discontent can make me, and so leave this thy enormous crime, and
the punishment thereof to God, in whom thou may be happy, but without whom
thou will assuredly be miserable. And think to what just calamities and
miseries thine inordinate lusts, and lascivious desires and delights have
already deservedly reduced and exposed thee. Since henceforth I will no more
esteem thee my Wife, or myself thy Husband, and that God will assuredly look^
on thee with an eye of indignation, and the world, of contempt.

DON IVAN.


Idiaques having read and perused that Letter of his son, and Marsillia this
of her Husband Don Ivan, they are therewith so touched in heart with shame, and
stung in conscience with sorrow for their foul crimes of Adultery and Incest,
that they blush each at other, and both of them most bitterly curse the name
and memory of Mathurina, who was the first author of this report to him, and
which so suddenly incensed him, and occasioned his departure. So to bear up
their reputations to the world, and their fames to him, they resolve (without
either asking leave or pardon of God) to justify their innocence hereof to
him, and so to pursue and solicit his return. To which effect they write and
return him (by his own servant) their two several Letters in answer of his,
whereof that of Idiaques his father carried this message.

IDIAQVES to DON IVAN.
THou do wrong thy self and the truth, God and thy Conscience, and thy wife
and me, in so basely taxing us of those foul sins of I^eest and Adultery,
whereof we are as truly innocent, as thou falsely and maliciously deemest us
guilty. For I have not abused her nor made her my Strumpet, although not God,
but the Devil (in the slanderous tongue of Mathurina) has made thee to
believe so. For Nature has taught me more Grace and goodness, not so little
impiety, for that I know they are sins more ^dious to God, and detestable to
the world, than either thy sorrows can express, or thy anger depaint me.
Neither have I made thy shame infinite, or can thou make my infamy visible,
much less eternal, although herein thou show me thy indignation, together
with thy disobedience, by leaving Portugal for Spain, and Santarem for
Madrid, whereof because thou will not make thy duty, I will content my self to
make thy discretion Judge betwixt us, If thou have not done me more wrong, than
either thy self, and the truth right herein, and offered a scandal likewise
to thy Wives honor, who made thy company her chiefest joy, as now she does
thy absence her sharpest misery and affliction. How then can I go to my grave
with content, when thou for sakest her bed with malice, and my house with
disdain. My innocence in thy accusation has no way irritated or offended
God, and, if therefore with tears and Prayers thou will resolve to (...) God,
thy Wife, and me forgiveness for this thy foul crime, and monstr^ ingratitude
toward us, then mine arms shall be as open as ^ver they have been to
receive, and my house to welcome thee, and therein thou shall make thy self as
truly happy, as thou falsely and uncharitably think that God will make me
miserable.

IDIAQVES.


The answer of his wife Marsillia to him was couched in these terms.

MARSILLIA to DON IVAN.
IT (...) neither Lust nor the Devil which can make me infringe or violate my
Vow given thee in marriage, although thou art as far from the truth as from God
to believe it. But how shall I hope that thy tongue will excuse me of these thy
pretended foul crimes of Adultery and Incest, when to my astonishment and
grief I see thou likewise condemnest thy old father to be guilty thereof with
me? And if this be any way affection to me, or obedience to him, let all other
Husbands judge, and all Sons define and determine. But to return thee truth
for thy falsehood; His age expected and deserved more grace, and my youth and
Virtues more affection and goodness from thee, than to have believed those
false calumnies and impostures upon the bare report and malicious relation of
my handmaid Mathurina, which are now dead with her, and are as false as thy
rashness and her revenge makes thee believe them true; for it is neither I nor
thy father who have any way blemished thi^ honor, or vanquished thy joys, but
rather thy self, and thy too too unkind and hasty departure from Santarem to
Madrid, which (to the prejudice of the truth, and of my content and honor)
has occasioned it. For my heart and foul will testify both with me and for
me, that my affection and constancy is both as s^lesse, firm, and true to
thee, as thy jealousy is false toward my self, and therefore as thou leavest
my pretended crime, so will I thy real ingratitude both to time and to God,
and if yet thou will be so wilfully cruel to live from me, and consequently
not to esteem me thy wife, yet as it is my zeal and duty to beg and pray
thee to return to me, so I will make it my Integrity and Conscience still to
hold and love thee for my Husband, and so preserving my heart for thee, as I
do my soul for God, I hope with assurance and confidence that I shall have no
cause to fear either his indignation, or the world, contempt, in regard I have
neither merited the one, nor deserved the other.

MARSILLIA.


Upon the writing and contents of these two Letters of Idiaques to his son,
and of Marsillia to her Husband Don Ivan, the Reader may please to observe and
remember with how much policy, and with how little Piety they seek to
over-vaile and deny these their Adulteries and Incest toward him, thereby to
make their actions and themselves appear as innocent, as they are guilty both
to him and to God. But God being the Author of Truth, and the Father of Light,
and whose Sacred Throne and Tribunal is environed with more glorious Suns
than we see glistering Stars in the Firmament; He will one day unmaske this
their hypocrisy, and bring their foul sins of Adultery and Incest, both to
light and punishment. Now as Marsillia is exorbitantly lascivious in her
affection to her brother De Perez, and he reciprocally so to her, so with a
world of false sighs and tears she shows him her Letter, and ^er fathers in
law Idiaques, which they had sent to her Husband Don Ivan to Madrid, and with
^y female oaths and asseverations protests to him of both their innocence
herein, which her brother believes ye^, her f^ed sorrows and false tears had
so far trenched and gained upon his cruelty, that in contemplation and
commiseration of her wrongs, he was then so vain and impious, as once he
thought to have carried these two Letters himself into Spain, and there to
have fought with Don Ivan for the reparation of his sisters honor. But at last
leaving passion to consult with reason, and temerity again to be vanquished
and swayed by judgment, first that these Letters of theirs should see Spain,
and then to attend his brother in Law Don Ivan his answer to them, and as he
shall therein find him either perverse or flexible to his wives desires, and
his fathers expectations, he will then accordingly bear himself and his
resolutions toward him, and hereon both himself and his sister Marsillia do
joyfully determine and conclude. So Don (...) own servant returns these two
aforesaid Letters from Santarem to Madrid to his Master, who breaking up the
seals, and perusing them, he does not a little wonder at his wives impudency,
and his fathers impiety, in so strongly denying these their foul crimes to
him: But he is not a little astonished, and withal afflicted and grieved,
when he falls upon that point and branch of his wives Letter, which reports the
death of her maid Mathurina, for in his heart and conscience he now verily
thinks and believes, that his wife in her inveterate malice and revenge to her,
has caused her to be murdered, and sent her to Heaven in a bloody winding
sheet. But alas, if it be so, how to revoke or remedy it he cannot. Once
therefore he was minded to have neglected these their Letters, and so to have
answered them with perpetual oblivion, and a disdainful silence: But then
again considering with himself that this might rather increase than extenuate
their hopes of his return, he betakes himself to his Study, where taking pen
and paper, he, neglecting his father, traceth his wife this Letter in answer of
hers, and again sends it her into Portugal by his own servant, which
assures them of his resolution not to return.

DON IVAN to MARSILLIA.
THe receipt of thy second Letter has not diminished but confirmed and
augmented my confidence of my fathers shame, and thy infamy, in your foul
sins of Adultery and Incest, perpetrated against me, and which is worse,
against God, so that I am fully resolved for ever to forsake his house, and thy
company, and to live and die here in Madrid, as grief and disconsolation will
permit me; For I prize the (unjust) Apology of thy (pretended) Innocence at
so low a rate, and value it at so base an esteem, as I disdain it for thy
sake, and thy self for thine own. I do as much grieve, as I both doubt and
fear, thou rejoycest at thy maid Mathurina's death, and as I am ignorant of
the manner, so if my father and thy self have been the cause thereof, you
have then all the reasons of the world to believe, that God (who is as just in
his resolutions, as sacred in his decrees) will in the end revenge it to his
glory, and punish it to your confusion.

DON IVAN.


This Letter of his does inflame his wife with malice and indignation, for now
her father and she see these their lustful and lascivious crimes seated and
confirmed in his belief, and his stay in Spain fixed in his anger, and
eternized in his resolution: When as close as they bear it, yet knowing full
well that the world will take notice of it, and ere long make it their public
scandal and infamy. He is so devoid of Grace, and she of goodness, that to
prevent it, he wishes his son in Heaven with his mother, and she her old
father in law in grave with her young maid Mathurina. But these vain hopes of
theirs may deceive them, which as yet they two are not so wise to think of,
nor so cautious or religious to consider, but rather more resembling bruit
beasts than Christians, they still continue their obscene and incestuous
pleasures, the which I take small delight or pleasure to mention in regard of
modesty, or to repeat in respect of Nature and Honor. Here Marsillia again
repaires to her brother De Perez, as to her Oracle and Champion; she shows him
both these two last Letters of her husband to his father and herself, and
conjureth his best advice and speediest assistance for the recovering of her
honor, in that of her husbands affection and company, or else that she were
freed from him, and he out of this life and this world, that so her scandal
and wrongs might die with him, and for ever be raked up in the dust of his
grave, and buried with him in eternal oblivion and silence. Don Perez (in
heart and mind) is so much his sisters, as he is no more himself, when making
his affection do homage to her beauty, and his judgment and resolution to pay
tribute to his affection, he prays her to refer this charge and business to
the care of his discharge; when giving her many kisses, and willing her to read
his heart in his eyes, he gives her the good night; and the next morning being
impatient of all delays, he takes one Seignior Gaspar Lopez, a noble
Gentleman, and a valiant intimate friend of his with him, and relating him his
intent to fight with his brother Don Ivan, and the cause thereof: They
undertake this journey of Spain, and so arrive at Madrid, where Lopez prays
Perez to make him his Second in that Duel; De Perez thanks him for this his
affection, but tells him he will hazard himself but not his friend; so writing
a Challenge to Don Ivan, he seals it up, and requesteth Lopez to deliver it
to him, and the same night to return him his answer. Lopez accordingly finds
out Don Ivan in his own chamber, and gives it to him in fair and discreet
terms, who wondering it came from his brother in law De Perez, but far more
to understand that he was now in Madrid, he no way dreaming of a Challenge, but
rather thinking that his wife his sister had sent him thither to him to work
her reconciliation, and consequently his return to her to Santarem, he hastily
breaks up the seals thereof, finds it charged with this language.

DE PE^EZ to DON IVAN.
I Have seen thy inveterate malice to thy Wife my sister, in thy false and
scandalous Letters to her, and Portugal has read it in thy sudden and
chollericke departure from her into Spain, wherefore considering what she is
to thee, and I to her, I hold my self bound (both in Honor and Blood) to make
her wrongs and quarrels mine. To which end I have left Santarem to find thee
out here in Madrid, purposely to pray thee to meet me to morrow betwixt six and
seven in the morning, at the farthest West end of the Prado, with thy Rapier, a
confident Gentleman of thy friends, and thy Surgeon, without a Second, where
thou shall find me to attend thy coming, and relying upon the equity of my
cause, and the ingratitude and infamy of thine, I make no doubt but to teach
Don Ivan what it is for him (without ground or truth) to cast a base aspersion
and wrongful blemish upon the luster of his Wife, and my Sister, the Lady
Marsillia's honor, whose descent and extraction is as good as thine, and her
education and Virtues far more sublime and excellent. Thy generosity obliges
thee to the honorable performance hereof, and mine honor reciprocally to
perform this Obligation.

DE PEREZ


Don Ivan having received and perused this Challenge of his brother in law De
Perez, and finding his furious resolution to exceed his judgment, he knowing
himself innocent, his cause good, and his courage and valor every way to be
superior to the others, highly disdaining to be out-braved by any Nobleman or
Gentleman breathing, in the point of Honor and generosity, he with a
cheerful countenance returns Lopez to his brother D^ Perez with this
accepting answer.

DON IVAN to DE PEREZ.
Mr hatred to Marsillia, and departure from her was justly occasioned through
her treachery and infidelity to me, and therefore my Letters to her to that
effect are as true as she is false in denying it; notwithstanding since she is
thy sister and my wife, I as much approve of thy affection to her, as I
condemn thy temerity to me, and thy indiscretion to thy self, in making her
quarrel thine, and by forsaking Santarem, to fight with me here in Madrid. And
because thou shall see and find that I have as much courage as innocence, I
therefore accept of thy Challenge, and am so far from learning anypoint of
valor of De Perez, as to his shame and my glory, I hope to teach him, that I
have no way cast a false aspersion or blemish on the luster of her reputation,
but she on herself, and consequently that I will neither affect her, nor fear
thee. For God lending me life, I will to morrow break fast with thee at thine
own time and place appointed, where my honor and generosity invites me to
come, and thine to meet me.

DON IVAN.


These two inconsiderate Gentlemen having thus embarked themselves in the
strong resolution of this weak quarrel and rash Duel, which earthly honor
cannot as justly approve and allow of, as divine Religion and Christian Piety
and charity disavow and execrate. Their malice and revenge each to other is so
violent and impetuous, that without any thought either of God or their Souls,
or of Heaven or Hell, they pass over the night, if not in watchfulness, yet
in broken and distracted slumbers, yea the morn no sooner peeped from Heaven
through their windows to their chambers, but they leap from their beds to the
Prado, where De Perez with his friend Lopez come first on horseback, and
immediately after them Don Ivan in his Coach, with a young Gentleman his
friend, termed Don Richardo De Valdona: So these two Duelists disdaining to be
tainted with the least spice of dishonor, or shadow of cowardice, they at
first sight of each other, throw off their doublets, and in their silk
stockings and pumps, with their Rapiers drawn, they without any further
complement or expostulation approach each other; But here before they begin
to reduce malicious contemplation into bloody action, I hold it fit to inform
my Reader with a circumstance that now past between them, wherein doubtless
the Providence of God was most conspicuous and apparent; For as by the Law and
custom both of Spain and Portugal, all Rapiers should be of one length, yet
De Perez curiously casting his vigilant eye upon that of Don Ivan, either his
fear, or his judgment, or both, inform him that that Rapier is longer than
his, whereat Don Ivan grieves far more than De Perez can possible either
rejoice or wonder, for he is so far from any way blemishing his honor with
this, or with any other point or shadow of dishonor, as now he gives his
Rapier to measure, and to write the truth, his is found one inch longer than
that of De Perez, when biting his lip for anger, he (resembling himself)
proffers to fight with that either of Lopez or Valdona, which was sufficient
reason for one Gentleman of Honor to give, and for another to take; but when
he sees that this proffer of his will neither secure De Perez fear, nor
confirm his content, then as a Noble and generous Gallant, he freely
exchangeth Rapiers with him, gives De Perez the longer, and contents himself
to fight with the shorter, whereat De Perez rests satisfied, and well he may,
since this action and his receipt thereof, does as much testify Don Ivans glory,
as his own dishonor and shame, and now they again approach each other to
fight.

At their first coming up Don Ivan runs a firm thrust to De Perez breast,
but he (bearing it up with his Rapier) runs Don Ivan in the cheek toward
his right ear, which draws much blood from him, and he in exchange runs De
Perez through his shirt sleeve without hurting him: At their second meeting they
again close without hurting each other, and so part fair without offering any
other violence: At their third assault De Perez runs Don Ivan through the
brawne of his left arm, who in exchange requites him with a deep wound in his
right side, from whence issued much blood, and now they breathe to recover
wind, and to the judgments of Lopez and Valdona, (as also of their
Chirurgions) they hitherto are equal in valor, and almost in fortune; so
although these spectators do of both sides earnestly entreat them to desist
and give over, yet they cannot, they will not be so easily or so soon
reconciled each to other; So after a little pausing and breathing, they (with
courage and resolution) fall to it afresh, and at this their fourth encounter
Don Perez gives Don Ivan a deep wound in his left shoulder, and he requites
him with another in exchange, in the neck; and although by this time their
several wounds has engrained their white shirts with great effusion of their
scarlet blood, yet they are so brave, so generous, or rather so inhumane and
malicious, that they will not yet give over, as if they meant and resolved
rather to make death fear them, than they any way to fear death; But their
fifth close will prove more fatal; for now after they had judiciously
traversed their ground, thereby to deceive each other of the disadvantage of
the Sun, whiles De Perez directs a full thrust to Don Ivans breast, he
bravely and skilfully warding it, in requital thereof, runs him clean
through the body, a little below his right pap, when closing nimbly with him,
and pursuing the point of his good fortune, he whips up his heels, and so
nails him to the ground, when he had the strength to beg his life of Don
Ivan, and God knows he much grieved that it was not then in his power to give
it him, for this his last wound being desperately mortal, he presently died
thereof, having neither the remembrance to call on God, much less to beg
mercy of him for his sinful soul; but as he lived abominably and profanely,
so he died miserably and wretchedly: And although I confess it was too great
an honor for him to receive his death from so brave a noble Gentleman's hands
as Don Ivan, yet it is a most singular providence, and remarkable punishment of
God, that he died by the hands of his own lascivious sisters Husband, and
which is yet more, by his own sword, as if God had formerly decreed, and
purposely ordained, that the self fame sword should give him his death,
wherewith so lately and so cruelly he had bereaved that harmless innocent
young Gentlewoman Mathurina of her life, although in regard of this his foul
and lamentable murder, he (with less honor and more infamy) every way
deserved to have died rather by a halter than a sword; But Gods Providence is
as unsearchable as sacred.

Don Ivan having rendered thanks to God for this his victory, he out of his
noble courtesy and humanity, lends Lopez his Coach to transport the dead body
of his brother in Law De Perez into the City, and taking his horse in exchange,
he by a private way gets home to his lodging. But this their Duel is not so
secretly carried, but within three hours after all Madrid rattles thereof; who
knowing the Combatants to be both of them noble Gentlemen of Portugal, it
gives cause of general talk, and argument of universal envy and admiration
in all Spaniards, especially in the nobler sort of Soldiers and Courtiers.
When the very day after that Don Ivan had caused this his brother to be
decently buried, Lopez repaires to his chamber to him, and in a fair and
friendly manner enquires of him if he please to return any Letter of this his
friends death, and of his own victory to Santarem to Don Idiaques his father,
or the Lady Marsillia his wife, and that his best service herein shall attend
and wait on his commands: Don Ivan thanks Lopez for this his courtesy, but
tells him that for some reserved reasons he will send no Letter to either of
them, but otherwise wishes him a prosperous return to Portugal; so Don Ivan
remains in Madrid, and Lopez returns for Santarem, and there from point to
point relates them the issue of that Combat, as the victory of his son Don
Ivan, and the death and burial of De Perez, adding withal, that he was so
reserved and strange, that he would write to neither of them hereof. At the
relation and knowledge of this mournful news, Idiaques cannot refrain from
much sorrow, nor Marsillia from bursting forth into bitter tears and
lamentations thereat; for seeing her dear and only brother thus slain by the
hand of her own unkind Husband; by losing him she knows she has lost her
right arm, and he being dead she knows not to whom to have recourse either
for counsel, assistance, or consolation. And yet as much as he sorrows and
she grieves at this diasterous accident, they notwithstanding are yet so far
from thinking it a blow from Heaven, or from looking either up to God, or down
to their own sinful hearts, consciences, and souls for the same, that
without making any good use, or drawing any divine or profitable moral
thereof, they still continue their beastly pleasures and damnable Adultery and
Incest together, as if there were no God to see, nor no deserved torments or
misery reserved to punish it. But they and we shall immediately see the
contrary.

To the grief of our hearts, and compunction of our souls, we have in this
History seen wretched Idiaques (by the instigation of the devil) to poison
his wife the Lady Honoria; and likewise his daughter in Law Marsillia to have
caused her brother De Perez to have cruelly murdered her waiting-maid in the
street; as also by the Providence of God Don Ivan to have slain the said De
Perez in the field, and our curiosity and expectation shall not go far, before
we shall see the just Revenge and punishments of God condignly to surprise
wretched Idiaques, and graceless Marsillia for the same; for his Divine
Justice contending with his Sacred Mercy, it has at last prevailed against
these their ^le and bloody crimes; so now when they are in the midst, yea, in
the height and jollity of all these their soul delights and security, like an
unlooked for storm and tempest, (...) will suddenly befall them. Life has but
one way to bring us into this world, but death has infinite to take us from
it, and what is this bu^ true argument and reason of Gods glory and our
misery, of his power, and of our frailty and weakness, and therefore because
we are as repleat of sin as he is of sanctity, and as subject to
imperfections, as all perfections are both properly co-incident and subject to
him: It will be an act of moral wisdom, and of religious piety in us, rather
to glorify than examine his sacred Providence, and rather to admire than pry
into his divine Decrees and resolutions. And because his correction and
punishment of all sins, especially of this crying and scarlet sin of
Murder, is as Just as secret, and as inscrutable as Just; therefore to (...)
toward the period of this deplorable History, God is first pleased to exercise
and begin his Judgments on miserable Marsillia, and then to finish it in
wretched Idiaques. But his divine Majesty is likewise pleased and resolved
both to impose and make as great a difference in their punishments, as he found
a parity and conformity in their crimes.

It is Marsillia's pleasure (or to say more truly, the providence and pleasure
of God) that she rides from Santarem to Coimbra to visit a sick Gentlewoman
her Cousin German, who dwelt there, being only accompanied with her man (...)
on horseback, and her foot boy Piscator to attend her, and as she comes
within a small half league of that town, having sent away her man Andrea
before, and her foot boy Piscator being a very little distance behind her,
there suddenly sta^s up a Hare between (or close to) her horse legs, which
so amazed her horse, (which was as hot and proud as the Gentlewoman his
Mistress whom he bore) as coming off with all four, he throws her to the
ground, and kicking her with his hind feet at her fall, he strikes her in the
forehead, and so dasheth out her brains; God so ordaining, that she had not
the power to speak a word, much less the grace or happiness to repent her of
her horrible sins, A dultery, Incest, and Murder. And thus was the
lamentable and fearful end which God gave to this graceless young Lady, the
which I cannot as yet pass over, without annexing and remembering one
remarkable point and circumstance therein, in which the Justice and Mercy of
God to both sexes, and all ages and degrees of people, does miraculously
resplend and shine forth; for that very horse which threw and killed her was
the very same which she formerly lent to her Brother De Perez, and whereon he
rid to Saint Saviors when he (by her instigation) killed her waiting maid
Mathurina. Good God, how just, and wonderful are thy decrees, Dear Lord, how
immense and sacred is thy Justice.

But this is but the forerunner, and as it were but the entrance into a
further progression of this History. For as her foot boy Piscator, extremely
wept and bitterly cried, at the sight of this mournful and tragical death of
his Lady and Mistress, God had so decreed and provided, that the next that
passed by, and who were sorrowful spectators thereof, were two Corigadors (or
Officers of Justice) of the City of Coimbra riding that way in their Coach to
take the air. Who^ compassion of the deplorable death of this fair unknowen
young Gentlewoman, they descend their Coach, and having enquired and understood
of her sorrowful Foot boy what she was, they then with much respect and
humanity cause (...) dead Corpse to be decently laid into their Coach, which
they shut, and so mounting their Servants Horses they return again to
Coimbra. From whence they send her Man Andrea, in all possible post have to
Santarem to acquaint his Master and her Father in law Don Idiaques with this
lamentable death of his daughter in Law Marsillia, and to pray him to repair
speedily thither to them to take order for her Burial. Andrea is no sooner
departed for his Master, but these two Corigadors consult on the fatality of
this accident, and very profitably consider for themselves, that the horse who
killed her, and all her apparel and jewels, by the custom and royalty of
their City were devolved and forfeited to their jurisdiction; to which effect
they cause her rings, chains, and bracelets to be taken from her, and then her
pockets likewise to be carefully searched for gold and jewels; so as murder
cannot belong concealed or underected; we may therefore here behold the
wonderful Providence, and singular Justice of God, for in one of her pockets
they find, folded up in a rich cut-worke handkerchiefe, the last Letter which
her Husband Don Ivan had written and sent her from Madrid; at the sight of this
Letter one of these Corigadors is desirous to have it read publicly, but the
other (being more humane and respective to the concealing of Ladies secrets,
which many times prove that of their honors) he contradicts it, till at last
God enligh^ing their judgments, and prompting and inspiring their hearts, that
the perusal of this Letter might (peradventure) import and report something
which might te^d to his service, and conduce to his glory; they fall then on a
(...) ^wixt both their (...), and so withdrawing themselves to a pri^ chamber,
they there secretly o^-reade this Letter, where in with admiration and
amazement they understand of the obscene Adultery and Incest of Don Idiaques
with this his daughter in law Marsillia, which was the cause of her Husband Don
Ivan his absence from her in Spain: But at length when they proceed farther
therein, and so fall upon these words of Don Ivan to her in this his Letter; I
do as much grieve as I both doubt and fear thou rejoycest at thy hand maid
Mathurina's death, and as I am ignorant of the manner, so if my father and thy
self have been the cause thereof, you have then all the reasons of the world
to believe, that God will in the end punish it to your confusion; then (led by
the spirit of God) they both concur in one opinion, that this their Adultery,
and this Murder of Math^rina did not only firmly reflect, but equally take
hold both on Idiaques and Marsillia, and therefore that this her late
deplorable and disasterous end, was only a blow from God, and the very true
forerunner, and undoubted Harbinger of his own to come: When resolving to
seize and imprison Idiaques as soon as he should arrive thither to Coimbria;
They hushing up this Letter and business in their own bosoms, do then hold
it fit to send for Marsillia's footman Piscator to come to them, which he
speedily does. They carefully enquire of him if his dead Lady had not sometimes
a waiting Gentlewoman named Mathurina, he answered them yes, and that she was
lately murdered in the streets of Saint Saviors, and that her murderers were
as yet unknown: They demand of him again whose daughter she was; he informs
them that her father is a Gentleman who dwells in Saint Saviors, and that his
name is Seignior Pedro de Castello, which being as much as they sought for;
putting their servants to watch over this footman, that he might not escape to
give the least inkling of their demands to his old Master Idiaques, they
presently send away poast to Saint Saviors for Castello, and (in honor to
Justice) these two Corigadors as Christian Magistrates, having put all things
in order for the vindication of the truth of these deplorable matters, that
very night Idiaques arrives at Coimbra, and descends from his Coach to the
house of one of these Corigadors, where the dead body of his daughter Marsillia
lay; at whose mournful fight, as soon as his passionate grief and sorrow had
caused him to shed and sacrifice many rivolets of tears, when he least
dreams or thinks thereof, these two Corigadors cause him to be seized on, and
instantlycommit him close prisoner, without acquainting him with the cause
hereof; where all that night his guilty heart and conscience (as so many Fiends
and Furies) assuring him that it was for poisoning of his own Lady Honoria;
there horror and terror, grief and despair, and sorrow, and anguish, do act
their several parts upon the Theater of his soul.

The next morn Castello (Mathurina's father) likewise arrives to Coimbra, to
whom the Corigadors communicate this Letter of Don Ivan to his wife, which he
sent her from Spain, wherein they tell him the murder of his daughter
Mathurina seems probably and strongly to reflect upon Idiaques, and his
daughter in law Marsillia; when they farther acquainting him with her tragical
death, as also with his imprisonment; Castello (with a world of tears and
cries) exclaimes that undoubtedly they were the authors, if not the actors of
his daughters lamentable murder, and so very passionately and sorrowfully
craves justice of them on Idiaques for the same, which they are as willing to
grant and perform, as he to desire: So after dinner in the public Tribunal
of Justice, they send for Idiaques legally and juridically there to appear
before them; where this sorrowful father (with much passion, and more tears)
does strongly accuse him for the murder committed and perpetrated on his
daughter Mathurina; the which Idiaques with many high and stout answers
denies; he alleges many oily words, and sugared and silken phrases, to
justify and Apologize his innocence: Which these Corigadors (led by the
finger of God) hold rather to be far more ayrie than solid, and far more
plausible than real or true; so they (still remembering his son Don Ivans
Letter to his wife Marsillia) do (without regard to his quality or age)
adjudge him to the Rack. The which Idiaques (fearing infinitely more the
murder of his own Lady Honoria, than that of Mathurina) endures the tortures
and torments thereof, with a fortitude and resolution far beyond his strength
and age, and with an admirable constancy stands firmly to the denial of this
fact and accusation; so seeing the Rack taken away, and himself from the
Rack, he is therefore very confident and joyful, that his danger is likewise
over past and over blown: But these vain hopes of his will yet both deceive,
and in the end betray him, for as yet his conscience has not made peace with
God. For the griefs and sorrows of this mournful father for this lamentable
murder of his daughter, have now made him both industrious in his
solicitation, and religious in this his prosecution against Idiaques toward
these Corigadors, to whom again he becomes an earnest, and yet an humble
Petitioner, that they will give him eight days time more to fortify his
accusation, and that all that time he may still remain prisoner without Bail
or Surety; which they finding reasonable, and consonant to all equity and law,
they freely grant him. When Castello having God for his Councellor, and whom in
a small time Idiaques shall find for his Judge, calling to mind some words of
his deceased daughter touching the suspicion of poisoning her old Lady by her
Husband, to make way for this match with Don Ivan, he does no more accuse him
for murdering of his daughter Mathurina; but some two days after he frames
and presents a new Indictment and accusation to his Judges against him, for
poisoning his old wife the Lady Honoria. Which these Judges admiring and
wondering at, they then partly; nay almost confidently believe, that there is
some great crime, and foul fact in this business against Idiaques, which God
will in fine detect and bring to light, by the solicitation and industry of
this honest poor Gentleman Castello. So they admit again of his second
Indictment against him, and by virtue hereof convent him before them at their
Tribunal of Justice.

Idiaques understanding hereof, his guilty conscience now denounces such
thundering peales of fear and amazement to his appalled heart and trembling
soul, as they will give no peace either to himself or them; and the Devil
who had ever heretofore promised him his best aid and assistance, now flies
from him, and leaves him to stand or fall to himself: And here it is that his
courage begins to fail him, and that his fear and shame is almost resolved
and ready to proclaim himself guilty of this his last and worst accusation,
the poisoning of his own wife the Lady Honoria: But again the hope of life is
yet so sweet to him, as the fear of death is displeasing and bitter, and
therefore (with a wretched resolution, and a miserable confidence) he again
artificially endeavors to bleare the eyes of these his Judges, with his
chiefest Eloquence, and sweetest Oratory; who having given him his full carreer
to speak in his own defense and justification, when they perfectly knew he
yet spoke not one valuable word or reason, either to defend or justify
himself; Then one of these cleere-sighted Corigadors (in the behalf of both
of them) returns him this grave reply and pious exhortation.

That as they have not the will to accuse him, so they have not the means or
power to excuse him, for being (at least) accessory to both, or either of these
murders, of his Lady Honoria, or Mathurina; that the sudden death of the
first, and the violent and untimely one of the last, the voluntary absence of
his son Don Ivan in Spain, with his killing of De Perez there, and now the
fearful and lamentable end of his daughter in law, Marsillia (whose body is
yet unbursed, and her blood scarce cold) left a dangerous reflection, and a
pernicious suspicion on his life and actions at least of Adultery and Incest
if not of Murder (whereof his Son Don Ivans Letter which he writ to his
wife Marsillia which they have there to show, isa most strong and pregnant
witness) and that the least of these crimes are capable to ruin a greater
personage than himself. That he could cast no mist of delusion before Gods
eyes, though he artificially endeavored and labored to cast a veil before
theirs. That the shedding of innocent blood was a crying Sin, which despite
of sorcery and of Hell would (in Gods due time) draw down vengeance to Earth
from Heaven on their Authors. That if he were guilty of his accusation, he had
no better plea than confession, nor safer remedy than repentance. That
contrition is the true mark, of a true Servant of God, and though we fall to
Nature and sin as being men yet we should rise again to grace and
righteousness as being Christians. That to deny our Crimes, is to augment them
and consequently their punishments, both in Earth, and in Hell, and that he was
not a Christian, but an Infidel, who would attempt to save his life with the
loss of his soul, with many other religious exhortations concurring and
looking that way.

But all this, notwithstanding, Idiaques his Faith and Conscience, was yet so
strong with Satan, and therefore so weak with God, that he left no excuse;
policy or evasion uninvented to bleare the eyes of these Corigadors, and so to
make his innocence to pass current with them* But his eloquence and
asseverations cannot prevail with the solidity of their Judgments, for God
will not suffer them to be led away with words nor seduced or deluded with
shadows: But from the circumference of circumstances, they now fly to the
center of truth, and to the Author and giver, yea to the life and soul
thereof, God. So they again adjudge him to the rack for his second accusation
of Murder, as they formerly had done to him for his first. At the pronouncing
of which sentence, If we may judge of his heart by his face, he seemed to be
much afflicted, appaled and daunted, which his Judges perceiving before they
expose him to his torments, they in Honor to his Age and quality, but far
more to Truth and Justice (whom they know to be two Daughters of Heaven) they
now hold it a point of Charity and Piety to send him two Divines to his prison
to work upon his Conscience and Soul, which they do: And God in the depth of
his goodness, and the richness of his mercy, was so mercifully propitious and
indulgent to him, that he added such efficacy to their persuasions and power
to their exhortations, as at the very sight of the rack, he with tears in
his eyes, then and there confessed unto them, That he was innocent of
Mathurinaes murder, but guilty of poisoning his own wife, the Lady Honoria,
for the which he said he most heartily and sorrowfully repented himself.
Whereupon his Judges (and the rest present) admiring with wonder and praising
God with admiration for the detection of this his foul bloody and lamentable
crime, they pronounce sentence against him. That for expiation thereof, he at
eight of the clock the next morning shall have his head cut off at the place
of common execution in that Town. When Idiaques, who (yet adhered so much to
Sat^an) that he could never be divested of his mortal sins before he were
first deprived of his sinful life, does yet still flatter himself with some
further hope of life, and so he appeals from the judgment and sentence of
this Court of Coimbra to that of Santarem, as being native and resident
thereof; as also because he committed his murder there for which they (not his
competent Judges) adjudged him to death: Whereat although the Corigadors of
Coimbra for the preservation of the privileges of their Court and Town, do
obstinately expose and vehemently contest it, yet at last well knowing, and
being conscious with themselves, that smaller Towns and Courts in Portugal
are bound and subject to depend of the greater; They therefore making a virtue
of necessity, and contenting themselves to give way to that which they cannot
remedy, do ordain that Idiaques should be conveyed and tried at Santarem.

But yet before they suffer him to depart their Town, they in honor to
Justice, in wisdom to themselves, and in reputation to their Town and Court,
do seriously and religiously charge him in the name and fear of God to
declare truly to them, whether his unburyed Daughter in Law Marsillia were not
likewise accessory with him in poisoning his Wife, the Lady Honoria, which at
first he strongly denies to them. But then they send away for the two Divines
who had formerly dealt with him and his Conscience in Prison, who exhort him to
carry a white and candyd soul to Heaven, and threaten him with the torments
of Hell fire if he do not. When with sighs and tears, he confesses that to
them, and that it was he himself who administered that poison to his wife, but
that his daughter in Law Marsillia bought it for him. So these Judges (upon the
validity of this free and solemn confession) in detestation of this her
lamentable crime, do reverently resolve to second, and glorify God in his
Judgments toward her, and therefore they presently condemn her dead body to
be burnt that afternoon in their market street, the common place of
execution, which accordingly is then and there performed in presence of a great
concourse of people, who infinitely rejoice that God so miraculously destroyed
the life, and their Judges the body of so execrable a female Monster.

By this time we must allow, and imagine that our old Lecher, and new murthere
Idiaques (by virtue of his appeal) is brought to his own City of Santarem,
and I think either with a ridiculous hope or a profane and impious resolution
to see whether God will punish him there with death, or the Devil preserve and
save him from it. He has many friends in this Court, who are both great and
powerful, and therefore builds all his hopes of life, on this reeling
quicksand, this snow, this nothing, that his great estate of money and lands
will undoubtedly act wonders with them for his pardon. But still he hopes,
because still the devil deceives him; He is arrived here at Santarem, where
this fair City which might heretofore have proved his delight and glory, is
now reserved for his shame and appointed and destined for his confusion; They
cannot brook the sight, much less the cohabitation and company of such
monsters of nature, and devils incarnat of men, who glory in making themselves
guilty of these soul sins, and crying crimes, Adultery, Inces^, Murder. So
that Idiaques (who has made himself a principal of this number, and a
monster of Art in these sins) thinking here in Santarem to find more mercy
and pity during his life, shall find less of both of them after his death. For
the criminal Judges of this Court who reverence and honor Justice because
Justice does daily and reciprocally perform the like to them, do confirm the
sentence of Coimbra; that the next morn he shall lose his head, but in
detestation and execration of these his foul and bloody crimes, they add this
clause and condition thereto, that both his head and body shall be afterward
burnt, and his ashes thrown into the air, which gives maatter of talk and
admiration, not only to Santarem but to all Portugal. And thus most pensively
and disconsolately is Idiaques reconveyed to his prison where Churchmen are
sent him by the Judges of that court, to direct his soul in her slight and
transsiguration from earth to Heaven whom they find (or at least ^hey make)
very humble, mournful, and repentant. According to which sentence he is the
next morning brought to the place of execution, which for the greater example
and terror to others, and of ignominy to himself, was before his own house,
wherein he had acted and perpetrated all his enormous crimes. Where the
scaffold is no sooner erected, but there flock an infinite number of people
from all parts of the City, to be spectators of this last scene of his Tragedy.
He came to the scaffold (between two Friars) in a suit of black Taffeta, a
gown of black wrought tuffe Taffeta, and a great white set ruff, which yet
could not be whiter than his broad beard: At his ascent on the scaffold, his
grave aspect and presence engendered as much sorrow and pity, as his beastly
crimes did detestation in the hearts and tongues of the people, to whom (after
he had a short time kneeled down and prayed) he made a short speech to this
effect.

That although the poisoning of his own wife, and his adultery with his sons
wife, were crimes so odious and execrable, as had made him unworthy any longer
either to tread on earth, or to look up unto Heaven, yet although he deserved
no favor of his Judges for his body, he humbly repented and begged some of
God for his soul, and for the more effectual obtaining thereof, he zealously
prayed all those who were present to join their prayers to his. He confessed
that it was Marsillia's beauty which first (at the instigation of the devil
drew him to that adultery with her, and this poisoning of his own wife
Honoria, whereof from his heart and soul, he now affirmed he implored
remission of God, of the Law, of his son Don Ivan, and of all the world, and
prayed them all to be more godly and less sinful by his example, and so
kneeling down, and praying a little whiles to himself, he rose up, and
putting of his gown, ruff, and doublet, which he gave to the Executioner,
he binding his head and eyes with his handkerchiefe, bade him do his office,
which he presently performed, and with one blow of the sword, made a perpetual
double divorce betwixt his head and his shoulders, his body and his soul; when
presently according to his sentence, both his head and his body were then and
there burnt and consumed to fire, and his ashes thrown into the air.

And this was the deplorable life and death of De Perez, Idiaques, and
Marsillia, of whom the spectators (according to their several humors and
affections) spoke diversely, all condemning the bloody cruelty of De Perez
toward innocent Mathurina, and of Idiaques toward his virtuous wife Honoria.
Again, some pitied, and others execrated Marsillia's youth, beauty, and lust;
but both sexes, and all degrees of people (as so many lines terminating in one
Center) magnified the providence and Justice of God, in so miraculously and
condignly cutting off these monsters of nature, and bloody butchers of mankind.

And if the curiosity of the Reader will yet farther enquire, what afterward
became of Don Ivan; The reports of him are different, for as first I heard that
his discontent and grief was so great, yea, so extreme for the death of his
Parents and wife, that he cloistered himself up a Capuchin Friar in their
Monastery at Madrid: So contrariwise I have since credibly been informed, that
he shortly after these disasters left Spain, and still lives in Santarem in
Portugal in great honor, welfare, and prosperity; But which of these his
resolutions are most inclining and adherent to the truth, it passes beyond my
knowledge, and therefore shall come too short of my affirmation.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XVII.
Harcourt steals away Masserina, his brother Vimoryes wife and keeps her in
Adultery; She hireth Tivoly (an Italian Mountebanke) to poison La Precoverte,
who was Harcourts wife; Harcourt kills his brother Vimory, and then marries his
widow Masserina; Tivoly is hanged for a robbery, and at his execution accuses
Masserina for hiring him to poison La Precoverte, for the which she is
likewise hanged; Noel (who was Harcourts man) on his deathbed suspecteth and
accuses his said Master for killing of his brother Vimory, whereof Harcourt
being found guilty, he is broken alive on a wheel for the same.

MAn being the Workmanship, and figurative Image of God, what an odious sin,
yea what an execrable crime is it therefore for one (out of the heat of his
malice or fumes of his revenge) to poison, or murder another, since Nature does
strongly impugn, and Grace (with a high hand) infinitely contradict it.
Therefore were not our hearts and understandings either wholly deprived of
Common sense or our souls of the gracious assistance and favor of God, we
would not thus so furiously and profanely make our selves guilty of these
infernal sins, but rather (with our best endeavors) would seek to avoid them
as Hell, and (with our most pious resolutions) to hate and detest them as the
Devil himself who is the prime Author and Actor thereof, But some such
monsters of Nature, and Disciples of Satan there are here on Earth. A
fearful and lamentable Example whereof this ensuing History will show us. The
which may all good Christians read to Gods glory, and remember to the
instruction of their Souls.

THere is a parish termed Saint Symplician a mile from the City of Sens in
the Duchy of Burgundy (which is honored with the title and See of an
Archbishop) where (within these few years) there dwelt and died an aged
Gentleman, (more Noble by birth, than rich in Estate and Demaynes) termed
Monseiur De Vimory, who left only two sons behind him, the eldest named
Mon^eiur D^ Harcourt, and the second Monseiur De Hautemont, who were two very
proper young Gentlemen, excellently well bred and qualified, as well in Arts as
Arms, or in any other virtue or perfection which was requisite, both to show
and approve themselves to be the sons of their father. And (to content my
Reader with their characters) Harcourt was tall, but not well favored, but of
a mild and singular good disposition; Hautemont was of a middle stature,
neatly timbred, of a sweet and amiable countenance, but by nature hasty and
headstrong; Harcourt had a light Aubrnn beard, which (like a Country
Gentleman) he wore negligently after the Ovall cut; Hautemont had a coal
black beard, which (Courtier-like) he wore in form of an invaled Pyramides;
Harcourt was thirty two years of age, very chaste and honest; Hautemont was
twenty five, but many times given to women, and ready to be deboshed and
drawn away by any; though but of an indifferent quality and complexion. To
Harcourt (the eldest son) their father gave his chiefest Manor house, with
eight hundred Crowns of yearly Revenew, and all his Goods and Chattels. To
Hautemont (his second son) he gave his second Manor house, worth four hundred
Crowns yearly, and fifteen hundred Crowns in his purse, by his Testament:
Estates, which though it came short of their blood, yet it exceeded that of
most of the Gentlemen their neighbors, and is held in France at least the
double, if not the triple of as much here with us in England. So having neither
the happiness, or the care to be accompanied with any sister or other
brothers, they interchangeably swear a strict league of brotherly love and
dear affection each to other, which by their Virtues and Honors they swear
shall never receive end, but with the end of their lives: They many times
consult together for the conduction and improving of their Estates, which they
promise to manage with more frugality than luster, and with more solid
discretion than vain ostentation or superfluity, and not to live in Paris, or
to follow the Court, but to build up their residence in the Country. To which
end they cut off many unprofitable mouths, both of servants, horses, and
hounds, which their father kept. They likewise vow each to other to be
wonderful charie and careful in their marriages, as well foreseeing and
knowing it to be the greatest part of their earthly felicity or misery. So here
we may see and observe many fair promises, rich designs and resolutions, and
many sweet covenants voluntarily drawn up between these two brothers, which
if they make good and perform, no doubt but the end thereof will be
successful and prosperous unto them, or if otherwise, the contrary.

But before I wade farther in the stream and current of this History, I must
first declare, that by the death of Vimory the father, and by the custom of
France, we must now wholly abandon and take away the title of Hautemont from
the second brother, futurely to give him that of Harcourt the eldest, and that
from Harcourt the eldest, to give him that of Vimory their father, for (by the
right and virtue of the premised reasons) these are now become their proper
names and appellations, which the Reader is prayed to observe and remember.

A year and half is not fully expired and past away since their father past
from Earth to Heaven, but the eldest brother Monseiur De Vimory being extremely
ambitious and covetous of wealth, and understanding that a rich Counselor of
the Court of Parliament of Dijon, named Monseiur De Basigni was dead, and had
left a very rich widow, (of some forty years of age) named Madamoyselle
Masserina, he earnestly seeks her in marriage. She is of short stature,
corpulent and fat, of a coale-blacke hair, and if fame toward her be a true
and not a tatling goddess, she has, and still is, a lover of Ve^s, and a
Votaresse who often sacrifices to Cupids lascivious Altars and Shrines.
Harcourt is very averse and bitter against this match for his brother. They
have many serious consultations hereon: He alleges him the inequality of her
age and birth in comparison of his, her corpulency, the ill getting of her
Husbands goods, who was held a corrupt Lawyer, and (as the voice of the world
went) who gained his wealth by the tears and curses of many of his ruined and
decayed Clients; and when he saw that nothing would prevail to dissuade his
brother from her, he rounds him in his ear, that it was spoken and bruted in
Diion, that she was not as chaste as rich, nor so continent as covetous; Vimory
is all enraged hereat, and charge Harcourt his brother to name the reporters
of this foul scandal vomited forth (quoth he) against the virtues and honor
of chaste Masserina; Harcourt replies, that he speaks it wholly upon fame, no
way upon knowledge, much less upon belief; so Vimory being wilfully deaf to
his brothers advice and requests, (and preferring Masserina's wealth to her
honesty) he marries her. But she is so wise for her self, as first (both by
promise and contract) she ties him to this condition; that he shall receive
all her rents, which are some twelve hundred Crowns per Annum, she to put her
ready money to Use into whose hands she pleases, and he also to have the one
half of the interest money, but the principal still to remain in her own
right, propriety, and possession, and as well in her life as death, to be
wholly at her own disposing.

Not long after Harcourt being at a great wedding (of a Gentleman his Cousin
German) at the City of Troyes (in Champagne) he there at the balls (or
public dancing) espies a most sweet and beautiful young Gentlewoman, whom he
presently fancieth and affects for his wife: He enquires what she is, and
finds her to be named Madamoyselle La Precoverte, daughter to an aged
Gentleman of that City, termed Monseiur de la Vaquery. Harcourt courts the
daughter, seeks the father, finds the first willing, and the second desirous;
but at last he plainly and honestly informs Harcourt, that his daughters
chiefest wealth, are her virtues and beauty; that he has not much land, and
less money; that he has two great suits of Law for store of Lands depending
in the Parliament of Diion, which promise him store of money, and that he will
futurely impart a great part thereof to him, if he will marry his daughter,
the which (for the present) he tells him, he is content to make good and
confirm to him both by bond and contract. Harcourt loves his fair young
Mistress La Precoverte so tenderly and dearly, as he is ready to espouse her
on those terms, but he will first acquaint his brother Vimory therewith, and
take his advice therein. Vimory informs his brother Harcourt, that he knows
Monseiur De Vaquery, of Troyes, to be a very poor Gentleman, that most of his
lands are morgaged out, and in great danger never to be redeemed; that his law
suits are as uncertain, as the following thereof chargeable. Harcourt extols
the beauty of La Precoverte to him to the sky; Vimory replies, that beauty
fades and withers with a small time, and that those who prefer it to wealth,
are many times enforced to feed on repentance in stead of content and joy, and
to look poverty in the face in stead of prosperity. But Harcourt having deeply
settled his affection on La Precoverte, he rejects this true and whole s^ne
counsel of his brother, and so marries her: When forgetting his former promise
to his brother, he in a small time turns a great Prodigal, abandoneth
himself to all filthy vices, and beastly course of life, and as a most
deboshed and graceless Husband (within one year) he for no cause quarrelleth
very often with this his fair and dear wife, then whom neither Champagne nor
Burgundy had a more beautiful or virtuous young Gentlewoman; she was of
stature tall and slender, of a bright flaxen hair, a gracious eye, a modest
countenance, a pure Lillie-rose at complexion, of a mild nature, and sweet
disposition, respectfully courteous to all the world, and exceedingly devout
and religious toward God, as perpetually making it, her practice, delight, and
glory, to consume a great part both of her time and of her self in prayer, and
in the service of God.

And although she were formerly sought for in marriage by many as good Gentlemen
as Harcourt, yet she could fancy none, nor affect any man for her husband but
himself. Never wife was more careful or more desirous to please a husband
than she, and as (for one whole year) it was her former content and joy to see
him to be a provident, kind, and loving Husband to her, so now it is her
matchless grief and calamity, to see his good nature perverted, his
resolutions transported, and his affections drowned in deboshed and vicious
company. She leaves no sweet advice, nor courteous requests and persuasions
unattempted to reclaim him from these his foul vices of drunkenness,
swearing, dicing, evil company, and whoredom; for of no less sins in
quality, nor fewer in number, she (with extreme grief and sorrow) sees him to
be guilty: But all this will not prevail, no nor her infinite tears and sighs
which many times she spends and sheds to him both at board and bed, yea, and
sometimes on her knees, but still (with a wretched violence, and sinful
impetuosity) he goes on in his vicious courses, and ungodly life and
conversation; neither caring for his health, or his estate and means, but
wilfully neglects the first, and prodigally wastes and consumes the second,
whereat she wonderfully grieveth and lamenteth. She often requesteth Vimory his
brother, and La Vaquery her father to persuade and divert him from these his
ungodly Courses and enormous vices, which threatens no less than the utter
ruin, and inevitable shipwreck of all their fortunes: but they likewise
cannot prevail, although his Brother Vimory (with whom they live and sojourne)
every hour and time he sees him, do strongly deal and labor with him to
that effect: For now he giving no limits to his vices and prodigalities, he
sels away his lands peece-meale, whereat his brother Vimory stormeth and rages
against him, and his virtuous sweet wife most pitifully weepeth and lamenteth.
But as a base Gentleman, and a most unkind and ungrateful Husband, he laughs
at her tears, smileth at hersighes, and contemns and scorneth both them and
her self. And it nowfalling out, that La Vaquery her father losing both of his
Law suits at Diion, where they (by the votes and sentence of that Court of
Parliament) are adjudged against him, whereby he was utterly ruined both in his
hopes and estate for ever; Harcourt hereat soslights and neglects his wife, as
he terms her beggars brat, threatens to send her home to Troyes to her
Father, and setting all at random, cares not what becomes either of himself
or her, who poor sweet Gentlewoman is so extremely afflicted, and as it were
weighed down with all these calamities and miseries (especially with the vices
and discourtesies of her husband) as in her heart she daylywisheth, and in her
soul hourly prays unto God, that she were out of this life, and in Heaven,
infinitely lamenting and a thousand times a day repenting that ever it was her
hard fortune to see her Husband, and her woeful chance to marry him. But how
to remedy or redress these her miseries she knows not.

For now do her Husbands vices and prodigalities make him daily grow poorer
and poorer, in so much (as in less than three years) he is become the shame
of himself, the contempt of his enemies, the pity of his friends and
Kinsfolks, and the extreme grief of his sweet and dear wife, so that he
has well neer^ spent all, and almost left nothing to maintain himself, much
less to maintain her, whose griefs are so great, and sorrows so infinite,
as her roseat cheeks now look thin and pale, her sweet eyes are become
obscure and dim, yea, and in so pitiful and lamentable a manner, that she falls
exceedingly sick, and her discontent and disconsolation is almost so
remediless, as she would, but cannot be comforted, for that her Husband whom
she thought would have proved the argument of her joy and prosperity, is now
become the cause of her endless grief, and the object of her matchless
calamity and misery. Thus leaving her sorrows, sighs and tears, to be
diminished through time, or dissipated and defaced by God, The order of our
History invites and conjures me now again to speak of this her base and
deboshed Husband, who has many beastly and bloody parts to act herein.

Whose lewd life and prodigalities enforcing him now to behold poverty, because
heretofore he disdained to look on frugality and providence: Seeing his wealth
wasted, his lands either sold or morgaged, himself forsaken of his brother and
friends, his reputation lost, his debts great, his creditors many, and who now
began to grow extreme clamorous and scandalous to him: He knows not which
way to look, or how or where to turn himself, to find out some invention
and means to repair the decays and ruins of these his miserable fortunes,
and so to bear up and screw himself again into the eye and repute of the
world. When his necessity gaining upon his heart and nature, and Satan upon his
Conscience and Soul, he knowing his brothers wife Masserina to be rich and
wanton, he will become so unfaithful to his own wife, so ungrateful and
treacherous to his own brother, and so dishonorable and ignoble to himself,
as to attempt to gain her affection from him, and to draw her to his own lewd
and lascivious desires, whereon his irregular hopes did more than partly grow
confident, because he flatters himself with this true, yet foolish belief,
that as he was seven years the younger, so he was twice seven times a
properer man than his brother. When taking time at advantage, as his brother
and her husband Vimory were rid to Diion, he finding her in a wonderful
pleasant humor, and exceedingly disposed to be merry, when (God knows) his
own sweet and sorrowful wife, was (according to her frequent custom)
disconsolately at her prayers and book in her own chamber, and her door shut
to her, then, then I say, he taking his said sister in law Masserina to a
window in a private Parlor, he there (for himself, or the devil for him)
breaks his mind to her, and is so far from shame, as he glories to make her
acquainted with his deep affection, and lascivious suit to her: Neither does
he fail of his hopes, or they of his voluptuous desires, for he finds this
his sister in law so dishonestly prepared, and so lustfully resolved and
disposed to grant him his desires, that sealing her affection to him with many
smiles, as he did his to her with more kisses, she is so impudent, so
graceless, as at this his very first motion, she vows to him she has not the
power to deny him any thing, and therefore most cheerfully and willingly gives
him her heart and her self, and he does the like to her, which they mutually
ratify and confirm between them with many private kisses, and amarous
daliances, as also with many secret protestations, and solemn oaths: But
because Satan is, therefore God will not be present at this their vicious
contract, and lascivious combination.

Thus Harcourt and his sister in law Masserina, having no regard to their
honors or reputations, to their hearts or consciences, to their souls or to
God, he pollutes his brothers bed in possessing his wives body, and makes it
both his delight and practice to defile and conta^ate his glory, in that of her
shame, and of his own infamy. And now his pockets and purse are again filled
and crammed with coin, for he gives her kisses for her gold, and she returns
him gold for his kisses. Hereupon he puts himself again into new and rich
apparel, but yet is so base, unkind, and ungrateful to his own sweet and
virtuous wife, that he will give her neither gold nor new apparel, but
permits her to go in her old. But to add more miseries to her misery, and
more new griefs and calamities to her old (because she is equally an eye sore
both to himself and to her) he will no longer permit her to live with him,
that he may the more often and the more freely and securely familiarize with
his old sister, or rather now with his new love Masserina: So (without any
regard to her birth, or respect to her youth and virtues, or without
considering that God had made her his wife, and therefore the other half of
himself) he sends her home to her father at Troyes, giving her but a poor
little ^agge, and a ragged footboy, only with so much money as could hardly
carry her thither, giving her neither money nor apparel, nor any thing else
which was beseeming or fit for her, although through the black and obscure
clouds of his vices and ingratitude, the bright and relucent Sunbeams of her
excellent perfections and virtues in her self, and of her constant affection
to him, will for ever most radiantly resplend and shine to all the world,
especially to those who had the honor to know her living, or who shall now or
hereafter read her History after her death. And never were those her sweet
perfections and virtues either more conspicuous and glorious in her, than now
at her enforced exile, and sorrowful banishment and departure from her
Husband: For although he were cruelly unkind, or unkindely cruel to her, yet
knowing and considering him to be her Husband, she therefore holds it her duty
and conscience still to attend and wait on him as his wife, and not, either so
soon or so suddenly to separate her self from him. When her eyes see, her
judgment knows, her heart doubts, and her soul fears, that then more than
ever his vices wanted her prayers, and his sins her virtues and presence, to
seek to rectify and reform them. But although she descended so low from her
self to him in her affection and humility, as with bitter sighs and tears to
cast her self on her knees to beg and request him, that (as by the laws of
marriage and nature, and of conscience and grace) she was obliged and bound, so
that she might enjoy the content and happiness to live and die with him, being
infinitely contented, and extremely desirous, as she then affirmed, (and again
and again repeated and confirmed to him) to participate and bear her part and
share, as well in his poverty as prosperity, yet he (as an ignoble Gentleman,
and a base and vicious Husband) having wholly taken away his heart and
affection from this his sweet and virtuous wife La Precoverte, and fully and
absolutely given it to his lascivious sister in law Masserina, he (I say) is
so hard hearted, ungrateful and treacherous toward her, as (without any
respect to her tears, or regard to her prayers) he will no way permit her to
live with him in St. Symplician or Sens, at his brothers, nor yet vouchsafe to
be pleased to go and live with her to Troyes, at her fathers: But here we may
observe his malice in his disdain, and his disdain in his malice toward this
dear and sweet young Gentlewoman his wife, (of whom God knows, and the world
sees, he is no way worthy) for he will grant her neither of these her two most
reasonable and loving requests, but indeed (rather as a devil than a man, and
a tyrant than a Husband) he with thundering looks and speeches, commands her
away his sight and presence, without once giving her so much as one poor
kiss, as he was bound in affection, or (which is yet less) a poor farewell
at their parting, as he was obliged both in conscience and christianity. So
this sweet disconsolate Gentlewoman (in a manner breaking her breast with her
signs and drowning her checks with her tears) only with her poor little nag
and ragged footboy, is by her flinty hearted Husband turned out of his Brother
Vimories house at Saint Simplician, and so in this slender manner, and base
equipage enforced softly, discontendedly, and sorrowfully to ride home to the
poor Gentleman her Father at Troyes, yea and such was the malice, and policy
of Harcourt, her cruel Husband, that this sudden departure of hers was
purposely acted when his Brother Vimorye, and his wife Masserina were at
another manor house of his some eight leagues off, to the end, that they
might not see, or take leave of her nor she of them; so allowing our sweet and
sorrowful La Precoverte by this time at Troyes with her aforesaid Father; I
will for a time there leave her, to the exercise of her patience, to the piety
of her prayers, and to the pleasure and providence of God.

Now does our disloyal and treacherous Harcourt, at his pleasure frolique it
out in Saint Simplician with his lacivious Sister in Law, and Strumpet
Mafferina, yea they are now grown so impudent, so careless, so graceless, in
these their obscaene Dalliances, that if Vimorye the Husband and Master do
not, yet his Servants cannot choose but take deep notice and exact and perfect
Knowledge thereof; Only ^e observes a late alteration in his Brothers
fortunes, that he is become far braver in his apparel then accustomed, and
has more store of Crowns in his pocket at his command then heretofore, both
to play and spend at his pleasure. Only from whence this his golden Mine
should proceed he knows not; except having heretofore made some progression,
and experiments in the Chymicall Science (or mystery of Alchymy) he had now
found the Elixar of the Philosophers Stone, but his cu^sity in this Quaere
proceeds no further, much less his Judgment, but least of all his Suspicion
or Jealousy.

But the graceless Vanity and Ambition of Harcourt will yet fly a pitch and
degree higher in the air of Ingratitude and treachery toward his Brother
Vimorye, For a little gold cannot redeem his Lands, nor make up the money and
great ^eaches of his former prodigalities, neither will a few kisses and
embraces of that ^ustfull Dame his Sister Masserina appease his unchaste
appetite, or satisfy his insatiable lust, and lascivious desires. Wherefore at
one time and cast, to set nature and honor at stake, and so commanding his
heart and thoughts to trample on both of them, without any respect or regard to
either, he contrives and assumes this vicious and treacherous resolution, that
having already taken the actual possession of her body, he should then
likewise do so of her gold, yea of all her whole Estate, and so fly away with
her, whose Estate (through his long dishonest familiarity with her) he now
knows to be great, yea far greater then his Brother Vimorye her husband
either ever knew or dreamt of; Wherefore with much superficial affection, and
artificial flattery and insinuation, he no sooner breaks this motion to her,
but her lustful heart corresponding with his, and her lascivious desires
likewise ay^ing and intending that way, she freely gives him her consent
thereunto, and to that end she very secretly draws in all her moneys and
gold, together with all her plate, Rings, and Jewels most carefully, and
privately packes it up, and so they fly away together; In a morning when her
Husband and his Brother was with his servants gone forth a hawking and hunting
for all that day, he without ever making his wife, or she her husband once
acquainted therewith. Vimorye is amazed, and La Precoverte extremely perplexed
and afflicted at the strangeness of their (undrea^t of) base clandestine
departure; And although (in regard of his affection to his wife) ^e were once
resolved, to send and make after them for their stay and apprehension, yet at
last, to avoid the universal scandal of the world (which thereby instead of
stopping one tongue, would assuredly let loose many,) he leaves the success
of this treacherous Accident to Time, and the due reward and true punishment
the reof to God. Now the first place of safety and shelter which Harcourt and
Masserina fly unto, is the strong city of Geneva (which depends not of
France, or Savoye, but of God, and it self) where they take two chambers, and
live together, having no servant at all to attend or follow them, but only
Noell, who for many ^eares before had been, and still was his man. But to live
here in Geneva with the more privacy and assurance (because they observe it to
be a City, exceeding politiquely, virtuously and religiously governed) they
find out this excuse for their stay, that he is heir to some lands (which by
the death of an uncle of his) is devolved and fallen to him in the estate, and
duchy of Millan (betwixt Pavia and Alexandria) whether he goes to sell it
away, in regard (as he falsely alleges) that both this Gentlewoman (whom he
resolves to leave there, and presently upon his return to marry) and himself
are Protestants, and for a month or six weakes, this false gloss, and true
imposture passes current with those of Geneva, whom all that time they freely
permit and suffer to enjoy the laws and previledges of Hospitality in their
city, and the sooner, (and with far less suspicion and doubt) because they
observe, that they very often frequent their Sermons, and Churches, although in
their hearts and devotions, God knows, they both are directly Roman
Catholics. But at the end of this small time, understanding that the two
Syndicks and the rest of the Magistrates of that City began to pry more
narrowly into their stay, and more neetely in^ their actions; Then they
thinking to mock with God and their souls, and so to make Religion only to
be a cloak to overvaile their villainy, he then and there resolves to marry her
before he go to Millan, (which indeed affords sweet music ^o the heart, and
melody to the thoughts and mind of this lascivious dame Masseri^ the which
she esteemed to be the chiefest felicity she could desire upon earth) excusing
the alteration of this his resolution upon her sickness and indispositi^
(which also was as false and counterfeit, as the pretense of their protestant
Religion was feigned and hipocriticall) and to that end he acquaints the
Ministers and the Ancients of the Church therewith; But they being as regular
in their actions as he was exorbitant, and as pious in their intentions as he
was profane in his, question him to show some authentical certificat from
that Protestant Church or Churches in Poictou (where they aver they formerly
dwelt) that they were both of them Protestants by religion, and that their
marriage was honorable and no way clandestine; affirming to him, that it was
against the rules of their religion, the Constitutions of their Church, and the
laws of their City, to do otherwise, either to them, or to any strangers
whatsoever; Which Harcourt well perceiving, He now comes too short in his
arithmeticke, and having none to show them in that nature, he sweats under the
saddle; and so slackes his importunacy therein, and puts it off with a specious
excused dilatory delay; When acquainting his Masserina therewith, they both are
equally afflicted and grieved, thus to see their hopes nipt, and their
expectations and desires of marriage frustrated, and blasted in the very bud
and blossoms; and now they see that their abode and stay in Geneva, neither
can; nor must belong. But here betides them another unlooked for accident which
will speedily transport them thence;

It is the pleasure and mercy of God, that Noell (Harcourts man) is not a
little grieved in heart, and afflicted in mind, to see his master guilty of
this foul and treacherous crime, in stealing away Masserina his Brothers wife,
and entertaining and using her as his own. He knows how infinitely this
their adultery is displeasing to God, and odious to men, and how opposite and
repugnant it is to Grace and Nature. Wherefore holding it a trouble to his
mind, a vexation to his heart, and a scruple to his conscience any longer to
attend and follow them, because he is assured, that the divine Justice and
vengeance of God, will never permit them to go long either undetected or
unpunished, He calling to his remembrance the sweet virtues and chastity of his
Mistress La Precoverte, and (by opposition and Antitheses) comparing them to the
foul vices and whoredoms of Masserina, he out of his duty to the first, and
detestation to the second, though a bad Servant to his Master, yet was a good
Christian to God, gives his Mistres La Precoverte very secretintelligence, of
his masters lascivious residing and living here in Geneva with Masserina,
whereof he sends her word, he is a very sorrowful and unwilling eye witness,
and so leaves the reformation thereof, first to God, and then to her self. Our
virtuous sweet Gentlewoman La Precoverte, is wonderfully afflicted and grieved,
at this foul crime of adultery betwixt her Husband, and his Sister Masserina,
whereat her chaste heart toward him, and her pure and religious soul toward
God, makes her send many tears to earth, sighs to heaven. Once she thought to
acquaint her brother Vimory herewith, but then fearing that his just choler
might peradventure exasperate him against her Husband, she again as soon
forsakes that opinion and intent, as holding it more discretion and safety to
be silent herein toward him. And yet consulting her griefs and afflictions
with God (whose sacred advise and assistance how to bear her self in this
action and accident, she religiously implores) she at last deemes it a part
both of her affection, duty, and conscience, to use her best zeal and
endeavors to reclaim them from this their abominable, and beastly course of
life. And in regard her poverty, weakness, and sickness will not (according
to her desires and wishes) permit her to ride over to them in person to Gen^va,
she therefore commits and imposes that charge to her pen, to write both to
her Husband Harcourt, as also to his lews Sister, or rather his lascivious
Strumpet Masserina, to see if her letters (by the permission and providence of
God) may prevail with their hearts and souls to reform and draw them home,
the which she purposely, and expressly sends by a confident messenger, and with
the greatest secrecy she possibly can devise.

Her Letter to her Husband intimated this?

LA PRECOVERTE to HARCOVRT.
YOur flight and Adultery with that graceles Strumpet Masserine, is so
displeasin^ to God, as I cannot but wonder that his divine Iusticewil permit
Geneva, or any other place of the world to contain you without punishing you
for i^; yea when in this foul crime of yours, I consider her by my self, and
you by your Brother Vimorye, I find that his grief proves myshame, and
myshame his grief, and that you and her are the true causes of both. I have
examined my thoughts and actions, my heart and soul, and cannot conceive that
I have any way deserved this your ingratitude toward me, and therefore fail
not to certify me why and wherefore you have undertaken this vicious and lewd
course of life, which in the end will assuredly produce thy misery, as now
already it does your infamy, except your contrition to God, do speedily
redeem it. And in regard that you are my Husband, and that I both hoape and
believe it to be the first fault in this kind and nature, I therefore hold you
more worthy of my pity than of my hatred, and of my prayers then of my curses.
So if you will abandon your deboshed Sister, and come home and live with me who
am thy chaste and sorrowful wife, my arms and heart shall be as open as ever
they were, both to receive and forgive you, yea, I will wholly forget what is
past, and prepare my self to welcome you home, with a thousand Smiles and
Kisses, if you will resolve and remember henceforth to love me as much, as
formerly (without cause or reason) you have neglected and hated me.

LA PRECOVERTE.


Her Letter to Masserina, bewrayd these passions.

LA PRECOVERTE to MASSERINA.
NOe longer Sister, but lewd strumpet, was it not enough for thee to abuse
thine own Husband, but that thou must likewise bereave me of mine, who is his
own and only Brother, as if a single sin and ingratitude, could not content
thy lascivious lust, or satisf^e thy inordinate desires: but that thy impiety
to God, and profaneness and obscenity to thy self, should make thee guilty
of so foul a crime as Adultery, and which is worse, of such a foul and base
Adultery as comes very near to the worst kind of Incest; whereof thy thoughts
and heart can inform thee, and thy conscience and soul assure thee, it will
hereafter make thee as truly m^serable, as now thou fasly think thy self
happy. Wherefore triumph not, to have made my grief thy glory, and my
affliction thy felicity, for God (who is as just, as powerful) will requite my
wrongs in thy Person, and when thou least dreamest thereof, his Divine
punishments will sharply scourge and revenge thy lascivious pleasures, except
thou deject and prostrate thy self at the fee^ of his sacred mercy with true
contritio^, and at the Altar of his saving Grace with unfeined repentance for
the same, by restoring my Husband to me, and thy self to thine, and by making
thy peacewith God, whom so highly and hainously thou have therein offended,
which if thou do, thou may then reestablish thy fortunes, an^ ^edeeme thy
reputation, or else for ever assuredly ruin both them and thy self. So if I
seethee to imb^ace this chaste, and to follow this virtuous and religious
course, I will again assume the name of a Sister and leave that of a Strumpet
toward thee, yea, I will wholly forget these thy (almost unpardonable) wrongs
and disgraces which thou offerest me, and for ever bury them in perpetual
silence, and eternal oblivion.

LA PRECOVERTE.


Her Messenger arriving at Geneva, he first finds out Noell, and then secretly
delivers these two Letters to Harcourt and Masserina, who much musing and more
wondering thereat, withdrawing themselves into their Inner Chamber, they there
break up the seals and peruse them; Whereat their hearts galled, and their
Consciences so netled and stung as they cannot refrain from blushing for mere
shame, and then again, from not looking pale with mere anger thereat. Thus
looking steadfastly each on other, their own guiltiness does for the time
present somewhat afflict and perplex them. Harcourt wondereth at his wifes
boldness in wri^ing to him; and Masserina is not a little dismayed and daunted
to see that her husband has not written unto her. Harcourt is discontented
with his wifes peremptory Letter, Masserina is apprehensive and fearful of
her husbands silence, when again changing their conceits and thoughts which
inconstantly alter, and extravagantly range, without any intrinsicall peace, or
tranquillity. Harcourt thinking of his Brother Vimoryes silence, attributes it
to contempt and hatred, and Masserina contemplating and ruminating on her
sister La Precovertes choler, reputes it to extreme grief, sorrow and
Indignation; But at last consulting together hereon, they both of them concur
and fall upon this resolution; that to color out their lascivious life, they
by their answers to her, must overvaile it with much seeming chastity, and
pretended sanctity and piety. And the better to prevent any danger which may
proceed from Vimories silence, or revenge, they must remove from Geneva and
speedily resolve to forsake and leave it; When fear giving life to their
despair, and despair adding wings to their fear, they call for pen and
paper, and each return La Pecoverte their several answers by her own
messenger, who had strickt charge and command from her to see them, but not to
dare once to speak or exchange a word with either of them, the which
(according to his duty) he very honestly and punctually performed, only to
show her gratefulness to honest Noell, she gave precise order to him to render
him many hearty thanks from her for his true respect and fidelity toward her,
which she would never forget nor leave unrecompenced, and yet all this while
neither Harcourt nor Masserina were any way suspicious that it was their man
Noell which gave La Precoverte intelligence of their residence in Geneva.

Harcourts Letter to his wife was in these terms.

HARCOVRT to LA PRECOVERTE.
Do not rashly and unjustly torment thy self with jealousy at my absence,
for thou shall find as much joy thereof at my return, as now thou beleevest
and fear the contrary. I have vowed to accompany my sister in law Masserina
to our Lady of Loreto, which is the best Saint of the best Country of the
world, Italy, (where we are now setting forwards from this town of Geneva;) to
which holy Lady and blessed Saint, her Oraisons for her Husband, and mine for
thee, are and shall be as repleat of pure affection and piety, as thou
imaginest they are of iniquity and profaneness. True it is, I committed an
error in not acquainting thee with my departure, which I perceive thou
esteemest a crime; but when shortly I shall be so happy to enjoy thy sweet
company and presence, then my just reasons will justly enforce thee both to
know and acknowledge, that that pretended crime of mine is less than an
error, and this error less than nothing. And if thou will yet be farther
inquisitive why, or from whence our journey was first derived, I pray let these
general terms content thy fear, and satisfy thy jealousy, that it was her
devotion and conscience to God, not my desire or affection to her which gave
life and birth to it; therefore I hold it rather an unmerited cruelty, than a
condign penance, either for my heart to be tied to ask forgiveness of thee,
or my soul of God for this thy pretended crime of mine, whereof I am as
innocent as thy fear and jealousy deemes me guilty. Therefore I allow of thy
piely, I accept of thy prayers, yea, and I rejoice in thy affection to
entertain, and thy resolution to welcome me home with thy smiles and kisses
when I come, the which shall be, if not so shortly as thou expectest or I
desire, yet as soon as reputation and good speed shall permit.

HARCOVRT.


Masserina's Letter to her sister in law carried these lines.

MASSERINA to LA PRECOVERTE.
MY departure and absence has neither wronged mine own Husband nor abused
thine, for it is my pure zeal to God, and not any lascivious lust in my self
which drew me to this devotion to see Loretto, and him (through his goodness)
to the resolution honorably to accompany me thither, and therefore my heart
defies that foul sin of Adultery, and my soul detests that odious one of
Incest, whereof I am far more innocent than thou think me guilty. I am
sorry for thy grief, and I grieve for thy affliction, and am so far from
triumphing in the one, or glorying in the other, as I have given that to my
thoughts with passion, and this to my mind with compassion, although I
confess I have small reason to place it so near me, in regard thy jealousy
is the sole author, and my fidelity and chastity no way the cause thereof;
wherefore I am so far from fearing, as I love Gods justice, because as in
other sins I have offended his Divine Majesty, so I am sure that in this I
have noway incurred or merited his indignation, and do most freely refer my
fortunes and reputation to his sacred pleasure, but not to thy secret
discontent, and ill grounded choler, from which (by the plea of a just
proviso) I have all the reasons of the world to appeal, as also from that
foul scandal and infamous Epithet of a Strumpet, which I thought thee too
virtuous once to conceive, much less to name, but least of all for one sister
in law (without cause or reason) to give to another: But thou art La
Precoverte, therefore I forget this ungrateful crime of thine, and I am
Masserina, therefore I freely and absolutely forgive it, and to do thee as
much right as thou have done me wrong, I will silence it in eternal obscurity
and oblivion.

MASSERINA.


And is it not worthy of our observation, or rather of our detestation, to see
how impiously these profane wretches deny this their Adultery toward God, and
also to La Precoverte, whom they have so hainously offended therewith, and
which to Heaven and Earth, to God and his Angels, and to their own hearts and
consciences are nevertheless as apparent as the Sun in his brightest
Meridian, yea, had they not wilfully fled from God, and presumptuously
abandoned themselves to Satan, to contrive such irreligious excuses, and to
frame such ungodly Apologies, for these their foul crimes and offenses, and so
to make Hypocrisy the veil of their Adultery, and the cloak to cover it from
the light and sight of the world: And is it not a resolution worthy of a halter
in this world, and of Hell fire in that to come, to attempt marriage, when the
wife of the one, and the Husband of the other, are in perfect strength, and
full of life and health, (especially Masserina's Husband Vimory) as but right
now to theit shame, not to their glory, they understand by La Precovertes
Letters to them. To the Magistrates of Geneva they are firm Protestants, and
as they pretended, so they then (as they constantly affirmed) intended to live
and die. To La Precoverte in their Letters they are sound Roman Catholics, and
in the sublimity and singularity of their zeal traveling toward the Lady of
Loreto in devotion. O wretched Christians, or indeed rather O miserable
wretches, thus with your hypocrisy to think to deceive God, when therein you
only deceive your own selves and souls. For can there be a greater misery
found by us on earth, or sent us by the devil from hell, to make Religion
(which of it self is a precious and sovereign Antidote) to become a fatal
drugge, and a pernicious ingredient to poison, not to preserve our souls, and
so only to delight our earthly humors and affections, and to please our
carnal desires and concupiscences? Of all sorts of men (after the Atheist and
the murderer) the Hypocrite is the veriest devil upon earth, and he is so
much the more wretched and execrable, in that he guilds over his speeches, life
and actions with the seeming show of piety and devotion, when God and his
ulcerated conscience know, that he is nothing less. To be lukewarm in
religion, is to be profane, not religious: And as wine mixed with water is
neither wine nor water, so he that is of two religions is of neither. For God
who is still jealous of his own honor, and of our salvation, will not only
have our souls, but our hearts to serve him, and not only our hearts, but also
our tongues to glorify him, that is to say, all our actions, and all our
affections, not a piece of our heart, but he will have our whole heart, and not
an angle or corner of our soul, but our whole soul: For in matters of his
divine worship and service, (which consists in that of our faith, and of his
glory) he will not admit of any Rival or Competitor, nor be served in any
other manner, than as he has taught us by his sacred Word and Commandments,
and instructed us by his holy Prophets, and blessed Apostles.

But again to Harcourt and Masserina, whose lascivious hearts and lewd
consciences not permitting them to rest in assurance, or reside in security any
where, the very day after they had dispatched the messenger with their Letters
to La Precoverte, (holding Geneva no place for them, nor they for Geneva) they
trusse up baggage, and so with much secrecy leave it, and direct their course
to the great and famous City of Lions, (some two and twenty leagues thence)
and which is the frontier Town of France, and there they think to shroud
themselves among that great affluence and confluence of people which inhabit
and aboard there from diverse parts, and they make choice to live in this
frontier City, because it is near to Savoy, where if any danger should chance
to betide or befall them, they might speedily and safely retire themselves
there, and so lay hold on the law and privilege of Nations, which is
inviolable throughout all the world. At their arrival at Lions they take their
chambers and residence near the Arsenall, though for the two first nights they
lie in Flanders-street. They have not been in Lions fifteen days, but there
befell them an accident very worthy both of our observation, and of their
remembrance, which was thus; A Gentleman of the City of Toulouse named Monseiur
De Blaise, having some five days before treacherously killed his elder brother
Monseiur De Barry, in the high way as they traveled together upon a quarrel
which fell out between them, for having deboshed and clandestine stolen away
his said elder brother De Barry's wife from him, and conveyed and transported
her away with them: There was a privy search then made in Lions, when that
same night Harcourt and Masserina were upon suspicion apprehended for them, and
laid in sure keeping. But the next morning before the Seneschall and Procureur
Fiscall, they justified their innocence, by many who knew De Blaise, and so
were cleared; but yet it gave them both a hot Camisado and fearful Alarm, and
left an ominous impression in their hearts and minds, whereof (for the
conformity of the circumstances of this action with their own) had they had
the grace to have made good use, they had not (hereafter) made themselves so
famously infamous, nor consequently this their History so prodigiously
deplorable.

Harcourt and Masserina whiles they stay here in Lions (as guilt is still
accompanied with fear) do seldom go forth their lodgings, and when they
do, they (for their better safety) disguise themselves in different apparel,
and for her part she goes still close masked, and muffled up in her Taffeta
coyffe. Yea both of them make it their practice to frequent the fields often,
but the Churches and streets seldom, as if their foul crime of Adultery had
made them unworthy the communion of Gods Saints, and consequently all good
company too worthy for them. He exceedingly fears his brother Vimory's silence
and revenge, and she highly envieth and disdaineth her sister in law La
Precovertes jelousie, and still that disgraceful word of Strumpet (which she
upbraided her with, and obtruded to her in her Letter) strikes and sincks
deeply in her heart and remembrance, in such sort, that it so possesses her
thoughts with malice, and takes up her mind with choler and fierce
indignation, as she vows to her self not thus to let it pass in silence, or
to vanish and die away in oblivion, quite contrary to that which her late
Letter to her sister La Precoverte promised and spoke. And here it is that the
devil first begins to take possession of her heart, and by degrees to seize
upon her soul, and to make her wholly to forsake God. For knowing La
Precoverte to be wife to her brother in law and lover Harcourt, (whom she
affects a thousand times dearer than her own Husband, yea, than her own life)
she is therefore so great a beam to hereye, so sharp a thorn to her heart,
and so bitter a corrasive to her content, as she not only assumes bad
thoughts, but bad blood against her: For vowing that none shall share with her
in his affection, she forgetting her Conscience and Soul, Heaven and God, is
speedily resolved to cause her to be poisoned, her enraged malice being capable
of no other excuse or reason but this, that it is impossible she can reap any
perfect felicity or content in earth, till she have dispatched and sent her to
Heaven. To which end she insinuates her self into the acquaintance of two
Apothecaries of that City, and deals with them severally and secretly to
effect this hellish business, for the which she promised either of them a
hundred crowns of the sum in hand, and as much more when they have effected
it, and fifty more to defray the charge of their journey, But the devil has
made her so crafty and subtle, as she still retains from them, the name
Masserina and the place Troyes where the party dwelt; There are good, and bad
men of all countries, faculties, and professions, these two Apothecaries are as
honest as she is wretched, and as religious and charitable as she is profane
and bloody, so the one denies her request with disdain and choler, and the
other with charity and compassion, alleging her many pious considerations and
reasons to divert and dissuade her from this foul and bloody act, the
execution whereof, though tacitly, yet infallibly threatens (says he) no
less than the utter subversion of her fortunes, and the ruin and confusion of
her life in this world, if not likewise of her soul in that to come; So she
being hereat a little galled and stung in Conscience, to see that this great
City of Lions affoords poison but no poysoners, to act and finish this her
bloody project; The devil has yet notwithstanding, made her so curious in her
malice, and so industrious, and resolute in her revenge, as enquiring whether
there were any Italian Empericke or Mountebancke in that City, (whom she
thought might be made fit and flexible to her bloody desires and intents) she
is advertised, that there departed one hence some eight days since, who is
gone to reside this spring of the year at the Bathes at Pougges, a mile from
the city of Nevers, his name being Signior Baptista Tivoly (whom I conjecture
may derive his surname from that pleasant small town of Tivoly, some twenty
small miles from Rome, wherein there are many Cardinals, country Palaces, or
houses of pleasure) being very skillful in Mineralls, and in attracting the
spirits and quintessence of diverse other vegitives; Of a vain glorious, and
ambitious humor and disposition, and yet of a very poor estate and means,
and such a one, as indeed Masserina holds every way a fit agent and instrument
for her turn and purpose.

She is glad of this advertisement, and will neither give nor receive any truce
from her heart, or her heart from her revenge before she have seen and spoken
with Tivoly. The which to effect she to Harcourt pretends a sudden ach in her
right arm, and so upon good advise tells him that she is very desirous to go
to the Bathes of Pougges by Nevers, there to stay some fifteen or twenty days
at farthest; Harcourt (no way once dreaming, of her inveterate malice, and
far less of her revengefull and bloody intents toward the safety and life
of his wife La Precoverte) approves of her resolution and journey, but entreats
her to be wonderful careful of her self, her health and safety, and
proffereth to accompany her himself: she with many kisses, dearly thanks him
for his care of her and affection to her herein; answers him that his stay in
Lions will make her journey the more safe and short, so she accepts of the man
for the master, and only takes Noell along with her, who respects her so well,
as he cares not for her sight, much less for her company: She arrives at
Nevers, and (impatient of all delay) the next morning finds out Tivoly at
Pougges, being a very tall man, of a cole black beard, and of a wanne and
sullen countenance, she by his Phisiognomie judges that her hopes will not be
deceived of him; The second day she breaks with him about het hellish
business and finds him tractable to her devilish intents: They proceed to
this lamentable bargain, and she is to give him one hundred Crowns in hand,
and a faithful promise of a hundred and fifty more when he has effected it
as also fifty Crowns for the Charge of his journey, the which she limits at
fifteen days, so having settled this her business, she now names the party
to Tivoly whom she will have him to poison, La Precoverte, to be the woman who
resides and dwells with her Father Monseiur La Vaquery, a poor Gentleman in the
City of Troyes in Champagne, and she a young Gentlewoman of some twenty
years of age, of a flaxen hair, and very sickly. When giving him a small
Saphir Ring from her Finger, she therewith swears him both to the performance,
and to the secrecy of this murder, the which, armed by the Devil he does.
When being exceeding glad of this his bloody employment, which brings him store
of gold, the which he esteems the Elixar of his heart, and the felicity and
glory of his life, and which indeed, was the maine business that brought him
on this side the Alps, from Italy to France. Thus without any fear of God or
thought of Heaven or Hell, these murtherous and damnable miscreants have
concluded and shut up this their bloody bargain.

Our poor sweet La Precoverte, having received her Husbands Letter from Gene^,
and considering the contents thereof, as also that of her Sister in Law
Masserina, she knows not what to think either of their Letters or of
themselves: she sees her letter to promise much zeal and devotion to God, and
his much affection to her, and yet remembering his former unkindness, I may
say cruelty, toward her; as also the manner of their base and clandestine
departure, then she thinks the first to be false, and the second feigned, and
rherfore conceives she has far more reasons to despair than to hope either of
their Innocence, or their return; But this is her resolution, Harcourt is her
Husband, therefore she will still love him dearly; She is his wife, and
therefore she will for ever pray for him, and his prosperity religiously.
Thus hoping and many times (with many heavy sighs and bitter tears) wishing
and desiring his happy return, and virtuous reformation, she in his absence
lives pensively and sorrowfully with her Father, rather as a widow than a
wife, and such is her miserable Estate; and poor and sorrowsull fortune, that
she well knows not, whether she may more grieve or rejoice that God hitherto
has given her no Child: For ah me, she is so environed with afflictions, so
encompassed with calamities; so assaulted with sickness, and so weighed down
with sadness and disconsolation, as she reputes her life worse than death,
and either wishes her Husband athome with her, or her self in Heaven with God.

But Alas, alas, dear sweet young Gentlewoman; little do thou think or
dream (now thou desire death) what a hellish plot there is contrived and
intended against thy life by these two bloody Factors and Agents of the Devil,
Tivoly, and thy Sister Masserina: O Masserina Masserina, the disgrace of thy
name, the infamy of thy family, the shame of thy time, and the scandal of thy
sex. O how I want words not tears, to condemn thy cruel rage, and to
execrate thy infernal malice and fury, thus to resolve to imbrue thy guilty
hands in the innocent blood of thy chaste and virtuous Sister in Law La
Precoverte; for was it not sin and lust enough for thee to have heretofore
bereaved her of the love and presence of her Husband, but that thou will now be
so wretched and inhumane, as likewise to rob her of her life. O grief, O
shame, O pity, that thou should once dare to think thereof, much less to
attempt it, I mean so lamentable a crime, and so bloody a fact, which assure
thy self as there is a God in Heaven will never go long unpunished in Earth.

But I must proceed in this our sad and mournful History, and rherefore with
an unwilling and trembling resolution, I am enforced to declare that this limb
of the Devil Tivoly, rides away to Troyes, where he speedily and secretly
makes profession of his Empery. When understanding that Monseiur de la Vaquery
is constantly in the City he (with an Italian impudence and policy) soon
skrewes and insinuates himself into his Company. And as it is the vanity of
our times, and the weakness and imbecility of our Judgments, (in any
profession whatsoever) still to prefer and respect strangers, before our own
Countrymen, so Monseiur de la Vaquery, hearing this Italian to devour Latin
at his pleasure, and rather to vomit than utter forth whole Catalogues of
physical phrases which he had stolen, not learnt from Aristotle, Galen, and
Parecellsus, His ignorance believes him to be very learned, and therefore he
holds him a most fit Physician, to cure his Daughter La Precoverte of her
consumption, whereinto (as before) she was deeply and dangerously fallen, by
the unparalleld griefs and sorrows which she conceived, for her husbands
former unkindnesse to her, but more especially, for his present absence and
flight with his lascivious Sister Masserina. So (in a most unhappie hour) Her
Father La Vaquery mentions it to Tivoly; Which (being the only occasion and
opportunity he gaped for) he freely promises him his best art and skill for
her recovery, and the next day goes home to his house with him, and visits
his daughter; He finds her to be weak, lean, and pale, the which serves the
better for his turn, to color out this his bloody purpose to her. When (if
there had been any humanity in his thoughts, any Grace in his heart, or any
spark of religion or piety in his Soul) the very sight of this sweet, this
harmless, this beautiful young Gentlewoman would have moved him to
compassion, and not with hellish cruelty to resolve to poison her. But his
sinful heart, his seared Conscience, and his ulcerated and virulent soul
had (in favor of gold) made this compact with the Devil, and therefore he
will advance, and not retire in this his infernal resolution. He feels her
pulse, casts her estate in an Vrinall, receives thirty Crowns of her Father
for her cure, and so bidding her to be of good comfort, he administreth her two
pills, three mornings following, whereof (harmless sweet Gentlewoman) within
three days after, she suddenly dies in her bed by night; Tivoly affirming to
her sorrowful Father and Friends, that before he came to her, the violency,
and inveteracy of her consumption, had turned all her blood into water, and
exhausted and extenuated all the radical humors of her life, which opinion of
this base and bloody Italian Mountebanke past current with the simplicity of
his belief and their Judgments: So he burieth his daughter and with her his
chiefest earthly delight and joy: Within three days after that this sorrowful
and lamentable tragedy was acted, This monster, this Devil incarnate Tivoly,
leaves Troyes, and poasts away to Nevers, where he ravisheth Masserina's heart,
with the joyful news and assurance of La Precovertes death and burial, of
whom he receives his other hundred and fifty Crowns, the which according to
her promise she fails not presently to pay him down. And here again they
solemnly swear secrecy each to other of this their bloody fact.

Wretched Masserina feasting her heart with joy, and surfeiting her thoughts
with content to see the rival and competitor in her loves, La Precoverte thus
dispatched and sent for heaven, She now thinking to domineere alone in her
Harcourts heart and affection esteems her self a degree nearer to him in
marriage, that so of his Sister she may become his Wife. For this is the
felicity and content whereat her heart aymeth, and the delectation and joy
wherein her desires and wishes terminate. But her Husband Vimories life does
dash these joys of hers in pieces, as soon as she conceives them, and
strangles them if not in their birth, yet in their cradle. She finds Nevers to
be a pleasant City and Pougges a delightful little place to live in and when
the Spring is past and the great confluence of people retired and gone home, to
be a place of far more safety for them than Lions. Yea, and she affects and
loves it far the better, because here it was she first heard and understood
of La Precovertes death, which as yet for a time she closely conceales to her
self; Wherefore she sends Noell (her man) to Lions to his Master, and by her
letter prays him speedily to come and live with her at Nevers, which she
affirms to him is a pleasant City, and that there she attends his arrival and
company with much affection and impatiencie.

Harcourt, to please his Sweet-heart-Sister Masserina, leaves Lions and comes
to her at Nevers, where with thanks and kisses, she joyfully wellcomes him,
telling him that these bathes of Pougges, have perfectly freed her of her ache;
but in her heart and mind, she well knows, it is the death of La Precoverte,
and not those bathes, which has both cured her doubts and secured her fears.
They have not lived in Nevers and Pougges above three weeks since his
arrival, until they there (but by what means I know not) understand of La
Precovertes death, whereat he seems nothing sorrowful, but she extremely
glad and joyful. And by this time, which is at least a whole year since their
flight and departure from Saint Simplician and Sens, they in their Travells and
other gifts and expenses, have consumed and expended a pretty Sum of their
money. In all which time, we must understand that Vimory hates his wife and
Brother so exceedingly, as he (in contempt of their crimes and detestation of
their treacherous ingratitude) scorns either to look or send after them; but
the only revenge which he uses toward him in his absence he pretends a great
Sum of money to be due to him from him, and in compensation thereof, seizes
upon the remainder of his lands, and by Order of Justice gathers up, and
collects his rents from his Tenants, to his own use and behoof. Which
extremely grieves Harcourt, and afflicts Masserina, who (by this time) seeing
in what obscurity and considering in what continual fear and eminent danger
they live in, As their lascivious affections, so their irregular desires, and
irreligious resolutions, look one and the same way, which is to send her
Husband, and his Brother Vimory to Heaven, after his wife La Precoverte, yea so
resolute are they in this their bloody intentions and desires, as they wish and
pray for it with zeal, and desire it with passion and impatiency. And now
their malice is grown so resolute, and their resolution so graceless in the
contemplation and conceiving of this bloody (...), as they bewray it each to
other. Masserina vows to him that she can reap no true content either in her
life or conscience, before, of his sister he make her his wife; Nor I replies
Harcourt before my brother Vimorie be in Heaven, and I marry thee and be thy
husband here in earth. When (as a bloody Courtisan and Strumpet) she gives him
many thanks and kisses for this his affection to her, and malice to his Brother
Vimory for her sake; when (working upon the advantage of time, occasion and
opportunity) She tells him, that in her opinion, the shortest and surest way
is to dispatch him by poison* Harcourt dislikes her judgment and plot, as
holding it no way safe in taking away his brothers life, to entrust and hazard
his own at the co^rtesie of a stranger (at which speech of his, she blusheth
and palleth as being conscious and memorative of what she had lately caused to
be perpetrated by Tivoly) Therefore he thinks to acquaint and employ his own
man Noell in this bloody business, and pro^ him two hundred Crowns, and
forty more of yearly pension during his life, if he will pistol his Brother
Vimory to death as he i^ walking in the fields. But Noell is too honest a man,
and too good a Chri^ to stabbe at the majesty of God, i^ ^ling man his creature
and Image, and so absolutely denies his Master, and although he be a poor man,
yet he rejects his offer, as resolving never to purchase wealth, or preferment
at so dear a rate, as the price of innocent blood; whereat his Master bites
his lip for discontent and anger. So he conjures him to perpetual secrecy and
silence of this proposition and business, which Noell promises but swears
not. Hereupon Harcourt to approach nearer to Sens, He and Masserina leave
Nevers, and very secretly by little Iournies (and the greatest part by night)
come to Mascon, and there his heart strikes a bargain with the Devil, and the
Devil with his soul and resolutions, to ride over himself to Sens, and there
with his own hands to pistol his Brother Vimory to death in the fields, or if
his Bullets miss him, then to finish and perpetrate it with his own Sword. O
wretched Gentleman, O execrable Brother, thus to make thy Hope and Charity
prove bankrupt to thy Soul, and thy Faith unto God.

But nothing will prevail with Harcourt, to diswade him from this bloody
business; Whereunto the damnable treachery and malice of Masserina impetuously
precipitates and hastens him onwards, although it be against her own Husband.
So he leaves Mascon, and in a disguised beard, and poor suit of apparel,
comes to Saint Symplician purposely leaving Sens, a little on his left hand.
Where waiting for his Brother Vimory, at the end of a pleasant wood of his, a
little half mile from his house where he knew he was accustomed to walk alone
by himself solitarily; He personating and acting the part of a poor begging
Soldier, and counterfeiting his tongue as well as his beard and apparel, with
his hat in his hand (espying his Brother) he goes toward him with an humble
resolution, and requesteth an Alms of him. Which Vimory seeing and hearing;
he in mere charity and compassion of him, because he saw him to be though a
poor, yet a proper man, and which is more a Soldier, draws forth his purse
and whiles he looks therein for some small piece of silver; Harcourt (as a
Disciple of the Devil) very softly draws out his little pistol out of his
left sleeve (which he covered with his hat) and having charged it with two
bullets, he lets fly at him, and so shoo^ him in the truncke of his body, a
little under the heart, of which two wounds he presently fell dead to the
ground, being as unfortunate in his death, as his brother was miserable and
diabolical in giving it him, for he only fetched two groans, but had neither
the power or happiness to speak one word. And the Devil (in the catastrophie
of this mournful Tragedy) was so strong with Harcourt, as his malice toward
his Brother Vimory, exceeded not only malice but rage and fury it self, for
fearing he was not yet dead, he twice ran him through the body with his sword.
When leaving his breathless body all goring in his hot reeking blood, he with
all possible celeritie takes his horse (which he had tied (out of sight) to a
tree not far off) and so with all possible speed gallops away to his now
intended wife Masserina at Mascon, who triumphs with joy at his relation of
this good news, the which to her, yea to them both, is equally pleasing and
delectable. But God will not permit that these wretched joys and triumphs of
theirs shall l^st long.

This cruel murder of Monseiur Vimory is some two hours after known at his
house and Parish of Saint, Symplician, as also in the City of Sens, and so
dispersed (...) all Burgundy, and the murderers narrowly sought after, but in
vain; Harcourt and Masserina meet with these reports at Mascon, but yet they
hold it discretion and safety, a small time longer, to conceal themselves
secretly in that Town, and so to suffer the heat of this news to pass over,
and be blown away. But at the end of two months, Har^t (setting a milk
white face upon his bloody fact) arrives at Sons and from thence to his ma^or
house of Saint Symplician, which now by the death of his Brother Vimorye, who
died without issue, wholly devolved and fell to him. Who having formerly played
the Devil in murdering his said Brother, he now as infernally plays the
Hypocrite in mourning for his death making so wonderful an outward show and
demonstration of sorrow for the same, as he and all his servants being dighted
in blackes. A month after he sends for his good Sister in Law Masserina, who
comes home to him, and they seem so absolutely strange each to other, as if
they had never seen one another during all the long time of their absence, and
she likewise seems to drown her self in her tears, and is likewise all in
blackes for the death of her Husband; But God in his due time will pull off
this their false mask, and detect and revenge both their horrible Sins of
Adultery and Murder. Now as close as they conceal this their dishonorable
fleight and departure, yet it discovered and found out, and held so odious, so
foul, to all the Gentlemen and Ladies their neighbors (who yet know nothing
of their murders) as they disdain to welcome them home, or (which is less)
to see them, which they both are enforced with grief to observe, as holding it
to be the reflection of their own disgrace and scandal, the which henceforth
to prevent: they within two months after, sends for their Ghostly fathers, as
also for two Jesuits, and the Vicar of their parish, and acquaint them with
their desires and resolutions to marry: But these Ecclesiastiques affirm it to
be directly opposite to the Rules and Canons of the holy Catholic Roman
Church, for one Brother to marry the widow of another, as also against the
written law of God; and therefore they utterly seek both to persuade and
diswade them from it, as being wholly unlawful, and ungodly, and so refuse to
Consent thereto, much less to perform it without a dispensation from the
Pope, or his Nuntio now resident at Paris. They cause the Nuntio to be dealt
with about it, but he peremptorily refuses it; But in favor of money, and
strong friends, within three months they procure it from Rome, and so they
are speedily married, now thinking, and withal, believing and triumphing, that
this their nuptial knot, has power to deface and redeem all their former
Adulteries, and now wholly wiped off their disgrace and scandal with the
world. And therefore in their own vain and impious conceits, are secure, and
abound in wealth delight, and pleasure; But as yet they have not made their
peace with God.

Come we therefore first to the detection and discovery of these their bloody
crimes of murder, and then to the condign punishments which they received for
the same: Whereof the manner briefly is thus. It is many times the pleasure and
providence of God, to punish one sin in and by another, yea and sometimes one
sin for another, the which we shall now see apparent in this bloody and
hellish Itallian Mountebancke Tivoly, who repayring to the great Fair of Sens,
and there beginning to profess his Emperie to a rich Goldsmithes wife of that
City named Monseiur de Boys, he the third day stole a small casket of Jewels
and Rings from him out of a cupboarde, (the lock whereof he cunningly picked,
and shut again) vallued at four thousand Crowns, and the same night fled
upon that robbery toward Mascon, thinking there to put himself on the River
of Soan, and so to slip down to Lions, and from thence over the Alps into
Italy. De Boys makes a speedy, and curious research for his thief, whom as yet
he could not find, or discover; When hearing of this Mountebancke Tivolie his
sudden departure and flight, he takes him to be his thief, pursues him in
person and within four leagues of Mascon apprehends him, (having to that end
brought two Provosts (or Sheriffs) men with him in their Coats, with their
pistolls at saddle bow, to assist him) De Boys finds many of the Jewels and
Rings about Tivoly, and diverse others wanting, the which he could never
recover: So being brought back to Sens, he was first imprisoned, and then
examined by the Senshall and the Procurer Fiscall: When having neither cause,
nor color to deny this robbery of his, he therefore freely confessed it, the
devil still assuring, or rather betraying his hopes, confidence, and
Judgment; That it is very possible, and he thinks very probable and feaseable
to corrupt his Judges with some of the Jewels which he had closly conceald and
hid about him; But, he shall speedily see the contrary.

For they seeing this Itallian Empericke (by his own confession) guilty of
this great and remarkable robbery, they condemn him to be h^nged the very
next day for the same. So having a Cordelier (or Gray) Friar, sent him that
night to prison to prepare his soul for Heaven; He the next morning
(according to his sentence of condemnation) is brought to his execution: Where
on the Ladder, he (to free his Conscience and soul) does constantly and
sorrowfully Confess, that he had formerly poisoned Madamoyselle La
Precoverte, daughter to Monseiur de La Vaquery of Troyes, and that he was hired
to do it by the Lady Masserina of whom at Pougges he received two hundred and
fifty Crowns and a small Saphir Ring to perform it, as also fifty Crowns
more, which she gave him for his charges from Nivers to Troyes, and so he dies
in the constant confession of this his foul and lamentable murder, and is
hanged for his Robbery: and his body afterward burnt for destroying and
poisoning of this young Gentlewoman La Precoverte, whom many Gentlemen and
Ladies there present well knew, and exceedingly bewailed, for the goodness of
her sweet nature and pure beauty, as also for the excellency of her honorable
perfections and religious virtues; And although the Spectators of this wretch
Tivoly his death expected some speech from him, at the taking of his last
farewell of this world, yet (besides his former confession he spoke nothing,
but mumbled out some few words to himself, which were not understood; And thus
he lived wretchedly as he dyed miserably, giving no testimony of his contrition
or sorrow to the World, or of any spark of grief, or repentance, toward God.

Now before his body was fully consumed to ashes. This our Wretched and bloody
Gentlewoman Masserina, together with her old Lover but new Husband Harcourt,
are (by order of the Judges of Sens) apprehended and taken prisoners in their
own house of Saint Simplician, as they were walking and Kissing together,
without any thought of danger, muchlesse of death. They hereat look each on
other with grief and astonishment, especially Masserina, who understanding (by
some of those that apprehend them.) That it was the Italian Mountebanke Tivoly,
who at his execution accused her, but not her Husband Harcourt for having and
causing him to poison her Sister La Precoverte, she then sees her self to be
a dead woman, and no hope left her in the world of her life, But every way a
firm assurance and confidence of her death; yet seeing Tivoly dead, she
resolves to stand upon her Justification. She is all in tears at this her
lamentable disaster, curses the name and memory of Tivoly for ruining her,
with himself, and now, when it is too late she blames herself of
indiscretion, for neglecting, and not dealing effectually with Tivoly in
prison, to conceal this her fact and name. As for her Husband Harcourt, he
(knowing himself absolutely Innocent of this murder, he grieves not for the
death of his first wife La Precoverte, but now extremely mourns and
lamenteth to think of this, of his second wife Masserina for, live, he fears
she cannot. He bids her yet be of good comfort, and whispereth her secretly in
her ear that he will give all his estate and means to save her life, or else
that he will dye with her, she thanks him with a world of sighs and tears,
and rounds him as privately in his ear with many deep oaths and
asseverations, that her tongue shall never dare to speak any one word or
syllable to her Judges, which shall tend to the prejudice of his reputation,
safety or life, and so they are by their apprehenders separated; and then
severally conveyed to the prison of Sens: Masserina is first arraigned by the
Judges, where (according to her former resolution) she (not with tears, but
with high words and speeches) stands upon her Innocence and Justification, they
inform her how strongly Tivoly at his death declared she had given him two
hundred and fifty crowns, a Saphir Ring, and fifty crowns more to pay his
charges at Pugges and how he at her instigation, and in favor of this her gold
poisoned La Precoverte at her father Monseiur La Vaqueris house at Troyes, She
terms Tivoly witch and devil, yea worse then a thousand devils thus to accuse
her fasly of this murder of her sister Precoverte, whereof she vows to God
and the world, to Earth and Heaven, that she is as Innocent as that damned
Italian was guilty thereof; but the Judges (notwithstanding all these her great
fumes and crackes) do presently condemn her to the rack, the which as soon
as she saw and considered the sharp nature of those exquisite torments, then
God was so merciful to her soul by his grace, though she was not so
heretofore to her body by the perpetration of her foul sins, that she would
not permit her tender dainty limbs to be exposed to the misery of those cruel
tortures, but then and there confesses her self to be the author of
poisoning La Precoverte her sister, as Tivoly was the actor thereof, when being
here by her Judges farther demanded whether her last Husband Harcourt were not
likewise accessory with her in poisoning of his first wife La Precoverte, she
with much assurance and constancy cleeres him hereof, and is so kind and
loving to him, as she speaks not a word to them, of his pistolling to death
of her first Husband his Brother Vimorey: So for this her foul and bloody fact
of hers she is condemned to be hanged the next morning, and for that night
again returned to prison, where she and her sorrowful husband, make great
suit to the Judges that they may for a short time see and speak one with the
other, but it will not be granted them: When Harcourt being as confident of
his own life, as he was of his wifes death, makes secret proffer (by some
friends of his) to the Judges of all his lands and demaynes to save his wife,
but they (resembling themselves) do so much fear God, and reverence and
honor the sacred Name of Justice as they are deaf to his requests.

The next morning (according to her sentence) she is brought to the place of
her execution, but (at her earnest and importunate request) so early, that very
few people were present at her death, where being ascended the Ladder, she
there again cursed the name, and execrated the memory of that wretched
Villain Tivoly, and wished much prosperity and happiness to her Husband
Harcourt, when turning her eye about, and seeing a Cosen German of his there
present named Monseiur de Pierpont, she calls him to her, and is so vain at
this last period (as it were) of her life, as she takes off her glove and
bracelet from her right hand and arm, and prays him to deliver it to his
Cousin and her Husband Harcourt, and to assure him from her that she dyed, his
most loving and constant wife, which Monseiur Pierponte faithfully promised her
to perform, then a Subordinate officer of justice being there to see her dye,
tells her that he was now commanded by the Judges his Superiors, to tell her,
that she being now to leave earth, and so ready to ascend into heaven, they
prayed her in the name and fear of God to declare to all those who were
present, if her Husband Harcourt, yea or no, had any hand, or were knowing or
accessory, with her in the poisoning of his first wife La Precoverte, and that
she should do piously and christianly to discover the truth thereof, which
would undoubtedly tend to Gods glory, and the salvation of her own soul: When
she solemnly vowed to him and to all the people, that her Husband Harcourt
never knew, nor in thought, word, or deed, was any way accessory knowing or
consenting with her or Tivoly in poisoning of his wife, and this which she now
spoke was the pure truth as she hoped for Heaven; And now after a few tears,
she most vainly and idely fell praising and commending of him, especially how
tenderly and dearly he loved her; with other ridiculous and impertinent
speeches tending that way, which I hold (every way) unworthy of my mention and
repetition (but had not the grace, either to look up to heaven, or to God with
repentance, or the goodness to look down into her own heart, conscience or
soul, with contrition and sorrow for all those her foul Adulteries and
Murders.; Neither to pray to God for her self, or to request those who were
present to pray to God for her; And so she was turned over, all wondering and
grieving at her bloody crime, and therefore some few lamenting or sorrowing for
this her infamous death: But she there speaks not a word, or the shadow of a
word, either of her Husband Harcourts pistolling to death of his Brother her
first husband Vimory, or of her knowledge thereof or consent thereunto.

Now though Harcourt seemed outwardly very sorrowful for this shameful death
of his wife Masserina, yet he is inwardly exceeding Joyful, that her silence
at her death, of murdering his Brother Vimory, has preserved his life with
his reputation, and his reputation with his life; Whereupon being the same day
freed and acquitted by the Judges of Sens; both of his pretended crime, as also
of his imprisonment; He composing his countenance equally betwixt joy and
sorrow, returns to his house of Saint Symplician where now thinking himself
absolutely discharged and cleared of all these his former Adulteries, as also
of his late cruel murdering of his Brother; He within two (or at most within
three months after his wife Masserinaes Execution casts of his mourning
apparel, (which he wore for her death) and neither thinking of his soul or
his conscience, or of heaven or hell, he ^antes and froliques it out in brave
apparel, and because he is now fortunately arrived to be chief Lord and
master of a great Estate both in Lands and money, therefore he thinks it not
his pride, but his glory, and not his vanity but his generosity to dight and
put himself now into far richer apparel then ever formerly he had done,
whereof all the Gentlemen his neighbors yea all the City of Sens, (with no
little wonder) took especial notice thereof; Yea he is so far from once
dreaming or thinking either of his murdering of his Brother Vimorye, or of the
deplorable and untimely ends of his two wives, as with much vanity, and with
far more haste then discretion or consideration, he now speedilyresolves to
take and marry a third. But his hopes will deceive them, because God in his
sacred Justice and Judgments will deceive his hopes.

For, when he thinks himself secure and safe, not only from the danger, but
likewise from the suspicion of any fatal or disasterous accident which can
possibly befall him; then, the triumphant power of Gods revenge will both
suddenly and soundly surprise him. His honest man Noell, (with an observant
eye, and a Conscionable, and sorrowful heart) has heard of La Precovertes
poisoning, and of Vimories pistolling to death, and has likewise seen the
hanging both of Tivoly, and of his last Mistress Masserina. In all which
several accidents, as one way he wondereth at the malice of Satan: So
another way he cannot but infinitely admire and applaud the just judgments of
the Lords: He likewise knows what his Master Harcourt is to him and he to
his master, and in the time of his service and attendance under him, what
different and several passages of business and secrets have past between
them: He has remarked far more vices then virtues in his Master, whereat
he much grieveth, but he was infinitely more enforced then desirous either to
see or know them, and this again does exceedingly rejoice him: He well knows
that fidelity is the glory of a servant, and yet it is a continual sensible
grief to his heart, and vexation to his soul, to see that his Master serves
God no better: He does not desire to know things (which concern his said
Master) whereof he is ignorant, but does wish and pray to God that he were
ignorant of many things which he knows, and of more which he fears; and
being very often perplexed in his mind with the reluctation of these different
causes, and their as different effects. He cannot but in the end satisfy
himself with this resolution: That as Harcourt is his Earthly Master, so God
is his Heavenly Master; But here betides an unexpected and unwished Accident to
this Noell, which will speedily try of what temper and metal both himself,
his heart, his conscience and his soul is made, and what infinite disparity
there is betwixt Earth and Heaven.

By the pleasure and visitation of God: He is suddenly taken extreme sick of
a pestilent Fever, but not in his Master Harcourts house, but in his own
Fathers house, who dweltsome four leagues thence at a parish called Saint
Lazare, and his Physician yielding him a dead man, he as a religious Roman
Catholic, takes the extreme Unction, and then prepares himself to dye: But
he is so moral, and so good a Christian, as (the premises considered) he
resolves to carry his conscience pure, and his Soul white and unspotted to
Heaven. He prays his Father therefore, that he will speedily ride to Sens
(in whose Jurisdiction Saint Lazare was) and to pray two of the three Judges to
come over to him, for that he has a great Secret to reveal them now on his
death bed, which conduces to the glory of God, the service of the King, and
the good of his own soul. His Father accordingly rides to Sens, and brings
two of those Judges speedily with him to his Sons bed side, to whom (in
presence of three or four more of his Fathers neighbors) ^hee very sick in
body but perfectly sound in mind, tells him, that his Master Harcourt would
(heretofore) have had him pistol his Brother Vimorye to death, and proferred
him two hundred Crowns in money, and forty Crowns Annuity during his life to
perform it, but he refused it, and knowing the said Mounseiur De Vimorye to
be since murdered by a pistol, he therefore verily believes, that it is
either his said Master, or some other for him; which is guilty of that
lamentable murder, the true detection whereof he says he leaves to God and to
them, and within half an hour after, (yea before they were departed his
Fathers house) this Noell dies.

Hereupon, these Judges wondering at the providence of God, in the evidence of
this dying man for the discovery of this lamentable murder. They speedily send
away their officers who apprehend Harcourt in his own house of Saint
Simplitian, carowsing and froliking it in his best wine in Company of three or
four of his deboshed consorts and Companions, and so they bring him to Sens:
Where lying in prison that night, the next morning the Judges of that City
cause him to be arraigned before them; and Charge him with pistolling of his
Brother Mounseiur De Vimorie to death, which (fortified and armed by the
Devil) he strongly and stoutly denies, they read his man Noells dying
Evidence against him, to prove it: So they adjudge him to the fiery torment of
the Scarpines, for the vindication of this truth, the which he endures with a
wonderful fortitude and constancy, and still denies it: When their hearts
being prompted from Heaven, and their souls from God: That he was yet the
undoubted murderer of his Brother, they the second time adjudged him to the
rack, whereon permitting himself to be fastened, and the tormenters giving a
good touch at him, God is more merciful to his soul, then his Tortures are to
his body, and so with tears in his eyes, he confesses that it was he which
pistolled his Brother Vimorye to death, and which afterward ran him twice
through the body with his Rapier: Whereupon for this bloody and unnatural fact
of his: His Judges (without any regard to his extraction or quality) condemn
him the next afternoon between four and five of the clock, to be broken a
live on the wheel at the public place of execution: Some few Gentlemen his
kinsfolk solicit his reprivall, because as yet they despair of his pardon,
but their labors proves vain, and they purchase no reputation in seeking it,
for now all Sens and the adjacent Country cry fie on him, and on his foul and
enormous Crimes of Adultery and Fratricide.

So the next day, (at the hour and place appointed) he is brought to his
execution, where a mighty concourse of people both of Sens and the adjacent
Country flock to see, this monster of nature take his last farewell of this
world: Being mounted on the Scaffold, in a Tawny Satin suit with a gold edge:
He confesses himself guilty of murdering his Brother Vimorye, and yet he
grieves far more for the death of his last wife Masserina then he does for
that of his first, La Precoverte: He demands forgiveness of God, and the
world for this his foul crime of Fratricide and prays all who are there
present to pray to Almighty God for the salvation of his soul, and that they
become more charitable and religious, and less bloody and profane by his
example: So commending his soul unto God, his body to the Earth from whence it
came, and marking himself three or four times with the sign of the Cross,
he willingly suffers the Executioner to fasten his Legs and Arms upon the
wheel, the wheel, the which as soon, as he breaks with his iron bar;
until he have seized upon death, and death on him.

And thus was the wretched lives, and miserable, and yet deserved deaths of
these our cruel, and inhumane, graceless Murderers, and in this manner did
the Triumphs of Gods Revenge justly surprise them to their shame, and cut them
off to their Confusion: May we read this History to Gods glory, and as often
meditate thereon to our own particular reformation and instruction.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST, THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
Romeo (the Laquey of Borlary) kills Radegonda, the Chamber maid of the Lady
Felisanna in the Street, and is hanged for the same: Borlari afterward hireth
Castruchio an Apothecary to poison her Husband Seignior Planeze, for the which
Castruchio is hanged, and his body thrown into the River and Borlari beheaded
and burnt.

IT is a thousand griefs, and pities, to see Christians who are honored with
that glorious title and appellation, should so wilfully and wretchedly lose
it, by imbrewing their guilty hands in the innocent blood of their Christian
Brethren, and thereby to bereave our selves of that rich ornament, and
inestimable Jewel, which God (in his Son Christ Jesus) has lent us for the
planting of our Faith; and given us for the extirpation of our profaneness, and
the rooting out of our Impiety. But this is the subtle malice, and malicious
subtilty of Satan, (the professed enemy, and Arch-Traytor of our souls) as
also of his infernal Agents and Factors, who thereby prove and make themselves
to be the firebrands and incendiaries of their own felicity and safety. And
because the examples of the wicked, do strike apprehension and fear to the
godly, and that the punishment and death of murderers, does fortify the
Charity, and foment and confirm the Innocence of the living. Therefore (for
that Reason, and to this end) I have purposly given this next History a place
in my Book, wherein we shall see Choler, Malice, and Revenge, to act many
deplorable and bloody parts; Let us read it with a zealous fear and a
Christian fortitude, and so we shall assuredly hate this foul and crying
Sin i^ others, and religiously, and constantly avoid it in our selves.

THe foundation of this History; is laid in the fair and famous City of
Verona, (anciently a great Colony of the Romans, since a free estate of it
self, but now dependant and subject to the Estate and Seignory of Venice)
wherein their lately dwelt, an old Gentleman being a widdower, and one of the
chiefest and noblest families of that City, named Seignior Fabritius Miniata,
who was rich in lands, but exceeding wealthy in money, (whereof he had put a
great and remarkable Sum in the bank of Venice) he had one only Child, a
daughter of some eighteen years of age, named Dona Felisanna, who was
wonderful fair, and a most lovely sweet Creature, tall and slender of
stature, of yellow golden hair, and sanguine damask Rose Complexion; Now as
her beauty was every way answerable to her birth and extraction, no less were
her singular virtues and sweet perfections to her beauty, and as wealth,
beauty, and virtue concurring and meeting together, are three powerful lures
and attractiue Adamants to draw the desires and affections of many Noble
gentlemen to seek her in marriage. So two of her chief Suitors and who chiefly
flattered their hopes to enjoy this sweet and precious Jewel of nature, and
who stood in best possibility to bear away her affection and her self, was
Seignior Thomas Planeze a brave young gentleman of the neighbor city of
Mantova of a sweet presence, and proper comely feature of some twenty five
years old, not very rich, yet endued with competent means to maintain
himself like himself, but infinitely well bred and adorned and honored with
all those generous parts and endowments which are requisite to make the gallants
of our times complete, and the other Seignior Inan de Borlari, a very rich
Gentleman, of the same city of Verona, a proper man of countenance, but of
personage some what crook backed and much Camber leggd and drawing toward
forty years of age, but of education, conditions, and qualities so ignorant
and inciuill as he seemed to be rather a Citizen then a Gentleman, or indeed
more a clown then a citizen, and yet otherwise of metal and courage enough:
And that we may the more apparently see and perfectly know upon what terms
they both stand, as well in the opinion of the Father as the affection of the
Daughter; Miniata is infinitely desirous of Borlari for his Son in law but not
of Planeze, and Felisanna is excedingly affected to take Planeze for her
Husband, but not Borlari; which they both perceiving, whiles Borlari intends to
seek the affection and consent of the Father before that of the Daughter;
Planeze shapes a contrary course, resolves to seek and prefer that of the
daughter before the Father; the regard of Borlari his wealth and of Planezes
poverty with covetous Miniata like a furious stream or impetuous Torrent bears
down all other regardes and considerations before it. But the consideration
and respect of Borlari his deformed personage, and then that of Planezes sweet
feature and deportment with amorous Felisanna, as a delicious charm and
heart-ravishing ecstasy, sweepes away all other regards and respects whatsoever.
The Father bids Borlari to be courageous and cheerful, and then he shall not
fail to have his daughter for his wife; But the daughter wills Planeze to be
descreet and constant, and then she will not fail to take him for her Husband;
Miniata to show his love to Borlari, forbids Planeze his his house, and the
company of his daughter; Felisanna to reveal her dear and fervent affection
to Planeze, assures ^m he shall often enjoy both her sight and company, but
confidently if not peremptorily, prohibits Borlari to approach her presence.
Thus whiles Borlari often frequenteth and converseth with the Father publicly,
no less, or indeed far oftener does Planeze privately, and whiles the first
has more cause to despair, than reason to hope of her affection and consent
to be his wife: the second has all the reasons and causes of the world, not
only to hope but to assure himself thereof; But the patience of a little
time, will shortly resolve our curiosity, whereunto these different affections
will tend, and what the event and issue will be of these their opposite
intentions and resolutions.

But because the ambition and wisdom of Borlari will make it conspicuous and
apparent to his Mistress. That there is as much difference betwixt him, and
Planeze, as there is between her self, and her Chambermaid Radegonda. He
therefore seeing that he cannot hitherto gain her by the persuasion of her
Father, now hopes and attempts it by this her maids solicitation; as holding
her to be a fit instrument for the compassing of his desires, and a proper
Agent for the perfecting and crowning of his wishes, because his best genius
and intelligence inform him, that she has a great power and bears a great
stroke and sway with her Mistres: But we shall shortly see, and he too soon
find the contrary, and that these his ill grounded hopes and undervalewing
attempt of his, will both deceive his ambition and betray his wisdom and
judgment. Now to gain this her chambermaide Radegonda to his will, that
thereby with the more facility and cherfulness, she may obtain him her
Mistress, her favor and affection: He bribes her with silver and Gold, and
many other gifts, if not too costly for his giving, yet I am sure too rich for
her receiving, and in requital thereof she with her tongue promises him her
best power and assistance toward her Mistress, but in her heart intendes the
contrary which is directed to betray him; He sends likewise by her to his love,
and her Mistress diverse curious rich presents and two Letters and prays her to
take time at advantage, and so to deliver them to her from him, the which
likewise she faithfully promises, but yet intends nothing less, so she holds
it rather a virtue than a vice, to keep these presents for her self, and to
give the letters to his Corrivall Planeze, to whom (by solemn oath) she had
formerly engaged her best art and power, and her chiefest assistance. Which
policy, or rather which fallacy of hers, is not so secretly borne betwixt
Planeze and herself, but Borlari (by some sinister accidental means) has
perfect notice thereof, which he takes so unkindely at Radegondaes hands, as
(consulting more with passion then reason) his heart is so inflamed with
Choler, and his resolution with revenge against her, that (impatient of all
delays) he sends for her one afternoon to meet him at the Amphitheatre, and
from thence goes with her to the next street to a friends house of his, where
ascending a chamber and bolting the door withinside to him, he (with choler
and threats) charge her with this her ungrateful infidelity and treachery
toward him: when drawing all the truth from her, by making herself a witness
against her self, as well of the delivery of his letters to Planeze, as also of
keeping her presents for her self, and that her Mistress and he are solemnly
contracted each to other: He there in mere revenge to her, and in malice and
disdain to her Mistress, pulls off her head attire, and very basely and
violently cuts away all her hair, and throws it into the fire,
notwithstanding that Radegonda first fell on her knees, and with infinite
tears and pra^s besought him to the contrary: But as he has made it an act of
his reve^ to Radegonda and of his disdain to her lady, his unkind mistress
Felisanna, so he now likewise resolves to make it one of his justifications to
the world. Poor Radegonda is all in tears and choler at this her
disgraceful accident received of Borlari, and no less but rather far more
is her young Lady and Mistress Felisanna, the grief of the, one engendring the
choler of the other, yea this ignoble and malicious fact of his does so
deeply stick in her heart and mind, and so extremely exasperateth her,
against him, as she makes her lover Planeze acquainted therewith, who
(notwithstanding her fathers prohibition) was then descended his Coach and
assended the Parlor to visit her. Planeze wondreth and grieves at this incivill
and base indignity of Borlari toward Radegonda, which he every way sees, can
no way but reflect on the other part of himself Felisanna, and so consequently
on himself: When (being in her presence) the passions of his affection, and
the fumes of his revenge so far eclipse and transport his Judgment, as he
freely profereth her his sword, and self, to right Radegondaes wrong on the
person and life of Borlari, the which courtesy and noble affection and respect
of his, Felisanna takes most lovingly and kindly of him, but yet loves him so
tenderly and dearly, that by no means she will permit him to engage,
muchlesse to hazard himself in this trivial quarrel, which being (as she
affirmed) more feminine then masculine, did therefore more properly belong to
her own deciding and requital, the which (in that regard) she prayed him
wholly to leave and refer to herself.

Borlari (by some of Miniataes domestique servants, whom in favor of money he
has made to be his friendly Spies and intelligencers) hears hereof, and
especially takes notice of Planezes forwardness to fight with him for the
quarrel of a poor chambermaid, so seeing that he could hope for nothing but
for despair in his affection from Felisanna, he takes this so ill from
Planeze, (who although he be his rival and competitor, yet being in a manner
but a stranger to him) that he cannot, he will not be outbraved by this
Mantovesse in any point of courage or valor, and therefore to prevent his
insulting and daring Generosity, and to give him a touch and taste of his own:
He the next morning by his laquey Romea sends him this challenge.

BORLARY to PLANEZE.
IN Regard thou could not content thy self to bereave me of the Lady
Felisanna, whose sweat beauty and virtues are by far more dear and precious
to me then my life, but that (with much ostentation and malice thou likewise,
make it thy Trophies and Glory, to offer her the sacrifice of my death, only
for the trivial respect of her Chambermaids hair; Therefore because thou
make so small an esteem of my life; My reputation invites, and mine honor
conjures me to see what care thou will have for the defense and preservation
of thine own. Towhich end, I pray thee to meet me to morrow (betwixt five and
six of the clock in the afternoon) with thy single rapier without seconds,
in the first meadow without the Vinsensa gate of this City, where I will attend
thy arrival, with much zeal and impatiency, Thou art Noble enongh to be so
generous, and I generous enough to try if thou will appear, and approve thy
self so Noble.

BORLARY.


The Lady Felisanna well knowing Romeo to be Borlari his laquey, and seeing him
deliver a letter to her lover Planeze, which s^areth to be some challeng, she
thereat (adorning and beautifying her lilly cheeks with a Roseat blush) prays
him to tell her what Borlari his letter contained; When (his own hohonour
getting the supremacy of his affection toward her) he tells her, that Borlari
therein only requested him, to meet him the next day in the Domo (which is the
Cathedral Church of that City dedicated to Saint Athanasius) the which he is
now going to grant him in his answer. But Felisanna, still jealous and
fearful) prays him to show her those two letters which he pleasantly puts
off with some kisses, and yet her blood and heart so freezeth within her with
fear, as she uses the best power of her Art, and the chiefest Art of her
affection, to conjure him not to fall out, muchlesse to fight with Borlary at
there meeting in the Church. Planeze tells her he is too religious to be so
profane, to distaine and pollute that sacred place with the effusion of
Christian blood, because it is the temple of prayer, the house of God, and
therefore every way fitter for a peaceful atonement and reconciliation, then
for a contentious quarrel, now (as the malice of men are finite, but of women
infinite) Felisanna seeing her Planeze going to write his letter revenge and
choler being then extravagantly predominant in her looks and resolutions,
she hastily steps down into a chamber next to the garden, where she sends for
Borlaries laquey Romea, and causes three of her grooms (whom she had
purposely placed there by force and violence to cut off his right ear; which
they presently do, notwithstanding that he used a thousand entreaties and
prayers to her to divert her from this her unworthy and malicious fact, and
then hastily departing from him, she spoke this to him: Tell thy Master
Borlari, that I have caused thine ear to be cut off, to requite the affront
and disgrace which he offered me in cutting off my chambermaid Radegondaes
hair.

Planeze, having secretly to himself read Borlari his challenge: He thinks
so honorably of himself, and so disgracefully of him, as he not a little
wondereth to see, that he has the courage to write to him, muchlesse the
resolution to fight with him; When grieving that he cannot now have the
felicity and honor to make trial of his valor to himself, and affection to
his mistress upon a more generous spirit, and nobler personage then Borlari, he
accepts his challenge, and in this answer promises him to meet him and
perform it, the which he honorably conceales from Felisannaes fear and
jealousy, and so sealing up his letter, he goes down to deliver it to
Borlary his Laquey, and resolves to dispeede and hasten his return, but
contrary to his expectation he finds this laquey Romeo bitterly storming and
weeping; and so demanding the cause thereof, he then and there by a Gentleman
his servant is first informed of the Laqueys disgrace, and of the manner
thereof as we have understood; Planeze is wonderfully grieved at this
disasterous accident, but love prescribes so powerful a law to his discretion,
as he is enforced to bear up with the time and so to dissemble it, and when in
the language of a victory and a triumph Felisanna acquaints him therewith; he
holds it discretion, rather to wink at it, and dissemble it with silence, then
to remember it with choler or reprehension toward her; So he to acquit his
ignorance, reputation and honor herein toward Borlari, calls his laquey
again, and vows and protests to him, as he is a Gentleman that he is free
from being any way knowing or accessory to this his disgrace and disaster, and
bids him to assure his Master from him that he is every way Innocent hereof,
the which he would have signified to him in writing, but that his letter was
sealed before he knew it, and so giving him some crowns to wash down his
anger and sorrow, he then takes leave of him.

Romeo says little but thinks the more, and as he disdaineth to bewray any
appearance of grief hereat, so he cannot cloak that of his choler, nor
overvaile or smother that of revenge, in their fatal effects, which time will
too soon produce.

Romeo in great haste and more choler, arrives to his master Borlaries
presence, gives him Planezes letter, who very speedily and hastily breaking up
the seals thereof finds therein these lines.

PLANEZE to BORLARY.
I Acknowledge it to be rather thy misfortune then my merits that induces the
fair and virtuous Lady Felisanna to give her affection to me, and not to thy
self, the which as a rich treasure and precious Jewel I do not only esteem
equal to my life, but a thousand degrees above it, and therefore it was with
much affection and zeal to her, and with no ostentation or malice to thy
self, that I tendered her my best service, to right her of the ignoble wrong
which thou did offer to her Chamber-maide Radegonde. In which regard, because
thou purposely give a sinister construction to my intent therein, and art so
ambitiously resolute to hazard thy honor and life in hope of the loss of
mine, I do therefore freely and cheerefullie accept of thy challenge, and my
impatience and zeal shall anticipate thine before I perform it, wherein if my
Rapier give not the lie to my blood, my misfortune to my Rapier, thou shall
find me enough noble and generous to attempt this duel for thy sake, and to
finish those of greater danger for the Lady Felisannas sake, who I freely
profess is the Empress of my affections, and till death shall be the Queen
Regent of my desires and wishes.

PLANEZES.


Borlari has no sooner perused and ore read this letter of Planeze, but
finding his challenge accepted, he is exceeding glad and Joyful thereof, as if
his glory consisted in his shame, and his safety in his danger: Then his laquey
Romeo acquaints him with his disgrace acted, says he, wholly by Dona
Felisanna and no way as he vows and thinks, by the consent or knowledge of
Planeze, and so relates all that he and she charged him to report unto him:
The which Borlari hearing and understanding, he extremely storms to see his
own affront and disgrace, offered and brought home unto him in that of his
Laquey: When having other affairs and business in his head, he contents
himself for that time to give him some gold, thereby the sooner to make him
forget the loss of his ear, which his locks better then his looks could now
overvaile and cover.

These two inconsiderate Gentlemen, (being infinitely more ambitious to
preserve their honors then their lives, and more careful of their reputations
toward the foolish people of the world, then of their souls toward God, are
now fitting of their Rapiers and Chirurgions, to dispatch this their rash
enterprise and irreligious business, and it is not the least part of Planezes
discretion and care to play the Mercury and now to blind the Argus eyes of
Felisannaes fear and vigilance, and how to see a beginning and end to this
duel, with his generosity and fame, that he be no way disturbed or prevented
by her in the performance thereof: The prefixed hour being come, Borlari (with
his Surgeon) as Challenger, comes first into the field, I mean into the
meadow, the designed place and theater where they intend to act this their
bloody Tragedy, and he has not stayed half a quarter of an hour, but
Planeze the Challenged arrives there likewise with his Surgeon: When there
malice is so furious, and their courages so inflamed each against other, as
passing over their saluting ceremonies without a ceremony, they putting
themselves into their shirts, do both of them draw, and so approach each
other. At their first coming up, Planeze runs Borlari through the left
thigh, and Borlari him in the right shoulder, and the sight of their scarlet
blood upon their white shirts does rather revive than quench their courages: At
their second meeting Borlari runs Planeze into the right arm of a large and
deep wound, and Planeze dies not in debt for it, but requites it with a
dangerous one in the small of his belly, which went near to prove mortal, for
it fetched much blood from him, made him to begin to faint and stagger, so
being both of them well near out of breath, they make a stand to breath and
take the benefit of the air, but their hearts and animosity are so great as
they will not as yet desist or leave off but now begin a fresh to redouble
their blows and courages, and here they traverse their ground to gain the
advantage of the Sun: with far more advisement and discretion then before.
Now at this their third coming up, Borlari presents Planeze a furious thrust,
but he very actively and nimbly wards it off him, and in exchange runs
Borlari into the neck, a little wide of his throat bole: whereat Planeze
instantly closing with him, he fairly attempted to whip up his heels, but
that Borlari his strength prevented Planezes agility: when each having the
other by the collar of their doublets with one hand, and their rapiers in the
other, as they are striving and struggling together, God (more out of his
gracious goodness and mercy, then of their desires and wishes) is pleased that
neither of them shall for this time dye. For the Earl of Lucerni riding poast
(with three gentlemen in his company) from Venice toward Turin, chanced to
epsy and see them in the meddow, almost all covered over with sweat, blood,
and dust, when he and they leaping from their Horses, he very honorably and
charitably runs to them and parts them; offering them his best power and a
pretty parcel of his time, to end and shut up their differences in a friendly
atonement and reconciliation, but so inveterate and strong (by this time) is
their malice each to other, as he found it no way feaseable but impossible to
effect it: So this brave and honorable Earl contents himself, to reconduct
and see them safe into the City, where privately leaving them to their future
fortunes, he again takes horse and away. Our two Duellists having first
thanked him for his noble Courtesy toward them, but otherwise they are
exceedingly grieved to see the victory pulled out of their hands, for the vanity
and impiety of either of them flattered and bounded their hopes with no less
ambition and felicity, then each their own life and either of them the death
of his adversary. But as they are grateful to the Earl of Lucerni for this
his honorable courtesy toward them; yet they are so irreligious as they
look not up to Heaven, nor once have the Grace to think of God, much less to
thank his divine Majesty, for now so mercifully and so graciously withdrawing
them as it were from out the very Jaws of death; but still they retain their
malice and cherish and foment their revenge each to other, especially Borlary
to Planeze, for it is a Continual private grief and a secret Corrasive to his
content and mind, to see that he is enforced to wear the willow Garland, and
that Planeze must bear away his fair and beautiful Mistres Felisanna from
him: But we will for a little time, leave them to their thoughts and their
thoughts to God, and so again speak of Romeo, the Laquey of Borlari, who as a
wretched and most execrable villane comes now to act a bloody and woeful part
in this History.

For we must here understand, that this lewd Laquey Romeo, is so extremely
incensed with Choler and enraged with malice against the Lady Felisanna for
the loss of his ear, as (being seduced and encouraged by the Devil) he was
once of the mind to have murdered her in the street, the very first time he
had met or seen her: but then again respecting his master Borlari, whom he
knew affected her tenderly and dearly, he forsook that opinion of his, and
resolved to wreake his wrath and indignation upon her-three servants who were
the Actors of cutting off his ear, as he was the Author thereof: But then
again remembering that he knew them not, nor any of them for that they were all
purposely masked and disguised, He then swaps a bargain with the devil, and
the devil with him, that the storm of this his malice and revenge should
assuredly fall on Radegonda her Chambermaid, from whom it originally proceeded,
and from this resolution he is so execrably profane and bloody, as he vows
that neither Heaven or Earth God or man shall divert him.

But as Envy cannot prove so pernicious an enemy to others as to her self, so
Revenge will in the end assuredly make us as miserable as first it fasly
promised to make us happy.

Romeo continues still resolute in his rage, and implacable in his revenge
toward Radegonda (and yet poor innocent harmless soul, she was not so
much as guilty of a badde thought, muchlesse of a bad action or office toward
him; and therefore least deserving this his revenge;) when waiting many Nights
for her, as she issued forth in the street in her Ladies errands, he at last
in a dark night found her, and there slew her with his rapier, giving her
four several wounds, whereof he might have spared the three last, because
the very first was mortal, and thereuppon betook himself to his heels and
fled through the streets, where the people flocked together at the report and
knowledge of this lamentable Murder, but God is so exasperated at this foul
and lamentable fact of his, as (in his Star Chamber of Heaven) he has
ordained and decreed that Romeo shall instantly receive condign punishment for
the same as not deserving to survive it, for running through the streets to
provide for his safety and life: He at last took the river of Addice, near
the old castle, where thinking to swim over to the other side, or to hide
himself in some of the mill-boates, he was discovered by the sentinells (for
the watch was already set) and the news of this murder was by this time
resounding and ecchoing in all parts of the City. The Soldiers of the Castle
suspected him to be the murderer, they send a boat after him and apprehend
him: so by the criminal Judges he is committed to prison for that night, and
being the next morning accused by Seignior Miniata by way of torture, and by
the Lady Felisanna his daughter by legal order for the murdering of her
Chambermaid Radegonda, he without any thought of fear, or show of sorrow or
repentance, freely confesses it, for the which he is presently condemned to
be hanged, and the same day after dinner he was accordingly dispatched and
executed, notwistanding that his master Borlari, used his best friends and
power, yea and proffered two hundred zechines to save him. Thus we see there
was but one poor night between Romeoes taking away of Radegondaes life, and
losing of his own, and between her murdering and his hanging; At his
execution he spoke not a word either of the loss of his ear by the Lady
Felisanna, or of that of Radegondaes hair by his master Borlari, whereat both
of them exceedingly rejoice and no less does Planeze: But for the other
speeches which this bloody footman delivered on the ladder at this execution
they were either so ungodly, or so impertinent, as the relation thereof no way
deserves my pen, or my Readers knowledge.

And here to leave the dead Servant Romeo, return we again to speak of his
living Master Borlari: who after he had spent much time and labor, and as I
may say ran his invention and wit out of breath, to seek to prevent that
Planeze might not marry the fair Felisanna, has notwithstanding, to his
matchless grief, and unseparable sorrow sees that it is al bootlesse and in
vain for by this time she through the importunity of her tears and prayers
has obtained her father Miniataes consent, to take and enjoy Seignior Planeze,
for her Husband: when to both their hearts delight and content, they are
solemnly married in Verona, and in that height of pomp and bravery as is
requisite to their noble rank and quality: When Planeze the more to please his
new wife leaves Mantova, and wholly builds up his residence in Verona with her
and in her father Miniataes house, who never hated him so much heretofore, as
now he deeply affects and loves him, and to say and write the truth, he well
deserved that affection of the father, and this love of the daughter: since the
luster and virtue of his actions made it apparent to all Verona, yea to all
Italy, that he proved a most kind and loving Husband to the one, and a most
obedient, and respective son in law to the other.

Now although Felisanna be thus married to Planeze, yet the affection of
Borlari to her, is still so far from fading or withring thereat, as it re^iveth
and flourishes at the sight of her pure and delicate beauty: for those golden
tresses of her hair, those splendant rays of her sparkling eyes, and
thosedelicious lilies and Roses of her cheeks do act such wonders in his
heart, and his heart in his resolutions: that his lust ecclipsing his
judgment, and outbraving his disdiscretion he cannot, he will not refrain, to
try if he can yet procure and get her to be his friend though not his wife;
and so futurely to obtain that courtesy from her by the eye, which formerly he
knew it impossible for him to get by the maine. To which end his affection or
rather his folly, giving no truce to his thoughts, nor peace to his mind,
because both the one and the other were still ranging and ruminating on
Felisannaes sweet Idea, and delitious feature, He enters into a consideration
and consultation with himself, whether he should bewray his amorous flame to
her by himself or by some other, or either by his pen or his tongue, when
after he had proposed and exchanged many poor reasons and trivial Motives
Pro and Con, he at last resolves on the last, which is to do it by letters,
when hying himself to his closet, he traceth her these lines, which by a
confident friend of his he forth with sends her.

BORLARY to FELISANNA.
I Will crave no other witness but thy self, of my fervent love and constant
affection to thee; for none can better testify, how I always made it my
chiefest Care and Ambition to make the dignity of my zeal answerable to that
of thy beauty; and that this might be as truly Immortal, as that is devinely
rare and rarely excellent, which to confirm. I have sealed it with some blood,
but with more tears, so that although thou have given thy affection from me
to Planeze, yet my heart and soul tells me it is impossible to give mine to
any but to the Lady Felisanna. And because thou can not be my wife,
therefore I pray be pleased to resolve to live my friend, as in requital I do
dye thy Servant. I confess I am not worthy of thy affection, much less to
enjoy the sweet fruit thereof, thy sweet self, yet because I cannot be more
thine then I am, therefore I pray thee make thy self as much mine as thou
may be. Thy heart shall not be a truer Secretary to our affections then my
tongue, and for the times and places of our meetings, I wholly refer it to
thy will and pleasure, which mine shall ever carefully attend, and religiously
obey, I send the my whole heart enclosed in this Letter, and if thou vouchsafe
to return me a piece of thine in exchange, Heaven may, but Earth cannnot
cross our affection.

BORLARY.


The Lady Flisanna receives this letter with much wonder, and ore reads it
with more Contempt and Choler, for if she disdained Borlari and his affection
when she was a maid, much more does she now when God and her Husband have made
her a wife: Once she was of opinion to have thrown this his Letter into the
fire, and have answered it with disdain and silence; But then again
considering the vainity of his thoughts, and the obscaenity of his desire^ ^hee
conceived he might (peradventure) repute her silence to a degree of consent:
and therefore though not in affection to him, yet in discretion and love to her
honor, she resolves to return him an answer, when knitting her brows with
anger, dipping her pen in gall and vinegar, and setting a sharp edge of
contempt and Choler on her resolutions, she hastily frame her Letter, and
gives it to his own Messenger to deliver it to Borlari, whose heart steering
his course betwixt hope and fear till he receive it: he first kissing it, and
then hastily breaking up the seals thereof, finds that it speaks this
language.

FELISANNA to BORLARY.
IF thou want any witnesses of thy folly, not of thy affection, thy obstinate
and vain perseverance herein, of one makes me capable to serve for many. And
if thou had been as truly careful and ambitious of thine own honor, as
thou fals^ pretendest to be of my poor beauty thou would not so often have
sacrificed thy shame to my glory, nor so sottishly have cast away thy blood or
tears on my contempt: How thou intendest to dispose of thy self, I neither
desire to know, nor care to understand. But as I have given my soul to God, so
God has given my heart to my husband Planeze, from whom neither the malice of
Satan or power of hell shall withdraw it, and therefore as I am Felisanna I
detest thy lustful suit, and as Planezes wife, I de^ie both it and thy self;
And thus to be thy friend thou shall find me thy friend, but for such
servants as thy self I leave them to their own proper Infamy and Repentance.
I make God the Secretary of my ^ctions, and my husband of my affections,
therefore it shall please me well when I understand that thy tongue will recant
thy folly, I repent thy indiscretion toward me, in seeking to erect the
Trophies of thy lascivious lust, upon the ruins of my pure and candid honor:
And I assure thee, that if hereafter thou inspire, and fortify not thy heart
with more religious, and less sinful desires and affections, that Earth can
and Heaven will make thee as truly miserable, as now thou falsely think thy
self fortunate.

FELISANNA.


Borlari at the reading of this Letter of Felisanna, is so galled with
griefeand netled with sorrow, to see his refusal sent him in her disdain, as
he knows not to what passion to betake himself for ease, or to what Saint for
comfort, for the consideration of her coyness and cruelty, makes his despair
to gain so much on his hopes, that once he was minded absolutely to forsake
her, and to court her affection no more, but then again his lustful heart and
desires, remembering the freshness of her beauty and the sweetness of her
youth, he held himself a coward, every way unworthy to enjoy so fair a Lady,
and so sweet an Angel, if he retired upon her first denial, especially
because as those Cities and Castles, so those Ladies and Gentlewomen who
entertain a pearl, are already half won. In which consideration because it
many times proves an error in Nature; but still in judgment, to flatter our
selves most, with that which we most hope for and desire, He therefore once
more resolves to hazard another letter to her, as having some reasons to
believe, that his second may perchance obtain that from her which his first
could not, for that he knows that most ladies and gentlewomen pride themselves
with this felicity to be often sought and importunately sued unto by their
lovers, wherefore resolving once more to try his fortune, and her courtesy, he
by his former messenger greets her with these lines.

BORLARY to FELISANNA.
THy sweet and excellent beauty has enkindled so fervent a flame in my heart,
that thy late disrespect and contempt of me in thy Letter, is not sufficiently
prevalent to make me, or so soon or so slightly forsake thee. For although
thou term my love folly, and my affection obstinacy, yet until thou cease to
be fair, find it ^t strange, if it be impossible for me to cease to be
affectionate: Neither do I sacrifice my shame to thy Glory, or cast away my
tears on thy contempt, since I perform it more out of duty then complement,
and rather out of true zeal then false hypocrisy. And as the strongest Cities
and Castles by the rule of war, so the fairest beauties, by that of love,
deserve to be honored with more then one assault and siege; and that Cavilleir
cannot justly, be termed, either a Gentleman, a Soldier, or a Lover, who will
resolve to be put off with the first repulse, especially from so sweet, and so
beautiful an Enemy as thy self: Neither can it any way breed infamy or
repentance in me to be servant to so dear, and slave to so fair a Mistress,
because the excellency of thy beauty is every way capable both to confound
sense, and to subvert and overthrow Reason. Be then but as courteous as thou
art fair, and as kind as I am constant, and thou shall find that I only
desire to erect the Trophies of mine Honor and Glory upon those of thy
content, to sacrifice my best life at the shrine and altar of thy beauty, and
to devote and prostrate my best zeal and service to the feet of thy Commands,
which if thou please to grant me: Earth will not make me miserable but Heaven
fortunate.

BORLARY.


The Lady Felisanna having received and oreread this second Letter of Borlari,
as one way she laughes to see the constancy of his folly, and indiscretion, so
another way she storms, and yet grieves to see her self to be both the
object and the cause thereof: When returning to the party who brought it her,
she thinks, to vent part of her choler on him, taxes his audacity and
rashness herein, and strictly conjures him to bring her no more of Borlari his
Letters: yea, she is so far transported with passion and choler against
Borlari for sending them to her, as now she resolves to answer this w^
silence, and hence forth to burn all other which are sent or brought to her
from him, because if his folly make him culpable of sending, she will not
futurely make herself guilty of receiving any more. But here again, her
thoughts are taken up with fear, and her heart surprised with resolution and
doubt, whether (yea or no) she should show these his two letters to her
Husband: For her affection is so tender, so faithful, so constant to him;
because she likewise knows that his is reciprocally so to her, that she will
rather displease her self, then any way discontent him, or administer him the
least cause whatsoever, to run the hazard of his displeasure or indignation,
for as by concealing them from his knowledge, she knows this business will be
for ever hushed up in silence, and perpetually buried in oblivion; So
contrariwise if either through Borlarie his malice to her, or indiscretion to
himself, it should any way come to her Husbands ear, then she thinks she
should give him a just cause of exception and offense against her; Wherein if
the subtilty of the Devil should once put his foot, or the malice of any of
his members, their tongues or fingers, then his jealousy might call her Honor
and Fidelity in question, and make him suspect and fear her to be dishonest,
though heretofore (in heart and soul) he confidently knows and believes the
contrary, she farther knows that there is nothing so easy as to entertain
jealousy, nor so difficult as to expel it, and therefore that it is not
enough for us to prevent a scandal, but likewise to remove the original cause
thereof, feign she would conceal these foolish letters of Borlari from her
husband, but yet she doubts it, and willing she is to accquaint him there with
and yet she fears it: And although her chastity, and innocence persuade her to
perform the last, yet her discretion and judgment encourage and prompt her to
execute the second: And here our Beautiful and Virtuous young Wife is
perplexed as a traveller, who meets with two different ways and knows not
which is the best for him to take; and her heart and thoughts here in this
accident) is as a ship at sea at one time surprised and met with two contrary
winds and tides; for preferring her honor to her life, and her affection to
her husband, and his to her before any other earthly respect or felicity
whatsoever; she in the intricacy and ambiguity of these doubts, wishes that
Borlari had slept when he writ and sent her those Letters, or she when she
received and read them. But at last consulting with Reason and Religion, with
her Soul and God, then her chastity gives a commanding law to her fear, and
her innocence to her doubt, so first hoping and then praying that nothing
herein might breed bad blood in her husband, or disturb the tranquillity and
sincerity of her marriage; she watching a fit opportunity shows her husband
the first letter of Borlari to her with her answer thereof, and then his second
letter, the which she informs him she answered with silence and contempt,
adding withal: That had she a thousand lives as she has but one, she would
cheerfully sacrifice and lose them all, before she would be guilty of the
least thought to distaine the honor of his bed, or to break her sacred vow of
Love and Chastity, which in presence of God and his Church, she religiously
made and gave him in marriage.

Planeze at the hearing of these speeches and the reading of these Letters,
does at one instant both blush and pale, for as he looks pale with Envy
toward Borlari, to see how secretly and subtly he endeavors to ruin his
honor in that of his wifes; so he blusheth for love toward her, to see how
sweetly and chastely she had demeaned her self in her answer to him, as also
what a wise and loving part it was in her so punctually and fully to acquaint
him therewith; when in requital hereof he gives her many praises and kisses,
extols her chastity and virtues to the sky, and condemns Borlarie his lustful
vices to Hell, and although (for the present) she find some incongruity in
his speeches, and observe some per^bation in his looks, yet he makes his
affection so apparent to her, and dissembleth his hatred and choler toward
Borlari so secretly and artificially: That his wife Felisanna wholly reposing
herself upon her own integrity, and her husbands discretion, she (sweet
innocent Lady) little dreams or thinks of any disaster which will ensue
hereof, muchlesse what dismal effects threaten to proceed from this
inconsiderate act of hers, in acquainting her Husband with those Letters. But
she will have time enough to see it to her grief and know it to her sorrow,
yea she will find occasions enough to repent, but never any means how to
remedy it except it be too late, and which then will merely prove physic
after death.

Planeze (as we have formerly understood) is extremely incensed against
Borlary thus to attempt to bereave him of his sweetest Joy, which is his wifes
affection, and she of her most precious Jewel her chastity: And although
(both in reason and religion) he had far more cause to rejoice then to grieve
at this accident, in regard he was both assured and confident that his wifes
chastity triumphed ore Borlaries lust, and her glory was apparent in his shame,
for as objects so actions being best distinguished by their contraries,
therefore through the obscure clouds of Borlari his obscaene concupiscence,
that of Felis^as Angelical chastity, as a bright relucent Sun, shined forth
most radi^tly and sweetly with far more vigor and glory, yet Planeze being a
man composed of corrupt flesh and blood, and therefore subject to passions, and
those passions to errors and imperfections, So he takes a course and
resolution herein contrary to all Judgment and to all reason, yea
diametrically opposite to the rules of Nature and precepts of Grace. For
although his heart be upright in the opinion of his wifes chastity and honor,
yet as the dearest and purest affections cannot be exempted of some shadow or
spice of fear, so although his heart looked directly on Borlari with malice,
he cannot possibly ^aine nor retain his thoughts, from glancing squint-eyed
on his wife with ^lousie. And although he knows it to be a most ignoble
ingratitude, and irreligious impiety in him thus to call her honor in question
on (in the best ^ce) to revoke it to doubt, by making any puplike show of
suspicion or (...) to her, or by seeking any private revenge on Borlari, yet
because her beauty and virtue is a thousand times deerer to him then his life;
and the pu^ty and integrity of her affection to him as dear as his soul: He
therefore thinks she shall not profane his good opinion of her, no^ offer her
merits (...) his own reputation any wrong, if he resolve to right both her,
and himself on Borlari when consulting not with reason or charity, but with
their opposites malice and revenge, he will not be at peace with his heart,
nor at ^ce with his thoughts before he have fought with Borlari, albeit
(indeed) his ^lict and offense toward him, more deserved his scorn then his
Care, and was every way far more worthy of his oblivion then of his
remembrance. To which end (by a Surgeon which he had made choice of) he
sends him this challenge.

PLANEZE to BORLARY.
THy crime is so foul, and so apparent to me, in seeking by thy two
lascivious Letters to distaine my honor in that of my wifes chastity, as
nothing but thy life is capable to expiate it, or (...) to desace and forget
it; wherefore if thou have (...) much courage (...) thou want grace, bring
thy self, thy ^upier, and thy Surgeon with thee, to morrow at six a clock
in the morning, in the City Ditch, without the utter Gate, which looks toward
Brescia, and there my self and my Surgeon (who is the bearer hereof, will
silently and honorably wait for thee. And if thy obscene heart retain yet any
spark of generosity, or thy vicious brain of judgment, thou will resolve to
perform this my request, and to excuse my resolution herein, since it is wholly
derived from thy lasciviousness, and receives its life and birth from thy
treachery.

PLANEZE.


Borlary receiving and perusing this Challenge of Planeze, he is much grieved
and sorrowful, to see that Felisanna had so little discretion for her felfe,
and so much hatred against him, to show her husband these his Letters, and
except she meant to make her self the present author, and the cause of her
future affliction and misery, he knows not else what she intends hereby. But
for Planeze his spleen and resolution against him, Borla^y knows it to be
both just and well grounded in the best sense, and in the worst to be yet a
requital of that Challenge and Duel which he formerly sent and presented him:
Only he does a little admire (if not wonder) that he should now again make
trial of his valor and courage, whereof he so lately had experience, and
tasted. And although he had far more reason to rest assured than doubtful,
that this second Duel of theirs would not prove so fortunate as their first,
but would rather terminate in one, if not in both of their lives. He yet loves
Felisanna so dearly, albeit she hate him extremely, that he will by no means
refuse to fight with her husband once again for her sake, yea and to kill him
for his own, if possible he can, the devil making him strong in the vanity
of this belief and confidence; that if it prove now his good fortune to kill
Plan^, that he can then requite and limit his victory with the reward of no
less happiness and felicity, by his death to obtain his widow for his own
wife. But this is to write upon the water, and to build Castles of vain hopes
in the air, which the least breath of Gods mouth, or wind of his nostrils will
easily reverse and blow away. For this is to consult and resolve with Satan and
not with God; and therefore no marvel if he see his lascivious desires to come
too short of his ridiculous hopes, and both his hopes and desires herein to end
in as much true misery, as they began in false hope of felicity and joy.

So Borlari having made a turn or two in his Garden to resolve upon this
business which so much imported both his honor and life: He at last with joy
in his looks, and courage in his countenance turns to Planeze his Chirurg^on,
whom after he used respectfully and courteously, he secretly rounds him thus
in his ear; Tell Seignior Planeze from me, that I will not fail to meet him
to morrow morning according to his request and expectation, and so he
dismisseth him, who as soon returns this answer of Borlari to Planeze, whom
he now finds staying for him in the Church of the Augustine Friars, but God
knows with no intent or devotion to pray, or to invoke his Divine and Sacred
Majesty to divert him from this his intended bloody enterprise, but rather to
reconduct home the Lady Felisanna his wife, who harmless sweet Gentlewoman was
there in that Church, upon the Altar of her heart, proffering up the most
religious prayers, and zealous Orisons of her soul unto God, without once
surmising or thinking what a mournful and dangerous part her husband was
resolved to act the next morning, to the prejudice of her content, if not to
the utter dissolution and ruin of her Matrimonial joy and felicity. But her
husband Planeze bears this business, and these his intentions so secretly
from his wife, as it was impossible for her to have any suspicion, much less
knowledge of this his next days intended Duel.

The night which brings rest to others, has not power to give it to our two
inflamed Duelists. For the consideration of their honors and their lives, of
their quarrel, and the cause thereof, does equally possess their brains, and
pre-occupate and prevent their eyes of their sleeping faculties. So preferring
their danger to their safety, their resolution to their rest, and the field to
their beds, they (under other pretexts) are not long from it, I mean from the
City ditch, the prefixed place of their rendezvous: Which Planeze first
enters, and there makes half a dozen of turns, before he have any news of
his Contendant or Adversary Borlary, whereof he does not a little muse, yet he
no way despaires of his coming, because (by late experience) he knows him to
be courageous and valiant. But to put Planezes musing out of doubt, and his
doubt out of question, in comes Borlari all unbraced and untrussed, and a far
off espying Planeze in the Ditch before him: He (ashamed of this advantage he
had because of long stay) with his hat in his hand prays him to excuse this
error of his, affirmi^g it to be the fault of his Watch, but not of his heart,
which he alleged should ever go true with his honor and reputation; When
Planeze returning his Complement, by approving of his Apology, (without any
further expostulation) they draw, and here fall from words to blows.

At their first meeting Borlary give Planeze a wound in the right arm, and
Planeze requites him with another in his right side, which if his Rapier had
not met with a rib, it had the undoubtedly ended the quarrel with his life.
But although it make him lose much blood, yet he has strength and courage
enough not to die in his debt for it, only he desires Planeze that they may
breathe a little, the which he generously grants. At their second coming up,
Planeze presents a thrust to Borlari, but he wards it, and runs Planeze into
his left thigh, of a deep wound, and yet they will not give over, although
their Chi^geons do earnestly pray them to desist, as having now already here
sufficiently testified their courage and valor. At their third meeting and
joining, Planeze gives Borlary a lick over the forehead, which makes his
blood stream ^wne his face and eyes, and Borlary fully incensed and prepared
to requite it, ^ves a fair thrust to Planezes breast, but he very dexterously
and fortunately wards it, beating down the point of Borlary his sword into the
ground, and then with much agility leaps to him, and whips up his heels, who
falling upon his own Rapier, breaks it in two pieces, at which unlooked for
disaster, Borlary seeing his naked breast exposed to Planezes bloody Rapier, and
consequently his life to lie at his mercy, (without once striving or
endeavoring to grapple with his enemy) he (more desirous to live with shame,
than to die with honor) descends so far from true and noble generosity, as
he begs his life of Planeze; when (although many hot and jealous spirits would
gladly have taken hold of this advantage, and wreaked the utmost of their gall
and spleen upon the misfortune of this accident) yet Planeze is so truly noble
and generous, as disdaining to fight with an unarmed man, and so to eclipse or
blemish the luster of his reputation in killing him who begged his life of him,
and when it lay at his pleasure to give or take it, as he throws away his
Rapier, making him promise and swear he will never henceforth attempt against
the honor of his wife, Planeze very freely and cheerfully gives him his life:
And to show himself the more generous in this his courtesy, he lends him his
hand to raise him up on his feet; for which infinite kindness Borlary yields
him many thanks: When muffling up their faces with their cloaks, they part very
good friends, and so get themselves into two of the nearest houses of the
Suburbs, very secretly and silently to dress their wounds, and at night they
return to their houses: Where our dear and fair Felisanna understanding the
manner and cause of this combat betwixt her husband and Borlary, it is
impossible for me to define whether she wept and sighed more for the loss of
her husbands blood, or rejoiced and praised God for the saving and sparing of
his life.

Yet this Combat of theirs is not so secretly acted, but in less than two
days all Verona has news, and prattles thereof. When measuring the first
Duel of Planeze and Borlari by the second, and the second by the first. They
extol Borlary his courage to fight with Planeze, but infinitely applaud the
noble courtesy and generosity of Planeze, in giving Borlari his life when it
lay in his power and pleasure to have taken it from him. And as most commended
the Lady Felisanna for disdaining to make shipwreck of her honor on the Cylla
and Charibdis of Borlaries lust, and for not sacrificing her chastity to his
lascivious affections and desires; So, in general all Gentlemen and Ladies
condemn her of indiscretion in showing his Letters to her husband, and in
acquainting him with his suits and desires, it having been sufficient for her
secretly to have given him the repulse and denial, and herself the glory.
Again, there want not diverse, especially the younger sort of the Nobility and
Gentry of Verona, who tax Borlari of Cowardice, in shamefully begging his life
of Planeze, when either his good fortune in struggling, or his piece of sword
in his defense, might peradventure have preserved it. Thus every one speaks
according to his own fancies and affections.

Borlary having lost so much blood for the affection which he bore to
Felisanna, and recived and reaped nothing from her but disdain and hatred, he
is not a little grieved and vexed hereat. But when he understands that he has
now made himself the laughture of all Verona, in this his cowardly begging his
life of Planeze, and that his reputation does therefore universally suffer in
this action, he is then as it were pierced to the heart with sorrow, and to the
soul with shame. He knows it were far better for him to be borne a Clown,
than to be held and esteemed a Coward; and that having once purchased that base
title, he shall difficultly ever lose. Yea, wheresoever he goes he hears and
sees that his Superiors, his Equals, and his Inferiors, not only prattle at
his shame, but point at his infamy herein, so that he is (in a manner) a shame
to all Gentlemen, and therefore almost a shame to himself. But see here the
vanity and impiety of this inconsiderate Gentleman, and if it be not worthy
the Readers curiosities, yet it will deserve his compassion and pity, to see
what use, or rather what abuse he makes of this his imaginary dishonor: For
neither with reason, which is the soul of his heart, nor with Religion which
is the life of his soul, does he once look up to Heaven to thank God for so
mercifully protecting, and so miraculously preserving of his life in these two
Duels, when he as it were stood on the brinke, and in the very jaws ofdeath
and when betwixt his life and his death there was nothing but the point of
Planezes Rapier, and of his pleasure. No, no, Borlary is too much a man, to be
so much a Christian, and too much the member of Satan, to be so much the
child of God: For having formerly given up his heart to the turpitude of
lascivious desires and lust; now as a limb and agent of the devil he will
wholly abandon it to infernal rage and hellish revenge, sor knowing Planeze to
be both the author and object of his dishonor, and the instrument and cause of
his disgrace, he therefore retains this diabolical and bloody Aphorism in
his heart, that as long as he lives it will live with him, and when he dies
will die with him, and therefore to refetch his honor out of his infamy, his
heart wholly sacrificing to malice, and his thoughts and resolutions to
revenge) he most ingratefully and desperately resolves to murder Planeze, or
at least to cause him to be murdered. Lo here the woeful estate, and wretched
resolution of this execrable Gentleman Borlari, and what a monstrous
ingratitude and prodigious cruelty is this in him to conspire his death, of
whom (in a manner) he but rightly now received his life, he little knows, or
(which is worse) he will not know, that revenge still proves as pernicious as
pleasing to their authors, and that murder ends in as much true misery as it
begins in false content and Joy; for it is a better Oblation, and an odious
sacrifice to the Lord, who is the God of peace, and the father of all unity and
charity.

But the devil is so familiar a guest, and so frequent a counselor to Borlari
that he wretchedly vows and execrably swears that Planeze shall no longer
live but dye. Once he was of opinion either to pistol or poniard him in the
street by night, but then again seeing the eminency of that danger in the
misfortune of his Laquey Romeo, he rejects it as ruinous, and resolves on
poison which he thinks is the shortest, and safest way for him to send him
for Heaven, and thinks none so fit for his purpose to give and administer it
to him as Planezes own Apothecary Castruchio, being the more confident in this
his choice, because he knows him to be a wonderful poor man, and withal
extremely vicious and debaushed, as neither fearing nor caring for God, but
more an Atheist than a Christian, and more a devil then a catholic, and
therefore believes that a little money will act wonders in his heart and
resolution; Neither does he fail in his judgment, or deceive himself in the
hopes of his choice, for he no sooner proffereth him three hundred Dukatons, to
poison Planeze (one half in hand, and the other when it is performed) but he
accepts thereof, ingageth himself (by hand and oath) speedily to dispatch and
finish it, and so like two Factors or furies of Hell, both of them swear
secrecy each to other herein.

Borlary longing and Castruchio desiring to finish this Tragedy on Planeze that
he might likewise touch the last one hundred and fifty Dukatons. The Spring
approaching wherein Planeze everyyeare for the preservation of his health) was
accustomed to take physic of Castruchio, he no sooner sent for him to that
effect, but first purging, then bleeding him, he then artificially persuades
him to take a vomit the next morning, whereunto Planeze easily consents, so he
administreth it to him and therein infusing poison, he within six days after
dies thereof, when Castruchio demanding his other one hundred and fifty
dukatons, Borlari speedily paies it him with much content, joy, and
delectation: But let the first know and the second remember, that it is the
price of ^nocent blood.

The order of our History leads us now (as it were by the hand) to our
sor^owfull young widow Felisanna who poor soul (not dreaming any way in ^he
world either of poison or of Borlari) is ready to weep her self to death,
that she must survive and cannot dye with her dear and sweet husband Planeze,
and that as one bed, so one grave might contain them, yea her grief is so
great and her sorrows so infinite for the loss of this her other part of her
self, that neither her father, kinsfolks, or friends can possibly comfort
her, for still she fees him before her eyes as if he were not buried in his
grave, but in her heart, or that it was wholly impossible for him to dye as
long as she lived: Which excess of sorrows, sighs, and tears of hers, so
withered the roses and lillies of her beauty and so ecclipsed the luster of her
sparkling eyes, that to the eyes and judgments of all those who saw or knew
her, she become so pale and lean, as she was no longer Felissanna, but only
the poor sick Anatomy of Felisanna.

We have seen this wretched Gentleman Borlari, and this execrable Apothecary
Castruchio commit this horrible murder upon the person of noble and Generous
Planeze, and we shall not go far before we shall see the sacred Justice,
and just punishments of God to surprise and oretake them for the same, For God
is now resolved to triumph ore those bloody miscreants, and although they have
so closely acted and perpetrated this their lamentable murder as their are no
earthly eyes to detect nor witness to give in evidence against them for the
same: yet our good and gracious God, who who is the true searcher of our hearts
and reins, will to his glory and their confusion bring this to light, by an
accident worthy of our deepest consideration, and of our most serious and
religious observation: The manner whereof is thus.

This wretched Apothecary Castruchio, having received his other hundred
dukatons of Borlari (as we have formerly understood) for minishing this bloody
business, and being (as we know) of a most vicious and debaushed life, he
had already in his riots and prodigalities spent and consumed all his estate:
And now this three hundred Dukatons which received of Borlari for performing
this bloody business, makes him by many degrees far worse then he was
before, for (as by Gods sacred and secret providence) it was impossible to
prosper with him, so his profane vices and sins and his beastly pleasures
and prodigalities made it consume and melt away as snow against the Sun, in
such sort that it seemed to him that he was a thief to himself and that one
of his hands and pockets hourly cozened and betrayed the other; And although
for a time he bore this his vicious course of life very close and secret from
the eye and knowledge of the world, whereby his credit far exceeded his
estate, soafter the committing of this foul murder, both his Estate, credit,
and all went to wrack and spoil, for he left nothing either unspent or
unpawned, and which is yet worse he fell into many arrerages and debts which at
last grew so clamorous (especially when his prodigal and and beastly life of
whoring, drunkenness, and dicing, came to be divulged and spread to the world;
that by three of his greatest creditors he is arrested and clapped into prison,
and his shop seized on by them, which they find as empty of drugges, as his
masters heart was of pity and his soul of piety: And as it is the nature and
(or rather the misery) of prisons that where one man virtuously improves his
life and actions their, a hundred do vitiously ruin themselves, so Castruchio
being one of this last number, he there wastes and consumes all that he has,
or which he can possibly procure, and in a few week reduces himself to so
extreme poverty and beggary, that he is clapped into the common goal among the
poorest sort of prisoners who live by the alm^ and charity of well disposed
people, his clothes being all tottered and torn^ having no bed to lie on nor
hardly bread to suffice nature, or to maintain life being abandoned of all his
friends and acquaintance, who will rather see him starve and dye then relieve
him: And yet in all these extremities, and at the very lowest ebb of these his
wants and miseries, he will yet neither look down into his Conscience,
heart, and soul with sorrow, nor up to heaven or to God with repentance for
all his foul sins and vices, especially not for this his cruel and
lamentable poisoning of Planeze, which are the true reasons and the efficient
causes of these his miserable calamities and afflictions, yea his wants and
miseries are so great and infinite here in prison, that none whosoever will
come thither to see him, muchlesse to pity him, and least of all to relieve
him. Only Dorilla (a filthy old baud of his) more out of importunacy to her,
then of her courtesy or charity to him, although she disdain to go herself
into prison to see Castruchio, yet she is contented sometimes to send him her
son Bernardo, a boy of some sixteen years of age to go his errands, so his
necessity making his invention pregnant and clear sighted, after he had tired
all his friends and acquaintance with notes and Letters, which return still
empty fisted, his memory at the last falls and pitcheth on Borlari, who (for
the bloody reason formerly mentioned) he thinks the only fit man of the
world to redress his wants, and to releave his weather beaten fortunes, and to
him he often sends Bernardo with many pitiful requests and entreaties for
money, but to write him he dares not.

Borlari considering that he has far more cause and reason to love
Castruchio then to hate him for that (by virtue of the premises) he sees his
own life to lie at the mercy of his tongue, although he rather wish him in
Heaven then in prison, yet being extremely covetous, and yet holding himself
both inconscience and discretion bound to relieve him; he therefore sends him
some small sums of money, but no way enough to buy him clothes, or to
maintain his former prodigalities, but rather hardly sufficient to maintain
life in him, much less to cherish or pamper him. And so often does Castruchio
send the boy Bernardo to Borlari for money, that at last being weary thereof,
and resolute to depart with no more money, (God here makes his covetousness
partly the means to chaulke out a way to his own confusion) and is resolved
neither to speak nor to see Bernardo, and to that effect gives order to his
servants: When little Bernardo seeing that he wears out his time, and his
shoes in vain to hunt after Borlari, whom he knows will not be spoken with
by him, he tells Castruchio that he provide himself of another messenger
toward Borlari for he will go no more to him, because he sees it is wholly
impossible for him to speak with him: and at this discourtesie of Borlari,
Castruchio does now bite his lip with discontent and hung his head for anger,
and from henceforth he begins to assume badbloud, and to conceive dangerous
thoug^ against him, but as yet the consideration of his own safety or danger
makes him patient and silent; But God will not have him to continue so long,
for almost presently we shall see his patience burst forth into violence and
impetuosity, and his silence break out into extreme choler and indignation
against him.

His old Baud Dorilla, (as an expert Hag of her sinful profession) as often
as she hears or knows that Castruchio had any money from Borlari so often she
would come to the prison to him, and speedily carouse and consume it with him,
but when by her son Bernardo she sees his purse shut, that fountain
exhausted, and that her boy could no more see Borlari but a wod den face, I
mean his door shut, then she (resembling her self) again forsakes
Castruchio, and will neither see him nor come near his prison, so that at last
he not seeing Bernardo nor once hearing from Borlari in three weeks or well
near a month together and being ready to perish, starve and dye under the
heavy burden and pressure of his wants, he earnestly sends for Dorilla to
come to him, and causes her to be informed, that if she will come to him and
deliver a letter to a friend of his, he will speedily send him some store of
money, and then she shall have a share and part thereof, so when no other
respect or consideration will, then this of money again brings this old filthy
Beldam Dorilla to the prison to Castruchio, who having provided her a bottle of
wine, and five Gazettaes to drink by the way (thereby the more carefully to
effect his business he exceedingly incensed with choler and revenge against
Borlari for this ingratitude toward him) writes him this angry Letter and
deeply charge Dorilla with speed, care, and secrecy to deliver it into
Borlari his own hands and to no other, which Letter of his spoke this language.

CASTRVCHIO to BORLARY.
THou know that for three hundred Dukatons which thou gave me, I poisoned
Seignior Planeze in a Vomit, and will thou now be so hard and cruel hearted
against me to suffer me to dye in prison for want of so small a sum as twenty
Dukatons. I am made of the same flesh and blood as thou art, and although my
fortunes be so low plunged yet my heart is so high seated and elevated, that I
give thee to understand I will rather consent to be hanged then starved:
Wherefore because my Tragedy will infallibly prove thine, if thou mean to
prevent the one, and to secure thy self from the other, fail not speedily to
send me the said twenty Dukatons by this bearer Dorilla, whom I have entrusted
with my letter fast sealed (and so may thou with thine (but for the secret
therein (which thou wotest of) she is wholly ignorant of it: In performing me
this courtesy thou shall not only tie my tongue and pen but my heart and
soul to silence, or else not: Amiddest thy wealth remember my poverty, which
if thou forget, God has reserved me to make thee know that thou do not
use, but abuse it, and therein thy self.

CASTRVCHIO.


Dorilla receiving this Letter from Castruchio, she puts it into her purse and
promises him her best care and fidelity for the delivery thereof to Seignior
Borlari although she confesses that she neither knew him nor his house: But
see here the providence and mercy of God which clearly resplends and shines in
the deportment and action of this beastly old bawd, for she meeting with some
of her gamesters and gossips in the street (though contrary to the custom of
Italy) away they go to a tavern, where they all swill their head and brains
with wine especially Dorilla: So the day being far spent, her business for
Castruchio is ended ere begun; for she forgetting her self cannot remember
his letter, but as fast as her reeling legs will permit her, away she
speedes toward her own house, which was some half a mile off in the City.
But when she was in the streets and had a little taken the air, then she calls
Castruchios letter to mind, and her promise to him to deliver it, but to whom
(through her cups) she has quite forgotten; for she cannot once hi^ on the
name Borlari. But at last remembering the letter to be in her purse and she by
this time in the midst of the City, she takes it out in her hand, and seeing a
fair yet sorrowful young Lady to stand at the street door of her house all
in mourning attire and no body near her, after she had done her duty to her,
she reaches her the letter and humbly requesteth her to tell her the
Gentleman's name to whom it was directed, when (God out of the profundity of his
power and immensity of his pleasure having so ordained and ordered it, that
this fair young Lady was our sweet Felisanna (who for the death of her dear
husband Planeze had dighted her self al in mourning attire and apparel thereby
the better to make it correspond with her heart: who reading the superscription
thereof and finding it directed to Seignior Borlari (by some motion or
inspiration from heaven) her heart could not refrain from sending all the
bloudof her body into her face, when demanding of this woman from whom this
letter came: Dorilla (as drunk in her fidelity and innocence as she was
guilty of her drunkenness) tells her that the letter came from an Apothecary
who lay in prison named Castruchio: At the very repetition of which name, our
Felisanna again blusheth and then palleth, as if God had some news to reveal
her by this Letter, because she remembers that this Castruchio as we have
formerly understood, was the very same Apothecary who gave her husband Planeze
physic a little before his death; Whereupon she praying Dorilla to come with
her into her house because she purposly and politikely affirmed she could not
read written hand herself but would pray her father to do it, she leaves her
in the utter hall and herself goes into the next room, where breaking up the
seals of this letter, she at the very first sight and knowledge that her
husband was poisoned and by whom, and that God had now miraculously revealed it
to her through the ignorance and drunkenness of this old woman, she for mere
grief and sorrow is ready to fall to the ground in a swoone had not her father
and some of his servants who over hearing her passionate outcries) come
speedily to her assistance: which yet could not awake Dorilla, who had no
sooner sat her self down in a chair in the hall but being top heavy with
wine she presently fell a sleep. Miniata rousing up his fainting and
sorrowful daughter, brought her again to herself; and seeing her in a bitter
agony and passion of sorrow, demands of her the cause thereof: when the
brinish tears trickling down her virmilion cheeks, she crossing her arms
and fixing her eyes toward heaven, had the will but not the power to speak a
word to him but reaches him the Letter to read, Miniata perusing it, is as
much astonished with grief as his daughter is afflicted with sorrow at this
poisoning of her Husband and his son in Law Planeze: so enquiring of her who
brought her this letter, she after many sighs and pauses tells him, that it was
the mercy and providence of the Lord who sent it her by a drunken woman who was
forth in the Hall: They both go to her and finding her fast sleeping and
snoring, Miniata pulls her by the sleeve and wakes her, and then demands of her,
before his daughter and servants where and from whom she had this letter: who
as drunk as this Baud is, she is constant in her first speech and confession
to Felisanna that she had it from Castruchio an Apothecary who lay in prison,
but she had forgotten to whom she was to deliver it, and then prays them both
to deliver and give her back her letter again. But Miniata seeing and knowing
that it was the immediate finger of God which thus strangely had revealed this
murder of his son in Law Planeze, he calls in two Gentlewomen his next
neighbors to comfort his daughter Felisanna, and so leaving Dorilla to the
guard of two of his servants, he (with two other Gentlemen his neighbors)
takes his Coach, and having Castruchio's Letter in his hand, he drives away to
the State-house, where he finds out the Podestate and Prefect of the City,
and showing them the Letter which revealed the poisoning and poysoners of
Planeze his son in Law, they (in honor to justice, and out of their respect
to the sorrowful Lady his daughter) take their Coaches, and return with
Miniata home to his house: Where they first examine Felisanna, and then
Dorilla, who is constant in her first deposition. Whereat these grave and
honorable Personages, wondering and admiring that a Gentleman of Barlari his
rank and quality, should make himself the guilty and bloody Author of so
foul a Murder, they likewise admiring and blessing Gods providence in the
detection thereof) do presently send away their Isbieres (or Sergeants) to
apprehend Borlari, and so they go to their Forum (or seat of Justice) and
speedily send away for Castruchio to be brought from the prison before them:
Who at the very first news of their accusation of him, and the producing of
his Letter to Borlari, he curses the person and name of this old Bawd Dorilla,
who is the prime Author of his overthrow and death, and then confesses
himself to be the Actor, and Seignior Borlari to be the Author, cause, and
Instigator of this his poisoning of Planeze; but never puts his hand on his
conscience and soul, that the strange detection of this lamentable murder
came directly from Heaven, and from God.

The Sergeants (by order from the Podestate and Prefect) find Borlari in his
own house, ruffling in a new rich suit of apparel, of black Satin, trimmed
with gold buttons, which he that day put on, and the next was determined to
ride to the City of Bergamo, to seek in marriage a very rich young widow,
whose Husband lately died, drowning himself (as it were) in pleasure and
security, without so much as once thinking of his poisoning of Planeze, or how
he was revealed to be the Author thereof by Castruchio his Letter, sent unto
him by Dorilla; He is amazed and astonished at this his apprehension, now
beating his breast, and then repenting (when it was too late) that ever he
embrewed his hands in the innocent blood of Planeze. So both himself and
Castruchio are brought to the State house, where the Podestate and Prefect
first examine them a part, and then confront them each with other. Where
finding that neither of them deny, but both of them to confess themselves
guilty of this foul murder, they pronounce sentence of death against them,
and condemn Borlary to have his head cut off, and then his body to be burnt;
and Castruchio to be hanged, and his body to be thrown into the River of
Addice, whereon he was first taken, the which the next morning was accordingly
executed. All Verona is as it were but one tongue to talk and prattle of this
foul and lamentable murder, and especially of Gods miraculous detection
thereof by this drunken Bawd Dorilla, who having heretofore often brought
Castruchio to whores willingly, now at last she brings him to the gallows
against her will. The morning they are brought to their execution, where there
flock and resort a world of spectators from all parts of the City. And
although the charity of their Judges send them Priests and Friars to direct
their souls for heaven, yet this miserable wretch Castruchio, seeming no way
repentant or sorrowful for this his foul fact, uttered a short prayer to
himself, and so caused the top-man to turn him over, which he did, and within
two hours after his body was thrown into the River. But for Borlary he came
to the scaffold better resolved and prepared; for with grief in his looks,
and tears in his eyes, he there delivered this short and religious speech:

That he grieved in heart, and was sorrowful in soul, for this lamentable
murder of his committed on the person of Planeze, as also for seducing of
Castruchio to effect it by poison, for whose death he affirmed he was likewise
exceedingly afflicted and sorrowful: That it was the temptations of the flesh
and the devil, who first drew him lustfully to affect the fair, chaste, and
virtuous Lady Felisanna, and consequently to murder her husband, in full hope
afterward to obtain her for his Wife, or for his Curtesan: That he was
infinitely sorrowful for all these his enormous crimes, for the which he
religiously asked forgiveness, first of God, and then of the Lady Felisanna,
and likewise prayed all those who were there present, to pray unto God for his
soul; that he was more careful of his reputation toward men, than of his
salvation toward God, and that his neglect of prayer, and of the participation
of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, was the original cause of this his
misery. So again commending himself to the prayers, and recommending his
sinful, yet sorrowful soul into the hands of his Redeemer, the sword of the
Executioner at one blow made a perpetual divorce between his soul and his
body, which pious and Christian speech of his was as great a consolation to the
virtuous, as his death, as that of Castruchio was a terror to the vicious
spectators and Auditors: So to confirm the sentence, the dead body of Borlary
is presently burnt.

And thus was the bloody lives and deserved deaths of these three irreligious
and unfortunate persons; Of Romeo the Laquey: Of Borlary the Gentleman; and of
Castruchio the Apothecary. And in this manner did the justice of the Lord of
Hosts (in due time) justly triumph over their execrable crimes, in their sharp
punishments, and shameful ends. Pray we that we may read this their History
with fear, and as religious and godly Christians remember these their
lamentable Murders with horror and detestation.

GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
Beaumarays and his brother Montagne kill Cahmpigny and Marin (his Second) in a
Duel; Blancheville (the widow of Champigny) in revenge thereof, hireth Le
Valley (servant to Beaumarays) to murder his said Master with a Pistol, which
he does; for the which Le Valley is broken on the wheel, and Blancheville
hanged for the same.

LEt all Religious Christians examine their hearts and souls, with what face
we can tread on Earth, or look up to Heaven, when we stab at the Majesty of
God, in killing and murdering man, his image, a bloody crime, so repugnant to
nature, as reason abhorres it, a scarlet and crying sin so opposite to grace,
as God and his Angels detest it. And yet if ever Europe were stained or
submerged with it, now it is, for as a swift current, or rather as a furious
torrent it now flows, and overflowes in most Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities
thereof, in so much as (in dispight of divine and humane Laws) it is now
(almost) generally grown to a wretched custom, and that almost to a second
nature. A fatal example whereof this ensuing History will report and relate
us. Wherein Gods Justice has so sharply and severely punished the perpetrators
thereof, that if we either acknowledge God for our Father, or our selves for
his children and servants, it will teach us to be less revengfull, and more
charitable by their unfortunate ends, and deplorable judgment.

I Will now relate a sad and bloody History which betided in the fair City of
Chartres, (the Capital of the fertile Country of Beausse) so famous for her
sumptuous Cathedral Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, as also for
that Henry the fourth, (that great King, and unparalleld Captain of France)
during the combustions of the league, was (despite of the league) crowned
therein. In which fair and pleasant City, as there still dwell some Noblemen,
and many Gentlemen, in respect of the sweet air, and goodly Champaigne
Country thereabouts, (second for that to no other in France.) So of late
years there resided two rich and brave young Gentlemen, well descended, being
both of them heirs to their two deceased fathers. The one of them named
Monsieur De Champigny, and the other Monsieur De Beaumarays, and their Demaines
and Lands lay within seven leagues of this City, in the way toward Vendosme.
Now the better to see them in their true and natural Characters: They were
both of them tall and slender, and of fair and sanguine complexions, and very
near of an age: For Champigny was twenty six years old, and Beaumarays twenty
four, and yet the last had a beard, and the first none, and of the two
Champigny was by far the richer, but Beaumarays the Nobler descended. Now to
lay this History upon its proper seat, and natural foundation, we must
understand that there was a very rich Counselor of the Presidiall Court of
Chartres, named Monsieur De Rosaire, whose wife being dead, left him no other
child, but one fair young daughter, of the age of some eighteen years,
named Madamoyselle De Blancheville, very tall and slender of stature, and of a
wanne and pale complexion, and a Coale-blacke hair and eyes brows, and of
deportment and gesture infinitely proud, coy, and imperious, to whom at one
time both these our two Gentlemen, Champigny and Beaumarys were importunate
Suitors, and passionate Rivals to marry her, in so much as the one of them could
difficultly be absent from the fathers house, and daughters company, but the
other was present, which engendered some malice, but more emulation between
them. But in the end, (after a whole years research and more) as the Willow
was destined and reserved for Beaumarays, so was the Laurel for Champigny; for
to his joy, Blanchevilles desire, and her fathers content, he marries her.
Whereat Beaumarays knowing his birth to be more Noble, and his breeding far
more generous than that of Champigny, (though not in outward show, yet in
inward sense) was extremely discontented and sorrowful, but to remedy it he
could not.

In such and the like refusing accidents, discretion is ever far better than
passion, and contempt than care. But Beaumarays cannot or at least will not be
of this temper. He forsakes reason to fly to choler, and so loses his real
and solid judgment, in the Labyrinth of her imaginary beauty. For being at
Supper in company of some five or six Gentlemen, where mention was made of
Blancheville, he transported with malice and revenge toward her, forgate
himself so far, as (between jest and earnest) to let fall these indiscreet
and rash words, That she was more disdainful than chaste: a speech which he
shall have time enough both to remember and repent. The honor of Ladies and
Gentlewomen ought still to be dear and precious to all Gentlemen of Honor,
because their loss thereof can seldom be repaired, but never so well or so
fully recovered, but that there still remains some stain or blemish thereof.
This undeserved scandal of Beaumarays to his quondam Mistress Blancheville,
falls not to the ground, for the iniquity of our times, and the depravation of
our manners are such, as there are few companies without a Fool or a Traitor
to their friends, and some are accompanied with with both. Monsieur Marin a
Gentleman of Chartres (more vain than honest) will make himself one of this
last number, for he being ambitiously desirous to skrew himself into the
favor and familiarity of Blancheville, (whom from her infancy he affected and
loved) reports and tells her this speech of Beaumarays, whereat she is
exceedingly incensed and exasperated: But for that time (as a true woman) she
dissembles her malice and revenge toward him, and so rakes up the memory
thereof in the embers of silence; but yet with this condition and reservation,
that hereafter she will take time to make it flame forth (toward him) with
more violence and impetuosity.

In the mean time there falls out an unexpected and untimely difference
between her husband and Beaumarays, whereat she is so far from grieving, as
she rejoices: Beaumarays quarrelleth with him for his priority and precedence
of seats in the Church, (as being both of one Parish) as also for that he takes
the holy bread first, and goes before him in all Processions, as pretending it
due to him by his right of extraction and propriety. Champigny is of too high a
grain to yield that to him which he never yielded, and is therefore resolute
to justify his equality of birth, and consequently not to wrong his ancestors
in himself. When seeing Beaumarays passionately bent to maintain and preserve
that which he had undertaken, he flies to Justice, and so presently puts him in
suit of Law for the same, in the Presidiall Court of that City. Blancheville
(whose pride in her self exceeded her birth, and whose malice and revenge
toward Beaumarays at the least surmounted her discretion and reason) brings no
water to quench, but oil to inflame this quarrel betwixt him and her husband,
when seeing them already entered into a deep process of Law; she disdaining to
see her self thus abused, and her husband thus wronged by him, can reap no
truce of her thoughts, nor they any peace of her choler, before she have
written him these lines:

BLANCHEVILLE to BEAVMARAYS.
WAs it not enough for thee to have heretofore wronged mine honor in thy false
and scandalous speeches to Monsieur Marin and others, but thou must now attempt
to disgrace my Husband in the Church, and because these crimes of thine are so
^just and odious, as they deserve acknowledgement and satisfaction from a far
better Gentleman than thy self, therefore I speedily expect the performance
thereof from thee, either by thy Letter or presence, which if thou deny us, we
will make thee know what it is to abuse thy self and us in points of these
high natures, whereof the first cannot, the second will not admit of any other
excuse or expiation. But to write thee now the truth of my mind; as thou have
heretofore vented me the malice of thy heart, I have not as yet acquainted my
Husband herewith, or with this my Letter. Consider therefore seriously with thy
self what thou have to do herein, for the vindication of my honor, and thine
own discretion, and as soon as I receive thy answer and resolution, I will
not sail speedily to return thee mine.

BLANCHEVILLE.


Having written this her Letter, she is irresolute with her self by whom to
send it him, but at last she sends it by her Chambermaid Martha, to whom only
she entrusteth this great secret, and charge her to deliver it to Beanmarays
his own hands, and to crave his answer thereof. Martha being a wi^ty fa^re
maid, of some two and twenty years of age, goes to Beaumarays house, and
speaks with a young man of his, named Le Valley, who tells her, that his Master
is now busy with two Gentlemen in his study, and that she shall immediately
speak with him as soon as they depart. In the interim his eyes cannot
refrain from amorously gazing and ranging upon the excellency of her blushing
beauty, and upon her sweet vermillion cheeks, great rolling eyes, and flaxen
hair, wherewith his heart at the very first encounter is surprised and
ravished. Here Le Valley kisseth and re-kisseth Martha, and entertaines her
with much prattle, and many pleasant love speeches, yea, then and there loves
her so dearly, as he vows she shall remain his Mistress, and he her
servant till death. So some half an hour after the two Gentlemen take leave
of his Master, and then Le Valley brings Martha to him, who orderly delivers
him her Mistresses Letter and message, so he wondering at the last, receives the
first, leaves her in the Hall with his man Le Valley, and so steps to his
study, and with much admiration, and more laughture, peruseth this Letter. Here
he accuses his own indiscretion in speaking against Blanchevilles chastity,
and exceedingly condemns Marins treachery in revealing it to her. Once he was
of opinion to have returned her his answer by Letter, but at last s^orning her
and that resolution, he then contrariwise resolves to answer her with silence,
and so steps forth to Martha, and with a disdainful frowning look, bids her
tell her Mistress from him, that her malicious, proud, and foolish Le^ter
shall have no other answer from him but contempt and silence. Martha yet holds
it her duty to pray him for his answer in writing to her Mistress, but
Beaumarays his first resolution is his last, so she departs from him
infinitely discontented. But the Master is not so unkind to Martha, as his man
Le Valley is courteous; For he being deeply enamoured of her beauty, brings her
the one half of her way home, and goes into a Mercers shop, buys her a fair
pair of gloves, and as the pledge of his future affection, bestows them on
her, the which (without farther excuse or ceremony) she thankfully accepts, and
promises him to wear them for his sake. Martha returning home to her Lady and
Mistress, she delivers her Beaumarays his answer verbatimas he told it her,
but no Letter. Blancheville seeing herself thus wronged and slighted of him,
in that he disdaineth to give her any satisfaction, and which is worse, that he
peremptorily refuses, and scorns to answer her Letter: She is so strangely
transported with malice and choler toward him for the same, as she vows to
cry quittance, and to be revenged of him; but as yet she knows not in what
manner to perform and perpetrate it: Only she again resolves not as yet to
acquaint her Husband therewith, but to attend and watch for some future desired
opportunity.

Two years are almost past away, wherein Beaumarays and Champigny (to their
great cost and charge) do vehemently contest in Law about their Church
quarrel for precedence, but they do it far more out of malice toward
themselves, than any way out of piety toward God. And as most of the great
Judicial Courts of France are too too frequently oppressed with Law suits of
this nature, so I may affirm with as much truth as pity, that this is a fatal
rock whereon many hot contentious French spirits do most inconsiderately
suffer shipwreck. At the end of which time (as the loss of one party proves
still the gain of the other) the Presidiall Court of Char^res pronounces
sentence in favor of Beaumarays, adjudging him the precedencie in the Church,
and condemning Champigny in five hundred Crowns charge and damage to
Beaumarays This thundering sentence so prejudicial and contrary to Champigny
his proud wives hopes and expectation, dri^es him into extreme choler, and
her out of all patience toward Beaumarays. He bites his lip with grief, and
his wife in enflamed with rage at the report and knowledge hereof, and although
he were once minded to appeal from this sentence of the Presidiall Court of
Chartres, to the Court of Parliament at Paris, yet being powerfully diverted by
his best friends, he as soon abandoneth as embraces that resolution. He
cannot see Beaumarays but with envy, nor his wife hear speak of him but with
infinite malice and detestation. She is all bent on revenge toward him, and
with her speeches and actions both day and night precipitates her husband
onwards to it. And now her old grudge and malice against him begins a fresh
to revive and flourish, and now she thinks it a very fit time and opportunity
to acquaint her husband with Beaumarys his base and scandalous speeches against
her honor, the which with much passion, and many tears she effects, and also
shows him the Copy of her Letter which she sent him by her maid Martha,
whereunto she informs him, he disdainfully returned her no answer but contempt
and silence. Champigny is so deeply incensed hereat against Beaumarays, as his
wife needs not many words or circumstances to induce and persuade him to
revenge it on him: when presently he being as incapable of delay, as of better
advise and counsel, he finds out Marin, who (more in love to Blancheville,
than in hatred to Beaumarays) confirms as much to him as he would have him
affirm. Now as Blancheville thinks that her Husband Champigny will question
Beaumarays by the Law of Justice, for this his crime toward her: He (as a
valiant and generous Gentleman) flies a higher pitch, and assumes a contrary
resolution, to do it by that of his sword. When having prayed, and procured
Marin to be his Second, and they both agreeing to fight on horse back, he
(consulting with nature, not with grace) the very next morning by Serou his
foot man, sends Beaumarays this Challenge.

CHAMPINY to BEAVMARAYS.
AS thy knowledge is Judge, so Monsieur Marin is witness, what base and
ignoble speeches thou have falsely vomited forth against the honor and chastity
of my wife. And because crimes of this nature are still odious to men, and
execrable to God, and no way to be tolerated by a friend, much less to be
digested and suffered by a Husband: Therefore thank thy self, if (for
reparation hereof) thy folly now call on thy valor, to invite thee and thy
Second, to meet me and mine, with your swords on horse back, on Tuesday next,
between six and seven in the morning, without the North hedge of the very
first Vineyard beyond the River, where you shall find we will attend you, and
comparing the equity of my cause, to the injustice and infidelity of thine, it
makes me fully confident that the issue of this Duel will prove glorious for
me, and shameful and ruinous for thy self.

CHAMPIGNY.


Serou (according to his charge and duty) finds out Beaumarays in his own
house, and very secretly gives him his Masters Letter; who much musing thereat,
steps to the window, and there privately reads it to himself: When blushing
and smiling to see the bold folly of Champigny, the foolish malice of his wife
Blancheville, and the base treachery of Marin toward him, he is so courageous
and generous, as he disdaines to be out-braved by any man whatsoever in the
point of honor, (which he esteems far dearer and precious than his life)
especially by Champigny, whom he holds to be as much his inferior in valor as
blood. He therefore trips to his study, and writes Champigny this Letter the
which he returns by his footman in answer of his.

BEAVMARAYS to CHAMPIGNY.
AS I will not make my self Judge, so I desire not to be witness either of
thy wifes chastity or unchastity. It is sufficient for me to leave her to
herself, and herself to thee. Marin shall have time enough to repent his
treachery toward me, and thou to exchange thy jealousy into Judgment. But
because I see thy choler now exceeds all the bounds of reason, for that thou
art so inconsiderately and rashly audatious, to seek and preserve thy wifes
honor with the los^e and ruin of mine, know therefore that to cherish and
maintain it equally with my life, I cheerfully accept thy challenge, and do
hereby give thee to understand that I with my second, will at the time and
place appointed meet thee and thine on horseback, where we doubt not but to
acquit our selves, as our selves, and to make thee and thine acknowledge that
our swords are composed of agood temper, and our hearts of a better, and
consequently that you may perchance meet with your superiors as well in valor
as in blood and extraction.

BEAVMARAYS.


He has no sooner ended this his letter but he presently begins to think of
his second, when calling to mind his own younger brother Le Montagne (a young
Gentleman of some twenty years of age) is brave and valiant, and that he has
already fought two Duels, and in both of them came off with his honor, he
sends for him to his closet and there shows him Champigny his challenge and
his answer thereu^to, and demands of him if he have any stomach to second him
at this feast, his brother Montagne highly applauds his generous resolution for
accepting this challenge, thanks him for the honor and favor he now does him
in making him his second, vows that if he had many lives as he has but one,
he is ready to sacrifice them all at his feet and service, and courageously
tells him he should have taken it for a sensible affront, disgrace and injury,
if he had made choice of any other then himself: So they both prepare their
horses, swords and courages against the approaching time, and no less does
Champigny and Marin.

Beaumarays and his brother Montagne conceal this business from all the
world; and Champigny bears it so close and secret, as he makes not his
ambitious and malicious wife acquainted therewith, but in favor of his love to
her beauty and reputation to himself, smothers it up in silence. Tuesday
morning being come, our four impatient champions are in the fields at their
Rendez-vous: first arrive Champigny and Marin, and presently after them
Beaumarays and his brother Montagne, all of them being bravely mounted upon
neighing and trampling coursers: At their entrance Marin comes with a soft trot
toward Beaumarays thinking to apologize himself to him: But Beaumarays is so
brave and generous as he is deaf to his speeches, and will not hear him, but
tells him that it is swords not tongues which must now decide their difference,
and prove him innocent or guilty: So Marin missing of his aim, he returns
again upon the same trot to Champigny, and now according to the order and
nature of Duels it is ordered between those four desperate Gentlemen, that
their principals shall search the seconds, and the seconds the principals, to
see whether their doublets were any more then sword proof, but they might well
have saved themselves that labor, for they are all of them too noble and
valiant any way to taint their reputations and honors with the least shadow or
tincture of cowardice, so they cast of their doublets, devide themselves, and
then draw, and the first which must and will try their fortunes, are Champigny
and Beaumarays, who being some fourscore paces off, they give the Spurs and
reins to their horses, and part as swift as the wind, or rather so furiously
and suddenly as two claps of thunder or flashes of lightning: At their first
encounter Beaumarays runs Champigny through his shirt band into the right
side of his neck, and Champigny him into his left shoulder, whereat
reciprocally inflamed as Lions, they make short turns with their horses and so
fall to it amain with their swords, when again Beaumarays gives Champigny two
other wounds, and he returns him one in counterexchange, whereof neither of
them being mortal they again devide themselves to breath, which having done
and both of them as yet unsatisfied, they part the second time, at which cloze
Champigny misseth Beaumarays and hurts his horse in the neck, but BBeaumarays
gives Champigny a lick with his sword ore his forehead which bled exceedingly,
but yet they are too courageous to desist, as scorning rather then caring for
the number of their wounds. They to it again the third time, which proves as
fortunate for Beaumarays as fatal for Champigny, for as his horse stumbleth on
his fore-feet Beaumarays in his bending runs him through the body a little
above his left pappe, where his sword meeting and cutting the strings of his
heart, he presently in a fainting and faltering language spoke these his last
words Beaumarays I forgive thee my death, and God be merciful unto my Soul,
And with the same fell stark dead from his horse to the ground: When
Beaumarays as a noble Gentleman leapt presently from his horse to his
assistance and so did his own second Marin, but their charity and care to him
was in vain, for already life had forsaken his body, and consequently his
soul was fled to his place: So he lies there gored in his blood, and whiles
Marin was covering of his breathless body with his cloak; Beaumarays sheathes
up his sword, and with hands and eyes elevated to heaven renders thanks to God
for this his victory.

No soonerhath Montagne congratulated with his brother Beaumarays for this his
good fortune, but with a heart and courage worthy of himself, he calls out
to his Rival Marin and bids him prepare to fight: When his brother Beaumarays
notwithstanding his loss of much blood, does in finitely desire to spare his
Br^ther Montagne from fighting with Marin, and so to perform it himself. But
Montagne is too courageous and generous either to understand this motion, or to
relish this language from his brother, and so in hot words and high terms, he
peremptorily tells him: That he came to fight with Marin, and fight he would:
whereupon his brother Beaumarays gives him his prayers, commits him to his good
fortune and so with his cloak muffled about him; sits down a Spectator to
their combat: When Montagne remounting his steed, he calls out again to
Marin and bids him prepare to fight.

Marin no way appalled or daunted with the unfortunate disaster of his
principal but rather the more exasperated and encouraged thereat, he as a
valiant Gentleman vows to sell and requite his death deerly on the life of his
adversary Montagne: to which end they devide themselves and draw, and so part
each toward other I know not whether with more swiftness or courage: At their
first encounter Narin runs Montagne into the small of the belly of a slight
wound, and in exchange he cuts Marin a great slash on his left cheek which
hangs down and bleeds exceedingly: When presently closing again; Montagne
runs Marin into the right thigh and he him in requital into the right arm, and
then they devide themselves to take breath, and all these their wounds being as
yet incapable to appease or satisfy their courages, they presently determine
again to fall to it with bravery and resolution: When behold the Marquis of
Bellary (the Titular King of Ivetot) with two Lords his Sons, and their
train passes that way from Chartres to go to Paris and seeing two Gentlemen
on Horseback in their shirts with their swords drawn, he judges it a Duel,
when he and his two sons gallop into the little meddow joining to the
Vineyard to prevent and part them, but they came too late; for Montagne and
Marin seeing them swiftly galloping toward them, they (to prevent them) with
more haste then good speed, set spurs to their horses the sooner, and at this
there second meeting Montagne warding Marins sword and putting it by, dot^ at
the very same Instant run him through the body a little below his navell, of
which mortal wound, he fell presently from his horse dead to the ground,
uttering only these words: O Montaigne, thou have slain me: Thou have slain
me, God receive my Soul: and then and their without speaking a word more
immediately dyed.

No sooner has Montagne wiped and sheathed up his sword, but his joyful
brother Beaumarays gallops up to him and cheerfully congratulates with him for
the same: When instantly the Marquis of Bellay and the two Lords his Sons,
arrive to them though a litt^e too late: They are astonished to see two proper
Gentlemen lie their slain in the field and reeking in their hot blood: when
turning to Be^umarays and his brother Montagne whom they knew, they
congratulate with them for their victories, and the Marquis as briefly as his
time and their wounds will permit, enquire of them the cause of there quarrel
and the manner and particulars of their combat, whereof being fully informed
and satisfied by them, he sends the dead bodies of Champigny and Marin to
Chartres in his Coach: And understanding by Beaumarays and his brother Montagne
that for the preservation of their safeties and lives they were resolved to
leave Chartres and Beausse, and so thwarting ore Normandy by Euereux and
Lesieux to embarke themselves for Caen and thence to pass the Seas into
England till their friends in their absence had procured their grace and
pardons from the King, as also that they were destitute both of Chirurgions to
dress their wounds and of a guide to conduct them thither; He very nobly gave
them his own Surgeon and guide, and promising them likewise to labor with
the King to the utmost of his power for their peace, he passes on his Journey
and commits them to the best fortune: A singular, yea an honorable courtesy
of this brave old Marquis of Bellay whose deserts and fame I should much wrong,
if I gave not the relation and memory of his name a place in this History.

Whiles thus the Marquis of Bellay is traveling toward Paris, and Beaumarays
and his brother Montagne posting for Caen, come we briefly to Chartres which
now resounds and ratles with the report and issue of this combat, where
Gentlemen Citizens and all (according to their passions and affections speak
differently thereof; some condemn the vanity of Beaumarais, others the folly
and treachery of Marin, but all do highly extol the courage and generosity of
Champigny and Montagne. But leave we them to their censures, and come we again
to speak of Blancheville who takes the news of this untimely death of her
husband so tenderly and sorrowfully that she is ready to drown herself in
her tears, It is not only a grief to her heart to see, but a terror to her
conscience to know, that her husband Champigny and her friend Marin, have both
of them lost their lives for her sake, and when again she falls on the
consideration and remembrance, that the first dyed by the hand and sword of
Beaumarays, her mortal enemy, and the second by that of his Brother Montagne,
then she is again ready to burst her heart and breast with sighing thereat. She
is so incapable of Counsel, as she will heat of no consolation, nor speak of
any thing but of her malice and revenge toward Beaumarays, and to write the
truth, this implacable wrath and revenge of hers to him, takes up all her
thoughts and speeches, her contemplations and actions, and both her time and
her self. To which end she converts most of her Corn and Wine into money,
goes to Paris, casts herself at the Kings feet, and to the feet of that great
and illustrious Court of Parliament for Justice, against Beaumarays the
murderer of her husband, the which again and again she aloud resounds and
echoes forth to their ears, yea her rage is so great and her malice so
outrageous toward him, that notwithstanding his body is absent, yet she spends
five hundred Crowns in law to have him according to the law and custom of
France to be hanged up in effigy: But although her suit be just, yet (by
reason of his great friends in Court) she sees herself so unfortunate that
she cannot obtain it. Whereupon after twelve months vain stay in Paris and
a profuse expense of money, she (with much grief and sorrow) secretly vows
to herself, that if ever he return again to Chartres, or which is more,
into France, that she herself will be both his Judge and Executioner, by
revenging her Husbands death in his, and from this hellish resolution of hers
she deeply swears, that neither Earth nor Heaven shall divert her.

Now to follow the natural stream and tide of this History: We must again
bring Beaumarays and his brother Montagne on the stage thereof: For the Reader
must understand, that their wounds being dressed and secured having bestowed
both of their horses on the Chyrurgeon and guide, the two servants of the
aforesaid Marquis of Bellay, and likewise written him a thankful Letter for
his honorable courtesy extended to them, and therewith likewise prayed him to
solicit the King for their Grace and pardon in their absence, they privately
(without any followers) embarque themselves upon an English vessel at Caen and
so with a prosperous gale arrive at Rye, and from thence take Horse for London,
where they settle up their abode and residence, from whence Beaumarais sends to
Chartres for two of his footmen, and his Brother Montagne for one of his, which
come over to London to them some six weeks after, and brings their masters
word, how earnestly and violently their adversaries follow the rigor and
severity of the Law against them in Paris, but especially against Beaumarays,
they receive these advertisements from their servants and friends, rather with
grief then contempt, and therefore to prevent their malice, and their own
disgrace and danger, they often write from London to Paris to the Marquess of
Bellay, and likewise to the Bishop of Chartres (their dear friend and kinsman)
to hasten their pardons from the King: So that Noble Lord, and this reverend
Prelate, pitying their danger and absence, as much as they wish their safety
and return, take time at advantage, and the King in a well disposed humor,
and so do most effectually and powerfully acquaint his Majesty; how these two
absent Gentlemen and brothers Beaumarays and Montagne were without just cause
or reason provoked to this unfortunate combat by their adversaries; that they
were the Challenged, not the Challengers; that heretofore they had never
committed any act unworthy either of their honor, or of themselves: That for
their virtues and generosity they were beloved of all their Country and
acquaintance: That they had formerly received many wounds in his Majesty's
wars; and that their valor and courage was such, that in these times, which
threatened more troubles than promised peace, they would undoubtedly prove happy
and necessary members for his service, with many other prevailing motives and
reasons conducing that way; which at last so weigh down the heart and mind of
the King, that he freely conceded and gave them their pardons under his great
Seal, the which to make the more authentical, they caused them to be
enregistred and confirmed by the Court of Parliament of Paris, and thereupon
both the Marquess and Bishop jointly and speedily writ to them thereof from
Paris. And after some five months of their stay in London, they send them over
these their Pardons, which are delivered to them by the Earl of Tillieres,
then ordinary Ambassador there for this present French King, Lewis xiij. the
which they receive with infinite honor, content, and joy.

This good news of theirs makes them now like the air of France better than
that of England. So they speedily pack up their baggage, leave London, and
with all celerity poast away Dover, Callais, and Paris. Where being arrived,
the first thing they do, they find out the Marquis of Bellay, and the Bishop
of Chartres, to whom they owe their peace, as they do their lives to the King:
To whom they express a thousand demonstrations of thankfulness for this their
honor and favor showed them. They likewise burn with desire to testify so
much to the King, when the Marquis, seconded by the Bishop, present them to his
Majesty, who falling to his feet, he gives them his Royal hand to kiss.
They can better express their thankfulness in deeds than words to him, and in
language of their swords, than in that of their tongues: Only they tell his
Majesty, that having received their lives of his mere clemency and Royal
favor, they most humbly therefore implore him to gr^t them the favor and
honor, that they may spend and end them in his service. He allows of their
zeal and humility, and to redouble his favor, he gives them again his hand
to kiss, adding farther to them, that it is rather likely than impossible,
that he shall shortly have occasion to use their swords and service, and so
dismisseth them.

These our two brothers remain a month in Paris, wherein almost daily they
tender their thankful respects and service to the Marquis and Bishop, at the
end whereof leaving their duties, and receiving their commands, they take horse
and return home for Chartres, (from which by reason of their disaster they
have been so long absent) where all their kinsfolks and friends welcome them
home with infinite delight and joy, yea, almost all Chartres and the Gentlemen
thereabouts, exceedingly rejoice of their fortunate and safe returns. Only
the Parents of Marin do envy Montagne deeply, and Blancheville, the
sorrowful and incensed widow of Champigny, hate Beaumarays deadly. As for
Montagne he makes such good means and friends, that in less than two months
he obtaines a perfect reconciliation of the first; but although Beaumarays have
made many fair overtures and proffers of atonement by his friends to the
second, yet in six months he sees it is wholly impossible for him to procure
it of her, and which is worse, she is still so outrageous and revengefull
toward him, that he thinks he never shall; for she disdaines to see him, and
scorns to hear of him; and still her malice and indignation against him,
makes her constant in her former hellish and bloody resolution, that by one
means or other she will ere long murder him, as he has her Husband: A
fearful and most execrable resolution, every way unworthy the heart of a
Gentlewoman, and far more the soul of a Christian.

In the former part of this History we have understood the affection of Le
Valley (Beaumarays his man) to Martha, Blanchevilles Chambermaid. In the middle
thereof we have remarked and seen the implacable intended malice and revenge
of Blancheville toward Beaumarays: And we shall nor go far before the end
hereof will inform us what mournful fruits, and deplorable effects, these
different accidents and persons will procure us.

As there is no love to that of a man, so I am of opinion, that there is no
malice comparable to that of a woman, and if the truth deceive not my judgment
herein, I believe we shall shortly see the Antitheses of this position made
good and verified in the persons of Le Valley, and Blancheville. For whiles Le
Valley is lovingly thinking and inventing all possible means how he may
marry Martha; so is Blancheville maliciously pondering and ruminating with her
self how or by what means or agents she may murder Beaumarays. Thus we see
that the heart of the first is as full of kindness and courtesy, as the mind
and resolutions of the second is of cruelty and blood. Now the Reader for his
better information, will I hope remember, that in all this time of two years
and upwards, since Le Valley first saw and spoke with his sweet heart Martha,
in his Masters house, that there has past many love tokens between them, but
as yet he could never draw her consent to marry him; for still she tells him
that she loves her Mistress so dearly, that she will not depart from her
service, nor wed any man, without her free consent, and therefore that they
have far more reason to doubt than to hope of this match between them,
considering the lamentable accident and disaster which has past between their
Masters. Le Valley seeing he must first win the Mistress, before he can wed
the maid, with his sweet hearts advise, resolves to seek Blanchevilles consent
therereto, the which he does in fair and orderly terms. Blancheville who
had formerly heard an inkling how dearly Le Valley affected her maid Martha in
the way of marriage, now by this his motion thereof to herself, she is fully
confirmed thereof. When observing more passion than judgment, as well in his
affection to her maid, as in his speeches to her self, she presently (being
industrious in her malice, and vigilant in her revenge toward Beaumarays)
forgets God and all goodness, abandoneth all Christianity and humanity, and so
the devil brings her a plot, or else her own heart and head fetched it from
hell: She thinks that this poor servant Le Valley, is a fit agent and
instrument for her, either to poison or pistol his Master Beaumarays to death,
and that his love to her maid Martha, and his consideration of her fresh youth
and beauty, is a sufficient bait, and powerful lure to make him undertake and
perform it, and hereon she settles up her bloody resolution. To which end
Blancheville having already sufficiently woven this treachery in her heart, and
closely and finely spunne it in her brains, she politickly gives Le Valley
more hope than despair, that he shall shortly marry her maid Martha; only
she tells him she must first confer with her, to see how she stands
affected to him, and that if he repair to her again at the end of the week,
she will then assuredly give him such an answer, as she doubts not but will
content and please him, or else the fault shall be his: But to conclude her
speech, she charge him not to speak or utter a word hereof to his Master
Beaumarays, all which Le Valley faithfully promises her to perform. He goes
from the Mistress to the maid, and reports what she has told and spoken, so
these young folks flatter themselves, that they very shortly shall be man and
wife. Blancheville (whose heart and mind runs wholly upon a bloody revenge
toward Beaumarays) no sooner understands that Le Valley is gone forth her
doors, but she sends for her maid Martha into her chamber, where (no way
acquainting her with her bloody intent and policy) she charge her to swear
that she will never marry Le Valley without her free consent, and that in the
end she shall not repent the following of her advise and counsel herein, which
Martha solemnly does, whereof this malicious and vindictive Dame is exceedingly
glad and satisfied. The end of the week being come, away comes Le Valley to
his sweet heart Martha, to know if she be shortly resolved to marry him, who
having been perfectly taught her lesson, tells him plainly, that she will be
his wife, conditionally that he can gain her Mistress Blanchevelles consent
thereunto, but never without it. Whereof he being exceedingly joyful, he
giving her many kisses, entreats her to bring him to her Mistress, and that he
hopes to receive pleasing news from her, to both their contents. Blancheville
(with much longing impatiencie (attends his coming, and receives and welcomes
him into her Closet with a cheerful countenance, where bolting the door, this
hellish Erinnis (not heavenly Urania) passionately tells him, that it shall be
impossible for him ever to enjoy or marry her maid Martha, except he first
swear to her to perform a secret business for her, which infinitely
concerns her content and service. Le Valley desires to know of her what it is,
but she first swears him to secrecy herein, both from Martha, and from all
the world, the which he freely swears: When Blancheville (with hypocritical,
yea, with diobolicall tears in her eyes) being instructed and prompted by the
devil, represents unto him, how foully his Master Beaumarays had first
wronged her chastity and honor, then abused her husband in the Church, and
afterward killed him in the field, and therefore that he should not only
marry her maid Martha, but that she would likewise give him three hundred
Crowns of marriage money with her, if for her sake, and at her request) he
would kill his said Master, either by poison, Poniard, or Pistol, of which
sum she told him he should have the one half in hand, and the other when
he had performed it, the which if he refused to do, she swore by her part of
Heaven, that he should never marry her, nor come near her.

Le Valley is amazed and astonished at this bloody proposition and request of
hers, the which she might well perceive by the distraction of his looks, and
the perturbation of his countenance. He tells her, that although he loves Martha
far dearer than his life, yet he cannot find in his heart to kill the
poorest Christian in the world, much less so good and so dear a Master as
Beaumarays was to him. Blancheville (being now as subtle in her malice, as she
was malicious in her revenge toward Beaumarays) shows Le Valley the three
hundred Crowns in fair gold) which was far more than ever before he had
seen, Tells him what a dear friend she will ever remain to him and his wife,
and (in a word) leaves no lure unpractised, nor charm unattempted, to draw him
to the enterprise of this deplorable, and to the execution of this hellish
fact. But finding him as frozen as she was fiery therein, she bids him to take
a weeks the to consider thereof, then to bring her his last resolution, and
withal to remember his oath of secrecy herein from all the world, both which
points he constantly promises her to perform. As he descends the stairs from
her, his sweet heart Martha comes presently to him to know the mind and
resolution of her Mistress, whom he thinks good then to satisfy with this
pleasing answer, that he hopes a small time will work and compass both their
desires. So after a few kisses and embraces, they for that time take leave each
of other. He is no sooner returned home, but his heart is as pensive and
sorrowful, as his mind and brain is perplexed and troubled for the cause
thereof. He consults with himself, and his resolutions are as different as his
desires. He cannot as yet find in his heart to kill his Master, and yet he
can resolve rather to die than to lose Martha his Mistress. True it is, that
the sight of the Lady Blanchevilles gold does act wonders in his hearts, but
far more the sight and remembrance of Marthas sweet youth and delitious
beauty: So the first tempts him exceedingly, the second extremely, and the
devil in both of them infinitely; yet notwithstanding his faith and soul are
so strong with God, that hitherto he cannot consent or be drawn to imbrue
his hands in the innocent blood of his Master. But here befalls an unexpected
accident, which violently precipitates and throws him headlong on the contrary
resolution.

His Master Beanmarays (not for want of any respect or love to Blancheville,
but because he perfectly knew she extremely hared him) having formerly
charged his man Le Valley that he should not frequent her house, nor no more
dare to seek her maid Martha in marriage, the which he confidently promised him
he would: He now understands that contrary thereunto, his man Le Valley the
very day before was there, and continued still an earnest suitor to her; so he
hereupon calls him to him, and gives him five or six sound boxes on the ear,
for his disobeying him, and vows that if he ever any more return thither, and
seek Martha in marriage, he would utterly cashier him, and wholly discharge
him from his service. Le Valley not accustomed to receive blows of his Master,
was so extremely incensed hereat, as disdaining the blows for his Master, and
his Master for the blows sake, they engender such bad blood in him, as he
presently strikes a bargain, first with his choler, then with the Devil,
that he would now adhere to the request of Blancheville, and so speedily
return his Master a sharp requital and bloody revenge for the same; and
indeed from that time forwards he never looked on him but with an eye of hatred
and detestation. So without farther delay, the same night as soon as his
Master was gone to bed, he trips away to Blanchevilles house, informs her at
large what had past betwixt his master and himself, and therefore assures her
that he is fully and constantly resolved to murder him within three or four
days, if she would perform her promise to him, to give him the three hundred
Crowns, and that also within a month after h^e shall marry Martha, whereat
Blancheville being beyond measure joyful, she faithfully and solemnly swears
him the performance thereof when (as a pledge of the rest) she presently pays
him down the first hundred and fifty in gold, the which Le Valley joyfully
purseth up. But the receipt thereof shall cost him dear.

From the intended matter of the murder of Beaumarays, these two agents of
Satan and Hell, Blancheville and Le Valley, proceed to the manner thereof, she
proposes that infernal drugge poison, but he rejects it, as dangerous to be
bought, and difficult to be applied. And because she dislikes to have him
pon^arded, therefore they both conclude and agree, that he shall pistol him to
death, and this is their difinitive, cruel, and hellish resolution. Le Valley
having thus dispatched his business with Blancheville, and taken leave with
kisses of his sweet Martha, (who poor soul is as innocent, as they two are
wholly and solely guilty of this deplorable conspiration) he puts a cheerful
countenance on his revengfull heart, so returns home, and the very next day
gets his Masters pocket pistol, which he loads with a brace of bulletts, and
watches every day and hour for a desired opportunity to send him to heaven.
So the third day after Monsieur Montagne going abroad a hawking with his
brothers Hawks and Spannels, and taking almost all his men servants with him,
and leaving Le Valley to wait and attend on his Master, then and there this
fatal occasion answered his prodigious expectation. For that very Fore-noone,
his Master Beaumarays coming from the house of office, he calls up Le Valley
to him in his chamber to trusse his points, which wretched Villain he is busy
in performing, but alas, in most barbarous and bloody manner: For as that good
and Noble Gentleman thought of nothing less than of his danger or death, then
this monster of nature fingering his hind points with his left hand, very
softly drew his Pistol out his pocket with his right, and then and there (with
an infernal courage and audacity) shot him into the reins of his back,
nearly opposite to his heart, whereof he presently fell down dead to the
ground, without having either the power or happiness to utter on prayer or
word whatsoever, but only two or three small fainting, or indeed dying groans.

This bloody and execrable wretch Le Valley, seeing his Master dead, he
triumphs in his good fortune, to see what a brave Butcher he had proved
himself in so speedily and neatly dispatching him. When to put the better
varnish on his villainy, and so to make it appear to the world, that his Master
was his own murderer, he takes the pistol and places it in his dead right
hand, lays the key of the Chamber upon the Table, and the door having a
strong Spring-locke, pulls and shuts it fast after him. When again, to make his
innocence the more clear and conspicuous to the world, he speedily and
secretly taking a horse out of the stable, a Hawke on his fist, and a Spanniell
at his heels, and so very joyfully and cheerfully gallops away to the fields,
where (after some hour at least, or hour and half at most) he finds out
Monsieur Montagne, and tells him his Master dispatched him to him with a fresh
Hawke, which was his best and chiefest Gashawke. They Hawke all day together,
and Le Valley (as accustomed) is very officious and diligent to Monsieur
Montagne, who toward night returns home to Chartres, having (between them
all) taken eight Partridges and one Phesant. He arrives at his brothers house,
where missing him, he gives the Phesant and four of the Partridges to the
Cook to dress for their Supper; when afterward again missing his brother
Beaumarays, and enquiring for him, the meniall servants of the outhouses tell
him they saw him not to day. Supper being preparing, and the Table covered, he
sends up Le Valley to look him in his chamber, who returns him this answer,
that his Master is not there, but the door is shut: Montagne marvelleth at his
brothers long (and unaccustomed) absence, and so do all his Servants. They
find his Cloak, Rapier and Belt, hanging up at a pin in the Hall, and
therefore deeming him not far, but at some neighbors house, he sends Le
Valley one way, and the rest of the servants to other places to find him out;
but whiles they seek after him, Le Valle (favored by the night) trips away
speedily to the Lady Blanchevilles house, and there most briefly and secretly
acquaints her how bravely he has dispatched his Master that forenoone, she
cannot Contain herself for Joy of this sweet news, nor express it to him in
less then a Kiss, he says he will tell her the rest to morrow night and then
come and receive the remainder of her promise to him, the which she again and
again swears to him she will perform it with a surplusage and advantage, so
he kisseth his sweet heart Martha, and again dispeeds himself home: Where he
and the rest of the servants who were sent into the streets return Montagne
no news of their master his brother: Supper being more then fully ready, his
long missing of him does at last bring him much doubt, and some suspicion and
fear of his welfare. It runs still in his mind that he may be yet a sleep
in his Chamber; wherefore he ascends thither with Le Valley and others of his
Servants, who call a loud and bounce amain at the door, but they hear no
answer nor speech of him, the which does the more augment his doubt and
redouble his fear of his Brother: At last he commands them to force and break
open the door, but it being exceeding thick and strong, they cannot, Montagnes
tender care of his brother does by this time infinitely increase his fear of
him, which at last so powerfully surpriseth him, that he presently commands a
Ladder to be erected to his brothers chamber window toward the garden, and
sends up one of his Laqueyes with a torch to look into the chamber, the laquey
forces open the casement, and then thrusts in his torch first, and his head
after, which he speedily withdrawing very passionately cries out: That his
master has murdered himself with his pistol, and lies there dead all gored
in his blood. Montagne at this lamentable news tears his hairs weeps and
cries out a maine for sorrow thereof and so do all his Servants: Among whom Le
Valley is observed to be one of the most, who weeps, and cries mightly
thereat. Montagne being almost as dead with grief and sorrow hereat, as his
Brother Beaumarays was with his wound, He bids the Laquey to tear down the
casement and to enter and unlocke the door, which he does: So he with Le
Valley and the rest of the servants ascend and enter the chamber, where to
their unexpressable grief and sorrow) they see this mournful and murdered
personage, with the discharged pistol fast in his hand, and the key of the
chamberdoore on the table, as has been already expressed. Once Montagne
thought that his brother might be robbed and killd by thieves, but seeing all
his trunkes fast locked, and then opening his study door, and finding all his
gold, silver, and Jewels there in good order, he abandons that suspicion and
Jealousy and then both he and they all believe, that he has absolutely
murdered himself. The report of this tragical and sorrowful accident sounds
loud in the streets of Chartres: Montagne sends for the Kings Attourny, and the
Fiscall to see, and for Chirurgions to visit his dead brothers body, they all
concur and agree in opinion with Montagne and his servants, and so generally
affirm and conclude: That Beaumarays has (with his little pistol) shot
himself into the back with a brace of bullets, whereof he dyed, which is
sweet music and melody to Le Valley, but his wormwood and gall comes after.
And now Montagne withal requisite order, state, and decency, solemnizeth his
brothers funerals, and not only all Chartres, but all Beausse, and all
Gentlmen who knew him, yea the bishop of Chartres, the Marquis of Bellay, and
the King himself much lamented and bewailed the unfortunate loss of this
noble, and valiant Gentleman.

The grief and sorrow of Montagne for his Brothers untimely death, is the joy
and felicity of Le Valley and Blancheville, for as he triumphs, so for her
part she is so extremely delighted and ravished with this sweet news, as at
their next meeting (which is the very next night) she gives him his hundred and
fifty crowns, and because he has dispatched his master Beaumarays so speedily
and secretly, she therefore takes a Diamond ring off her finger (worth one
hundred crowns) and likewise gives it him: When to make good her oath and
promise to him, (as also to make his pretented joy complete) the very same day
month after, marryeth him to her maid Martha. But marriages that are founded
and cymented with innocent blood, never have prosperous ends. Now is
Blancheville proud in her revenge for the death of her mortal enemy
Beaumarays, and now likewise is Le Valley (in his conceit and mind) rapt up
into the third Heaven of joy, in enjoying his fair and sweet wife Martha, and
neither of them has the conscience to think of, or the grace to repent this
foul and bloody fact of theirs: Which (when they least dream thereof) we
shall see God in his sacred mercy in Justice, will speedily detect, revenge,
and punish, as the sequel thereof will declare and inform us.

As the matter and manner of the detection of this lamentable murder of
Beaumarays proceeded primarily from God, so it did secondly from his sorrowful
brother Montagne, who wanting all other witnesses and evidence (and wholly
guided by sacred power, and swaid by divine influence) was led to it by four
remarkable circumstances and considerations, every way worthy of our Knowledge
and retention. The first was his finding and perusing of Blanchevilles Letter
to his brother Beaumarays (which formerly we have seen) wherein he observed a
wonderful deal of inveterate malice toward him from her; The second was Le
Valleys sudden marrying of her chambermaid Martha, by the which he conceived
that that suspicion strongly reflected on her, and this on him: The third was
from the sight of the Diamond Ring which Le Valley wore on his finger (being
the same which we have formerly seen Blancheville to give him) for Montagne
believing that he had stolen it from his dead brother his master, he
challenged him for it by order of law, when Le Valley to clear himself of
this predended theft, was enforced to inform both him and the Judges, that it
was given him in marriage with his wife by the Lady Blancheville her Mistress,
the which confession of his, indeed added much suspicion and jealousy of them
both to the heart and mind of Montagne, as believing that it must be some
extraordinary tie and service which should make Le Valley capable to deserve so
great a bounty and reward of her. But the fourth and last consideration was
far more powerful and pervalent with him than all the three former to ground
his suspicion against Le Valley for thus murdering of his brother, and wherein
the Reader may deservedly admire and wonder at the celestial providence and
justice of God, which most miraculously and divinely appears herein, for the
same day two months after the murder of Beaumarays, and the same day month
that Le Valley married his wife Martha, It pleased the Lord (in his secret
pleasure and justice) to send him a Gangreene in his right hand, which
beginning to extend and spread, his Chyrurgeons to save his life, advised his
said hand to be speedily cut off, which was accordingly performed.

This suddenly cutting of Le Valleys right hand by advise of his Chyrurgeons
brings terror to him, fear to Blancheville, and astonishment and admiration
to Montagne, who (led by the immediate spirit and finger of God) does now
confidently believe, that it was that hand of his which pistolled his brother
to death, and that it might be rather probable than impossible, that
Blancheville might be the Author, and he the actor of this cruel Murder.
Wherefore grounding this his strong suspicion upon the piety and innocence of
his brothers life and disposition, as also on his own four former premised
serious considerations and circumstances, he neither can nor will take any
contrary Law or peace of his thoughts. But goes to the Seneshall, and Kings
attourny of that City, and accuses Le Valley to be the murderer of his
brother Beaumarais. The wise and prudent judges, advertised the presidiall
court thereof likewise: So they presently cause him to be apprehended and
imprisoned for the same: They charge him with this cruel murder committed on
the person of his master, but he stoutly denies it with many fearful oaths
and imprecations: But his crime being greater then his Apology, they adjudge
him to the rack, where in the midst of his tortures, God so deals with his
heart and prevails with his soul, that he confesses, it was he who murdered
his master Beaumarais with a pistol charged with a brace of bullets, and that
he was hired to perform it by the Lady Blancheville, who gave him three
hundred crowns in gold, and a Diamond ring to effect and finish it. At the
relation and confession whereof Montagne and the Judges, exceedingly admire and
wonder, and being by them again demanded if his wife Martha were not ^ewise
accessory with them in this murder, he freely and constantly told them that
she was not, and that he would take it to his death, that she was e^ry way as
Innocent, as himself and Blancheville her mistress were guilty thereof.

The Judges of this Court speedily send sergeants away to apprehend Blan^ville,
who is so far from the apprehension or fear of any danger, as she dreams
not thereof: They find her in her own house playing on her lute, ^d singing
in company of many Gentlemen, and Gentlewoman her friends: The Sergeants seize
on her, and tells her accusation and crime, whereat she is amazed and weeps
exceedingly, and no less do those who are with her: She is brought before her
Judges, who strongly accuse her for being the Author of this cruel murder of
Beaumarais, and acquaint her with Le Valleys full and free confession thereof
as we have formerly understood: When here sometime with tears, and then again
with passion and choler, she tells the Judges, that Le Valley is a devil and a
villain, thus to accuse her falsely: That she never gave him a ring or three
hundred crowns to do it, and takes God to witness that she is wholly
innocent of that murder. But this poor and passionate Apology of hers, will
not pass current with her Lyncee-eyed Judges, who cause her to be confronted
with Le Valley, who stands firm to his former accusation against her, and yet
her faith is so weak with God, and so strong with satan as with many cries
and curses, she again and again cries out and protests of her Innocence:
They produce her her ring, and part of gold, but she boldly denies and stoutly
forsweares both; So they presently adjudge her to the rack, whereto with much
constancy she permits herself to be fastened: But at the very first touch and
wrench thereof, her dainety delicate limbs not able to brook those exquisite
torments, God was pleased to be so gracious and merciful to her soul, as she
presently (with many tears) cries out that she was the guilty Author of this
horrible murder, and so in all points and circumstances concurres and agrees
with Le Valleis deposition and accusation against her; Here her Judges again
demand of her if her maid Martha were never accessory or consenting with her
and Le Valley in this their bloody ^ct, but she vows to them, that upon
peril of her soul, she was absolutely innocent thereof, so hereupon this our
inhumane Lady Blancheville is again loosed from her rack, and brought away to
the Tribunal of Justice, and so likewise is Le Valley, where Montagne and the
Kings attorney presently crave judgment of the presidents against these two
murderers, who after a long and a religious speech which they made, both to
them and to all who were present upon this bloody fact and crime of theirs:
They conclude and adjudge Le Valley the very next day to be broken on the
wheel alive, and Blancheville then likewise to be hanged, which gave matter of
Universal speech and admiration to all Chartres and Beausse.

We have seen the perpetration and detection of this inhumane and lamen table
murder, committed by these two unfortunate wretches Le Valley and
Blancheville: And now (by the mercy and Justice of God) we are come to see the
triumphs of his revenge to fight against them in their condign punishments
for the same. They by their Judges are that afternoon returned again to their
prisons, and the same night are there effectually dealt with by Divines, who
(out of Christian charity) direct and prepare their souls for Heaven. So the
next morning about ten of the clock they are brought to the common place of
execution in Chartres, where a world of people attend to be spectators of these
their unfortunate ends and deplorable tragedies: And first Le Valley ascends
the scaffold, who is sad and pensive, and says little else (...) effect but
this, that it was partly Blanchevilles gold, but chiefly his love to her maid,
his wife Martha, who first drew him to murder his dear master Beaumarays,
whereof he affirmed he was now heartely repentant and sorrowful, and besought
the Lord to pardon him; He here took it to his death that his said wife Martha
was every way innocent of this murder, and therefore beseeched Monsieiur
Mantagne, to be good and charitable to her after his death, whom he likewise
prayed to forgive him, when uttering a few Ave Mary's to himself, and often
marking himself with the sign of the cross: He was by his Executioner
presently broken on the wheel, whereof he immediately dyed.

Le Valley was no sooner dispatched, but up comes our Female monster
Blancheville on the Ladder, whose youth and beauty drew pity from the hearts,
and tears from the eyes of most of her spectators: in her countenance she was
very sad and mournful, and yet I am enforced to confess this truth of her,
that (in this last Scene and act of her life) her pride and Vanity so far
usurped on her judgment, her piety, and her soul, that she came here to take
her last leave of the world, apparelled in a rich black razed satin gown, a
crimson damask petty coat, la^d with white satin guards, a rich cutworke
falling band, her hair all strewed with sweet powder, decked with white ribban
knots and roses, and a snow white pair of gloves on her hands, so she there
craves leave of the people to speak a few words before she dies, which with a
well composed countenance, and behavior, she does in these terms.

She said that her dear and tender affection to her husband Champigny
occasioned her deadly hatred and malice to Beaumarays, and that as soon as she
had slain him in the field, she in revenge thereof instantly resolved and
vowed to send him to heaven after him: she affirmed that she was now sorrowful
from her heart and soul, that she had caused Le Valley to kill this his
master, also that she was so unfortunate and miserable, as now to see him dye
for her sake and service, in requital whereof she gave all her apparel, and
some of her plate and Jewels to her old maid, now his new wife Martha, whom she
affirmed in presence of God and his angels, was no way guilty or consenting to
this lamentable murder, which she beseeched the Lord to pardon and forgive
her, she likewise besought Montagne and Martha to forgive her and entreated all
who were present to pray to God for her Souleshe conjured al Ladies and
Gentlewoman who were sorrowful eyewitnesses of her untimely death, to beware by
her unfortunate example, and so to hate malice and revenge in themselves as
much as she loved it: When again praying all her spectators to pray to God
for her, she after a few pater-nosters, and Auc-maries was turned over.

And thus was this lamentable, and yet deserved deaths of these two bloody
wretches Le Valley and Blancheville, and in this sharp manner, did God justly
revenge and punish this their horrible crime of murder: Whose untimely and
unfortunate deaths, left much grief to their living parents and friends, and
generally to all who either saw or knew them. May we read this their History,
first to the honor of God, and then to our own Instruction and reformation:
That the sight and remembrance of these their punishments may deter us from
the impiety and inhumanity of perpetrating the like bloody crimes,

Amen.
GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
Lorenzo murthereth his wife Fermia: He some twenty years after (as
altogether unknown) robs his (and her) son Thomaso, who likewise not
knowing Lorenzo to be his father, does accuse him for that robbery, for which
he is hanged.

THose who (by the pernicious instigation, and fatal temptation of Satan) do
wilfully imbrue their hands in innocent blood and so make themselves guilty of
murder, are no longer men but have prodigiously metamorphosed themselves into
the nature and quality of devils. And as after this their crime, they are
worthy of all true christians detestation, so most commonly (without Gods
saving grace and mercy) their hearts are so obdurated with impenitency of
security, and their souls seared up and abandoned to all kinds of atheistical
prophannesse and impiety, that they are so far from thinking of God, as they
believe there is no God, and so far from fearing of his judgments and
punishments, as they are desperately confident they have not deserved any: But
because their hearts and actions are as transparent to Gods eyes and knowledge,
as Gods decrees, and resolution are invisible to theirs, therefore (despite
this their blindness and the devils malice and subtilty to obscure and
conceal it, this world will afford them no true peace, nor this life produce
them any perfect tranquillity: But wheresoever they go or live, their guilty
thoughts and consciences as so many hellish bloudhounds will incessantly pursue
and follow them, till in the end they drag them to condign shame, misery, and
confusion for the same: which this subsequent history will verify and make
good to us, in a wretched and execrable personage, whom it mournefully presents
to our view and consideration. Let us read it in the fear of God, that we may
weigh that benefit by it which becomes good Christians to make.

IT is not the meannesse of the personages, but the greatness and eminence of
Gods Judgments which has prevailed with me to give this History a place among
my others: The which to draw from the head-spring, and original, we must
understand, that in Italy, (the Garden of Europe, as Europe is that of the
whole world) and in the City of Genova, (seated upon the Mediterranean Sea,
which the Italians for the sumptuousness and stateliness of her buildings,
do justly style and entitle, proud Genova) near unto the Arsenall upon the
Key, there dwelt (of late years) a proper tall young man, of a coal black
hair, some twenty five years old, named Andrea Lorenzo, who by his trade was
a Baker, and was now become Master of his profession, and kept forth his Oven
and shop for himself; wherein he was so industrious and provident, that in a
short time he became one of the prime Bakers of that City, and wrought to many
Ships and Galleyes of this Estate and Seigniory: He in few years grew rich,
was proffered many wives, of the daughters of many wealthy Bakers, and other
Artificers of Genova, but he was still covetous, and so addicted to the world,
as he could fancy none, nor as yet be resolved or persuaded to seek any maid
or widow in marriage, since he knew it to be one of the greatest and most
important actions of our life, and which infallibly draws with it, either our
chiefest earthly felicity or misery.

But as marriages are made in heaven, before consummated on earth; So Lorenzo
going on a time to the City of Savona, which (both by Sea and Land) is some
twenty little miles from Genova, and heretofore was a free City and Estate of
it self, but now swallowed up in the power and opulencie of that of Genova, he
there fell in love with a rich Vintners daughter, her father named Iuan
Baptista Moron, and she Firmia Moron, who was a lovely and beautiful young
maiden, of some eighteen years of age, being tall and slender, of a pale
complexion, and a bright yellow hair, but exceedingly virtuous and religious,
and endowed with many sweet qualities and perfections; who althouhh she were
sought in marriage by diverse rich young men, of very good families of that
City, with the worst of whom (either for estate or extraction) Lorenzo might no
way compare, yet she could fancy none but him, and he above all the men of
the world she (secretly in her heart and mind) desired might be her Husband.
Lorenzo (with order and discretion) seeks Fermia in marriage of her father
Moron, who is too strong of purse, and to high of humor to match his daughter
to a Baker, or to any other of a mechanical profession, and so gives him a
flat and peremptory denial. But Lorenzo finds his daughter more courteous and
kind to his desires, for she being as deeply enamoured of his personage, as he
was of her beauty and virtues, after a journey or two which he had made to her
at at Savona, she consents and yields to him to be his wife, conditionally that
he can obtain her fathers good will thereunto, but not otherwise; which
Lorenzo yet feared and doubted would prove a difficult task for him to
compass and procure; for her father knowing Fermia to be his own and only
child and daughter, and that her beauty and virtuous education, together with
the consideration of his own wealth and estate, made her every way capable of
a far better husband than Lorenzo: As also that his daughter in reason and
religion, and by the laws of heaven and earth, was bound to yield him all duty
and obedience (because of him she had formerly received both life and being)
therefore he was resolute that Lorenzo should not have his daughter to wife,
neither would he ever hearken to accept, or consent to take him for his son
in Law.

Lorenzo having thus obtained the heart and purchased the affection of his
sweet and dear Fermia, he now (out of his fervent desire and zeal to see her
made his wife, and himself her husband) makes it both his ambition and care
(according to her order) to drawher father Moron to consent thereunto, wherein
the more importunate, humble, and dutiful he (both by himself and friends) is
to Moron, the more imperious, averse, and obstinate is he to Lorenzo, as
disdaining any farther to hear of this his suit and motion for his daughter.
But Lorenzo loves the daughter too tenderly and dearly thus to be put off with
the first repulse and denial of her father, and so (notwithstanding) he
again persevereth in his suit toward him, with equal humility and
resolution: He requesteth his consent to their affections with prayers, and
his daughter Fermia (having formerly acquainted her father with her dear and
inviolable love to Lorenzo) she now prays him thereto with tears: But (as one
who had wholly wedded himself to the singularity of his own resolution and
pleasure) he again proudly refuses him with disdain, and peremptorily
rejects her with choler and indignation, and so secretly vows to himself,
and publicly swears to them, that he will first die, and salute his grave,
before ever he will permit him to marry his daughter. Which unkind answer, and
thundering resolution of his, proves the extreme grief of his daughter
Fermia, and infinite affliction and sorrow of her lover Lorenzo, who hereupon
are enforced to bear up with the time, yea, and to make a virtue of necessity,
by separating their bodies, but not their hearts and affections. So he
returns to Genova, and she lives and remains with her father in Savona,
having no other comfort left them in their absence but hope, nor no other
consolation, but sometimes to visit each other with their Letters, which they
do.

Old Moron now finds his young daughter Fermia, far more pensive, reserved,
and sorrowful than heretofore, and therefore although he grieve to see her
affection entangled with this Baker Lorenzo, yet he rejoices to see that he
comes to Savona, as also to understand that his daughter has no way engaged
her self to him in promise of marriage, but with the condition of his free
will and consent thereto, which as heretofore, so now again, he deeply
swears he will never be drawn or persuaded to grant. And the sooner and
better eternally and fully to dash these their irregular loves and affections,
he thinks it fit for him to provide, and requisite to present his daughter with
another Husband: To which end he gives her the choice of two or three proper
young men, and of very good families in Savona, but she will have none of
them, for her affection is so deeply fixed, and constantly settled on Lorenzo,
that say her father what he will, or do he or they what they can, he can
hardly draw her to see, much less to speak with any one of them: Whereat he
calls her foolish Gigglet, and fond Girl, and swears that he will wholly
renounce her for his daughter, and absolutely disinherit her, and leave her a
beggar, if she marry Lorenzo, and then and there flies from her in rage and
choler, and leaves her alone to her self, to entertain her disconsolate and
sorrowful thoughts, with a world of sighs and tears.

As for the Letters which pass from Genova to Sevona, and that are also
returned from Savona to Genova, between these our two lovers Lorenzo and
Fermia, deeming them impertinent to this their History, I have therefore
purposely excluded, and for order and brevities sake omitted them: The which
entertained their time, and took up their affections and patience so long,
that three years are now past and blown over, since they first saw each
other, and since Lorenzo first motioned Moron for his consent to marry his
daughter, during all which long tract of time, which to those our two young
lovers seemed at least so many ages. The Reader is prayed to understand and
take notice, that Lorenzo has made five or six journeyes from Genova to Savona
to see his Fermia, and has importunately requested her father Moron for his
consent, and that at least as many times she likewise has employed all her
Parents and friends toward him, yea, and has been more often on her bended
knees to him to beg it, but all these their requests and sotions toward him
prove vain.

When Lorenzo at last considering and remembering, that he had used all the
lawful means he could possibly invent, and Fermia all her best endeavors and
inventions which lay in her mortal power to draw her father Moron to their
desires and wishes of marriage, and that neither they nor all the world could
prevail with him, he thinks it now high time (as well for the settling of his
fortunes and trade, as also for the confirmation of his hearts content) to lay
close siege to his Fermia, that (notwithstanding her fathers refusal) she
would consent and yield to marry him, and so very secretly by night to leave
him and Savona, and to come live and die with himself in Genova, telling her,
that although he had never a Duckaton of marriage money with her from her
father, yet that God had given him estate and means enough to maintain her
and his family, in full and plentiful prosperity, and that he would be a
thousand times more tender and careful of her than of his own life. Thus with
a world of sweet words and sugared promises, and persuasions, this sweet and
fair young maiden (contrary to her former wholesome, virtuous, and obedient
resolutions) is at last drawn and tempted away by him, now to prove
disobedient to her father, yea, and to forsake and fly away both from his
house and himself. So Lorenzo having to that end secretly provided himself of
a fine small Frigot, of four oars in each side, he therewith comes by night
into the key of Savona, (which the policy of the Genouesses (now their Lords
and Superiors) have dammed up, and made incapable of ships of burden, that
thereby all the trade and commerce by Sea, may arrive to their own capital
City) where giving notice to Fermia of his being there, she (taking her best
clothes, and other chiefest necessaries with her) in the dead time of the
night, when her father and his servants were fast in sleep, and all things
being hushed up in silence, seemed to conspire to her rash and inconsiderate
escape, she by the Garden door issues forth to Lorenzo, who there received
her with much joy, and many kisses, and so conducts her to the Frigate, where
the wind (in favor of this their clandestine flight) proving very fair, they
hoise up sail, and early the next morning arrive at Genova, where (within two
hours after) Lorenzo conducts her to St. Saviors Church, and there very
secretly (yet solemnly espouseth and marries her. But O Fermia, how I pity thy
youth and beauty, thine innocence and indiscretion, thy few years and many
virtues, thy affection and misfortune, and thine ignorance and credulity, so
rashly and disobediently to fly from Savona to Genova, and to take (or rather
to steal) away thy self from thy father, purposely to give thy self in
marriage to Lorenzo, for which indiscreet and disobedient fact of thine, it is
not unpossible for thee to see this ensuing position verified and confirmed in
thy self, That there is nothing so easy in young people as to commiterrours,
nor so difficult as to repair them.

Whiles thus our young married couple celebrate their nuptials in Genova with
delight and joy, old Moron the father grieves and storms thereat in Savona,
for the sudden flight of his daughter: When fearing and believing that Lorenzo
had stolen her away, he secretly makes enquiry thereof at his house of Genova,
from whence he has perfect notice, that she is there, and married to him,
whereat he passionately converts his grief into choler, both against her and
him, and (in regard of this their disgrace and dishonor offered him) most
constantly vows to himself, and to all who are near him, that they shall
never touch nor enjoy the vallew of one Duckaton of all his Estate and wealth,
as long as he or they live, and that he will not once send after thm, nor ever
hereafter see them, which sharp vow and bitter sentence against our Lorenzo and
Fermia, we shall be enforced to see him too carefully to keep, and too
severely and punctually to perform.

Some ten days after this marriage of Lorenzo and Fermia, when their wedding
joys and pleasures had given them some truce and time to consider of their
worldly affairs, because they know and repute it folly, to think to be able
wholly to live by love, Lorenzo considering the injury and disgrace which he
had offered his father in law Moron in this action, and therefore very desirous
yet now again to seek his consent and good will to this their marriage, that
thereby he may participate and share of some part of his wealth, he determines
shortly to ride over to Savona to him, and with his best respects and duty to
comply and labor with him for a reconciliation; and yet nevertheless he
thinks it very fit, and hold it most expedient, that his wife in the mean time
should first excuse her self to her father by her Letter, the which she does
in these terms:

FERMIA to MORON.
ALthough the cause and manner of my departure from you and your house make me
more worthy of your indignation than of your pordon, yet when you shall please
to remember that you are my father, and myself your only child and daughter,
and that God and his holy Church has of Lorenzo my friend, now made him my
Husband, and also tha^ for the term of three whole years, I with tears and
prayers came many times prostrate to you on my bended knees to obtain your
consent thereunto, then I hope you will at least excuse, if not wholly forget
and pardon this error of mine: Or if these reasons be not enough powerful to
interceed with your displeasure, I most humbly beseech you further to consider,
that herein I have neither blemished nor disgraced your reputation with any
point of dishonor, for as I came to my Husbands bed a pure Virgin, so I will
live and die with him a chaste wife; and that as this clandestine flight and
marriage of mine was the first, so it shall be the last act of my disobedience
toward you. Some small portion of your wealth at our first beginning, will do
my Husband and self a great deal of good in our trade, but this I leave, as
to your consideration, so to your pleasure. Only in all humility and duty (as
low as the earth, and lower if I could) I desire your blessing to me, and
implore your prayers to God for me, the which in religion you cannot, and in
nature I hope you will not deny me. My Husband will shortly second this Letter
of mine to you with his presence, and will then commit that task to his
tongue, which I have now obediently imposed and commanded to my pen: And my
prayers and hopes, and his promises and ver^es do assure me, that (in his
respects and service to you) you shallever find him to be as much your servant
as your son in law. God ever prosper your age with health, and bless your
health with prosperity.

FERMIA.


Moron received this Letter in Savona, and understanding by the messenger who
brought it, that it came from his daughter Fermia from Genova, he was at first
in such a fret and fume of choler thereat, as he once thought to have thrown
it into the fire, without vouchsafing to read it: But after he had made three
or four turns in his Parlour, and so somewhat abated the violence of his
passion and choler, he then procures so much time from his pleasure, and so
much patience from himself, as he breaks up the seals thereof, and peruseth
it, the which as soon as he had performed, he in presence of the messenger who
brought it, tears her Letter in pieces, and then (all enraged with choler)
throws it into the fire, when again turning himself to him, he bade him tell
the Gigglet his daughter, That her carriage had been so base, disobedient, and
ungrateful to him, that he disdained to return any answer to her Letter, and
was very sorry that he had so much descended from himself as to have received
and read it: When without once enquiring of him how his daughter did, yea,
without giving the messenger any reward, or which is less, without making him
drink, he hastily and chollerickly flings from him, and will no more see or
speak with him. Who returning to Genova, and reporting to Lorenzo and his wife
what cold entertainment his Letter and himself had of her father Moron in
Savona; she grieves and storms thereat publicly, and he privately, and at
their first relation and knowledge of this her fathers unkindnesse in answering
her Letter with silence, they look each on other with their countenances
composed partly of discontent, and partly of sorrow, and for her part she
cannot refrain from tears, till at last her Husband Lorenzo steps to her,
when (as much to dissipate her grief, as to dissemble his own) he gives her
many smiles, and comforts her with these speeches; That according to her
promise (in her Letter) to her father, he will the next week go over to him,
and will then bear himself so respectively toward him, that he hopes his
presence shall purchase his affection, which her Letter could not, so she
hereat remains better satisfied than her Husband contented with this harsh
carriage, and unkind resolution of their father toward them.

Now some eight days after Lorenzo rides over to Savona, (handsomely clad, and
rather above than below his quality) and putting up his horse in an Inn, he a
little before supper time, goes to his father in law Morons house, where
enquiring of his servants for him, they tell him he is above in his chamber,
when desirous to see and speak with him, one of them steps up to him and
enformes him thereof: Whereat Moron starting up as if he had been suddenly
awaked out of a dream, he at the first mention and name of Lorenzo, but
especially of that of his son in law Lorenzo, bolts himself fast in his
chamber, and then calling up his servants to him, he flatly charge them to
deny his being within to Lorenzo, and as soon as he is gone forth, to shut the
doors against him, and at any hand not to admit him into his house, for that
his pleasure and resolution is neither to see nor speak with him. Lorenzo
bites the lip at this baffle of his servants, first to say their Master his
father in Law was within, and then in one breath to contradict and deny it.
When for that time he holds it discretion to depart, goes to his Hostary (or
Inn) to Supper, and returns thither again speedily after, but finds the
same answer. So then fearing the truth, that his father Law was (infallibly)
within, and yet would not be within, he returns to his lodging, and in much
choler betakes himself to his bed, but this discourtesie of his father in Law
will not permit him any sound rest, but only affords him many broken
discontented slumbers. The next morning very early he returns thither again
to see and speak with him, but the first prove the last answer of his
servants, whereat Lorenzo (all nelted with choler and anger) takes horse and
rides away for Genova.

Allow we him by this time returned to Genova, where he truly and fully
relates to his wife Fermia the discourtesie of her father toward him, from
point to point as we have formerly understood, which (poor sweet soul)
exceedingly grieves her heart, and infinitely perplexeth her mind and
thoughts, but how to remedy it she knows not, for as she knows she (by
her disobedient flight and marriage against h^ fathers consent) has committed a
greatfault toward him, so now she s^ that (of necessity) she must own and
make the best of it: When he c^orting his wife with encouragement, and she
reciprocally encouraging ^m with comfort, they refer the issue of this their
fathers pleasure or displeasure unto God; but yet rather hoping than
despairing, that a little time will make him more tractable and flexible to
their desires, they pass away their time merrily and sweetly together, he
proving a courteous and loving husband t^er, and she a kind and dutiful wife
to him. He exceeding provident to ge^ and thrive by his trade, and she as
careful in her house and family to save what he gets, and thus in six months
after they neither go nor send to their father, thinking and hoping that
although it be unlikely, yet it is not impossible but that hereafter of his
own free accord and good disposition and nature, he may shortly exchange his
displeasure into courtesy, and his malice into affection toward them; but as
yet they still find the contrary, for in all this time, he never sends to
them, nor so much as once hearkens after them.

At the end of six months Lorenzo prays his wife Fermia to ride over to
Savona to see what alteration this long time has wrought in her fathers
affection, and so recommends her portion from him to her care and remembrance,
but resolves not to write to him because of his unkindnesse to him at his last
being at Savona. Fermia (more in obedience to her husband, than out of her own
willingness or desire) accepts of this journey, but still she fears that she
shall find her father to be one and the same man in his discontent and
displeasure against them. But yet in regard she is his own flesh and blood,
his only child; and therefore a great part of himself, she yet flatters her
self with this hope, that he cannot be so unnatural to her, as he was unkind
to her husband. She comes to Savona, but look what entertainment her husband
Lorenzo found from her father, the same in all respects and points does she,
and no otherwise: For he will neither speak with her, no nor see, nor permit
her, either to lie, eat, or drink in his house, but most uncourteously and
unnaturally causes his doors to be fast shut against her; yea, and to add
cruelty to his unkindnesse, he is extreme angry with his servants for daring
to admit her to speak with him, and with her Aunt Alcyna, (his own sister)
for receiving and lodging her.

Our sweet Fermia the daughter is extremely perplexed, afflicted, and grieved
at this her fathers bitter unkindnesse and cruelty toward her, the which she
seals with many sighs, and confirms with infinite Rivolets of tears, which
trickle down her beautiful cheeks as so many pearled drops of dew on blushing
and fragrant damask Roses: When again employing her aforesaid Aunt Alcyna,
and likewise entreating father Bernardin De Monte, her fathers own ghostly
father, to persuade him in her behalf, which they do. But at last seeing the
requests of the one bootlesse, and the spiritual exhortations of the other
vain and to no effect, then as she came from Genova to Savona with some hope
and joy, so she is again constraind to return from Savona to Genova, with
infinite grief and despair; Where from point to point (betwixt anger and
tears) she relates to her husband Lorenzo, the unnatural discourtesie, which
her father had offered her: Whereat as before, so now he again dissembleth his
discontent thereof and with many sweet speeches, and some few kisses seeks to
comfort and pacify her: But still the remembrance hereof sticks deep in her
mind, and yet far deeper in his thoughts, for the knowledge of his father in
Law Morons discourtesie first offered to himself, and now to his wife in
Savona, being known and reported to many of his neighbors and friends in
Genova, they scoff and taunt at his foolish ambition, in marrying and stealing
away his wife, and in all companies which he frequenteth, they give him this
quip, that he had done far wiser to have married a poor trades man's
daughter in Genoua with a small portion, then a rich Vintners in Savona with
nothing: which foolish and malicious speech of theirs, falls not so easily
from his memory as from their tongues, but leaves an impression therein, for
from henceforth, Lorenzo of a wise man proves himself a fool, of an honest
man a knave, and so of a good christian to God, an extreme bad husband both to
his wife and himself: for now seeing the mountains of his hopes of a rich
wife turned to molehils, and they to nothing through his fathers displeasure
and unkindnesse to them, he looks not on his wife with so kind and
respective an eye as heretofore, although poor harmless young woman, she
knows far better to lament and greive, then how to remedy her fathers
cruelty toward them: But this is but the beginning of his ingratitude and her
unfortunacy, for before a whole year be past since their marriage, her husband
so far forgets his love to his wife, his regard to himself and his
reputation and credit to the world, as he first begins to slight her, and
then to neglect both himself and his profession: And here now it is that
idleness begins first to enter into his hands, vice into his heart, and
sin into his soul; and here it is that he first falls into bad courses, and
wicked company from whence in the end (I fear) will proceed nothing but shame,
repentance, misery, and confusion of all sides.

He who formerly prayed often with his wife and family in his house and was a
devout and religious frequenter of his Church, now he is so dangerously fled
from God and so desperately following of the devil as he scorns the Church,
and will neither pray himself at home with his wife, nor (which is worse)
permit or suffer her to do it at home with her family: He has forgotten her
dear affection and constancy to him, and how she has incurred her fathers
indignation for making him her husband and herself his wife: He has forgotten
his former oaths and promises of his tender affectiand constant love to her,
and how that in life and death he would live and dye more hers then his own:
He has forgotten how for his sake, and for the fervent love she bore him,
that she forsook diverse rich young men of Savona who were every way his
Superiors in Birth, Wealth, and profession: Or else if he did remember it, he
would not thus slight her by day, or lie from her by night in lewd and
lascivious company, spending both his time, his means, and himself: upon
panders, bauds, and strumpets, from which ungodly life and sinful
conversation, neither her prayers, entreaties, requests, persuasions, sighs or
tears can possibly reclaim him; but he lets all things run at random and
confusion without order, care, or consideration, so that within the compass of
one year and a half, his trade is neglected, his credit cracked, his
reputation lost, his estate spent, and nothing left either to maintain
himself or relieve her, but grief, sorrow, despair and misery. She sets all
his best friends, and most virtuous acquaintance to convert him from this his
abominable life, yea she holds it more shame, then sin to acquaint his
confessor therewith, who taking a fit time, deals roundly with him for his
reformation, and fails not to paint out his sins and vices, as also their
deserved punishments in their foulest and most hideous colors: But still her
husband Lorenzo is so strongly linked to the devil, and so firmly wedded to
his beastly vices and enormities that all the world cannot divert, or dissuade
him from them, and still he is so far from abandoning and forsaking them, as
he adds new to his old: for the devil has now taught him to delight in
cursing and swearing, for in his speeches and actions he uses many fearful
oaths and desperate execrations: He begins to revile her, and to give her
foul language, tear ming her Beggar, and her father villain, and that he is
bound to curse them both, because (says he) they have beggerd him: When God
and his sinful soul and conscience well knows that there is nothing more
untrue or false: For if his piety toward God, or his care and providence of
himself and his family had equallized hers, he had than made himself as happy
as nowhe is miserable; and she as joyful, as now we see her disconsolate and
sorrowful; and then no doubt but time and God would have drawn her father
Moron to have bestowed some portion on him with his wife, whereas now the
knowledge of his impious life and lascivious prodigalities does justly occasion
him to the contrary. Again here befalls another accident which brings our
sorrowful Fermia new grief, vexation and tears, for she sees herself
great, yea quick with child by her Husband Lorenzo so as that which she once
hoped would have been the argument of her joy, now proves the cause of her
affliction and sorrow, for his vices has scarce left her wherewith to
maintain herself, and therefore it grieves her to think and consider, how
hereafter she shall be able to mainetain her child, when God in his appointed
time shall send it her, for he has so consumed his estate, and spent, sold,
and pawned all their best household stuff and apparel, that almost they have
nothing left to give themselves maintenance, hardly bread: But yet still how
lewd and irregular soever Lorenzo be, his virtuous and sorrowful wife Fermia
serves God duly and truly, and spends a great part of her time in prayer,
still beseeching the Lord to give her patience, and to forgive her husband all
his foul sins, toward him, and cruel ingratitude toward herself: When in
the midst of this her poverty and misery, once she thought to have left her
husband in Genova, and to have cast herself at her fathers feet in Savona,
that he would pardon, receive and entertain her: But then again considering
his flinty heart and cruelty toward her, and that he would rather contemn
then pity her youth and misery, but especially calling to mind her duty to
her husband, and her Oath given him in marriage, in presence of God and his
Church for better for worse, for richer for poorer: Then I say the
consideration and remembrance thereof, is so strong a tie to her conscience and
so strict an obligation to her soul, that she thinks his vices and poverty
has now more need of her assistance, prayers and company then of her absence,
so as a virtuous wife and a religious christian, she will not consent to
forsake and leave him, but resolves to stay and live with him, to see what the
Lord is pleased to impose on her, and (for his sins and hers) what
afflictions and miseries he has ordained and decreed for them: And yet being
desirous to draw hope and comfort any way, because she finds grief and
despair from all parts, she resolves to acquaint her father with her
calamities, as also (earnestly and humbly) to pray him to relieve them, the
which she does in this her sorrowful letter to him, which she sends him safely
to Savona.

FERMIA to MORON.
I Now find to my grief, and know to my shame and Repentance, that my
disobedience in marrying Lorenzo against your consent and without your
blessing, is the reason why God has thus punished me with a bad husband in
him: whose fervent affection to me is so soon forgotten and frozen, and whose
Virtues in himself are so suddenly and sinfully exchanged into vices, that
his prodigality has spent and consumed all his estate, and left not wherewith
either to give himself or me mainteinance: In which regard because my
afflictions are so great, and my miseries so infinite, that I rather deserve
your pity then your displeasure; Therefore if not for my sake who am your
living Daughter, yet for my Mothers sake and remembrance, who is your dead
wife, either give my Husband means to set up his old trade and forsake his new
vices Genoua, or else take me home to live with you again in Savona: And if
you will not in Nature respect me as your Daughter, yet in compassion
entertain me as your Handmaid, and I most humbly and religiously beseech you
to think and consider with your self to what great wants and necessity I am
now reduced, since I write you this my letter rather with tears then incke: God
direct your heart to my relief and consolation, as mine is eternally devoted
to your service, and consecrated to his glory.

FERMIA.


Her father Moron after a long consultation and reluctation with himself,
whether he should read or reject this letter of his Daughter. He at last
(having formerly understood of her husbands prodigality, and her poverty and
misery) breaks up the seals thereof and peruseth it, and surely if there had
been any spark of humanity or reason, or of good nature or pity in him at
all, his former knowledge of her miseries, and now this present assurance and
confirmation thereof, should have persuaded him to grant her, if not the first,
yet the second of her requests, which was to receive her, and give her
maintenance: but he is still so hard hearted to her as he will neither relieve
her wants, nor pity her afflictions, but (more out of hatred then affection to
her) thinks he has done enough in sending her not his love but this his sharp
letter in answer of hers.

MORON to FERMIA.
IF thy Husband prove not to thy liking, thou have just reason to thank thy
self, and to condemn thine own temerity and disobedience in choosing him,
and if his affection be so soon forgotten or frozen to thee, it is a just
punishment of God, because thine was so first to me, whereof as that is the
effect, so doubtless this is the prime, and original cause thereof, and as
his vices and prodigality has spent all his estate, so I have not so little
judgment, (though thou so small understanding) to think that mine shall
redeem it, which (upon the whole) were then to immytate and second him in his
folly, and consequently to make my self guilty in consuming it. And because
thou fleddest with him without my knowledge from Savona to Genoua; and did
there marry him without my consent, therefore it is neither thy Grief nor
Misery, or thy shame and repentance, which shall induce me either to respect or
pity thee as my daughter, or which is less, to relieve and entertain thee as
my handmaid, you both are young enough to work and labor for your living, as
thy mother and my self did for ours, and therefore know that thy youth
deserves no compassion from my age, and if this will not satisfy thee, then
the best advise and counsel which I can or will give thee is, that thou
continually direct thy prayers to God, for thy releife and consolation: And
herein thou will then serve thy self, please me, and glorify him: And as
thou regardest my Commands, or desire my blessing, let me neither see thee,
or hereafter hear any more of thy vain and foolish Letters.

MORON.


The receipt of this her fathers unkind and cruel letter to her, does at one
time kill both her hopes with despair, and her heart with grief; or if that
do not, then the mad tyranny, and new cruelty of her deboshed husband does:
for now contrary to nature, beyond reason and opposite to Grace, he many times
beats her; she is all in tears hereat, uses all possible means to reclaim
him from his new vices to his old virtues: She continually persuades him
fairly with exhortations, sweetly with sighs, and dearly with tears, yea
poor sweet young woman, she many times casts herself at his feet, and with
her arms crossed, her hands elevated toward heaven, her hair dishevelled and
dandling about her cheeks, and her pearled tears bedewing the lillies of her
mournful and disconsolate countenance, begs him to forsake his vices to
himself, and his undeserved unkindnesse and cruelty toward her: But all this
is in vain, for he proves death to her requests and prayers, and blind to
her sighs and tears. He has no longer money to buy corn, and is so far
from selling any bread to others, as he has scarce enough to give to himself
and to his great bellied wife, and as for his servants he is enforced to put
them all away: His vanity to himself and cruelty to his wife is too too
lamentably notorious and remarkable, for when he wants money, he beats her, if
she will not presently supply his wants, and furnish his expenses. Now in the
midst of all these her griefs and miseries, God sends her a fair young
son, of whom the father is not worthy, no nor of his virtuous wife who bore
it: For had not the care, affection, and charity of her neighbors been far
greater then that of her husband to her, both the mother had miscarryed, and
the child perished in the sharp throws and agony of her delivery; and the
name of this her little son, whom she causes to be christened in a very
poor manner and ceremony, is Thomaso: for she is so poor as she has nothing
but rags to wrappe and cover him with, and therefore with much grief and
shame, she begges poor linen clouts of her neighbors to keep him clean and
sweet: When it is waking, she looks and kisseth it often with joy, but when it
sleeps or suckes, then she grieves that it is so unfortunate both in a wicked
father, and poor disconsolate mother, who has more means to lament and
pity, then milk to feed and nourish it: She often shows her husband his
child, and importunately begges him hence forth to have a more provident care
of himself for his childs sake, and of his child for his own sake: But he
as a lewd husband and too degenerate a father does neither love nor care for
either but hates both of them, yea his vices and cruelty makes her sorrow so
infinite, that she reputes herself a burden to herself, and a thousandtimes
wishes she were in heaven; And one time among the rest after her husband
without cause, had given her many bitter words and some sharp and cruel
blows her child being in its cradle, he gone forth from her in choler, she
falls down on her knees to prayer, the which so soon as she had ended, and
her child awaking and crying, she takes it up in her arms, and mournfully
sitting down on the floor by her bed side, she (weeping as fast as her poor
infant babe sucked) having bolted her chamber door, was overheard by one of
her neighbors, (twixt whom and her self there was but a wainscot enterclose
and partition) to pronounce these (or the like) sorrowful speeches to her
self.

O poor Fermia, it had been an infinite happiness for thee if thou had
never seen thy Husband Lorenzo, or perished and sunk in the Sea when thou
fleddest with him from Sevona to Genova, before he was thy Husband. For surely
thou have great causeto think, and reason to believe, that this cruelty of his
toward thee, is a just plague and punishment sent thee from God, for
disobeying thy father, in marrying without his consent and blessing; with whom
when thou livedst single, thou had so much felicity and joy, as thou knew
not what belonged to sorrow and misery, and now living a wife to this thy
Husband, thou art enforced to taste so much grief and misery, as thou know
no more what belongs to joy and felicity. Then thou did surfeit with the
choice of the costliest meats and viands, and now thou art ready to starve
merely for want of bread: Then thy apparel was rich, but now rent and torn:
Then thy beauty made thee sought in marriage by diverse, and now the griefs and
sorrows having defaced and withered it, thou art contemned and hated of him
who married thee. For can thy griefs be matched, or thy afflictions and
sorrows parralleld, when thou have a Husband who neither fears nor serves
God, who will neither go to Church, or pray himself, or permit or suffer thee
to do it; and who is so far from loving thee, as he loves nothing better
than to hate, revile, and beat thee: For (aye me) he drownes himself and his
wits in wine, and keeps whores to thy nose, spends all his estate upon them,
and upon Bawds, Panders and Drunkards (the offscumme and Catterpillers of the
world) with whom he consumes his time and himself, making night day, and day
night in these his beastly revels, and obscene voluptuousness, and upon whom
he has spent so much, as he now has nothing left either to spend or
maintain himself and thee; yea, thy miseries are so great, and thy
afflictions and sorrows so sharp and infinite, that thou have no parent left
to succor or releeve thee, and which is less, no friend who will assist or
comfort thee. Poor young woman, and disconsolate sorrowful wife that thou
art, it were a blessed happiness, and a happy blessing for thee that thou were
either unborne or unmarried. Alas, alas, thy mother died too soon for thee,
when thou were young, and therefore she cannot, and thy father lives, (and is
exceeding rich) yet hates thee so much as he will not assist and releeve thee.
And as all thy kinsfolks refuse to lend or send thee any comfort in these thy
wants and calamities; so those who professed themselves thy friends in thy
prosperity, will not now either see thee in thy poverty, or know thee in thy
misery. When again and again looking on her pretty babe, and giving it many
tender kisses, then (her tears interrupting her words, and her sighs again
cutting her tears in pieces) she continues her speech thus: And thou my
sweet babe, what shall I say to thee, since almost I can do nothing for thee,
for I have no food to give my self, how then can I give milk to thee; and yet
I love thee so dearly and tenderly, that although thy unkind and cruel father
hate me so deadly, yet I will starve before thou shall want, yea, I will
cheerfully work, and (if occasion serve) beg my self to death to get
sustenance and necessaries for the preservation of thy life. For live thou my
sweet babe as happy as thy poor mother is miserable and unfortunate: And if I
die before thee, (as I hope I shall not live long) say thou had a mother who
loved thee a thousand times dearer than her own life, and who was rich in care
and affection, though poor in estate and means to maintain thee. And if I
leave thee nothing behind me, (because I have now nothing left me either to
give or leave thee) yet I will give thee my blessing, and leave thee heir to
these my most religious prayers; That God in his divinest favor and mercy will
not power down his wrath and punishments on thee, but thou may live to be
as happy in thy virtues, as I fear thy father will be miserable in his vices;
and as true a servant and instrument of Gods glory, as (with grief and tears)
I see he is of his own disgrace and dishonor.

Neither is our virtuous Fermia deceived in the cloze of this her passionate
and presaging speech toward her husband, for he continues his odious and
ungodly course of life both toward God and her, and now (as well in his fresh
as his drunken humors) makes it his practice to revile, and his delight and
glory to beat her; who not withstanding yet thinking and hoping to work some
good in him, through his sight of this poor infant his son. She often
shows it to him, and with sighs and tears prays him to leave off this his
sinful life toward God, and these his cruel courses and actions toward her
self. But he is still the same man, yea, he is so wretchedly debauched and
vicious, as he will not endure to think of making himself better, and to say
the truth, I believe and think that the devil cannot possibly make him worse;
the which his poor sorrowful wife perceiving, as also that her child being
now by this time almost two years old, she has not wherewithal in the world
to maintain it meat or clothes, she is enforced to make a virtue of necessity,
and so works exceeding hard with her needle, thereby to give life to her self,
and her pretty young son; and yet say she what she will with sighs, and do
she what she can with tears, her husband still forcibly takes away the two
parts of the poor profit, and small revenewe of her labors, both from her
self, and her little son Thomaso, not caring if they starve or die, so he
have to maintain his vicious expenses among his lewd Consorts and Companions;
yea, her miseries and wants are now so great, and her affection to her child
so dear and tender, that when she has no means to set her self to work,
nor can procure any from others, then (though to her matchless grief and
shame) she descends so far from her self, as shamefully and secretly in
remote streets and Churches, she begs the alms and charity of some well
disposed people for their subsistence and maintenance: But at length, when she
sees that her husband is informed and acquainted therewith, and that he is so
inhumane in himself, and so cruel hearted to her and her son, that he
likewise takes these small moneys away from her, (which in effect is to take
bread out of their mouths, and life out of their bodies) then not knowing what
(in the world) to do, or which way to wind or turn her self any longer, to
maintain her son, which (by many degrees) she loves better than her self, she
resolves to write to her father to take him home to him at Savona; and
maintain him, which she does by this her ensuing Letter, which carried him
this humble language and petition:

FERMIA to MORON.
THe increase of my Husbands vices are those of my wants and miseries, which
are now grown so extreme and infinite, that I have nor clothes nor food left
to maintain my self, or my poor little son Thomaso, nor scarceto give life
to us: And considering that I am your daughter, (yea your only child) me
thinks both in Nature and Christianity, that my father should not see me driven
to these sharp and bitter extremities, without releeving me, especially,
because as heretofore, so now my sighs beg it of you with humility for
charities sake, and my tears with sorrow for Gods sake. Or if yet your heart
will not dissolve into pity, or relent into compassion toward me, at least let
it toward my poor and pretty young child, whom now with prayers and tears I
beseech you to take from me and maintain, though not as a great part of me,
yet as a little piece of your self, and whom God (in his sacred power and
secret providence) may (for his honor and glory) reserve to be as much
happiness to you, as I your sorrwfull daughter, and his poor mother see my
self borne to affliction and misery: God will requite this your charity to
him, and thereby I shall the sooner forget your unnatural unkindnesse and
cruelty toward my self. And so may you live in as much prosperity, as I fear
I shall shortly die in extreme indigence and misery.

FERMIA.


Her father Moron receives and peruseth this third Letter of his daughter
Fermia, whereat being yet nothing moved in charity, or touched in compassion
toward her, but only toward her young son (and his grand child) Thomaso,
he returns her this short answer.

MORON to FERMIA.
I See thou art both wilful and obstinate in disobeying my commands with thy
Letters, wherein I believe thou take more glory, than either I conceive
grief at the relation of thy wants, or sorrow at the repetition of thy
miseries, the which I am so far from releeving, as I only pity it that I am
thy father, but not as thou art my daughter. And yet because thy young son
Thomaso is as innocent as thou art guilty of my displeasure and indignation,
therefore give him to this bearer, whom I have purposely sent to receive hi^ of
thee, and I will see whether it be the pleasure of God that I shall be as happy
in hi^ as I am unfortunate in thy self, and if in his sacred providence he
has ordained and decreed that he prove as great a comfort to thy age, as thou
art a cross and calamity to ^ine, which if it prove so, then give God the
only praise and glory, which is the best use and requital which thou can
make, or I desire.

MORON.


Our poor and desolate Fermia having received and over-read her fathers
letter, although she be wonderful sorrowful at the perseverance of his
cruelty toward her self, yet she is infinitely glad and joyful at his
compassion and kindness toward her young son, who apparelling the very best
that possibly she could, which God knows is ragged, mean, and poor) she
(with a thousand sighs, tears, prayers, blessings, and kisses) gives him to
her fathers messenger, and to whose affection and education, as also to Gods
gracious protection and preservation, she religiously recommends him; when (to
her exceeding grief and sensible affliction) she sees it out of her possible
power once to persuade her husband Lorenzo either to kiss or see him at his
departure, as if it were no part of his affection to bless it, or of his duty
to pray to God to bless it, much less to kiss it at parting. A most unkind
and unnatural part of a father to his sweet and pretty young son. Which
strange and discourteous ingratitude of his, it is not impossible for us to see
God as strangely both to requite and revenge.

Sorrowful Fermia having thus sent away her little son Thomaso to her father
Moron at Savona, she the very same night dreams in her poor bed and house in
Genova, that she shall never be so happy to see him again; when being awaked,
and remembering this her sorrowful dream, she for mere grief bitterly weeps
thereat, and although she would, yet she cannot possibly forget or suppress
the remembrance thereof, or once put it out of her mind; so that thinking her
self fortunate in placing this her little son with her father, and his
Grandfather, she is now very pensive and sorrowful for his absence, because
she can no longer see him, play with him, and kiss him, and is infinitely
disconsolate and mournful when she thinks of her dream of him. In the mean
time her lewd husband grows from bad to worse, so that her cohabitation is but
a bondage with him, and her marriage and wedlock but an Indenture of slavery,
and a contract of misery under him. Such is her incomparable grief, such her
unparalleld afflictions and calamities.

Five years our disconsolate Fermia lives in this rich misery, and miserable
poverty with her husband, and yet all the whole world cannot persuade her
father Moron to take her home to him and maintain her. She has no consolation
left her but prayers, nor remedy but enforced patience; so she arms her self
with the last, and adorneth her self with the first. She was contented to
beg for the maintenance of her little son Thomaso, but now being eased of
that burden, she will give it over, so she works hard to get her hard and
poor living, which yet she cannot get so fast as her husband spends it
prodigally and lasciviously. Her care and virtues make her the pity, as his
lewdness and vices make him the scorn and contempt of all their neighbors.
So whiles she sits at home close at her needle in poor apparel, he idly
wanders and gads abroad until he have brought his apparel to rags, and
himself almost to nakedness. And here it is that her wretched husband Lorenzo
now first begins to hearken to the devil, yea, to prove a very devil
himself toward this his dear and virtuous wife; for he enters into a
consultation with himself, that if he were once rid of his wife Fermia, he
might marry some other with a good portion to maintain him, and so again set
up his trade of baking which now had forsaken him, because he had vitiously and
unthriftily forsaken it. When his faith being as weak with God, as his
infamous life and vices were odious to the world, he assumes a bloody and
damnable resolution to murder her, and hereunto the Devil is still at his
elbow to provoke and egg him onward, and continually blows the coals to this
his malice and indignation against her: So neither his mind or heart, his
conscience or soul can divert him from this fearful enterprise, and
lamentable and bloody business: The which to perform and perpetrate, he on a
great holiday (which was the purification of the blessed Virgin Mary) takes her
with him into a Vineyard some half a mile from the City of Genova, under
color to recreate themselves, and to take the air, which God knows she poor
soul takes for a great, because an unaccustomed favor and courtesy at his
hands, where she most lovingly and willingly goes with him, and there feigning
himself fast a sleep, and she (innocent harmless young woman) then and
thereslept soundly, and every way being as devoid of fear as he was of grace,
he with a barbarous and diabolical cruelty, (seeing the coast clear) softly
rises up and cuts her throat, without giving her the power, time or happiness
to utter one word before her death: Where leaving her weltring and goring in
her blood, he speedily and politikely enters Genova by a contrary gate, thereby
to avoid all suspicion of this his bloody and damnable fact.

The very same night this her breathless murdered body is found out by some
of Genova, who accidentally walked that way; and they causing it to be brought
to the City, it is known by some of Lorenzo's neighbors to be his wife
Fermia, whereat to add the better cloak to his knavery, and shadow to his
villainy, he seems to be wonderfully sad, and passionately sorrowful for the
same, and so requesteth the Criminal officers both in and about the City, to
make curious research and enquiry for the murderers of his wife, which they
do; but this hypocritical sadness and false sorrow of his, though (to the
eye of the world) it prevail for a time, yet (to that of Gods mercy and
justice) in the end it shall little avail him; so he gives her a poor and
obscure burial, every way unworthy the sweetness of her beauties, and the
excellency of her virtues. Her father Moron has speedy notice of this
deplorable death of his daughter, who considering how she had cast away her
self upon so bad a Husband as Lorenzo, though outwardly he seem to bewail
and lament it, yet inwardly he much cares not for it; and for her little son
Thamaso, his few years dispenceth with his capacity from understanding, much
less from lamenting and mourning for this disastrous end of his mother.

A month after the cruel murder and burial of this virtuous, yet
unfortunate young woman Fermia, her bloody and execrable husband Lorenzo (is
yet so devoid of fear and grace) as he goes to Savona to request his father in
law Moron to give him some maintenance, in regard he had no portion from him
with his wife his daughter, as also to see his son Thomaso. But Moron by his
servants sends him a peremptory refusal to both these his requests, and so
will neither see him, nor suffer him to see his son, but absolutely for ever
forbids him his house: Whereat Lorenzo all in choler leaves Savona and
returns to Genova, where selling away his wives old clothes to provide him
new, he seeks many maidens and widows in marriage, but the fame of his bad
life and infamous carriage and deportment with his late wife is so fresh and
great, that they all disdain him; so that utterly despairing ever to raise
himself and his fortunes by marriage, he forsakes and leaves Genova, inrols
himself a Bandetti, and for many years together practices that theevish
profession, to the which we willl eave him, and speak a little of his young
and little son Thomaso.

Old Moron trains up this his Grandchild Thomaso very virtuously and
industriously, and at the age of fourteen years bids him choose and embrace
any trade he best likes: When Thomaso exceedingly delighting in limming,
graving, and imagery, he becomes a Goldsmith, and in four or five years after
is become a singular, expert, and skillful workman in his trade: His
Grandfather loves him dearly and tenderly, and intends to make him his heir;
but Thomaso (led as I think by the immediate hand and providence of God, or
out of his own natural disposition and inclination) being of a gadding humor
to travel abroad, and see other Cities and Countries, and having a particular
itching desire to see Rome, (which he understood is one of the very prime and
chief places of the world for rich and curious Goldsmiths.) He finding a
french ship of Marseilles (which by contrary winds stopped in the Road of Savona
bound up for Civita Vechia, very secretly packes up his trunk and trinkets and
so goes along in that ship: Now as soon as his Grandfather Moron understands
hereof, he very much grieves at this his rash and sudden departure: So Thomaso
arrives at Civita Vechia, goes up to Hostia by sea, and thence on the River
Tiber to Rome, where he becomes a singular ingenious Goldsmiths, and thrives
so well, as after a few years) he there keeps shop for himself and
constantly builds up his residence.

In all this long tract and progression of time, which (my true information
tells me) is at least twenty four years, his father Lorenzo continues a
theevish Bandetti in the state of Genova and Luca, where he commits so many
Lewd robberies, and strange rapines, depraedations and thefts, as that country
at last becomes too hot for him, and he too obnoxious for it so he leaves it
and travelleth into Thoscany, and to the fair and famous City of Florence
which is the Metropolis thereof, where with the moneys he had gotten by the
revenewes of his robberies he again sets up his old trade of a Baker; in which
profession he knew himself expert and excellent, and here he setleth himself
to live and dwell, takes a fair commodious house, and looks out hard for some
rich old maiden or young widow to make his new wife: But God will prevent his
thoughts and frustrate his designs and desires herein: For as yet his bloody
thoughts have not made their peace with his soul, nor his soul with his all
seeing and righteous God for the cruel murdering of his old wife Fermia which
as an impetuous storm and fierce tempest will suddenly befall him when he
least dreams or thinks hereof, yea by a manner so strange, and an accident so
miraculous that former ages have seldom if ever paralleld, or givenus a
precedent hereof, and wherein the power and providence, the mercy and Justice
of God resplends with infinite luster and admiration, and therefore in my poor
judgment and opinion) I deem it most worthy of our observation as we are men,
and of our remembrance as we are christians.

Charles now Cardinal of Medicis going up to Rome to receive his hat of this
present Pope Urban VIII. and Cosmos the great duke of Florence his Brother, (in
honor to him and their illustrious blood and family whereof they are now
chief (resolving to make his entry and aboade in that City of Rome to be
stately and magnificent: He causes his house and train in all points to be
composed of double officers and Servants to whom he gives rich and costly
liveryes, and among others, our Lorenzo is found out, elected and pricked down
to be one of his Bakers for his own trencher in that Journey, where in Rome he
flaunts it out most gallantly and bravely in rich apparel, and is still most
deboshed and prodigal in his expenses before any other of the Cardinals
meniall Servants, without ever any more thinking or dreaming of the murdering
of his wife Fermia but rather absolutely beleives, that as he, so God had
wholly buried the remembrance of that bloody fact of his in perpetual silence
and oblivion: But the devil will deceive his hopes: For now that Lamentable
murder of his, cries aloud to Heaven and to God for vengeance: Wherein we
shall behold and see, that it is the providence and pleasure of God many times
to punish one sin in and by another, yea and sometimes one sin for another as
reserving it in the secret will and inscrutable providence, to punish Capital
offenders, whereof murderers are infallibly the greatest, both when, where,
and how he pleases, for earthly and sinful eyes, have neither the power to
pry into his heavenly decrees, nor our mind and capacity to dive into his
divine actions and resolutions, because many times he accelerateth or delayeth
their punishments, as they shall stand most fit and requisite for his Justice
and their crimes.

When therefore the Panders and strumpets, and the new pride and bravery of our
Lorenzo had eaten out all his money and credit in Rome, and that (to his grief)
he now saw that by no possible means he could procure or borrow any more there
being infinitely unwilling to let his vice and prodigality strike sail, and
so as he vainly and foolishly thinks to disgrace his Lord Cardinals service
instead of honoring it: He once was minded, and resolved to steal some gold
out of the Argentiers or pay masters truncke; But then consulting with his
Judgment and discretion, and finding that attempt to be full of danger,
ingratitude, and infamy: He buries that resolution as soon as it was borne,
and then gives conception and life to another, which was to steal some pieces
of plate out of a young Goldsmithes shop there in Rome with whom he was
familiarly acquainted, and whose shop and company, he with diverse others of
his fellows) very often haunted and frequented since his coming to Rome; The
which, watching and taking his time he does, and from him takes away two fair
rich guilt Chalices, and a curious small gold crucifix set with a few Saphires
and Emeralds, all mounting to the value of four hundred and fifty Dukatons.
This young Goldsmith (whose name we shall anon know) is amazed at this great
loss, when being guided and directed by the immediate finger of God, he knows
not whom to suspect or accuse for this robbery but Lorenzo the Cardinal of
Florence his Baker: whom he saw, and observed did very often and too
familiarly frequent his shop, and far the more does he fortify and increase
this his suspicion of him, because then making a curious enquiry and research
of his former life and actions, he found both the one and the other in all
points so vicious and deboshed, as we have formerly understood, only the
murder of his wife Fermia excepted, which as yet none but God and himself
knew: Whereupon well knowing that he lay not in his Lord Cardinals palace,
which as all others are privileged as sanctuaries, but in a Tailors house
near adjoining: He with an officer searched his chamber and trunk wherein he
found one of his Chalices, but not the other, or the gold crucifix, which
Lorenzo immediately had sold both to pay his debts, and to put some double
pistols in his pockets for his vain and prodigal expenses; When hunting after
this his theife Lorenzo he presently finds him, commits him to prison, and
accuses him to the Captain and Judges of Rome: Who upon knowledge and sight
of one of the chalices found in Lorenzoes trunk, and also upon his confession
of having sold away the other, and likewise the crucifix of Gold, they condemn
him to be hanged the very next day for the same, Lorenzo bitteriy weeping and
fuming at this his disaster) does most humbly sue and petition the Lord
Cardinal his Master to beg his life of the Pope, who considering him to be
a base Companion, and no Gentleman, and his fact (during this his service) to
be very foul and scandalous, He is too Noble and wise to attempt or
undertake it, and therefore becomes deaf to his requests; Whereupon Lorenzo is
that night returned to his prison, where he has leisure though not time
enough, to think upon his conscience and soul, upon the baseness of this his
robbery, and the foulness and bloudinesse of murdering his wife Fermia.

The next morning he is brought to his death, at the common place of execution
at the Bridge foot, in a little walled court close to the castle of Saint
Angelo, where a world of people flock from all parts of Rome to see the
Cardinal of Florence his Baker take his last leave of the world, and being the
night before prepared by a Friar, in his souls journey toward heaven, as
soon as he ascended the Ladder, he there confesses this his robbery: And
likewise that his name was Andrea Lorenzo, and that he (about some Twenty and
three years since) murdered his own wife named Fermia Moron in a vineyard
near Genova, whereof he says he will no longer charge his soul: The which
the young Goldsmiths (whose name was Thomaso Lorenzo over hearing) he
presently bursts forth into tears, and very passionately and sorrowfully cries
out, that this man on the Ladder is his own Father; and that Fermia Moron was
his own Mother, and therefore he with a world of sobbes, sighs, and tears
prays the Officers, and then the Executioner of Justice to forbear, and
leave the prisoner for a small whiles, which accordingly they do: When at the
descent of his Father from the Ladder: Thomaso (in presence of all that huge
number of people who were present) throws himself at his feet, and seeming to
drown himself in his tears for sorrow, confesses himself to be his Son,
and acknowledges Fermia Moron to be his mother, and therefore prays him to
forgive him this his innocent ingratitude toward him, in seeking his death of
whom he had received his own life: And although the consideration of his
mothers lamentable Murder does pierce him to the heart with grief, yet
knowing him likewise to be his Father, and himself his Son, he freely and
willingly offers the Captain of Rome, and the Judges all his Estate to save
his Fathers life, but this his robbere is so foul, and that former murder of
his so inhumane and lamentable, yea so odious to God and the world, and so
execrable to men and Angels that none will presume or dare to speak in his
behalf: So the next day Lorenzo is hanged, having first freely forgiven his
Son Thomaso, and entreated him likewise to forgive him for murdering of his
mother, and for any other thing else, he at his death said little: But cursed
the name and memory of that miserable and covetous wretch his Father in Law
Moron, whose unkindness and cruelty he said had occasioned and brought him
to all this misery. But he spoke not a word of his grief or sorrow for having
murdered his wife Fermia Moron; Only he said and believed that this his
untimely death was a just revenge and punishment of God to him for the same.

The common sort of the Spectators and people of Rome, seemed to tax the
Cardinal of Florence his Master for not saving this his Bakers life: but the
wiser and more religious sort, applauded his generosity and piety for not
attempting it from the Pope: But all do admire and wonder at Gods sacred
providence and divine Justice in making the Son the cause and instrument of
his fathers hanging for murdering of his mother, the which indeed gave cause
of speech and matter of wonder to Rome, Genova, Savona, and Florence, yea to
all Italy: And thus was the wicked life and deserved death of this bloody
Villain Lorenzo, and in this manner did the Justice of the Lord triumph ore
his crime in his punishment. And as for his Son Thomaso (the Goldsmith) after
this infamous and scandalous death of his Father, he could no longer content
himself to live in Rome, but returned to Savona to his Grandfather Moron, who
received him with many demonstrations of Joy, and affection, and after his
death made him sole heir to all his wealth and Estate.

To God be all the Glory.
FINIS.
December. XII. 1633.
Recensui hunc librum cui titulus (The fourth Book of Gods Revenge against the
crying and execrable sin of wilful and premeditated Murder) una cum
Epistola Dedicatoria ad Honoratissimum Dominum Philip: Com. Pemb. and Montgom.
qui quidem liber continet paginas 93. in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae
aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur, ita
tamen ut si non intra december menses typis mandetur, haec licentia fit omnino
irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood. Archiep. Cant. Capellanus domesticus.

THE TRIUMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.

Expressed In thirty several Tragical Histories, (digested into six Books)
which contain great variety of mournful and memorable Accidents, Amorous,
Moral, and Divine.

Book V.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.

VERITAS TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA
RS

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEE; and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks Head, near the Mitre Tavern.

1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE (AND TRVLY NOBLE) FRANCIS, Lord RVSSELL, Baron of
Thornehaugh, and Earl of Bedford.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
WHEN I had the honor to refer, to that Valiant, Wise, and Honest Nobleman,
Arthur, Lord Chichester, Baron of Belfast (whose sublime merits do here justly
deserve and challenge this Testimony from my Duty, That he was too good for
Earth, and therefore is now so soon crowned a Saint in Heaven) I then had
first the happiness to know, and to be known of your Honor at your
Cheswicke; In whom (because I ever hold it a far less crime to speak the
truth, then either to silence or dissemble it) I then found so many prints and
stamps of true honor, and Characters of ancient Goodness and Nobility, that
(with a pleasing content and delectation) I was enforced to be again and
again enamoured of Virtue and Honor for your sake, and reciprocally, to love
and respect your Lordship for both their sakes. Since when (out of your
generositie, not my expectation or deserts) your Honor was pleased to confer
a favor on me, the which though you forget, yet the remembrance thereof I will
(with equal Zeal, and Ambition) strive to make as eternal, as I know my
self to be mortal and transitory. You are a Religious Christian, and a true
hearted Englishman; and therefore as it is your glory, so it is our happiness,
that you are both a constant Lover of God and his Church, and a firm and
faithful honourer of your Prince and Country; and you are now Lord Lieutenant
(under our Royal and Gracious Sovereign) of that famous County of Devon, and
fair, and honorable City of Excester, to which I owe my nativitie; and in
both which the Russels (Earls of Bedford) your Noble Ancestors have condignely
left behind them many honorable Trophies of their Valor, and sweet and
precious perfumes of their Virtue.

These premises being so powerful in truth, and so considerable and prevalent
in Reason, I therefore flatter my self with this hope, that your Honor will
attribute it rather to Duty, then Presumption in me, If I now publicly
attempt to profer and sacrifice up something to the Honor of your Illustrious
Name, and to the Dignity of your resplendent Virtues: Missing therefore of that
desired happiness (by some rare, or elaborate piece) sufficiently to testify
to your Lordship and to the whole world, what you are to me in the height of
Honor, and what I am, and desire to be found of you in the lowness of
Observance and Humility, It will therefore be no less my Felicity, then
your Goodness, If you vouchsafe to accept and patronize this my Fifth Book of
foraigne Tragical Histories, and also please to permit them to travel and
seek their Fortunes abroad in the world, under the auspitious Planet, and
authentical Passeport of your Noble Protection, wherein you may behold and
see, how soundly, how sacredly the Justice of God meets with this crying and
scarlet Sin of Murder, which (in these our depraved, and sinful times) in
contempt of the Laws of Heaven and Earth, make so lamentable and so prodigious
a progression; and how sharply and severely it (deservedly) punishes (those
Butchers, and Monsters of Nature) the perpetrators thereof; And if I may borrow
(for I desire not to usurp) any part of your Lordships hours of leisure to
give first to the Knowledge, and then to the Contemplation of these Histories,
and the several Accidents which they report and relate, I shall then triumph
in my good fortune, as having obtained that Honor and Favor, which I
ingenuously acknowledge, I am far more capable to desire then deserve.

I come now to implore pardon of your Honor for this my Presumption, in
inscribing and adventuring so mean a work to your noble acceptance. And I
have ended this my Epistle, as soon as began, to assure you, That I will ever
(religiously) pray unto God to accumulate all prosperities and blessings on
your Honor; as also on your most Virtuous Countess, and successively on your
Honorable and Flourishing Posterity, who now promise no less then a happy
and famous perpetuity to your thrice Noble Name, and Family.

Your Honors in all Duty and Service, JOHN REYNOLDS.

THE GROUNDS AND CONTENTS OF THESE HISTORIES.
HISTORY. XXI. Babtistyna and Amarantha poison their Eldest Sister Iaquinta,
after which Amarantha causes her servants, Bernardo and Pierya to stiffle her
elder Sister Babtistyna in her Bed. Bernardo flying away, breaks his neck
with the fall off his Horse, Pierya is hanged for the same, so likewise is
Amarantha, and her body after burnt; Bernardo being buried, his body is again
taken up, and hanged to the Gallows by his feet, then burnt and his ashes
thrown into the River. HISTORY. XXII. Martino poysoneth his Brother Pedro,
and murthereth Monfredo in the street; He afterward grows mad, and in
confession reveals both these his murders to Father Thomas his Ghostly
Father, who afterward dying, reveals it by his Letter to Cecilliana, who was
Widow to Monfredo, and Sister to Pedro and Martino. Martino has first his
right hand cut off, and then is hanged for the same. HISTORY. XXIII. Alphonso
poysoneth his own Mother Sophia, and after shoots and kills Cassino (as he was
walking in his Garden) with a short Musket (or Carabyne) from a Window. He is
beheaded for those two murders, then burnt, and his ashes thrown into the
River. HISTORY XXIV. Pont Chausey kills La Roche in a Duel. Quatbrisson
causes Moncallier (an Apothecary) to poison his own Brother Valfontaine,
Moncallier after falls, and breaks his neck from a pair of stairs.
Quatbrisson likewise causes his Fathers Miller to murder and strangle Marieta
in her Bed, and to throw her body into his Mill-Pond, Pierot the Miller is
broken alive on a wheel, and Quatbrisson first beheaded, then burnt for the
same. HISTORY. XXV. Vasti first murthereth his Son George, and next
poysoneth his own Wife Hester, and being afterward almost killed by a mad
Bull in the Fields, he reveals these his two murders, for the which he is
first hanged, and then burnt.
THE TRIVMPHS OF GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING, AND EXECRABLE sin of
Murder.
HISTORY XXI.
Babtistyna and Amarantha poison their Eldest Sister Iaquinta, after which,
Amarantha causes her servants Bernardo and Pierya to stifle her Elder Sister
Babtistyna in her bed; Bernardo flying, breaks his neck with the fall off his
Horse, Pierya is hanged, so likewise is Amarantha and her body after burnt,
Bernardo being buried, his body is again taken up, hanged to the Gallows by
his feet, then burnt, and his ashes thrown into the air.

THe Golden times being past, what does this Iron or flintie age of ours
produce, but Thorns for Roses, and Brambles for Lillies, I mean, bloody and
barbarous acts in stead of deeds of Compassion and works of Charity. Not
but that Christianity (as a fair and glorious veil) covers the face of
Europe, as the firmament of Heaven does that of Earth; and that (by the mercy
of God) there are now great variety of learned and godly Preachers, who (by the
sanctity of their lives, and the purity of their Doctrine) spend the greatest
part both of their time, and of themselves to propagate Virtue, and Piety in
us, and consequently to root out vice and Sin from among us; But it is the
vanity of our thoughts, the corruption of our depraved Natures, the infirmity
of our Judgments, the weakness of our Faith, the coldness of our Zeal, and
our neglect of prayer, which sometimes (O that I might not say too too often)
transporteth our selves, beyond our selves, and our resolutions and actions
beyond the bounds of reason, yea and violently carries us to desperate and
inhumane attempts, which this next deplorable History will so apparently and
perspicuously verify unto us, that we shall difficultly read it without
sighs, nor understand it without tears, at least if we have but the sparks
of so much Charity in our hearts, and Piety in our Souls as the unfortunate
authors, and miserable actors hereof wanted.

IF Tuscany be the beauty and glory of Italy, then Florence (the capital City
thereof) must needs be that of Tuscany; or else it could not so justly and
generally deserve that true and excellent Epithet of fair. It is a City
which has given both life and being to the Illustrious family of the Medicis,
(or as some affirm, they to it.) The worst grounds about it are V^eyardes, and
the best are dainty Meadows, and delicate Gardens, or rather their Gardens are
Meadows for their spaciousness, and their Meadows are Gardens for their
fertility and beauty. It is divided and crossed in two parts by the famous
River Arno, and that river again by two stately Bridges curiously embelished
and adorned with many Marble and Alabaster Statues. The streets hereof are
well paved, broad and long; the buildings (for the most part) rather Palaces
then private houses, and the Temples for sumptuousness and beauty, nothing
inferior to the best, and richest of Italy, especially the two most sumptuous
and unparalleld Chapels of the Babtistaria, and Saint Lorenzo, as also the
Domo, and Campanella (which is the Tower) thereof, it being a most magnificent
and stately Cathedral Church, which not only catches our eye with wonder,
but surpriseth our thoughts with admiration, as all our English Noblemen and
Gentlemen Travelers, do (peradventure) know far better then my self; I say
in this rich and fair City of Florence, near the Church of the Dominican
Friars, in the latter days of the great Duke Ferdinand, there dwelt an
ancient, virtuous, and generous Cavallier, named Seignior Leonardo Streni,
descended of a Noble family, near to the City of Pistoia, where his
Ancestors left him many fair demeanes, and a very rich Patrimony, the which
(through his Frugality, Virtue and Wisdom, the true foundation of most of the
chiefest houses, and best familyes of Italy) he managed and improved so well,
that within the space of twenty years he became exceeding rich and oppulent;
but near about this time, that the sweetness of his content, might receive
some check of bitter affliction, to show him that man is subject to God, and
that there is no perfect or permanent felicity here on Earth, his Lady
Alcydina dyed, which brought him much sorrow and affliction, having only yet
this joy and consolation left him, that he had by her in marriage, three proper
young Ladies to his Daughters, named, Iaquinta, Babtistyna and Amarantha, who
albeit, he hoped would prove the stays and comforts of his Age, yet they will
futurely afoord him, far less felicity, and more misery then he can expect,
or my Readers (as yet) any way conceive or imagine, the which, to approve and
verify, they are by me prayed to understand, and remember, that these two
youngest Daughters, Babtistyna, and Amarantha, are wonderful fair and
beautiful, of a reasonable tall stature, very straight and slender; But
Iaquinta, the eldest Daughter is of a brown complexion, short, and
Crooke-backd, but she has this slight, that her Tailors art serves to
overvayle the defects, and to cover the deficiencie of her Nature; and she her
self has the skill to put on fresh tincture and complexion on her face, vices
which the purity and simplicity of former Ages were not acquainted with, or
else purposely disdained and hated, although the pride and vanity of these our
times do ambitiously allow and practice them. Again, Iaquinta is proud and
stately, Babtistyna chollericke, sullen, and revengefull, and Amarantha (to the
eye and judgment of the world) pleasant and courteous. Have we but a little
patience, and we shall shortly see each of these three Sisters, appear in
their true colors, and in very different ways to act their several parts
upon the Stage and Theater of this their History.

Streni seeing himself a widdower, not so much favored of God to have any
Son to enjoy his name and Lands, and all his three Daughters to be now
capable of marriage; He (as a provident and loving Father) holds it a great
point of affection and discretion in him now to leave his Manor house of
Cardura near Pistoia, and to betake himself to live and reside in Florence,
hoping thereby with less difficulty, and far more advantage, to look out
and provide fit Husbands for his daughters, answerable to their rank and
degree; which disposition and resolution of his pleased them well, and
administered them cause of great content and joy, siith it is now grown to a
custom, and a habit, that young Ladies and Gentlewomen do infinitely desire
to live in great Towns and Cities, where they may see, and be seen, and
especially in those of Italy, more then in any Country of the World, where the
whole Nobility and Gentry make all their abode and residence, the which
indeed is one of the maine points, and essential reasons, why their Cities are
so rich, populous, and fair.

Thus we see Streni and his three Daughters by this time come to Florence, and
dwell (as I have formerly said) near the Monastery of the Dominican Friars,
where his wealth, birth, and port, cause him to be visited and frequented of
the best and noblest sort of that City, and as the time of his residence, so
the number of his acquaintance increases, for virtue is capable to purchase
friends every where, and his wealth and Daughters beauties like so many
powerful Lures and Adamants draw many young gallant Gentleman to his house to
see and serve them; Where although Babtistyna and Amarantha, are beloved and
sought in marriage of many, yet their Father is resolute to marry their eldest
Sister Iaquinta first, wherefore when any noblemen or Gentlemen come to his
house, she is to be seen, and courted, but Babtistyna and Amarantha are mewed
and fast locked up in a Chamber. They grieve hereat, but they can neither alter
nor remedy this their Fathers resolution, for his word must be their Oracle,
and his will their Law. Now before I proceed farther in the dilation of this
History, as I one way commend Streni his resolution to marry his eldest
daughter first, so yet in approving his discretion for her preferment, I must
nevertheless tax his want of affection, in hindering that of his two youngest
daughters; For as it was a courtesy of him to have Iaquinta seen of Suitors,
so it was a degree of dis-respect, I may say, of cruelty in him to confine
Babtistyna and Amarantha as prisoners to their Chambers, when diverse of them
came purposely and honorably to his house, both to see and seek them in
marriage.

But Iaquinta (armed with her fathers love and authority) grows extremely
imperious and stately; She triumphs in conceit to see her self preferred of
her father before her Sisters. She sees her two sisters Babtistyna and
Amarantha are sued and sought for in marriage by diverse Cavalliers, and the
very consideration hereof grieves, and the remembrance afflicts her, but
withal she observes, that they dare not disobey, or contradict their fathers
command, to affect or speak with any, and therefore the very knowledge and
remembrance hereof, again rejoices her. As it is a happiness for us to
purchase friends, so it is a misery to lose them. Her Sisters love her, but she
loves not them, they are as unworthy of her hatred, as she is of their
affection. Nature (indeed) has given her the prerogative, and privilege, but
yet she should consider, that they are her Sisters, and not her Servants, and
that their blood is hers, and hers theirs. It is an argument both of
indiscretion and insolency, for one Brother or Sister to think themselves
better then another; But many Gentlewomen, who are Sisters, esteem pride a
second beauty, or at least an excellent Grace and Ornament to them, and
therefore to prefer and elevate themselves, they care not how they disparage
and deiect others. The beauty of Babtistyna and Amarantha is an eyesore to
Iaquinta. The tree of malice never produces good fruit. It is still a happy
virtue for us to check and vanquish our own vices. She knows that many
Gentlemen love them, but sees and observes with grief, that none affect her.
Her desire to marry is so immodestly licentious and boundless, as she could
willingly resolve to accept of any Gentleman for her husband, that would be
content to take her for his wife: but Incontinencie prooves still a pernicious
counselor to young Ladies and Gentlewomen. Now, as Cantharides fly still to
the fairest flowers; so she sees (and indeed infinitely bites the lip, and
grieves to see) that all Lovers and Suitors fly to one of these her two
Sisters, and wholly abandon and forsake her self: but being a woman, she wants
not an invention to apply a present remedy to this her discontent and choler.
She must have her Sisters beauties and braveries eclipsed, that hers may
appear more bright, and resplend and shine with more luster and glory: She
knows that Crystal seems precious when Diamonds are not in place; to which
end, she very passionately, and yet subtly works upon the affections of her
Father, and obtaines of him, that as her years, so her apparel may excel and
exceed that of her Sisters, the which he inconsiderately grants her; and this
she receives and conceives to be a step to her advancement, and an obstacle
to theirs. So if they formerly grieved to see themselves imprisoned in a
chamber, whiles she to her content and pleasure rejoices both to see, and be
seen of Gentlemen: So now their discontent thereof grows into choler, and
their choler into rage, to see this their elder sister Iaquinta not only to
step some degrees beyond them, but likewise many beyond her self in her
apparel.

It is ever a wise and discreet virtue in Parents to distribute their favors
and affections equally to their Children, or if they chance to affect one
better then others, at least that they be so reserved and cautious, as to
conceal it secretly to themselves, that the rest may neither perceive nor know
it. That Streni sought to marry Iaquinta before Babtistyna and Amarantha (as I
formerly have said) he did well, but yet to make them lose when they might find
and gain a fortune, was withal to be indiscreet, if not unnatural. Men's
fancies and affections in marriage are many times counseled and led by the
eye, as the eye is by the heart. Some will prise and affect beauty without
virtue, others virtue without beauty; but where both meet and concur, it
does not only please, but delight, and so jointly sympathize to make each
other excellent. Many of the best and noblest Cavalliers of Florence love
Babtistyna and Amarantha, but not Iaquinta; or if they seem to court Iaquinta,
it is but with a reserved hope and intent to enjoy the sight and company of
Babtistyna and Amarantha: but as Iealousy and Malice have always four eyes in
stead of two; so it is at least a torment, if not many deaths, to Iaquinta, to
see her two Sisters to live and be beloved of all Suitors, and her self of
none; the which to prevent, and so to stop the progress of their triumphs, and
consequently of her own discontent and affliction, she (not desirous to have
two such stars of beauty to appear and shine together in the firmament of
her Fathers house in Florence) does so secretly undermine, and so cunningly
prevail with him, as her two sisters (when they least dream or think thereof)
are by his order and command suddenly sent away by Coach to his Country house
of Cardura, near Pistoia (whereof we have already made mention)
notwithstanding all their requests, sighs, and tears to the contrary, and
there by his appointment to be privately and disconsolately shut up, from any
access or conversation of any man whatsoever, and under the charge and custody
of an old ill-favored Beldame (sometimes their Schoolmistris) named Dona
Malevola.

Babtistyna and Amarantha, being enforced to banishment from Florence to
Cardura, believed that it proceeded as well by the pride and malice of their
Sister Iaquinta as by the severitie of their Father; They know not from what
Saint to implore aid or assistance, or from what point their Art, or Invention
to expect for hope or redress hereof; But at length (being constrained to make
a Virtue of Necessity) they brook this their disgrace, with as much patience
as they may, no way doubting (much less dispayring) but that a little time
will work a great alteration in their Estates and Fortunes; But seeing a
month past over, and their Keeper Malevola, still more and more bent to
restrain them of their liberty, without suffering them to see or speak with
any stranger, or any stranger with them, they at last recollect, and pluck up
their spirits to themselves, and so resolve to write a fair Letter to their
Father, and a peremptory one to their Sister Iaquinta, to procure their return
to Florence, which they do, and send it by one Bernardo a trusty Servant of
theirs, That to their Father spoke thus.

BABTISTYNA and AMARANTHA to STRENI.
IT is with much astonishment and grief to us, that you have so suddenly
banished us from your presence, and from Florence, to live here rather as
Prisoners, then your Daughters, in your Country house of Cardura; And having
the honor to be so great a part of your self, we do not a little wonder
what our Errors or Crimes should be, that we must be enforced to be deprived
of that felicity, and to taste and suffer this misery. If we have been sought
or sued unto by any Noblemen or Gentlemen, it has been in the way of
marriage, and therefore in that of honor, and yet we have still so strictly
tied our fancies to our Duties, and our affections to our obedience toward
you, that in the least degree we have not swerved from your consent, but have
done, and do still inviolably make your Pleasure therein our resolution, and
your Will and Commands our Law. But we are confident that although you are the
cause, yet that our Sister Iaquinta is the sole Author of this our sorrowful
and immerited sequestration; Who (peradventure) in regard that her beauty
comes short of ours, that her Malice therefore must not only exceed the bounds
of Reason, but of Nature. And although she allege her Privilege and
Prerogative of years against us, yet because our blood is as good as hers, and
our Hearts and Education no worse, therefore we humbly beseech you to be so
favorable, and kind to us, that in regard her Malice and Pride has made her
our Accuser, and which is worse our Enemy, that you will not make her our
Judge, but that we may speedily reobtaine the happiness to return and live
with you in Florence, without which we shall assuredly either live here in
Despair, or shortly dye in Discontent and Misery: Which request of ours is so
just and equal, as you cannot deny it to us either in affection or nature,
much less in Reason or Pity. God ever bless you with happiness, and make us
happy in your blessing.

BABTISTYNA. AMARANTHA.



Their Letter to their Sister Iaquinta depainted these passions.

BABTISTYNA and AMARANTHA to IAQVINTA.
HAving curiously examined our thoughts and actions, we cannot find the least
shadow of cause, much less of Reason, why thou should so sharply
exasperate our Father ^ainst us, so suddenly to banish and exile us from
Florence to Cardura, neither do we ^ke it is for that we are fairer then thy
self, but that thou art more malicious then us, ^ch has occasioned thee, and
thou precipitated him to this sharp resolution against us. If thou art
desirous of a Husband, let it content thee, that as yet we no way intendor
desire to become Wives to any, and therefore if thou will not believe us, at
least believe this truth from us, that thou have far more reason to doubt
thine own haste, then any way to suspect or fear ours therein, for whiles
thou prayest for a Husband, we will first make it our Prayers to God, that we
may be capable and happy to deserve good ones. We advise thee therefore in
Love, and counsel thee in Affection and Charity, to consider seriously with
thy self, that we are thy Sisters, not thy Servants, much less thine
Enemies; and in that regard that we are as unworthy of thy malice, as
unwilling and incapable to digest it, because the priority of thy years can no
way justly introduce an inequality in our blood; and if thou will not enforce
us to degenerate from our selves, and consequently from the nature and
affection of Sisters, thou shall do us great right, and to thy self more
reason, to cause our Father to recall us home to him, with as much celerity and
favor, as he sent us away from him with discourtesie and indignation.

BAPTISTYNA. AMARANTHA.



The Lackey Bernardo arriving to Florence, and having delivered these two
Letters to Streni and Iaquinta, they breaking up the seals thereof, perused
and read over their Contents; when he smiling to see the indiscretion of these
his two daughters, attributed this their disobedience toward him, and their
discontent toward their sister Iaquinta, rather to ignorance and simplicity,
then to malice, and yet he could not but wonder at this their bold and
peremptory Letter sent him: But for Iaquinta, she was so galled and nettled
with her two sisters insolent carriage and Letter toward her, that it
exceedingly troubled and perplexed her, but especially, and far the more, for
that she feared that their Letter to her Father might cause him to grant their
return to Florence, the which to her possible power she would no way
willingly permit or suffer, as desirous to rule and govern her Father alone,
and so to reign sole Lady over his humors and house, without rivalls or
competitors: to which end she goes to him, and in the softest and sweetest
terms which either her art, or malice could invent, she extremely incenseth
him against her Sisters, alleging to him that their stay in Cardura was
necessary, and their disobedient motion for their return to Florence too
insolent and insupportable, and that she hoped with confidence, that he would
not permit their malice so unjustly to fall and reflect on her, because she was
as innocent as they guilty thereof; and that for any thought and desire of a
husband she vowed she had none, but that his will and pleasure should in all
things be hers, as resolving both to live under his commands, and to dye in his
favor and service: Which sugared and treacherous speeches of hers so prevailed
and vanquished the credulity of her old Father, yea and so powerfully wrought
and trenched upon his affections, that being all in choler against Babtislyna
and Amarantha, he resolves with himself to return them a sharp answer, and
commands Iaquinta to do the like, the which they both write and send back to
them by Bernardo, who returning to Cardura, he delivers his two young Ladies
and Mistresses these two Letters, and they speedily and privately retiring
themselves to a close shaddowed arbor in the Garden, they there with much
earnest desire and impatiencie, first break up that of their Father, wherein
contrary to their hopes, but not to their fears, they find this language.

STRENI to BABTISTYNA and AMARANTHA.
IF it be not purposely to cross your own good fortunes, you would not so
rashly and perem^ torily have attempted to cross my good intentions and
affection toward you, in sendi^ you to Cardura, but would have brooked it with
as much patience as I see you do with discontent, and before this act of your
disobedience, now revealed me in your Letter, I held you for my Daughters, not
for mine enemies, and my house of Cardura to be rather a Palace then a Prison
for you: So if you knew how ill those errors of yours become you, you would
rather redeem them with repentance and tears, then remember them either with
the least thought of delight, or conceit, or sense of joy. Nay think with
your selves what modesty it was, what wisdom it is, for your green youth to
presume (or to dare presume) to teach my gray age how, or when, to chase you
husbands, when God knows that neither your years, nor your discretion, do as
yet make you capable to think of husbands; and if you have any judgment
remaining in you, then judge with your selves how false and incongruous your
reasons are, when in words you pretend to obey my commands, and yet in effects
you wilfully oppose and contradict them. And having used me with so small
respect, see again with how much untruth and envy you abuse your sister
Iaquinta, who to my knowledge is as innocent of those false aspersions of pride
and malice toward you, as your selves are guilty of them toward her, since
she loves nothing more, and you affect nothing less then humility and
charity, their contraries; for believe me I find her to be your true friend,
and your selves to be the greatest and only enemies to your selves; for
otherwise you cannot live in the smallest degree of despair, discontent, or
misery, because such is my care of your education and maintenance, that no
young Ladies of Tuscanie, and few of Italy, of your rank and quality, are
brought up in more bravery, delight, and honor, the which my indulgencie and
affection shall still continue to you, if your disobedience and folly
henceforth give me no farther motive to the contrary: and therefore as you
tender my blessing, I charge you to make it your delight and practice to think
of God, not of Husbands; of your love to your sister Iaquinta, not of her
hatred to you; and of your Prayer-bookes, your Lutes, and your Needles, and not
of such vain conceits, and passions, wherewith you have stuffed and farced up
your Letter to me; the which, together with the Coppie of this of mine to you,
I now enclose and return to your Governesse Malevola, that she hereafter may
be more careful of your conduction and carriage, and that you give more hours
to discretion and honor, and less to idleness and vanity, to the end that
she seeing her fault in yours, she may thereby the better futurely know how to
teach, and you how to learn to reform them. And so I beseech God who has
made you my Daughters, to bless, and make you his faithful servants.

STRENI.


They having thus perused their Fathers Letter, and seen his spleen and
passions toward them, they cannot so much accuse him of choler, as they
believe they have reason to condemn their sister Iaquinta of cruelty toward
them; wherefore with more speed then affection, and with more haste then
charity, they likewise break up the seals of her Letter, wherein she greets
them thus.

IAQVINTA to BABTISTYNA and AMARANTHA.
I Am so far from incencing, or precipitating our Father against you, as I
vow to God, and to you, that his sending of you from Florence to Cardura, was
not only without my consent, but without my knowledge; and for calling in
question either the thought of your beauties, or of my husbands, you equally
wrong me, and the truth therein; for it is that most whereof I trouble my heart
and mind least: and therefore my haste to marry comes infinitely short of your
jealousy and fear; and except it be out of your pride and malice, of Sisters
to become mine enemies herein, I know no cause in Nature, and less reason in
Grace, why those false suggestions of yours should fall within the compass of
your conceits, or those untrue scandalls within the power of your heart and
pen, and it is as vain as ridiculous either for your love or counsel ever to
think to make me believe or conceive the contrary. As for the priority of my
years, it shall never make me esteeme-worse-of you then of my self; for my
conscience to God, and my actions to the world shall still make it apparent,
that although you contemn my friendship, I will yet corroborate and cherish
yours, and that there shall want no good will or zeal in me, that (according
to your desires and expectation) our father do not speedily recall you from
Cardura to Florence, where your presences shall still be my happiness, and
your company my content and felicity: And except your deportments and carriage
toward me give me not henceforth just cause to divert me from this sisterly
affection and resolution, I am constantly resolved both to live and dye in the
same.

IAQVINTA.


Babtistyna and Amarantha having thus read and considered these two several
Letters of their Father and Sister Iaquinta, they are infinitely incensed and
chollericke to see his discourtesie, and her dissimulation and cruelty toward
them, in that they must be enforced to live a solitary country life in
Cardura, whiles she triumphs in pride, and flants it out in bravery in
Florence; and as they much repine and murmr at his dis-affection, so they
infinitely disdain and complain of her imperious courses and carriage toward
them, adding no belief to her Letter, but judging it to be hypocritical. They
pity the weakness of their Fathers judgment, in suffering himself to be
so violently transported and carried away by the subtle policy and secret
malice of their Sister toward them; wherein although their duty and obedience
do some way excuse his age, yet their blood and beauty can no way possibly
dispense with the pride and malice of her youth, which they hourly see
confirmed and made apparent in the unaccustomed strict and hard usage of their
Governesse Malevola toward them, which with her best endeavors and ambition
sought as well to captivate their minds as their persons, by making her self
to be as much their Jailer as their Governesse; but they vow to requite her
unkindness, and to revenge their Sister Iaquinta's cruelty toward them: They
see her deformity in their beauty, her malice in their love, and her pride in
their humility; so they alter the course of their natural affection, and now
decline, in stead of increasing, in sisterly love and charity toward this
their Sister. To go retrograde in virtue, is to go forwards in vice; for as
it is the mark, so it is the duty of Christians to render good for evil, but
not evil for good: yea, all contrary examples and Axioms are ill taught, and
worse practiced, and it is to be feared, that the end thereof will produce at
least sorrow, if not misery and destruction.

But Baptistyna and Amarantha are too young and wilful to make good use of
their Sister Iaquinta's bad affection, and malicious carriage toward them; for
else, had they had as much wit as beauty, or as much affection as malice, they
would then fly that which they follow, and detest this bloody design and
resolution of theirs, which they now intend to embrace and put in practice.
They are weary of their Sisters hard usage of them, they cannot digest her
imperiousness and pride, and (in all outward semblance and appearance) if they
stay from marriage till she be married, they may all dye Mayds, and as our
English adage goes, Whi^ Apes in hell for company. They prefer their beauty
before hers, as much as she^ does her age before theirs, and deeming it
impossible for them to have husband^ ere she be a wife, they thereupon
abandon all reason and religion, and so at one time begin both to desire and
to plot her death; and of these two wretched Sisters Babtistyna is the most
forwards in this their intended deplorable business; for she is so weak with
God, and Satan so strong with her, that she says often to her self, she can
reap no content in this world, before her Sister Iaquinta see another. It were
better for us not to foresee a sin, then seeing it, not to prevent, but
perpetrate it. To which end, she purposely lets fall some words to her Sister
Amarantha, tending, and bending that way; but Amarantha is too courteous to be
so cruel, and too religious to be so outrageous and diabolical to any,
especially to her Sister: had she lived in the piety, and persevered in the
integrity of this opinion and conscience, peradventure her days had seen:
better fortunes, and her end been freed from so much misery. It is not enough
for us to be virtuous and godly, except we religiously and faithfully
continue therein; for constancy in all good and pious actions, makes men and
women excellent, and of being wholly mortal, to become (in a manner) partly
divine: But (to report truth in her naked colors) Amarantha is too weak to
resist her Sister Babtistyna's strong temptations and persuasions. It is an
excellent virtue and happiness in us, to have our ears still open to good
counsel, and shut to that which is evil and pernicious: but Amarantha hoping
and desiring to gain a good Husband, makes her in a small time consent to the
loss of a bad Sister; and now she is therefore fully resolved to join with
Baptistyna, to make Iaquinta away, Good God, what cruelty, rage, and barbarism
is it for two Sisters to resolve to murder their third! But this is not all;
for we shall see more blood spilt upon the Theater of this History, before we
see the Catastrophe thereof. These two unnatural young Gentlewomen having thus
swapt a bargain with the Devil to dispatch their Sister Iaquinta, they now
consult on the manner thereof, whether or no, they should perform it, with
Poniard, or Poison; but at last they agree upon Poison, but disagree which of
them shall administer it to her, and if there were anysparke of grace remaining
in either of these two bloody minded Sisters, it was in Amarantha; for she
cannot find in her heart or conscience to do it, and yet she is so graceless
and impious, as she freely gives way to the performance of this bloody fact;
so in the end, they fall upon this ungodly resolution, that Lots must decide
it: thus the Devil holds, and they as his infernal factors and agents, draw
them, and it falls to Babtistyna to do it. But here ere they proceed farther
in the progress of this lamentable business, and how to execute it, they are
now assayld with a doubt and difficulty of no mean importance; for as they
hold it requisite for them to perform this Murder in Florence, so they know
not how to escape from their watchful Governesse Malevola from Cardura: but
they are Women, and therefore they will be industrious in their malice; they
are Ladies, and therefore they will be swift and subtle in their revenge; for
having gold (though not their liberty at their command) they resolve that the
first shall speedily procure the second: To which end, they, by their servant
Bernardo, secretly hire a Coach for four Duckatons, the next night to carry
them away very closely and privately from Cardura to Florence, and with so many
more to corrupt the Gardener to give him the Key of the Garden Posterne gate;
both which (with much care, fidelity, and silence) he effects, being
himself only by them appointed to attend, and commanded to accompany them in
this their ^ourney.

These two revengeful Sisters having thus given order for their escape, and
secret^y packed up such things as they held necessary to carry with them, as
soon as their Governesse Malevola was in bed and fast asleep, who was as
innocent as they were guilty of this their clandestine departure, in comes
Bernardo about midnight to their chamber door, to which giving a soft knock,
they presently descend the stayres with him to the Garden, and from thence to
the Coach, wherein seating themselves, they leave Cardura, and so with great
speed drive away for Florence, where they arrive to their Fathers house,
betwixt nine or ten of the clock the next morning, he much wondering, and
their sister Iaquinta extremely perplexed and grieved at this their sudden
and unexpected arrival, they cast themselves at their Fathers feet, and crave
his blessing and excuse, but he receives them with more anger then joy, and so
gives them frowns and checks in stead of Kisses: He hears their reasons of
their unlooked for departure from Cardura, which he rejects both with contempt
and choler, sharply reproves their disobedience, and voweth speedily to
return them; they answer him, that his presence is the sole felicity and glory
of their life, and that they had rather dye with him in Florence, then live
without him in Cardura. As for their Sister Iaquinta, she dissembles her love
to them, as they do their malice to her; for whiles she secretly wishes them
out of Florence, so (in counterchange) do they as silently wish and desire her
in heaven: but after a day or two was past over, then their hypocrisy and
dissimulation was such each to other, as (to the eye of the world) it seemed
they could not be better friends, nor dearer or kinder Sisters, then now they
were; so artificially could all of them overvaile their malice, and so
cunningly could they conceal their different intentions, thereby the better to
compose their countenances and speeches. But when Iaquinta again perceives
that the Gallants of Florence do afresh repair and flock to her Fathers
house, purposely to neglect her, and to admire and adore the excellent beauties
of these her two younger Sisters, then her old jealousy revives, and inflame
her new malice toward them; so as with all her power and art, she again
secretly tampers with her Father, either to return them again to Cardura, or
to contract and espouse them to a Nunnery, that she might thereby triumph
alone at her pleasure, and being then sole heir to all his lands and estate,
might wed her self to the greater fortune, and nobler Husband; and she wanted
neither sighs nor tears to draw him to this her earnest desire and resolution.

This is not so secretly borne betwixt their Father and Sister Iaquinta, but
Babtistyna and Amarantha have present and pregnant notice hereof, the which
strongly and fully to prevent, they (now encouraged and animated by the Devil)
resolve to reduce, and draw their bloody contemplation into action, and so
(with more have then good speed) to dispatch their Sister for heaven, because
they loved Florence, disdayned Cardura, and above all (from their hearts and
souls) infinitely detested to spend and end their days in a Nunnery; when
neither having the fear of God in their hearts, nor his justice or judgments
before their eyes, Amarantha buies the poison, and Babtistyna administreth it
to their Sister Iaquinta, in a Lemmon posset, which they observed she often
used to drink the Summer time, so that some ten days after she dyed hereof,
when none but God, besides them, was witness of this their unnatural and
bloody business: So they rejoice as much as their father grieves and sorrows
hereat, and now they are alone, and domineere at their pleasures in their
Fathers house at Florence, without rivalls o^ competitors: But God is as just
as they are sinful, and therefore they shall reap^ but poor and miserable
fruits of this their bloody victory. For within less the^ six weeks after
the deplorable death of Iaquinta, a sudden languishing sickness oretakes and
surpriseth Babtistyna, so as the white tincture of her face looks yellow, and
the fresh roses and lillies of her beauty did exceedingly fade, and wither of
the Iaundies: A sickness, which I think God sent her purposely to punish her
for that execrable crime of hers in poisoning her Sister. But the beauty of
Babtistyna cannot be so much eclipsed or deformed, as that of Amarantha daily
grows more deliciously sweet, and sweetly delicious and amiable; so as all
those Nobles and Gallants of Florence and Tuscanie, who come to seek Streni
his Daughters in marriage, do infinitely prefer Amarantha before Babtistyna,
and passionately desire the first, as much as they now slight and neglect the
second: Babtistyna is not ignorant hereof, but sees it with grief, observes it
with sorrow, and remembers it with choler and indignation; and yet she seeks
and strives to conceal it from her Father, and to dissemble it to her Sister
Amarantha. She in this wane of her beauty and joy, begins now to participate
of her dead sister Iaquinta's living humors and conditions; she is now become
the eldest Sister, and therefore will not permit or suffer her younger to be
her mate, or equal, much less her superior; and although her Sickness has
deprived her of a great part of her beauty, yet it has no way diminished, but
rather increased and augmented her desire to marry, she envies the sight and
fame of her Sister Amarantha's beauty, as much as she lamenteth the decays,
and pittyeth the ruins of her own; and both grieves and scorns to see so
many Gallants court and seek her in marriage, and none her self: Now as pride
and malice (for the most part) are in separable companions, so her discontent
hereof has made her so devillishly malicious, as she secretly vows to her
self, that she could almost find in her heart to make Amarantha as well a
companion of Iaquinta's fortune, as of her blood: but God then presenting her
first Murder to her eyes and remembrance, the devil was not then enough
prevalent or powerful with her, to draw her to conceive or commit a second.
Thus not being willing to add murder to murder, and so to gallop in stead of
pacing to hell and destruction, she nevertheless determinately resolves to
emulate and imitate the actions of her dead Sister Iaquinta, toward her living
one Amarantha; and yet so to wreake her malice and revenge on her, as closely
to insinuate, and under hand surreptiously to prevail with her Father, that
she be speedily eclipsed, and again sent away to Cardura, under the guard
and custody of Malevola, the which she effectually and briefly obtayneth of
him; so our young and fair Amarantha (though infinitely against her will) is
now enforced to leave Florence, and suddenly (when she least thought or
dreamt thereof) is again confined and banished to Cardura, notwithstanding all
her sighs, tears, and prayers to her Father to the contrary.

Amarantha (with much sorrow and more indignation) being arrived to Cardura,
she is not a little perplexed and grieved thereat, but rather exceedingly
discontented with her Father, and infinitely incensed against her Sister
Babtistyna for the same, as well knowing that it wholly proceeded from her
mere pride and malice toward her; the which she now does not conceal, but
make apparent to her old Beldame Governesse Malevola, both in her looks,
speeches, and actions. She wondreth that her Sister is so inconsiderate of her
self, and so imperious and bitter toward her; and how it is possible for her
so soon to forget either their joint crime, or their several danger for their
so inhumanely and cruelly poisoning their elder Sister Iaquinta; the
consideration and remembrance whereof is of so sharp and bitter digestion to
her, as her thoughts vow to her heart, and her heart swears to the Devil,
that she neither can nor will long endure it; yea, the time seems so irksome
to her, and her stay in Cardura so infinitely long and tedious, as if hours
were years, and days ages, that she often thought to steal away from thence
to Florence, either on foot or horseback, and so to have put herself into
some disguised apparel, that none should know thereof before she came to her
Fathers house and presence: but at last considering, that her reputation and
fortune might suffer much in this action, she holds it not amiss, rather
convenient, first to write to her Father and Sister, to see if her Letters may
prevail with them for her return; the which she does, and sends them to them
to Florence, by her old trusty servant Bernardo. Her Letter to her Father
bewrayed these passions:

AMARANTHA to STRENI.
MY obedience has not deserved so much contempt and hatred, as that (without
cause or reason) you should thus again banish me from Florence to Cardura; and
with how much grief and sorrow I digest it, I can better relate with
discontent, then conceal with pattence: How dear your sight and presence was,
and ever shall be to me, if you will not know, and withal remember, God does;
for my soul appeals unto him, and my heart to Heaven, that I made it the
chiefest life of my joy, and the sweetest joy of my life; So as if you are not
the cause, I am sure my Sister Babtistyna is of this (undeserved) cruelty
toward me, who out of her pride, ambition, and malice, strives to be as
unnaturally imperious to me, as my deceased Sister Iaquinta was both to her
self and me. The remedy hereof is every way worthy of you, as you are my
Father, and of my self, as God and Nature have made me your Daughter; for if
you will not permit me to respire and breath the air of Florence, I will
shortly hazard my life to enjoy that of heaven: for already this my enforced
exile has brought me to extreme discontent, and that almost to utter
despair.

AMARANTHA.


Her Letter to her Sister Babtistyna carried this Message:

AMARANTHA to BABTISTYNA.
Could thou not be contented to live happy in Florence, but that thou must
needs constrain our Father to make me live miserable here in Cardura? Is our
Sister Iaquinta's blood already cold, or is the memory as well as the manner
and cause of her death already of thee forgotten, and so raked up in the dust
of her Grave? Judge with thy self (if thou art not wholly as devoyde of
judgment, as of affection and charity) what a palpable, yea what a gross and
sottish vice it is in thee, hereby to make thy self both guilty of her pride,
and Heir apparent to her malice. I remember those ungrateful crimes and vices
of hers toward us with pity, and I pity these of thy self to me with
admiration, in that thou will not suffer me to live at the courtesy of thy
tongue, when thou well know that thy life stands at the mercy of mine; Not
that I am either so malicious to thee, or so uncharitable or undiscreet to my
self, to wish thee any disaster or danger to the prejudice of mine own
happiness, and safety; for I desire all peace, affection, and atonement
betwixt us: the which if thou will grant me, by causing our Father speedily
to recall me home to Florence, he shall then see, and thou assuredly find,
that I will be as much thy Handmayd as thy Sister, and that I will far
sooner both hope and pray for a good Husband for thee, then for my self: but
if thou deny me this courtesy, then blame not me, but thy self, if the event
and issue of this thy cruelty come too short of thy hopes, and so
(peradventure) fly a pitch far beyond thy expectation.

AMARANTHA.


Bernardo being thus charged by his Lady Amarantha, for the safe and speedy
delivery of these her two Letters, as also to procure her Fathers and Sisters
Answers to them, he rides away to Florence, where he is no sooner arrived at
Streni his house, but meeting with the young Lady Babtistyna, and thinking to
deliver her Letter (whether it were out of ha^te, or misfortune, or both) he
delivers her her Fathers Letter, in stead of her own, the which she well
observing, she hastily and purposely breaks up the seals thereof, and
silently reads it to her self; whereat growing first red with choler, and
then again pale with envy, she foldes it up, and committing it to her
pocket, turns to Bernardo, and demands him for her Sister Amarantha's Letter
to her self; for (quoth she) that which I have already read and perused, is
hers to my Father; when Bernardo (as much amazed at his error, as afflicted at
his foolish simplicity) reading the direction of the second Letter, and finding
her speeches and his mistaking true, he then gives her her own Letter, and
desires back the other for her Father, as also both their answers thereunto,
for his Lady and Mistress Amarantha; whereunto, when she had perused her own
Letter, she (with disdain in her looks, and malice in her eyes) tears her
Fathers Letter before Bernardo's face, and then returns him this bitter
answer; Tell that proud Girl thy Mistress from me, that it is my Fathers
pleasure and mine, that she shall stay in Cardura, and not see Florence, till
she receive other order from us; and for any further answer, either from our
Father, or my self, it is both a vanity and a folly for her to expect: And so
(in much choler and indignation) she flies from him, and violently throws
fast the door against him. Bernardo, not expecting such sharp and cold
entertainment, and seeing it now wholly impossible for him to have any access
to Streni, or answer from Babtistyna, he leaves Florence, and speedily
returns to Cardura to his Lady Amarantha, to whom he punctually and fully
relates the bitter reply, and sharp and proud answer which her Sister
Babtistyna had given and sent her, and leaves not a syllable unrehearsed, but
only silenceth his mistaking, in giving of her her Fathers Letter in stead of
her own, as right now we understood.

Amarantha is all inflamed with choler at this proud and cruel carriage of
her Sister Babtistyna toward her, yea the remembrance thereof, so transporteth
her thoughts with envy, and her heart with revenge against her, that she
vows she neither can, nor will brook it at her hands; and here, not
hearkening either to Reason, or Religion, or to her Conscience, or Soul, she
now violently seduced, and exasperated by the Devil, does afresh revive her
old malice, and resumes her former pernicious resolutions to her Sister
Babtistyna: She has neither the wit, much less the grace, to consider, That
Choler increases her own torment and misery, and that if we vanquish not our
own malice and revenge, it is more to be feared then doubted, that it will in
the end both vanquish and ruin us. She has formerly con^ented to poison her
eldest Sister Iaquinta, and now she likewise vows, that she will cause her
elder Sister Babtistyna either to be poisoned or pistoll'd to death; but which
of these to make choice of, as yet she is irresolute, and upon this bloody
business her thoughts run incessantly to her heart, as so many lines to
their center. O that so young a Lady, and so sweet a beauty should make her
self accessory and guilty of so foul and inhumane crimes: but this I may
write to her shame, and the Reader may please to observe it to his comfort, and
retain it to his instruction; That had she had the grace to have been
formerly sorrowful and repentant for her first Murder, she had then never
proceeded so far, as to have made het self guilty of contriving and
resolving a second.

Babtistyna has a Chamber-mayd named Pierya, of some twenty four years old,
who was far more fair then rich, as being heir to much beauty, though to no
lands, or estate; and having hereto fore for some trivial respects sometimes
incurred the anger and displeasure of her Lady, and for the same received many
a sharp word, and bitter blow from her, as being a freer Gentlewoman of her
hands, then of her purse; She now accidentally chancing to break a fair rich
Looking-glass of hers, her Lady does not only exceedingly beat her, but also
without pity or humanity draws and drags her by the hair about her Chamber,
and then again and again kickes her with her foot. Pierya's heart is not so
ill lodged, nor her extraction and quality so contemptible, but that she is
very sensible of this her disgrace, as holding her fault far inferior to her
correction, and therefore disdaining any longer to serve so cruel a Mistress,
she very privately packes up her apparel, leaves Florence, and flies to
Cardura, forsakes Babtistyna, and so resolves henceforth to live and dye with
her younger Sister Amarantha: But as there are many of both these places, who
report that it was only her hatred to Babtistyna, and her affection to
Amarantha, which drew her to this resolution; yet there are diverse others both
of Florence, Cardura, and Pistoia, who (better acquainted with Pierya, and her
secrets) have solidly affirmed to me, that it was wholly her affection to
Bernardo, which was the truest reason, and strongest motive thereof, and the
event and issue of this History, will confute the first, to confirm this
second opinion of these her deliberations and resolutions; for, for the term
of at least three or four years heretofore, Pierya was known to be
passionately in love with Bernardo, and she had employed many friends toward
him, to persuade and draw him to marry her; but he was still as averse, as
she forward in this suit: For although he were inamoured of her beauty, and
loved her tall and slender personage, yet he hated her poverty, and (because
of some small lands and means he had) as he thought himself too good to be
her husband, so she in regard of her beauty, youth, and chastity, both highly
and infinitely disdayned to be his strumpet; and indeed the passage, and
process of these their affections was not from time to time unknown to
Amarantha. Pierya is as welcome to Amarantha, as Babtistyna is sorrowful for
her departure, and the youngest Sister now entertaynes her with as much
courtesy, as the eldest formerly retained her with cruelty; as for Bernardo,
he inwardly delights, though outwardly will not seem to rejoice in her
company, and so gives her his eyes, though not his heart; and for Pierya, her
carriage was so modest, and yet withal so respective to him, as if she
endeavored to make it her chiefest ambition and glory, that her virtues and
chastity should make as true and as perfect a conquest of his heart, as her
beauty had of his eyes: as for Babtistyna (her quondam Lady) she is now angry
with her self, as soon as she knew of her departure from her; but when she
understands that Pierya is fled to Cardura, and lives with her discontented
Sister Amarantha, then (under hand) she makes strong means to her to return
again to her service, intimating to her that she is ready to redeem her
former discourtesie toward her, both with acknowledgement and requital. But
these her hopes will deceive her, for she will find that errors are not so
soon repaired as committed, and that her want of kindness to her
Chamber-mayd Pierya may in the end (perchance) prove cruelty to her self.
Pierya is deaf to all these her ^equests, and endeavors rather to tie her
self to Amarantha's new affection, then ^o Babtistyna's old unkindnesse, as
preferring the courtesy of the first to the choler and indignation of the
second. On the other side, Amarantha is glad of this resolution of her new Maid
Pierya; for the Devil being still at her elbow, he continually sets fire to
her malice, and (as an infernal incendiary) perpetually blows the coals to
her revenge against her Sister Babtistyna; yea, and now he so captivateth her
soul, and extinguisheth her devotion and zeal toward heaven, that (I write
it with pity and sorrow, and not with passion, but compassion) she had
neither the power to pray, nor the happiness or grace, either to frequent the
Church for Gods sake, or to desire Gods presence and assistance for her own:
No, no; Such thoughts of piety were far from her profane thoughts and mind:
for as her best blood, so her best zeal was now corrupted and polluted with
revenge toward her Sister. And here, as a wretched Lady and a bloody Sister,
she does yet far worse; for (by the Devils suggestion) she assumes this
horrible resolution, not only to engage and hazard her self, but others
therein, as if she took a pride, and conceived a glory, not to shipwreck her
self alone, but to confound and cast away others with her for company in this
prodigious and lamentable business of hers. The manner is thus:

She knows, that by reason of her strict exile in Cardura, she must needs
employ some factors and agents, either to poison or murder this her Sister
Babtistyna in Florence; and therefore she thinks none so fit and proper to
attempt and perform it, as her old trusty servant Bernardo, and her new maid
Pierya his sweetheart, whom (by degrees) she purposely draws and obliges to
her by gifts and promises; and her reason for this conceit and opinion of
hers, that they will concur with her in this bloody fact, is derived from
this foundation and ground, that Love and Money may easily act wonders in the
hearts and minds of those, who desire the one, and want the other; as also,
for that she perfectly knows, that for many years Pierya has deeply loved
Bernardo, and dearly desired and wished him for her husband, and that he has
ever affected her, but only disliked her poverty: Wherefore believing that she
would do much for the obtaining of this husband, and he for preferment and
gold, she is resolute in making this her bloody proposition to them; when not
caring any more to write to her Father, she is now as hasty as bloody in her
malice and revenge toward her Sister; and so impatient of delay (and without
any further consideration with her self, or consultation either with her
soul, or with God) she taking time at advantage, first breaks with Pierya
about this bloody business, adding withal, that her desire and resolution is
to have her Sister Babtistyna stifled in her bed; for now the Devil has cast
off her resolutions from poison or poniard; to which effect, she promises to
gain her Bernardo to her husband, and to give them wherewithal to maintain
themselves well being married, if she will consent with him to undertake and
perform her request: which profers and promises of her Lady do sound so
sweetly in poor Pierya's ^ares, and work so deep an impression in her heart,
especially that she shall hereby enjoy Bernardo for her husband, whom she
loves far dearer then her own life, that being wholly vanquished with the
consideration thereof, as also enchanted with the sweet melody of her Ladies
sugared persuasions, she (without any fear or thought of God, as an
inconsiderate and graceless Maiden) yieldes to her ungodly and inhumane
requests; who then swearing her to secrecy, she within a day or two after
likewise boardeth her servant Bernardo upon this bloody business, the which if
he will perform for her, and take Pierya to his wife, she faithfully
promises to give him 150 Duccatons of yearly Annuity, during his life, and to
remain their true and constant friend for ever. At first Bernardo wondereth
and staggereth at the hearing of this cruel and lamentable project, as amazed
and astonished thereat, as if he were now so good a Christian, that Grace
triumphed above Nature in his heart, and God above Satan in his soul; but at
last being deeply inamoured of Pierya's delicate youth and beauty, which he
likes well, and of this yearly sum of gold for their maintenance in marriage,
which he loves dearly, he (forgetting himself, and which is worse God)
without any further rubbes or rumination, gives his Lady Amarantha his free
consent and promise to perform both her requests, as well of the Murder as
Marriage. Whereupon she carries him to her Closet, and there calls for Pierya
and acquaints her with her and Bernardo's conclusion; So in her presence they
(by j^yning of hands) contract themselves each to other; and then they all
three do severally and jointly swea^e secrecy, as also punctually to
accomplish this which they have concluded: When this wretched and execrable
Amarantha (the faster and stronger to tie them to her desires and their
promises) opens a Ca^ket of hers, and gives each of them fifty Duckatons in
gold, as a pledge and earnest penny of her love to them; and then faithfully
promises to reward them with so much more, as soon as they have sent her
Sister Babtistyna to heaven; when Bernardo and Pierya (to testify their
thankfulness to her) do both vow and swear, that herein (as in all things
else) her will shall be their law, and that both their best services and best
l^ves shall for ever be prostrate to her commands. But they shall ^epent the
taking, and Amarantha the giving of them this gold, because it is the price and
hire of innocent blood.

This lamentable (because sinful) compact, being thus secretly shut up, and
impiously concluded between these three wretched personages, then Bernardo and
Pierya fall so close and thick to their amorous kisses, as being desirous to
become one in body, as already they are in heart and mind, they request their
Lady Amarantha, that she would please to permit them to finish and consummate
their marriage, before they perpetrate the murder of her Sister Babtistyna;
but she (who was clearer sighted in her malice and revenge to her said Sister,
then they in their judgments and affections to themselves) considering that
this seal of their marriage was the great tie, and Gordian knot for them to
perform and finish her desire, the which if it were once solemnized, then
their devo^ion and zeal thereunto might (peradventure) afterward, either grow
cold, or freeze, if not shortly wither and dye away upon the design, she
strongly opposes and contradicts it, as affirming they shall first dispatch her
sister before they marry; the which Bernardo well observing and considering,
he thinks it no folly in him to learn by her, and so to make her discretion
his: and therefore that this Murder being once committed, she might after at
her pleasure revoke her verbal Annuity given him; the which to prevent (and so
to be as wise in his covetousness, as she was cruel and bloody in her
bounty) he tells his Lady Amarantha, that according to her desire he will
willingly defer his marriage till then, but withal, humbly requesteth her to
give him her promised Annuity written, and signed with her own hand; the which
because she cannot well refuse, she then and there does in these terms:

IN consideration, that my servant Bernardo do espouse, and take to his wife
my Chamber-mayd Pierya, I do promise, that (after the consummation thereof)
upon my fidelity and honor, I will yearly give and pay unto the said
Bernardo, or his Assigns, during all the term of his life, the full and
entire sum of one hundred and fifty Duckatons of Florence Money, and in
witness and testimony of this truth, I hereunto subsigne my name.

AMARANTHA.


A promise and contract written with more blood then ink, or rather not with
ink, but wholly with blood, and which therefore God, in his divine providence,
may hereafter produce, and bring to light, to serve as a powerful witness,
and Instrument of his glory, and peradventure to the infamy and confusion of
those who gave and received it.

Amarantha having thus given this promise to Bernardo, and likewise received
his, and his intended wifes Pierya's oaths in counterchange, she now thinks
with her self, that she must again return Pierya to Florence, and by some
sly hypocrisy, to reinvest and skrew her anew into her old Lady Babtistyna's
service, thereby to be the more able and fit to dispatch her. Now, as she is
maliciously ruminating on this invention, there falls out an accident, which
seems both to favor her hopes, and to further her desires and expectation
herein; For by this time, Babtistyna writes over to Malevola, to deal secretly
and seriously with Pierya for her return to Florence to her service, and that
she shall find her welcome to exceed her expectation and desires: So the
truth is apparent, that Pierya (instructed by the Premises) now needs not many
great persuasions from Malevola, to draw her to consent to this resolution; for
as she and her Bernardo receive the first motion of this (unexpected) news
with joy, so Amarantha imbraceth and entertaines it with delight; and now their
last consultation is held between them, about the conclusion and finishing of
this mournful business. To which end, Pierya is dispatched for Florence, and
the fifteenth day after, Bernardo is likewise secretly and precisely to arrive
there to her by night, and then is, the direct appointed time for them to close
and shut up this Tragedy. We must now allow and conceive Pierya to be again
entertained of her old Lady Babtistyna in Florence, with much courtesy and
joy; and for the seal and cyment of this their reciprocal reconciliation, her
Lady gives her a new black wrought Silk Gown, and a purple Damask
Petticoat, the which (as a treacherous dissembling wretch) she seems to
receive of her with much content and thankfulness, the which yet we shall
shortly see her requite with a most inhumane and prodigious ingratitude; for
her desire of marriage, and longing for a husband makes her think every hour
ten, before the fifteenth day be arrived. And for her late Lady Amarantha (who
sees by no other eyes but by those of malice and revenge toward her Sister)
she thinks every day an age, before she hear of her dispatch. At the
expiration of which time (according to their former agreement) Bernardo arrived
by night at Streni's house in Florence, and at one of the Clock after midnight
he finds the little Garden door open, and his Pierya there purposely to
receive and welcome him; so they begin their meeting with kisses. She leads
him by the hand to the outer door of her Ladies chamber, and they two having
agreed on the manner how to stifle her in her bed, she had there to that
purpose provided two pillowes, keeps one and gives him another to effect it:
These miserable wretches (for the more secrecy) put off their shoes, and out
the candles, and the darkness of the Moon, and the obscurity of the night
seeming to conspire to their conspiracy, they softly enter her chamber, go
one by one side, and the other by the other, where unfortunat Babtistyna lying
soundly sleeping and snoring, they stifle her with their Pillowes, and then a
little whiles after thrust a handkercher into her mouth, and their fury and
malice was so fierce and implacable toward her, as she has neither the grace
to speak, nor the power once to screech or cry. Thus she who had formerly
poisoned her elder Sister Iaquinta, is now also cruelly murdered by the
treachery of her youngest Amarantha, which makes me cry out and say, O Lord,
as thou art immense in thy mercy, so thou art inscrutable in thy judgments,
and that therefore, as we ought not, so we cannot resist his divine power and
eternal preordination.

Bernardo and Pierya (as two limbs of the Devil) having finished this cruel
murder on Babtistyna, they leave her breathless body on her b^d, and then
withdrawing themselves from her Chamber, they softly pull fast the door, which
had a Spring lock, and then she secretly throws in the key within side, at a
private hole, or crannie; when her Sweetheart and her self descend the
stay^es, and with wonderful silence stalk away to the Garden, without the
Posterne door whereof, his horse, tied up to an Iron ring in the wall,
awayted, and attended him; where with a multitude of kisses they part, he
faithfully promising her to return to her again at Florence within a month
after at most, and then to marry her: So whiles Pierya now (in the depth and
dead of this dismal night) betakes her self to her bed, and there (as devoyd
of fear as of grace) sleeps soundly, her sweetheart Bernardo, that very
obscure night, gallops through the streers of Florence toward the gate which
leads to Pistoia, where God (in all seeing providence) causes his horse to
stumble, and fall with him to the ground, whereof he brake his neck, and
presently dyed, and his horse then rising flies from him straglingly in the
streets, leaving the breathless corpse of Bernardo in the street, having not
the happiness either to cry or utter one word at this his sudden and disastrous
death; God having so ordained and decreed in his Star Chamber of heaven, that
although for the murdering of the Lady Babtistyna he deserved a more shameful
end, yet that this poor horse which brought him to Florence, should at the
same time and place be his executioner, as also that there was scarce one hour
between his crime and his punishment, between her murder and his own death: An
act and example of Gods justice, worthy of all men to know, and of all
Christians most especially to remember, so secret and sacred are the judgments
of the Lord of Hosts. All that night Bernardo's dead body lay gored in his
blood (which abundantly issued forth his mouth) as also in the dirt of the
street, unespyed of any mortal eye; but as soon as the morning began to
appear through the windows of heaven, then it was found, and likewise to be
done by the fall of a horse, whereof his neck the beholders saw was broken,
the which the sooner they were induced and led to believe, because they
likewise found a horse near him straggling in the streets without his rider:
This his dead body is therefore presently exposed to the Criminal Judges of
that fair and famous City, who forthwith cause his Pockets to be searched,
where in stead of gold they by the direction of God find the before nominated
promise of a yearly Annuity, which we have formerly understood Amarantha gave
him: Whereupon, they knowing the Lady Amarantha to be Seig. Leonardo Streni's
daughter, and by this note confidently believing this dead man to be the same
Bernardo, and he to be Amarantha's servant, they (without once suspecting or
dreaming of any murder committed by him) hold it a part of their office and
duty to acquaint Streni herewith. But the news of this dead found Corpse
rattling through the streets of the City, it devanceth this care of theirs, and
so speedily arrives to Streni's house before them; whereat Pierya (looking for
nothing less) takes so hot an allarum of grief, fear, and despair, that her
guilty thoughts and conscience (like so many Bloodhounds) still pursuing her,
she seeing this unlookt for disaster and death of her Bernardo to be an act of
God, and a blow from heaven, which infallibly predicted both her danger and
death; she therefore presently flies out a door, and (with much celerity, and
more fear) betakes her self to the least frequented and most remotest streets
of the City for her safety. By this time the Criminal officers are arrived at
Streni's house, whom they acquaint with this mournful accident, show him this
assurance of Annuity, and inquire of him if it be the Lady Amarantha his
Daughters hand, as also the dead Corpse, and if this were her servant, who (with
a countenance composed of astonishment, fear, and sorrow) acknowledges to
them, that it is his Daughter Amarantha's own hand writing, and the dead
personage to be her Servingman Bernardo: Whereupon they confidently believe,
and he sorrowfully fears, that this death of his, and that assurance of hers,
does either import or include some greater disaster and misfortune; whereupon,
they again modestly, yet juridically, demand of him for his Daughter
Amarantha, and her Chambermayd Pierya, who returns them this answer, that the
first is at his Manor of Cardura near Pistoia, and the second here in his
house, and now serving his eldest Daughter Babtistyna; they demand to speak
with Pierya, whom he causes to be sought in all places of his house, but
she is not to be found; so he sends to look her in his Daughters chamber,
her Mistress, but his servants return and report that the door of that
Chamber is fast locked, and that they can get no speech either of her, or of
the Lady Babtistyna; which answer of theirs does exceedingly augment the
jealousy of the Judges, and the fear of the Father: So (...) all resolve to
ascend themselves to that Chamber, where they aloud again calling both the
Lady and her Maid, and hearing no answer of either of them, they instantly
cause the door to be forced open; where (contrary to their expectation) they
find the Lady Babtistyna dead, and well near cold in her bed, and causing her
body to be secretly searched by some Chirurgians, and neighbor Gentlewomen,
they all are of opinion, that she is undoubtedly stifled in her bed, and her
face very much black and swollen with struggling for life against death. They
are amazed, and her Father Streni almost drowned in his sorrowful tears at
the fight of this deplorable accident, and mournful spectacle; and therefore
what to say, or how to bear himself herein he knows not.

But the Judges upon farther knowledge and consideration of the flight of
Pierya, the death of Bernardo, and the promised Annuity of Amarantha upon their
marriage (as it were prompted by God) do vehemently suspect and believe that
they all three were undoubtedly consenting and guilty of Babtistyna's death,
notwithstanding that the Key of her Chamber was found thrown in within side: So
they presently leave this sorrowful Father to his tears, and betaking
themselves to their Seat of Justice, do instantly cause all the Gates of the
City to be shut, and a strict and curious search to be made in all parts
thereof, for the apprehension of Pierya, which (in their zeal and honor to
sacred justice) they perform with so much care and speed, as within three
hours after she is found out, and apprehended in an Aunts house of hers, who
was a poor woman and a Laundresse of that City named Eleanora Fracasa. The
Judges being presently advertised hereof, convent her before them, and (by
virtue of this Annuity) charge both her and her lover Bernardo to be the
actors, and Amarantha to be at least the accessory, if not the author with
them of murdering Babtistyna, she can hardly speak for tears at this her
examination, because her sighs still cut her words in pieces; and yet she is
so far from grace and repentance, as at first she stoutly denies all, and
boldly affirms that both Amarantha, Bernardo, and her self were every way
innocent of attempting any thing against Babtistyna's life, and that if she
were dead, she dyed only of a natural death by the appointment of God, and
no otherwise; and to this Answer of hers the Devil had made her so strong, as
she added many fearful oaths and deprecations, both for her own and their
justification; but yet (notwithstanding this her Apology) these grave and
cleere-fighted Judges are so far from diminishing, as they augment their
suspicion both of her and them, and so commit her to prison, and forthwith to
the rack. At the pronouncing of which Sentence, Pierya is much daunted, seems
to let fall some of her former fortitude and constancy, and to burst forth
into many passionate tears, sighs, and exclamations: But they will nothing
avail her; for, seeing her pretended Husband Bernardo dead, in whom lived the
imaginary joys of her heart, she so fainted, as at the very first sight of
the Rack (with some tears, and more deep fetched sighs) she confessed to
her Judges, that she and Bernardo had stifled her Lady Babtistyna in her bed;
but still constantly affirmed that her sister Amarantha was wholly innocent
thereof, flattering her self with this hope, that for thus her clearing of her
Lady Amarantha from this crime and danger, she (in requital thereof) could
do no less then be a means to procure a pardon for her life: But these
hopes of hers will deceive her, and fly as fast from her hereafter, as ever
she formerly did from God. So the Judges (in detestation of this her foul and
bloody crime) adjudge her to be hanged for the same; but first they send her
back to prison, and the very next morning before break of day, they secretly
send away three of their Isbieres (or Sergeants) to Cardura, to fetch the Lady
Amarantha to Florence, being very confident (notwithstanding Pierya's denial)
that she likewise had a deep finger and share in her Sister Babtistyna's
murder.

Amarantha not dreaming in Cardura what had betided in Florence to (...) and
Pierya, but flattering her self with much hope and joy, that by this time they
had undoubtedly made away her Sister Babtistyna, and consequently that she
should shortly revisite Florence, and there domineere alone, and obtain some
gallant Cavallier of her Father for her husband, she in expectance of her
servant Bernardo's return, and of his pleasing news, had that day (as it were
in a bravery and triumph) purposely dighted her self up in her best attire,
and richest apparel; and so betaking her self to her Chamber, and to that
window which looked toward Florence, she with a longing desire expects
every minute when he will arrive; when about ten of the clock before dinner
(contrary to her expectation) she sees three men to enter into the house,
apparelled as Florentines, whereat she much museth and wondereth, as not
knowing what they, or their coming should import. These three Sergeants having
entered the house, they are brought to the Governesse Malevola, who brings them
to her young Lady Amarantha in her Chamber; to whom (with a dissembling
confidence) they report to her, That Se^gnior Streni her Father has sent them
to conduct and accompany her speedily to Florence. Amarantha inquires of them
for her Fathers Letters to that effect, whereunto one of the subtlest of them
makes answer very slily and artificially to her, that her Fathers haste, and
her preferment would not permit him to write to her, for that he perfectly
knew from him, he was now upon matching her to a rich and noble Husband: Her
Governesse Malevola likewise demands of them, if he had not written to her
self, they answer no, but that he bad them tell her, that he willed her
without delay to bring away his Daughter Amarantha with her, and themselves to
Florence by Coach, and only one Footboy. The Pupil and Governesse consult
hereon, and the very name of a Husband makes the first as willing as the second
is discontented to go to Florence without a Letter; but the policy of the
Sergeants so prevail with the simplicity of this young Lady, and old
Gentlewoman, that they speedily pack up their Trunkes, so dine, and then take
Coach and horse, and away for Florence; during which short journey, although
the mirth and joy of Amarantha be great, yet she finds so many different
reluctations, and extravagant thoughts in her mind at the absence and silence
of her man Bernardo, as she cannot possibly again refrain from musing and
wondering thereat. They all arrive at Flor^nce, where these Sergeants (having
learnt their parts well, and acting them better) in stead of Amarantha's
Fathers house, do clap her up close prisoner in the Common Goal of that City,
notwithstanding all her prayers and cries, sighs and tears to the contrary;
and then send her Governesse Malevola home to her said Father to advertise him
hereof; who tearing the snow-white hair of his head and beard at this sad
news, and extremely fearing the dangerous consequence of this deplorable
accident, he (with tears in his eyes, sorrow in his looks, and sighs in his
speeches) repaires speedily to the Judges, to whom sorrowfully and humbly
casting himself almost as low as their feet, he prays them to think of his
age, and of his imprisoned Daughters youth, and that having unfortunately lost
his eldest Daughter, that they would not deprive him of his youngest, nor cast
her life away either upon bare presumption or circumstance, or upon the
wrongful reports and malice of his and her enemies: But these grave and
Lynce-ey'd Magistrates (who look as deeply into the privilege and dignity of
Justice, as he does into the passions of paternall affection and nature) cut
him off with this sharp reply, That they honor his age, and respect his
Daughters youth, that she shall have justice, and that by the laws of Florence
he must expect no more; with which cold answer he returns home to his house,
as disconsolate, as he came forth sorrowful, being not permitted, but
defended to see, or speak with his Daughter Amarantha in prison, only he
has permission to bury his murdered Daughter Babtistyna, the which he
performs with far more grief and sorrow then solemnity.

The truth and decorum of this History must now invite the Reader to visit
Amarantha in prison, who being there debarred from speaking with any, or any
with her, except (those miserable comforters) her Sergeants and Goalers, she
now seeing the imminencie of her danger, and fearing the assurance of her
death, for that she heard a secret inckling (from the lower Court, through her
Chamber window) That her Sister Babtistyna was murdered, her Maid Pierya
imprisoned, and she her self vehemently suspected for the same: She
therefore now begins to think of her former bloody crimes with repentance,
and of these her inhumane cruelties toward her two elder Sisters with
contrition, and solemnly vows to God, that if his divine Majesty will now
please to save her life, she will henceforth religiously redeem the first and
second with repentance. So in the midst of these good thoughts, though vain
desires and wishes of hers, she yet still flatters her self with this poor
hope, that if her man Bernardo be living, then her promised Annuity to him
written with her own hand is still sure, and therefore tacitly dead in his
custody; and that both he and Pierya cannot any way wrong her without
infinitely wronging themselves, and indangering their own lives: so albeit her
Judges have matter of suspicion, yet they can have no cause of death against
her, or if peradventure they have, yet that the power of her Fathers greatness
and friends are so prevalent in Florence and Tuscany, that (if the worst fall
out) he and they can obtain at least her reprivall for the present, if not her
pardon for the future. But (contrary to all these her weak and trivial hopes)
the very next morning she is sent for before her Judges to a private
examination, who (after they had made a grave and religious speech to her) they
demand her, first, If she employed ^ot her servant Bernardo, and Pierya to
murder her Sister Babtistyna, the which she firmly and constantly denies;
Secondly, If she had not given an Annuity of 150 Duckatons during his life to
marry Pierya, the which sh^e likewise denies; then they produce and show it her
under her own hand writing, whereat (they measuring her heart by her
countenance) she seems to be so much perplexd with sorrow, and amazed with
fear, as she cannot refrain from giving them less words, but more tears;
Of which her Judges conceiving a good opinion and hope (and therefore deeming
themselves now to be in a fair way, and a direct course to obtain the whole
truth of this lamentable business from her) they bethink themselves of a
policy, thereby to effect and compass it, which is every way worthy of
themselves and their offices, of their discretion and justice. They tell
Amarantha, that in regard of her youth and beauty, and of her Fathers age and
nobility, they desire and intend to save her, if she will not wilfully cast
her self away; That her safe^y and life now consists in her plain
confession, and not in her perverse denial and contestation, of being
accessory and consenting to the murder of her Sister Babt^styna; That they
have proofs thereof, as clear, and as apparent as the Sun: and that they
having caused Pierya to be executed for the same this morning, she confessed
it to them at her death, yea and dyed thereon. At which speeches of her Judges,
and confession and death of Pierya, this wretched and unfortunate Lady
Amarantha (seeing her self so palpably convicted of this her bloody and
inhumane crime) being wholly vanquished either with fear toward her self, or
choler toward Pierya, she falls on her knees to her Judges feet, and (with a
great shower of tears) makes her self (by her free confession) to be the
prime author of her Sister Babtistyna's murder; That she had hired Bernardo
and Pierya to perform it, and given him an Annuity of 150 Duckatons per annum,
and to each of them 50 Duckatons more in hand to that effect, concealing no
point or part thereof, as we have already formerly understood: when (contrary to
the expectation of her Judges) she most bitterly exclaymed on the name, memory,
and ingratitude of this base wretch Pierya (for so she then termed her) in
that she could not be contented to die her self, but also as much, and as
maliciously, as in her power, to think likewise to hazard her own life with
her. And now our chollericke, and yet sorrowful Amarantha (between these two
different extremes of hope and fear) lays hold of her Judges late promise
and proffered courtesy to her to save her, and then and there (with many
reverences, tears, and ringing of her hands) most humbly beseeches them for
Gods sake, and for honors cause, to be good unto her, and to give her her
life, although she confesses she is most worthy of death, in being so
degenerate and bloody minded toward her own Sister. But they (having by this
commendable means, and artificial policy, drawn this worm from Amarantha's
tongue, I mean this truth from her mouth) are exceeding sorrowful, and as
much detest this her barbarous fact, as they pity her descent, youth, and
beauty; but well knowing with themselves that God is glorified in the due and
true execution of Justice upon all capital malefactors, and especially on
murderers (who are no less then monsters of nature, the disgrace of their
times, and the very butchers of mankind) and that the greatness of their
quality and blood does only serve but to make these crimes of theirs the
greater: therefore (I say) these wise and religious Judges prove deaf to her
requests, and blind to her tears; and so having first caused then to sign
this her confession, and then confronted her with Pierya, who now to
Amarantha's face confirmed as much as she her self right now confessed and
affirmed, they now in expiation of this her cruel murder, adjudge her
likewise to be hanged the next day, at the common place of execution, in
company of Pierya, although her aged sorrowful Father Seignior Strent (being
well nigh weighed down to his grave with the extreme grief and sorrow of these
his misfortunes and calamities) proffered the Judges and the great Duke the
greatest part of his estate, and lands, to save this his youngest, and now his
only Daughter Amarantha: But his labor proved lost, and his care and affection
vain in this his suit and solicitation, because those learned Judges, and this
prudent and noble Duke, grounded their resolutions and pleasures upon this
wholesome and true Maxim, That Justice is one of the greatest Colossus and
strongest columns of kingdoms and commonweals, and the truest way and means
to preserve them in flourishing prosperity and glory, and consequently, that all
wilful and premeditated murderers cannot be either too soon exterminated,
or too severely punished, and cut off from the world. So Amar antha with more
choler then sorrow, and Pierya with more fear then choler, are now both sent
back to their prisons; and that night Streni sends his Daughter, and the
Judges send Pierya, some Friars and Nuns to prepare their souls for heaven,
but (in honor of the truth) I must affirm with equal grief and pity, that
both these two female monsters had their hearts so sealed, and their souls so
seared up with impiety, that neither of them could there be persuaded, or
drawn, either to think of repentance or of God.

Whiles thus Florence resounds of these their foul and inhumane crimes, as
also of their just condemnations, the next morning about ten of the clock,
they are brought to the destined place of execution, there to receive their
condign punishments for the same. Pierya first mounts the Ladder, who made a
short speech at her death, to this effect, That her desire to obtain Bernardo
for her husband had chiefly drawn her to commit this murder on her Lady
Babtistyna, and that it was far more her Sister Amarantha's malice to her,
then her own, which seduced her to this bloody resolution; and that this her
own shameful death was not half so grievous to her, as the unfortunate end
of her lover Bernardo, whom, she there affirmed to the world, and took it to
her death, that she loved a thousand times dearer then her own life, with
many other vain and ridiculous speeches tending that way, and which savoured
more of her fond affection to him, then of any zeal or devotion to God; and
therefore I hold them every way more worthy of my silence, then of my relation:
and so she was turned over. To second whose unfortunate and shameful end, now
our bloody and execrable Amarantha (with far more beauty then contrition, and
bravery then repentance) ascends the Ladder; who (to make her infamy the more
famous) had purposly dighted and apparelled her self in a plain black Satin
gown, with silver lace, and a deepe-laced Cambricke Ruff of a very large Set,
with her hair unvailed, and decked with many roses of filver Ribband: At her
ascent, her extraction, beauty, and youth, begat as much pity, as her bloody
and unnatural crime did detestation, in the eyes and hearts of all her
spectatours: When after a pause or two, she (vainly composing her
countenance, more with contempt, then fear of death) there to a world of
people, who flocked from all parts of the City and Country to see her dye
(with a wondrous boldness) confessed, That she had not only caused her
Sister Babtistyna to be stifled in her bed by Bernardo and Pierya, but that
her said Sister Babtistyna and her self had formerly poisoned their elder
Sister Iaquinta, and that it was only their imperiousness and pride toward
her, which drew her to this resolution and revenge against them both; the which
she affirmed, she could now as little repent, as heretofore remedy, and that
she more sensibly lamented, and grieved for the sorrows of her Fathers ^fe,
then for the shame and infamy of her own death: when, without any show ^f
repentance, without any speech of God, or which is less, without so much as
once looking up toward heaven, or inviting or praying her spectatours to pray
to God for her soul, she (with a graceless resolution, and profane
boldness) conjured her Executioner speedily to perform his office and duty,
which by the command of the Magistrate he-forthwith did. So this wretched
Amarantha was hanged for her second murder, and then by a second decree and
sentence of the Criminal Judges, her body is after dinner burnt to ashes for
her first; who likewise, in honor to Justice, and to the glory of God, do
also cause the dead body of Bernardo (for two whole days) to be hanged by his
feet in his shirt to the same Gallows, and then to be cast into the River of
Arno. And here the Judges also, to show themselves, themselves, were once of
opinion to have unburyed Babtistyna, and likewise to have given her dead body
some opprobrious punishment, for being accessory with her Sister Amarantha to
poison their elder Sister Iaquinta; but having no other evidence or proof
hereof, but only the tessimony of her condemned dying Sister Amarantha, whom
it was more probable then impossible, she might speak it more out of malice
then truth, as also that God had already afflicted a deplorable end and
punishment to her, they therefore omitted it. And thus was the deserved ends,
and condign punishments of these wretched and execrable murderers; and in
this manner did the just revenge, and sacred justice of God meet and triumph
over them and their bloody crimes.

And now here fully to conclude and shut up this History in all its
circumstances; The griefs and sorrows of this unfortunate old Father was so
great and infinite, for the untimely and deplorable deaths of all these his
three only Daughters and Children, that although piety and religion had
formerly taught him, that the afflictions of this life are the joys of that to
come, yet being wholly vanquished and depressed with all these his different
bitter crosses and calamities, he left Florence, and retired himself to a
solitary life in Cardura, where he not long survived them, but dyed very
pensively and mournfully.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXECRAble Sin of Murder.
HISTORY. XXII.
Martino poysoneth his Brother Pedro, and murthereth Monfredo in the street;
He afterward grows mad, and in confession reveals both these his murders to
Father Thomas his Ghostly Father, who afterward dying, reveals it by his
Letter to Cecilliana, who was Widow to Monfredo, and Sister to Pedro and
Martino. Martino has first his right hand cut off, and then is hanged for the
same.

AS it is a dangerous wickedness to contrive and plot murder; So much more it
is a wretched and execrable one to finish, and perpetrate it; for to kill our
Christian Brother, who figuratively bears the image of God, is an act so
odious, as Nature cannot excuse, and so diabolical, as no Clemency can
pardon; And yet this age, and this world is but too plentiful and fertile of
such bloody Tigers, and inhumane Monsters, and Butchers of mankind, as if they
had not a Conscience within them to accuse them, a God above them to condemn
them, and a Hell below them to punish them; or as if they had not the sacred
Oracles of Gods eternal Word, I mean the Law and the Gospel, and the blessed
Precepts and Doctrine of the holy Prophets and Apostles, yea, of Christ Jesus
himself, the great Shepherd, and sacred Bishop of our souls, to teach us the
rules of Mercy, Meekness, and Longsuffering, whiles we live in this vale of
misery here below, and that we must embrace and follow Peace and Charity with
all men, if ever we think to participate of the true felicity and joys of
Heaven above: But nevertheless (yea directly contrary hereunto) this ensuing
History will produce us one, who though sufficiently instructed in the rules of
Piety and Charity, yet he wilfully abandoned the first, and contemned the
second, by cruelly and unnaturally imbruing his hands in innocent blood; for
the which we shall see, that he in the end suffers a severe and shameful
death. May we read this History to the glory of God, and the instruction of
our selves.

THe Scene of this History is laid in Spain, in the famous Province of old
Castile, and in the fair and ancient City of Burgos, where lately dwelt a
noble and rich old Gentlewoman, termed Dona Catherina A^z (a Surname much
known, and famous in that City, Province, and Kingdom) who had by her
deceased Husband Don Roderigo de Ricaldo, two sons, Don Pedro, and Don
Martino, and one Daughter named Dona Cecilliana. Her eldest son Don Pedro was
a gallant Cavallier of some eight and twenty years of age, tall, and
well-timbred, by complexion and hair black, and of a swart and martial
countenance, who for the space of seven years served as a voluntary Gentleman
under that wise and valiant Commander Don Gonsalez de Cordova in Germany, and
against the Lords States of the Netherlands, and since in the Voltoline and
Millane, against the Grisons and French; In both which wars, he left behind
him many memorable testimonies of his prowess, and purchased diverse honorable
trophies of true valor, and generosity: but for any other intellectual
endowments of the mind, he was no scholar, and but of an indifferent
capacity, yet very honest, courteous, and affable, particularly to his friends,
and generally to all the world. His Brother Don Martino was of some four and
twenty years of age, short of stature, very slender, but crooke-back'd, of an
Aubrun hair, a withered face, a squint eye, of inclination extremely sullen,
and of disposition and nature envious and revengefull, as desirous rather to
entertain a night-quarrell in the street, then a day-combate in the Field; but
as God is many times pleased to countervaile and reward the defects of nature
in the body, with some rich gifts and perfections of the mind, so though not by
profession, yet by education he was an excellent Scholar, of an active and
sharp wit, a fluent tongue, and singularly able either to allure or divert, to
persuade or dissuade, according as the stream of his different passions and
affections led him; Virtues enough relucent and excellent to build a fame, and
sufficient to raise an eminent fortune, if his former vices do not too fatally
eclipse the one, and deface the other. Their Sister Cecilliana (aged of some
twenty years) was of an indifferent height, but growing to corpulencie and
fatness, of a black hair, an amiable brown complexion, a big rolling eye,
and the air of her countenance rather beautifully amorous, then modestly
beautiful: She was of a nimble wit, of humor pleasant and facetious, yet so
reserved in the external demonstration thereof, that through her Mothers pious
and austere education of her, she (in all outward semblance) seemed rather to
be fit for a Nunnery then a Husband, and more proper to make a Saint, then a
Wife; but as the face proves not still a true Index of the heart, nor our
looks and speeches still a true Sybile of our souls, so how retired soever
her Mother kept her from the company of men, yet her wanton eye, conspiring
with her lascivious heart, made her the more desirous thereof, and far the
more licentiously, in regard she was strictly forbidden it; so as (not to
contradict or dissemble the truth) I am here enforced to relate and affirm,
that she imparteth her favors upon two or three young Gentlemen of that
City, of her private acquaintance, and is more familiar with them, then
modesty can well warrant, or chastity allow of. But there is a young Gallant of
this City likewise (more noble by birth, then rich in estate and means) named
Don Balthazar de Monfredo, who (deeming Cecilliana as famous for her chastity,
as for her beauty) bears a singular affection to her; yea, his heart and
thoughts are so fervently entangled in the snares of her delicious beauty, that
in public and private, in his desires and wishes, and in his speech and
actions he proclaims her to be his Mistress, and himself her servant; and
if he affect and desire Cecilliana for his Wife, no less does she Monfredo
for her Husband; so that they many times by stealth meet and confer privately
in remote Churches and Chappells, it being rather a profane then a religious
custom of Spain (wherein Heaven is too much made to stoop to Earth, and
Religion to Impiety) for men to court their intended wives, and (which is
worse) many times their Courtizans and Strumpets. Cecilliana (oftentimes
warranted by her Mothers indisposition) can no sooner take Coach to enjoy the
pleasure and benefit of the fresh air abroad in the fragrant fields, but
Monfredo assuredly meets her, where leaping from his Coach into hers (and
leaving his Page to accompany her Wayting-gentle woman in his own) they at
first familiarly kiss and confer, and in a few of these meetings at last
effectually resolve to give themselves each to other in the sacred bonds of
marriage; so he gives her a rich Diamond ring, and she reciprocally returns
him a pair of Gold bracelets, in token of marriage, and they then and there
(calling God to witness) very solemnly contract themselves man and wife, yet for
some solid reasons, and important considerations, which conduce to the better
accomplishing of their desires, they for a time conclude to bear it secretly
and silently from all the world; and it is concluded and agreed between them,
that a month after, and not before, he shall attempt to seek her publicly
in marriage, both of her Mother the Lady Catherina, as also of her two Brothers
Don Pedro and Don Martino. So when this month is past over (which to these out
two Lovers seems to be many ages) Monfredo very fairly and orderly seeks her
of her Mother in marriage, and likewise (in terms fit for him to give, and
them to receive) acquaints her two Brothers with his suit and affection to
their Sister, and with his best art and eloquence indeavoureth (on honorable
terms) to gain and purchase their consents thereunto. As for her Mother, she
(preferring wealth to honor, and riches to content) considering the weakness
of Monfredo's estate, the death of his parents, whereby she sees him deprived
of all future hope to raise his fortunes, does absolutely deny to bestow her
Daughter on him in marriage; and the more to bewray her extreme distaste of
this his suit and dislike of himself, she (with much obstinacy and choler)
forbids him her Daughters company, and (with more incivility and indignation)
conjures him to leave and forbear her house, telling him she has already
firmly engaged her word and promise to Don Alonso Delrio, that he shall
shortly espouse and marry her. Now although this sharp answer of hers seem to
nip Monfredo's hopes and desires in their blossoms, yet relying more on the
affection and constancy of the Daughter, then on the power or resolution of
the Mother, he again and again (with a most respective and honorable
importunity) solliciteth her consent; but he sees it lost labor, because she
is resolute that her first shall be her last answer to him herein. As for her
Brother Don Pedro, he loves his Sister so perfectly, and her content so
dearly, that he finds him to stand well affected to their affections, and in
regard of his love to her, and respect to him, that he utterly contemnes the
motion and mention of Delrio; and therefore faithfully promises Monfredo his
best assistance toward his Mother for the effecting of their desires. But for
her younger Brother, Don Martino, he finds a contrary nature and disposition in
him; for he never loved, but hated his Sister Cecilliana, and therefore hates
Monfredo for her sake, and loves Delrio, because he hears she hates him, and
so animates his Mother against them; and thus he gives Monfredo cold answers,
and (the sooner and bet^r to convert his hope into despair) tells him
plainly, that Delrio must and shall ^arry his Sister, and none but he: Thus
Monfredo departs, as glad of Don Pe^ his love, as he is sorrowful for his
Mother and Brother Don Martino's hatred. And here (to observe the better order
in this History, and likewise to give the curi^sity of the Reader the fuller
satisfaction) it will not be improper rather pertinent ^or us to understand,
that Don Delrio was a well descended Gentleman likewise of ^e same city of
Burgos, rich in lands and monyes, but at least fifty five years old, having a
white head and beard, of a hard and sour favor, and exceedingly
baker-legged; yet as old as he was, he was so passionately inamoured of the
fresh and sweet beauty of Cecilliana, that he thought her not too young to be
his wife, nor himself too old to be her husband, but led more by his lust
then his judgment, and encouraged by Dona Catherina her Mother, for that his
great lands and wealth wholly inclined and weighed down her affection toward
him, he often visits her Daughter Cecilliana, and with his best oratory and
power seeks and courts her affection in the way of marriage: but she having
her heart fixed on Monfredo's youth, and comely feature, she highly slights
Delrio's frozen age, as disdayning to make her self a May to this December,
because she apparently knew, and perfectly believed, that he was every way
fitter for his grave, then for her bed; for it was Monfredo, and only
Monfredo, whom her heart had elected and chosen for her second self and
Husband: And suppose (quoth she) that Monfredo be not so rich as Delrio, yet
all Castile, yea all Spain well knows, that by descent and generosity he is
far more noble, and that there is as great an Antithesis and disparity
between the virtues of the first, and the defects and imperfections of the
last, as there is between a Clown and a Captain, and a Peasant and a Prince;
therefore let my Mother say whar she will, Delrio what he can, or my Brother
Martino what he dare, yet they shall see, and the world know, that I will be
wife to none but Monfredo, and that either he, or my Grave, shall be my
Husband.

But the Lady Catherina her Mother (notwithstanding her Daughters averseness
and obstinacy) lays her charge and blessing upon her to forsake Monfredo, and
take Delrio, urging to her the poverty of the one, and the wealth of the other,
what delights and contentments the last will give her, and what afflictions and
misery the first does threaten her: but the affection of Cecilliana is still so
firmly fixed, and strongly settled and cymented on her Monfredo, that she is
deaf to these requests, and blind to these reasons of her Mother, in seeking
to dissuade her from him, and in consenting and persuading her to accept of
Delrio for her Husband; and although her Mother follow her in all places as her
shadow, and haunt her at all times as her Ghost, to draw her hereunto, yet she
still finds her Daughter as resolute to deny, as she is importunate to
request it of her, vowing that she will rather wed her self to a Nunnery,
then to Delrio, whom she says she cannot affect, and therefore peremptorily
disdayneth to marry. Her Mother seeing her daughter thus constantly and
wilfully to persevere in her obstinacy against her desires, she (with much
choler and grief) relates from point to point to her Son Don Martino what
had past between them; whom she knew did as much love Delrio, and hate
Monfredo, as her eldest Son Don Pedro hated Delrio, and loved Monfredo for
their Sister in marriage. Martino takes advantage of thi^ occasion and
opportunity, and thinking to give two blows with one stone, b^ crossing his
Sister in her affection, and his Brother in his designs and wishes, dot^ now
more then ever incense his Mother against her, alleging that it would be
(...) far greater honor, and less scandal to their Name and House, that
she were rather married to a Nunnery, then a Beggar, and with many powerful
reasons and artificial persuasions, strives to make her incli^able to this
project, and flex^ ble to this resolution of his, as indeed in a little time
she does: For the Moth^ being thus wedded to her will, and therein now
confirmed by the sly polici^ and fortifyed by the subtle insinuation of her
Son Don Martino, she hereup^ constantly resolves to betake and give her
Daughter to God and the Church, (...) firming that she shall never reap any
true content in her thoughts, nor peace her heart, before she see her
cloystered up and espoused to a Nunnery. But this compact of theirs is not so
closely carried between them, but the vigilancie of Don Pedro (whose affection
and care aims to give Monfredo and his Sister content) has perfect notice and
intelligence hereof, the which for a time he holds fit to conceal from them
both; when firmly purposing to prevent it, and so to cross his Mother and
Brother, who herein delight and glory to cross him, he bethinkes himself of
an invention (worthy of himself) how and which way to effect it. He sends for
Don Alonso Delrio to the Cordeliers Church, and there relates him the
friendship he bears him, that he will not see him run himself into an
error in seeking his Sister Cecilliana in marriage, whom he knows he cannot
possibly obtain; She (to his knowledge) being already firmly contracted to
Monfredo, notwithstanding all that his Mother and Brother Don Martino have said
or can do to the contrary. Delrio heartily thanks Don Pedro for the
expression of this love to him, the which he affirms he shall ever find him
ready both to deserve and requite; when measuring the time future by the
present, and of Cecilliana's blooming youth by his weather-beaten and blasted
age, he vows to Don Pedro, that he will henceforth no more desire or seek
his Sister in marriage, nor yet speak with her, or come near his Mother or
Brother; so that business is for ever dashed, and receives an end, almost as
soon as a beginning. The which Don Martino (out of his deep reach and
politic pate) understanding, and knowing that this falling off of Delrio,
from farther seeking his Sister in marriage, proceeded wholly from the secret
underminig of his Brother Don Pedro, he is extremely in choler against him for
the same; and so (with more passion then discretion) goes and charge him
herewith: Whereupon these two Brothers fall at great contention and variance,
and many bitter words and outrageous speeches here interchangeably pass
between them, the repetition whereof I think good to bury in silence, because
it matters not much to give it a place in this History; only (to deal on
generals) I must say that Don Pedro was high, and Don Martino hot, and that
the first spoke not so much as he dared, and the last dared not so much as he
spoke. But this tongue combat of theirs was so violent and blusterous, as the
issue thereof redounding to Don Pedro's glory and generosity, and to Don
Martino's shame and baseness, and Martino finding that he had more will then
power to be now revenged hereof on his brother, he is inflamed with choler
and revenge against him for the same, as consulting with Satan, not with God,
he is so revengefull and inhumane, as he wishes his said brother in heaven,
and from thenceforth plotteth with himself how to finish it, reasoning thus
uncharitably and damnably with himself; That he being dead, and his sister
pent and mewed up in a Nunnery, he shall then be sole heir and Lord to all
the Lands and Estate which his Father left him.

Thus in the heat of his choler, and the fumes of his revenge against his
brother Don Pedro, he repayres to his Mother, informs her how it is he and
his policy which has beaten off Delrio from seeking his sister Cecilliana in
marriage, and that through his close treacherous dealing, he has prevayled
with him for ever to abandon her; yea, he here leaves no invention unassayed
to intense his mother against his brother, nor means unattempted to inflame
her against his sister, by still putting her in mind of his rashness toward
Delrio, and (...) her disobedience toward her self; and here (he remembering
his own a^ritious ends) does again modestly persuade, and then again
importunately ^ay his mother to constitute her to a Nunnery; whereunto (as we
have former^ understood) he knows she is already resolutely bent and
resolved: When she (being vanquished with her own desires, and his
importunity) promises him very shortly to effect it. But first she sends for
her Son Don Pedro, and in a language of thunder rebukes and checkes him for
his double crime, in dissuading Delrio from so suddenly forsaking his sister,
and in persuading so strongly to affect Monfredo, adding withal, that
notwithstanding his treachery and policy, and her ungrateful disobedience to
her, she is inviolably resolved shortly to send ^onfredo to seek another
wife, and to give and betake her to no other Husband then a Nunnery. Don Pedro,
holding it his duty to entertain this choler and these speeches of his mother
rather with modesty then passion, returns her this answer, that he has nor
said, nor done any thing to Delrio, but what he can well justify with his
obedience to her, and his honor to the whole world; that his affection to his
sisters present content, and care of her future prosperity, makes him assume
this belief and confidence, that Delrio is as unworthy of her, as she
worthily bestowed on Don Monfredo, and therefore that it is both pity and
shame, that the wealth of the first should be preferred to the nobility and
generosity of the second; he prays her to consider, that as Cecilliana is her
daughter, so she is his sister, and that he is so well acquainted with her
disposition and secrets, as not to dissemble her the truth, he holds her far
more fit to make a Wife then a Nun, and a Nunnery therefore (every way) to
be improper for her, and she for it; that he is not ignorant that it is the
policy, or rather the malice of his brother Don Martino, which has wrought
these false impressions in her belief against himself, and this her
uncharitable resolution against his sister; for which base treachery and
ingratitude of his, if he thought him as worthy of his care, as he knows he
is of his scorn, he would not fail to call him to a strict account for the
same, but that Nature and Grace prescribe him contrary rules. Dona Catherina
being far more capable to distaste, then to relish this bold answer of her
Son Don Pedro, and contenting her self to have now delivered him her mind
and resolution at full, she leaves him, and finds out his brother Martino, to
whom she punctually relates what had past between her and his brother Don
Pedro; whereat he is afresh so netled with choler, and inflamed with revenge
against him, as what before he has desperately plotted and resolved against
his life, he now vows and swears shortly to execute, whereat his bloody
thoughts (without intermission) aim and tend, and next thereunto he desires
nothing so much, as to see his Sister made a vowed and vayled Sister.

Whiles thus his mother and himself are deep in conference, and busy in
consultation how to effect and compass these their different designs, Don
Pedro goes to his sister Cecilliana, finds out Monfredo, and to them both
sincerely delivers what has past between his mother, his brother, and
himself, in their behalfes; yea, it is a jest (both worthy, and well beseeming
his laughter) to see how between earnest and jest, he tells his sister (in
presence of her lover Monfredo) that she must shortly prepare her self for a
Nunnery, for that their brother Don Martin^ has decreed it, and their mother
Dona Catherina sworn it: At this pleasant passage and conceit of Don Pedro,
Cecilliana cannot refrain from blushing, nor Monfredo from smiling: for
looking each on other with the eyes of one and the sa^ tender affection and
constancy, he smiles to see her blush, and she again blusheth to see him
smile hereat, here she tells her brother Don Pedro plainly, and h^ lover
Monfredo pleasantly, that she will deceive her mothers hopes, and her brother
Don Martino's desires, in thinking to make her a cloystered Sister; when (...)
gain metamorphosing the snow-white lillies of her cheeks into blushing dama^
roses, she with a modest pleasantness, directing her speech to Monfredo (who
then lovingly led her in the Garden by her arm) tells him, that his house
should be the Nunnery, his arms the Cloister, and himself the Saint, to whom
(till death) she was ready to profer up, and sacrifice both her affection and
her self; that as she did not hate, but love the profession of a Nun in
others, so for his sake she could not love, but hate it in her self, adding
withal, that for proof and confirmation hereof (if it were his pleasure) she
was both ready and willing to put her self into his protection, and to repose
her honor in the confidence of his faithful affection and integrity toward
her. Monfredo first kissing her, then infinitely thanks her for this true
demonstration of her dear and constant affection to him, when again
intermixing kisses with smiles, and smiles with kisses, he swears to her, in
presence of God, and her brother Don Pedro, that if the Lady her mother wholly
abandon her, or resolve to commit her to a Nunnery, he will receive and
entertain her in his poor house with delight and joy, and preserve her honor
equally with his own life, and that in all things (as well for the time
present, as the future) he will steer his actions by the star of her
desire, and the compass of her present brother Don Pedro's commands: for which
free and faithful courtesy of his, Cecilliana thanks him, and no less does
Don Pedro, who in requital hereof makes him a general and generous tender of
his best power and service to act and consummate his desires; and so for that
time, and with this resolution, they part each from other, leaving the
progress of their affections, and the success thereof partly to time, but
chiefly to God, whom they all religiously invocate to bless their designs in
hand.

Leave we them for a while, and come we now again (cursorily) to speak of
their mother Dona Catherina, and of Don Martino their brother, who being the
oracle from whom she derives and directs all her resolutions, she is still
constant to her self, and therefore still vehemently bent against her son Don
Pedro, her daughter Cecilliana and Monfredo, swearing both solemnly and
seriously, that she will rather dye, then live to see him her son in law:
and yet whatsoever Don Martino do say, or can allege to her to the contrary,
she yet loves Don Alonso Delrio so well, and her daughter Cecilliana so
dearly, that before she will attempt to cloister her up in a Nunnery, she
hoping to reclayme him to affect her, and to revive his suit of marriage, does
by a Gentleman her servant send him this Letter.

CATHERINA to DELRIO.
I Am wholly ignorant why thou thus forsakest thy affection and suit to my
Daughter Cecilliana, whereof, before I am resolved by thee, I have many reasons
to suspect and think, that it was as feigned, as thy promises and oaths
pretended it to befervent. Sure I (...), that as Envy cannot eclipse the fame
of her virtues toward the world, so Truth dare ^t contradict the sincerity of
my well wishes and affection toward thee, in desiring to make thee her
Husband, and her thy Wife. Her poor beauty (which thou so often sworest thy
^art so dearly admired and adored) has lost no part of its luster, but is the
same still; and (...) am I, who have ever wished, and ever will faithfully
desire, that of all men of the world, ^y self only may live to enjoy it. If
thou think her affection be bent any other way, (...) do her no right, but
offer a palpable wrong to thine own judgment, and to my knowledge: Or if thou
imagine the Portion be too small, which I promised to give, and thou to ^ceive
with her in marriage, thou shall command that augmentation from me, which none
(...) thy self shall either have cause to request, or power to obtain; yea,
thou shall find, that for the finishing and consummating of so good a work
(which thou so much deservest, and I so much desire) I will willingly be
contented to enrich her fortunes with the impoverishing of mine own. If thou
send me thine Answer hereunto, I shall take it for an argument of thy
unkindnesse: but if thou bring it thy self, I will esteem it as one of thy
true respects and affection to me.

CATHERINA.


Don Martino being solicited and charged by his Lady mother likewise to write
effectually to Delrio to return to seek his sister Cecilliana in marriage,
yet notwithstanding drawn thereunto for his own covetous ends, secretly to
desire and wish that he might never marry her, but she a Nunnery, he
therefore to that effect writes, and sends him a most dissembling and
hypocritical Letter by the same messenger, to accompany hers, but he is so
reserved and fine, as he purposely conceales the sight and reading thereof
from his mother. This Letter of his, which was as false and double as himself,
reported this language:

MARTINO to DELRIO.
MY duty ever obliging me to esteem my Mothers requests as commands, I
therefore adventure thee this Letter, as desiring to know who or what has so
suddenly withdrawn thee, or thy affection from my Sister Cecilliana. Thou
can not be ignorant of my hearty well-wishes and love to thee in obtaining
her to thy wife; and yet it is not possible for thee to conceive, much less
believe, the hundredth part of the bitter speeches, which I have been enforced
to receive and pack up, from her and my Brother Don Pedro, for desiring and
wishing it. I know that enforced affections prove commonly more fatal then
fortunate, and more ruinous then prosperous; therefore I am so far from any
more persuading thee to seek her in marriage, that I leave each of you to your
selves, and both unto God. And to the end thou may see how much the Lady my
Mother affects thy suit, and distastes that of Monfredo to my sister, she upon
thy forbearance and absence has vowed unto God, that if thou be not, he
shall not, but a Nunnery must be her Husband. My Mother is desirous to see
thee, and my self to speak with thee; but because Marriages ought first to
be made in Heaven, before consummated in Earth, therefore thou know far
better then my self, that in all actions (especially in Marriage) it is the
duty of a Christian to wait on Gods secret Providence, and to attend his
sacred pleasure with patience.

MARTINO.


Delrio receives and reads these two Letters, and (consulting them with his
judgment) finds that they look two different ways; for Dona Catherina the
mother would marry her daughter to himself, but not to Monfredo, and her son
Martino, aims and desires to have her married to a Nunnery, and not to
himself; wherein wealth and covetousness are the chiefest ends and ambition
of them both, without having any respect to the young Ladies content, or regar^
to her satisfaction; and although the speech which Don Pedro delivered him i^
the Cordeliers (or Gray Friars) Church, have so much wrought with his
affection, and so powerfully prevailed with his resolution, that he will no
farthe^ seek Cecilliana in marriage, yet in common courtesy and civility he
holds him self bound to answer their two Letters, the which he does, and
returns the^ by their own messenger. That to the Lady Catherina had these
words:

DELRIO to CATHERINA.
THough you suspect my sincerity, yet if you will believe the truth, you shall
find, that the affection which I intended the Lady Cecilliana your daughter
was fervent, not feigned; and because you are desirous to know the reasons why
I forbear to seek her in marriage, I can give you no other but this, that I
know she is too worthy to be my wife, and believe that I am not worthy enough
to be her husband: so though envy should dare to be so ignorant, yet it
cannot possible be so malicious, either to eclipse the luster of her beauty,
or the fame of her virtues, since the one is so sweet a grace to the ^ther, and
both so precious ornaments to her self, that infinite others besides my self
hold it as great a profaneness not to adore the last, as a happiness to see
and admire the first. For your affection in desiring my self hers, and she
mine in marriage, I can give you no other requital but thanks for the
present, and my prayers and service for the future. How your daughter has, or
will dispose of her affection, God and her self best know; and therefore I
shall do her right, and your knowledge and my judgment no wrong, rather to
proclaim my ignorance, then my curiosity herein: but this I assure you, that
if hers to me had equallized mine to hers, I should then thankfully have
taken, and joyfully received her with a far less portion then you would have
given me with her. To your self I wish much prosperity, and to the Lady your
daughter all happiness. I must return you this mine answer by mine own
servant, and whether you make it an argument of my unkindnesse, (...)
affection, in pleasing your self, you shall no way displease me.

DELRIO.


His Letter to Don Martino spoke thus:

DELRIO to MARTINO.
I Have (by my Letter) given the Lady thy mother the reasons why I desist from
any farther seeking thy sister Cecilliana in marriage; and because I know she
will acquaint thee therewith, therefore I hope they will suffice both for thee
and her. I am as thankful to thee for thy well wishes to have obtained her
for my wife, as I grieve to understand that thou have received any bitter
speeches, either from her or thy brother don Pedro, for my sake. It rejoices
me to see thee of the opinion that enforced marriages prove commonly fatal
and ruinous, in which belief and truth, if thou and thy mother persevere, I
hope you will espouse your sister to don Monfredo, and not to a Nunnery,
because (if I am not misinformed) her affections suggest and assure her, that
she shall receive as much content from the first, as misery from the second.
As thy mother is desirous to see me, so am I to serve her, and likewise thy
self; and as thou writest religiously and truly, that Marriages should first
be made in heaven, ere solemnized in earth; so, doubtless, God has reserved
thy sister for a far better husband then Delrio, and him for a ^rre worse
wife then Cecilliana: And thus (as a Christian) I recommend her with ^ale to
the Providence, and my self with Patience to the Pleasure of Almighty God.

DELRIO.


When in regard of his former affection, and future respect, devoted to the
^eautie and virtues of Cecilliana, and seeing her self, her Mother and Brother
Don Martino bent to dispose otherwise of her in marriage, he will yet be so
jealous of her good, and so careful of his own honor and reputation, as he
holds himself obliged to take his leave of her by Letter, since not in person,
and so to recommend her and her good fortunes to God; the which he does, and
gives his Letter to the same bearer, but with a particular charge and secret
instructions to deliver it very privately into the Lady Cecillianas hands,
without the knowledge either of her mother or brother don Martino, which he
faithfully promised to perform: His said Letter to her was charged with these
lines.

DELRIO to CECILLIANA.
BEing heretofore informed by your brother don Pedro of your dear affection to
don Monfredo, and your constant resolution to make him your husband, I held my
self bound, out of due regard to you, and firm promise to him to surcease my
suit to you, and (because the shortest errors are ever best) no more to strive
to make impossibilities possible, in persevering to seek you in marriage, whom
I see (heaven and earth have conspired) another must obtain and enjoy: And
when I look from my age to your youth, and from that to Monfredo's, I am so
far from condemning your choice, as I both approve and applaud it, praying
you to be as resolute in this confidence, as I am confident in this
resolution, that my best prayers and wishes shall ever wish you the best
prosperities. And to the ^d you may perceive that my former affection shall
still resplend and shine to you in my future respect, I cannot, I will not
conceal the knowledge of this truth from you, that by Letters which right now
(by this bearer) I received from the Lady your mother, and brother don Martino,
they have some exorbitant and irregular design in contemplation, shortly to
reduce into action, against the excellency of your youth and beauty, and the
sweetness of your content and tranquillity; which howsoever (to your self and
the world) they seem to shadow and overvaile with false colors, yet although
they make religion the pretext, you (if you speedily prevent it not) will in
the end find that their malice to your lover Monfredo is the true and only
cause thereof. God has endued you with a double happiness, in giving you an
excellent wit to second and imbellish your exquisite beauty, whereunto if in
this business you take the advice of your best friend Monfredo, and follow
that of your noble brother Don Pedro, you will then have no cause to doubt, but
all the reasons of the world to assure your self that your affections and
fortunes will in the end succeed according to my prayers, and your merits and
expectation.

DELRIO.


The Messenger first publicly delivers the two former Letters to his Lady
Dona Catherina, and her son Don Martino, and then privately the other to the
young Lady Cecilliana, according to his promise and Don Delrio's request: As
for the mother she grieves to see that Delrio will not be reclaymed, but has
quite forsaken her Daughter; But for her Son don Martino he is exceeding
joyful hereof; for now he is confident, that (according to his plot) his
mother upon Delrio's refufall, will (in mere malice to Monfredo) assuredly
commit his sister to a Nunnery: Thus if he obtain his ends and desires he
cares not who miss theirs. As for Cecilliana, she does not a little rejoice
at Delrio's Letter to her, and at his constant resolution to leave, and commit
her to Monfredo; yea she reputes his advise to her concerning her mother, and
her brother don Martino's intended discourtesie toward her to much respect and
honor. She acquaints her brother don Pedro, and her Monfredo with this Letter
of Delrio, who now plainly see their mother and brothers former resolution
confirmed, in aiming and intending to make Cecilliana a holy Sister, whereat
they again laugh and jest at her, and she to them, for in their hearts and
thoughts they all know, and resolve to prevent it. But they cannot but highly
approve of Delrio's noble respect and true discretion, in being so constant to
give over his suit to her, and yet so courteous and honest toward them all in
this his kind and respectfull Letter to Cecilliana; the which above the other
two, she cheerfully receives, and joyfully welcomes, that she resolves she
can (in honor) do no less, then return his complement, and answer his
Letter with one of her own to him, the which she does in these terms.

CECILLIANA to DELRIO.
WHat my brother don Pedro informed you concerning Monfredo and my self, was
the very truth and sincerity of those affections wherewith God has inspired ^r
hearts, and settled our resolutions each to other. As I was never doubtful of
your wellwishes and love, so now I am not a little thankful to you for your
dear respect toward me, in approoving my choice, and in praying to God to
make it prosperous, whereas the obstinacy of my Lady mother, and the malice of
my brother don Martino (without ground or reason) affirm it must needs prove
ruinous. I have heretofore been advertised, and (...) (by your care of me,
and respect to me which clearly resplends and shines in your L^tter) an^
fully confirmed that my said mother and brother have some undeserved design
against me, and my content; and although my poor beauty and silly wit no way
deserve those excellent praises of your pen, yet my heart shall consult with
don Pedro how to bear my self in this so weighty and important a business,
whereon (although the cause be malice, and the pretext religion) I know depends
either my future content or affliction, my happiness or my misery, in the
mean time I will pray for those who vitiously hate me, and honor these (...)
virtuously affect and honor me. Of which last number, I ingenuously and
gratefully acknowledge, that your generosity, not my merits, has condignely
made you one.

CECILLIANA.


When she had dispatched this Letter to Delrio, then Monfredo by her consent,
and the advice of her brother don Pedro, holds it very requisite now once
again to sound the affection, and to feel the pulse of their mother dona
Catherina's resol^tion toward him, to see whether yea or no she will please
to give him her daughter in marriage; and it is agreed of all sides between
them, that at the very time and hour which he goes there, that she and her
brother don Pedro will purposely absent themselves, and ride abroad in their
Coach, to take the air, which they do: To this effect Monfredo takes his
Coach, and goes directly to the Lady Catherina's house, and sends up his name
to her, as desiring to have the honor to salute her, and kiss her hand; but
she is so enraged and transpor^ed with choler at his arrival and message, as
she sends him down a flat and ^eremptory denial, that she will not see him,
and as formerly she prayed, so ^ow she commands him to depart, and ever
hereafter to forbear her house. An ^swer so unkind and uncivil, that
Monfredo well knows not whether he have ^cason to digest it with more choler
or laughter; so returning her answer by her ^ayting-gentlewoman, that he will
obey her commands, and no more trou^ either her house or her patience, yet that
he will still remain her most hum^ servant, and although she refuse to see
him, that he will ever pray for her long life and prosperity: don Martino is
now at home, and laughs in his sleeve as a Gypsy, to see what brave
entertainment his mother gives Monfredo, he expects also that he should
visit him, but because his mothers stomach is so high, therefore his cannot
descend so low, as owing him no such duty and service, and so takes Coach and
away; and knowing where don Pedro and his Mistress Cecilliana were, in the
fields, he drives away presently to them, and very pleasantly relates them the
whole long story of their mothers short entertainment to him, which
administreth matter of laughter to them all, and far the more, in regard
neither of them expected less; so Monfredo staying an hour or two with them
in the fields, and then bringing them to the gates of the City, they for that
time take their leave each of other, and all appoint to meet the next day after
dinner, in the Garden of the Augustine Friars, and there to provide and resolve
for their affairs, against the discontent of their mother, and the malice of
their brother don Martino.

The next morning, the Lady Catherina (storming at Monfredo's yesterdayes
presumption and boldness) sends for her daughter Cecilliana into the Garden to
her, as being fully resolved to deal effectually with her for ever to forsake
Monfredo, or if she cannot, then to commit her to a Nunnery. She comes; when
(in great privacie and efficacy) she lays before her the poverty of
Monfredo, the which she affirms will bring her to more misery then she can
expect or think of, or indeed which she deserves, at least if she be not so
wilful to ruin her self and her fortunes, as she is to preserve them.
Cecilliana now seeing her mother bent to play her prize against the merits and
honor of her Monfredo, and therefore against the content and felicity which
she expects to enjoy by enjoying him, she no longer able to brook or digest
it, cuts her off with this reply, that (her duty excepted) it is in vain for
her, either to seek to disparage Monfredo, or any way of the world to attempt
to withdraw her affection from him, and therefore with much observance and
respect prays her to affect and honor him, if not for his own sake, yet for
hers. Her Lady mother weeps to see her daughter thus obstinate (she might have
said thus constant) in her affection to Monfredo, and therefore (with frowns
in her looks, and anger in her eyes) she thunders out a whole Catalogue of
disprayses and recriminations against him; and because yet she despayreth to
prevail with her hereby, she now (thinking it high time) resolves to divert
and change the stream of her affection from him to God, and so at last to mew
and betake her to a Nunnery, whereon her desires and intentions have so long
ruminated, and her wishes and vows aimed at: to which end calming the storms
of her tongue, and composing her countenance to patience and piety, she with
her best art and eloquence speaks to her thus; That in regard she will not
accept of don Delrio for her husband, with whom she might have enjoyed
prosperity, content, and glory, but will rather marry Monfredo, from whom she
can, and must expect nothing but poverty, grief, and repentance, she
therefore (out of her natural regard of her, and tender affection to her) has
by the direction of God, bethought her self of a medium between both, which
is to marry neither of them, but in a religious and sanctified way to espouse
her self to God and his holy Church; when (thinking to have taken time by the
forelocke) she depainteth her the felicity and beatitude of a Nuns
profession and life, so pleasing to God and the World, to Heaven and Earth, to
Angels and Men: When her daughter Cecilliana being tired and discontented with
this poor and ridiculous oration of hers, she lifting up her eyes to Heaven,
with a modest boldness, and yet with a bold truth, interrupts her mother thus,
that God has inspired he^ heart to affect Monfredo so dearly, and to love him
so tenderly, as she will rather content her self to beg with him, then to
live with Delrio in the greatest prosperity which either this life or this
world can afford her; that although she had no bad opinion of Nuns, yet that
neither the constitution of her body, much less of her mind, was proper for a
Nunnery, or a Nunnery for her; in which regard, she had rather pray for them
then with them, and honor then imitate them: when the Lady her mother, not
able to contain her self in patience, much less in silence, at this audacity
(and as she thought) impiety of her daughter, she with much choler and
spleen demands her a reason of these her exorbitant speeches. When her
daughter no way dejecting her looks to earth, but rather advancing and raising
them to heaven, requites her with this answer; That it is not the body, but the
mind, not the flesh, but the soul, which is chiefly requisite and required to
give our selves to God and his Church; that to throw, or (which is worse) to
permit our selves to be thrown on the Church through any cause of constraint,
or motion of distaste or discontent, is an act which savoureth more of
profaneness then piety, and more of earth then heaven; that as Gods power, so
his presence is not to be confined or tied to any place, for that his Center
is every where, and therefore his circumference no where; that God is in Egypt
as well as in Palestyne or Jerusalem, and that heaven is as near us, and we
heaven, in a Mansion house, as in a Monastery or Nunnery; that it is not the
place which sanctifyeth the heart and soul, but they* the place; and that
Churches and Cloisters have no privilege or power to keep out sin, if we by
our own lively faith, and God by his all-saving grace do not. Which speech of
hers as soon as she had delivered, and seeing that the Lady her mother was more
capable to answer her thereunto with silence then reason, she making her a low
reverence, and craving her excuse, departs from her, and leaves her here alone
in the Garden to her self and her Muses.

Her mother having a little walked out her choler, in seeing her daughters
firm resolution not to become a Nun; she leaves the garden and retires to
her Chamber, where sending for her son Martino, she relates him at full what
conference had there past between his sister and her self, who likewise is so
much perplexed and grieved hereat, as putting their heads and wits together,
they within a day or two, vow to provide a remedy for this her obstinacy and
wilfulness. As for Cecilliana she likewise reports this verbal conference,
which had past between her mother and her self, to her brother Don Pedro, and
Monfredo, when (according to promise) they met that afternoon in the
Augustines garden, who exceedingly laugh thereat; and yet again fearing lest
the malice of their brother Don Martino toward them, might cause his mother
to use some violence or indurance to her, and so to make force extort that from
her will, which fair means could not, they bid her to assume a good courage,
and to be cheerful and generous, promising her that if her mother attempted
it, that Monfredo should steal her away by night, and that he, as he is don
Pedro her brother, will assist her in her escape and flight; whereon they all
resolve with hands, and conclude with kisses: Neither did their doubts prove
vain, or their fear and suspicion deceive them herein; for her incensed
mother being resolute in her will, and wilful in ^er obstinacy, to make her
daughter a Nun, she shuts her up in her Chamber, makes it no less then her
prison, and her brother don Martino her Guardian, or ^ather her Jailer. Poor
Cecilliana now exceedingly weeps and grieves at this ^ruelty of her mother,
and brother don Martino, which as yet her dear brother don ^dro cannot remedy,
by persuading, or prevailing with them to release her; he acquaints Monfredo
herewith, and they both consulting, find no better expedient to free her from
this domestical imprisonment, then counterfeitly to give her mother to
understand and believe, that her daughter has now changed her mind, and that
(by Gods direction) she is fully resolved to abandon Monfredo, and so to spend
and end her days in a Nunnery; but contrariwise, they resolve to fetch her
away by night, and without delay. Accordingly hereunto Cecilliana acts her part
well, and pretends now to this spiritual will and resolution of her mother, sa
before she was disobedient. Her mother infinitely rejoices at this her
conversion, and no less (or rather more) does her brother don Martino, who to
fortify and confirm her in this her religious resolution, they send some
Friars and Nuns to persuade her to appoint the precise day for her entrance
into this Holy house and Orders; which with her tongue she does, but in her
heart resolves nothing less, or rather directly the contrary. The mother now
acquaints both her sons with this resolution of their sister, which is the
next Sunday to give her self to God and the Church, and to take holy Orders;
when don Pedro purposely very artificially seems as strongly to oppose, as his
brother don Martino cheerfully approves thereof, now extolling her devotion
and piety as far as the Sky, if not many degrees beyond the Moon; so the day
appointed for her entrance and reception drawing near, the Lady Abbess is
dealt with by her Mother, her Cell provided, her Spiritual apparel made, all
her kinsfolks and chief friends invited to a solemn Feast, to celebrate this
our new Holy Sisters marriage to God and the Church. But whiles thus dona
Catherina the mother, and don Martino her son are exceeding busy about the
preparation and solemnity of this Spiritual business, don Pedro and Monfredo
resolve to run a contrary course, and so to steal away Cecilliana the very
night before the prefixed day of her entrance into the Nunnery, as holding that
Saturday night the fittest time and most void of all suspicion and fear,
whereof (both by tongue and letter) they give her exact and curious notice;
which striking infinite joy to her heart and thoughts, she accordingly makes
her self ready, packes up all her Jewels and Bracelets in a small Casket, and
acquainting none of the world therewith, for that her brother don Pedro's
chamber was next to hers, and he as vigilant and watchful as her self, for
Monfredo's coming about midnight, which was the appointed hour for his
Rendevouz: when at last both their several Watches (in their several
Chambers) assuring them that it was near one of the clock, it being the dead
of the night, none of the house stirring, but all hushed up in silence,, as if
every thing seemed to conspire to her escape and flight; then, I say, don Pedro
issues forth his Chamber to hers, where the door being a little open, and her
candle put our, he finds his sister ready, when conducting her by the arm,
they softly descend the stayres, and so to a Posterne door of the Garden;
where they find Monfredo (joyfully ready to receive the Queen regent of his
heart) assisted with two valiant confident Gentlemen his friends, who were well
mounted on excellent horses with their swords and Pistolls, and for himself
and her a Coach with six horses: When briefly passing over their Complements
and congees each from other, they (with a world of thanks) leave don Pedro
behind them, and so away as swift as the wind, who seeing them gone, secretly
and softly returns to his Chamber and bed, silently shutting all the doors
after him, whiles Monfredo with his other self and his two friends drive away
to Valdebelle, a Manor house of his some eight leagues from Burgos.

Don Pedro lies purposely long in his bed the next morning, thereby the better
to color out his ignorance and innocence of his sisters Clandestine flight
and escape: So his mother about five, or near six of the clock, sends
Felicia her daughters Wayting-gentlewoman to her Chamber, to awake and apparel
her, to receive many young Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were come to visit her,
and to take their leaves of her before her entry into Gods house: but Felicia
speedily returns to her with this unlookt-for answer; That her Ladies Chamber
door is fast locked, whereat she has many times called and knocked aloud,
but hears no speech. The mother is amazed hereat, and no less (rather more)
is her son don Martino; so they both run to her Chamber, and knock and call
aloud, but hearing no answer, they force open the door, where they find the
nest, but the bird flowne away; whereat the mother infinitely weeps, and her
son don Martino does exceedingly rage and storm, at this their afront and
scandal, he tells his mother he will engage his life, that his brother don
Pedro is accessory to his sister Cecilliana's flight, and gone with her; so
they both run to his Chamber, but find him in his bed fast sleeping and
snoring, as he pretends and they believe: their outcries awake him; but they
shall find him as subtle and reserved in his policy toward them, as they
were in their malice to his sister; so he hears their news, puts on his
apparel, seems to be all in fire and choler hereat, profereth his mother
his best endeavors and power to recover his sister, and to revenge himself on
the villain who has stolen her away. But his brother don Martino is so galled
and netled at the escape of his sister, and these words of his brother, as he
tells him to his face, in presence of their mother, that his speeches and
profers are counterfeit, and himself a dissembler, and that it is impossible
but he assisted and favored her escape and departure; for which uncivil and
foul language of one brother to another, don Pedro gives him the lie, and
seconds it with a box on the ear, and then very cunningly betakes himself to
consolate and comfort the Lady his mother, who is not a little grieved and
angry at this her second affliction, and the more in regard he did it in her
presence; so don Pedro reconducting her to her Chamber, and leaving her weeping
in company of many of their sorrowful ^folkes and neighbors, he then calls
for his horse, and under color to find out his sister, he rides to
Valdebelle to her and Monfredo, stays there some eight days, where being
exceeding careful of the preservation of his sisters honor and reputation,
he before his departure sees them solemnly but secretly married; where leaving
them to their Nuptial joys, and pleasures, he again re^es to Burgos, and
tells his Mother it is impossible for him to hear any news of his sister.

And now, what does the return, sight, and presence of don Pedro do here in
his mothers house at Burgos, but only revive his brother don Martino's old
ma^e, and new choler and revenge against him, for the lie and box on the
ear, which he so lately gave him? For the remembrance thereof so inflames his
heart and thoughts against him, that he forgetting his conscience and soul,
yea ^ven and God, as he assumes and gives life to his former bloody resolution
to ^ther him, and thinks no safer, nor surer way for him to effect it, then by
^yson, that ingredient of hell, and drug of the Devil. But don Martino is
reso^e in his rage, and execrable in his bloody malice and revenge against this
his ^erous and noble brother don Pedro; so (disdayning all thoughts of
religion, ^d considerations of piety) he procures a pair of poisoned perfumed
Gloves, ^d treacherously insinuating them into his brothers hands and wearing,
the fatal ^enom'd sent thereof in less then two days poisoneth him; so he is
found dead ^s bed: when don Martino, the more closely to overvaile this
damnable fact (...) his, purposely gives it out, that it was an Impostume which
broke within him, and so he dyed suddenly thereof in his bed, there being no
servant of his own, nor none else that night near him, or by him to assist
him, and this report of his passes current with the world; so the Lady his
mother and himself cause him to be buried with more silence then solemnity,
and every way inferior to his honorable birth and generous virtues, because
she still affected and loved don Martino far better then him: so his death
did not much afflict or grieve her, and far less his brother don Martino.
But for his sister Cecilliana, as soon as she understood and heard hereof,
she is so appalled with grief, and daunted with sorrow and despair, that
she sends a world of sighs to heaven, and a deluge of tears to earth for the
death of this her best and dearest brother. Her husband don Monfredo (for
henceforth so we must call him) likewise infinitely laments don Pedro's death,
as having lost a constant friend, and a dear and incomparable brother in law
in him; and yet all the means which he can use to comfort this his sorrowful
wife, has will, but not power enough to effect it; for still she weeps and
sobs, and still her heart and soul do prompt and tell her, that it is one
brother who has killd another, and that her brother don Martino is infallibly
the murderer of his and her brother don Pedro; but she has only presumption,
no proofs for this her suspicion, and therefore she leaves the detection and
issue hereof to time, and to God.

Now, by this time, we must understand that dona Catherina has perfect news,
that it is Monfredo who has stolen away her daughter Cecilliana, and keeps
her at his house of Valdebelle, in the Country, but as yet she knows not
that he has married her; wherefore being desirous of her return, not for any
great affection which she now bore her, but only to accomplish her former
desires, in frustrating her marriage with Monfredo, and in marrying her to a
Nunnery, she again still provoked and egged on by the advice of her son don
Martino, sends him to Valdebelle to crave her of Monfredo, and so to persuade
and hasten her return to her to Burgos, but writes to neither of them. Don
Martino arrives thither, and having delivered don Monfredo and his sister
Cecilliana his mothers message for her return to Burgos, he then vainly
presumes to speak thus to them from himself. He first sharply rebukes her
of folly, and disobedience, in flying away from his and her mother, and then
(with more passion then judgment) checkes him of dishonor to harbor and
shelter her; that this was not the true and right way to make her his wife, but
his strumpet, or at least to give the world just cause to think so; and if he
intended to preserve her prosperity and honor, and not to r^ine it, that he
should restore his mother her daughter, and himself his sister, and no longer
retain her; but speaks not a word of his brother don Pedro's death, much
less makes any shadow to mourn, or show to grieve or sorrow for it. His
sister Cecilliana (at his first sight) is all in tears for the death of her
brother don Pedro, and yet extremely incensed with him for these his base
speeches toward her and her Monfredo, she once thought to have given him a hot
and chollericke reply, but at last considering better with her self (as also
to prevent Monfredo, whom she saw had an itching desire to fit him with his
answer) she then in general terms returns him this short reply; That she is
now accomptable to none but to God for her actions, who best knows her heart
and resolutions, and therefore for her return to her mother at Burgos, or her
stay here at Valdebelle, she wholly referres it to don Monfredo, whose will
and pleasure therein shall assuredly be hers, because she has, and still
finds him to be a worthy and honorable Gentleman: when (before she conclude
her speech to him) she tells him, that she thought his coming had been to
condole with her for the death of their brother Don Pedro, but that with grief
she is now enforced to see the contrary, in regard his speeches and actions
tend to afflict, not to comfort her, and rather to be the argument of her
mourning, than the cause of her consolation. But Monfredo being touched to the
quick, with these ignoble and base speeches of Don Martino, both to himself
and Cecilliana, he is too generous long to digest them with silence, and
therefore preferring his affection to her, before any other earthly respect,
and her reputation and honor dearer than his life, he composing his
countenance to discontent and anger, returns him this answer: That if any
other man but himself, had given him the least part of those unworthy
speeches, both against his honor, as also against that of his sister
Cecilliana, his Rapier, not his tongue, should have answered him; That his
affection and respects to her, are every way virtuous and honorable; and that
she is, and shall be more safer here in Valdebelle, than the life of his noble
brother Don Pedro was in his mothers house at Burgos; That as the young Lady
his sister is pleased to refer her stay or return to him, so (reciprocally
to requite her courtesy) does he to her; and for his part, he is fully
resolved not to persuade, much less to advise her to put her self either into
her Mothers protection, or his courtesy; for that he is fearful, i^ not
confident in this belief, that the one may prove pernicious, and the other
fatal and ruinous to her. And so with cold entertainment, and short
ceremonies, Don Martino is enforced to return to Burgos to his Mother, without
his Sister, where as soon as he is arrived, he tells his Mother of his Sister
Cecilliana's constant resolution, from whence he thinks it impossible to draw
or divert her, because he finds Monfredo of the same opinion: but whether he
have married her or no, he knows not, neither could he inform himself
thereof. And here yet Don Martino is so cautious to his Mother, as he speaks
not a word or syllable of any speech or mention they had of the death of his
brother Don Pedro. But as soon as he had left his Mother, and retired
himself to his chamber, then he thinks the more thereof; yea, then he
again and again remembers what dangerous speeches he publicly received from
his Sister Cecilliana, and Monfredo, concerning that his sudden death, whereby
they silently meant, and tacitly implied no less than murder; Wherefore he
is so helli^h and bloody minded, that he resolves shortly to provide a
plaster for this sore; and he knows, that to make their tongues eternally
silent, he cannot better or safer perform it, than by murdering them,
whereof he says the reason is apparently and pregnantly true: for as long as
that suspicion lives in them, he therefore can never live in safety, but in
extreme danger himself. But because of the two, Monfredo seemed to intend and
portend him the greatest choler, and the most inveterate rage, therefore (as a
limb of the Devil, or rather as a Devil incarnate himself) he resolves to
begin with Monfredo first, and as occasions and accidents shall present, then
with his sister Cecilliana after, without ever having the grace to think of
his Conscience or Soul, or of Heaven or Hell, or without once considering,
that our own malice and revenge does more hurt us then our enemies; That anger
is a short madness, and that it is a most assured happiness for us rather to
forget offenses, than to revenge them; and which is more, that (in a manner) it
is but right now that he came from poisoning of his own brother, whose
innocent blood is yet hardly cold in his untimely grave, but still cries alowd
for vengeance from Heaven on his head for that cruel and damnable fact.

But this shame, this monster of nature, don Martino, who fears none less
than God, and loves none more than the Devil, will not thus forsake his cruel
malice, norabandon his execrable revenge: but understanding that Monfredo
sometimes (though secretly) leaves Valdebelle to see Burgos, he hearkens out
therefore for his next coming thither: when being assured that he was now in
the City, he waiting for him as he issued forth his house, which he did
between eleven and twelve at night, he with his small Target, and dark
Lantern in his left hand, and his Rapier drawn in his right, runs him twice
through the body therewith, of which two mortal wounds he presently fell dead
in the street, his misfortune being then so great, as he had no Servant nor
Friend present to assist him, and his fear and care of himself so small, as
he was killed before he could see his enemy, or have the leisure to draw his
sword in his own defense and assistance; so fierce and sudden was Martino's
rage and malice, in murdering of this harmless and innocent Gentleman: the
which as soon as he had performed, he secretly hies home to his Mothers
house, and speedily betakes himself to his bed, where the Devil rocking him
asleep in security, he as his infernal Agent, and bloody Factor, nothing
cares what God or man can do unto him. The next morning at break of day, this
breathless body of Don Menfredo is found in the street: so all Burgos resounds
of this his lamentable murder, but no mortal eye has seen, or tongue as yet
can tell who the murderer should be. But God (in his divine Justice, and for
the exaltation of his sacred Glory) will shortly bring both it and him to
light, by an accident no less strange than remarkable.

Dona Catharina hears hereof, and is so far from grieving, as she rejoices
thereat, no way doubting, but Monfredo being dead, she with much facility
(according to her desires and wishes) shall now of two resolutions, draw her
Daughter Cecilliana to embrace and follow one; that is, either to marry Delrio
in earnest, or a Nunnery no more in jest. The next day after Dinner, the
Relation of this deplorable accident arrives to Valdebelle, and consequently to
the knowledge of our Cecilliana, who so pitifully weeps and mournes thereat,
as for mere grief and sorrow she tears her hair, bolts her self into her
Chamber, and there throws her self down on the floor, and neither can, nor
will be comforted, no, nor permit any one to administer it to her, or which is
less, to see or speak with her. So although Monfredo's Kinsfolks and friends
do infinitely lament this his unfortunate death, yet all their sighs and
tears put together, are nothing in regard of those of his young wife, and now
widow Cecilliana, who (out of the immoderate excess of this her anxietie, and
affliction) is now become so reasonlesse, and desperate, that first the murder
of her dear brother Don Pedro, and now this of her sweet Husband Monfredo, is
both a grief to her thoughts, and a torment to her heart and mind, yea to her
very soul: For still she remains confident in this opinion, that her brother
Don Martino is infallibly the murderer of them both; and from this suspicion
of hers, she cannot, she will not be diverted; yea, her living affection to
their dead memories, is so extreme and fervent, that to be assured whether it
be him, or who else that have murdered them, it leads her mind to a
resolution, to prove an Experiment, which though profane curiosity in some
persons sometimes seem to allow and practice as tolerable, yet sacred Religion
must and does for ever both reject and contemn it as Diabolical. She
disguiseth her self in her apparel, and very early in the morning rides to
one Alphonso Sanchez, a famous reputed Wizard or Sorcerer, who dwelt at Arena,
some six leagues off from Valdebelle, and giving him the two pictures of her
murdered Brother and Husband, as also a perfect note of their age, and
horoscope of their Nativities, she prays him to discover and show her in a
Looking-glass, the true pictures and representations of their murderers; When
to have him dispatch both it and her self the sooner, she gives him ten
Ducats, upon the receipt whereof he promises her his best Art and skill,
makes her stay till almost dark night, and then fools her off with this
flamme, That he has effectually invocated and raised his Spirit, from whom he
could get no other answer, but that God for that time would not permit him to
show her these Murderers pictures in a glass; whereby this Wizard proving
himself more a cheating knave than a Sorcerer, and more a true Impostor, than
a Christian, he herein makes a fool of this sorrowful young Lady, in
thinking to make her know that, which it is both a foul shame, and a shameful
ignorance for any Christian to be ignorant of, (to wit) That it is not the
Devil, or his Agents, but only God, who (in his divine pleasure and
providence) has power to reveal Murders, and Murderers, both when, where,
how, and by whom it seems most agreeable and pleasing to his Allseeing, and
sacred Majesty.

Cecilliana returning home, more laden with doubts than gold from this Monster
of men, (because in effect he makes it his profession to be less a man that
a devil) she is ashamed of her ignorance and impiety herein, and for mee^e
grief and sorrow) weeps, to see that the foundation of her faith should be
so weak and reeling, as not constantly to rely upon the providence and
justice of God, but to repose her foolish curiosity and belief upon this
profane and sottish Sorcerer, for the detection of these Murders. But leaving
her for a while in her disconsolation and sorrow at Valdebelle, I come now to
this wretched villain Don Martino her brother in Burgos, who having thus
committed these two cruel and lamentable Murders, does for the first two or
three months after put a cheerful and frolike countenance thereon, thereby
the more absolutely to betray, and bleare the eyes of the world, that the least
spark or shadow thereof should not diffuse or reflect on him. But here before
I proceed further, the Reader is requested to observe this one remarkable
circumstance of Gods Justice and Providence, in detecting of Don Martino, to
be the sole Author, and Actor of these two unnatural and deplorable Murders.
For as the Devil had made him so cautious in his malice, and subtle in his
revenge, that he employed no other Minister, nor used no other agent or
assistant herein but himself; so being deprived of any witness, either to
accuse, or make him guilty hereof; God (I say) out of the immensitie of his
power, and profundity of his providence, will make himself to become a
witness against himself, and wanting all other means, will make himself the
only means both to detect and destroy himself. The manner thus.

As there is no felicity to peace, so there is no felicity or peace
comparable to that of a quiet and innocent conscience; It is a precious Jewel
of an inestimable ^alue, and unparalelld price, yea, a continual Feast, than
which Heaven may, but Earth cannot afford us either a more rich or delitious:
and the contrary it is, where the heart and conscience have made themselves
guilty of some foul and enormous crimes, and especially of Murder, wherein
we can never kill Man the creature, but we assuredly wound God the Creator: for
then, as those, so this, (with less doubt and more assurance) gives in a heavy
and bloody evidence against us, and which commonly produces us these three
woeful and lamentable effects, Despair, Horror, Terror; the which we shall
now see verified and instanced in this bloody and miserable wretch, Don
Martino, who (as I have formerly said) has not fully past over the term of
three months in external mirth, jollitie, and braverie, thereby to cast a
cheerful countenance and varnish on those his bloody villainies, but God so
distracted his wits and senses, struck such astonishment to his thoughts, and
amazement to his heart and Conscience, as it seemed to him, that (both by night
and day) the ghosts of his harmless brother Don Pedro, and of innocent Don
Monfredo still pursue him for revenge, and justice of these their murders. And
now his looks are extravagant, fearful, and ghastly, which are still the
signs and symptoms either of a distempered brain, a polluted conscience and
soul, or of both. He knows not to whom, or where, or where not to go for
remedy herein, but still his heart is in a mutiny and rebellion with his
Conscience, and both of them against God. He is afraid of every creature he
sees, and likewise of those who see him not. If he look back, and perceive
any one to run behind him, he thinks it is a Sergeant come to arrest him;
and if he chance to be hold any Gentleman in a scarlet cloak coming toward
him, he verily believes and fears it is a Judge in his scarlet Robes to
arraigne and condemn him. He has not the grace to go into a Church, nor the
boldness to look up to the Tower thereof, for fear lest the one swallow him
up alive, and the other fall on him, and crush him to death: If he walk in
any woods, fields, or gardens, and see but a leaf wagge, or a bird stir, he
is of opinion there some furies or executioners come to torment him; or does he
hear any Dog howl, Cat cry, or Owl whoot, or screech, he is thereat so
suddenly appalled and amazed, as he thinks it to be the voice of the Devil,
who is come to fetch him away. He will not pass over any bridge, brook, or
River, for fear of drowning, nor over any planke, gate, or style, lest he
should break his neck. The sight of his shadow is a corosive to his heart,
and a Panique terror to his thoughts, because he both thinks and believes,
that it is not his own, but the hang-mans; and when any one (out of charity
or pity) come to see and visit him, he flies from them, as if Hell were at
his back, and the Devil at his heels. The very sight of a Rapier, stabs him
at his heart, and the bare thought, or name of Poison, seems to infect and
kill his soul; and yet miserable wretch and miscreant that he is, all this
while he has not the goodness to look down into his heart and Conscience
with contrition, nor the grace to lookeup to Heaven and to God with repentance.
The Lady Catherina his Mother is wonderfully perplexed and grieved hereat, and
so are all his kinsfolks and friends in and about Burgos, who cause some
excellent Physicians and Divines to deal with him, about administering him the
means to cure him of this his lunacie and distraction. But God will not
permit, that either the skillful Art of those, or the powerful persuasions of
these do as yet prevail with him, or perform it. Two Moons have fully
finished their Celestial course, whiles thus his frenzy and madness
possesses him; and in one of the greatest, and most outrageous fits thereof,
he (without wit, or guide) runs to Saint Sebastiano's Church, finds out
Father Thomas his Confessor, and in private and serious confession, reveals
him, how he has poisoned his brother Don Pedro, and also murdered Don
Monfredo; adding withal, that God (out of his indulgent mercy) would no
longer permit him to charge his soul with the concealing thereof, and then
beggs his absolution, and remission for the same. His Confessor (being a
religious Churchman) much lamenting, and wondering at the foulness of these
his (Penitents) two bloody facts, although he find more difficulty than
reason to grant his desire, yet enquiring of him, if there were any other
accessory with him in these murders, and Don Martino freely and firmly
acknowledging to him there was none, but the Devil and himself: he (after a
serious check, and religious repremendo) in hope of his future contrition and
repentance, gives him a sharp and severe penance (though no way answerable to
his crimes) and so absolves him; and yet for the space of at least a whole
month after, his lunacie (by the permission of God) still follows him, when
(for a further trial of his comportment, and hope of his repentance) God is
again pleased to slack the hand of his judgment, and so frees him from his
madness and distraction, to see whether he will prove Gold or Dross, a
Christian or a Devil.

Not long after this, his Confessor Father Thomas (being Curate of one of the
neighboring parishes) falls extreme sick of a Piurisie, and so dangerously
sick, that his Physician (despairing of his life) bids him prepare his body
for death, and his soul for Heaven, and God: Who then revoking to mind (what
he has heard and seen) how grievously and sorrowfully the Lady Cecilliana
takes the Deaths of her Brother and Husband, and the more, in that she is
ignorant who are their Murderers, he is no longer resolved to burden his
conscience and soul with concealing thereof; but to write it to her in a
Letter, the which he charge and conjureth his own Sister Cyrilla to deliver
into her own hands, some three days after his burial; the which we shall see
her shortly perform: for the Priest Father Thomas, her brother, lived not
three weeks after.

In the mean time, come we to the Lady Dona Catherina, the Mother, who having
outwardly wept for the death of her eldest Son Don Pedro, for the disobedient
flight and clandestine Marriage of her Daughter Cecilliana to Monfredo, who is
now murdered, but by whom she knows not, and seeing her said Daughter
thereby made a sorrowful Widow, she (as an indulgent and kind Mother)
forg^ng what she had formerly done and been, and now desirous to comfort her,
and to be comforted of her, again sends her son Don Martino to Valdebelle,
to sollici^e his Sister to return, and to live with her in Burgos: Who
(detesting this p^ject and resolution of his Mother) is very sorrowful
thereat; but seeing that she will be obeyed, he rides over to Valdebelle, to
his Sister, and there delivers his Mothers will and message to her; but in
such faint and cold terms, as she thereby knows, he is far more desirous
of her absence than her presence, and of her stay, than her return; yea (and
to write the truth of her mind) his very sight strikes such flames of fear
into her heart, and of suspicion into her thoughts, that she still assumes and
retains her old opinion and confidence, that he is the absolute Murderer of
her brother Don Pedro, and her husband Don Monfredo, but herein she now holds
it discretion to conceal her self to her self, and so gives him kind and
respective entertainment; she prays him to report her humble duty to her
Mother, that she will consider of her request, and either send or bring her
(...) resolution shortly: but inwardly in her heart and soul, she intends
nothing less, than either to hazard her content upon the discontent of her
Mother, or (which is worse) her life on the inveterate malice of her brother
Don Martino.

And now we approach and draw near, to see the judgments and justice of God
overtake this our wretched Don Martino, for these his two most lamentable and
bloody Murders. And now his sacred Majesty is fully resolved to detect them,
and his Arrow is bent, and Sword whetted, to punish him for the same; for we
must understand that the very same day which her brother Don Martino was last
with her at Valdebelle, his Confessor Father Thomas dyed; and some three days
after, his Sister Cyrilla (according to his dying order) rides over to the Lady
Cecilliana, and delivers her the Priest her brothers Letter; at the receipt
whereof, Cecilliana finds different emotions in her heart, and passions in her
mind: (...) going into the next room, she breaks up the seals, and finds
therein these Lines.

FATHER THOMAS to CECILLIANA.
WEll knowing that the Laws of Heaven are far more powerful and sacred than
those of Earth, as I now lie on my Deathbed, ready to leave this life, and to
fly into the Arms of my Savior and Redeemer Christ Jesus, I could not go to
my Grave in peace, before I had signified unto thee, that very lately thy
brother Don Martino, in Saint Honoria's Church, delivered unto me in
confession, That he had first poisoned thy brother Don Pedro with a pair of
perfumed Gloves, and then after murdered thy husband Don Monfredo with his
Rapier in Burgos: And although I must and do acknowledge that he was in his
Fit of Lunacie and Madness, when he thus made himself a witness against himself
hereof, yet no doubt the immediate finger and providence of God led him to this
resolution as an act which infinitely tends to his sacred Honor and Glory. I
send thee this Letter by my Sister Cyrilla, whom I have strictly charged to
deliver it to thee three days after my burial, because I hold it most
consonant to my Profession and Order, that not my Life, but my Death should
herein violate the seal of Confession; and thou shall show thy self a most
religious and Christian Lady, if thou make this use hereof, that it is not my
self, but God who sends thee this News by me.

FATHER THOMAS.


Cecilliana having o're-read this Letter, and therein understood and found out
that her brother Don Martino is the cruel Murderer, both of her brother Don
Pedro, and her husband Don Monfredo, her grief thereat does so far o'resway
her reason, and her malice and revenge her religion, as once she is of the
mind to murder him with her own hand, in requital hereof; but then again
strangling that bloody thought in its conception, she vows, that if not by
her own hand, he shall yet infallibly dye by the hand of the common
Executioner: When Love, Pity, Nature, Reason, Grief, Sorrow, Rage, and
Revenge, acting their several parts upon the Stage of her heart, she finds a
great combat in her heart, and reluctancie in her soul, what, or what not to
do herein; when with many tears and prayers (by the Advice and Counsel of
God) she enters into this consultation hereon with her self. Ahlas,
unfortunate and sorrowful Cecilliana! It is upon no light presumption, or
trivial circumstances, that I believe my brother Martino to be the inhumane
murderer of my brother Don Pedro, and husband Monfredo; for besides that God
ever prompted my heart, and whispered my soul that this was true, yet now here
is his own Confession to his Ghostly father, and his Ghostly Fathers own
Letter and Confession to me, to the same effect, Evidences and Witnesses,
without exception, as clear as noone day, and as bright as the Sun in his
hottest and brightest Meridian, that he, and only he, was the Murderer of
them both: but Oh poor Cecilliana (quoth she) to what a miserable estate and
perplexity has these his bloody facts and crimes now reduced me! for he has
murdered my brother and husband, shall I then permit him to live; but withal,
he is likewise my brother, and shall I then cause him to dye? True it is, I
cannot recall their lives, but it is likewise as true that I may prevent his
death; for as the first lay not in my power to remedy, yet all the world
knows, that the second merely depends of my pity, courtesy, and compassion
to prevent: but Ahlas (says she) the ties of heaven are, and ought to be
infinitely more strong than those of earth, and the glory of God to be far
preferred before all our natural affections and obligations to our best
Friends, or nearest or dearest Kinsfolks whosoever. Therefore, as to detect
these Murders of his, thou art no friend to Nature, so again, to conceal
them, thou thereby make thy self an enemy to Grace; for assure thy self,
unfortunate Cecilliana, that God will never be appeased, nor Justice
satisfied, until their innocent blood be expiated, and washed away in his, who
is guilty thereof; because, as by detecting Murder, we bless and glorify
God, so by concealing it, we heap a fatal Anathe^a, and curse upon our own
heads.

As Clouds are dis^pated, and blown away, when the Sun arises, and mo^teth in
his Vertical luster and glory, so Cecilliana having thus ended her
consultation with her self, and now began her resolution with God, she leaves
Valdebelle, takes her Coach, and dispeeds away to Burgos; where, in steed of
going to he Lady Mother's, she goes directly to the Corrigador's (or Criminal
Judges) of that City, and with much grief and sorrow (her tears interrupting
her sighs, and her sighs her tears) before them accuses her brother Don
Martino to be the bloody murderer of her brother Don Pedro, and her husband
Don Monfredo; and for proof of this truth, produces the Letter of Father
Thomas his Confessor. The Judges read it, and are astonished with this report
of hers, and far the more, in regard they here see a Sister call the life of
her own Brother in question; but they see that she has as much right and
reason for her Accusation, as her inhumane brother Don Martino wanted for his
Malice, in making himself guilty of these foul and bloody Crimes: Wherefore
attributing it wholly to the pleasure and providence of God, they highly extol
her piety and integrity toward his sacred Majesty, in preferring his Glory
before the Scandal and Misery of her so wretched and execrable brother; and
then (out of their zeal and honor to Justice) they (to evince and vindicate
the truth of this lamentable business) send away for Cyrilla, and (as soon as
she came) upon her Oath propose her these three Questions; First, whether she
had this very Letter from her deceased brother Father Thomas his own hand, and
that he gave her order and charge to deliver it to the Lady Cecilliana, three
days after his decease? Secondly, if it were of his (...) writing and sealing?
And thirdly, if she with her own hands delivered this Letter to the Lady
Cecilliana? To all which three Questions, Cyrilla (with a stayed look and
countenance) answers affirmatively, and thereupon (with haste and secrecy)
grant out a Warrant to apprehend Don Martino, when he was as it were drowned
in voluptuousness, security, and impenitencie, as making it his vainglory to
build Castles of content in the air, and to erect Mountains of wealth and
preferment in the V^opia of his ambitious desires and wishes, without ever
having the grace, either to think of his former horrible Crimes, or future
punishment for the same. He is amazed at his Apprehension by the Sergeants,
but far more, at the sight and presence of the Criminal Judges, before whom
he is now brought. They sharply accuse him of these two aforesaid foul
Murders, and for evidence, and witnesses, produce him his Confessor Father
Thomas his Letter, his sister Cyrilla, and his own sister the Lady Cecilliana;
at the sight and knowledge whereof, he at first seemed to be much appalled
and daunted, but at last recollecting his spirits (taking co^ of the Devil,
and not of God) assumes a bold countenance, puts himself and his tongue on the
points of denial and justification, and so to his Judges terms his Confessor
a devil, and no man, and Cyrilla and his Sister Cecilliana witches, and no
women, so unjustly and falsely to accuse him of these foul Murders, whereof
he affirms not only the act, but the very name and thought is odious and
execrable to him. But God will not be mocked, nor his Judges deluded with this
his Apology: So they adjudge him to the Rack; the first tortures whereof, he
indureth with an admirable fortitude and patience, but the second he cannot;
but then and there confesses himself to be guilty, and the sole Author and
Actour of both these deplorable Murders: but yet his heart and soul is still
so obdurated by the Devil, as he has neither the will to be sorrowful, nor
the grace to be repentant for the same.

For Expiation of which his inhumane and bloody Crimes, his Judges condemn him
to be hanged, and his Right hand to be first cut off and burnt the next
morning, at the Common place of Execution, notwithstanding that his afflicted
and sorrowful Mother (out of the natural and tender affection which she bore
him) employed all her friends and possible power, yea and offered all her own
estate and Lands to save his life; but she could not prevail or obtain it.
So the next morning, (in obedience to this his Sentence) this Monster of Nature
Don Martino is brought to the Common place of Execution, to take his last
farewell of this life, and this world: He was clad in a black Silk Grograine
Suit, will a fair white Ruff about his neck, and a black ^eaver Hat on his
head, which he drew down before his eyes, that he might neither see, nor be
seen of tha^ great concourse of people there present, who came to see him
conclude the la^ Scene and Catastrophe of his life; When after his Right hand
was cut off and burnt, which held the Rapier, whereby he murdered Don
Monfredo, he then ascended the Ladder: Where the Spectators expecting some
repentant and religious Speech from him before his death, he resembling
himself (I mean, rather an Atheist than a Christian, and rather a Devil than
a Man) as he lived, so he would dye, a profane and graceless Villain; for
some speeches he (betwixt his teeth) mumbled to himself, but spoke not one
word that could be heard or understood of any one: and so most resolutely he
himself putting the Roape about his neck (although all the people, and
especially two Friars near him, cried to him to the contrary) he saved the
Hangman his labor, and so (with more haste and desperation then repentance) he
cast himself off the Ladder, and was hanged. And thus was the bloody life and
deserved death of this Hell hound and limb of the Devil, Don Martino, and in
this fort and manner did the just revenge of God triumph ore his foul and
bloody Crimes; which, may all true Christians read to Gods glory, and to the
instruction of their own souls. And if the curiosity of the Reader make him
farther desirous to know what became of the ^old Lady Catherina the Mother, and
of Dona Cecilliana ^he Daughter, after all these their dismal and disastrous
Accidents, I thought good (by the way of a Postscript) briefly to add this
for his satisfaction: That the Mother lived not long after, but her Daughter
was first reconciled to her, and she to her Daughter, to whom she (having no
other child) left all her whole Estate: And for her, who was now become
likewise very rich, as having a fair yearly Revennue and Ioynture out of her
deceased husband Don Monfredo's Lands and Means, although she were again
sought in Marriage by some noble Gallants of Castile and Bur^, yet she
resolved never to marry more; and as I have within these very few years
understood, she then lived sometimes at Burgos, and sometimes at Valdebelle, in
great Pomp and Felicity.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXECRAble Sin of Murder.
HISTORY. XXIII.
Alphonso poysoneth his own Mother Sophia, and after shoots and kills Cassino
(as he was walking in his Garden) with a short Musket (or Carabyne) from a
Window. He is beheaded for these two murders, then burnt, and his ashes
thrown into the River.

AS Faith and Prayer are the two pillars of our Souls, and may well be called
the Fortress of Christian piety against the tentations of Satan: so by the
contrary we expose and lay open our selves to the treacherous lures and malice
of the Devil. For if by Faith we do not first believe, then pray unto God
for our own preservation, it will be no hard matter for him to tempt us in
our choler, to quarrel with our best friends, and in our malice and revenge
to murder even our nearest and dearest Kindred. O Faith, the true foundation
of our sovereign felicity! O Prayer, the sweet preservative, and sacred Manna
of our souls, how blessed do you make those who embrace and retain you! and
contrariwise, how miserable and wretched are they who contemn and reject you!
Of which last number, this ensuing History will produce us one, who (by his
debauched life, and corrupt conversation) trampled those two heavenly Virtues
and Graces under his feet, without thinking of God, or regarding, much less
fearing his judgments: But how God (in the end) requited him for the same,
this History will likewise show us. May we therefore read it to Gods glory,
and to our own instruction.

IN the City of Verceli, (after Turin, one of the chiefest of Piedmont)
bordering near to the Estate and Duchy of Millan, there lately dwelt a rich
Cannon of that Cathedral Church, named Alosius Cassino, who had a dainty
sweet young Gentlewoman to his Niece, named Dona Eleanora, whose mother (being
sister to Cassino) named Dona Isabella Caelia, lately died, and left this her
only daughter and ^ild her heir, very rich both in demeanes and moneys, when
her Uncle Cassino, ^eing nearest her in blood, takes Eleanora and her Estate
into his protection and ^ardship, and is as tender of her breeding and
education, and as curious of her ^omportment and carriage, as if she were his
own daughter; for there is no sweet ^alitie, nor exquisite perfection
requisite in a young Gentlewoman of her rank and extraction, but he caused her
to become, not superficial, but artificial therein, as in Dancing, Music,
Singing, Painting, Writing, Needling, and the like, whereof all the Nobility and
Gentry of Verceli take exact notice and knowledge; yea, her beauty grew up so
deliciously with her years, that she was (and was justly) reputed to be the
prime Flower and Phoenix of the City. Cassino considering that his house was
desti^te of a Matron, to accompany and oversee this his Niece Eleanora, that
his age was too Stoicall for her youth, and that his Ecclesiastical profession
and function called him often to preach and pray; he therefore deeming it very
unfit and unseemely (in the Interims of his absence) to leave her to her self,
and to be ruled and governed by her own fancy and pleasure, she being now
arrived to twelve years of age. He therefore provides her new apparel, and
other pertinent necessaries, and giving her a wayting-mayd, and a man of his
own to attend her, he sends her in his Coach to the City of Cassall, in the
Marquisat of Montferrat, to the Lady Marguerita Sophia, a widow Gentlewoman,
l^ft by her deceased husband but indifferently rich, but endowed with all those
ornaments of Art and Honor, which made her famous, not only in Piedmont and
Lombardie, but also to all Italy; and to her he therefore writes this ensuing
Letter to accompany his Niece, and charge his man with the delivery thereof
to her.

CASSINO to SOPHIA.
TO satisfy your courteous Requests, and my former promise, I now send you my
Niece Eleanora to Cassall, whom I heartily pray thee to use as thy daughter,
and to command as thy Handmaid. She has no other Uncle but me, nor I any
other acquaintance but thy self, with whom I would entrust her for her
Education, and recommend her for her Instruction. She is not inclined to any
vice that I know of, except to those imperfections wherein her youth excuses
her ignorance, and it is both my order and charge to her, that she carefully
and curiously adorn her self with virtues in thy example and imitation,
without which the privileges of Nature and Fortune (as Beauty and Wealth) are
but only obscure shadows, and no true substances, because there is as much
difference betwixt those and these, as between the purity of the soul, and
the corruption of the body, or between the dignity and excellency of
Heaven, and the invaliditie and baseness of Earth I am content to lena her to
you for a few months, but do infinitely desire to give her to thy Virtues for
ever. In which my voluntary transaction and donation, thou will confer much
happiness to her, and honor to me, and consequently for ever bind both her
Youth, and my Age to thee in a strict obligation of thanks and debt. What
apparel, or other necessaries thou deemest her to want, thy will shall be
mine. God ever bless her in his fear, and you both to his glory.

CASSINO.


The Lady Sophia receives this sweet young Virgin with much content and joy,
yea, she sees her tender years already adorned with such excellent beauty,
and that beauty with such exquisite virtues, that it breeds not only
admiration, but affection in her toward her, whom she entertaineth with much
respect and care, as well for her own sake, as also for her Uncle Cassino's,
whose letter she again and again reads over, highly applauding his virtuous
and honorable care of this his Niece, whom in few years she hopes will prove
a most accomplished and gracious Gentlewoman; when Cassino's Coachman after a
days stay, deeming it high time for him to return to Verceli to his Master,
he takes his leave of his young Mistress Elianora, who, out of her few years,
and tender affection and duty to her Uncle, with tears in her eyes, prays
him to remember her best service to him at his coming home; and the Lady
Sophia by him likewise returns and sends him this letter in answer of his.

SOPHIA to CASSINO.
I Know not whether you have made me more proud, or joyful, by sending me
Eleanora, wherein you have given me far more honor than I deserve, though
far less than she meriteth, and who henceforth shall be as much my Daughter
in affection, as she is your Niece by Nature; and if I have any Art in Nature,
or Judgment in Inclinations, her virtues and beauty do already anticipate
her years; for as the one is emulous of Fame, and the other of Glory: so (as
friendly Rivals, and yet honorable friends) they already seem to strive and
contend in her for supremacy: to the last of which (as being indeed the most
precious and sovereign) if my poor capacity, or weak endeavors may add any
thing, I will esteem it my ambition for your sake, and my felicity for hers.
But if you resolve not rather to give her to me for some years, than to lend
her to me for a few months, you will then kill my hopes in their buds, and my
joys in their blossoms, and so make me as unfortunate in her absence, as I
shall be happy in her sight and company. As for her Apparel, and other
necessaries, she shall want nothing which is either fit for her to have, or
you to give. Let your prayers to God ever desire, and follow her welfare, and
then rest confident, that her prayers and mine shall never fail to wish you
long life, and to implore all prosperity for you.

SOPHIA.


Cassino did well to place his young niece Eleanora with the Lady Sophia, but
ill in forgetting that she had a very debauched young Gentleman to her son,
named Seignior Alphonso, of some two and twenty years of age, who (to her
grief and shame) haunts her and her house as a ghost, makes himself the
public laughter and pity of all the different humors of Cassall, yea the
lewdness of his life, and the irregularitie of his conversation, and actions,
has reduced him to this fatal point of misery, that he holds it a noble
virtue in him, to precipitate himself and his reputation into base debts,
vices, and company, making this his shame his glory, and lewd vices his
honor, till in the end not caring for the world, the world will not care for
him, nor he for himself, until he have wholly lost himself in himself,
without either desert, or hope ever to be found or recalled again. But at last
seeing so sweet a Beauty, and so rich an heir as Eleanora fallen into his
mothers hands, and therefore he vainly thinks into his; and hoping that her
wealth shall redeem his prodigalities, and revive his decayed Estate and
Fortunes, he secretly courts her: but Eleanora (as young as she is) sees his
vices with disdain, himself with contempt, and his affection to her with
scorn. He is importunate in his suit, and she perverse and obstinate in her
denial, but she resolves to conceal it from all the world. As for Alphonso,
he (after some six months time) acquaints the Lady Sophia his mother
herewith, and with his fervent desire and affection to marry Eleanora; but she
charge him on her blessing, never to proceed any farther herein without her
consent and order; and quoth she, if here (in the presence of God and my
self) thou will now swear wholly to abandon all thy former vices, henceforth
to be absolutely led by my advice and counsel, and to steer all thy actions
by the star of Honor, and the card of Virtue, then I will promise thee to use
all my best endeavors, and possible power, both with Cassino, and Eleanora, to
effect thy desires. Alphonso hereat (with much courtesy and humility) thanks
his mother, and solemnly swears to God and her, to perform all these points
carefully and punctually; and to add the more Religion and reverence to this
oath, he does it on his knees; and it is a wonderful joy to her, to see that
the fruits and ^ffects thereof do accordingly fall out and follow: for this
her son Alphonso in a very few days, is become a new man, and she (from her
heart and soul) praises and glorifieth God for this his happy conversion: and
if his mother Sophia be glad hereof, no less is our sweet young Eleanora,
for now hereby she sees that she is rid of her Suitor.

Cassino comes over three several times to Cassall to see his Niece. The Lady
Sophia gives him her best entertainment. He is wonderful glad to see that
she has imprinted such characters of virtue and honor in her; and during his
stay there, Sophia charge her son Alphonso, not to speak or motion a word
to Cassino, of this his affection to his young Niece Eleanora: so he bears
himself exceeding modestly and respectively toward him, and for his mother,
she holds it fit not as yet to break or speak a word hereof to Cassino.
Cassino (no way dreaming of their intents and desires toward his Niece) tells
the Lady Sophia, he is infinitely joyful to see that her son Alphonso proves
Fame to be no true, but a tatling goddess in his condition, and conversation;
whereat she heartily thanks him: and thinking then (though reservedly and
secretly) to take time and opportunity at advantage, she leaves not a virtue
of her sons either undisplayed, or unmagnified, but extols them all to the
sky, and himself beyond the moon, and so leaves the remainder hereof to
time, and the issue to God. But yet revolving and ruminating in her mind, how
(in a fair and honorable way) to obtain this rich and beautiful young prize
for her son; and holding it discretion, not as yet either to motion or
mention it to her, she secretly lays wait at Verceli to know when Cassino will
have home his Niece, and so some three weeks before that time she holds it
fit to motion it to him by her Letter, which she does in these terms.

SOHHIA to CASSINO.
THe fervent affection, and virtuous desire of my son Alphonso, to marry your
Niece Eleanora, is now the sole cause and argument of this my letter to you,
the which I had not attempted to write or send you, but that I know his love
and zeal to her is as pure, as her beauty and virtues are excellent. He
(without my privacie or knowledge) has already motioned his suit to her, and
as he tells me, she has returned him her denial instead of her consent,
whereof I held my self bound to advertise you, because his ambition and mine
herein is so honorable, as it shall go hand in hand with your goodwill and
approbation, but never without it, especially in regard you have pleased to
recommend her to my charge and custody, wherein I faithfully promise you,
nothing shall be designed or practiced to the prejudice either of her honor,
or your content. All the estate and means which I can give, or you require of
me, to make my son a fit Husband for your Niece, I will freely and
cheerfully depart with; and yet were I not fully and firmly assured, that he
is now as deeply enamoured of virtue and goodness, as heretofore he was of
their contraries, neither my tongue or pen had dared thus to have presented his
suit to her acceptance, and your consideration. The joy and blessing of which
marriage (if God in his secret and sacred providence resolve to make it a
Marriage) will I hope in the end be theirs, the honor mine, and the content
your own; wherein I request your Answer, and entreat you to remain most
confident, that both in this, and in all things else, Alphonso's will and
resolution shall ever be Sophia's, and hers Cassino's.

SOPHIA.


Cassino, upon the receipt and perusal of this Letter of the Lady Sophia, is
not a little displeased, to see her ambition in desiring his Niece Eleanora for
wife to her son Alphonso, and although he be formerly well acquainted with
the weakness of the mothers estate, as also perfectly advertised of her sons
debauched life, and corrupt and prodigal conversation, howsoever she pretend
^o put a vertuou^ glos^e and color hereon to the contrary, yet he holds it
discretion to seem to be ignorant of the one, and not to take notice of the
other, but will frame his excuse to them herein, that he has already disposed
of his Niece, and that their motion to him for her came too late, when in heart
resolving to make her p^eferment and fortunes more assured, and not so
doubtful; and to match her in a higher blood; and nobler family then that of
theirs; he yet in descretion and honor, knowing himself bound to answer the
Lady Sophia's Letter, calls for pen and paper, and by her own Servant and
Messenger returns his mind and resolution to her thus.

CASSINO to SOPHIA.
ALthough the tender years of my Niece Eleanora make her incapable of
marriage, yet your rich deserts and resplendant merits, and your Son
Alphonso's honorable affection and zeal to her (which every way exceeds her
poor beauty and virtues) had infallibly made me to grant her for his wife,
which I am now enforced to deny, in regard I have already (by my promise)
disposed and given her to another before your Letter came to my hands, and
consequently before that motion of his arrived to my knowledge and
understanding: For to me it would and should have been both a sweet joy and a
singular honor, to have seen your Son matched to my Niece in the lincks of
Wedlock. But God having otherwise decreed it; you have many reasons to rest
confident, that your Son is reserved for her better, and she promised to his
inferior; and therefore the freeness of this your proffered courtesy to her,
and of your honorable respect and affection toward me, shall for ever tie me
to a thankful acknowledgement and an immortal obligation; and I will make it
my chiefest Felicity and Ambition, if (in requital thereof) I may any way
either serve you in your Son Alphonso, or him in his Mother Sophia, of whose
conversion to virtue, and propension to goodness, your Letter has so firmly
and joyfully assured me, that the truth hereof will, I hope, hereafter prove
his happiness in your content and glory; the which my most Religious Prayers
shall still desire of God, because he is your only Child and Son by nature,
and your self my most honorable friend, both by desert and purchase.

CASSINO.


Within three weeks after that Cassino had dispatched away this his Letter to
the Lady Sophia, he then (in contemplation and consideration of the debaushed
life and corrupt prancks and vices of her Son Alphonso) not thinking his
Niece Eleanora to be safe with her in Cassall, for fear lest her old wit, or
his smooth tongue might peradventure too far prevail and work upon her
young years and indiscreet affection: he therefore sends over his Coach, and
one of his Servants to bring her home, and to the Lady Sophia writes this
gratulatory Letter for her honorable education and entertainment.

CASSINO to SOPHIA.
ACcording to my last Letter to you, having heretofore privately contracted my
Niece Eleanora to a husband, reason and religion, his request and my promise
now require, that I take her from you in Cassall, to give her to him here in
Vercely; to which effect I here send my Coach and Servant to you for her, and
desire you to return her to me with your best prayers, as I sent her to you
with my best affection: and had not God now visited me with sickness, my
resolution for her return had not been either so sudden or so speedy. For
your honorable care in adorning her few years with so many excellent virtues
and sweet perfections, I know not how to deserve, much less how to requi^e,
except in my Prayers and Orisons to God for his best favors and graces to you,
and the best prosperities and honors to your Son: But if my age now cannot,
I hope her youth hereafter will endeavor partly to free me of that debt, and
to aquit her self of that strong obligation, till when as I will not fail to
give it a place in my heart, so I am sure will not she likewise to allot it one
in her remembrance: In which mean time, I forget not my chiefest respects
first to your self, then to your Son. God give us all his Grace that we may
live and dye his Servants.

CASSINO.


Now as Cassino's first Letter to Sophia (wherein he denied her Son to marry
his Niece) exceedingly afflicted and discontented her, so this his second to
her wherein he so suddenly sends for her away from her, does extremely afflict
and torment her, and not only her, but likewise her Son Alphonso, who is all
in sorrow, all in grief hereat: For now they fear that their ^s of this young
Lady are frustrated, and she according to her Uncles report in his Letter is
contracted to some Gallant of Vercelly: When Alphonso again laying before his
Mother the fervencie of his affection to Eleanora, and representing unto her
the extremity of the grief and misery which her refusal of him, and his loss
of her, will occasion him, he with sighs and tears again and again entreats
his Mother to seek out some cure for this his disconsolation, and that she
will please once more to try her chiefest wits and invention to change
Eleanora's refusal, and her Uncle Cassino's denial of him to be her husband;
when at last his Mother being much moved and induced with these his sorrowful
passions and importunities, she before her departure does her self break
this motion for her Son to her, wherein her wit and age sets upon the
innocence and simplicity of her youth, with the sweetest oratory and most
delicious speeches and persuasions which possibly she could invent, but she
finds her Art to be Ignorance, and her Eloquence Folly therein. For Eleanora is
(as young as she is) deaf to her requests, and dumb to her entreaties and
persuasions; returning contempt to the first, and little deafness to the
second, and disdain to both; so as in detestation of his suit, and envy of
his affection, she will no more hear the Mother for her Sons sake, nor see
the Son for his Mothers sake. When yet again, although Sophia despair of
the Niece, yet she will once more make farther trial of her Uncle Cassino,
flattering her self with this hope, and her hope with this conceit, that his
pretense of precontracting her to another, might be but only a policy of
his, to try her Sons affection in his constancy toward his Niece, and her
own zeal in her perseverance thereof toward himself: When seeing Breakfast
ended, the Coach prepared, and Eleanora ready to depart, she betakes her to
her Closset, where taking pen and paper, she hastily scribles out a few lines,
and sealing up her Letter, delivers it privately to Eleanora, whom she
secretly prays, and effectually conjureth to deliver it carefully to her
Uncle Cassino at her coming to Vercelie, which this young Lady confidently
promises her; when likewise taking her own Coach, she and her Son conduct
her three or four miles in her way, where the Mother with many sugared speeches
and complements, and the Son with many amorous sighs, regards and kisses,
take their leave of her, they returning to Cassall, and she driving away to her
Uncle Cassino at Vercelie, who receives her with much joy; and welcomes her
with infinite gladness and humanity; to whom she delivering the Lady Sophia's
Letter, he hastily breaking up the seals thereof, finds therein this language.

SOPHIA to CASSINO.
BEfore I was so happy to answer your first Letter, your second, which now
calls home your Niece from me, makes me again double unfortunate: Neither do I
hold it your resoluti^n, but rather your pleasure, or at least your policy, in
thinking to make me believe you have formerly contracted her to another. I will
not say but that she deserves my Sons betters in mrriage; but thus much I
will speak for him out of my knowledge of his affection, and ^fidence of his
zeal toward her, that in heart and soul he is a perfect honourer of her
Virtues, and a true Admirer of her Beauty: Yea, and no way to exceed or stray
from the truth, I have many pregnant reasons for this belief of mine, that he
is a Servant to the first, and a Slave to the second, and that his flame is so
fervent toward her, that he would think himself honored to prostrate his
life at her feet, and esteem himself blessed to receive his Death at her
commands. Think not then so slightly of him, who thinks so seriously and
sincerely of her; and this assure your self, that if you will give her to him
in marriage, I will give nothing which I enjoy^ the world from him. In
obedience to your request and order; I (...) send you your Niece, and I am sure
that her proficiencie, as her stay, has bin so small with (...) in Cassall, as
it neither deserves her debt, or your obligation, your requital or her
remembrance. My Son was desirous to have visited you with his Letter, but
that I comman^d his pen and resolution herein to silence: And notwithstanding
all your prayers for his p^erity, I am assured he is more your real Servant,
then you as yet are his intended friend. God bless your self and my Son,
and your Niece and my self, and make us all the Lovers if his Grace, and the
heirs of his glory.

SOPHIA.


Cassino upon the perusal of this Letter, perceiving that the Lady Sophia and
her Son Alphonso, were so far from giving over of their suit to his Niece
Eleanora, as they now prosecuted it with more importunity and violence then
before, he not only calls her respect toward him, but her discretion in her
self likewise in question, to see that she is incredulous that he has
precontracted her, or that his former Letters to her in that behalf are not
worthy of her belief, and confidence: Whereupon being sensible of a kind of
disrespect and wrong, whereof she had voluntarily made her self guilty toward
him, in the passage of this business, and absolutely refusing to hearken to, or
to entertain any other parley, and so to cast away his Niece on the vices and
prodigalities of her Son, He arming his pen with Discontent and Choler,
returns her this peremptory answer, which he covenanteth and resolves with
himself, shall be the very last that he will either write or send to her in
this nature.

CASSINO to SOPHIA.
I Had well hoped and thought, that your affection and judgment would have
deemed my former Letters to you (in contracting my Niece) to be current, not
counterfeit? yea, to be the pure truth, and therefore no way my policy to
inform you of the contrary; for such pro^edings to any one, especially to your
self (whom I so much respect for your Birth, and honor (...) your Virtues)
are as unworthy of me, as I am and will be ignorant of them: As for your Son,
his zeal to my Niece, or his affection to her service in the way of marriage,
if it be (...) pure and fervent as you affirm it, she is the more bound to
him; but I notwithstanding, ^e less to your self, in that you endeavor to
make me an enemy to my self, and to mine own ^nour, which next to my soul is
the best part of my self, in persuading me to take her from a Gentleman, to
whom (by faith and promise) I have solemnly given her; and as this was my
first, so it shall be my last resolution and answer to you, which I assure you
I write not slightly, but (to use your own words) seriously and sincerely:
Therefore I thank you for imposing silence to your Sons pen; and if you will
henceforth likewise prescribe the same Law to your own herein, I will take it
both for a courtesy and a respect from you; only in^ other matter whatsoever
that you shall think me capable to sleed him or serve you, your will and
pleasure shall be my Law, and your Letters shall receive many respects and
kisses from me. I have received my Niece, and her tongue, and mine eye and care
inform me, how much we both are bound to you for your care, and her
proficiencie in Cassall, the which my Age and her Youth will expose to Usury
before I have the honor to pay you the Principal, and she the Interest
thereof. God ever bless you, and your Son Alphonso, and give you no less
Joy and Honor of him, then I hope and desire to find in mine own Niece
Eleanora.

CASSINO.


The Lady Sophia grieves, and her Son Alphonso storms at the receipt of this
unkind Letter from Cassino, whereby they see their hopes of his Niece Eleanora
reversed and frustrated; and although this his flat refusal made her of
opinion no more to stir or enter-meddle herein, yet (as Lovers are impatient
of denials and delays) some three weeks after, he prays his Mother to ride
over to Vercelie, again to prove Cassino, and likewise to (again) motion and
solicit it to Eleanora, hoping that her presence may purchase that which her
Letters cannot procure; and he is very desirous and willing to accompany her
himself. His Mother Sophis grants both his requests; they arrive to Vercelie,
where the Mother courts the Uncle, and the Son the Niece; and although they
find exceeding great Cheer and noble Entertainment, yet in the point of their
business, which is Alphonso's marriage to Eleanora, they find themselves lost,
and their suit in vain, and so they are enforced to return to Cassall with
their definitive sentence of denial, which makes her bite the lip, and
infinitely grieves and exasperates her Son; so now he again casts off the
Cloak of virtue, and far worse then ever, flies to his old vices and sins,
which his Mother with her sweet persuasions and remonstrances, can no longer
retain or conceal, especially from his Whoring and Drunkenness: yea, and
which is most lamentable and deplorable, he will no longer serve God, either
abroad or at home, for he forsakes the Church, and wholly abandoneth that sweet
and Heavenly Virtue of Prayer, which is the spiritual food and life of the
soul. His Mother Sophia exceedingly weeps and grieves hereat, but how to
remedy it she knows not: For his discontent has made him so vicious, his
vices so obstinate, and his obstinacy so outrageous and violent, as his Mother
surfets with his Love-sute to Eleanora, and will no more entermeddle with it.
He prays and reprayes her, to make one Journey more for him to Vercelie, to
see what alterations time may have wrought in the hearts of Cassino and
Eleanora, but she is as averse and wilful, as he is obstinate and peremptory:
and therefore constantly vows, neither to write, nor ever to confer more
with them herein. But this resolute answer of the Mother breeds bad blood in
the Son, yea it makes a Mutiny in his thoughts, a Civil war in his heart,
and a flat Rebellion in his resolutions against her for the same, to which the
Devil (the Arch-enemy, and Incendiary of our souls) blows the Coals. For he
who here^ofore looked on his Mother with obedience and affection, cannot (or at
least will not) see her now but with contempt and malice; yea, he is so devoid
of Grace, and so exempt of Goodness, that he looks from Charity to wrath,
from Religion to Revenge, from Heaven to Hell; and so resolves to murder her,
thinking with himself, that if he had once dispatched her, he should then be
sole Lord of all her wealth, and that then this his great and absolute estate
would soon induce Cassino and Eleanora, to accept of his affection: But he
reckons without his soul and without God, and therefore no marvel if these
his bloody hopes deceive and betray him: his Religion and Conscience cannot
prevail with him, neither has his Soul either grace or power enough to
divert him from this fatal business, and execrable resolution; for he will be
so infernal a Monster of nature, as to act her death of whom he received his
life. He consults with himself, and the Devil with him, whether he should
stab or poison her, but he holds it far more safe and less dangerous, to use
the Drug then the Dagger, and so concludes upon poison; to which and he being
resolute in his rage, thus to make away his Mother, he as an execrable Villain
(or indeed rather as a Devil) provides himself of poison, the which he still
carries about him, waiting for an opportunity, to give an end to this
deplorable business, the which the Devil very shortly administreth him: The
manner thus.

This refusal of Cassino to her Son Alphonso, and his miserable relapse to
whoredom, drunkenness, and neglect of prayer, does exceedingly distemper the
Lady Sophia his Mothers spirits, and they her body, so that she is three days
sick of a Burning fever; when to allay the fervor of that unaccustomed heat,
she causes some Almond-milke to be made her, the which she compoundeth with
many cool herbs, and other wholesome Ingredients of that nature and quality,
which she takes three times each day; morning, after dinner, and before she
goes to bed: So the third day of her sickness, walking in the afternoon in
one of the shaddowed Allies of her Garden with her Son, and there with her
best advice rectifying and directing his resolutions from Vice to Virtue, she
is unexpectedly surprised with the Symptom of her Fever, when sitting down,
and causing her waiting Maid to hold her head in one of the Arbours, she prays
her Son Alphonso to run to her Chamber, and to bring her a small wicker
Bottle of Almond milk, the which he does; but bloody Villain that he is,
nothing can withhold him (but his heart being tempered with inhumanitie and
cruelty) he first poures in his poison therein and then gives it her, who,
good Lady, drinks two great draughts thereof; when a sweat presently over
spreading her face, and she beginning to look pale, he (as a wretched
Hypocrite) makes a loud outcry from the Garden to the house, and calling there
Servants to her assistance, he likewise calls for a Chair, so she is brought
to her Chamber, and laid in her bed, and within few hours after (as a virtuous
Lady and innocent Saint) she forsakes this life and this world for a better,
and the ignorance of her Servants, and her bloody Son (drenched as it were in
the rivolets of his fained tears, together with his excessive lamentations)
do coffin her dead body up somewhat privately and speedily, so that there is
no thought nor suspicion of poison; and thus was the lamentable Murder, and
deplorable end of this wise and religious Lady Sophia committed by her own
wretched and infernal Son. Now this Devil Alphonso (to set the better
luster on his forrowes, and the better varnish and color on his mourning for
the death of his Mother) gives her a stately Funeral, the pomp and cost
whereof, not only equalized, but exceeded their rank and quality: For he left
no Gentleman, or Lady in or about Cassall uninvited to be at her burial, and
his Feast, and dighted himself and all his Kinsfolks and Servants in mourning
attire, thereby the better to carry off the least reflection or shadow of
suspicion from him of this his foul and inhumane Murder.

The news of the Lady Sophia's death, runs from Cassall to Vercelie, where
Cassino, and his Niece Eleanora understanding thereof, they both of them
exceedingly lament and sorrow for it, in regard she was a very Honorable,
Wise, and Religious Lady, and to whom the tender youth of Eleanora was
infinitely beholding and indebted for many of her sweet virtues and perfections;
so that as her Uncle honored her, so this his Niece held her self bound to
reverence her, as making her eminent and singular virtues, the mould and
pattern whereon she framed all her terrestrial comportments and actions,
which in few months after were so many, and so excellent, that as she was
known to be one of the most beautiful, so she was likewise justly reported
to be one of the wisest young Ladies of all that City and Country, which
together with her own great Estate, as also that of her Uncle Cassino's, to
the full enjoying whereof (in contemplation of her virtues and consanguinity)
he had justly both designed and adopted her his sole heir; the which made her
to be sought in marriage by diverse young Gallants of very noble and chief
houses; most whereof were superior to Alphonso, both in blood and wealth. When
her Uncle at last (with her own free affection and consent) privately marries
her to Signior Hieronymo Brasciano, a rich and brave young Gentleman of
Vercelie, who was Nephew and Heir to the Bishop of that City; but he being
likewise very young, the tenderness of both their ages dispensed them from as
yet lying together, and both the Bishop and her Uncle Cassino (for some
important reasons best known to themselves) caused this their marriage as yet
to be concealed from all the world with great privacie and secrecy, he for
the most part living with the Bishop his Uncle at the City of Turin (which is
the Court of the Duke of Savoy) and she in Vercelie with her Uncle Cassino,
only they visit each other with their Letters, which is all the familiarity
that as yet they are permitted to reap and receive each of other.

And here the true order of our History calls us again, to speak of this
degenerate and debaushed Gentleman Alphonso, who had no sooner embrued his
guilty hands in the innocent blood of the Lady Sophia his Mother; but he then
without any farther show of sorrow, or sight or sense of repentance for the
same, again desperately abandoneth himself to all old vices and
prodigalities, flaunting it out in brave apparel (for his mourning weeds he
speedily cast off) and swimming as it were in the Vast Ocean of all his carnal
delights, and worldly pleasures and sensualities, never thinking of Religion or
Prayer, but passes away whole days and nights, yea consumes whole weeks and
months in all licencious riots, and excessive prodigalities with his debaushed
Companions and Strumpets, which began to drown his Estate, and to devour his
Lands apace: and in the heat and ruff of these his Ioviall follies, and
exorbitant intemperancies, he be thinks himself again of the wealth and
beauty of the young Lady Eleanora, and so (in the vanity of his conceits, and
the imbecility of his judgment) flattering himself, that being now Lord of
all his deceased Mothers lands and wealth, her Uncle Cassino could not refuse
to give her him in marriage, not so much as once dreaming or remembering how
plainly and peremptorily, both he and she had formerly given him the repulse:
To which effect he dights himself and his Followers in exceeding rich
apparel, and (with a train too worthy of himself) he rides over to Vercelie,
and there becomes a most importunate Suitor, both to Cassino and Eleanora, first
seeking her, and then courting her Uncle for her: but all in vain, for he puts
him off with disrespect, and she rejects him with disdain; and when yet they
see that his importunacie herein passes the bounds of reason, and exceeds
the limits of Discretion and Civilitie, then Cassino tells him plainly that his
Niece is married; and that therefore (in that consideration) he forbids him
his house and her company; which point of discourtesie (and as Alphonso terms
it of dishonor) to him, he takes in so ill part from Cassino, that exchanging
his reason into rage, and forgetting himself to be a man, or which is more a
Gentleman, or which is most of all a Christian, he again strikes hands and
agrees with the Devil, and for mere despite and rage vows that he will
murder Cassino: The Devil making him strong in the vanity of this belief and
confidence, that this speech and suggestion of his, that his Niece Eleanora is
married, is but fabulous and false, and that if he were once dead, he could not
impeach or hinder him from enjoying the fair and rich Eleanora to his wife,
which is the same prodigious bait and lure whereby Satan formerly drew, and
betrayed him to poison his Mother: the Devil still so closely over-vailing his
conscience and soul, and so ecclipsing, and wincking his understanding and
judgment, that as his hand so his heart is inured and obdurated to the
effusion of innocent blood, and therefore he will not retire with grace, but
onwards with impiety to the finishing of this cruel Murder of Cassino; and
although he had an itching desire, and a hellish ambition likewise to effect
it by poison, yet in regard he was denied access to his house and company, as
also for that he was unacquainted with any Apothecary or Physician of Vercelie,
he therefore resolves with the Devil to do it by a Carabine, which many
times by night he wore and carried about him. There is nothing easier then to
do evil, and as it is the nature, so it is the policy of Satan, as well to
furnish us with the means, as the matter thereof: For when we cast our selves
from Malice to Revenge, and from Revenge to Murder, he then makes us
industrious, first in the contriving, and then in the execution thereof, but in
the end God will so ordain that this hellish policy shall turn to misery.

Alphonso's malice against Cassino will give no peace to his thoughts, so he
informs himself, that every morning and evening he is accustomed to walk
alone in his Garden, for an hour or two in his spiritual meditations, and
therefore he thinks this a fit place (from some adjacent house and window) to
shoot at him; when being likewise assured, that there was a poor small tavern
(not much frequented with company) that lay somewhat near and commodious to
Cassino's Garden, he resolves to make choice of that, and there to give end to
this bloody business, which his heart so much desires, so abandoned by God, and
guided and conducted by the Devil, he about six of the clock in the evening
rides thither, and tying up his horse to the door, he in a disguised suit of
apparel, pretending there to stay for a friend of his, which promised to come
thither to meet him (and having purposely sent away his Servants before him to
Cassall) he goes up into the Chamber, calls for wine and something to eat, the
better to favor and color out his stay there, when bolting the Chamber door
to him, he (putting aside the paper Casements, which they use in Italy to
expel the fervencie of the Sun) from thence (according to his former
intelligence) plainly perceives Cassino walking in his Garden, with his Hat in
one hand, and his Breviary (or Praier-booke) wherein he reads, in another, with
the which he was as busy with God in his meditations and devotions, as he was
with the Devil, in charging his Carabine with a brace of bullets, and dressing
of his fire lock, and priming of his powder touch-holl, when, without the
least spark of grace, or fear of God, or his punishments, he lets fly at
him; and the Devil had made him so expert a Marke-man, that as Cassino was
saftly coming on, walking toward the window, wherein he secretly and
scelerously stood, both the bullets hit him right in the breast a little below
the left pap, whereof this harmless and religious old Gentleman Cassino fell
presently dead to the ground, and none being in the Garden with him (wherein I
my self have since some times been) I could not understand, that he had the
power or happiness to speak a word: But we shall see, that this his inhumane
and bloody Murderer, shall not go far before the judgments of God will
surprise and ore take him. The manner whereof is thus.

As soon as Alphonso had given this bloody blow, and seen Cassino fall dead
to the ground, he unbolting the Chamber door, presently resolves to take horse
and fly a way, but God ordained the contrary: For as he had again put up his
Carabine into his Belt, God presently struck him into a stupefied swoone,
whereof falling to the ground, the noise of his fall, the report of his
Carabine, and the rattling of his sword and it, presently invited the people of
the house below, to see what had befallen above to this Gentleman, where
finding him grovelling and gasping for life, they (by Gods immediate direction)
do think that he has there shot and murdered himself; when devesting him
of his apparel, and laying him in bed to search for his wounds, they find
none; but yet it is an hour before they perceive any motion, or action of life
in him: And then opening his eyes, he with a distracted look and amazed
countenance, deeming himself upon the very point of death; and that for his
murdering of Cassino, the Lord in his judgment had infallibly stricken him
with sudden death, he finding this foul and bloody act of his, to lie heavy
upon his soul and conscience, in this last Scene (as he then thought) of his
life, he (rather raving then speaking) in the heat of his madness and
distraction, cries out again and again, that he had murdered Cassino: The
which the people of the house are exceedingly astonished to understand. And now
by this time Cassino is found dead in his Garden, and shot through with a brace
of bullets. So his Niece ^leanora is all in tears hereat, and all Vercelie
resounds of this his lamentable murder. When Cassino's friends and servants
make speedy search for the Murderer, and finding a horse tied to this little
Tavern door, they find the Man, Wife, and Servants thereof in outcries and
amazement: So they ascend the stairs, find Alphonso in bed, with his Carabine
by him on the bench, and his clothes on the Table, and examining the people of
the house, they report to them this sudden accident of his swooning, and
therein of his confession of the murdering of Cassino; so they all praise and
glorify God, in that they have so soon, and so readily found out the inhumane
Author, and Actor of this bloody Murder.

But here before I proceed farther, I (in the name and fear of God) do
request and invite the Reader to take notice of another remarkable (I may say
miraculous) circumstance of Gods mercy and glory, which likewise appears in
this detection and confession of Alphonso, to be the cruel Murderer of this
innocent, harmless Gentleman Cassino; for he being no better then distracted
of his wits, before God had caused and brought him to confess it, which else
he had never done, but that in the agony and anxiety of his stupefied spirits
he (as I have formerly said) thought himself on the point and brinke of
death, and no shadow of hope left him, either of this life or this world: Then
I say, as soon as he had confessed it, God in his good pleasure and
providence presently restored him again to his perfect health, strength, and
memory; so that being put in mind, and again remembering his confession, and
seeing the eminency of his danger by the presence of Cassino's friends and
servants, who were there present about his bed, to apprehend and carry him away
to prison for the same; he now with tears, and bitter oaths, and curses,
declines and recants what he has formerly spoken thereof, and, rather as a
Devil then a Christian, in lofty and proud speeches stands upon the terms of
his Justification, alleging and affirming to them farther that what he had
formerly confessed, or said to them, concerning the Murder of Cassino,
proceeded from the destemperature of his heart and brains, in that of his
distraction, or else from the delusions and temptations of the Devil, and no
otherwise. But his own confession, the testimony of those of the house who
heard it, and the rest of the presumptions and circumstances are so pregnant
and apparent, that he is the undoubted Murderer of Cassino, as they believe
not what he now says in his own behalf and Apology, or that it is any way
the delusions of the Devil, but the good pleasure of God, which brought him to
this detection and conviction of himself for the same: So they being deaf to
his requests and oaths, they enforce him to draw on his apparel, and then by
order of the criminal Judges, they that night commit him to prison, where the
Devil having brought him, he now leaves him to himself, and to his own
misery and confusion, which it is to be believed, that the Lord has ordained
shall speedily befall him.

The next morning this Monster of nature Alphonso, is called to his araignment,
where being by his Judges, charged with this foul Murder, the Devil has as
yet so obdurated his heart, as he not only denies it, but contests against it
with vehemency and execrations. So the Vintner and his wife, and servants are
produced against him as witnesses, who acknowledge and confess his own
confession thereof, as also the report of his Carabine, and the vicinitie of
their house, and prospect from the Chamber wherein he was, to Cassino's
Garden, wherein as he was walking he was shot to death. When the mournful and
sorrowful young Lady Eleanora, is likewise brought forth as a witness against
him, who informs his Judges, that Alphonso was a most importunate Suter to
her, both in his Mothers house at Cassall, as also at her deceased Uncles
house, here in Vercelie; adding withal, that (in her heart and soul) she
verily believes him to be the Murderer of her said Uncle. But still he denies
it with choler and indignation: whereupon, the presumptions and circumstances
hereof, being more apparent to his Judges, then the knowledge of this truth,
they adjudge him to the Rack, where at his very first torments thereof, he
with tears confesses it; and God is now so merciful to his soul, as he
seems to be very sorrowful and repentant thereof: so they seeing him guilty,
pronounce sentence against him, the next day to have his head cut off for the
same; and that night the Judges (out of their honorable zeal to charity and
piety) send him some Friars to Prison to him, to direct his soul to Heaven;
who willing him to disburthen his conscience and soul of any other capital
crime, which he might have committed in all the course of his life, to the
end that it might not hinder her passage and transmigration from Earth to
Heaven; He then and there reveals them, how he had also formerly poisoned
his own Mother, the Lady Sophia, at Cassall, for the which he likewise craved
absolution both of them and of God. Whereat his Judges are exceedingly amazed
and astonished, to see a Gentleman so degenerate, inhumane and bloody, as to be
the death of his own Mother, of whom formerly he had received his life.

The day following (according to his sentence) Alphonso is brought to the place
of execution, clad in a black suit of silk Grograine, and a falling band,
where ascending the scaffold, and drawn to much humility and contrition, by
his secular Priests and Friars, he in presenee of a great concourse of people,
there made this short speech. That these two murders of his, and especially
that of his own Mother, the Lady Sophia, were so odious in the sight of God
and man, that he acknowledged, he no longer deserved to tread on the face of
the earth, or to look up to Heaven. That he knew not justly, whereunto to
attribute this infamy and misery of his, but to his continual neglect and
omission of prayer, whereby he banished himself from God, and thereby gave the
Devil too great an interest over his body and soul; that he desired God to
forgive him, these his two soul and bloody crimes of Murder, as also that of
his neglect of Prayer; and so (with tears in his eyes) besought all who were
there present, likewise to pray unto God for him: When again beseeching the
virtuous young Lady Eleanora, to forgive him the murder of her good old Uncle
Cassino, he often making the sign of the Cross, and recommending himself
into the hands of his Redeemer, bad the Executioner do his office, who
presently with his sword severed his head from his body, and both were
immediately burnt, and the ashes thrown into the River of Ticino, without the
walls of Vercelie, although his Judges were once of opinion, to send his said
head and body to Cassall, for the Judges of that place to do their pleasure
therewith, for there poisoning of his own Mother, the Lady Sophia.

And thus was the miserable (and yet deserved) death and end, of this bloody
and execrable Gentleman Alphonso, and in this sort did the judgments and
punishments of God befall him, for these his two most inhumane, and deplorable
Murders. May God of his infinite grace and mercy, still fortify and confirm
our faith by constant and continual prayer (the want whereof was the fatal
Rock whereon he perished) that so we may secure our selves in this world, and
our souls in that to come.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXECRAble Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXIV.
Pont Chausey kills La Roche in a Duel. Quatbrisson causes Moncallier (an
Apothecary) to poison his own Brother Valfontaine, Moncallier after falls, and
breaks his neck from a pair of stairs. Quatbrisson likewise causes his
Fathers M^er (...) (...) murder, and strangle Marieta in her Bed, and to throw
her body into his Mill-Pond. Pierot the Miller is broken alive on a wheel, and
Quatbrisson first beheaded, then burnt for the same.

We may truly affirm, that the world is in her wane, when Murder is become
the practice of Christians, which indeed is the proper office of the Devil;
and how frequently those wofnll accidents happen, we cannot think of, but
with much horror, nor remember but with grie^e of mind, and compassion of
heart; For is it not to m^ke our selves wilful Traitors and Rebels to God, to
violate his Divine Majesty, in spoiling his true Image and resemblance; yea,
is it not the highway of Hell? But that this age of ours produces such
Monsters of nature, read we but this ensuing History, and it will inform us
of much innocent blood shed, we know not whether more wilfully or wickedly.

IT is not unknown, that the Province of little Britain, was (long since)
annexed and united to the flourishing Kingdom of France, by the marriage of
Charles the Eighth, with Anne the young Duchess thereof, notwithstanding that
she we^e formerly contracted to Maximilian (Archduke of Austria) where we
shall understand, that in the City of Vannes (formerly the Court and Residence
of those British Dukes) thereof late years dwelt a noble Gentleman (of rich
Demaines and Revenues) termed Monsieur de Caerstaing, who by his wife
Madamoyselle de la Ville Blanch, had two Sons, the eldest named by his title
Monsieur de Quatbrisson, and the youngest Monsieur de Valfontaine: The first
aged of twenty four years, being short and corpulent, the second of twenty,
being tall and slender; both of them brave and hopeful Gentlemen, as well in
their outward personages, as in the ^ward perfections, and endowments of their
minds; For in all respects, the care and affection of their Parents, had made
their education answerable to their births. Valfontaine (for the most part)
lived in the City of Nantes (the second of that Duchy) with an Uncle of his
named Monsieur de Massy, being President of the Kings Chamber of Accounts
which is kept there, who frequenting the Bals or public Dancings (whereunto
the youth of France are generally adicted) amongst many other excellent
beauties, wherewith that City is graced, and those pastimes and meetings
honored, he sees a young Gentlewoman (being a stranger, and newly come to the
City.) so infinitely rich in the excellencies of nature, and the treasure of
loveliness and beauty, as (with a kind of imperious commanding power) she
atracts all men's eyes to behold, to admire, to affect her. So as although
Valfontaines youthful heart and yea^es, had never as yet stooped or sacrificed
to Love, yet at the very first sight of this sweet young Gentlewoman, (whose
name we shall not go far to know) he cannot retain his enamored eyes from
gadding on the Roses, and ranging on the Lillies of her sweet complexion, nor
his resolutions from enquiring, what her name and her self was; when being
informed, that she was the only daughter and heir of a rich and noble
Gentleman, a Widdower termed Monsieur de Pennelle, of the Parish of Saint
Aignaw, four leagues from the City, and her name Madamoyselle la Pratiere, of
the age of some seventeene, he at the very first sight likes her so well, and
loves her so dearly, that (if her interior virtues come not too fhort of her
exterior beauty and feature) he vows he will be her Suitor and Servant; and so
he attempts to court and seek her for his wife.

To which end, he (more like a Tutor then a Pupil, in the Art and School of
love) is so far from neglecting any, as he curiously and carefully seeks all
opportunities and occasions to enjoy the felicity of her company, and so (for
the most part) he conducts her to and from the dauncings, sits and talks with
her in her lodgings, meets her at Church, where as well at Vespers as Mass, he
accompanies and prays with her, and (briefly) she can difficultly be present
any where, where he is long absent from her; For by this time (which is scarce
a month since he first saw her) her peerless beauty, and unparalleled
virtues and discourse, have acted such amorous wonders in his heart, as he
vows, he must either live her Husband, or die her Martyr. But see the
providence and pleasure of God, for if Valfontaine tenderly love our sweet and
fair La Pratiere, no less does she him; for knowing him to be the Son of
his Father, and therefore a Gentleman of noble extraction and worth; and seeing
him to be wise, discreet, and proper, as also remembering and marking, that he
fervently and infinitely affects her, she is so delighted with his neat feature
and personage, and ravished with the melody of his discourse, as albeit at
first, her tongue be so civil and modest to conceal her affection from him,
yet her eyes (the Ambassadors of her heart) cannot but in dumb Eloquence, and
silent Rhetorike bewray it him. So as (to omit the gifts, presents, and
especially the letters, which interchangeably past between them) and which
indeed powerfully assisted to the sympathising and cimenting of their youthful
affections, it suffices that we take notice and knowledge, that Valfontaines
presence was La Pratiere's delight, and the enjoying of her company, his
felicity and glory, and that she in life and death would remain his obedient
and faithful Wife, and he her faithful and loving Husband; Only she prays
him, carefully and respectfully to conceal her affection to him, and so
likewise to observe her Father in seeking his consent to their marriage, the
which he promises her shortly to perform; For as soon as La Pratiere has
left Nantes, and purposely retired her self home to her Fathers house, at
Saint Aignaw, Valfontaine is not many days behind her, where he acquaints her
Father Pennelle, with his affection to his daughter, seeks her in marriage,
requesteth his consent, and with many reasons, fairly and discreetly
endeavoreth to induce him thereunto, where for three or four days, he takes
up his lodging and residence, under pretense to court the Daughter, whom we
know he has already won, but his suit is no way pleasing, but distasteful to
Pennelle, who although he know, that Monsieur de Caerstainge his Father (as
well for lands as blood) is every way rather his Superior then his Equal, yet
because his Daughter La Pratiere is his only child and heir, and Valfontaine
but a Cadet (or younger Brother) therefore covetousness makes him assume this
resolution, that he will have none of him for his Son in Law: but this
reason, and conclusion he conceales to himself, and so (in general terms)
gives Valfontaine a cold and averse answer, little better in effect then a
flat denial; and thus for his first Journey, Valfontaine takes leave of his
sweet La Pratiere, no way doubting but that his second to her, will prove less
distasteful and more fortunate, he leaves Nantes and rides home to Vannes.

Being arrived at Vannes, he acquaints his Father and Mother, with his
affection and suit to Madamoyselle La Pratiere, the only daughter and heir
(as we have heard) of Monsieur de Pennelle, of Saint Aignaw, whereunto (because
they know him to be rich and noble, and his Daughter fair and virtuous) they
give good approbation and allowance, when Valfontaine praying his Father to
ride over to Monsieur de Pennelle, to confer with him about this business,
whose presence he hops will effect that with him, which he fears and
knows his poor power cannot: But his Father although he be very glad, to
procure his Sons advancement and content by this match, yet being at that
time much troubled with the Gout, he excuses himself upon his indisposition,
and so defers off that Journey to another time. Valfontaine missing of his
Father, deemes it rather expedient then impertinent, to entreat his brother
Quatbrisson herein, to whom he fully relates what has past between Pennelle
and himself, but withal conceales upon what terms he stands with La
Pratiere, or that she is any way his, or he hers, either by contract or
promise, to the end that he may have no just cause, either to tax her
immodesty, or condemn her indiscretion, in so suddenly giving her self to
him. Quatbrisson very willingly yields to his brothers request; when (followed
with a ^raine and equipage answerable to their rank and quality, and armed
with their Fathers Letter to Monsieur de Pennelle) they take horse and ride to
Saint-Aignaw. Now as it is the error (or nature) of Lovers to be still
unsecret Secretaries, in delighting to talk and pratle of their Mistresses,
whom they esteem their sovereign good and chiefest felicity: So all the way,
between Vannes, and Saint Aignaw, Valfontaine could neither refrain, nor
restrain his tongue from painting forth La Pratiere in all the excellency of
her praises, and from extolling her beauty and perfections above the skies;
yea, he ran so curious a division, and so ample a comment on the wonders and
raritie of her beauty, that his verbal relation already prepared his Brothers
eyes to behold a female Masterpiece of nature in La Pratiere; but being
arrived to her Fathers house (a little before dinner time) and seeing, and
saluting first him, then her, at the very first encounter and sight, his senses
are so surprised with the sweetness of her countenance, and so taken with she
exquisitnesse of her feature, as he now finds that his brothers report and
praises of her come infinitely short the dignity and excellency of her beauty.

Dinner being ended, and Quatbrisson delivering his Fathers Letter to Pennelle,
with whom making a slight and superficial conference, concerning his brothers
affection and suit to his Daughter, he turns from him to her, who dying her
milk white cheeks with a roseat blush to entertain him, he ravished with the
delicacie of so amorous an encounter, and sweet object, could not like wise
refrain from blushing to see her blush, when enquiring of her, if she pleased
to take the air of the Garden (where her Father and his Brother were already
gone and attended them) and she replying, that his pleasure therein should be
hers, he taking her by her hand conducts her thither; where Valfontaine in
civilitie purposely walking aloof off, because he hoped and assured himself,
that his brother Quatbrisson now meant effectually to speak with his Mistress
in his behalf, there being then no witnesses to their conference, but only the
sweet Quiresters of the woods (the Thrushes and Nightingales) who purposely and
pleasantly sat on every bush and tree, to delight them with their melifluous
melody; the very first words he administered and directed to her was; That if
she pleased to swear her tongue to secrecy, to what he should now say and
deliver to her, he would reveal her a secret which should infinitely import
her good. La Pratiere (wondering at the nature of Quatbrissons first speech and
request, and what it might mean or concern) stood a little while mute and
silent, not knowing what to conceive thereof, much less what to answer
thereto: But at last considering that Valfontaine was her Lover, and
Quatbrisson his brother, she imagined there was some plot secretly compacted
between them, that if her Father would not condescend to their desires, that
they had then resolved to steal her away from him, and so to make it a
Clandestine marriage: Whereupon (her affection being desirous to know the
certainty hereof, and her curiosity ambitious to see this abstruse mystery
unlocked) she grants him his request, vowing to impose secrecy to her tongue
in what he should deliver, or entrust her with: When he kissing her, and
evaporating many far fetched sighs (as the Herald to proclaim his
affection) he tells her; that her incomparable beauty has captivated his
thoughts, and made his heart both her Tributary, and her Prisoner; that he
envies his brothers happiness, in having the honor to see her before
himself. That as he is his Superior in years so he is in affection to her,
and that he knows his brother is as unworthy of her, as himself worthily
bestowed on her: La Pratiere (whose affection and thoughts ran a direct
contrary Cariere, lest dreaming of that which she is now enforced to
understand) is so afflicted, and withal so incensed at these unexpected
speeches of Quatbrissons, that (her passion giving a law to her civilitie)
casting a snow-white veil over her crimson cheeks, and bending her brow (in
whose furrows it seemed that discontent and choler sat now triumphant) her
affection is so sincere and entire to Valfontaine, as she returns his
discourteous Brother Quatbrisson, this short and sharp answer: Quatbrisson
(quoth she) to have offered this unkindnesse of yours to your friend, had
been ignoble ingratitude, but to do it to your own brother, can be no less
then treachery; and therefore this know from me, that I esteem your
Primogenitorship as inferior to Valfontaines virtues, as they are in all
respects superior to yours, and had you not tied and wedded my tongue to
silence, I would now presently publish it to the world, to the admiration and
detestation of all good men, and so (with a look ingendered of choler, and
derived from disdain) she hastily and suddenly trips away from him, leaving
him alone in the Garden to his Muses; Quatbrisson biting his lip at this sharp
repulse of La Pratiere, is yet resolute not thus to leave her, when hoping to
find her Father more tractable and propitious to his suit then his Daughter,
he seeks him out, and in fair terms informs him of his affection and love
to her, and that (notwithstanding his brothers research of her) he himself
infinitely desires her to be his own wife. Old Pennelle (being more covetous
of his Daughters preferment, then any way careful of her content) gives an
attentive and pleasing ear to this motion of Quatbrisson, and is so delighted
with the melody of his speeches, as already in heart, he wishes her married to
him, but how to answer, or give content to Valfontaine he knows not.

Now the better to effect, and compass this match, so much wished of
Quatbrisson, and desired of Pennelle; he (in the absence of Valfontaine) sends
for his Daughter into his closet, shows her what preferment and happiness is
now offered her, if she will forsake Valfontaine and accept of his elder
Brother Quatbrisson for her husband. La Pratiere (both moved and grieved with
this her Fathers proposition and speeches) very humbly beseeches him; that if
ever he will respect her content, or regard her life, that Valfontaine may be
her Husband, and not Quatbrisson, because she confesses she loves the younger
Brother, but that she neither can nor will affect the elder: Now although this
her resolute and obstinate answer, do exceedingly afflict and grieve her
Father, yet hoping that a little time will prove capable to draw her to his
desires, he secretly bids Quatbrisson to ride home to Vannes, to take his
Brother with him, and shortly after to return again to Saint-Aignaw without
him, and that he shall find no cause to fear, or reason to doubt, but that
he shall enjoy his Mistress; the managing whereof, he prays him to refer
to his care in his absence: Thus we see the Father and Daughter differently
affected, he loves Quatbrisson and not Valfontaine, and she Valfontaine, but
not Quatbrisson, who grieving as much at the Daughters refusal, as he
rejoices at her Fathers consent: He now venteth his malice on the Innocence,
and his treachery on the integrity of his Brother, by acquainting him, that he
has used his best power and art of solicitation toward Pennelle; and that he
finds it impossible to draw him to reason; adding withal, that he is so far
from consenting, that he shall obtain his Daughter in marriage, as (upon the
whole) in terms enough clear and apparent, he futurely denies him access to
his house; Wherefore Brother (quoth he) because I see with grief, that you
strive against the stream, and that in all actions and accidents whatsoever,
the shortest errors are still best, let us to morrow take horse and away, and
let this indifferency be your resolution: That if God have decreed it shall be
a match, it then will be, otherwise not. Valfontaines heart bleeds at
Pennelles averseness and cruelty, and his eyes overflow with tears, so soon
to forsake the sight and company of his Daughter, of his dear and fair
Mistress La Pratiere; but (being ignorant of all his brothers passages, and
treacheries intended, and meant toward him) he holds it folly to impugn, or
contradict his pleasure, and so resolves to leave Saint-Aignaw, and depart home
with him to Vannes.

Our fair La Pratiere, seeing all things bent to cross her desires, and her
Valfontaines wishes, she (out of her tender affection to him) resolves to give
him a private meeting and conference, when that very night (as her Father and
his Brother were in their beds soundly sleeping) she sends for him into her
Chamber, where seeing him extremely pensive and sorrowful; she bids him be
cheerful and courageous, tells him that he has no reason to despair, but to
hope, for that in life and death she will be his, and only his; and then
informs him, that instantly upon his arrival to Vannes, she will write and
send him a Letter, wherein she will acquaint him with the passage of a business;
whereof he neither can conceive or dream; conjuring him now to enquire no
farther what it is, for that her tongue was enjoined to secrecy, and sworn to
silence, and so (with much chat, and more kisses) he giving her a Diamond Ring
from his fingers, and she him a pair of pearl Bracelets from her arms, in
token of their mutual constancy and affection each to other, they (infinitely
against their minds) are enforced to take ^ave each of other, and the
succeeding morn being come, the two Brothers prepare, and dispose themselves
for their Journey. When breakfast ended, according as it was concluded betwixt
Pennelle and Quatbrisson, Pennelle takes Valfontaine aside to a window, and in
short terms prays him, henceforth to forbear his house, and refrain his
Daughters company, for that he has provided another Husband for her; so having
severally and solemnly taken their Congees, first of the Father, and then of
the Daughter, they take horse and away. Now as they are riding home toward
Vannes, as it is a sensible and heart-killing grief to La Pratiere, so soon
to be deprived of her Valfontaines dear and sweet company, so again she
cannot refrain from smiling, to see how ingratefully and subtly Quatbrisson
goes to work to betray his Brother, in seeking to obtain her for himself in
marriage; but measuring the integrity of the one, by the treachery of the
other, and likewise remembering her promise to Valfontaine, to write to him at
the end of two days after their departure, she (by a confident Messenger)
accordingly sends him this Letter.

LA PRATIERE to VALFONTAINE.
MY promise owes you this Letter, whereby I give you to understand, that I know
not whether you have greater cause to love me, or to hate your brother
Quatbrisson, in regard he vows, he affects me dearer then your self, and
has attempted to rob you of your Wife, and consequently me of my Husband; and
as this is ingratitude in a friend, so it must needs be treachery in a Brother.
I have heard his courting, and seen his complements tending that way, but for
your sake I relish those with distaste, these with neglest, and himself with
contempt and disdain. He has won my Father to his will, but rest you
confident (my dear Valfontaine) that he neither can, nor shall draw me to his
desire. And because true affection, especially in accidents of this nature,
cannot still be exempt of fear, therefore if any arise, or engender in your
thoughts, let this dissipate and dispell it, that although my Father have
banished you his house, yet his Daughter is (till death) constantly resolved to
retain and cherish you in her heart, and none but you: Manage this your
Pratieres advice with discretion toward my Father, and not with choler
toward your Brother, and be but a little time a patient Spectator of my
affection and constancy to you, and you shall assuredly see him act his own
shame, and your glory; his affliction, and your content and desire.

LA PRATIERE.


Valfontaine having received and read this Letter; the base ingratitude and
foul treachery of his brother Quatbrisson, does extremely afflict and torment
him; yea the knowledge and remembrance thereof, throws him into such passions
of choler, and fumes of revenge, as once he resolved to right himself on him,
by sending him a Challenge, and fighting with him; vowing that the bonds of
nature were not by far so strong, as those of affection, and that his brother
having given the first cause of offense, and breach of amity betwixt them, it
was no marvel that he took that course, and preferred that form of
proceeding to any other. But then again considering his dear La Pratieres
injunction and prohibition from choler, this last reason ore-swaied and
prevailed against his former resolution, when knowing himself infinitely
obliged to her for her courtesy, and constancy, so sweetly expressed to him
in this her Letter, he can do no less, then return her an answer thereof in
requital, the which he does by her own Messenger in these terms.

VALFONTAINE to LA PRATIERE.
OF all men of the world, I least thought that my brother Quatbrisson would
have proved my Rival, in attempting to love you, because he perfectly knows,
I affect you far dearer then the whole world; yea this error (or as you
justly term it, this treachery) of his, is so odious, so strange to me, as it
had far exceeded my belief, if your affection and constancy had not so
courteously revealed it to me in your Letter, the which I both blushed and
palled to peruse. Neither is it any thanks to him, that he missed of his
desire, in missing of you, rather to your virtuous self, which distasted his
courting and complements for his own sake, and disdained him for mine. Dear
and sweet La Pratiere, in that my brother has won your Father, I exceedingly
grieve, but in that I have not lost his Daughter, I far more triumph and
rejoice: But why think I of losing you, since to call your constancy in
question, is no less then to profane your affection and my judgment, and so
to make my self both incapable and unworthy of you, for how can my love to
you, retain any spice or spark of fear, for that being banished your Fathers
house, I am yet so happy, to recover so safe a Harbor and Sanctuary, yea so
precious a Temple, as your heart; In which regard it is every way fit, that
your requests should be to me commands, for otherwise my Sword had already
called me Coward, if by this time I had not called my Brother to a strict and
severe account for this his treachery. I will still observe your Father with
respect, though he refuse to respect me with observance; and for my ungrateful
and treacherous Brother, he may act his own shame and affliction, but cannot
conduce to content, or desire, because that must soly proceed from your self,
since in the sweet enjoying of you to my Wife, consists the only content of my
life, and the chiefest of all my earthly felicity.

VALFONTAINE.


Some two days after that La Pratiere was made joyful with this answer of her
Valfontaine, she has again sorrowful news of Quatbrissons arrival to her
Fathers house at Saint-Aignaw, who had purposely given it out to his brother
Valfontaine at Vannes, that he rides to Hennbon. He here renewes his late suit
to the Father and Daughter, but he finds them both in the same humors and
resolutions, he left them; he willing, and she coy, he desirous to have him
his Son in law, and she resolute never to make him, but his brother
Valfontaine her Husband. He profereth her many rich gifts and presents, and a
blancke to write down what Iointure she pleases to demand, but she
peremptorily refuses it all, and bids him bestow it on some other, of whom it
may find better acceptance; yea I may safely say, and truly affirm, that
their affections are far more opposite, and contrary, then their sexes; for
the more he sees her, he loves her, and the oftener she beholds him, the more
she hates him; so that when he apparently perceives, that she deeply vows to
her Father, and himself, only to marry his brother Valfontaine, or her Grave,
he seeing his labor for the time present lost, and his affection to her in
vain; having nothing left to comfort him against the repulse of this amorous
suit, but the constant friendship of her Father, he sorrowfully takes his
leave of them, and rides home to Vannes; but as close as he bears this his
Journey from his brother Valfontaine, yet La Pratiere holds her self bound to
signify it to him, the which the very next day she does by her second Letter,
which speaks thus.

LA PRATIERE to VALFONTAINE.
I Hold it a part of my duty and affection to advertise you, that these two
days, I have been again importunately haunted and solicited by your unkind
Brother Quatbrisson for marriage, but he has found my first answer, to be my
second and last; Yea I have so nipt his vain hopes in their blossoms, by
signifying to him and my Father, my infallible resolution, either to wed you or
my grave, as I think (except their hopes betray their judgments) the one is
assured, and the other confident, that time will make it apparent to the world,
that my words will prove deeds, and that the last will make the first real:
But if your said brother will yet (notwithstanding) farther exercise his folly
in my patience, and so make himself as ridiculous to me, as to you he is
treacherous, I (out of the dear affection, and tender respect which I bear
you) will then fall on my knees to my Father, to hasten his consent to our
marriage; that in seeking my content, you may therein find your own; and this
is my resolution, wherewith if yours concur and sympathise, Heaven may, but
Earth shall not cross our desires.

LA PRATIERE.


Valfontaine receives this second Letter from his Mistress with smiles and
frowns; with smiles to see her inviolable constancy and affection, with
frowns to behold his brother Quatbrissons continual malice and treachery
toward him, the which considering (as also because it so nearly concerns
him) he resolves to tax him thereof, and to see whether (by fair requests
and persuasions) he may reclaim him from affecting his fair and dear La
Pratiere, and so to give over his suit to her, but first he knows himself
indebted and obliged, to return her an answer to this her last Letter, the
which he does in these terms.

VALFONTAYNE to LA PRATIERE.
IT is every way your affection, no way your duty (sweet La Pratiere) which
again advertiseth me of my Brother Quatbrissons perseverance in his treachery
toward me, by seeking to betray and bereave me of your self, in whom my
heart and thoughts imparadise their most sovereign earthly felicity; and your
resolution in nipping his hopes, and your Fathers will, by electing me or your
grave for your Husband, does so ravish my heart with joy, and so rap my
conceits in an ecstasy of sweet content, as I am confident God has reserved La
Pratiere, to be Valfontaines sweet Wife, and he to be her dear Husband. But
as I know not whether my unkind and treacherous Brother, will yet farther
bewray you his folly, in exercising your patience with his importunity; so to
save you that labor and penance, which for my sake and love you are ready to
impose to your self, I am both ready and resolved, not only to fall on my
knees to your Father, but also to your sweet self, that our marriage be
hastened; for as your resolution herein, is, and ever shall be mine, so our
hearts and thoughts sympathising in these wishes, I hope that both Heaven and
Earth have resolved, not to cross, but shortly to consummate and finish our
desires.

VALFONTAINE.


He having thus dispatched and sent away his Letter, to his sweet and fair
Mistress, he now resolves to have some conference with his unkind Brother, to
see what a brazen face, he either will, or can put upon this his ingratitude
and treachery: But Quatbrissons policy will anticipate and prevent him; for he
having his heart and contemplations deeply fixed on La Pratieres beauty, and
having ran over all the inventions of his art and affection, how to make her
forsake he coyness, and so how to obtain her for his wife, he at last
resolves to feign himself sick, and so then to reveal to his brother
Valfontaine, that it is his dear and fervent affection to La Pratiere; which
is the cause thereof. To which purpose he keeps his bed, and in his perfect
health is twice let blood, thereby to look ill; when sending for his brother
to his Chamber, and exempting all other company thence, he acquaints and
informs him, That since he first saw La Pratiere, he still most tenderly
loved her, and that he must now die, because she will not affect and love him;
He prays and conjures him (by virtue of all the same blood which equally
streams in both their bodies) for the saving and preserving of his life, that
he will now abandon his affection from her, and so yield him up all the power
and interest that he has, or pretends to have in her, and that in requital
thereof (if occasion require) he shall still find him ready, not only to
expose all his means, but his dearest blood and life at his command: A request
so unjust, and a proposition so devoid of common sense and reason, as
Valfontaine observing it, and therein seeing his brothers impudency, now
grown to the height of baseness and folly, he exceedingly incensed thereat
(with a disdainefull look) returns him this sharp and bitter, yet deserved
reply. Was it not enough that I understood your treachery, by my fair and
dear La Pratiere, in seeking and attempting to bereave me of her, but that
thou art thy self become so sottish, to ^ake thy tongue the Advocate, as well
to plead and apologize thy treachery to me, as to publish thy shame to thy
self, and to the whole world, in seeking and desiring me to surcease my
affection to her, and to renounce my interest of her to thy self: No, no, base
Quatbrisson (for henceforth I highly disdain to term or esteem you my
brother) I give thee to understand and know, that in heart, and in honor she
is mine, and I hers, and therefore you shall die and damn, before I will
permit thee to enrich thy self with my loss of her, whom I affect and prise a
thousand times dearer then my self, or then all the lands and treasures of the
world; when without any other farewell, he hastily and chollerickly flings
forth his Chamber from him.

Quatbrisson seeing his brothers furious departure, and remarking his
peremptory and incivill answer to him, he (in his heart and thoughts) vows
revenge, and in his resolutions swears to make him repent it. To which effect,
forsaking his bed, and abandoning his counterfeit sickness, his choler hardly
affording his patience three days to recover his blood and strength, but
knowing his brother to be now at Nantes with their Uncle De Massy, he seeks
out a dear and intimate friend of his named Monsieur La Roche, whom engaging
to be his second in a Duel against his own brother Valfontaine, they ride
over to Nantes, when coming to (...) small Parish, termed Saint-Vallerge,
within a league of the City, he writes a Challenge, delivers it to La Roche,
and so dispeeds him away with it to his bro^r. La Roche comes to Nantes, finds
out Valfontaine at the President, his Uncles ^use, being in the company of a
very intimate friend of his, of that City, na^ed Monsieur de Pont Chausey, and
delivers him, his brothers Challenge fast sealed, ^e which he hastily
breaking open, and perusing, he finds that it speaks this ^guage.

QVATBRISSON to VALFONTAINE.
^N regard it is impossible for both of ^s to enjoy the fair La Pratiere to
wife, therefore it is fit that one of us dye, that the other may survive and
live, to be enriched with so ^ious a treasure, and crowned with so inestimable
a blessing and felicity; which considering, as also because my modest requests
have (undeservedly) met with thy incivill carriage, and been requited with thy
malicious execrations, Therefore find it not strange, to see affection give a
Law to Nature, and mine honor to contemn thy contempt and malice, in enviting
thee, and thy Second, to meet me and mine with your single Rapiers, to morrow
twixt two or three after dinner, in a fair meddow at the East end of
Saint-Vallery, within a little flight shot thereof, where thou shall find this
Gentleman (whom I have prayed to be the Bearer hereof) who will safely conduct
thee to me, where I will patiently attend thee; I expect no other answer but
thy self, neither do I any way doubt (much less despair) of thy meeting me,
since by birth I know thou art Noble, and by inclination pretendest to be
generous.

QVATERISSON.


Valfontaine smiles at the reading of this Challenge, and in conceit laughing
at his brother Quatbrissons errors and folly, he cheerfully turns himself
to La Roche, to whom he speaks thus. Monsieur La Roche, I make no doubt but
you are Quatbrissons Second; to whom he replies; My respect to your Brother
has engaged me thereunto, instead of a more worthy, and yet I ingenuously
confess and protest (Sir quoth he) that I have promised no more to him, then
(if occasion presented) I am ready to perform for your self, Valfontaine
thanks him, and prays him to return his Brother Quatbrisson this answer,
That to morrow at the appointed hour and place he will not fail to meet him:
When entreating La Roche to walk with him into the next Chamber, he told him,
he presumed he should show him his Second; when Valfontaine taking Pont
Chausey to the window, he shows him his brothers Challenge, and prays him to
honor him in being his Second. Pont Chausey (not out of any fear in himself,
but in love to these two brothers) as a Christian Gentleman profereth to ride
over to Quatbrisson to Saint-Vallery, and to use his best power and endeavors
to take up and reconcile these differences between them; but La Roche tells him
he may save that Journey and labor, For that (to his knowledge) Quatbrisson
is both resolute and irreconcilable in that quarrel; whereupon Pont Chausey
freely engages himself to Valfontaine, and so these two Seconds (though not
as loving friends, yet as friendly and honorable enemies) very secretly that
evening provide their Rapiers, which done, La Roche rides back to
Saint-Vallery, acquainting Quatbrisson with his brother Valfontaines generous
resolution, to meet and fight with him the next day, as also that Pont Chausey
is his Second: And although (by the instigation of Satan) that Choler and
Revenge make minutes seem hours, and hours years, ere it has wrought his
wished effects, and effected his bloody designs: So these our four rash and
inconsiderate Gentlemen (more full of Valor then Virtue, and of Courage then
Christianity) the hour appointed for the Rendesvous approaching, and
Quatbrisson with his Chirugion, being first in the field, has difficultly made
two turns, before La Roche ushereth in his brother Valfontaine, his Second
Pont Chausey and their Chirugion; when they all tying up their horses to the
hedge, they (according to the custom of Duels) do all throw of their dublets,
and each unbooting his fellow, they appear in their silk stocking^ and white
pumps, as if they were fitter to dance Coranto's or Pavins, then t^ fight Duels.

So the two brothers first draw, and approach each other, and at their first
coming up, Valfontaine (without being touched himself) gives Quatbrisson a
deep^ wound in his right thigh, and if his Rapier had not beaten down the
thrust, it ha^ undoubtedly nailed him to the ground; at their second encounter
they are bo^ hurt, Quatbrisson in the right arm, and Valfontaine of a scarre
in the neck, and here they make a stand to take breath, Quatbrisson not as yet
despairing, nor Valfontaine triumphing or assuring himself of the victory, and
the sight and effusion of their blood is so far from rebating or quenching,
as it rather revives their courages with more spleen and animositie, so they
will again try their fortunes; They now traverse their ground, and approach
each other, and although they are not less vallorous then before, yet (to the
eyes of their Seconds and Chirurgions) they are now more cautious in their
plea, and more advised in choosing and refusing their ground, when Valfontaine
breaking a thrust (which his brother presented him) he then calling to mind the
sweetness of his La Pratieres beauty, and the foulness of his brothers malice
and treachery toward him, drives home a thrust at him, which enters betwixt
his short ribs, and making the blood to gush and stream forth, does soon
quail his courage; so as he who right now thought himself master of his
brothers life, now fears his own, so that he thinks he has given enough,
if not received too much in counter-exchange, as well to secure his reputation
from the scandal of his friends, as to warrant his generositie from the
detraction of his enemies, and therefore throwing away his Rapier, he (with
more wisdom then honor) begs his life of his brother, vowing henceforth
wholly to forsake and leave him La Pratiere, and to love him as dearly as
formerly he hated him deadly: Which cowardice of his, is so far from being
relished, or approved of the Spectators, as it proves the wonder of
Valfontaine, the laughture of Pont Chausey, the disdain of his own Second La
Roche, and the contempt of both their Chirurgions; but Valfontaine was as
benign as Quatbrisson was base and envious, and as noble as he was
treacherous, and so upon his submission, he sheathes up his sword, gives him
his life, and with his hat in his hand embraces him, and thus with many
fraternall words and complements, these two brothers (in all outward show) are
again reconciled, and become perfect friends: But the end proves all things.

Now to follow the stream of our History, and the ceremonies of Duels, we
must pass from Quatbrisson and Valfontaine the Principals, to La Roche and
Pont Chausey, their Seconds, to see in what shape they will come forth, and how
they resolve to bear themselves in the conclusion, and knitting up of this
reconciliation; As for Pont Chausey, he thinks it no disparagement or shame
to him now to refuse to fight, since his Principal has given his Enemy the
foil, in giving him his life; but contrariwise, La Roche being Second to the
Challenger, not the Challenged, he therefore holds it no lawful plea or
excuse for him to exempt himself from fighting. Pont Chauseys modesty seems
to over-vaile his valor with ^lence and indifferency, which the insulting
vanity of La Roche does so far misconstrue, as he erroniously attributes it,
rather to fear and cowardice, then to reason or judgment. The worst of Pont
Chauseys malice venteth no other speeches and language, but that he will follow
and abide the censure of their Principals, whether they being their Seconds
ought to fight or no, and accordingly he is ready either to retire or advance;
But La Roches intemperate passions (flying a higher pitch) with much vehemency
and choler protests, that he came into the field purposely to fight, and not
to keep sheep, or to catch flies with his Rapier. The two brothers interpose
and consult hereon, and do jointly affirm, that because they themselves are
reconciled, and become good friends, they hold it repugnant to reason and
contradictory to the right and nature of Duels, that their Seconds should once
draw their weapons, much less fight; But this neither does nor can as yet
satisfy La Roche, whose choler is now become so boundless, as he in lofty
terms elevateth Valfontaines valor to the skies, and dejecteth Quatbrissons
cowardice as low as Hell, begging permission of the one to fight with his
Second, and peremptorily informing the other, that he will fight; But both
Quatbrisson and Valfontaine condemn those fumes, and this heat of La Roche,
and are so far from applauding it in him, as they (in downeright terms)
repute it to temeritie and rashness, and not to magnanimity and valor; yea
his impatiencie has so provoked and moved their patience, as (not in jest but
in earnest) they bandy these words to him, that he glories so much in his
generositie, as in now ambitiously seeking to add to his valor, he
substracteth from his judgment. When Pont Chausey (to retort and wipe off the
least taint or blemish, which either La Roche, or the two brothers might
conceive, lay on his reputation) thinks it now high time to speak, because as
yet he had spoken so little, and prays La Roche to find out some expedient,
either that they might return as loving Friends, or fight it out as Honorable
Enemies, and that for his part he is so far from the least shadow of fear,
or conceit of cowardice, as he tells him plainly, he shall find his Rapier of
an excellent temper, and his heart of a better: Whereupon vain and miserable
La Roche, consulting with nature, and not with grace; he to give end to this
difference, resolves on an expedient as wretched as execrable, the which he
proposes to Pont Chausey and the two brothers in these terms; That the only
way, and his last resolution is, that a fair pair of dice shall be the Judge
and Vmpier between them, and that who throws most at one cast, it shall be
in his choice either to fight or not to fight, whereunto Pont Chausey willingly
consents, although Quatbrisson and Valfontaine do in vain contradict and
oppose it. But the decree is past, and La Roche (very officious in his
wickedness, and forward in his impiety) spreads his Cloak on the ground,
draws a pair of dice forth his pocket, and because he was of the Challengers
side, he will throw first, which he does, and the fortune of the dice gives him
seven; Pont Chausey follows him and likewise taking the dice throws only
five: Whereat La Roche gracelesly insulting and triumphing, with an open throat
cries out, fight, fight, fight; and so presently draws his Rapier. Pont
Chausey seeing his enemy armed, thinks it no longer, either safe or honorable
for him to be unarmed, when (yet with a kind of religious reluctancie, and
unwilling willingness) he likewise unsheathes his Rapier, and so without any
farther expostulation, they here approach each other: But because (for
brevities sake) I resolve to pass over the circumstances, and only to mention
the issue of their single combat, let me (before I proceed farther) in the
name and fear of God conjure the Christian Reader, here to admire with wonder
and admiration, at his sacred Providence, and divine Justice which in the issue
of this Duel is made conspicuous and apparent to these two rash and
unconsiderate Gentlemen, the Combattants, and in them to all others of the
whole world; For lo, just as many picks as each of them threw on the Dice, so
many wounds they severally received each from other, as Pont Chausey five, and
La Roche seven, and he who so extremely desired to fight, and so insatiably
thirsted after Pont Chauseyes blood, is now here by him nailed dead to the
ground, and his breathless corpse all gored and washed in his own blood. A
fearful example and remarkable president for all bloody minded Gentlemen of
these our times, to contemplate and look on, because wretched La Roche was so
miserable, as he had no point of time to see his error, no spark of grace to
repent it.

Quatbrisson and his Surgeon (as sorrowful for his death, as his brother
Valfontaine is glad thereof) take order for his decent transporting to the
City; whiles Valfontaine congratulates with Pont Chausey for his good fortune
and victory; who for ^ty flies to Blavet, until the Duke of Rays (to whom he
was homager) had procured and sent him his Pardon from the King, the which in
few weeks after he effected. Monsieur de Caerstaing, and Madamoyselle
Ville-blanche his wife are advertised of their two Sons quarrel at Saint
Vallery, and of the cause and issue thereof, who condemn Quatbrisson for his
treachery and malice, and applaud Valfontaine for so nobly giving of his
brother his life, when it lay in his power and pleasure to have deprived him
thereof, which news is likewise speedily conveied first to Nantes, and then to
Saint-Aignaw, where Pennelle as much grieves at Quatbrissons foil and
disgrace, as his Daughter our fair La Pratiere triumphs at her Valfontaines
victory, and because she will no longer be deprived of his presence, whose
absence deprives her of all her earthly content and felicity, she makes her
prayers and tears become such incessant Orators, and importunate Advocates to
her Father, as she now draws his free consent to take Valfontaine for her
husband, which at last to their own unspeakeable Joy, and the approbation and
content of all their parents of either side, is at Saint-Aignaw performed and
consummated with much pomp and bravery.

But albeit Quatbrisson (as we have formerly understood) have all the reasons
of the world, to be fully and fairly reconciled to his brother Valfontaine,
yea (and according to his promise and oath) to affect him tenderly and dearly,
yet where the heart is not sanctified and in peace, the tongue may pretend
though not intend it; For the more he gazeth on his sister in law La Pratieres
beauty, the more the freshness and delicacie thereof, revives and inflames his
lascivious lust toward her, when knowing her to be as chaste as fair, and
being confident that he was out of all hope to receive any immodest courtesy,
or familiarity from her, whiles her Husband his brother Valfontaine lives, the
Devil has already taken such full possession of his heart, as (with a hellish
ingratitude and impiety) he wretchedly resolves to deprive him of his life,
of whom as it were but right now he had the happiness to receive his own.

As soon as we think of Revenge we merely forget our selves, but when we
consent to murder we absolutely forget God; for that hellish contemplation,
and this inhumane and bloody action, do instantly work so wretchedly in us,
that of men we become Monsters, and (which is worse) of Christians Devils; for
thereby we make our selves his slaves and members. A misery to which all others
are not comparable, because those are finite, in regard they have only relation
to the life of our bodies, but this infinite in regard it occasioneth the death
of our souls: But all this notwithstanding, it is not in jest but in earnest,
that Quatbrisson assumes this bloody resolution to murder his brother
Valfontaine; For seeing that it was neither in his power or fortune to kill him
in the Duel, he therefore holds it more safe, less dangerous to have him
poisoned, and so deals with his brothers Apothecarie, named Moncallier, to
undertake and perform it, and in requital thereof he assures him of three
hundred crowns, and gives him the one half in hand, whereupon this Factor of
the Devil, this Empericke of Hell, confidently promises him speedily to
effect and perform it, the which he does, The manner thus.

Valfontaine within six weeks of his marriage, finds his body in an extreme
heat, some reputing it to an excess of wine, which he had the day before
taken at Po^tivie Fair, and others for having been too amorous and uxorious
to his sweet young wife La Pratiere; But it matters not which excess of these
two gave him his sickness, only let it satisfy the Reader, that (as we have
already heard) his body was very much inflamed and hot, the dangerous symtomes
either of a burning Fever, or a Plurifie, the which to allay and cool, he
sends for his (...) the carry Moncalier from Vannes to Saint Aignaw, and after
their consultation he opens him a vein very timely in the morning, and
draws ten ounces of blood from him, and toward night gives him a Glister,
wherein he infused strong poison, which spreading ore the vital parts of his
body, does so soon work its operation, and extinguish their radical
moisture, that being the most part of the night tortured with many sharp
throes, and heart-killing convulsions, he before the next morning dies in his
bed: His wife La Pratiere being desperately vanquished with sorrow, does (as it
were) dissolve and melt her self into tears, at this sudden and unexpected
death of her Husband Valfontaine, and indeed her griefs and sorrows are far
the more infinite and violent, in that she sees her self a widow almost as
soon as a wife. Her Father is likewise pensive and sorrowful for the death of
his Son in Law, and so also is his own Father and Mother at Vannes. But for
his inhumane brother Quatbrisson, although he neither can, or shall bleare the
eyes of God, yet he intends to do those of men, from the knowledge and
detection of this foul and bloody fact; for he puts on a mournful and
disconsolate countenance, on his rejoicing and triumphing heart, for the death
of his brother, the which he endeavoreth to publish in his speeches and
apparel; so he rides over to Saint Aignan to his sister in law La Pratiere,
condoles with her for her Husband his brothers death, and with his best oratory
strives to dissipate and dispell her sorrows; but still her thoughts and
conscience do notwithstanding prompt her, that (considering his former
affection to her, and his fighting with his brother her, Husband for her) sure
he had a hand in his death, but in what manner or how she knows not, and so
as a most virtuous and sorrowful Lady, leaves the revealing thereof to the
good pleasure and Providence of God; and the curious heads both of Nantes and
Vannes concur with her in the same conceit and belief.

But three months are scarce past over, since Valfontaine was laid in his
grave, but Quatbrisson is still so deeply besotted with his own lust, and the
beauty of La Pratiere, as he sels his wit for folly, and again becomes a Suitor
to marry her, having none but this poor Apology to color out his incestuous
desires; that he will procure a dispensation from Rome to approve it; and that
he has already spoken to Yvon Bishop of Reimes to that effect, who was many
years Penitentiarie (or Almoner.) to Pope Paulus Quintus. And what does this
indiscretion of his work with La Pratiere, but only to increase her
jealousy, to confirm her suspicion, and to make her the more confident, that
her Husband had been still in this world if he had not been the means so
soon send him into another: Wherefore she rejects both his suit and himself,
tells him, that if he can find in his heart and conscience to marry her, she
cannot dispense with her soul to espouse him, and therefore that he shall do
well to surcease his suit, either to the Pope or Bishop, since if it lay in
their powers, yet it should never in her pleasure to grant, or resolution to
effect it; but this peremptory refusal of hers cannot yet cause Quatbrisson to
forsake and leave her; For if his lust and concupiscence formerly made him
peevish to seek her for his wife, now it makes him merely sottish and
impudent to alter his suit, and so to attempt and desire to make her his
strumpet: But he has no sooner delivered her this his base and obscene
motion, but all the blood of her body flushing in her face, she highly
disdaineth both his speeches and himself, and vowing and scorning henceforth
ever more to come into his company, so she informs her Father of his
dishonorable intent, and unchaste motion to her, who to rid himself of so
incivill and impudent a guest, thereupon (in sharp terms) forbids him his
house and his Daughters company, as having hereby altogether made himself
unworthy to enjoy the privilege of the one, or the honor of the other, when
this sweet and chaste young Lady (to be no more haunted with so lascivious a
Ghost and Spirit) being sought in marriage by diverse noble and gallant
Gentlemen, she among them all (after a whole years mourning for her first)
makes choice of Monsieur de Pont Chausey for her second Husband, and marries
him; Quatbrisson seeing himself so disdainefully slighted and rejected of La
Pratiere, he (as a base Gentleman, and dishonorable Lover) metamorphoseth his
affection into hatred toward her, and vows that his revenge shall shortly
match her disdain, and meet with her ingratitude, and so flies her sight and
company as much as he formerly desired it. But as the best Revenge is to make
our enemies see that we prosper and do well, so he quite contrary makes it
his practice and ambition to do evil; For from henceforth among many other of
his vices he defiles his body with whoredom, and gives himself over to
Fornication and Adultery, which has taken up so deep a habit in him, as it is
now grown to a second nature; for he wholly abandoneth himself to Queanes and
Strumpets, that be she maid, wife, or widow, his wanton eye scarce sees any,
but his lustful heart desires, and his lascivious tongue seeks.

Now Quatbrisson (among many other) hearing that a poor Peasant, or country
man, termed Run Malliot, of the parish of Saint-Andrewes, three miles from
Vannes, had a sweet and fair young Daughter, he therefore very lewdly
resolves to see her, and to tempt her to his obscene desires, when provoked and
halled on by his lust, as that was likewise by the Devil, he rides over to
her Fathers house, and alighting from his horse calls there for some wine, but
with his Hawk on his fist, and his laquay and dogs at his heels, thereby the
better to over-vaile and color out his lascivious design and in^ent: And that
the Reader may the better and apparently behold this country Virgin Marieta;
she was aged of some sixteen years, and toward her seventeenth, tall and
straight, and rather a little endining to fatness then to leanesse; her hair
was of a bright flaxen color, and she of so fresh a beauty, and sweet and
delicate complexion, that her eyes were capable to inflame desire, and her
cheeks to engender and exact affection, so that as it was a wonder among many
to find so delicate a Countrey-lasse, it was also many wonders in one, to see
how sweetly her rich beauty graced her poor clothes, whiles they (though in
vain) endeavor to disgrace it. Quatbrisson no sooner sees Marieta, but she is
so fair and amiable in his eyes, as they inform him, that report comes
infinitely short of her beauty, when burning in the flames of his beastly
concupiscence toward her, his lust so exceedingly out braves his reason, that
his eyes and heart do already do homage to hers, and he is so far caught
and ensnared in the contemplation of her fresh youth and beauty, as he vows
to leave no art unattempted to obtain his lustful desires in enjoying of her
virginity: To which end he very often and secretly visits her, discovers
her his lewd desires and affection, gives her Gloves, Bonlace, Lawne, woorsted
Stockings, and the like trifles, thereby the sooner to prevail with her, when
God knows this fair poor maiden was so chaste, as yet she knew not what
belonged to unchastity, such was her obscure dwelling, and innocent education,
and yet behold the Devil was so busy with her, and Quatbrisson with the
Devil, to draw and prostitute her to sin, as she was so far in love with
his gay clothes, sugared speeches and fair promises, rich gifts, and especially
because he was a Gentleman, that in a few weeks she had hardly the power or
will to deny him any thing, no not her self.

But whiles thus Quatbrisson lays close siege to the chastity of the daughter,
her Mother Jane Chaumett (being of a quick wit and sharp apprehension,
measuring his youth by her Daughters beauty) begins to mistrust and fear that
by his often visits, he endeavored to put a rape on her virtue, in seeking to
enrich himself with the loss of her maidenhead, the which to prevent, she
forbids him her house, showing him that she had rather dye, then live to see
her Daughter made a Strumpet, adding farther, that if hereupon he did not
forbear her house and her daughters company, she would forthwith acquaint his
Father Monsieur de Caerstainge therewith, alleging, that how close so ever
he bore himself, she knew him to be his Son and heir, and termed
Quatbrisson; which cross speeches of hers do much afflict and perplexe him,
and the more because he sees he cannot now approach Marieta, and which is
worst of all, in regard he knows not whom to employ toward her, to win her to
his desires: But at length remembering that he was well acquainted with an old
Franciscan Friar of Auroy, named Father Symplician, who many years begged the
Country for the repairing of their Monastery, and with whom he had often
caroused and been merry: He therefore holds him a fit Instrument and Agent for
his purpose, and so rides over to Auroy, and sends for him to his lodging,
where giving him good cheer, and well heating his head with wine, he there
from point to point discovers this secret, and lays open himself to him: So
this old Friar loving his cups better then his beads, and Monsi^ de Quatbrisson
better then his Guardian (because he had twice formerly expelled him the
Monastery for some of his dishonest and debauched prancks) he freely engages
himself to him, affirming that he well knew both Father, Mother, and Daughter,
having heretofore many times layen in their house, when he has been over
taken, either by night or rain.

Hypocrisy is the Devils Mask or Visard, and there is no way so subtle or
sinful to deceive, as under the Cloak and Color of Religion, and therefore it
is a most pernicious and odious shame to Christians, that those who profess
piety should profane it. This good fellow Friar Symplician (taking the tide of
time, and the wind of opportunity) under the pretext of visiting some of his
kinsfolks leaves Auroy, repaires to Vannes, and so to Malliots house in the
country, where purposely faigning himself sick, thereby to procure himself
the better color for his stay, and the better means for the dispatch of this
love business for Monsieur Quatbrisson, there Malliot and his wife Jane Chaumet
(out of their respect to Religion, and reverence to Churchmen) entertain him
lovingly, and attend him carefully and diligently, thinking no cost too much,
nor any meat, care or labor enough which they spent and bestowed on him; But
we shall see him requite this Hospitality, and repay this courtesy of theirs
with a base ingratitude.

For in the absence of the Father and Mother, this deboshed Friar teaches
their fair Daughter Marieta a new Catechism; he tells her that Monsieur
Quatbrisson is deeply in love with her; that if she will hearken to his
Affection, and so become flexible to his desires, he will shortly steal her
away from her Parents, and either maintain her Gentlewoman-like in brave
apparel, or else marry her to some rich Serving-man, or Farmers Son, with
whom she might live merrily; and at her hearts content all the days of her
life; adding withal, that it was pity (...) delicate fresh beauty should be
so strictly and obscurely mewed up in her Fathers poor Cottage, and that it
was a shame to her to prove an enemy to Nature, who had been so bountiful and
so true a friend to her, with many more obsce^ reasons, and deboshed speeches
looking that way, the which (in modesty) I cannot remember without shame, nor
relate without detestation. So this pand^rising old* Friar (degenerating from
his habit, profession, and name) what with the honey (or rather indeed the
poison) of his speeches and promises, and the sugar of some gifts and tokens
which he delivered her from Qu^brisson, he draws this harmless and innocent
poor Country maid, so far to forget her self, her Parents, and God, that
in hope of rich apparel and a good husband, she tells Father Symplician, that
she is wholly Quatbrissons a^ command, and that for his sake and love she is
absolutely resolved to forsake her Father and Mother, and to go away with him
any night or day, when he pleases to fetch her; the which he shortly does, and
she accomplisheth: And thus was the odious ingratitude of this Friar
Symp^cian, toward honest Malliot and his Wife, for his good cheer, lodging,
and entertainment, to betray and bereave them of their only child and
daughter, whom they well hoped would have proved the Joy of their life, and the
staff and comfort of their Age.

Quatbrisson (in the vanity of his voluptuous thoughts) having thus (by
himself and the Friar) played his prize in stealing away fair Marieta, he by
night brings her to his own old Nurse her house, which is a little mile
distant from that of his Father, where he secretly keeps her, takes his
pleasure of her, and as often as he pleases, lies with her whole nights
together; but Marieta's sorrowful Father and Mother seeing themselves thus
robbed of their only Jewel their daughter, they bitterly lament her loss, and
their own misfortunes therein. They complain to all their Neighbors thereof,
and leave few adjacent Parishes or houses ^ought for her; yea her Mother Jane
Chaumets grief and jealousy transport her so far, as vehemently suspecting
that Monsieur de Quatbrisson had stolen her away, ^rips over to his Fathers
house, and there (with sorrow in her looks, and tears in her eyes) acquaints
both him and the Lady his Wife thereof; who presently send for their Son
Quatbrisson before them. They show him what an infinite scandal this foul
fact and crime of his will breed him, and likewise reflect upon themselves, and
all their Kinsfolks and Family. How the Justice of God infallibly attends on
whordome and fornication, and that he has no other true course or means left
him to expiate and deface it, but Confession, Contrition, and Repentance, and
by returning the poor Country girl again to her aged and sorrowful
parents: But Quatbrisson their Son (as a base deboshed Gentleman) denies all,
terms old Malliots wife an old hagge and devil, to charge him thus falsely
with the stealing away of her Daughter; and so without any other redress or
comfort, this poor Mother returns again home to her sorrowful husband, and
Quatbrisson secretly to his Nurses, to frollicke and sport it out with his
sweet and fair Country Mistress Marieta.

But to observe the better Order and Decorum in the dilation and unfolding of
this History, leave we (for a small time) this lascivious young couple,
wallowing in the beastly pleasures of their sensuality and fornication, and
come we a little to speak how suddenly and sharply (at unawares) the vengeance
and justice of God surpriseth our execrable Apothecary Moncallier, who so
wretchedly and lamentably (as we have formerly understood) had sent innocent
Valfontaine from earth to heaven, by that damnable drug and ingredient of
Poison. The manner whereof briefly is thus:

Quatbrisson (as we have already seen) having exchanged his former affection
into future malice and envy toward his Sister in law La Pratiere, does still
re^aine such bloody thoughts against her, as (striking hands with the Devil)
he (...) favor of three hundred Crowns more) has again engaged his Hellish
Apothecary Moncallier likewise to poison her, at his first administering of
Physic to her; which intended deplorable Tragedy of theirs is no sooner
projected and plotted of the one then promised speedily to be acted and
performed by the other, to the end (quoth these two miserable wretches) to make
her equal, as in marriage, so in death with her first husband: Valfontaine.
Thus Quatbrisson longing, and Moncallier hearkening out for La Pratieres first
sickness, two months are scarce blown over, since her marriage with Pont
Chausey, but she is surprised with a pestilent Fever; when he as a loving and
kind husband (at the request of his sick Wife) ri^es over to Vannes for this
monster of his profession and time Moncallier, to come with him and give her
Physic, the which presently (with as much treacherous care, as feigned
sorrow) he promises to effect; and so inwardly resolves with the Devil, and
himself to poison her: but we shall see here that Gods providence will
favorably permit the first, and his goodness and mercy miraculously prevent
the second.

Moncallier sees this his fair and sweet Patient La ^ratiere, but he is yet so
far from shame or repentance that he had poisoned her first husband, as (with
a graceless ratiocination) he confirms his former impious resolution likewise
to dispatch her self: but for that time he contenteth himself only to draw
six ounces of blood from her, and promises to return to her the next morning
with Physic, and therein to insinuate and infuse the Poison. But here (in the
fear, and to the glory of God) let me request the Christian Reader to admire
and wonder with me at the strangeness of this sudden and divine punishment
of God, then and there shown on this wretched Apothecary Moncallier: For as he
was ready to depart, and being on the top of the Stayres (next to the Chamber
door where La Pratiere lay sick) complementing with her husband Pont Chausey
at his farewell, he trips in his Spurs, and so falls down headlong at the
foot thereof, there breaks his neck, and which is lamentable and fearful, he
has neither the po^er or grace left him to speak a word, much less to repent
his cruel poisoning of Valfontaine, or to pray unto God to forgive it him. And
thus was the miserable end of this wretched Apothecary Moncallier, who, when
he absolutely thought that that bloody fact of his was quite defaced and
forgotten of God, then God (as we see) in his due time remembered to punish him
for the same, to his utter confusion and destruction, that as his Crime was
bloody, so his punishment should be sudden and sharp.

Return we now again to Quatbrisson (who amidst his carnal pleasures with
his young and fair Marie^a) is advertised of Moncalliers sudden and unnatural
death at S. Aignaw, whereat (resembling himself) he is so far from any
apprehension or grief, as he exceedingly triumphs and rejoices thereat;
yea, he is as glad that he has thus broke his neck, because he can now tell
no tales, as sorrowful if now before his death he have not poisoned La
Pratiere, as formerly he did her first husband Valfontaine his brother. Whiles
thus Quatbrissons joy in enjoying Marieta, proves the grief and disconsolation
of her Parents, for it is now generally bruted in Vannes, that Quatbrisson has
stolen away Malliots daughter Marieta, whereof her Father and Mother being
sorrowfully acquainted (he being weak and sickly) she again repaires to
Monsieur de Caerstaing and his Lady, and with tears in her eyes throwing her
self at their feet, acquaints them with this public report, humbly
beseeching them to be a means to the Gentleman their son, that he restore
them their daughter; but they are (in a manner) deaf to her requests, and so
only return her this general answer, that they will again examine their son,
and cause all their tenants houses near about to be narrowly searched for her,
and this i^ all the redress and consolation which this sorrowful mother could
get from them; Whereof Quatbrisson being advertised, he (with much secrecy and
haste) about midnight, causes Pierot his Fathers Miller, to fetch Marieta away
from his Nurses house to his Mill, which is some quarter of a League from his
Fathers house, the which accordingly Pierot effects. The very next morning
Quatbrisson goes secretly to the Mill and visits her; he informs her how her
parents have incensd his against him, and against her-selfe likewise: he bids
her be of good comfort, that she shall want nothing, that he will very
shortly procure her a better lodging, and provide both for her safety and
reputation, and so continually frollickes it out, and there takes his pleasure
of her; yea, he lies so often with her many whole nights and some days at this
Mill, that at last her belly swells, and both of them apparently perceive that
she is with child by him: when poor soul, seeing her self as it we repent
up in a prison, that she had no new Apparel, nor was toward any Husband; yea
looking back into the foulness of her fault, and seeing that she had made her
self the grief of her Father and Mother, the laughter of the world, and
almost the contempt and disdain of Quatbrisson, who (surfeiting in his
pleasures ^th her) began now to look less familiar, and more strange to her
then accustomed, she with many sighs and tears repents her self of her
error; but how to remedy it, she knows not.

As for Quatbrisson, he supposing he had his Fathers Miller Pierot at his
command, profereth him two hundred French Crowns to marry her; whereat this
Meal-cap Miller (being a lusty young fellow of some five and twenty years old)
could not at first refrain from blushing and laughing; when seeing Marieta to
be young and fair, he is so far in love with her, as at first he wishes
her to his wife; but then again considering that she has a great belly by
his young Master, that he still lies with her, and that if he should marry
her, he would undoubtedly be more Master and owner of her then himself, he
prays him therefore to excuse him, for that he is fully resolved not to marry
her. When Quatbrisson yet farther desirous to draw him to take her to his wife,
profereth Pierot a new Lease and Estate of his Mill from his Father for seven
years, at his own cost and charges. But this Miller (being a pleasant joviall
wag) tells his young Master that he had rather never hear the clacking of his
Mill, then to live to see himself cornuted; and so upon no terms will marry
Marieta, but for any other service, he swears to him, that he is, and ever
will be wholly at his command. Poor Marieta now seeing her hopes grow small,
and her belly great, and consequently her joys decline, and her sorrows
increase, finding that she is now rather Quatbrissons prisoner then his prize,
and the Miller rather her Jailer then her Landlord, she (with many far
fetched sighs and brinish tears) very passionatly beseeches Quatbrisson on her
knees, that he will speedily either provide her a husband, or permit her with
her shameful and sorrowful burden to return home to her afflicted and angry
parents. Two requests, and both so reasonable (quoth she to him) as if it be
not in your power to grant me the first, yet I hope it will be your pleasure
not to deny me the second. But Quatbrisson, notwithstanding all these tears
and prayers of Marieta, he is still so vexed, as well with her importunity, as
with the sharp complaints of his own parents, and the bitter lamentations and
outcries of hers, that (in the heat of sottish choler and ungrateful
disdain) he flies from her, absents himself longer then accustomed, and
thenceforth (by degrees) begins as much to loath her, as he formerly loved
her. Marieta perceiving this his unexpected and ungrateful unkindnesse toward
her, it pierces her very heart with grief, and her soul with despair; She
requests the Miller to tell Monsieur de Quatbrisson that she prays him to see
her, or to permit her to see him; but he perceiving that his young Master
slighted her, and that his hot affection was by this time waxed cold and frozen
to her, he refuses to go himself, and so sends his boy: But what does this
importunity of hers procure or effect with Quatbrisson, but only the more
inflame his choler, and therein the more increase her own sorrows, and
accelerate and hasten on her miseries? For he bids the boy tell her, that he is
gone to Rennes, and will not return in a month; and withal, he wills him to
bid his Master to come secretly to him in the morning, at his Fathers Orchard.
So if Quatbrissons unkindnesse to Marieta formerly made her seem to be the
picture of sorrow, Ahlas, now this his discourteous departure, and disdayning
either to see her, or once bid her farewell, makes her really to be sorrow her
self; for she tears her hair, and (with a mournful and sorrowful
Ambition) indeavoureth to drown her self in the Ocean of her tears; yea, her
griefs are so infinite, and her discontents so insupportable (in that she has
so deeply disobeyed her parents, and offended God with her Fornication) as the
remembrance of these sins and crimes of hers make her not dare to look up to
heaven for assistance; a thousand times she repents her self of her folly,
and as often says and dictateth to her, that she should be as happy as now
she is miserable, if she again were a child, and not with child, and that she
were again as living in her Mothers belly, as now by this time she finds her
own poor unfortunate innocent b^be is in hers. She as high as heaven
exclaimeth on Quatbrissons ingratitude, and curses the name and memory of
Friar Simplician as low as hell, for thus betraying and seducing her to sin,
which has now brought her to misery and disconsolation; yea, her unfortunacie
is so great, as she cannot write for assistance from any where, or if she
could, she knows not from whom once to expect, much less to receive it: but
rather sees her self reduced to such extreme affliction and misery, that she
is every way far more capable to weep or sigh forth her sorrows to her
self, then to speak, or make them known to the world.

Whiles thus Marieta is pensively and pitifully ecchoing forth her complaints
to the bare walls of her poor Chamber, Pierot the Miller finds out his young
Master Quatbrisson, in the Orchard behind his Fathers house, according to his
appointment, where betwixt this wretched and execrable couple the Reader must
prepare to see them consult and conclude a most bloody and mournful business,
which will both exact pity, and command lamentation from the most flinty and
barbarous heart, yea in a word, from any living mortal man, whose profane
life and impiety has not absolutely made him a mere devil. For Quatbrisson
having thus satiated and surfetted himself in reaping his beastly pleasures of
poor Marieta, and (as before) exchanged his familiarity into malice, and his
affection into envy toward her, knowing that she will be a perpetual
eyesore to his parents, and a continual shame and scandal to himself, as
long as she lives in this world, he therefore most ingratefully and cruelly
resolves speedily to send her into another; and no consideration whatsoever,
either of her youth or beauty, of her great belly, or of his quick child
within her, or of his own soul, can prevail with him to the contrary: but
the Devil is so strong with him, that he is miserably resolute not to retire,
but to advance in this bloody business. To which effect, he breaks with
Pierot the Miller to attempt and finish it, and again promises him the
Fee-simple (or at least a Leaf of seven years) of his Mill, to finish it;
which this bloody miscreant (out of his hellish covetousness, and itching
desire to please his young Master) promises to accomplish. They now consult of
the manner how to murder Marieta: The Miller affirms it to be the surest way
(under some pretext) to take her into the next Wood by night, and there to
murder her, which Quatbrisson contradicts, because (says he) her dead body
being found so near his Fathers house, this her murder will reflect on him;
and therefore to make sure work, he bids the Miller to strangle her by night
in her bed, and so to bury her in his outer yard, and there to clap a Wood-vine
over her: whereon they both agree. When swearing perpetual secrecy each to
other, this execrable Miller here promises Quatbrisson to dispatch her within
three days at farthest.

This bloody bargain and compact being thus concluded between them, Pierot the
Miller returns to his Mill, where poor Marieta (little suspecting or dreaming,
what a dismal stratagem was plotted and resolved against her life) she
(finding comfort from no where, and therefore seeking it every where) enquires
of him if he came from Monsieu^ de C^er stainges house, and if his Son
Monsieur Quatb^sson were departed for ^nes, as his Mill-boy had told her; who
(here the better to lull her asleep, thereby with more facility to finish his
bloody design on her) tells her that he was gone thither, but that before his
departure he had left secret word for him to use her ^urteously in his absence,
the which he swore to her he would carefully perform; whereat Marieta
thanks him, but yet again prying more narrowly into this Millers looks then
his speeches, she found that he now looked more sullen and haggardly to her
then accustomed, or else that either her conceit or his countenance and
Physiognomy deceived her therein. But here (before I proceed further) let us
remarke the strange effects, and events hereof; For as dreams prove seldom
true, because they are as incertaine as their ^uses, which for the most part
either proceed from the influence of the heart, or ^se now from the operations
of the brain in their different pa^ions of affection, Envy, Hope, Fear, Joy,
Sorrow, or the like; So it pleased God that the very same night Marieta dreamt,
that Pierot the Miller killed her, and threw her dead body into the Pond; the
which remembering the next morning, she likewise remembered to acquaint him
therewith, who ^vild wretch and dissembling Hypocrite) seemed to be in choler
thereat, vowing and swearing to her with many oaths and deprecations, that
she was and should be as safe in his Mill, as if she were either in the Tower
of Blyn, or the Castle of Blavet, which indeed are reputed to be two of the
strongest and most important pieces of little Britany; whereat poor Marieta
again and again thanks him. But this notwithstanding, I now here tremble to
report, that the very next ensuing night (Marieta proving too true a Herald
and Prophetess, to her own immediate mournful Tragedy) as the night had
given truce to her tears, and sleep administered rest to her eyes, as she lay
in her poor pallet bed, then this bloody villain Pierot the Miller very
secretly enters her Chamber, and softly convaies a small cord under her head,
and fastening it to her further bed poast (his strength conspiring with his
malice) he then and there strangles her dead, giving her neither the power or
time to cry, much less to speak one word, and as soon as this Agent of Hell
had bereaved her (and consequently the fruit of her womb) of life, he within
less then an hour after (not to give the lie to her own dream) changes his
purpose in the manner of her burial, and so (in her clothes as she was)
carries her to his little Mill-boat in the Pond, where fastening a great piece
of an old broken Millstone to her middle (or waste) by a strong new rope which
he had purposely provided, he there throws her into the deepest place of his
Pond, hoping, yea assuring himself, that he should never see not hear more of
her.

The very next morning after the finishing of this deplorable fact, Pierot the
Miller (not able to sleep for joy) at the very break of day, despeeds
himself away with the news hereof to his young Master Quatbrisson, who hears
and receives it with much content and joy, when (by his promise and oath again
assuring the Miller of his Mill) he the better to bear, and wipe off the
suspicion which this Murder might reflect or cast on him (if it should ever
hereafter come to be detected or discovered) rides away to the City of Rennes,
where the States General of that Province (which we in England term our
Parliament) was then to assemble, where rejoicing that he had so happily
dispatched his clownish Strumpet Marieta; and Pierot the Miller at home
likewise singing and triumphing at this his easy purchase of his Mill, they
not so much as once look up to Heaven and God, or down to their own
consciences and souls, what this foul and detestable Murder of theirs
deserves. And not to go far, by this time the Lord thinks it high time, to
bring this their cruel Murder to light, by a strange (I may justly say by a
miraculous) accident, which at unawares and when they least think thereof,
will (amidst their mirth and security) befall them.

A month is not full past over since this murder of Marieta, but God (in his
sacred mercy and justice) is now resolved to make Monsieur de Pont Chausey (La
Pratieres second Husband) to be the first means for the detection hereof (and
in that likewise afterward of: the poisoning of Valfontaine) who being one day
at Vannes with three other Gentlemen, his friends, he is desirous to hunt a
Ducke with two of his own Spaniels; And no Pond being so fit or near as that
of Monsieur de Caerstaignes, he makes choice thereof, but the Ducke is no
sooner in the Pond and the Dogs after her, but these two poor harmless curs
swimming eagerly for their prey, as they come to the place where Marieta's dead
body was suncke and tied, they instantly forsake and abandon the Ducke, and
there pudling with their feet, and sn^ffling with their noses in the water,
they most lamentably set up their tunes, and aloud houle and bark each at
other, without departing or stirring thence, the which Pont Chausey and the
other Gentlemen well observing, God instantly inspires their conceits with
this apprehension, and their hearts with this jealousy; that (peradventure)
there was some body, either accidently or purposely drowned there, and that it
now pleased his divine Majesty to make these two poor dogs his Agents and
Officers to discover it, whereupon they once resolve to draw up the sluice, and
to let out all the water of the Pond, but first they resolve to make another
trial and experiment hereof, so for that time they take up their Ducke,
depart, and call away their Spaniels, but after dinner they return, and the
Ducke being again put in, the Spaniels in the very same place do the like as
in the morning, still howling and barking most lamentably, the which indeed
yields harsh and displeasing music to the trembling heart and guilty
conscience of this murderous Miller, but still the Devil his Schoolmasters
makes him put a brazen face on his fear. Now this second action and demeanor
of the Spaniels, confirms the first jealousy and apprehension of Pont Chausey
and his associats, who (to vindicate this truth) are now resolute in their
former proposition, and desire of letting out the water of the Pond, the which
they attempt to effect: But then this wretched Miller seeing himself now so
narrowly put to his trumps and shifts, and therefore knowing it high time to
prevent them, at least if he mean to provide for his own safety and life; he
with many humble and sugared speeches (not seeming any way to take notice of
their apprehension) tells them, that he is a poor young man, that this is his
first year of setting up his Trade of a Miller for himself, that it being now
in the midst of a hot and dry Summer, his Pond will not receive in water again
for his Mill to go in a week or two after, which will infallibly beggar him,
and therefore (almost with tears) he beseeches them to desist from their
purpose, and not to turn out the water of his Pond, yea he speaks so
passionatly and pitifully to them, as his reasons prevail with the three
other Gentlemen, but with Pont Chausey they cannot, but rather the more
confirm his former apprehension and belief, that sure there was some one or
other drowned, and withal God does afresh distill and infuse into his
imaginations, that this very Miller himself might have some hand therein,
notwithstanding all his humble prayers and smooth speeches to the contrary: To
which end Pont Chausey the better to effect his desire and resolution, he (as
a wise and discreet Gentleman) grants the Miller his request, when purposely
sending away his Servants, Ducke and Dogs, he enquires of the Miller if he
have any dice or cards in his Mill, who answers him that he has cards, but
no dice: So into the Mill they all four go, and play at Lansknight for
Cartdescus, and the Miller (now ravished with Joy to see how his fair tongue
has kept the water in his Pond) is wonderful diligent to wait, and officious
to attend them and their commands.

But they having played an hour, Pont Chausey now thinks it high time for him
to effect his design and resolution, and then tells Pierot the Miller, that he
is very dry and thirsty, demanding of him if there be any wine to sell near
his Mill, who tells him there is none nearer then the Town, where he willingly
profereth to go and fetch some speedily, which indeed is that very part and
point whereat Pont Chausey only aimed: So he gives him money to fetch two
grand pots of wine; when this inconsiderate and secure Miller (without either
fear or wit) seems rather to fly then to run to the Town with Joy for it,
thinking and assuring that the storm of his danger was now already quite past
and blown over; but he is no sooner out of sight, but Pont Chausey presently
throws up the Cards, and prays the rest of the Gentlemen to assist him in
drawing up the sluice and emptying the Pond, for that his heart still prompts
him there is some one drowned therein, whereunto they all give free consent; so
by that time the water is half out, Lo (with much admiration and pity) they
behold a dead body floating therein, and yet fastened with a rope to the bottom
of the Pond. And prying more narrowly to discern it, they (by the coats it
wore) perceived it to be a woman, whom they cause to be taken up in the
Mill-boat, but her flesh is so riveld and withered with the water, and eaten
and disfigured by the fish, as it was impossible to know what she was, and she
st^nke so odiously, as almost none durst approach her. Pont Chausey (and his
associats) seeing this woeful and lamentable spectacle, and comparing there
with the Millers earnest refusal, not to permit them to empty his Pond, he
here confirms his former jealousy, and now confidently suspects him, either
to be the Author or Actor of this cruel murder; To which end he and his
associats lay exact and curious wait for his return with the wine; who
coming therewith from the Town merrily singing, and not so much as once
dreaming what had happened at the Pond, he ascending the top of the Hill by the
Woods side, and espying his Pond emptied, then the foulness of his fact and
conscience, and the eminency of his danger does so terrify and amaze him,
that he sets down his pots of wine on the ground; and (committing his safety
to the celerity and swiftness of his heels) he with all possible speed runs
away toward the center of the Wood; the which Pont Chausey and the rest of the
Gentlemen espying, they need no other evidence but this his flight, to
proclaim himself guilty of this murder, and so they speedily send after him,
and within one hour after he is found out, apprehended and brought back; they
vehemently accusing, and he as resolutely excusing himself of this murder;
but notwithstanding they shut him up close in his own Mill, till it be found
out what this drowned murdered woman is.

The report of this mournful accident being speedily divulged in Vannes, and
bruted in the neighbor parishes, there are a world of people, who from all
parts flock to the Pond, to be spectators of this dead woman; and among the
rest, Yvon Malliot and his wife Jane Chaumet, no sooner understand hereof, but
knowing it to be a woman, and drowned in Monsieur de Caerstaings Pond, they
exceedingly fear it is their Daughter Marieta, and to see the issue and truth
hereof she runs before, and he limpes after as fast as he can, as if they
should not come time enough to make themselves miserable, with the fight and
object of their misery. Now they are no sooner arrived to the Pond, but they
see all the people stand aloof from this murdered corpse, because of the
stinch thereof; but they (hardened by their fear, and encouraged by their
affection) do willingly rush toward it, but cannot as yet discern what she
was, by reason the fishes had almost eaten away all the flesh from her bones,
which therefore no way satisfying their curiosity and inquiry, they then fall
to wash away the mud and oze from her clothes, hoping to draw some information
and light from them, as alas they now instantly do, for they find the
Wast-coat and two Petty-coats, that of ash color serge, and these of green
and red bays to be the very same which their Daughter Marieta wore, when she
either fled, or was stolen from them; whereat crossing their arms, and sending
their sighs to heaven, and their tears to earth, this poor afflicted Father
and Mother cry out that it was the dead body of their fair and unfortunate
Daughter Marieta, and doubtless, that either Monsieur Quatbrisson or Pierot
the Miller, or both of them were her Murderers; whereat all the people admire
and wonder, every one speaking thereof as their several fancies led them, and
as they stood affected, or disaffected to Quatbrisson, and the Miller.

But Pont Chausey rides presently to Vannes (leaving the other three Gentlemen
his friends to guard the Miller in his mill) and advertiseth the Seneshall, and
the other two Judges of this deplorable fact; so they send for this Miller to
Vannes, and the next day being brought before them, they examine and accuse him
for thus murdering of Marieta, but (having learnt his answer and resolution of
the Devil) he with many bitter oaths and curses denies it, deposing and
swearing that he never knew her nor saw her; but this false answer and
counterfeit coin of his will no way pass current with his Judges, but they
forthwith ordain him to the Rack. Our wretched Miller Pierot is amazed and
terrified at the sight hereof, yea now his courage begins to fail him, as
fearing it to be the true Prologue, and fatal Harbinger to his death; so he
endures the single torment reasonable well, but feeling the pinches and
tortures of the second, and well knowing that his heart, Ioints, and patience
can never endure it, he then and there confesses to his Judges, that he was
the only Author and Actor of this murder, and that he strangled her in his
Mill, and then suncke her in his Pond, because she would never consent or yield
to be his wife, but speaks not a word of Qua^brisson, or that he had any way
seduced or hired him to commit it; but fed his exorbitant thoughts and
erroneous hopes with the air of this vain belief, That when he was condemned
to die here in Vannes, that he would then appeal thence to the Court of
Parliament of Rennes, where he knew his young master Quatbrisson then was, and
where he presumed he had so many great and noble friends, as he should not need
to fear his life: But (contrary to these his weak and poor hopes) the very
next morning when he expected to hear the sentence of death pronounced
against him, his Judges again adjudge him to the torments of the Scarpines, to
know if Monsieur Quatbrisson, or any other were accessory with him in this
murder, when they cause his left foot to be burnt so soundly, as he will not
endure to have his right touched, and so confesses that his young master
Quatbrisson seduced and hired him to strangle Marieta in her bed in his Mill,
and promised him the Fee Simple or Lease thereof to perform it, that he it was
who likewise threw her into the Pond, and that he also believes she was quick
with child by his said master.

All Vannes wonder and talk of Quatbrissons base ingratitude and cruelty,
toward this silly and harmless young country maiden Marieta, yea this foul
and lamentable murder, administreth likewise talk in all the adjoining Towns
and Parishes; So this execrable Miller Pierot is by the Seneshall condemned to
be broken alive on the Wheel, but yet (in regard of the necessity of his
confrontation) they defer his execution till Quatbrisson be apprehended in
Rennes, where the Seneshall, and Kings Attorney General of Vannes, do by post
send away his accusation to that famous Court of Parliament; where whiles he
is prauncing in the streets of that City on his great Horse, and ruffling in
his scarlets and sattins, with three Lackies (richly clad) at his heels, the
height of this his pomp and bravery makes his shame the more apparent, and his
crime the more foul and notorious; For then when he thought himself to be
farthest from danger, lo the Justice and Providence of God brings him nearest
to it; for he is now here by a band of Huysiers (or Purs^vants) taken off from
his horse, apprehended and imprisoned by the command of the Lieutenant
Criminal of that great Court, who yet vainly reposing on the fidelity and
secrecy of Pierot his Fathers Miller, he seems to be no way dismayed or
daunted thereat; But when he hears his accusation and enditement read, that
Marieta's murdered body was found in the Pond, that Pierot the Miller was
apprehended and imprisoned for the same, and that he had confessed him to be
the Author, and himself the Actor of this her cruel murder, then I say he
is so appalled and daunted, and so far from any hope of life, as he utterly
despaires thereof, and palpably sees the Image of death before his eyes: When
(with a few tears, and many sighs) he here to his Judges confesses himself
to be the Author of this foul fact, and so begs pardon thereof of God; for
from these his grave and incorruptible Magistrates he is assured and confident
to find none; Whereupon although four of the Counselors, and one of the
Presidents, were resolved in regard of this his inhumane and base crime, to
have him hanged, yet the rest of that wise and honorable Senate, knowing him
to be Son and Heir to a very ancient Gentleman, nobly descended, they ore
sway and prevail with the others, and so they adjudge him the very next day to
have his head cut off, although this his sorrowful aged Father Monsieur de
Caerstainge, offered the one half of his lands to save his life, and likewise
was a most importunate Suppliant to the Duke of Tremoville (who then and there
preceded at the Estates for the Nobility) to intercede with that Farliament for
his reprivall, and with the King for his pardon, but in vain; For that noble
Duke (considering the baseness and enormity of this his inhumane fact) was too
wise to attempt the one, and too honorable and generous to seek the other. So
the very next morning Quatbrisson (apparalled in a suit of black Satin,
trimmed with gold Lace) is brought to the Scaffold (at the common place of
execution, which is in the midst of the City) where a very great concourse of
people of all sorts, resort and flock to see him take his last farewell of
this world, of whom the greatest part and number, lamented and pitied, that so
proper and noble a Gentleman, should first deserve, and then receive so
untimely a death: When after the Priests and Friars have here prepared and
directed his soul, he aseending the Scaffold, with some what a low voice, and
dejected and sorrowful countenance, he delivered this short speech.

That in regard he knows, that (now when he is to take his last leave of this
life) to charge his conscience with the concealing of any capital crime, is
the direct and true way to send his soul to hell in stead of heaven, he will
now therefore reveal, that he is yet more execrable and bloody, then his
Judges think or know, or his spectatours imagine, for that he not only hired
Pierot his Fathers Miller to murder Marieta, but also the Apothecary
Moncallier to poison his own brother Valfontaine; of both which foul and
bloody crimes of his, he now freely confesses himself guilty, and now from
his heart and soul sorrowfully lamenteth and repents them; that his filthy
lust and inordinate affection to women was the first cause, and his neglect of
prayer to God the second, which has justly brought him to this shameful end
and confusion; that therefore he beseeches all who are present to be
seriously forewarned of the like by his woeful Example, and that (in Christian
charity) they will now join their devout prayers with his to God for his
soul: When on the Scaffold praying a little whiles silently to himself
kneeling, and then putting off his Doublet, he commits himself to the
Executioner; who at one blow severed his head from his shoulders. But this
punishment and death of Quatbrisson suffiseth not now to give full content and
satisfaction to his Judges, who (by his own confession) considering his
inhumane and deplorable poisoning of his own brother Valfontaine, they as
soon as he is dead, and before he be cold, adjudge his body to be taken
down, and there burnt to Ashes at the foot of the Gibbet, which accordingly is
performed.

And here our thoughts and curiosity must now return poast from Rennes to
Vannes, and from wretched Quatbrisson to the base and bloody Miller Pierot,
whom God and his Judges have now ordained shall likewise smart for this his
lamentable murder on poor and harmless Marieta. He is brought to the
Gallows in his old dusty mealy Suite of Canvas, where a Priest preparing him
to dye, he (either out of impiety, or ignorance, or both) delivers this idle
speech to the people, That because Marieta was young and fair, he is now
heartily sorry that he had not married her, and that if he had been as wise as
covetous, the two hundred Crowns, or the Lease of his Mill, which his young
master Monsieur Quatbrisson proffered him, might have made him wink at her
dishonesty, and that although she were not a true Maid to her self, yet that
she might have proved a true and honest wife to him, with many other frivolous
words and lewd speeches tending that way; which I purposely omit, and resolve
to pass over in silence, as holding them unworthy either of my relation, or
the Readers knowledge: when not having the grace once to name God, to speak of
his soul, to desire heaven, or to seem to be any way repentant and
sorrowful for this his bloody offense, he is stripped naked, having only his
shirt fastened about his waste, and with an Iron bar has his legs, thighs,
arms, and breast, broken alive, and there his miserable body is left naked and
bloody on the Wheel, for the space of two days, thereby to terrify and
deter the beholders from attempting the like wretched crime. And the Judges
of Vannes being certifyed from the Court of Parliament at Rennes, that
Quatbrisson at his death charged the Apothecary Moncallier to have (at his
hiring and instigation) poisoned his brother Valfontaine, they hold the Church
to be too holy a place for the body and burial of so profane and bloody a
Villain: When after well near a whole years time that he was buried in Saint
Francis Church in that Town, they cause his Coffin to be taken up, and both
his body and it to be burnt by the common Hangman, and his Ashes to be
thrown into the air; Which to the Joy of all the Spectators is accordingly
performed.

GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND EXECRAble Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXV.
Vasti first murthereth his Son George, and next poysoneth his own Wife
Hester, and being afterward almost killed by a mad Bull in the Fields, he
reveals these his two murders, for the which he is first hanged, and then
burnt.

TO religious hearts, there can nothing be so distasteful as Sin, nor any
Sin so odious and execrable as Murder; for it being contrary to Nature and
Grace, the very thought, much more the act thereof, strikes horror to their
hearts and consciences. Wherefore, if this foul and bloody Sin be so
displeasing to godly men, how infinitely more detestable is it then to God
himself, who made all living creatures to serve Man, and only created Man
purposely to serve Himself? But as Choler and Malice proceed from the
passions of men, so does Murder from the Devil; for else we should not so
often and frequently see it perpetrated in most Countries and Cities of the
World as we do: A mournful Example whereof I here produce to your view and
serious consideration.

THe place of this History, is Fribourg (an ancient city of Switzerland) which
gives name to one of the Divisions (or Cantons) of that famous and warlike
country; Wherein (of fresh memory) dwelt a rich Burger named Peter Vasti, who
had to his wife a modest, discreet, and virtuous woman named Hester, by whom he
had one only child, a Son called George Vasti, whom God sent them the latter
end of the first year of their marriage; and for the term of some ten years
following, this married couple lived in most kind, and loving sort each with
other, yea their hearts and inclinations so sympathized in mutual and
interchangeable affection, as they held and reputed none of their Neighbors so
rich in content as themselves; for she was careful of her Family, and he very
diligent and industrious to maintain it; both of them being chaste and
continent in themselves, very religious toward God, and exceeding charitable,
affable, and courteous to all their Neighbors and Acquaintance, only they are
so temperate in their drinking, as ^ee would not, and she could not be
tainted with that beastly Vice of Drunken^esse, whereunto that Country, and
the greatest part of that People, are but too excessively addicted and subject:
So that had Vasti still embraced and followed those Virtues in the course and
conduction of his life, he had not then defiled this History with the
profusion of so many sins, nor besprinckled it with the effusion of so much
innocent blood, nor consequently have administered so much sorrow to the Reader,
in perusing and knowing it: but as contrary Causes produce contrary Effects, so
he (by this time) polluting himself with filthy and pernicious Company, it is
no marvel if he leave his temperancie to follow drunkenness, his chastity to
commit fornication and adultery; yea, it is no marvel I say, if these foul
sins (as Bawds to rage and revenge) exact such power in his heart, and
predominancie in his soul, as in the end to draw him to murder: for goodmen
cannot receive a greater plague, nor the Devil afford or give them a worse
pestilence, then bad company. It is the fatal Shelves, and dismal Rocks,
whereon a world of people have, and do daily suffer shipwreck; yea, it is the
grief of a Kingdom and Country, the bane of our Age, and the corruption and
poison of our Times; for it turns those who profess and pursue it, out of
their estates and homes, which they are then enforced either to sell, or rather
to give away to Usurers and Cormorants, and consequently which makes
themselves, and their poor wives and children ready to starve and dye in our
streets. So this is now the cause of our Vasti, and therefore it will be his
happiness, if it prove not his misery hereafter; for after twelve years time
of a most peaceable cohabitation, and Godly conversation between him and his
virtuous wife Hester, it is a thousand griefs and pitties that she must now be
enforced to see so brutish and beastly a Metamorphosis in her husband; for he
is no more the man which he was, nor the husband which she formerly found him
to be. He loves neither his house nor his wife, but stays abroad every day
with his whores, and then at night returns home to her stark drunk, and in
lamentable sort reviles and beats her, whereas heretofore he would rather have
lost his life then have stricken her, and whereas heretofore he affected and
loved her so dearly, as he thought he could not be kind enough to her, now
(in the extravagancie of these his deboshed humors) he hates her so deadly as
he deemes and supposes he cannot be sufficiently cruel to her, although her
affection be still so fervent to him, and her care so vigilent and respectfull
of him, as she gives him nothing but either sweet words, tears, sighs,
silence, or prayers; yea, she proves her self so good a woman to so bad a
man, and so courteous and virtuous a wife to so unkind and vicious a husband,
as to the eyes and judgments of all their kinsfolks and neighbors, they know
it is now her praise and glory, and fear it will hereafter prove his shame and
misery. She leaves no means unassayed, or invention unsought and unattempted,
to divert and turn this foul inundation of his Vice into the sweet streams
of Virtue, and the pure rivers of Godliness: But Ahlas good woman, her care
proves vain, and her affection and zeal impossible herein, although her pale
cheeks, mournful eyes, brinish tears, farfetcht sighs, religious prayers,
and sweet persuasions, do still second and accompany her endeavors in this
her desired hope of his reformation; for she is enforced to know that he
keeps a young strumpet, named Salyna, at the Town of Cleraux, some six
Leaugues from Fribourg, whither most mornings he goes to her, and to make
himself the more treacherous a dissembler to his wife, and the more execrable
a traitor to his soul, he fortifyeth and colors out this his accustomed
journey to his strumpet with this false Apology, that he goes to Cleraux to
hear the Sermons of Mr Abraham Tifflin, a very famous and religious Preacher
there, when God and his ulcerated soul and conscience know the contrary, and
that this pretended excuse of his is but only a false cloak to overvail his
true Adultery, and profane Impiety: for he needed not to have formerly added
Whordom to his Drunkenness, and now Ingratitude, Cruelty, and Impiety to his
Whordome, in regard the least of these enormous crimes and sins assuredly
have the power, and will infallibly find the means to make him futurely as
miserable, as now he foolishly thinks himself happy; for these his journeyes
to Cleraux are only the Pilgrimage of his wanton Lust. Salyna is the Saint of
his voluptuous devotion, her House the Temple of his obscene wishes, and
Adultery the Oblation and Sacrifice of his lascivious desires.

We can difficultly make our selves guilty of a fouler sin on earth, then to
seem sanctified in our devotions toward God, when we are profane, or to
endeavor to appear sound without, when we are rotten within in our Faith and
Religion: For as Man is the best and noblest of all Gods creatures, so an
Hypocrite toward God is the worst of men, yea or rather a Devil and no man;
for our hearts and actions, and our most retired thoughts, and secret darling
sins, are as conspicuous and transparant to Gods eyes, as his decrees and
resolutions are invisible to ours, since he sees all things, and we see nothing
when we do not see him. A miserable hight of impiety, in making of our selves
foolishly sinners, and wilfully Hypocrites, and yet it is a more fatal and
fearful degree thereof, when we so delight in sin and glory in hypocrisy,
as to make Apologies for the same.

But Vasti not thinking either of Religion or God, frolicks it out with Salyna
his strumpet in Cleraux, whiles his own virtuous wife Hester weeps at home at
Fribourg, and when he returns thence, he is still so hard hearted and cruel
to her, as he continually beats her. Now by this time George their Son is
sixteen years of age, of a man's courage and stature, and of a very pregnant
wit; so that as young as he is, he has been long enough a sorrowful
eyewitness of his Fathers cruelty, in beating of his Mother; He has
formerly seen the lamentable effects, and now he falls on his knees to her,
and (with tears and prayers) beseeches her to acquaint him with the true
cause thereof, and from whence it proceeds; when his Mother (adding more
confidence to his wisdom then to his youth) from point to point fully relates
it to him, accordingly as we have formerly understood, George bursts forth into
sorrowful passions at her repetition, and his knowledge hereof, as not able to
refrain from sighing to see her sigh, nor from weeping to see her weep; He
as much grieves to be the Son of so vicious a Father, as he rejoices and
gloryeth to be that of so virtuous a Mother, so he makes her sorrows his, and
here weds himself to her quarrel (with promise and oath) either to right it
with his Father, or to revenge it on Salyna, whom he knows to be the original
cause of all these storms and tempests, of all these afflictions and miseries
which befall his Mother, and in her himself. He will no longer be a child,
because God and nature has now made him a man, so the very next time he sees
his Father beat his Mother he steps to her assistance, and defends her from
the tyranny of his blows, and then advances so far, as he performs it
with an unwilling willing resistance of him, the which his Father takes
extremely ill and chollerickly from him, gives him sharp words, and menaceth
him with bitter blows. George his Son, first returns him a brief
rehearsal of the wrongs and indignities he still offers to his Mother, when
protesting of his obedience to him, he yet tells him, that he is willing to
entertain his words, but no longer capable to digest and receive his blows,
adding withal (as a passionate Corolary) that ere long he will visit his
Strumpet Salyna in Cleraux, and make her feel a part of her base carriage, and
ill deservings, both toward his Mother and himself: ^asti is much astonished
at this audacity and boldness of his Son, but far ^re to hear him name
and threaten Salyna, the very thought of which his speeches grates him to his
heart, and grieves him to his soul, so he puts water in his wine, holds it for
that time a virtue, to be no longer stormy but calm, and then (chollerickly
threatening him with his finger) he departs to his Chamber, leaving his Wife and
his Son consulting in the Parlour, how (with most assurance, and least
scandal) they may provide for their affairs.

The next morning, Vasti his Father keeps his bed, and gives order, that
neither his Wife or Son have admittance to him, the which discourtesie of
his, gives his Son a fresh and strong motive, to revive his last nights
discontent against his Father, and his choler against Salyna, when bidding his
Mother the good morrow, and craving her blessing, he (purposely) frames an
excuse to leave her till she be ready, and so very privately takes horse, and
that morning acts a business, every way worthy of himself, and indeed far
more worthy of laughture, then of our pity. For it is not so much his malice
to Salyna, as his affection to his Mother Hester, which carries him and his
resolution to Cleraux; where entering Salyna's house; he (with fire in his
looks and thunder in his speeches) calls her whore and strumpet, charge her
for abusing his Father, and in him his Mother and himself. His choler cannot
retain his patience, to hear her false answers and apologies to the contrary,
but disdaining as much to use his sword on a woman, as to foul it on a
strumpet, he takes his man's short cudgel, and gives her at least a dosen
blows on her back, arms and shoulders therewith, seriously vowing and
swearing to her; That if she forsake not his Fathers company, and use the
means that henceforth he do utterly abandon hers, he will shortly give her
so bitter a payment and requital, as he will hardly leave her either the will
or power to thank him for his courtesy, and so remounts his horse, and
presently gallops home to his Mother, whom he acquaints therewith, but yet
conceales it from his Father, whereat she seems not to be a little joyful,
and yet heartily prays to God; that this breed no bad blood in her husband,
or prove either an incitation to his choler against her self, or a propension
of revenge against their Son.

But this joy of Hester and her Son George, proves the sighs and tears of
Salyna, who not accustomed to receive such sharp payment, and usage from any
man's hands whosoever, it makes her extreme chollericke and vindictive, so that
her stomach is so great, and her heart so highly and imperiously lodged, that
she will not suffer this cruel affront offered her by George Vasti, to go
unrequited; but yet she will be as advised and secret in her revenge toward
him, as he was rash and public in his toward her. To which end and purpose,
seeing that Vasti his Father came not to her that day (whereby she judged he
was wholly ignorant what had befallen her from his Son) she that night writes
him a short Letter, and the next morning sends it home to Fribourg to him, by a
confident messenger of hers, who arriving there and finding him pensively
walking in his Garden, he respectfully delivered it to him, who breaking up
the seals thereof, found it spoke thus.

SALYNA to VASTI.
BY all the inviolable love and tender affection which is betwixt us, I pray
and conj^ you to leave Fribourg, and come over to me with haste and expedition
to Cleraux, because I have a great and important secret to reveal you, which
equally concerns us, and which I dare not to commit to pen and paper; for that
the relation and knowledge the needs no other witnesses but our selves. If you
any way neglect this my advise, or deny, or defe^e this my request, the grief
will be mine n^, but the prejudice and repentance yo^s hereafter. I write you
these few lines ^ith infinite affliction and for ro^, which nothing can deface
but your sight, nor remedy but your presence, and when you come to me, prepare
your heart and resolution, to receive it from me, with far more tears then
kisses.

SALYNA.


This letter of hers does so nettle Vasti with apprehension and fear, that his
Son George has offered her some violence and outrage, as he is almost as
soon in Cleraux as he is out of Fribourg, where his Mistress Salyna very
passionatly and chollerickly informs him of his Sons cruelty toward her,
and (to add the more efficacy to her speeches, the more power to her
complaints, and the more oil to the fire of his anger and revenge) she forgets
not to paint out to him (in all their colors) the number of his Sons blows,
and the nature and quality of his threats given her, when watering her words
with her tears, she swears, that if he speedily do not right and revenge
these her wrongs upon his said Son, she will never kiss, or see him more.
Vasti takes these speeches from Salynas tongue, and places them in his own
heart; yea he hereat is so chollerickly intended toward his Son, and so
sottishly affected to her, as consulting with rage, but not with reason, and
with Satan, not with God, he (to exhale her tears, and so to give
consolation to her sorrows) tells her; That he loves her so tenderly and
constantly, as he will not fail to kill his Son for this incivill and
inhumane fact of his toward her. Salyna is amazed and astonished at this his
unnatural resolution to his Son, the which (as vicious as she is) she
abhors and condemns in him as soon as understands. So she ^s him plainly,
that albeit she have given him her heart and body, yet that she is not so
exempt of grace, or so wretchedly instructed in Piety, as to take away her
soul from God, and therefore that although she be guilty of Adultery, yet
she will never be of Murder; so in religious terms (worthy of an honester
woman then her self) she powerfully seeks to dissuade him from this bloody
and unnatural attempt, as well to prevent their future wrongs and fears, as
to secure their dangers and reputations, and so prays him to seek out some
other remedy and requital toward his Son, the which he promises her, and
seals it with some oaths and many kisses, stays and dines with her, and
immediately takes horse and rides homewards. His Son George finding his Father
ridden forth, and being ascertained that he was gone to Cleraux, to his
strumpet Salyna, where she would acquaint him at full with his beating of her,
he fearing his choler, holds it more discretion then disobedience in him, to
take his sword with him for his defense; when choosing a good horse out of the
stable, ^d deemes it more secure and less dangerous to meet his Father ^alfe
way, betwixt Cleraux and Fribourg, and there in the open field to expect and
attend what he had to say to him. Vasti seeing his Son George a far off
come riding toward him, with his sword by his side, he much marvelleth
thereat, when well knowing his courage and valor, and that (as young as he
was) he had lately at ^fouse acquitted himself of a Duel to his honor and
reputation, he therefore resolves to make it a tongue and not a sword quarrel
with him, and so they meet; George doing his duty to his Father with his hat
off, and his Father speaking not angerly but mildly to him; Their meddow
conference which they then and there had betwixt them was thus.

Fa. What reason had thou so cruelly to beat poor Salyna?

So. A thousand times more then you have to beat my Mother Hester.

Fa. Tell me why.

So. The reason is just and pertinent, because that is your lascivious whore,
and this your chaste and virtuous wife.

Fa. What have thou gotten by this thy rash choler in beating her?

So. Not by far so much as you have lost by your sottish lust in kissing her.

Fa. It is thy Mothers jealousy which has sown and scattered these untruths
in thy belief.

So. I pray excuse me, for they are palpable and apparent truths, and such as
it is wholly impossible either for your hypocrisy or policy to root thence.

Fa. Since when becamest thou so saucy and peremptory?

So. From that very time I first understood you were become so vicious.

Fa. I have a mad Son in thee.

So. It were a great happiness both for my Mother and my self, if you proved
a tamer Husband to her, and an honester Father to me.

Fa. If thou follow those courses, to love thy Mother better then my self, I
vow I will wholly disinherit thee.

So. If you follow these courses, to love Strumpets better then my Mother, I
swear you will shortly consume all your estate, and disinherit your self
first.

Fa. This word Strumpet is very rife in thy mouth.

So. I wish to God that the thing were not so frequent in your heart.

Fa. Will thou be friends with Salyna, and reconcile thy self to her?

So. Yes, when I see you become an enemy to her, and a friend to my Mother, and
your self, but not before.

Fa. Why, Charity is the true mark of a Christian.

So. But I assure you, so is not Adultery and Cruelty.

Fa. Shall I make peace betwixt thee and Salyna?

So. No, but I would make it the joy of my heart, and the glory of my life, if
I might be so happy to knit and confirm a good peace betwixt your self and my
Mother.

Fa. Will thou attempt it, if I request thee?

So. I will, if you please to command me.

Fa. I pray thee George do.

So. My best endeavors shall herein wayt on your desires, and dutifully follow
your commands.

Fa. But be careful to make my reconciliation with thy Mother eternal.

So. It can never subsist, nor prosper, if you henceforth resolve to make it
temporary, because affection and amity which once receives end, had never
beginning.

Fa. Here I vow constantly a reformation of my life from all other women, and a
perpetual renovation of my affection to my Wife thy Mother.

So. God and his Angels bless this your conversion, and confirm this
resolution in you.

Fa. And God bless thee my Son, for wishing and desiring it.

So. I thank you Sir, but I humbly pray you likewise to forgive and forget
this my boldness to you in my Mothers behalf.

Fa. George, here in presence of God I cheerfully and freely do it from my
heart

So. Amen, Amen, Sir.

This meddow conference thus ended between them, they ride home toward
Fribourg, and by the way Vasti wills and prays his Son, to finish this
peace between him and his mother that very night, and to dispose her so
effectually thereunto, as that they may make a merry supper of it, and all
former differences between them, to be then and there ended; and for ever
trampled under foot, the which George his Son to the best of his possible
power cheerfully and joyfully promises him; So home they come; Vasti walks
in his Garden, and George finds out his Mother in her own Chamber, being newly
risen from her prayers, wherein she was so zealous and religious as she spent
the greatest part of her time. Here George informs his Mother Hester at full,
what conference had now past in the open fields betwixt him and his Father: And
(in a word) he here acts his part and duty so well and discreetly, as he
leaves no art nor persuasions unattempted to draw her to this atonement with
his Father. When she at first considering the nature and quality of her
husbands unkind and cruel usage to her, she found an opposition hereof in her
mind, a resistance in her will, and a reluctance in her nature and judgment;
But at last giving now her former discontent to charity, her passions to peace,
her sorrows to silence, her resolutions to religion, her anger to affection,
her malice to oblivion, and her grief unto God, she (after a brief
consultation, and a short expostulation hereof between them) with a cheerful
countenance thanks her Son for his care of her, and his affection to her
herein; and so informs him, That she (having never justly offended her
husband in thought word or deed) is as willing of peace and reconciliation with
him, as he can possibly desire or wish, and here to testify it to her Son as
well in action as words, she would then have gone down with him to her
husband, there privately to have concluded this Christian business betwixt them,
had her Son not diverred her from it; For being exceeding careful to
preserve his Mothers right and reputation, he prays her to stay, alleging
that he would presently fetch and conduct his Father to her Chamber to her, as
holding it more requisite and just, that the delinquent should first see and
seek the party wronged, before the party seek the delinquent, whereat she
cannot refrain from smiling, and then bids him go: So George descends to the
Garden, and acquaints his Father with his Mothers free disposition, and
cheerful resolution to a perpetual peace with him, whereat he seems
infinitely glad and joyful, and so ascends her Chamber, and having saluted her,
tells her, that he is very sorrowful and repentant for his former ill
carriage and unkindnesse toward her, whereof he prays her pardon, and
constantly vows reformation; so this his virtuous and kind wife Hester freely
forgets and forgives Vasti her husband; and then he gives her many kisses in
requital, and bids his son George to provide good cheer for Supper; and the
better to seal and solemnize this their reconciliation and atonement, he bids
him to invite some of their Kinsfolks and Neighbors to be present thereat,
who were formerly acquain^d with their debates and differences; where no good
cheer and choice wine is wanting; So they are wonderful frolic, pleasant,
and merry, all rejoice at this good news, and highly applaud their Son
George, for his discreet carriage and care in the managing of this business.
Thus all things seem to be fully reconciled, and here Vasti drinks many times
to his wife Hester, and she again to her husband with much affection and joy:
When supper being ended, their guests departed, and their Son George having
received both of their blessings, they betake themselves to their Chamber and
Bed.

Now (in all humane sense and reason) who would once conceive or think, that
after this Meadow conference of Vasti to his Son George, but that this his now
Table reconciliation with his wife Hester were true, and pronounced with much
i^egrity from himself, with deep affection to her, and infinite zeal and
devotion to God; but Ahlas nothing less, for here I am enforced to relate,
that Vasti the same night had not laien in bed by his wife five or six hours,
but she (good woman) sleeping in her innocence, he (as a devil incarnate) was
waking in his malice and revenge, and laughing in his sleeve to see how
cunningly and subtly he has lulld ^eep the courage of his Son with a
Meadow conference, and the iealousi^ of (...) Wife with a Supper, and a few
sweet words and kisses: When here again the the Devil blowing the coals to
his lust, and marshalling up his former obscene desires and resolutions, only
his body is in bed with his wife Hester, here in Fribourg, but his affection
and heart is still in the bosom of his strumpet Salyna in Cleraux; yea the
Devil I say, is now both so busy and so strong with him, that (as a hellish
counselor, and prodigious penman) he writes down this definitive sentence
in his thoughts, and fatal resolution in his heart, That Salyna he will love,
and his wife Hester he cannot, and that shortly he will give so sharp a
revenge to his son George, for his disobedience toward him, and for beating of
his Salyna, as she shall have no further cause to fear his cruelty, nor
himself his courage; and because he prefers her love to his own life (as
being dangerously entangled and captivated in the snares of her youth and
beauty) he likewise resolves to write and send her a Letter the very next
morning.

Now judge Christian Reader, is not this like to prove a sweet reformation and
reconciliatlon of Vasti to his wife and son, since these are the sparks which
diffuse and fly out from the fire of his lust, and the fatal lines which
issue forth from the Center of his bloody heart, and sinful soul; for in the
morning before his wife is out of her bed, he is stirring, and writes this
Letter to Salyna, which he sends her by a trusty messenger.

VASTI to SALYNA.
I Am plotting of a business, which will infinitely import both our contents;
so if thou will resolve to brook my absence, with as much patience, as I do
thine with sorrow, I shall finish it the sooner, and consequently the sooner
see thee. I have met with an Accident, which I thought was wholly impossible
for me to meet with; and though at first it brought me fear and affliction,
yet at length I was enforced to interpose discretion, instead of courage,
thereby to draw security out of policy, which I could not hope for out of
resistance; for I must inform thee of this truth, that if my Zeal and
Affection to thee had not been of greater power and consideration then that of
mine own life, I should then with more facility and willingness rather have
hazarded it for thy sake, then have reserved it for mine own. But the mists of
those doubts are now dissipated, and the ^lowds of these fears blown away; or
if not, I will shortly take that order, that thou shall have no cause to fear
the one, or I to doubt the other. When I shall be so happy to see thee, I know
not, but if Fortune prove propitious to my desires and wishes, my return shall
be acted with as much celerity, as it is eagerly longed for of me with
Affection and Passion.

VASTI.


Salyna receives this letter of Vasti with equal fear and joy; for as she was
glad to hear of him and his news, so she was sorrowful, as fearing that for her
sake he should imbarke himself in some bloody business, which might prove
ruinous to them both: And although her apprehension do far exceed her
knowledge herein, yet her suspicion will give her no truce, neither can her
jealousy administer any peace either to her heart or mind, before she be
resolved by Vasti of the doubtful and different truth hereof. She is so
profane and lascivious, as she can content her self to make him guilty of
Fornication; but yet Religion has left some sparks and impressions of Piety
in her, that she would still have him innocent of Revenge and Murder: to which
effect, by his own messenger she returns him this answer.

SALYNA to VASTI.
BEcause you deem me unworthy to know your Designs, therefore I have assumed
the boldness to fear them; in which regard and consideration, find it not
strange that I (...) entreat you to ingrave in your heart, and imprint in your
memory, that Malice is most commonly squint eyed, and Revenge still blind:
therefore if you will not ruin our affections and fortunes, take heed that you
imbrue not your heart or hand in innocent blood; for Murder is a crying and a
Scarlet sin which God may forgive and make white by his Mercy, but will not
by his Justice; whereof this my Letter of Advice to you shall be a witness
betwixt God, your self, and me: and therefore, as you love me, bazard not
your life for my sake, but preserve it for your own. As it is in your will to
make your stay from me as long or short as you please, so it shall be in my
pleasure to judge thereof, and thereby likewise of your affection to me. I wish
I could be more yours then I am, and your self as often in my sight and
company, as I desire God prosper you in your stay, and me in your absence.

SALYNA.


Vasti having thus settled his affection and affairs with Salyna, he sees with
grief that it is now almost impossible for him to see her in Cleraux, because
of the vigilant and watchful eye of his Son George, over himself and his
actions here in Fribourg; wherefore notwithstanding her wholesome and religious
advice to him to beware of blood, yet his lustful affection to her does so
outbrave and conquer his natural love to him, that to satisfy his inordinat
concupisence, and to give content to his obscene and beastly desires, he vows
he will shortly send him to heaven in a bloody Coffin. Now the sooner and
better for him to compass and finish this his deplorable stratagem, and
unnatural resolution against his son, his counselor the Devil advises
him that he must for a short time make wonderful fair weather with him, and
gild over all his speeches and actions to his wife Hester, with much respect
and courtesy; the which Vasti does speedily put in practice: So for a month
or six weeks time, he sees not Salyna, but all things (to the eye of the
world) go in great peace, affection, and tranquillity betwixt Father, Mother,
and Son. But this false sunshine will be too soon o'retaken with a dismal
storm and tempest; for what religious or Christian show soever Vasti
externally makes unto them, yet although he have God in his tongue, he
nevertheless internally carries the Devil about him in his heart; so again
and again he definitively vows and swears to himself, that his son George
shall not live but die. Thus being resolute in his bloody purpose, he likewise
resolves to add policy to his malice against him, as thinking and hoping
thereby, with more facility to draw him to the lure and snare which (in his
diabolical invention) he has ordained for his destruction, he fills his head
with the fumes and honor of military actions, inflames his courage with the
generosity and dignity of a soldier, whereunto as also to travel into other
Countries, he knew that this his Son of himself was already ambitiously
inclined and affected. At other times he represents to him, to how many
damages and dangers Idleness is exposed and subject, and what a noble part
and ornament it is in young men to learn Virtues abroad, thereby to be the
more capable to know how to practice them at home, and with what renown and
glory their Ancestors have heretofore beaten and ruined the Dukes of
Burgundy, their professed enemies, and now made themselves and their country
famous to the greatest Princes and Potentates of Europe, especially to the
Kings of France and Spain, who these many years, and now likewise at present
(quoth. he) do equally court our affections and service, though not with the same
or like integrity. And these, and such treacherous Lectures, does Vasti still
read unto his son George, as often as he calls him into his company and
presence, until at last the fame and name of a soldier, and the honor of
travel, have so surprised his youthful affection, and seizd on his ambitious
resolutions, that at last he beseeches his Father to send him abroad, in some
martial service, or generous employment. But the Father being as cunning as
his son is rash and inconsiderate, suffers himself of purpose to be
earnestly and frequently importuned by him to that effect; the which he does:
When at last his Father promises to send him to Rome, to his Uncle Andrew
Vasti, who (he says) is a chief Captain of one of the Companies of this
present Pope Urban VIII. his Guard, who was an old man, very rich, and without
wife, child, or kinsman with him. George thanks his Father for this his
courtesy and honor, and importuneth him again and again to hasten this his
departure and journey to Rome to his Uncle; the which he then firmly
promises him: but yet the greatest difficulty hereof is, how he may obtain
his Wifes consent to this journey of her Son; who at first opposes it very
strongly and passionately, as knowing her Son to be her only child, her
right arm, a great part of her self, the delight and joy of her life, and the
prop and stay of her age. But the Father leaves his Son to draw and obtain
his Mothers consent, as politickely knowing and foreseeing, that the less
himself, and the more his Son importuned her, the sooner she would grant
it; the which indeed fell out as he expected. Only whereas the Son requested
to stay four years abroad, his Father gave him but three, and his Mother
would grant him but two, whereunto at last both Father and Son were enforced
to condescend; and now this cruel hearted Father provides his
courteous-natur'd son George a new Suit of apparel, a Horse, and Money, and
resolves to accompany and bring him as far as Turin in his journey; which
courtesy of his, his Wife and Son take most lovingly and thankefully. The
morn of George his departure comes, and because his Mother the precedent night
dreamt that her Son should dye in this journey, she was now exceeding
sorrowful to let him go and depart from her; but being again fortifyed and
rectifyed by the advice of her husband, and likewise vanquished by the
importunate requests and prayers of her son, she bedews his cheeks with her
tears, gives him much good counsel, some gold, and her blessing; and so they
take leave each of other, God putting apprehension into her heart, and the
Devil assurance into her husbands resolutions that she should never see her
son again: And indeed I write with grief, that we shall progress very
little farther in this History, before we see her dream verifyed, and her
apprehension confirmed. The manner thus:

For Vasti (being privately as resolute in his malice and revenge to his son,
as this his son is innocent in not deserving it of his Father) is so far
from bringing him to Turin, as he will not bring him as far as Geneva, but a
mile before he comes to Losanna (where he tells his son he would lie that
night) the night approaching, and in a long narrow Lane, where he saw that no
earthly eye could see him (being wholly deprived of the grace and fear of God,
and absolutely abandoned to Satan and Hell) as his son rides close before
him, he shoots him through the back with his Pistol, charged with a brace of
bullets, who immediately falling dead to the ground, he there descends his
horse, and (without any remorse or pity, as no Father, but rather as a Devil
incarnate) cuts off his nose, most lamentably scarres and mangles his face,
that he might not be known, and so takes him on his shoulders, and there
throws him into a deep ditch or precipice, as also the saddle and bridle of
his horse, and turning the horse to seek his fortune in the wide fields, he
(to provide for his safety) rides swiftly to Morges, and there very secretly
husheth himself up, pretending to be sick, and eight days being expired
(which was the prefixed time and day he gave his wife for his return) he by
a contrary Rode way of Roll, and Saint Claude, arrives home to Fribourg to
her, brings her word of the health of her son, and of the remembrance of his
duty to her, and that he left him well in Turin, expecting the benefit of good
company to travel up to Rome; whereat, harmless loving Mother, she weeps for
joy, and yet rejoices in weeping.

And now for some ten days after his return from acting this woeful and
deplorable tragedy on his son, he keeps a good correspondencie and decorum
with his wife Hester; but at the end thereof (soly forgetting his heart and
soul, his God and his conscience, his promises and oaths, and his atonement
and reconciliation) he again falls into the dangerous relapse of his former
old Vice; Whordome and Drunkenness; and yet counseled by a better Angel then
his own, he forbeares to beat her, as well seeing, and now knowing, that
thereby nothing redounded to him, but scandal and scorn from all his
Neighbors, Friends, and Kinsfolks. But now his lust is again so great, and
his desires so fervently lascivious toward Salyna, that in staying less then
eight weeks, he thinks he has stayed more then seven years from her; when
pretending another journey to his Wife, he rides over to Cleraux to her.
Salyna gives him many kisses for his welcome, and as many more for relating her
that he has sent away his son George to Rome, to reside and live there: for
she being his Fathers Strumpet, her guilty and sinful conscience made her
stand in extreme fear of him; but yet amidst her kisses and pleasures with
him (remembering the tenor and contents of his last Letter to her, and her
answer thereof to him) her thoughts are something touched with doubt, and her
mind assaulted and perplexed with fear, that the Father had played no fair
play with his Son, but that in regard of his inveterate malice to him for
beating her, he might have sent him to heaven, and not to Rome. To which
purpose, she feels and sounds him every way, but he is as constant to deny
it, as she curious to inquire after it. So she believing that he had assumed
no bloody thoughts against his Son, she is not yet so devoyd of grace, or
exempt of goodness, but she gives him this religious caveat for a Memento,
which she delivers to him accentively and passionatly, That if she knew he
had made away his Son by any untimely end, or unnatural accident, or that
he were any way accessory to any prodigious disaster which had befalne him,
she vowed to God, and swore unto him, that she would spit in his face,
disdain his company, and reject his affection and himself for ever; for that
she was most assured and confident that God (in his due time) would po^re down
vengeance and confusion on those whom the Devil had seduced and drawn to
imbrue their hearts and hands in innocent blood. But Vasti is past grace, and
therefore slightly passes over these virtuous speeches of his vicious Salyna,
with a denial and a kiss; and then again they fall to their mirth and
familiarity, and he stays there all that day, and lies with her the whole
night foll^wing; but still Salyna (resembling her self and her profession) is
very fingrative of his gold, and he as sottishly prodigal in giving it to her,
as she is covetous to crave and desire it of him: so (after he had glutted
himself with his beastly pleasures of Salyna) he the next day rides home to
his wife, who knowing where, and with whom he had been, and considering it to
be the first time of his new error, and his first relapse into his old one,
since their reconciliation, she says nothing to him to discontent him; but
yet thinks and fears the more: When retiring her self into her Garden (after
many bitter sighs and tears for these her immerited crosses and calamities)
she there grieves and repents her self for permitting her son George to go
to Rome, and a thousand thousand times wishes his return to assist and
comfort her: but her tears herein prove as vain, as her wishes are impossible
to be effected, although at present very needful and necessary for her.

For now Vasti her husband (to make her sorrows the more infinite, her hopes
the more desperate, and her afflictions the more remediless) falls again to
his old practice of beating her, notwithstanding all his late oaths and new
promises to the contrary; but he the more especially plays the Tyrant with her
in this kind, when he comes home to her from his cups and whores, for she
knows with grief, that he retains and entertaines more then Salyna, only
she is too sure that Salyna has his purse, his company, his affection, and his
heart at her command, far more then her self; she sends her sighs to
heaven, and her prayers to God, that (out of the profunditie of his mercy and
goodness) he would be pleased, either to amend her Husband or to end her
self; for griefs, sorrows, and afflictions are so heaped on her, and (like
the waves of the Sea) fall so fast one upon the neck of the other to her, that
she is weary of her life, and of her self. When on a time after he had
cruelly beaten her, torn off her head attire, given her a black eye and
swollen face, and desheveled and disparpled her hair about her ears and
shoulders (making God her Protector, and her Chamber her Sanctuary, exempting
her servants who came to assist and comfort her, and fast bolting her door)
she to her self very pensively and mournfully breathes forth these speeches.

O poor Hester, what sensible grief is it to thy heart, to think, and
matchless torments to thy mind, to see and remember, that whiles thou art true
to thy husband Vasti, he proves both ungrateful and false to thee, and that
he continually makes it his delight and glory to hate thee who art his dear
wife, purposely to bestow his time and his affection, yea to cast away his
estate and himself, on his lewd young strumpet Salyna: O were he more happy
and less guilty in that lascivious and beastly crime, I should then be less
miserable, and more patient and joyful in the remembrance thereof. O how
wretched is his estate and condition, and therefore how miserable is thine, in
that he wilfully forsakes God and his Church to follow adultery and
drunkenness, and abandoneth all piety and prayer, to shipwreck himself, and
(which is worse) his soul, upon all carnal pleasures and voluptuous
s^sualities; The which grieving to see, and almost drowning my self night and
day in my tears to understand, I have none but God to assist me in these my
bitter afflictions and miseries, and under God, none, but my hopeful Son
George, lest to comfort me in these my unparalelled calamities and
disconsolations. Therefore, O God, if ever thou heardest the prayers, or
beheldest the tears of a po^re miserable distressed woman, because I can
neither now see, nor futurely hope (...) any reformation, in the life and
actions of my debauched and vicious Husband, be (I beseech thee) so indulgent
and gracious to me, thy most unworthy Handmaid, that either shortly thou
return me my said Son from (...), or spe^oily take ^ee to thy self in
heaven; But yet O my blessed Savior and Redeemer, not my, but thy will be done
in all things.

She having thus (privately to her self) vented her sorrows, but not as yet
found the means, either how to remedy or appease them, because her husband is
no Changeling, but is still resolute in this ungrateful unkindnesseand cruelty
toward her, she is now resolved (though with infinite grief and reluctation)
to acquaint the Preacher of the parish, and some two of her husbands dearest
and nearest kinsfolks to speak with him again, and to acquaint them with his
pernicious relapse into all his old vices of drunkenness, whoredom, and
fighting, and to desire them to use all their possible power to divert him from
it, wherein her resolution hat^ this just ^cuse, that if they cannot work it,
none but God can; But all their c^e, a^ and ^eale cannot prevail with him; For
he with the filthy dog retur^ to (...), and with the brutish swine again to
wallow in the dirt, and (...) in the mire of his former vices and
voluptuousness. For now her husband Vasti is oftener at Cleraux with his
Salyna, then at home at Fribourg with his wife, who (as formerly we have
understood) still makes him pay dear for his pleasures, and as a subtle
rooking strumpet, emptieth his purse of his gold, as fast as he foolishly
fills it, he being not contented to waste his body, to shipwreck his
reputation; to cast away his time, but also to cast away his estate, and
himself on her; the which his virtuous wife cannot but observe with sorrow,
and remember with grief and vexation, but she sees it impossible for her how
to redress it: For she is not capable to dissemble her discontent to him so
privately, as he publickely makes known his cruelty to her, wherefore her
thoughts suggest her, and her judgment prompts her, to prove another
experiment and trial on him. To which end she tells him, that if he will not
henceforth abandon beating of her, forsake his old vices, and become a new man,
and a reformed husband, that then all delays set apart, she will speedily (by
some one of her nearest kins folks) send poast to Rome to his brother Captain
Andrew Vasti, that her Son George return home to her to Fribourg, the which
she is more then confident, upon the receipt of her first Letter, he will
speedily and joyfully perform.

Her husband Vasti is extremely galled with this speech, and netled with this
resolution of his wife Hester, because (wretched villain as he is) he (but too
well) knows he has already sent his Son to heaven in a bloody winding
sheet, and therefore both fears and knows, that by this his wifes sending
poast to Rome, his deplorable and damned fact will infallibly burst forth and
come to light, the which therefore to prevent, he (as bad, and cruel hearted
as the Devil himself) is execrably resolved to heap Ossa upon ^elion, to
add blood to blood, and murder to murder; and so now to poison the Mother
his wife, as he had lately pistolled his and her only Son to death. O
Hester, it had been a singular happiness for thee, that thou had not thus
threatened thy husband Vasti, to send to Rome forthy son George, but that thou
had either bin dumb when thou spakest it, or he deaf when he heard it: for
hereby thinking to preserve, thou have extremely endangered thy self, and
hoping to make thy Son thy refuge and champion, I fear with grief, and grieve
with fear, that thou have made thy self the ruin of thy self.

For Vasti is so strong with the Devil, and so weak with God, in this his
bloody design, to murder his wife Hester, as neither Grace or Nature,
Religion or God, the fear of his bodies tortures in this life, or of his
souls torments in that to come are able to divert him from it, he having no
other reason for this his damnable rage, nor no other cause for this his
infernal and hellish cruelty, but this trivial and yet pitiful poor one,
that his wife Hester is an eyesore to him, because his Salyna is so to her. A
wretched excuse, and execrable Apology, and no less execrable and wretched is
he that makes it. So he (turning his back to God, and his face and heart to
the Devil) provides himself of strong poison, and cunningly infusing it into
a musk Mellon, which he knew she loved well, and resolved to eat that day at
dinner, she greedily eating a great part of it, before night dies thereof.
When very subtlely he gives out to his servants and neighbors, that she died
of a surfeit, in then and there eating too much of the musk Mellon; and so all
of them confidently believe and report.

Thus we have seen with sorrow, and understood with grief, that this
execrable wretch Vasti has ^layed the part of a Devil, in poisoning his
virtuous and harmless wife Hester; and now we shall likewise see him play the
part of an Hy^rite to conceal it, as if it lay in his power to blindfold the
eyes of God, as ^ll, or as easily, as to hood wincke those of men from the
sight and knowledge thereof. He seems wonderful sorrowful for his wifes
death, dights himself and his servants all in black, provides a great dinner,
and performs her funeral with extraordinary solemnity. But notwithstanding
God looks on him with his eye of Justice, for both these his cruel and
inhuman barbarous murders of his son and wife, and therefore now (in his
Providence) resolves to punish him sharply and severely for the same; As mark
the sequel, and it will instantly inform us how.

Our debauched and bloody Vasti, immediately upon his wifes death and burial,
does without intermission haunt the house and company of his lascivious
strumpet Salyna at Cleraux, as if the enjoying of her sight, presence, and
self, were his chiefest delight, and most sovereign earthly felicity. He
spends a great part of his estate on her, and to satisfy her covetous and his
lustful desires, he is at last enforced to morgage and sell away all his
Lands. For as long as he had money, she was his, but when that failed him,
then she (as a right strumpet, acted a true part of her self) failed in her
accustomed kindness and familiarity toward him, and casts him off.

The judgments of God, and the decrees of Heaven, are as secret as sacred, and
as miraculous as just, which we shall see will now by degrees be apparently
made good and verified in this Monster of men, and Devil of Fathers and
Husbands, Vasti. For his mansion house, and all his utensills and movables in
Fribourg, are consumed with a sudden fire, proceeding from a flash of lightning
from heaven; as also all his granges of corn, and stacks of hay, and yet those
of all his neighbors round about him are untouched and safe. His corn also
which grows in the field brings forth little or no increase, his vines wither
and die away, all his horses are stolen from him, and most of his cattle,
sheep and goats, dye of a new and a strange disease; For being (as it were
mad) they wilfully and outragiously run themselves to death one against the
other; he is amazed at all these his (unexpected) wonderful losses and
crosses, and yet this vild Miscreant and inhumane Murderer, has his
conscience still so seared up, and his heart and soul so stupefied and
obdurated by the Devil, that he has neither the will, power, or grace to
look up to Heaven and God, and so to see and acknowledge, from whom and for
what all these afflictions and calamities befall him: He grows into great
poverty, and again to raise him and his fortunes, he now knows no other art
or means left him then to marry his strumpet Salyna, to whom he has given
great store of gold, and on whom (as we have formerly heard) he has spent the
greatest part of his lands and estate. He seeks her in marriage, but (hearing
of his great losses, and seeing of his extreme poverty) she will not derogate
from her self, but very ingratefully denies and disdaines him, and will not
henceforth permit him to enter into her house, much less to see or speak with
him: he is wonderful bitten and galled with this her unkind repulse, and then
is driven to such extreme wants and necessity, as he is enforced to sell and
pawn away, all those small trifles and things which are left him, thereby to
give himself a very poor maintenance. So (as a wretched Vagabond whom God had
justly abandoned for the enormity of his delicts and crimes) he now roames and
straggleth up and down the streets of Fribourg, and the country parishes and
houses thereabouts, without meat, money, or friends, and which is infinitely
worse then all, without God. But all these his calamities and disasters, are
but the Harbingers and Forerunners of greater miseries and punishments, which
are now suddenly and condignly prepared to surprise and befall him; whereof the
Christian Reader is religiously prayed to take deep notice, and full
observation; because the glory of God, and the Triumphs of his Revenge, in
these his Judgments, do most divinely appear, and shine forth to the whole
world therein.

Vasti on a time returning from Cleraux toward Fribourg (where he had been
to beg some money or meat of Salyna, either whereof she was so hard hearted
to deny him) the Providence and pleasure of God so ordained it, That in the
very same Meadow and place, and near the same time and ho^e, which formerly
he, and his Son George had their conference there (being very faint and
weary) he lay himself down to sleep there at the foot of a wild
Chesnut-tree; yea, he there slept so soundly, the Sun being very hot, that he
could not hear the great noise, and out cry which many people there a far
off made in the Meadow, for the taking of a furious mad Bull; This Bull I say,
no doubt but being sent from God, ran directly to our sleeping and snoring
Vasti, tossed him twice up in the air on his horns, tore his nose, and so
wonderfully mangled his face, that al who came to his assistance held him dead;
but at last they knowing him to be Vasti of Fribourg, and finding him faintly
to pant and breath for life against death, they take off his clothes and
apparel, and then apparently discover and see, that this mad Bull with his
horns has made too little holes in his belly, whereof at one of them a small
piece of his gut hangs out, they carry him to the next cottage, and laying him
down speechless, they and himself believe, he cannot live half an hour to
an end, and as yet he still remains speechless; but at last breathing a
little more, and well remembering himself, and seeing this his disasterous
accident, it pleased the Lord (in the infiniteness of his goodness) to open
the eyes of his faith, to mollify the fl^ntinesse of his heart, to reform the
deformity of his conscience, and to purge and cleanse the pollution of his
soul; for now he lays hold of Christ Jesus and his promises, forsakes the
Devil and his treacheries, and God now so ordains and disposes of him, that
for want of other witnesses (seeing himself on the brink and in the jaws of
death) he now becomes a witness against himself, and confesses before all
the whole company, That he it was, near Losanna, who murdered his own Son
George with a Pistol, and who since poisoned his own wife Hes^ with a musk
Mellon, for which two foul and inhumane facts of his, he said, he from his
heart and soul begged pardon and remission of God.

He^ upon this his confession, some of the company ride away to Fribourg, and
acquaint the Criminal Officers of justice thereof; who speedily send two
Chirurgions to dress his wounds, and four Sergeants to bring Vasti thither
alive, if possibly they can. They search his wounds, and although they find
them mortal, yet they believe he may live three or four days longer. So
they bring him to Fribourg in a Cart, and there he likewise confesses to the
Magistrates his two aforesaid bloody and cruel Murders, drawn thereunto as
he says, by the treacherous alluremements and temptations of the Devil: So
the same day, they, for satisfaction of these his unnatural crimes, do
condemn him to be hanged, and then his body to be burnt to ashes; which is
accordingly executed in Fribourg, in presence of a great concourse of people,
who came to see him take his last farewell of the world, but they thinking and
expecting that he would have made some religious speech at his death, he
therein deceived their hopes and desires: for he only prayed to himself
privately, and then repeating the Lords prayer, and the Creed, and recommending
his soul to God, and his body to Christian burial, without once mentioning or
naming his son George, his wife Hester, or his strumpet Salyna, he (lifting up
his eyes to heaven) was turned over; and although (being a tall and corpulent
man) he there brake the rope and fell, yet he was found stark dead on the
ground.

And thus was the wretched life, and deserved death of this bloody Monster of
Nature Vasti. May we therefore read this his History to Gods glory, and to our
own reformation.

The End of the Fifth Book.
Iunij xiijo. 1634.
PErlegi hunc Librum cui titulus (The 5th part of the Triumphs of Gods Revenge
against the crying and execrable sin of Murder) una cum Epistola Dedicatoria
ad illustriss Comitem de Bedford: qui quidem Liber continet Paginas circa 103.
in quibus nihil reperio sanae Doctrinae aut bonis Moribus contrarium, quo minus
cum utilitate publica imprimatur, sub eatamen condition ut si non intr a annum
proxime sequentem Typis mandetur haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVILIELMVS HAYVVOOD Capellan: domest: Archiep: Cant:

THE TRIUMPHS OF GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of
Murder.

Expressed In thirty several Tragical Histories, (digested into six Books)
which contain great variety of memorable Actidents, Historical, Moral, and
Divine.

Book VI.

Written by JOHN REYNOLDS.

VERTIAS FILIA TEMPORIS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for WILLIAM LEE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Turks Head, near the Mitre Tavern.
1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr JAMES STANLEY, KNIGHT OF the Bath, Lord STRANGE,
Son and Heir apparent to WILLIAM Earl of Derby, one of the most ancient
Knights of the Illustrious Order of the Garter.
MY LORD,
THe first time that I had the honor to see and know your Lo. was in France,
when you then began your travels, accompanied with your Noble and Generous
younger brother Sir Robert Stanley, (likewise Knight of the Bath) who now lives
with God: And (if my fancy deceive not my Judgment.) it is equally worthy
both of my thoughts, and of your Lordships memory, to see how propitious God
has since proved to your content, and remains to your felicity, in so highly
recompensing this your loss of a Noble Brother, with the rich gift of a
Virtuous Wife* your Right Illustrious Lady who is descended from no meaner
house than the famous Dukes of Tremouille by her Father, and the Victorious
Princes of Orange by her Mother, and who being transplanted from France, and
(in the Sacred Bonds of Marriage) here matched and incorporated to your
Lordship, has (by the Mercy and Providence of God) in a few yoares brought you
many sweet Olive Plants and Branches to perpetuate your ancient Name, and most
Honorable Family of the Stanleyes.

And what are all these benefits of Nature, and blessings of Grace, which God
has so opportunely sent, and graciously given you, in and by them, but such,
and so sublime and transcendent, that they are strong proofs of his Mercy and
Goodness toward you, and I doubt not but (in a pious resolution) your
Lordship reciprocally makes them the cause of your eternal gratitude and
thankfulness to his sacred Majesty for the same.

And indeed who can possibly have, or conceive a different thought, that
observes how your Lordship conducts all your actions by Reason, and not by
Passion: That as you esteem Virtue, to be the chiefest earthly Honor, so you
likewise value Piety and Godliness to be the best and most Sovereign
Virtues. That you are confident, that in Hearts and Souls which are well and
fairly endowed, Honor and Honesty should still be Twins, or inseparable
Companions and Individuals, because the former without the latter, is but as
fire of straw to the Sunshine; and to shut up this point, that your Honor
gives the chiefest functions and faculties of your Soul to God, and the second
to the prosperity and service of your Prince and Country, that being the true
marks of a Religious Christian, and this of an excellent Subject, and
Honorable Patriot.

And this (my good Lord) was the Original cause, and these are the prevailing
Motives and Reasons, why I trench so far upon your Lordships Greatness and
Goodness; in proffering up this my Sixth and last Book of Gods Revenge
against Murder; to your Noble Protection and Patronage; not that your Lordship
is the last in my Affection and Zeal, much less in my Respects and
Observance: But that I could give no satisfaction to my self, before I had
prefixed your Illustrious Name, to this my unpolished Work, and before I had
given a public testimony to the whole world in general, and more especially
to our little world England in particular, what place and power your Honorable
Birth and Virtues have deservedly taken up in my heart, and worthily purchased
in my most reserved and entire affection.

The Histories which this Book relates, are memorable and mournful, and to
give your Honor my opinion of them, they are as lamentable for the bloody
facts, as memorable for the sharp, yet just punishments inflicted for the same;
wherein Gods sacred justice and Revenge (with equal Truth and Glory) triumphed
ore their wretched Perpetrators. I have cast them in a low Region of language,
and therefore if they come short of your Lordships accurate Judgment, my
Presumption in this my Dedication to you, has no other hope of excuse or
pardon, then to fly to your Lordships innate Goodness, and to appeal to your
known and approved Generosity and Candor, as making it your Honorable
Ambition to cherish Virtue in all men, and to defend it against unjust
scandal, and malicious detraction.

Proceed my Lord, as you have fairly and fortunately began, in the happy
exercise and progress of Piety, Virtue and Honor; and as the hopes are now
ours, so may the happy fruits and effects thereof, infallibly still prove your
Lordships hereafter, until it have perfected and completed you to be a most
Illustrious Pattern of Goodness in this world, and a glorious Saint in that
to come, the which none shall pray to God for with more true Zeal, nor desire
with more unfaigned Affection, then

Your Honors humblest devoted Servant, JOHN REYNOLDS.

The Grounds and Contents of these Histories.
History XXVI. Imperia for the love she bears to young Morosini, seduceth and
causes him (with his two Consorts, Astonicus and Donato) to stifle to death
her old Husband Palmerius in his bed; Morosini misfortunately letting fall his
gloves in Palmerius his chamber that night which he did it; They are found by
Richardo the Nephew of Palmerius, who knows them to be Morosinies, and does
thereupon accuse him and his Aunt Imperia, for the Murder of his Uncle; So
they together with their accessaries Astonicus and Donato, are all four of
them apprehended and hanged for the same. History XXVII. Father Justinian a
Priest, and Adrian an Inne-keeper, poison De Laurier, who was lodged in his
house, and then bury him in his Orchard; where a month after a Wolse digges
him up, and devoures a great part of his body; which father Justinian and
Adrian understanding, they fly upon the same, but are afterward both of them
apprehended and hanged for it. History XXVIII. Hippolito murthereth Garcia in
the street by night, for the which he is hanged. Dominica and her Chambermaid
Denisa, poysoneth her husband Roderigo; Denisa afterward strangleth her own
newborn Babe, and throws it into a Pond, for the which she is hanged; On the
ladder she confessed that she was accessory, with her Lady Dominica in the
poisoning of her Husband Roderigo; for the which Dominica is apprehended, and
likewise hanged. History XXIX. Sanctifiore (upon promise of marriage) gets
Ursina with child, and then afterward very ingratefully and treacherously
rejects her, and marries Bertranna: Ursina being sensible of this her
disgrace, disguiseth herself in a Friars habit and with a case of Pistols kills
Sanctifiore as he is walking in the fields, for the which she is hanged.
History XXX. De Mora treacherously kills Palura in a Duel with two Pistols: His
Lady Bellinda with the aid of her Gentlman Usher Ferallo, poysoneth her Husband
De Mora, and afterward she marieth and murthereth her said Husband Ferallo in
his bed; so she is burnt alive for this her last murder, and her ashes
thrown into the air for the first.
GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXVI.
^mperia for the love she bears to young Morosini, seduceth and causes him
(with his two Consorts, Astonicus and Donato) to stifle to death her old
Husband Palmerius in his bed; Morosini misfortunately letting fall his gloves
in Palmerius his chamber that night which he did it; They are found by Richardo
the Nephew of Palmerius, who knows them to be Morosinies, and does thereupon
accuse him and his Aunt Imperia, for the Murder of his Uncle,; So they
together with their accessaries Astonicus and Donato, are all four of them
appehended and hanged for the same.

THose Intemperate and lascivious affections which savor more of Earth than
Heaven, are still attended on with shame and repentance, and many times
followed by misery and confusion: For God being our Maker by Creation, and our
Savior by Redemption, consequently should be of our loves and affections, and
the true and sole object, in whom only they should begin and terminate: For
Nature must be a handmaid, not a Mistress to Grace, because God (in his Divine
decree and creation of man) has made our bodies mortal, but our souls
immortal. And the like Antithesis which there is between Lust and Charity,
the same there is between sinful adultery, and sanctified marriage. But where
our youthful affections begin in whoredom, and end in murder, what can be
there expected for an issue, but ruin and desolation. Crimes no less than
these does this ensuing History report and relate: A History I confess, so
deplorable for the persons, their facts and punishments, that I had little
pleasure to pen it, and less joy to publish it; but that the truth and manner
thereof gave a contrary Law to my resolutions, in giving it a place among the
rest of my Histories; That the sight and knowledge of others harms, may the
more carefully and conscionably ^each us to avoid and prevent our own.

THe free Estates and Commonweals of Italy, more especially the famous
Seigniory of Venice, (which for wealth and power gives place to no other of
Christendom) holds it no degree of disparagement, but rather an happy and
honorable virtue in their Nobles and Gentlemen, to exercise the faculty and
p^ofession of Merchants, the which they generally perform in Turkey, and all
other parts of the Levant Seas* with as much profit as glory, to the admiration
of the whole world and the envy of their private and public enemies: Of which
number of Venetian Gentlemen, Seignior Angelo Morosini is one, a young m^n, of
some twenty and four years of age, descended of a Noble name and family, and
(if reports be true) from whence ours here in England derives their Original:
He is tall and slender of stature, of a lovely sanguine complexion, a bright
Chestnut-coloured hair, but as yet adorned with a small apparition of a beard:
He is active of body, of a sweet carriage, and nimble wit, and a most pleasing
and graceful speech; and he is not so young, but he has already made two
several voyages to Constantinople and Alexandria, in both which he resided
some five or six years, and through his wisdom and industry won some
wealth, but more reputation and fame, in so much as his deportments and hopes,
to the eye and judgment of the world, promises him a fortune, equal, if not
exceeding his blood and extraction. Holding it therefore rather a shame than a
glory as yet to marry, or which is a thousand times worse, to pass his time
vainly and lasciviously at home among the Ladies and Courtisans of Venice, upon
whom (by the way of a premonition and precaution) he saw so many deboshed young
Gallants to cast away their Estates and themselves, he assumes his former
ambition to travel, and so undertakes a third voyage t^ Constantinople: He
embarkes himself upon a good ship, named the Little Saint Mark of Venice, and
in company of Seignior Astonichus, and Seignior Philippo Donato, likewise two
young Gentlemen, Mearchants of Venice of his dear and intimate acquaintance
(with a pleasant gale and merry wind, they set sail from Malanoca, the Port of
that City, and so direct and shape away their course for the Islands of Corfu
and Zant, where they are to stop, and take in some commodities, and from thence
through the Archipelagus, by Candy and Cyprus, to the Port (...) the Great
Seignior. But as men propose, and God disposes of all terrestrial a^ons and
accidents; so they are overtaken by a storm, and with contrary winds put into
the Harbor and City of Ancona, a rich* populous and strong City which belongs
to the Pope, and which is the Capital of that Province of the Mar^ (...), from
whence it assumes and takes its denomination, and wherein there are well near
three thousand Jews still resident, who pay a great yearly Revenue to his
Holiness. The wind being as yet contrary for our three Venetian Gallants, and
they knowing that our Lady of Loretto (the greatest and most famous Pilgrimage
of the Christian world) was but fifteen small miles off in the Country,
whereas yet they had never either of them been, they in mere devotion ride
thither, their ship now being fast anchored and mored in the Peer of Ancona,
which stands on the Christian side, upon the Adriatique Sea, vulgarly termed
the gulf of Venice.

And here it is neither my purpose or desire to write much, either of the
pretended piety of this holy Chapel of Loretto, which the Romanists say was
the very Chamber wherein the Virgin Mary brought up her Son, our Savior
Jesus Christ; or of her Picture which they likewise allege was drawn by the
hand and pensill of the Apostle Saint Luke, and both the one and the other, as
they affirm miraculously brought over the Seas from Palestine by Angels, and
first placed by them on the Hills of Recagnati (three little miles thence) and
long since by the said Angels translated and placed here in this small Town of
Loretto. But as for my self, this legend is to weak to pass current with my
faith, much less to esteem it as an Article of my Creed. Only this I will
confess and say. That as it was devotion not curiosity which carried our
Morisini, Astonicus and Donato thither: so it was my curiosity not my Devotion
which made me to take the sight thereof in my Travells. Where in the rich and
sumptuous Quire of a stately Cathedral Church, I saw this little old Brick
Chamber (now termed the Holy Chapel, very richly adorned with great variety
of massy Gold and Silver Lamps, and this Picture of the blessed Virgin in a
Shrine of Silver, most richly decked with Chains and Robes, imbroidered with
Gold and Silver, and set with precious Stones of inestimable value, which (to
express the truth in one word) bred much admiration in my thoughts, but no
veneration at all in my heart. So I leave Loretto, and return again to our
History, which was the only Relic that I brought thence.

The two first days, our three Venetian Gallants visit this holy Chapel with
much solemnity and devotion, where not to Jesus the Son, but to Marie the
Mother they offer up their prayers, and pay their vows of thankfulness for
their deliverance from the late storm which put them and their Ship in safety
at Ancona. But the third day there betides an unexpected accident to Morisini,
which will administer matter and life to this History. He leaves his two
friends and companions in bed, and steals away to the holy Chapel, where
being on his knees to his devotion, he near to him, sees a sweet young
Gentlewoman likewise on her knees at her devotion and orisons very rich in
apparel, but incomparably fair and beautiful. He curiously marks her Roseat
Lilly Cheeks, her piercing Eye, the Amber Tresses of her Hair, her Alablaster
Neck and Paps, and her straight and slender wast, all which made her to be
the Pride and Glory of Nature; At whose sight and contemplation, his mind is
so suddenly inflamed with affection to her, that he who heretofore could not
possibly be drawn to love any Gentlewoman, or Maiden, now despite of
himself, (and of his contrary inclination and resolution) he at first sight
is enforced to love her and only her. For the more he sees her, the more he
affects her, which engendereth such strange motions, and sudden passions in
his heart that the sweetness of this sweet object, enforced his eyes
incessantly to gaze on her both with affection and admiration. Our Morosini
would feign have boarded and saluted her there, but that he would not make
Heaven so much stoop to Earth, nor profane the holiness of his affection and
of this place with such impiety. But at last seeing her to rise from her
prayers, and so to depart the Chapel, he could not, he would not so leave
her, nor forsake the benefit of this sweet opportunity to make himself known
to her; When withdrawing his Devotion from the old Lady of Loretto to give it
to this his young Lady (and pretended Mistress) in Loretto, he trippes away
after her, into the body of the Church where seeing her only attended, by a
well clad Boy and her young waiting Gentlewoman, (after salutes on both sides
performed,) he there profereth her his service in these general Terms.

Moros. I know not sweet young Lady, whether I may term my self happy or
unfortunate, in being this morning honored with the sight of so beautiful a
Nymph, and Virgin as your self, because in thinking to gain my soul, I fear
I have lost my heart in the amorous ecstasies of that delitious Object and
Contemplation; therefore I beseech you think it not strange, that having
received my wound from your Beauty, I fly to your Courtesy for my cure and
remedy thereof; and that seeing you so weakly guarded, I presume to request
the favor of you that you will please to accept of my Company to reconduct you
to your home.

This young Lady, seeing her self so much gazed on by this unknown Gentleman
in the holy Chapel, and now so courteously saluted by him in the Church, she
could not refrain from dying her Lilly Cheeks with a Vermillian blush, when
having too much beauty to be too unkind, and yet too much coyness and
modesty at first to prove too courteous to him, she (brooking her name well)
returns him this answer.

Imp. Sir you being so happy to have given up your Soul this morning in your
devotion to the blessed Lady of this place, I do not a little wonder, that you
so soon profane it, by endevoring to make me believe, that you have lost
your heart in the contemplation of so poor, and so unworthie a beauty as
mine; For herein as you profane your zeal to her, so do you your affection
to me, since that should be more sacred, and this not so much feigned or
hypocritical. But such wounds still carry their cures with them, and therefore
as my beauty was not capable to occasion the one, so shall not my courtesy be
guilty in granting the other: If my weak guard be not strong enough to
conduct me to my home, my Innocence and Chastity are, as also to defend me
from the snares and lures of those Gentlemen, whose best Virtue consists more
in their tongues then their souls, and more in their complements then their
actions; Of which number fearing and taking you to be one, and my Fathers house
being so nigh, I shall not want your company, because as I deserve so I desire
it not, and therefore I will leave you, and yet not without leaving my thanks
with you, for this your proffered favor, and unexpected courtesy.

Although Morosini could not refrain from smiling at this her sharp and
witty answer, yet he seeing his complement retorted, and his courtesy
returned with a refusal, he could not yet refrain from biting his Lip
thereat. But again considering her to be exceeding fair and virtuous, and
hoping withal that her father might likewise prove rich, he would not
disgrace his breeding nor make himself a Novice in Love to be put off with
this her first repulse, but again sounds her in these terms.

Moros. My devotion to the Mother of our Savior does not profane but I hope
bless and sanctify my affection to you and therefore if it be not the
custom of the young Ladies and Gentlewomen of Loretto to use strangers with
this discourtesie, I cannot believe that you would purposly thus exercise your
wit in my patience, by inflicting on me this your unjust refusal. As for your
feigned shows of Hypocrisy: I am as innocent of them as you suspect and
term me guilty and have no more snares or lures in proferring you my
affection and service, than that which your pure beauty and chaste virtues give
me. Neither am I of the number of those Gentlemen, whom you please to traduce
and disparage because their hearts and tongues agree not, or for that their
actions prove not their speeches, and complements real; because I as much
disdain as you condemn them; Therefore if you cannot give me the courtesy, I
pray at least lend me the favor that I may wait on you to your Fathers house;
whom I shall ever be ready to serve with as much humility for your sake, as
to cherish and obey your self with affection for mine own.

This answer of Morosini makes this young Gentlewoman (whose name he and we
shall anon know) as sweetly calm, as right now she was unkindly passionate,
so that looking steadfastly on him, and composing her countenance rather to
smiles than frowns, she rejoynes with him thus.

Imp. It is the custom of the Ladies and Gentlewoman of Loretto, to use
Strangers rather with too much respect than too little favor, especially those
Gent. who savor more of honor than vanity. If therefore I have any way wronged
mine own judgment, in suspecting or not acknowledging your merits, I know I am
yet as worthy of your excuse as of your reprehension. And because I understand
by you that you are a stranger to this place though not to this Country, as
also that you seem to be so importunatly desirous and willing to conduct me to
my Fathers house; I will therefore give a contrary Law to my own will, and
now make civillitie dispense with my discretion by accepting of this your kind
proffer, and you shall not accompany me thither to him, with so much respect
and zeal as I will you with observance and thanks.

Which kind speech she had no sooner delivered and Morosini received, but he
again closed with her thus:

Moros. Sweet Lady, this courtesy of yours seconding your beauty, shall
eternally oblige me to your service; and in requital thereof, I will ever
esteem it my best happiness to receive your Fathers commands, and my chiefest
felicity and glory to execute yours: When reciprocally exchanging salutes, he
takes her by the hand and arm, and very gracefully conducts her to her Fathers
house, not far off from this sumptuous Church, and by the wayth there (among
other speeches and complements he gathers from herthat her Fathers name is
Signior Hierome Bondino, and hers Donna Imperia his only Daughter. Wherein he
for the former fame of his wealth and the present sight of her Beauty does
both delight and glory, as dreaming of a future felicity which he shall enjoy
in her sight and company; whereof for the time present he has far more
reason to flatter than to assure himself.

Now we must here understand that this Seignior Bondino her Father, is a
Gentleman of an ancient house and noble descent; and of a very great estate
both in lands and means, and withal he was exceeding covetous, as glorying
more in his wealth than in his generositie, and more in his fair and
beautiful Daughter Imperia, then in any other of his Children. Here Morisini
brings Imperia home, and she presents him and his courtesy to her Father, who
receives him respectfully and kindly thanks him for this his observance and
honor to his daughter: who led by the luster of her eyes and the delicacie of
her beauty, was so extremely inflamed with affection toward her, as at that
very instant he proclaimed himself her Servant, and she the Lady Regent of
his heart and desires, and then it was that he first acquainted her with his
name and quality, with his intended voyage to Constantinople, but chiefly with
his constant desire and resolution to seek her in marriage both of her self
and her father. Wherefore to contract this History into a narrow Volumne, I
will pass over his often courtings and visits of her, as also those sweet
speeches, and amorous discourses and conferences which past between them
during the space of three weeks; wherein the wind proving contrary to his
voyage, proved therefore propitious to this his suit and affection. In which
time he proved himself so expert a Scholar (or rather a Master) in the Art
of Love that he exchanged hearts with her, obtained her affection and consent
to be his Wife upon his first return from Constantinople, but yet it was
wholly impossible either for he or her to draw her fathers consent hereunto,
although many times he sought it of him with prayers, and she with tears.
For he making wealth to be the very image and idol of his devotion, and
gathering that Morosini's birth far exceeded his estate and means, as also
that in his opinion, that his estate was yet far greater than his capacity
or judgment, he would never hearken to him, much less give way that he
should be his Son in Law: but with much obstinacy and resolution, vowed
that he would first rather see his Daughter married to her grave than to him,
the which froward and harsh resolution of his, makes our two lovers exceedingly
to grieve and lament thereat. But how to remedy it they know not. Morosini now
acquaints his two consorts Astonicus and Don^to with his affection to Imperia,
and brings them the next morning to see her, who highly commend his choice, and
extol her beauty and virtues to the skies; They in Morosini's behalf deal
effectually with Bondino to draw his consent to this match, mount his praises
and merits as high as Heaven, and in a word they leave no friendly office, or
reasons unatempted to persuade and induce him hereunto, but they speak either
to the wind, or to a deaf man; for his will is his Law, and therefore they
find it a work, not only of extreme difficulty but of mere impossibility
to effect it; for neither they nor Morosini, can so much pray and exhort
Bondini to this match, as he with sharp words and bitter threats seeks to
divert his Daughter from it; which pierces and galleth these two Lovers to
their very souls. For by this time their affections and hearts are so
strongly and firmly united, that Imperia loves Morosini a thousand times
deerer than her own life, and he her no less. So when they think of their
separation and departure each from other, the very conceit and thought there
of draws even drops of blood from their hearts, and an Ocean of tears from
their eyes. But because they are more amorous then superstitious in their
devotion and affection each to other and that (in their thoughts and desires)
they sacrifice more to the Altars of Venus then to that of the Virgin Marie.
Therefore Fortune more envying then pitying them, and therefore resolving to
separate their bodies as far assunder, as their hearts are nearly linked and
combined together: the wind comes fair, and the Master of their Ship sends
speedily from Ancona to them to Loretto to come away, for that he is resolute
to omit no time but with all expedition to weigh Anchor, and set sail for
Corfu.

Morosini receives this news with infinite sorrow, and Imperia with extreme
grief and amazement, so as if grace had not prevailed with nature, and her
obedience to her Father vanquished and given a law to her affection toward
Morosini, she could then and there have found in her heart to have left Italy,
and to accompanied him in his voyage to Turkey and Constantinople, so sweet was
his sight and presence, and so bitter was the very thought of his abscence to
her heart and mind; Here Morosini comes again with his hat in his hand and
Imperia on her knees with tears to her father, that he will grant they may
contract themselves each to other before his departure, but he is dear to his
requests, and inexorable to her tears and prayers. For he vows he cannot,
and swears he will not consent thereunto; And therefore here the Reader must
conceive, for it is impossible for me to express the thousand part of the
sighs which he, and the tears which she expends at this their sorrowful
departure in so much as I cannot truly define whether he then gave her more
kisses, or she him tears. So here she vows to remain unmarried till his
return, and he both promises and swears, that he will return within one
year to her and marry her, the which the more authenti^ally to seal and
confirm he gives her a rich Emerauld ring from his finger, and she him a
fair carkamet of Orient Pearl from her neck, with whom the great drops of
her tears trickling down her vermillion cheeks seemed to have some perfect
sympathy and resemblance; Of which interchangeable and mutual contract
Astonicus and Donato are joyful witnesses, who seek to add comfort and
consolation to these her unspeakeable sorrows, and unparalleld afflictions for
this their separation; whiles Imperia in the mean time at the very thought
and consideration hereof, (she gazing on her Morosini) seems to burst her
heart with sighing, and to drown the Roses and Lillies of her beauty with the
showers and rivulets of her tears. So Morosini being again and again called
away by Astonicus and Donato, he then takes leave of Bondino, and then of his
dear and sweet Daughter Imperia in whose heart and breast he imparadiseth all
his most religious prayers, and treasureth up all his amarous desires and
wishes, and from thence (with his two faithful friends and companions takes
horse for Ancona, where as soon as they come their long boat is a shore and
takes them in, when the Wind continuing still exceeding fair, they presently
for Corfu and Constanti ople. Where we will leave them floating on the Seas,
exposed to the favor and mercy of the winds, and according to the order of
our History come we again to speak of Bondino, and of his sweet and fair
daughter Imperia, to see what matter they will administer us, and what Actions
and Accidents they will produce.

Whiles our fair Imperia day and night weeps and sighs for the absence of
her dearest and second self Morosini, and with her eyes and hands elected to
Heaven continually prays for his pr^speritie and return, her old Father
Bondino assumes a direct contrary course and resolution; for within two or
three months of Morisini's departure, he makes it his greatest care and
ambition to provide another husband for this his Daughter. He is not ignorant
of her tears and pensiveness for his absence, and knows full well, that her
solitary walks and palle thin cheeks, looks still constantly to him and
never from him. But he is resolute that his old covetousness shall prevent
and deceive this her young affection, and that to work on the advantage of
Morosini's absence, his best and shortest course is to heave him out of her
heart and mind, and contrariwise to propound and place another Husband in his
stead. To which end his said daughters beauty and his own wealth having
already procured her two or three other Suitors, who earnestly seek her in
marriage, he likes none of them so well, as old Seignior Palmerius a rich
Merchant of Ancona, aged of at least sixty years; whereas his fair Daughter
Imperia was not above twenty four, who was of so deformed and decrepit a
personage and constitution, that he seemed but as a withered January to this
fresh Lady May, and his age but a frozen Winter to the fragrant flourishing
Summer of her youth and beauty. But this old dotard Palmerius (who is every
way fitter for his own grave than for Imperia's bed) is so taken with the
daintiness of her personage, as he hopes that her youth and her fathers age
will stoop and strike sail to his wealth, and therefore he tricks and
prides himself up both in his apparel and beard, as if Love had taken away
much of his Age, now purposly to add it to his vanity and indiscretion, so he
comes to Bondino's house at Loretto, and seeks this his fair daughter in
marriage, where the consideration of his great estate and wealth act such
wonders with her fathers heart and resolution, that her father and he have
already swapt a bargain that he, and none but he shall marry his daughter,
before as yet he have the happiness to see her. But at last her father brings
her to him, charge her with his commands to dispose her self to affect and
marry him, and speaks to her not only in the language of a father, but of a
King, for such is his pleasure. These speeches of her father, and the sight of
this her old lover yet new suitor Palmerius, does much amaze and terrify his
young Daughter Imperia: so she receives and hears those with infinite
affliction and sorrow, and him with much contempt and disdain; For she rejects
his suteand himself, and boldly tells both her father and him, that Morosini
is too deeply lodged in her heart, for any other of the world to have entrance
or admittance, and therefore (with sighs and tears) casts her self at her
fathers feet, and prays him that he will not force her to marry Signior
Palmerius whom she affirms she cannot possibly affect; much less obey. But
her father is resolute to have it so, and therefore (passing over all other
respects and considerations) he adds threats, to his commands, and
vehemently charge her again and again to consent thereto. But her absent
Morosini is still so present in her heart and mind, and so fresh and pleasing
to her eye and memory, that she cannot, she will not forget him. So that for
this time her father can no more enforce her to speak with Palmerius, or draw
her to see him, and thus she puts him off for his first coming to Loretto to
her. Imperia being now infinitely glad to have thus given her father the foil,
and old Palmerius the repulse, she raises a thousand new Trophies of joy, and
victories of delight in her heart for the same, as if that outrageous storm
and tempest (so contrary and displeasing to her heart) had received end almost
as soon as beginning. Thus now ruminating on nothing less then on Palmerius,
nor on nothing more than on her sweet and dear Morosini, (to whom in his
absence she sacrifices all the flames of her heart, and all the vows,
desires and wishes of her soul) she passes away her time in perpetual
praying for his return, for the which she leaves not the Lady, no nor any
other Saint of Loretto unadored, or unprayed to. But contrary to her hopes and
desires herein, this her old suitor Palmerius, (having wholly lost the soliditie
of his judgment in the excellency of her beauty) he still keeps good
correspondence, and curious intelligence with her father, and continually his
heart runs as much on her youth as her fathers covetousness does on his
wealth and gold; so within two months he returns again to Loretto, where he
is received with as much joy of Bondino, as with extreme discontent and sorrow
of his Daughter Imperia, who now poor soul can receive no peace nor truce
from either of them, but they incessantly haunt her as her ghosts, and fail
not day and night to importune her for the consummation of this contract and
marriage, but her heart is so close united and wedded to Morosini, that it is
as yet impossible for either, or both of them to divorce or withdraw her from
him. Palmerius thinks to gain her by ric^ gifts and presents, but she
refuses them all for the sake of the giver, and her father now tempts her with
sweet speeches and persuasions, and then again, terrifies her with bitter
commands and threats, hoping thereby in the end to make her flexible to his
desires and wishes; But his daughter Imperia notwithstanding all this (with a
constancy worthy of her beauty, and every way equal to her self) resolves
to frustrate the hopes of the first, to annihilate and make vain the
expectation of the second, and so to deceive the desires and wishes of them
both, and to keep her heart wholly for Morosini as she has formerly promised
and obliged her self to do.

But although Palmerius were heretofore the first time so easily beaten off
with Imperias refusal, he will not be so the second, and therefore his heart
and mind telling him that the sweetness of her youth, and the delicacy of her
beauty deserve a stronger, and longer siege of his affection. He (by the free
advise and consent of her Father) resolves to stay and burn all that Summer in
Loretto, hoping that time would change her resolutions and make that feasible
in his Daughters affection, which now in a manner seemed to be impossible.
Thus if Palmerius use his best endeavors to bear and conquer Imperia one way,
no less does her Father another way, for the first gives her a world of sugared
words and promises, and the second of sharp and bitter threats to effect it;
Poor Imperia seeing her self thus straightly and narrowly begirt on both
sides, she has again recourse to her sighs and tears, the only weapons
left her in the absence of her Morosini to defend her affection and constancy
against the lust of Palmerius, and the power and tyrranny of her father
Bondino. A thousand times a day she wishes that Constantinople were Loretto,
or Loretto Constantinople, and as often prays that either she were in
Morosini's arms, or he here in hers. But Palmerius being as obstinate as her
father was resolute and furious in this suit and motion toward her, she shuts
her self up in her Chamber, where seeming to drown her self in her tears,
she consults with her affection, how she should bear her self in a matter
of this weight and importance, and what invention she should find out and
practice, to abandon Palmerius, and to call home her Morisini to marry her,
then which under Heaven she desired nothing more, or to write truer nothing
else. So at last she resolves to send one purposely to Constantinople to
hasten his return (which now wanted but a little of his prefixed time of a
year) when making choice of a dear friend of his of Ancona named Seignior
Mercario, and furnishing him with gold for so long a journey, as to sail from
Brundisium, to Ragusa, and so from thence by poast to Constantinople, she takes
pen and paper, and thereon (as much with tears as incke) traceth her Morosini
these lines where with she dispatcheth him away.

IMPERIA to MOROSINI.
I Should betray my affection to thee, and consequently make my self unworthy
of thine, if by this my letter (which I purposely send thee by thy friend
Seignior Mercario) I did not now acquaint thee, with how much impatiencie and
sorrow my self, and with how much joy my Father brooks thy long absence. Thou
know in what a sweet, and strict sympathy of Love, our hearts are united.
So as measuring Morosini by Imperia, I am confident that all those Seas
between Ancona and Constantinople are not capable to wash away the remembrance
thereof either from thy heart or my soul. And yet holding it a part both of my
duty and of my self, I am enforced to command my pen to relate then, the my
F^ther Bondino begins to exercise a point not only of his will, but of his
power, ye^ I may justly say of his ty^ie over (...), to persuade me to leave my
young Morosini (...) marry his old Palmerius. In which regard and
consideration, if my poor beauty o^ ^rit (...) ^ft any impress^ in thy breast
or memory, I now most heartily pr^ thee to ^ue Turkey for Italy, (...) C^ople
for Loretto, and to make me as happy in (...) thy sight and presence, as I am
miserable without it. And when our God, and (...) shall permit this my innocent
and sorrowful letter to fall into thy (...), think, ye^ judge with thy self,
what an ingratitude, yea what a crime it will be for thee (...) to bring me
thy self, but to send me any excuse whatsoever to the contrary. Farewell my
other self, thy sweet self, and may God and his Angels ever prove propiti^
thy Desires, and my Wishes.

IMPERIA.


Mercario (in three weeks time) arrives at Constantinople, and finds out his
friend Morosini, to whom he delivers his Mistress Imperias letter; the which
he first kissing, presently peruseth it, and very passionatly both rejoices
and grieves thereat: So Morosini very kindly feasts his friend Mercario there
some eight days, and then returns him home with an answer, which in less
than a months time he delivers into Imperias own hands in Loretto, who is
extremely glad thereof, and then beautifying her snow white cheeks, with some
crimson blushes, she hies to her closet and breaking up hastily the seals
thereof, finds it traced and charged with this message

MOROSINI to IM^IA.
THy health and constancy makes me as joyful in the receipt of thy Letter, as
thy Father Bondino his disrespect to me and love to Palmerius makes me
sorrowful, for so dear and tender is the true effection of my Imperia to her
Morosini, and the simpathy of our hearts so sweetly and sacredly united, that
for my part not only those small rivers of the Mediteraneum and Adriatique Sea
between Constantinople and Ancona, but that of the vast Ocean is incapable to
wash off the least sense or memory thereof, But as in the actions and accidents
of hu^ane life, reputation and profit, deserve some times to be entermixed
with pleasure, because the sweetness thereof is still made sweete^ by its
subsistence and permanency. So by the Seigniory of Venice, and by Landy their
Ambassador resident here in Constantinople, (contrary to my expectation or
meritt) I am now made Consul of Aleppo. I cannot therefore so soon leave
Turkey for Italy which I infinitely desire, nor in that consideration so soon
embrace and kiss my fair and dear Imperia, which above all the Crowns and
Scepters of the world I chiefly love and long for; but what this year cannot
perform the next shall, and then (all delays and excuses set apart) I will
bring thee thy Morosini with as much true joy as he transported himself from
thee with bitter tears and unfeigned sorrows, in the mean time my hopes and
heart tell me, that thy affection to me shall surmount thy Fathers tyranny to
thy self, and that thy bea^y and meritt are so incomparably resplendent, that
though Palmerius ^ee the fail, yet Morisini shall live and dye the Diamond of
thy love and the Love of thy Heart, as God i^ of thy Soul. O then my dear and
sweet Imperia, repute it (...) ingratitude much less a o^ime in me to send
thee this letter of excuse in steed of bringing thee my self, for I sp^ke it
in presence of God and his Angels, that as thou art my other half so I am
wholly thine, and that thou can not be the thousand part so sorrowful a^ I
am ^serable in this our short yet too long sequest^tion. ^well, (...) the only
Sa^ of my heart, and Goddess of my affections, and assure thy self that no
mortal man whatsoever is, or can be so much thy faithful Servant and Slave,
as

MOROSINI.


Our Imperia kisseth this Letter a thousand times for her Morisini's sake who
wrote and sent it her, and again as often weeps to see, that he loved Honor
and profit better then her self, and Turkey better than Italy, so whereas she
formerly hoped, now she begins to despair of his speedy return, and esteems
herself as miserable without him, as she thought to have been happy with
him. She reads over his Letter again and again, and then weeps as fast as
she reads, at the very perusal and consideration thereof; she would feign
draw comfort from any part or branch of it, but then his intended stay affords
her nothing but disconsolation and sorrow in stead thereof. She blames her
own misfortune, as much as his unkindnesse, and then again imputes this
impatiencie of hers, more to her fathers cruelty, than to Morosini's
discourtesie; she loves him as much as she hates Palmerius, and hates her
self because Morosini will not love her more, and Palmerius less. But
Morosini is so firmly seated and enthronized in her heart that she is
constantly resolved to stay his return, and rather to die his victim and martyr
than to live Palmerius his wife. And here her affection acts a great part in
passion, as this passion does in Love, she cannot refrain from enquiring of
Mercario how Morisini lives, and how he looks, who performs the part of a
friend, to his friend and tells her that he lives in great pomp and
reputation, and is the properest and bravest young Gallant either of Venice or
Ital^ which he saw in Constantinople, at the report whereof, she could not
refrain from blushing and smiling as if her delight and joy thereof were such,
as she could not receive or hear it, without these public expressions and
testimonies of her private zeal and interior affection to him; But all this
notwithstanding, wheresoever she goes or turns her self, her Father as her
shadow, and Palmerius as her spirit, are never from her, but still follow her
in all times and places without intermission. It is a wonder to see and
consider their obstinacy to make it a match, and her resolution and refusal
against it, as if they were wholly composed and made of commands and she of
denialls. In which interchangeable comportment, and different carriage of
theirs. We must allow six months time more past and slidden away, where in
despite of Palmerius his importunities and her fathers power she still
remains inflexible to them constant to her Morosini, and true to her promise.
But at last this old lustful Lover Palmerius (who was fitter to kiss an image
in the Church, then so sweet and fair a young Lady as Imperia in her bed)
seeing that he had consumed and spent so long time in vain by courting her,
and that she slighted him and his suit as much if not more now, than when he
first meant and intended it to her, he bethinkes himself of a new po^icy and
proposition to gain her, which love can not so much excuse, as discretion
justly condemn in him; He goes t^ her father Bondino, and proffers him that
if his daughter will become his wife, that he will infeoffe, and endow her with
the one half of his lands, and give all the rest of his Estate and wealth into
his hands and custody, for him to purchase her more. Which great and unexpected
proffer of his does solely and fully weigh down her covetous father to
Palmerius his will and desire, as he constantly tells him; that in lieu of
this his great affection and bounty to his daughter: he will speedily use all
his power and authority with her full^ to dispose her to a^ect and content him;
To which end Bondino goes to his daughter Imperia, acquaints her with this
great gift, and voluntary proffer of Palmerius to her if she will marry him.
He lies before her how infinitely it will import his content, and her own good
and reputation, and that few Gentlewoman of Loretto, or Ladies of the whole
Marca of Anconitana, do enjoy such rich Fortunes, that his wisdom and wealth
is far to be preferred to the vanity and prodigallity of Morosini, and that
the first will assuredly bring her much content and prosperity, but the second
nothing else but poverty, ruin and misery, and therefore he most
importunately conjures and commands her to cut and cast off all delays and so
forthwith to dispose her self to love and marry Palmerius, or else he vows
for ever to renounce her for his Daughter, and no more to acknowledge him self
for her Father. A cruelty which (in my opinion and judgment) ought to be
admired with pity and pitied with admiration, and not to serve for a
precedent and Example to other Parents, because this of Bondino's was grounded
on far more passion than reason, and covetousness than virtue; and which
Nature has all the reasons of the world rather than to term tyranny then
Providence or fatherly affection in him.

Our Imperia is, as it were, struck dead with grief and sorrow, at the
thunderbolt of these her Fathers cruel speeches toward her, so that she
cannot speak, nor yet weep for sighing and sobbing but at last encouraged by
her own Virtue, as much as she was daunted and dismayed by her fathers
severitie and cruelty toward her, she (casting her self at his feet) with
a trembling heart and faltering voice, returns her heart and mind to him in
these terms.

Honored Sir, although my afflictions and sorrows are such, and so infinite
that I am far more capable to weep and sigh, then to breathe or speak them
forth to you, yet I hold it my duty, not my disobedience to acquaint you, that
because marriages are first made in heaven, before contracted or consummated in
Earth, therefore being so happy first to love Morosini before I was so
unfortunate as to see Seignior Palmerius, I hope it is the pleasure of God,
that he has ordained the first to be my Husband, and consequently my self
never to be Wife to the second; I am proud in nothing but in my humility and
obedience and therein I hope I shall still both triumph and glory, and yet I
far more undervallew Palmerius wealth than you do Morosini's virtues. If
then you will not for my sake, I humbly beseech you for my Mothers sake or
which is more, for Gods sake, to make me Wife to Morosini and not to
Palmerius, because my heart and mind tells me, that I shall be as happy in the
company of the one, as miserable in that of the other. In granting me which
just desired favor and courtesy, my sovle shall become pledge and caution for
my heart, and my heart for my tongue, that you shall have no true cause, either
to renounce me for your daughter, or to deny your self for my Father; And to
conclude this my s^rrowfull and humble speech, it is impossible for you to
wrong me, but you must and will extremely wrong your self, by attempting and
resolving to enforce me to the contrary; But if yet you will not be sensible
hereof, then I invoke God to be a just witness, and Judge between us, of
your cruelty toward me, and of my can did innocence toward you, and my
betrothed spouse Morosini.

Imperia had no sooner (with sights and tears) delivered this her speech to
her father on her knees, but (as if he had lightning in his eyes, and thunder
in his tongue) he suddenly rusheth forth her company, when, more to displease
her than to please himself, he looking back on her, gives her this sharp
answer, and cruel farewell; Minion (quoth he) I will very shortly cool thy
courage and thy tongue, and make thee know with repentance, what it is to
disobey thy father, in making so much esteem of Morosini, and so little of
Seignior Palmerius, contrary to my advise and request to thee, for I say,
consider well with thy self, and thou shall then do well speedily to forsake
this error and obstinacy of thine, except thou resolve to die as miserable, as
I desire thou shall live happy: Once more Girl consider and remember what I
have now said to thee, and beware least Morosini prove thy shame, as much as
Palmerius will thy glory. Imperia weeps because she can weep no more at these
heart-killing speeches of her father to her, against her absent Morisini: So
being not well she betakes her self to her bed, and there again consults with
God and her self, what she shall do in this perturbation of mind, and
affliction of heart, and then and there (with waking eyes) reads a whole nights
lecture to her self of her obedience to her father, and her affection and
constancy to the other half of her self, Morosini; when in the morning being
prompted by her thoughts and desires, that she shall receive more delights and
joys from the last, then discontents from the first, she at her up-rising
resolves again to write away for her Morosini, as hoping that his presence
would easily dispell and scatter all these her clouds and tempests, when
dispatching a private messenger to Ancona for Mercario, she again earnestly
prays him to undertake a second voyage for her either to Aleppo or
Constantinople, to her Morosini, the which he then promises; so that night
again perusing over his Letter, she then from point to point punctually makes
answer to it, and the next morning very secretly gives it to Mercario in her
chamber, and therewith takes off a rich bracelet of sparks of Diamonds from her
right arm, and prays him to deliver it to him as a token of her true
affection and constancy, the which she affirms to him shall, ever live and
die with her. Mercario having received his commission from Imperia, as also
more Gold for the discharge and defraying of his journey, he hires a small
Brigantine to transport him to Corfu, and from thence embarques himself on a
ship of Marseilles, which accidentally stopped there, and so sailed first to
Aleppo; where being arrived in less than three weeks, and finding his dear
friend Morosini to be Consul there for the Seigniory of Venice, he secretly
delivers this bracelet and Letter of Imperia to him in his study, where he
was then hastily writing a dispatch for Constanti^ople: But the arrival of
Mercario, who he knew came from his dearest friend and Mistress Imperia, (for
mere joy) made him presently to cast away his hat and pen, and so to kiss and
receive this her Letter and token from him, whereof with much haste, and more
affection breaking up the seals, he therein found couched these ensuing lines.

IMPERIA to MOROSINI.
I Had little thought (because less deserved) that either profit or preferment
had bee^e dearer to thee than Imperia, or that the Seigniory of Venice, or
their Ambassador Landy had had more power to stay th^e in Aleppo, than she to
have requested or conjured thy return to Loretto; for if my poor beauty, or
rich affection to thee, be of so l^ and base an esteem, as thou preferrest
thy wealth and rep^tation to it, then I am as miserable, as I thought my self
happy in my choice, and the sweetness of my desires and wishes consequently
have end, as soon as they received a beginning. And see what a palpable
incongruity yea, what an apparent contradiction there is between thy heart and
thy pen, since feignedly endeavoring to make me believe thou love my kisses
and embraces above all the Crowns and Scepters in the world, I yet am truly
enforced to see that thou love Turkey far better than Italy, and art well
contented that Palmerius should love me better than thy self for else thou
would never permit that my fathers tyranny to me should (in thy absence,
give a law to my affection to him, or consent that Palmerius should be the
Di^mond, and thy self prove only the fail of my heart and love: And if this
ingratitude of thine be not a crime, I know what a crime is, nor how, nor in
what terms to define or determine thereof. Judge therefore with thy self,
(at least if thou art not as wholly exempt of judgment as of love) what a
poor half, yea, what a small part I am of thee, when by thy voluntary absence
thou will wholly re^gne me up to another, and that Palmerius must be my
husband, when my heart and soul, yea, when God and his Angels well know, I
desire nothing under Heaven so much, as to live and die thy Wife, or else thou
would not have been so unkind. to confine thy will, or to bound thy
obstinacy to no less than a whole years s^questration and absence from me,
which if thy heart were equal, or but the least shadow of mine, thou would
deem to contain as many months as hours, and as many ages as months. But
God forbid this discourtesie of thine should prove so great a cruelty to me, or
before I know what belongs to fortunacie, I should be constrained to feel and
suffer so much infelicity. Come away therefore my dear Morosini, and my sighs,
tears, and prayers shall implore the winds and Seas to prove propitious to thy
speedy return; and blame not me but thy self, if thy absence, and my fathers
obstinacy bereave me of my sweet Morosini, and thee of thy Dear.

IMPERIA.


Morosini could not refrain from blushing at the reading of this his Mistress
Imperia's Letter, as ashamed to see what an exceeding advantage her courtesy
had got of his unkindnesse. He oftentimes kisseth this her Letter and bracelet,
as the two sweet pledges of her sweetest love and affection to him, the which
he vows to requite, and shortly to make his return, redeem and ransom the
ingratitude of his long stay from her. He shows this Letter of hers to his
two old Camerados, Astonicus and Donato, (for their friendship and familiarity
is still so great, as they cannot, they will not forsake each other) who
infinitely tax. his unkindnesse, and condemn his inconstancy, in sequestring
himself so long from so sweet and fair a Mistress as Imperia. Now for the
space of some ten days Morosini feasteth his friend Mercario in Aleppo,
wherein he forgets not continually to solemnize his Imperia's health in the
best and richest Greek wines; at the end whereof (very hountifully rewarding
his love and pains, for so often crossing those dangerous Seas in his behalf)
he charge him with his Letter in answer of his, and in requital of her
bracelet of sparks of Diamonds, he returns and sends her a fair chain of
God, and a rich Diamond Ring fastened to the end thereof, with a pair of
Turkish silver embroydered bracelets, and so commits him to the mercy of the
winds and Seas; who in six weeks after arrives safely to Ancona, and the next
morning poasts away to Loretto where repairing secretly to Bondino's house, he
finds out his daughter Imperia alone, solitarily walking at the farther end of
the Garden among ^anks of Sicamour and Olive trees: Who no sooner espies
Merc^rio, but all her blood flashing into her face for joy, she speedily trips
away toward him, (who after salutes) bidding him a thousand times welcome
home, and he giving her Morosini's Letter and token, she clappes the last in
her pocket, and hastily kissing and breaking up the seals of the first, steps
aside a pace or two, and therein finds and reads these lines.

MOROSINI to IMPERIA.
THy sweet beauty, and rich affection and constancy, shall not only command my
resolution but my self, and it is impossible either for my profit or
reputation to give but to receive a Law thereof; for thy requests being to me
commands, and consequently thy felicity and misery equally mine, I will
therefore shorten and hasten the time of my stay and so convert a whole year
into a few months: For if Imperia be Palmerius his wife Morosini can then
never be either himself or his own friend, and to write thee the life of my
heart, as thou have now the heart of thy soul, It is not the ambition of a
Consulary dignity, nor all the treasure of Turkey, or the Indies, which shall
keep me from enjoying of my fair and sweet Imperia, in whose divine cheeks
and eyes, my heart has imparadized, all my most sovereign earthly felicity;
So that I not only deny but defy that Palmerius or any other of the world, is
capable to love her the thousand part or so tenderly or dearly as my self, to
whose sake and service I will still be found ready to lay down my best blood,
and to prostitute and sacrifice my dearest Life. O then my fair and sweet
Imperia live therefore my dear Wife, and Morosini will assuredly dye thy
loving and constant Husband, and thou shall briefly see that I will hate
ingratitude as much as thy inconsiderate Father loves and intends cruelty
toward thee, and make thee as joyful in my presence, as thou writest me thou
art afflicted and sorrowful in my absence. I come my sweet Imperia, and if I
want winds or Seas to bring me to thy blessed presence, my sighs shall
increase the one and my tears supply and augment the other to effect it.
Prepare therefore thy heart and eyes to see and salute me, as I do mine arms
and lips to embrace and kiss thee, and I both hope and rest confident, that my
prayers and constancy seconded by thine, will make thy Fathers obstinacy
vain, and prove Palmerius his attempts and hopes ridiculous in thinking to
have thee to his Wife, who art already mine, by choice and promise.

MOROSINI.


This Letter of Morisini, affoords no small music to the heart, or melody to
the mind of our Imperia, for she sweetly and carefully treasureth it up in
her breast and memory, and now in hope of his short return she leaves no
Church nor Chapel in or about Loretto unfrequented to pray for it, yea she
is so religious and virtuous, as she gives her self wholly to prayer, the
sooner to obtain it; whiles (in the mean time) her cruel Father Bondino
(contrary to her expectation and desires) cuts her out new work, in resuming
his old resolution to marry her to her old Lover Palmerius who still loves her
so tenderly that for her sake, he will not forsake Loretto to live in Ancona,
so that here the Reader is prayed to understand and know, that Bondino
finally, (and once for all) to cast his daughter Imperia and her affection from
Mor^sini to Palmerius, seeing that all other means will not prevail, he
infinitely debarres her of her liberty, takes away from her, her chiefest
apparel and jewels (the delight and glory of young Ladies and Gentlewomen) as
also her best vianes and diet, and in a word entreats her so rigorously, as
(upon the matter) he makes her more his prisoner than his Daughter. Imperia
who was never heretofore acquainted with such sharp severity and course
entertainment, bites her lip and hang^ her head hereat, But the more she
prays her father to reserve her for Morosini, the more tyrannously he
commands her speedily to marry Palmerius, so that all her sighs and tears to
the contrary do rather exasperate then appease his indignation against her,
and now she finds the long stay of Morosini from her, not only to exceed her
first expectation, but also his last promises to her in his Letter, and is
enforced to see, that her Father is as cruel as Palmerius is obstinate and
resolute in his suit to her. She has nothing to comfort her but the memory
and letters of Morosini, and yet nothing does so much confound her hopes and
patience, as her fathers cruelty in crossing this her affection. But at last
dispairing of Morosini's return, and vanquished by her Fathers tyranny, she
with an unwilling willingness) is enforced to suffer her self to be overcome
by him, as also to permit the walls of her affection, and the bulwarks and
fortifications of her constancy to be battered and razed down, by the
incessant solicitations, gifts, and prayers of Palmerius; So that forgetting
her promise, and her self, and putting a rape on her former resolution, she
is at last contracted and married to him, or rather to the calamities and
miseries which we shall shortly see will ensue thereof.

Here now then this old dotard Palmerius is married to fair Imperia, who
esteems himself as happy as she finds her self unfortunate in this match.
His Age is to old for her Youth, and her youth far to young for his Age;
Disparity of years seldom (or never) breeds any true content or felicity in
marriage. He cannot sufficiently estimate, much less deserve or requite the
dainties of her youth, so that truth must here needs implore this dispensation
for me of modesty, to affirm that his chiefest power was desire; and his best
performance but lust toward her, for whiles every night, as soon as he comes
to bed to her, he falls to his sleep; so poor young Gentlewoman she turns
to her repentance, wishing (from her very heart and soul) that her husbands
bed were her grave, and that her Nuptials had been her funeral. A thousand
times every day and night she accuses her Fathers cruelty and (with bitter
sighs and tears) as often condemns her own levity and inconstancy for
consenting thereunto. She can neither honor or love her husband, or rather
not love him because she so tenderly loves the person, and honors the
memory of Morosini. Thus whiles Palmerius retains and enjoys our Imperia in
his bed, no less does she her Morosini in her heart, so that the first has
only her body, but the second wholly her mind and affection, the sorrowful
consideration and remembrance whereof, does so torment her heart and perplexe
her mind, that she protests publicly to her self, and privately to all the
world, that there is no calamity equal to hers, nor no misery comparable to
that of a discontented bed. Thus being as much a maid as a wife, and yet more a
Nun than a maid, she makes spiritual books her exercise, solitariness her
pastime, her chamber her chapel, and her closset her Oratory to pray to God
to forgive her Fathers cruelty, and her husbands indiscretion toward her, as
also her own inconstancy and treachery toward Morosini, which foul
ingratitude and crime of hers she cannot remember but with extreme grief,
nor once think of, but with infinite shame sorrow, and repentance. Although
this her old husband Palmerius, be so amorous and kind to her, and so tender
of this his fair young wife, that he leaves no cost unbestowed on her. as well
in rich apparel, as chains and Jewels, wherein the Ladies and Gentlewomen of
Italy chiefly pride themselves. But this was not the content and felicity which
our Imperia desired because deserved; because her fresh youth, and her husbands
feeble and frozen Age, cast her heart on other opposite conceits, and her mind
on other different contemplations.

Whiles thus Bondino and Palmerius as much rejoice as Imperia mournes and
grieves at this herunequall and discontented match, and Morisini confidently
relying on the firm affection and constancy of his Imperia made his stay in
Alepo, some 10. months longer than his promise to her. He at lastled by the
star of her beauty and his own affection to her, leaves Turkey, and (in
company of his constant old friends Astonicus and Donato) sets sail for Italy,
and purposly puts in with their ship into Ancona, where they and he are no
sooner arrived, but Mercario finding him out, entertaines him with the welcome
of this sorrowful news, that his Mistress Imperia is now in this City of
Ancona, and married to old Signior Palmerius, whereat Morosini infinitely
grieves and Astonicus and Donato much wonder. He is stricken at the heart at
this sorrowful news, and (too too soon for him) believes it with as much
affliction as admiration. By this time likewise is Imperia advertised of his
and their arrival, whereat she seems to drown her self in a whole deluge of
tears; yet not for sorrow but for joy of his arrival. He imployes Mercario to
her to grant him a private visit, the which most joyfully the next night she
does in her own house, her old husband being in bed and snoring fast a sleep.
At Morisini's first sight and entrance into her chamber (where she all alone
privately stays for him) she throws her self on her knees at his feet, and
with sighs, tears, and blushes begges his pardon for her unconstancy in
marrying Palmerius, the which she no way attributes to his long stay, but
rather to her fathers cruelty and her own misfortune. Morosini is as joyful
of her sight as sorrowful of this her error, and so will not permit her to
kneel, because he sees and knows, and also assures her, that she is still
the Goddess of his heart and affection. He takes her up in his arms, and
there embraces and freely pardons her, and so they reciprocally speak each to
other in the sweet language of love, I mean of kisses, sighs, and tears,
with the last whereof, they again and again, bedew and wash each others
cheeks, as if love had made them far more capable to sigh than speak, and to
weep than sigh: Here their old affections revive, and flame forth a new with
more violence and impetuositie. She has no power to deny him any thing, no
not her self. For as he swears to live her servant, so she constantly vows
to live and dye his handmaid, and that his will shall ever be her Law, and his
requests in all things her commands. Here his heart beats for love, and her
breast pants for j^y. For as he promises her, that she shall be his sole and
only love; so she willingly) forgets her self so far, as solemnly to
protest to him, that he shall be more her Husband than Palmerius, when with
many embraces and kisses, they for that night part.

The next morning Morosini and his two consorts Astonicus, and Donato (by the
feigned way of a rejoicing complement) do visit his young Mistress Imperia, and
her old husband Palmerius, who (more out of his own goodness than their
deserts) bids them all most kindly and courteously welcome. They congratulate
with him for this his happy match with Imperia, for which, old Palmerius
respectively thanks them, but he knows not what dangerous snakes lurk under
the green leafes of this their pretended fair courtesy. As for his Wife
Imperia, she is so reserved in her comportment, and so coy in her carriage
toward them, that (according to the custom of Italy) her Husband can hardly
persuade or cause her to see and salute them, the which at last she faintly
and feignedly performs, rather with an eye of disdain than of respect. They
all see the young Wife with love and pity, but look on her old Husband with
contempt and envy; yet Morosini then and there in stealth sees Imperia's heart
in her eyes, when in counterchange, she knows his heart by his enamoured
looks and countenance: So Palmerius (being as innocent as aged) having
discoursed with them about their voyage, and about Turkey and Constantinople,
and courteously prayed them to be no strangers to him and his house, whiles the
contrary winds kept them here in Ancona, which they readily and thankfully
promise him, they for this time take leave each of other, Astonichus and Donato
highly applauding the beauty of Imperia, and Morosini infinitely condemning and
contemning the simplicity and age of her old Husband Palmerius.

But this is not all, for that very afternoon Morosini (out of the
intemperate heat and passion of his love) by a confident messenger sends to
pray Imperia to meet him at three of the clock in her Garden, which was a
pretty way distant from her house, the which she joyfully grants him; and here
it is where they meet, and where I am enforced to say, that in the pavillion or
banqueting house of this Garden, these our two youthful lovers (after a
thousand sweet kisses and embraces) first received each of other those amorous
delights and pleasures, which modesty will not, and chastity and honesty cannot
permit me to mention, as also for that these pills of sugar are most commonly
candide in bitter wormwood and gall, and but too frequently prove honey to the
palate, but poison to the heart and soul.

And here in this her Garden (I say again) was the very first time and place
where our fair Imperia, who was so famous in Loretto and Ancona for her piety
and chastity, forgetting the first, made shipwreck of the last, and where of a
Gentlewoman of honor, she lost her honor, by committing this her beastly
sin of sensuality and Adultery. When the winds, which were contrary to
Morosini's voyage, proved so favorable and propitious to his lustful desires,
that he thinks of nothing less than of his return to Venice, nor of any thing
so much as of his stay here in Ancona, with his fair and sweet love Imperia;
who likewise finds less content and pleasure in the company of her Husband
Palmerius than she hoped for, and now far more in her dear friend Morosini
than she either dreamt or expected: In which trivial regard, and sinful
consideration, she (in a manner) abandons the first, and gives her self
wholly over to the will and pleasure of the second, and so turning the custom
of these their lascivious daliances into a habit, and that into a second
nature, both in her Garden, and her own house, she very often (both by day
and night) commits this bitter-sweet sin of Adultery with Morosini, whereof a
subtle young Nephew of Palmerius, of some eighteen years old, who was his
sisters son, and termed Richardo, takes exact and curious notice, and once
among the rest he peeps in at the keyhole of his Aunts chamber door, and
there sees her and Seignior Morosini on the bed together, and in no less
familiarity than was requisite, or could be expected betwixt his Uncle her
Husband Palmerius and her self; whereupon secretly envying and hating her,
because he was afraid she should bear away all, or at least the greatest part
of his said Unkles Estate and wealth from him, (who for want of children, hoped
that he therefore should be his adopted heir) he therefore maliciously bears
the remembrance of this object and accident in his mind, with an intent that
when occasion should hereafter present the report and knowledge thereof to his
said Uncle, might justly cause him wholly to heave and raze her out of his good
opinion and affection. As for Morosini and Imperia, they (notwithstanding all
this) do still strongly endeavor to bleare the eyes of her Husband Palmerius,
who (thinking his wife to be as chaste as fair, and rather a Diana than a
Lais) out of his good nature does sometimes in his house feast Morosini, and
his two Consorts Astonicus and Donato: But they will prove pernicious and
fatal guests to him, for ere long we shall see them require this hospitality
and courtesy of his, with a prodigious and treacherous ingratitude. In which
mean time all Ancona resounds of the great expense and profuse prodigality of
Morosini, and his two associates, for they here revell it out in the best
Tavernes and companies of the City, and not only exceed others, but also
themselves, in the richness and bravery of their apparel, but most especially
Morisini, whose apparel is every way fitter for an Italian Nobleman, than a
Venetian Merchant. Our lustful and lascivious Imperia is never well contented
or pleased but in his presence, and her Husbands absence; and here to relate
the truth of her heart, Morosini is more her Husband than Palmerius, or rather
Palmerius is but the shadow, and Morosini the essential substance of her
Husband, and therefore (I desire the Reader to know and remember) that in that
regard and consideration I have purposely entitled this History not to be of
Palmerius and Imperia but of Morosini and Imperia.

Morosini, Astonicus, and Donato (in their lodging and chambers) have many
times many private speeches and conferences, what pity it is that so sweet and
fair a young Gentlewoman as Imperia, should (by the constraint of her unkind
and cruel father) thus be clogged and chained in marriage to so old a dotard
as Palmerius, (for a more favorable Epithet their vanity and folly could not
afford to give him) and Morosini (in the dumb eloquence and Logic of
Imperia's sighs and tears) apparently believes that (in her heart and soul)
she infinitely desires and wishes that Palmerius were in Heaven, and himself
now her Husband here on earth in his place: He reads as much in her looks and
countenance, and is therefore confident that her heart and ambition aspire to
no sweeter earthly felicity. He has not lost his wit in his affection, nor
wholly drowned his judgment, either in the fresh Roses and Lillies of her
beauty, or in the resplendent luster of those sparkling Diamonds and stars,
her eyes. He knows that his Estate is far inferior to his birth and
extraction, and yet that his prodigalities and expenses (both in Turkey and
Italy) are far superior and above his Estate: He would faigne (therefore)
find out the means to bear up his port, and consequently to preserve his
reputation with the whole world, the which he esteems equal to his life, if
not above it. He knows that Imperia is already more his Wife than her
Husbands, and is very confident that he can make her apt for any impression,
and capable of any design, which may advance his own fortunes, and confirm
both their contents, whereunto conjoyning the sweetness of her beauty the
excellency of her feature, and the exceeding great wealth of her old Husband,
he adding all these considerations together, they here weigh him down to Hell
and Satan, by terminating his thoughts and fixing his heart upon this hellish
resolution, to send him speedily to Heaven in a bloody winding sheet; and no
other charitable thought, or Christian consideration can divert him from this
inhumane and bloody project, neither can he possibly reap any truce of his
thoughts, or peace of his heart, before he have attempted and finished it.

To which end, the very next night that he lay and wantonized in bed with his
Imperia (for God knows her old Husband lay but seldom with her) and finding
her extraordinarily to sigh, he lays hold of this advantage, and
opportunity, and very earnestly demands of her what ails her, where at her
tongue then fled to her heart, because her heart was then flying from God to
the Devil, so she continues her sighing, but is still mute and returns him
no answer. Till at last Morosini suspecting that in her which his hopes
desired, and his desires hoped for, then I say what his demands could not
obtain of her his kisses do, when swearing him to secrecy, she) after many
far fetched fighes) tells him; that she loves him so deerly and tenderly, as
for his sake she either wishes her self in her grave or her husband
Palmerius in Heaven which is the sweet music and melody that Morosini
expects, and which to his unexpressable joy he now receives from her, when
paying her the principal and interest of this her dearest Love and affection
toward him, with many kisses; he passionately intreates her, that she will
employ him to finish this pleasing tragedy, but she is again mute hereat, and
therefore he again more earnestly entreates her to confer this favor on
him; Who then taking counsel of her Lust, and of Hell, she grants his first
request herein with silence, but his second with a free and cheerful consent.
When as two wretched and bloody miscreants) they reciprocally swear secrecy
herein each to other, as also that they will speedily dispatch him, and so in a
very short time after marry each other and no longer live in Ancona but in
Venice. But what a fatal, what a hellish contract was this, which they equally
confirm as well with oaths as kisses, and how at one time do I pity both
their youth and folly, and hate their obscence affections each to other; and
their foul crimes unto God herein. They cannot content themselves with lust
but with blood, for they are so resolutely inhumane and impious, as they will
needs add murder to adultery, as if one of these two foul sins were not
enough sufficient to make both of them wretched in this life, if not miserable
in that to come; but the Devil is so strong with them as they vow to advance,
and disdain to retire in the perpetration of this deplorable business; So
from the matter they proceed to the manner hereof. Morosini proposes poison,
but Imperia rejects this his opinion, as being dangerous both in the procuring,
and administering When she propounds to have him stifled by night in his bed,
to the which after two or three pauses and consideratious, he will and freely
consents. So heereon they both do finally agree and resolve. But because
Morosini knows his Imperia to be a wife and weak woman, and therefore fitter
for counsel than execution, and himself alone peradventure not strong enough
(with safety) to perform it without some other men's assistance, he therefore
tells her that he will likewise engage his faithful friends and companions
Astonicus and Donato herein. But Imperia is extremely against it, as grounding
her apprehension and fear upon this Maxim. That as one is more capable and
proper to keep counsel then two, so consequently are two than four. But when
(in answer hereof) he vows and swears to her that they they are no less his
faithful friends and servants than he hers; then (with much alacrity and joy)
she yields thereunto, so they confirming this their agreement with many
oaths, and sealing it with a world of kisses he leaves this his fair
sweetheart in bed, and at break of day departs from her, and so hies him home
to his own Lodging to his two companions Astonicus and Donato, who (the
premises considered) do perfectly know, at what midnight Mass he has been,
what shrine he has visited, and what Saint adored and prayed to.

Some three hours after they all call for their breakfasts, the which as soon
as they have taken and ended, (for still as yet the wind is contrary for them
to set sail for Venice) Morosini prays them forthwith to walk with him up to
the Domo (or Cathedral Church) of that City which stands over it on a high
rockie Hill, and there proudly looks up toward, the Mountains of Loretto, and
Recagnati, and down to the azurd plains and valleys of the Adriatique Sea
(whereon Boreas rings his Northern peales, and Neptune danceth his Southern
Lavolta's.) So here in this famous Church, (which was built for offering up
religious prayers to God, and not for making up bloody conferences and
contracts to, and with the Devil) Morosini first acquaints them with this
business, and with his, and his Imperia's most earnest prayers, and
affectionate requests for their assistance therein; Since the life of her old
doting Husband was no less their affliction and misery, then this his death
would infallibly prove their prosperity, triumph and glory, because she was
formerly contracted to himself, long before he married her: which she was
enforced and constrained to do through the cruelty and tyranny of her Father.
Now as their needs not many good words and persuasions to base hearts, and
polluted and profane souls, who of themselves are already disposed to
wickedness, and prepared to sinful actions. So (because of Morosini's old
friendship and familiarity, of Imperias beauty, and her old Husband Palmerius
his exceeding great wealth and riches) these two graceless wretches Astonicus
and Donato do cheerfully promise Morosini, the very utmost of their possible
powers for the accomplishment hereof, whereon they all three do there
solemnly and interchangeably give their hands and oaths as also for eternal
secrecy. Which done they return to their Lodging; and at dinner (when they
had purposly sent away their Servants, as also those of the house) they in very
great glasses of Albania wine, do on their knees drink healths to the
prosperity of this their intended great business: The which after dinner
Morosini (with much joy) fully relates to his Imperia, and she (for her part)
understands and receives it from him with no less delight and exhileration.
When being (as strongly seduced and provoked by their lacivious desires, as
they were merely propagated and engendered by the Devil who was the first and
sole Author thereof, impatient of all delays they conclude to finish this
business the second night after, which (as I have been credibly informed in
Ancona) was the very Eve of the purification of the blessed Uirgin Mary so
famous and famoused in Loretto, and hereon these our two lustful and lewd
Lovers Morosini and Imperia do give and take exact and curious directions each
from other, both of the hour and the manner thereby the better to dispatch it,
with less danger, and more assurance and facility; And they are so lascivious
in their wishes, so vain and profane in their hopes, so cruel and in humane
in their desires, and so fierce and bloody in their resolutions, as they think
every hour an age before they see it effected.

All this while our innocent and harmless old Palmerius, albeit he have the
will but not the power to please his young wife Imperia by night, yet by day
(yea and almost every day) he has hoth the power and will to bestow some rich
gifts and presents on her, and to rain down showers of Gold into her lap, as
Jove did to his fair Danae, and as one way he held it his felicity to gaze
and contemplate on the excellency of her pure beauty, so again he made it his
delight and glory to see her flant it out in rich and brave apparel, and also
to provide her the most rarest Viands and dantiest diet that gold or silver
could procure. But poor Palmerius (all this cost and courtesy of thine to thy
Wife notwithstanding) I am enforced to write with equal pity to thee, and
shame to her, little do thou conceive or think, what a dangerous Cockatrice
or pernicious Viper thou harbourest in harboring her in thy House, thy Bed,
thy Bosom.

The dismal night being now come, which these four execrable person; have
designed and destined for the finishing of this deplorable business. It is no
sooner twelve of the Clock by Morosini's watch, but he with Astonicus and
Donato (with their Rapiers and Pistols without any light) iffue forth their
Lodging, and presently trip away to Palmerius house, where (according to
promise) they find the street door a little open and Imperia (as a fury of
hell) there ready to receive them, when although it were a time and place
farmore fitter for them to tremble than kiss; yet so fervent is the fire of
Morosini and Imperias lascivious and furious affection; as they cannot yet
refrain from giving each other one, or two at least. When leaving Donato (with
his Rapier drawn) closewithin the door, to guard and make it good against all
opposing and intervening accidents, Morosini leads Imperia by her right arm,
and Astonicus by the left, and so for the more security (purposely) leaving
their shoes below with Donato, and drawing on woollen pumpes, they all three
ascend the stairs when she with wonderful silence) first conducts them to
her own Chamber (which was some two distant from her (Husbands) where the
windows being close shut, and a small wax candle burning on her table, and
her prayer book by it wherein (still expecting the hour of midnight) she
silently read whiles the Devil held the candle to her, she there gives each
of them a pillow to work this damnable fact, having silently given such order,
that her Husbands Nephew Richardo, and all the Servants of the house, were gone
to bed above three hours before: Thus this treacherous Shee-Devill Imperia
(for I can no more term her a woman, much less a wife, and least of all a
Christian) is the fatal guide to bloody Morosini and Astonicus, who brings
them first to the door of her old Husband Palmerius his Chamber, which she
had purposly left a little open, and then to his bed, who is deeply and soundly
sleeping in his innocence toward them, as they were but too too wide waking in
their inveterate malice against him, she keeping the door, and Morosini
standing by one side of the bed and Astonicus by the other, they there in
regard of his impotency and weakness) do easily stifle him to death, not so
much as suffering him either once to cry or screech, and then to make sure
work, they speedily and violently thrust a small Orange into his mouth,
thereby the better to cover and color out this their villainy to the world in
making all men believe, that it was Palmerius himself, who had put that Orange
into his own mouth thereby purposely to destroy himself, when leaving his
breathless body in his bed, they secretly issue forth the Chamber and she
draws fast the door after her, and so descends with them down the stairs to
the street door, where with much triumphs joy, and thanks between them all;
Morosini giving his Imperia many kisses, and she desiring them all three
immediately to repair to their Lodgings, and not to stir thence till they
hear from her, which she promises Morosini shall be as soon as conveniently
and possibly she can, they depart home. When she first softly bolting the
street door, and then her own chamber door, she presently (with much
security and no repentance) betakes her self to her bed, where (vilde wretch
that she is) she no more wakes for grief at the life, but now sleeps for
joy at the death of her old doting Husband Palmerius. But we shall not go
far before we see God convert these her triumphs into tears and this her
false joy into true misery and confusion for the same, The manner thus.

Whiles Morosini, Astonicus, and Donato, do in their lodging for joy of this
their bloody fact, carowse the remainder of the night, and the next morning
keep their beds till nine of the cloak, without once thinking of God or
heaven, or of fearing either Hell or Satan. Imperia putting an Angels face on
her divellish heart, goes (according to her accustomed manner) about six of
the clock in the morning away with her waiting maid, and her prayer book and
beads in hand to hear Mass at Saint Francis (which is the gray Friars)
Church near to the Jews Street, with an intent to stay there in her Oraisons
till past eight. But let the reader judge with what a profane zeal, and
prodigious and impious devotion she does it, as also farther know, that God
who is the great Judge of Heaven and Earth (in his sacred Justice) is now
resolved to bring this lamentable murdering of Palmerius to detection and
light and to proclaim and publish it to the sight and knowledge of the world
by a way no less strange than remarkable.

Within less than half an hour that Imperia went away to Mass to Saint
Francis Church, an Innekeeper of Loretto who dwelt there at the sign of the
Crown named Antonio Herbas, arrives there in Ancona to Palmerius house with a
letter for him from his Father Bondino, who speaking with his Nephew Richardo,
he delivers and sends up the Letter to his Uncle, who then opening the
lat^h of his chamber door, he no sooner enters but with his foot he
stumbles at a pair of rich gloves, which taking up and knowing them to belong
to Seignior Morosini, because some two or three days together he had seen him
wear them, he with a smile claps them into his pocket, and so giving his Uncle
the good morrow, he advances up to his bed to deliver him this Letter; When
withdrawing the curtains he (contrary to his expectation) finds him dead, and
well near cold in his bed with a whole small Orange in his mouth, whereat he
makes so lamentable and sorrowful an outcry, that the noise thereof brings up
two Servants of the house to enquire and know what the cause thereof might be.
Who being likewise sad spectators of this their masters sudden and unfortunate
death, they conceieve and believe, that he had voluntarily stopped his own
breath, and destroyed himself by putting this Orange in his mouth, and that
his face being black and swollen, was only his own struggling for life against
death; which opinion of theirs in common sense and reason was probable enough,
if God had not here resolved to disprove it, in verifying and making apparent
the contrary. For Richardo (who was of a pregnant wit, and of a sharp and
quick apprehension) considering that these were Morosini's gloves which he
found there in his Uncles chamber; And his memory now telling his heart, what
lascivious daliances and obscene embraces and familiarity his eyes had lately
seen and known between him, and his Aunt Imperia, as also that God heretofore
prompted and informed his soul, that they both had an equal share and hand in
this lamentable murder of his Uncle, and that it was far better for him
justly to ruin her now, then she unjustly to beggar him hereafter. He
therefore (with tears in his eyes) prays the Servants to stay a little while
in the Chamber with his dead Uncle till his return; and then with those gloves
in his pocket, and this letter in his hand) he speedes away to the Podestate
(or criminal Judge) of this City named Seignior Loudovicus Ceranno and in a
passionate and sorrowful speech makes him know as much as himself knows of
this lamentable murder of his Uncle Palmerius, for the which he strongly
charge Morosini and his said Aunt Imperia to be the Author and Actor, and so
craves Justice on them both for the same. This grave personage is very
sorrowful at this lamentable accident, and likewise at this relation and
accusation of Richardo, as well for the manner thereof, as for the quality of
the persons who he hears, and fears are interested herein, when walking a
turn or twodeeply contemplating hereon in his chamber, he sits himself down
in his Chair, and then (bidding Richardo approach nearer to him) he seriously
demands of him these four Questions. First if he were assured that these were
Morosini's gloves, to which Richardo answered he perfectly knew them to be
his, for that he had seen him wear them three or four several times.
Secondly, where Morosini was lodged in that City, whereat he replied that he
and his two associates Astonicus and Donato, lay at the sign of the ship upon
the Kaye; Thirdly, where he thought his Aunt Imperia now was, whereat he tells
him, she is now in Saint Francis Church in her devotions, and fourthly what
letter that was which he held fast sealed in his hand, when he also informed
him, that this was the very same Letter, which he formerly told him of, the
which Signior Bandino (the Father to his Aunt Imperia) sent to his Uncle this
morning from Loretto, by an Innekeeper of that Town named Antonio Herbas, whom
he said he had brought along with him to affirm so much, the which being
called up before the Podestate, he upon his corporal oath did so, when the
Podestate taking that Letter from Richardo, and breaking up the seals thereof,
he finds it to speak this language.

BONDINO to PALMERIVS.
IT was a sensible grief to me, when I first heard of Morosini's arrival from
Turkey to Ancona; But far the greater, when I since understand of his long
and lingering stay there, and to write thee the truth of my heart, my thoughts
by day, and my dreams by night do still prompt and assure me, that as it is
likely he will attempt some thing against the Chastity of thy wife my
Daughter, so it is not impossible for him likewise to plot somewhat against
thine own life, for by Nature and inclination I hear he is very malicious and
revengefull. If he depart speedily to Venice, then burn this Letter in Ancona
(which I now send the there by my Neighbor Antonio Herbas) But if he farther
protract his stay there, then speedily bring thy self, and thy wife away to me
here in Loretto; where my House shall be a Sanctuary for her, and a Castle and
Citadel for thy self: slight not this my careful, and tender advise to thee,
but rather resolve with considence, that as God gave it first to my heart, so
from my Heart I most affectionately now send it to thee.

BONDINO.


The Podestate being ascertained of all these Evidences, from the confession of
Richardo, the gloves of Morosini, the Letter of Bondino, and the acknowledgment
of Herbas, although hereupon he verily believes that Palmerius was stifled in
his bed by his Wife Imperia and her lover Morosini, yet (as a wise Judge and a
prudent magistrate) he will inform his knowledge of one important point more,
for the better disquisition and vindication of the truth of this deplorable
business. He will not send any subordinate Officer, but a private friend of
his to the Host of the Ship upon the Key, where Morosini lodged, whose name
he now knows to be Stephano Fundi, and that (in favor of a cup of Wine) he
should courteously allure him home to his house and presence, the which that
friend of his performs, where the Podestate then told him, that he has been
informed by diverse, that he is an honest man, and therefore in friendly sort
he prays him to answer him the truth of three demands which he shall make
unto him. First if Morosini and his friends Astonicus and Donato lay in his
house all the last night, or if not, when they went abroad, and at what hour
returned. When Fundi (performing his duty and reverence to the Podestate) tells
him, that they all three, went forth of his house together the last night with
their Rapiers without any lights, a little after twelve of the clock and
returned home again a little before two as near as he could guess.
Secondly, the Podestate shows him the gloves, and asks of him if he thought
these were Morosini's to the which he answered, he did assure himself they
were, for that he had many times seen him wear them. Thirdly he enquires of
him if he knew where Morosini, Astonicus, and Donato now were; whereunto he made
answer, that after they came home to his house the last night, they merrily
carowsed and drank in their Chamber till six of the clock in the morning;
that they then went to their beds, and there as yet, they all lay soundly
sleeping. The Podestate having thus happily cleared all these rubs he makes no
doubt they were the murderers of Palmerius, and therefore resolves speedily to
lay sure hold of them all. But he is so solid and wise in his administration
of justice, as he will add subtlety to his power, and discretion to his
authority. First therefore in friendly manner he confines Fundi to a chamber
here in his own House to prevent that he should not return home to tell
tales to Morosini and his associates. Then he presently sends away two of his
own Sons who were gallant young Gentlemen, named Seignior Alexandro and
Thomaso Ceranno (who were ignorant of all this matter) with his coach to Saint
Francis Church, and when they there see the fair Gentlewoman Imperia to issue
forth, then in courteous manner not to fail to bring her away in coach with
them to his House, under pretext and color that the Lady Honoria their mother
does desire to see and speak with her, and that she will please to pass one
hour with her in her garden, with whom, and where she (by the way of visits)
had formerly sometimes been. These two young Gentlemen (in obedience to their
fathers commands) drive away to that Church, and presently epsy Imperia on her
knees who now rises and goes forth, they follow her, and in the street with
their hats in their hands do present their Lady Mothers request and errand to
her, as we have formerly heard. Imperia knowing them to be the Podestates two
Sons, she at first is so infinitely perplexed, grieved and amazed hereat. Yea
she is hereupon vexed and tormented in so strange a manner, that with much
perturbation of mind, she now (through her foul and guilty conscience) looks
pale for sorrow, and presently red again for shame, so that in the turning of
a hand, and twinkling of an eye she exchangeth the Lillies of her cheeks
into Roses, and those Roses as soon again into Lillies. But then (fearing her
danger least when she had all the reasons of the world both to doubt and fear
it most) considering that the Podestate and the Lady his wife were her kind
and honorable good friends, and had now sent their coach for her, as also
observing the fair carriage, and courteous language of these two her young
sons toward her. She then (being blinded by the Devil) does so wholly
forget both her crime and her danger, her judgment and her self, that
rejecting her fear, and composing her countenance to a modest cherfulness,
she willingly obeyes the mothers commands, and accepts of the Sons courtesy
and so goes along home with them in their Coach, where being arrived. These two
young Gentlemen, do usher and conduct her up to the gallery, where not the
Lady their Mother, but the Podestate their father, (accompanied with two other
grave Officers of Justice attend her coming. Their very first sight is
sufficiently capable to daunt her courage with fear, and to transpierce her
heart and soul with sorrow; When the Podestate calling her to him, he with a
stern countenance gives her this thundering peale for her goodmorrow and
breakefast. That he is sorry to see that so fair a Gentlewoman as her self,
should harbor and enshrine so foul a heart. That her good old Husband
Seignior Palmerius is this morning found stifled to death in his bed with an
Orange in his mouth, and that he both thinks and assures himself, it is done
by her, and by her bloody Ruffian and Enamourato Morosini, for the which he
says he is constrained (in honor to justice) to make her Prisoner to the Pope
his holiness, his Soverainge Lord and Master, whereat this false Hipocrite
Imperia (with a world of sighs and tears cries out and tells him, that she
left her old Husband Palmerius in perfect health in his bed this morning, that
therefore she hops and trusts in God he is not murdered, or if he be,
that it must needs be done by his wretched Nephew Richardo, who impatiently
gaped and hoped for his great wealth and riches, or else by some Devil in his
shape, of his seducing and hiring him thereunto. That Morosini is not her
Ruffian or Enamourato, but a brave merchant by his profession, and an Honorable
Gentleman of Venice by birth and extraction, and that she dares pawn her life
for his that they are both of them as innocent of this foul crime, as the
infants who were borne but the last night, and that she has far more reason
to weep for the death of her husband, than any way to fear her own life,
because she knows that God is the defender of innocents, and the protector of
the righteous, with many other passionate and sorrowful speeches conducting
and looking that way; but these her speeches and tears cannot prevail with
the Podestate, for both he and his two colleagues do yet firmly believe that
she is guilty of this inhumane murder; So he imprisoneth her in a chamber of
his own house for that day, and intends at night to send her to the common
Goal of that City. Now as she is led along between two Ushers (or Sergeants)
through a lower room, where all the Podestates Servants and some few others of
the City were flocked thither to see her pass by, she infinitely more caring
for her Morosini's life, and fearing his death than her own, it is her chance
to espy Mercario (whom we have formerly understood she sent with her Letters
to him to Constantinople and Aleppo, and knowing that the Sergeants would then
difficultly permit her to speak with any of the company, she amidst her
tears be thinks herself of a pretty policy; for as she past close by
Mercario she purposly lets fall her gloves and wet handkerchiefe for him to
take up, the which he does; and as he was stooping to effect it, she secretly
and swiftly rounds him in his ear thus. I pray go instantly upon the Kaye to
Morosini's lodging, and tell him that I am a prisoner in the Podestates house,
for the business he knows of, and herefore that he (and Astanicus and
Donato) do speedily provide for their safety; as also that if I had a thousand
lives I would willingly lose and sacrifice them all for to preserve his, and
that I will live and dye his most loving friend and faithful handmaide, the
which as soon as she had uttered, she is imprisoned in a dark Chamber:
where she has none but her guilty conscience, the bare walls, and the two
Serieants for her miserable comforters; and yet here (thinking to breath and
draw some hope among all her despair and sorrows she prays one of the
Sergeants to report her humble service to the Lady Honoria the Podestates Wife,
and to pray her to oblige and honor her so much as to see and speak a word
with her. But she having been informed by the Judge her husband that he
absolutely held and believed her to be the murderer of her own Husband Seignior
Palmerius, she was too Honorable to grant Imperia this courtesy, and
therefore (in detestation of her foul fact) highly disdained to afford her
this charity and consolation, and so slatly denies either to see or speak
with her.

And now do the Podestate, and his two Colleagues sit and debate in council
with themselves, how and in what manner to surprise Morosini, Astonicus, and
Donato, for although they are not sure, yet by their absence the last night
from their lodging with Morosini they think that they two are Accessaries with
him herein; First, they are of opinion to seize on their ship, which is at
anchor in the Road, termed the Realto of Venice (a name I think derived and
taken from the merchants Exchange of that ci^ty termed the Realto, or else
from the Realto Bridge, which (for one Arche) is doubtless the rarest,
fairest, and richest Bridge of the world) which ship was of some three hundred
Tonnes, and bore some twenty pieces of Ordinance, and then presently after to
seize on themselves in their Lodging. But upon more mature deliberation, they
resolve to abandon this their opinion, and so to seize on their persons, but
not to arrest or make stay of their Ship and although their reale to justice,
and have for their apprehension be very great, yet Mercario out of his respects
to Imperia and affection to Marosini tripped on through the by Streets and
nearest way to the Key so swiftly, as he had already secretly related him and
his two consorts the sorrowful news which Imperia sent them by him. Whereat
with fear in their hearts and courages, and amazement in their looks and
countenances, they all three leap from their beds to their swords, discharge
their Inn, pack up their Truncks and bagage and resolve with all possible
speed to fly to their ship, and then if not with, yet against the winds to
put into Sea, and for their safety to leave Ancona, and sail for Venice. But
yet here Morosini's heart is perplexed with a thousand Torments to understand
of his Imperia's eminent and apparent danger, and with many Hels in stead of
one to see that he must now thus suddenly leave her dear sight and company,
which he every way esteems no less then either his earthly felicity, or his
Heaven upon earth. But here again violently called away by the importunate
cries of Astonicus and Donato, and yet far more by the consideration of his
own proper fear and danger; Mercario is no sooner stolen away from them, but
they all three with their swords drawn rush down the stayres with equal
intents and resolution to exchange their Inn for their Ship, and thereby to
metamorphose their danger into security; But they shall see that these weak
and reeling hopes of theirs will now deceive them. For they find all doors of
their Inn locked within ^ide, and surrounded and beleagured without, with many
armed Sergeants Soldiers, and Citizens for their apprehension: And although
Morosini, Astonicus and Donato, were so inflamed with their youthful blood and
courage, as they were once generously resolved to sell their lives dearly, and
with their Pistolls, and Swords to prefer an honorable to an infamous death,
yet being far overmastered with numbers and therefore enforced to take a Law
of the stronger; Whereunto they the sooner hearken and consent, in regard the
Sergeants and officers do politickly cry out to them, and pray them to yield,
as affirming that to their knowledge their resolution and fear does far exceed
the danger of their offenses. They make a virtue of necessity, and unlocking
the doors of their In and chambers do cheerfully yield up their persons,
pistolls and swords to the Popes Officers of Justice, who as soon conveigh
them all three to the common prison of that City, which was the same wherein
our not so sorrowful as unfortunate Imperia was already entered, and where to
her unexpressible grief, and Morosini's unparalleled affliction and
disconsolation, such exact charge was given of the Podestate, and such
curiousheed observed and taken of the Jailer, that he could not possibly be
permitted either to see or speak with her, or she with him, the which indeed
they conceived to be far more sharp than their crime, and infinitely more
bitter than the consideration either of their fear or danger.

Now the news of these lamentable Accidents being speedily posted from Ancona
to Loretto, our Imperia's cruel Father Bondino no sooner is ascertained
thereof. But seeing his son in law Palmerius murdered in his bed, and his
wife and his own only daughter Imperia (with her Ruffian Morosini and his two
consorts) to be imprisoned as the Authors, and actors thereof, he for the love
he bore to her life and the tender pity and sorrow he felt of the infamy of
her approaching death, suddenly falls sick, and dies; Whereof his imprisoned
Daughter Imperia understanding, she (in regard of his former severity toward
her) is so much passionate, and so little compassionate as she rather
rejoices than lamenteth at it; Only she prays God to forgive his soul of
that cruelty of his in enforcing her to marry Palmerius, which she knows to
be the the original cause, and fatal cloud from whence have proceeded al^
these dismal storms of affliction, and tempests of untimely death, which she
fears must very shortly befall both her self, and her second self Morosini.

Whiles thus Astonicus and Donato grieve at their hard fortune and danger, and
Morosini and Imperia do reciprocally more lament and sorrow for their
separation then for their imprisonment, and that the Podestate and other
officers of Justice of Ancona are resolved first to inform the Pope, and then
to expect his holiness pleasure for the arraignment, and punishment of these
four prisoners, it pleased God, exceedingly to visit the town of Loretto, and
especially the City of Ancona with the Plague, whereof many thousands in a few
months were swept away, so by special commission and order from Rome, they
(in company of diverse other Prisoners) are conveyed to the city of Polegnio,
two small days journey from Ancona and there to be arraigned and tried upon
their lives and deaths; At which time as they past by the old, little,. City
of Tolentino where I then (in my intended travells toward Rome) lay upon my
recovery of a burning fever; When I say the nature of their crimes, and the
quality of their persons made my curiosity so ambitious, as to see and observe
them in their several chambers of the Inn where they that night lay which was
at the sign of the Popes arms, as for Astonicus and Donato I found them to be
rather sad than merry; Morosini to be far more merry then wise, and Imperia
to be infinitely more fair than fortunate, and all of them to be less
sorrowful for their affliction and danger, than for the cause thereof.

Within three hours of their arrival to Folig^io they are all four convented
before the two criminal Judges, who are purposly sent from Rome thither and
are there, and then severally charged with this foul murder of stifling, to
death the old Signior Palmerius in his bed which all and every one of them
apart do stiffly deny. Notwithstanding that Fundt the host, and Richardo the
Nephew, give in evidence of strong presumption against them, and also
notwithstanding of Morosini's gloves and Bondino's letter written to his Son
in law Palmerius, and delivered by Herbas as we have formerly understood. But
these two grave and prudent Judges, yet strongly suspecting the contrary, they
will not be deluded with the airy words, and sugared speeches and protestations
of their pretended innocence, but consult between themselves what here to
resolve on for the vindication of this truth; So at last they hold it expedient
and requisite first to expose Astonicus to the torments of the Rack, the which
(he being a strong and robustuous man) he endures, with a firm resolution
and constancy every way above himself, and almost beyond belief, and still
confesses nothing, but his innocence and ignorance of this deplorable fact,
whereof the Judges resting not yet satisfied, they within an hour after
adjudge Donato to the tortures of the Scarpines, who being a little timbred
man, of a pale complexion and weak constitution of body, his right foot no
sooner feels the unsufferable fury of the fire, and his tormentors then
confidently promising him all desired favor from his Judges if he will
confess the truth, but after some sorrowful tears, and pitiful cries he
fully and amply does, and in the same manner and form, as in all its
circumstances we have formerly understood. The which when the Judges hear of,
they cannot refrain, first from admiring and wondering there at, and then from
lamenting that personages of their rank and quality should be the Authors and
Actors of so foul and lamentable a murder especially of this fair
Gentlewoman Imperia to her own good old husband Palmerius. Now by this time
also are Morosini, Imperia and Astonicus acquainted with this fatal confession
and accusation of Donato against them for this murder, whereat they do
infinitely lament and grieve, because they are thereby perfectly assured that it
has infallibly made them all three liable, and obnoxious to death, as also for
that their supposed firm friend Donato proved himself so false a man, and so
true a coward to be the cause thereof, wherein they so much forget themselves, as
they do not once think, and they will not therefore remember, that the
detection of this their foul murder proceeded immediately from Heaven, and
originally from the providence and justice of the Lord of Hosts.

The very same after noone, the Judges send for Morosini, Imperia and Astonicus
to appear before them in their public tribunal of Justice, where they first
acquaint and charge them with Donatos confession and accusation against them
for murdering of Palmerius, whereat they are so far from being any way
dismayed ordanted, as they all do deny, and re^ell his accusation, and so in
high terms do stand upon their innocence, and justification. But when they
see Donato brought into the court in a chair, (for his fiery torments of the
Scarpines, had so cruelly scorched, and pitifully burnt away the flesh of the
sole of his right foot almost to the bone that he was wholly unable either to
go or stand) and that they were to be confronted face to face with him, as
also they being also hotly terrified and threatened by the judges with the
torments of the Rack and Scarpines, then God was so gracious to their hearts
and so merciful to their souls, that they looking mournefully each at other,
she weeping, and they sighing, and all of them dispairing of life, and too
perfectly assured of death, they all confess the whole truth of this foul
fact of theirs, and so confirm as much as Donato had formerly affirmed of this
their bloody crime of murdering Pal^rius in his bed; when one of these two
reverend and grave Judges immediately thereupon do condemn them all four to
be hanged the next morning at the common place of execution of that city:
although Donato because of his confession hereof (in vain) flattered himself
that he should receive a pardon for his life; So they are all sent back to
their prison from whence they came, where all the courtesy which the
importunate requests of Morosini, and the incessant sighs and tears of
Impreia an obtain of their Judges is that they grant them an hour of time to
see, converse, and speak one with the other that night in prison, in presence
of their Goalers, and some other persons before they dye. When Morosini being
guided toward her chamber, such is the weakness of his religion toward God;
and the fervency (or rather the exorbitancy) of his affection toward her that
as he passes from chamber to chamber, he is so far from once thinking much
less fearing of death, as he absolutely believes he is going to a Victory, and
a triumph, here Moro^ni with a world of sighs throws himself into his
Imperia's neck and breast; and here Imperia with a whole deluge of tears
embraces and encloystereth her ^orosini in her arms, when after a thousand
kisses they beg pardon one of another, or being the essential and actual
cause each of others death, and do enterchangeably both kiss and speak,
sometimes privately, and most times publicly before the spectators, that if
those reports be true which I first heard thereof in Tolentino next in Folignio,
and lastl^ in Rome, I say to depaint and represent it at life in all its
circumstances, I should then begin a second history, when I am now on the very
point and period to end the first, neither in my conceit is it a task either
proper for me to undertake or pertinent for my pen to perform, because (to
speak freely and ingeniously) I hold the grant and permission of this their
amorous visit and enterview in prison before they dye, to be every way more
worthy of the pity than of the gravity or piety of their Judges. If
therefore I do not content the curiosity, I yet hope I shall satisfy the
judgment of my Christian Reader, here briefly to signify this their limited
hour is no sooner past, but to the sharp affliction of Morosini, the bitter
anxiety of Imperia, they by their Goalers are separated and confined to their
several chambers, where (by the charity of their Judges) they find two Friars
and two Nuns attending them, to prepare their souls for Heaven, and in a less
vain, and a more serious and religious conference to entertain both their
time, and themselves, from an Earthly to the speculation and contemplation of a
divine and heavenly love, as also from them to Astonicus and Donato.

But before I proceed farther, We must understand, that the two Friars have
not been with Morosini and the two Nuns with Imperia above an hour, But by the
two Judges there is a chief subordinate Officers of theirs sent to prison to
tell Imperia, that her Uncle Seignior Alexandro Bondino, a great Senator and
famous Judge of Rome, has obtained her pardon of this present Pope Urban the
eighth. But she is not of glad of this news, as she is then curious to
enquire if her Morosini be likewise pardoned, so the Officer tells her no, and
that he absolutely must suffer death, then she weeps far faster than she
rejoices, and affirms that she will not live but dye. The Judges send for
her, and persuade her to live, but she begges them as importunarely to give
Morosini his life, as they do her to accept and receive her own. They tell
her they have not the power to grant her the first, and she replies, that she
then has not the will to embrace and entertain the second. They acquaint
Morosini herewith, who by their order and by their selves do strongly persuade
her hereunto, but her first answer and resolution is her last, that she
willaccept of no life if he must dye, neither will he refuse any death
conditionally that she may live to survive him. The two Friars and two Nuns
use their best Art and Oratory to persuade her hereunto, but they meet with
impossibility to make her affection to Morosini, and her resolution to her
self flexible hereunto. Her life is not half so precious to her as is his,
for if she had many as she has but one, she is both ready and resolute to
lose and sacrifice them all for his sake, and would esteem it her felicity
that her death might redeem and ransom his life. The Judges (out of their
goodness and charity;) afford a whole day to invite and persuade her hereunto,
but she is still deaf to their requests, and still one and the same woman,
desirous to live with him, or constant and resolute to dye for him. Therefore
when n^thing can prevail with her, because dye he must, so dye she will; to
the which she cheerfully prepares her self, with an equal affection and
resolution, which I rather admire than commend in her.

So the next morning theyare all four brought to the place of common execution
to suffer death. Where Donato is first liftedup to the Ladder, who being fuller
of pain than words said little in effect, but that he wished he had either
died in Constantinople or Aleppo, or else sunk in the sea before he came to
Ancona and not to have here ended his days in misery and infamy. The next who
was ordered to follow him was Astonicus, who told the world boldly and plainly,
that he cared less for his death than for the cause thereof, and that he
loved Morosini so perfectly and dearly, that he rather rejoiced than grieved
to dye for him, only he repented himself for assisting to murder Palmerius,
and from his heart and soul beseeched God to forgive it him, and so he was
turned over. Then Morosini ascends the Ladder ^ad in a hair color satin
suit and a pair of crimson silk stockings, with garters and roses edged with
silver lace, being so vain in his carriage, action, and speeches, as before
he once thought of God, he (with a world of sighs) takes a solemneleave of
his sweet heart Imperia, and with all the powers of his heart and soul prays
her to accept of his life, and so to survive him; He makes an exact and godly
confession of his sins to God and the world, and yet nevertheless he is so
vain in his affection toward Imperia, as he takes both to witness, that had
he a thousand lives he would cheerfully lose them all to save and preserve
hers. As for Imperia such was her dear and tender affection to him, as she
would feign look on him, as long as he lives, and yet she equally desires and
resolves rather to die than to see him die, and because she has not the power,
therefore she turns her ^ace and eyes from him, and will not have the will to
see him dye; When he having said his prayers and so recommended his soul into
the hands of his Redeemer, he is also turned over.

Now although our Imperia be here again and again solicited by the Judges,
Friars and Nuns to accept of her life, yet she seeing her other self Morosini
dead, she therefore disdaines to survive him; she has so much love in her
heart, as she now has little life, and less joy in her looks and
countenance. She ascends the Ladder in a plain black Taffeta Gown, a plain
thick set Ruff, a white Lawne Quayfe, and a long black Cypress veil over
her head with a white pair of gloves, and her prayer book in her hands. When
being far more capable to weep than speak, she casting a wonderful sad
and sorrowful look on her dead lover Morosini, after many volleyes of far
fetchd sighs she delivers this short speech to that great concourse of people
who from City and Country flocked thither to see her and them dye,

Good People: I had lived more happy and not dyed so miserable if my Father
Bondino had not so cruelly enforced me to marry Palmerius whom I could not
love, and to leave Morosini, whom in heart and soul I ever affected a thousand
times deerer than mine own life, and may all fathers who now see my death, or
shall hereafter hear or read this my History be more pitiful and less
cruel to their daughters by his Example. I do here now suffer many deaths in
one to see that my dear Morosini is dead for my sake, for had he not loved
me deerly and I him tenderly he had never died for me, nor I for him, with
such cherfulness and alacrity as now we do. And here to deal truly with
God and the world, although I could never affect or fancy my old husband
Palmerius, yet no^ from my heart and soul I lament and repent that ever I was
guilty of his innocent and untimely death, the which God forgive me, and I
likewise request you all to pray unto God to forgive it me. And not to conceal
or dissemble the truth of my heart, I grieve not to dye, but rather because I
have no more lives to lose for my Morosini's affection and sake. I have and do
devoutly pray unto God for his soul, and so I heartily request and conjure you
all to do for mine. Thus I commend you all to happy and prosperous lives, my
self to a pious and patient death in earth, and a joyful and glorious
resurrection in Heaven, when signing her self often with the sign of the
cross, she pulls her veil down over her face, and so praying that she might
be buried in one and the same grave with Morosini, she bad the executioner
perform his office, who immediately turns her over.

And if reports be true. Never three young men, and one fair young Gentlewoman
died more lamented and pitied then they. For Morosini died with more
resolution than repentance, and Imperia with more repentance than resolution;
thus was their lives, and thus their deaths. May we extract wisdom out of
their folly, and charity out of their cruelty, so shall we live as happy as
they died miserably and finish our days and lives in as much content and
tranquillity as they ended theirs in shame, infamy, and confusion.

GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXVII.
Father Justinian a Priest, and Adrian an Inne-keeper, poison De Laurier, who
was lodged in his house, and then bury him in his Orchard; where a month after
a Wolf digges him up, and devonres a great part of his body; which father
Justinian and Adrian understanding, they fly upon the same, but are afterward
both of them apprehended and hanged for it.

WHeare our hearts are given to Covetousness, and cruelty, there is little
sign of grace, and therefore less hope of our prosperity either in this life,
or the next; For those are sins which so eclipse our judgments, and obscure
and darken our Understandings, that we thereby run blindefolded, and headlong
to all misery and confusion, and make our estates so desperate, that we shall
not deserve to be pitied of others, because we would neither pity nor
compassionate others, or which is worse our selves. A deplorable example
whereof, this ensewing History will present to our knowledge and consideration,
in the persons of two execrable wretches which did wilfully cast away
themselves, and their lives upon f^e and enormous motives. May we religiously
read it to the information of our Consciences, the reformation of our lives.

A Rich Goldsmiths of Dijon (the Capital City of Burgundy) named Monseiur De
Laurier, aged of some threescore years or upwards, having bin at Franckford
Mart. and there sold many. Iewelis, Bracelts, and chains of Pearl, for the
which he had there received some 1700 Crowns; as he returned homewards with
all that great sum of money, converted into couble pistolls, which he
carried behind him in his cloak bag and some remaining Jewels; and in a
private leather girdle next to his body, It chanced that he fell sick on the
way, whereof finding himself ill and weak, and therefore both unwilling and
unable to travel, he got into a poor Country Tavern upon the high way,
some five leagues off from the town of Salines, where he took up his Lodging
for that night, and there three other merchants who were in his company
(whereof one was of Auxone, and the other two of Troyes in Champagne) very
unkindly forsook him, and left him alone to himself; His sickness that night
increasing (which gave him much pain and little rest) he not liking his
lodging, and fearing himself not safe there; the next morning takes horse, and
very softly rides toward Salynes, where he arrived about some two of the
clock after dinner and went into the very first Inn which he met, at the
extremest end of the Town, at the sign of S. Denis, whereof the Host of the
house was named Adrian, and his wife Isabella, they were both of them about
some forty years old, very short of stature, and weak of constitution of
body, he of a cole black countenance, but she fair and of a palle white
color, as for him he was of a dissolute life and carriage, extremely given to
wine and women. He was of poor Parentage and borne to no means at all, but
she was well descended, and brought him at least two thousand Crowns to her
portion in marriage, the which he had prodigally wasted, and deboshedly spent
and squandered away, in following of his vicious riots and obscene pleasures
and prodigalities: As for her she was of a modest carriage and of a virtuous
disposition and inclination, so that by Antithesis I may well aver and
affirm, that his base Vices made her sweet Virtues the more apparent and
conspicuous, and her virtue his vices to all that knew them She made Chastity
and Piety to be the two sweet ornaments and ^eall virtues of her life, yea to
be the Eli^ of her life, and the life of her soul. It was therefore an
extreme grief to her heart, and a matchless torment to her mind, to see the
sordid actions and humors of her Husband, as being every way more capable to
pity than to remedy them. She grieved to see how because he would not serve
God, she could not serve him, and therefore that he had vitiously spent so
much, as now in a manner he had almost nothing more left to spend. The sight
and knowledge whereof drownes all the pleasures of her life, insomuch as she
could sacrifice to nothing but to Sorrow and Repentance, and that which grieved
her most and worst of all was to see that he disdained her advise and
counsel, and that he was so far from reformation, as his vices grew and
increased with his years: and had now not only taken up a habit but a second
nature in the perversity of his lewd action and affections. All the Lillies of
her joys and the Roses of her content were turned into thorns of grief, and
briers and th^les of her vexation, insomuch as she was far more able to sigh
than to speak forth her Calamities and miseries. He loved not his house, and
which was worse he hated her company, yea his estate was so miserable, so
deplorable, as he never conversed with God in prayer, and very seldom
frequented his Church, the Service or Sacraments, and to show himself the more
profane he hated all Priests and Preachers of Gods holy word and ordinances,
and loved none so well as his rio^us and ^oaring companions, the very bane of
the heart, and the true (...) and (...) of the soul.

And into this house, and to this vicious Ho^st Adrian, is our sick De Laurier
entered, for the end of his sickness, and the recovery of his health; and I
write rather with tears than ink, that it was impossible for him to have
entered into a worse; but such was his fate, such his misfortune. He likes the
carriage of Isabella his Hostess, far better than the countenance or
condition of Adrian her Husband; but as his disease gives him no truce, so
consequently he can give no peace to his patience. He grieves to be sick in an
unknown place, and among strangers, but far more to be so far off from his
own house, and from his only child and son Leonardo, whom he loves far
dearer than himself. It is another affliction to him, that his money and some
jewels are here, and not at his home, and if his judgment fail him not, he
suggesteth to himself, that the sight and knowledge thereof may engender him
far more danger than security; but he conceales and dissembles that, far
better than he can his sickness, for he puts his little Casket wherein it is,
under his head and bolster. He causes Adrian his Host to bring him a
Physician, named La Mo^te, who seeing his water, and feeling his pulse, tells
him he is very dangerously sick of a burning Fever, the which to prevent, he
lets him blood two several days following and then gives him far more hope
than despair of his health: But all this notwithstanding, De Laurier finds
himself very weak, and his sickness rather much to increase, than any way to
diminish. As for Isabella, according to the laws of hospitality (which ought
to be unviolable to all the world) she tends him with much respect and
diligence, and in a word, performs the part and duty, both of a good Hostess,
and of a good woman: But for her Husband Adrian, his thoughts and resolutions
run another contrary course and Carriere; for he imagining De Laurier to be
rich does therefore verily hope and pray that he may speedily die in his
house, or else he has already swapt a bargain with the Devil, to murder
him, thereby to make up the breaches and tuines of his poor and totteri
gestate. He finds it a work not only of difficulty, but of impossibility, to
know what rich stuff he has in his Casket and Cloak-bagge, because he still
keeps it under his pillow; and yet gathering and wresting from him, that he is
a Goldsmith of Dijon, and that he came now from Franckford Mart, he therefore
believes that he has store of Gold and Jewels about him. His poverty and his
covetousness gives the switch to the Devil, and the Devil gives the spur to
him, to raise his uncharitable contemplation into bloody actions, and his
thoughts and resolutions as so many lines, run to terminate in this one only
Center, which is that of De Lauriers death. He sets his wits and invention on
the Tenter-hooks, to discover this imagined Indies but he finds him to be as
cautious and secret in concealing, as he himself is curious to bewray it. He
purposly keeps all company from him, and will not so much as permit his
Physician or Apothecary to speak a word with him, but he will still be
present to hear and understand it. He with oily words and silken speeches,
pryes into his deepest secrets, and purposly endeavors to insinuate and screw
himself into his familiarity. But De Laurier does rather fear than love him,
and so esteems the revealing of his Cold to be the accelerating of his danger,
to which end, with many colorable excuses and evasions, he puts him off the
knowledge thereof. But he is so miserable to see his miseries approach,
because the violence and impetuosity of his Fever does every way advance, no
way retire; and now it is that his hopes of the recovery of his health do
fade, not flourish, and rather quail than prosper. He resolves to be as
Religious as he is sick, and therefore prays his Host Adrian to bring him a
Priest to give him the Sacrament; Adrian performs his request, but brings him
a Priest named father Iustini^n, of his own humor and complexion, and who
loves Whores and Wine, better than he does either Heaven or God; so this
unspirituall Father gives him the extreme Unction, and prepares him for his
journey and transmigration from Earth to Heaven. His continual vanities and
prodigalities has likewise made him poor, so being equal with Adrian both in
Vice and Poverty, he is likewise equal, and sympathizeth with him in hope and
desire to repair his Indigence, and to enrich himself by the supposed
treasure and death of De Laurier. But as this deboshed Priest is malicious in
this his policy, so he is also polititike in this his malice, for imagining
that Adrian levels and aims with him at the same Butt and mark; he dares, but
yet will not acquaint him with his bloody purpose, to contract a hellish league
and confederation with him, for the violent dispatch, and inhumane and untimely
dispeeding of him away from Earth to Heaven. Whiles thus De Lauriers sickness
and weakness increases, and his Priest and Adrians covetousness begins wholly
to weigh down their souls and resolutions to hasten his deplorable death; as
the Priest is ready to break his mind to Adrian, how and in what manner they
should finish and compass this bloody business, Adrian contrariwise, yea, and
directly contrary to the rules of Nature, and Laws of Grace, breaks his mind
hereof to his virtuous and Religious wife Isabella, whom he seeks to draw in as
an Actor in this mournful, and as an Agent in this cruel Tragedy. He is as
graceless, as impudent in this foul and fatal attempt of his; for he sets
upon her with the sweetest speech, and smoothest persuasions, that either Art
could suggest, or the malice of the Devil invent or dictate to him, and
therein ever and anon, leaves not to conveigh and distill in her mind, yea,
and to imprint in her memory their fore-past wealth, their present poverty and
misery, and the undoubted great riches of Gold and Jewels which De Laurier had
with him, in that (as formerly we have observed) he very carefully day and
night kept his Casket under his pillow, and in a hellish eloquence represents
unto her the facility of this fact, either by Poniard or poison, adding
withal, that the danger thereof would infallibly die with him, with a thousand
other damnable alluring speeches, conducing and looking that way, which I am
far more inclinable to silence than express: But wretched Villain, and
execrable miscreant that he is, he speaks not a word, no not a syllable of
God or his Justice, of Heaven or Hell, or of the foulness of that fact, or the
just revenge and punishment incident and due thereunto.

His virtuous wife Isabella is amazed and astonished at this bloody and
inhumane proposition of her Husband, and all trembling, with sighs and tears,
receives it from him with no less true affliction and sorrow, than he
delivered it her with cruelty and impiety. Her cheeks were as red for shame, as
his were pale with envy thereat; when God infusing as much goodness into her
heart and tongue, as Satan had cruelty into his soul and resolutions, she fell
on her knees to his feet, and with her eyes and hands erected toward Heaven,
delivered him this virtuous and Religious speech; That it was with infinite
grief and amazement that she understood this his bloody position to her,
which he knew she could derive from none but Hell and Satan: She represents to
him (with much grief and passion) that as punishment is ever the reward of
sin, so that of all sins murder was the foulest, and the most pernicious
and diabolical. She tells him farther, that covetousness is the root of all
mischief, that for her part she is as thankful to God, as he is displeased
with himself for their poverty, and that she would ever choose rather to
live in want, than to dye in shame and misery, and which is worst of all either
to live or dye in the horrors and terrors of a guilty and ulcerated
Conscience. That it is a profane and prodigious impiety to violate the laws
of Hospitality, but a fearful, yea a horrible crime, to kill any one under
our own roof, and who (in the right of humanity and christianity) comes to us
for shelter and protection. When rising again from her knees, she takes him
about the neck and (bedewing his cheeks with her tears) conjures and prays
him, by the remembrance of her youth and beauty, which had formerly been so
dear and precious to him, by the memory of their sixteen years sweet
cohabitation and conversation together in the holy Estate of Wedlock, yea for
his own sake, for his souls sake, and for Gods sake, that he would defy
this devil, which thus with his two bitter sweet pills of Covetousness and
Murder mocked and sought to betray him: and that therefore (in the name and
fear of God) he would henceforth resume, and put on a constant and religious
resolution, no more to seduce her, or to suffer himself to be seduced by the
Devil in imbruing their guilty hands in the innocent blood of this honest and
harmless Goldsmith De Laurier, whom God has now made their guest and Lodger;
In doing whereof (quoth she) the same our sacred Lord and God, (in his due
time) will be graciously pleased to increase our estate and means and to
bless our poverty with plenty. But her Husband Adrian (as a most wretched
Villane takes this godly refusal and denial of his Wife in ill part, and in
requital and consideration thereof, henceforth looks on her with a squint
eye, I mean with an eye rather of contempt and envy than of affection; But at
board, and bed, yea day and night he haunts her as a ghost, and never leaves
pursuing of her with his profane and importunate solicitations to draw her
consent to the acting and perpetrating of this bloody business; But God so
well assisted her mind and thoughts, with the grace of his holy Spirit, and so
divinely fortified her heart and soul with his sacred fear, that her Husbands
sweet persuasions could not gain, nor his threats or menaces obtain any thing
of her but still she answered this murtherous request of his, sometimes with
religious refusalls, and then again with passionate and peremptory denialls,
and therefore the more that she sees her Husband bent to malign and hate De
Laurier, the more devoted and resolute she is to respect and tend him, still
bearing a curious, a careful, and a vigilant eye over him during all the time
of his sickness to see that no disaster whatsoever might befall him in her
house

Adrian missing of this his purpose and desire in his Wife he is yet so hasty
and violent in this his bloody malice toward De Laurier, that measuring of Fa
there Justinian the Priest, by himself, and finding a conformity in their
deboshed vices and inclinations, he the sooner hopes to find a sympathy in
their affections and resolutions, and therefore although he be a Priest, yet
knowing him to be extreme poor, he therefore the more easily believes, that
the hope of Gold and Silver will act wonders with him, and make him act wonders
for the obtaining thereof.

Upon these hopes, and this confidence, he delays no time, but on a Monday
morning repaires to his house, and after their morning cups, telling him he
has a secret of great importance to reveal him, he takes him into a little
Grove of Walnut Trees, behind his house and there (swearing him to secrecy)
reveals him this his bloody business, where this vicious Priest Justinian, in
hope of De Lauriers wealth needed no great labor or industry to be drawn to
make one in this deplorable Tragedy. For had not Adrian now opened it to him,
such was his insatiable thirst and desire of gold though with blood, that the
next day he was fully resolved to do it to him, so he freely consents to him
herein, and swears to assist and second him in murdering of De Laurier and
the tie and condition of this their hellish bargain is, that what gold,
silver, or jewels they shall find him to have, they will instantly after his
death equally divide and share between them; and hereunto like two bloody
hellhounds, they enterchangeably give hands, and solemnly swear each to other.
Now from the matter of this their bloody design and resolution, they proceed
to the manner and time thereof, but they then are prevented therein, For Father
Justinians little Boy which was accustomed to answer him at Mass comes thither
hastily and with his little wine pot on his finger tells him, that there were
many persons who stayed for him before the Altar on their knees and earnestly
enquired for him to say Mass, whereupon they both refer the conclusion
hereof to the very next morning, and in the very same place and Grove, but at
least an hour sooner; So away goes Adrian home to his house, and away likewise
trips Father Justinian with his Surplesse under his arm and his Breviary (or
Matines book) in his hand to the Church, where every one may imagine what a
profane sacrifice, his bloody heart and hands offers up to the Lord.

They this night thinking of nothing but of gold and blood, in the morning they
(impatient of all delays) come at the aforesaid time and place of their
rendezvous where they presently fall to their former consultation of the manner
and time of murdering De Laurier, first, they propose to stabbe him in his bed
to death, but this they reject, because the blood would appear in the sheets,
bed, and chamber; So they resolve to poison him, and to this end Adrian buies
the poison and Father Justinian will give and administer it to him in a wafer
or Agnus Dei, the which he is sometimes accustomed to give him in his
sickness; But here father Justinian suggesteth another doubt; and proposes
another design, which is that Adrian must likewise draw in his wife Isabella
to make one in this bloody conspiracy and murder, or else he alleges that
it can never be safe for them to attempt or effect it; Adrian answers him
that he has heretofore with his best power and art sought to seduce his wife
hereunto, but that he finds it wholly impossible to draw her to this consent:
But father Justinian will yet make another trial and experiment on her
himself, so he and her Husband Adrian set afresh on her, to allure her to
bring at least her consent, if not her hand to the murdering of De Laurier.
But our sweet and virtuous Isabella is still one and the same woman, for she
hears these bloody speeches and persuasions of theirs, with infinite
discontent and detestation. She is too much a Christian to be so much a
Devil to consent to the murtherof this honest man; and therefore (with a world
ofteares and prayers) she seeks to divert them from it, but especially her
Husband, because (quoth she) the issue thereof will infallibly prove ruinous
to them both. They are both much grieved at this her resolute repulse and
denial, and yet to make a virtue of necessity, and to cast the better gloss
and varnish on their villainy, they now falsely seem to be diswaded from this
murder, by the sight of her tears and the consideration of her requests and
prayers; Wherefore with a profane and hellish dissimulation) they tell her,
that God by her religious speeches and disswasions has now made them wholly to
abandon that bloody attempt of theirs against De Laurier, as also the very
thought thereof, and therefore they conjure her to keep and swear secrecy
herein from all the world, the which she willingly does. But yet her fear
prompts her heart, that this humane conversion, and religious resolution of
theirs is only false and feigned, as every way savouring more of dissimulation
than truth. In which regard she fears with suspicion, and suspects with
doubt, that no less than honest and innocent De Lauriers life, lies now at the
stake of their bloody malice and envy

Here Father Instinian, and Adrian (to make smooth and clear work) do conclude
and resolve that Isabella must be speedily removed from Salines to some place
in the country without once seeing or speaking with De Laurier when a
favorable occasion seconds their damnable intents, and desires herin: for now
there is unexpectedly brought them word, that her own old Father who dwelt
some four leagues off from Salines is very sick and not like to live;
Whereupon Adrian presently dispatcheth away his wife Isabella to him, and with
her their Servant maid Graceta. But before her departure she is desirous to
see De Laurier, and to take her leave of him; but her Husband will by no means
permit her; So she goes from her home, and from him into the Country, with a
sorrowful and a trembling heart, as far more fearing De Lauriers unnatural
death, then doubting of her fathers natural case. For her heart frames her so
many apprehensions, fears, and terrors; that her husband and father Iustimian
are fully resolved to murder and make away De Laurier, as she absolutely and
sorrowfully believes, that he shall never see her more nor she him. Poor De
Laurier takes his Hostess Isabellas sudden and unexpected departure from him
very pensively and heavily, and far the more in that she could not be
permitted to see him before she went. He holds it for a bad presage, and
fatal Omen to him, in regard she was as diligent as her Husband distrustful
to him, for that her care and carriage toward him, pleased him as much as his
harsh looks and sour countenance discontented him; and now it is that God
first imprints in his heart and thoughts, a fearful suspicion and a
suspicious fear, that his Host Adrian, and father Justinian the Priest have
assuredly some dangerous and execrable plot, both against his gold and his
life. For he now sees himself reduced to this misery and despair, that he
can be permitted to see no body, nor no body to see him, except only they
two. He prays them both, that his Physician La Motte may come to him to
confer with him about the state of his sickness, but they maliciously and
wilfully deny it him, and tell him he is gone into France; This refusing
answer of theirs does now very much appale and daunt our fieke and discontented
De Laurier, so that his fear increases with his sickness, and his (...) with
his fear. Every day and night brings him more cause of (...), than hope of
consolation, and almost every moment he wishes his gold and himself in (...)
with his Son Du Pont, or he here in Salynes with him, to comfort him with
his sight and presence. He still conceales his go^ and (...) from this Priest
and his Host, with the greatest art and care he can, and ^ot he thinks and
fears that their jealousy thereof is not only the foundation, but will also
move the acceleration of his danger, for he very often se^ them privately
whispering together and still he observes some bad sign and and fatal
apparition in their looks and countenances, which infallibly tell him that all
is not well. And although they yet give him some sweet words and sugared
speeches, yet he notwithstanding the more believes that they are candide in
wormwood and confected in gall; and that they are no other but false and
flattering Sune shines, which portend some ensewing cruel storms and dismal
tempests toward him. Once he was minded to write and send to Dijon for his
Son, but then he as soon resolves the contrary, as finding it to relish more
of danger than discretion, as well for the matter which his letter might
contain, as also for the party who should carry it thither to him. But leave we
him a little to his weakness, and sickness to his doubts and fears, and to his
sorrows, calamities and perplexities, and come we again to speak of
wretched Adrian his Host, and of profane ^ather Justinian the Priest, to see
in what shapes they will come forth to act their bloody parts upon the stage of
this History.

They are both of them so inhumane and cruel in their resolution to murder
poor sick De Laurier, that neither the consideration of Heaven nor Hell is
capable to reclaim or divert them from this their bloody attempt. As fos his
hellish host Adrian, he is so wilful and hasty in his malice, as he tells
father Justinian, that they delay too long from murdering De Laurier, and that
it is high time yea more than time for them to dispatch him. But for father
Justinian who was no less malicious in his subtilty, but yet far more
subtle in his malice toward De Laurier. He I say maturely considering that
it were both a folly and a madness for them to murder him before they first
knew he were rich, and that he had some store of gold about him, he
therefore in sweet terms and phrases pathetically advises him to write and
send for his Son Du Pont, to come over to visit and comfort him, when
likewise the better to guild over his speeches with the more pleasing and
palpable show of affection he proffereth to ride to Dijon himself to deliver
it him with his own hands. Our poor sick De Laurier taking this Priests kind
advise to him in good part, he thereupon first thanks him for this his
courtesy, but then again deeming and fearing that it proceeded more from
false treachery, than from any true or real affection to him he begins to
grow cold therein, and so rather to reject, than embrace and follow that
resolution; But at last weighing and considering his sickness by his danger,
and his gold and jewels by both, as also if he should chance to dye or
miscarry there, that his Son were then consequently ruined in the loss
thereof; He thereupon changes his resolution; and presently resolves to write
and send over to Dijon for his Son and to that end requesteth Father Justinian
to excuse him, and so prays his Host Adrian to undertake that journey and
business, the which he willingly and cheerfully grants. Now the rest of
that day and the greatest part of the next night De Laurier lies ruminating and
musing in his bed what he should write to his Son, and no less does father
Justinian and Adrian to think and know what he would write him. The next
morning, six of the clock having stricken, De Laurier takes his pen and
paper, and with a weak and trembling hand writes his Letter to his Son: An
hour after, Adrian comes into his Chamber booted and spurred to receive his
commands, whom he had to take and ride his own horse, then gives him four
double pist^ls to defray his journey, and so seals and gives him this ensewing
Letter, and prays him and his Son Du Pont to make all possible speed back
from Dijon to him.

DE LAVRIER to DU PONT.
SOme seven weeks since, coming from Frankford Mart, I fell sick at Salynes
where I still lie very weak in body and much discontented in mind in (...)
^use of mine Host Adrian (the bearer hereof) whom I purposly send over to
thee, to pray and command thee to come ride hither to me with all possible
speed, I have herewith me in gold and Jewels to the vallew of one thousand
seven hundred Crowns, and for some private reasons) I fear that neither it
nor my life is safe here; Come away with an intent to find me dead or dying.
Conceal this Letter from all the world. Love this Messenger but trust him not;
God prosper my Health, and ever bless thy prosperity.

DE LAVRIER.


As soon as De Laurier had delivered his Host Adrian this Letter, and he
taken leave of him, father Justinian begs leave of De Laurier to see Adrian
take horse. But alas these two lewd Villains do deceive his honest hopes, to
perform their own treacherous Intents and purposes; For they fly to a low
parler, and then lock and bolt the door to them; where (as if the devil had
thrown them on covetousness, or covetousness on the devil) they hastily
break up the seals of De Lauriers letter to his Son (which we have already
seen and understood) wherein they glut and surfeit their hopes with joy of this
new desired treasure and discovered Indyes, and so they presently sacrifice it
to the fire, and wretchedly resolve to make that very same ensuing night to be
the very last of De Lauriers time and the first of his eternity. To which end
Adrian husheth himself up privately in his house from the sight of all the
world, and especially from De Lauriers knowledge and so here he ends his
pretended, but not his intended journey to Dijon, before he begin it: And he
having procured exceeding strong poison therewith that night to send De Laurier
to Heaven whereof giving a little to his great old mastive dog in a piece of
bread for a trial he therewith presently fell dead to the ground; he likewise
sends away Thomas his Ostler a days journey into the Country upon some feigned
business, to the end he should be no witness of this foul and cruel fact
of theirs and then all things being first by the devil, and then by these his
two execrable agents prepared in a readiness; Father Justinian goes up to De
Lauriers chamber, and treacherously entertaines him with the hope of his
recovery of his health, the have of Adrians Journey, and consequently with the
speedy return of his Son Du Pont to him from Dijon. But I write it with
truth and grief, that De Lauriers heart and mind is preoccupated with too many
obnoxious apprehensions and fears, and taken up with too much doubt and
despair to the contrary; For as most sicknesses and diseases are most commonly
devanced and preceeded by their symptoms so all that day and all that evening
he found a swimming in his head, and his sight obscured and darkened, as if
some black scarf, or fatal cloud had been drawn and extended before his
eyes. His heart likewise pants, beats and trembles within him, as if it and his
senses were in a factious mutiny each with other at this their direful
departure and fatal sequestration. For still his fears and doubts inform
him, and his apprehensions and despair prompt him that either father Justinian
the Priest, or his Host Adrian, or both of them, had conspired to murder him,
the which he once thought to have revealed to Father Justinian, but yet again
he dares not, as holding it more folly than discretion, and that it might
therefore produce him more danger than safety; he neither can nor will eat any
thing that day, and his heart and mind is so incessantly perplexed with fear,
that he fears he shall not outlive the next ensuing night: And now indeed
comes that sorrowful and dismal night, wherein these two bloody Villains have
fully resolved to poison him, Adrian having in a lower room the poison ready,
and Father Justinian above, almost ready to call for it: Whiles thus the candle
in De Lauriers chamber burnt dim and obscure, as disdaining to see, or be
accessory to so cruel a murder; near about twelve of the clock of that
night he awakes out of his sorrowful distracted slumbers, and prays Father
Justinian to give him a little spoonful or two of warm wine, in a small
earthen pot wherein he was used to drink; when this monster of men rejoicing
for this fit opportunity, he steps forth to his bloody companion Adrian, takes
the poisoned wafer from him, and powers the poison from it into this small
black pot of wine, and so warmes it a little by the fire in De Lauriers
chamber, and then gives it to him to drink, the which he as greedily as
innocently does, whereof, after many strong convulsions and struglings, he
within one hour after dies, having neither the means to utter one word, or
the power to scritch or cry, and yet for fear and doubt hereof, like two
furies, or Devils incarnate of Hell they with thebed-staves ram in a great
holland towell into his mouth, that he may tell no tales, when God knows that
deadly strong poison had wrought its operation before, made a full conquest of
his life, and given up his soul into the hands of his Redeemer, of whom he had
formerly received it.

As soon as these two wretched miscreants have dispatched this lamentable
business, then they tear off his secret leather girdle full of gold from his
waste, and then break open his Casket which was under his pillow, wherein
(before his breathless body was half cold) they find this aforesaid great
sum of Gold and Jewels, the which they presently divide, and equally share
between them, when having curiously searched his purse, pockets, doublet and
hose, they make a great fire, and immediately burn it all, as also his riding
Coat, Casket, and leather Girdle, yea, and his hat, band and cuffes, that no
marks might remain either of it or him, and likewise turn his horse into the
open field and hye-wayes, to seek for the fortune of a new Master; so wise (as
they thought) were they in their villainy, and so industrious and cautious in
this their devilish cruelty and in humanity. By this time, as the murdered
corpse of De Laurier grows cold, these two Factors of Hell likewise begin to
provide for his burial; so a little after two of the clock, they dig a pit
in Adrians Orchard, next adjoining to his house, and so giving him no other
winding sheet or coffin but his shirt, they secretly and silently carry down
his body between them, and there bury him, and to make all things sure, they
cover over the pit, or his grave with green turffes, that no mortal eye might
take suspicion or notice thereof. This bloody business being thus acted and
perpetrated by these two execrable wretches, Father Justinian and Adrian, who
now surfeit in Gold, and wallow in Jewels, they presently dight themselves into
new apparel, and costly suits, and then day and night haunt and frequent the
Tavernes and Stews, as if they wilfully meant to drown themselves in all
sorts of ungodly riots, prodigalities and voluptuousness, whereof their
neighbors, yea, all Salynes take exact observation and knowledge, as wondering
at the manner, but far more at the cause thereof, or from whence it should
proceed.

Some three weeks being past over, Adrian now holds it fit to send home for his
wife Isabella to Salynes, the which he does, who much wondering at her Husbands
unaccustomed bravery, she presently enquires of him for Monsieur De Laurier, as
if she had far more cause to doubt and fear of his danger, than any way to
assure her self of his safety and welfare: When, he putting on a brazen face,
and steeling and tempering his tongue with equal falsehood and impiety, tells
her that he departed thence safe and well some ten days since; that he gave
him fifty crowns for the charges of his entertainment and lodging, and for a
token of his love, had likewise left her and Father Justinian, to each of them
twenty other Crowns in Gold: But his wife Isabella out of her goodness and
piety) deeming these speeches of her Husbands to be as false as fatal, and
verily suspecting and fearing, that he (with the assistance of Father
Justinian) had sent that harmless good old man to an untimely death and grave;
she bursts forth into immoderate sighs and tears, as suspecting all was not
well, yea, fearing nothing more, and believing nothing less, than that which
he affirmed to her herein. He proffers her the twenty Crowns in Gold, but
(good virtuous woman) she fearing it to be the hire and price of innocent
blood, her tender conscience is too prevalent, and her harmless heart and
soul too powerful with God to accept thereof, and therefore she refuses it with
as much disdain and discontent, as he endeavors to give it her with
affection and desire. And that the Reader may the more fully be informed of her
integrity and charity herein, I mean to the present memory and well wishes of
absent De Laurier, whom she silently fears is for ever absent, both from this
life and this world; she never goes into the chamber where he lay sick, but
she sacrifices some sighs to sorrow in his behalf, and her imaginary
apprehension of his death, makes her mournfully conceive, that either she
still sees his living picture, or his dead ghost and representation, such was
her charitable care of him, such her Christian fear for him.

We have seen this deplorable and cruel murder committed on the harmless
person of old De Laurier, by these two members of Satan, Adrian, and Father
Justinian the Priest, and if the truth deceive not my hopes, we shall not
proceed much farther in this their History, but we shall see Gods just
Judgments miraculously to resplend and shine forth in his punishments on them
for the same: For I may properly term murder and punishment to be
Individuals and Companions, in regard the one follows the other, as the shadow
does the body, as the first derives its original from Satan, so does the
second from God, to whom (in a language of blood) it still cries for
restoration and satisfaction. But nevertheless God is as secret as sacred in
disposing of the manner and time thereof, and in ordaining by whom, when and
how he will afflict and execute it: It is no false axiom in Philosophy, but a
true tenent and maxim in Divinity; That God who made all things, sees and
governes all things, and that nothing can be concealed from the eyes of his
sacred Power and divine Providence: All the four Elements are the ministers of
his justice, yea, Men and Angels, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the fowls of
the air, and the beasts of the field prove many times the Agents of his
Revenge; of which last sort and nature, the Reader (to Gods glory, and his own
information and admiration) may here observe a lively example, and receive a
most powerful president; but whether more strange for the truth, or rare for
the strangeness thereof I know not, and therefore will not define. For the
same day month next after, that Adrian and father Instinian had buried the
dead body of De Laurier, behold a huge and ravening Wolf (being lately
arroused from the the adjacent vast woods) seeking up and down for his prey,
came into Adrians Orchard next adjoining to his house (purposly sent thither by
God as a minister of his sacred justice and revenge) who senting some dead
carrion (which indeed was the dead Corpse of De Laurier, that was but shallowly
buried there in the ground) he fiercely with his paws and nose tares up the
Earth, and at last pulls and dragges it up, and there till an hour after the
break of day remains devouring and eating up of the flesh of his arms
legs, thighs, and buttocks. But (as God would have it) he never touched any
part of his face, but leaves it fully undissigured; When instantly some
Gentlemen hunters of Salynes, and the Neighbor parishes, being ascertained by
some Peasants in the fields, that the Wolf was past that way, they closely
follow him with their Dogs and Horns, and so at last find him in Adrians
Orchard, eating as they think of some living beast or dead carrion; But the
Wolf being terrified with the noise of the hunters loud shoutes and cries, as
also of their Dogs fierce yawling and bawling, presently forsakes his prey,
and saves his life by his flight, although the Dogs and many Peasants do
eagerly pursue him; Whiles all the Gentlemen (as if led by the immediate finger
of God) with their Iavelins and boarespeares in their hands, rush into the
Orchard to see and find out whereon the Wolf had preyed, when lo (contrary
to their expectations) their amazed eyes are enforced to behold the pitiful
spectacle, and lamentable object of a mangled dead man's body, miserably
devoured and eaten by that savage Wolf, and the which they saw he had dug
and torn up, as they fully believed from his untimely grave: They therefore at
first stand astonished with grief, and amazed for sorrow at this prodigious
and deplorable sight, and yet such was their living compunction to this dead
corpse, and consequently their zeal to Gods glory and Justice, as confidently
believing that he was proditoriously murdered by some inhumane person or
persons; that the odious stinch of this long buried body; could not hinder them
from approaching to survey and behold it; They find the greatest part of the
flesh of his body devoured by the Wolf, but (as before) his face whole and
untouched, when they see (and extremely grieve and sorrow to see) that it was a
grave old man with a long white beard, but so besmeared with earth and dust as
they coud not refrain from sighs and tears to behold it. Here they cease to
pursue the Wolf, and because neither of them knew this poor and miserable
dead carkase, they therefore step to the other end of the Orchard, and there
consult what is fit to be done in this lamentable business and accident. But
their opinions as so many lines concur and terminate in this center, that
absolutely this dead body was cruelly murdered, and there by the murderers
privately and silently buried. They farther vehemently suspect and believe,
that because it was buried in Adrians Orchard, that therefore it was apparently
probable, it was he with his wife and Servants who had murdered and buried
him there, wherefore to keep these suspected bloody birds in their Cages,
they (as wise and juditious Gentlemen) place a strong guard of their Servants
and Peasants to watch the doors and windows of Adrians house, that none issue
forth thence, and they themselves go presently to the Criminal judges of the
Town, and acquaint them with this lamentable object and accident.

In the mean our harmless and virtuous Isabella, hearing these loud shouts
and outcries at her doors so soon in the morning, she in the absence of her
Husband; (who lay forth of his house that night deboshing and revelling with
his cups and Queanes) fearing that all was not well, and therefore her amazed
and sorrowful heart; not willing to know that whereof she was infinitely
desirous to be ignorant, she lay still bitterly sighing and weeping in her
bed, because her thoughts and mind, her suspicions and fears told her, that
this unseasonable alarm and noise might descend and reflect from some fatal
news which had betided De Laurie^, and if this storm and tempest fell not on
her, yet alas she extremely fears and doubts it would fall on Adrian her
husband, whom she vehemently thought and feared had imbrued and imbathed his
hands in the innocent blood of this honest man. As for Thomas her Ostler, and
Gracetta her maid, although this unaccustomed noise made them suddenly forsake
their beds and apparel themselves to receive their mistress commands how they
should bear themselves in this hurly burly, yet because they were white with
innocence, yea so innocent as they knew no hurt, or thought of danger they only
deemed, that it was either some unlawful assembly of Peasants, or else some
cast and disbanded soldiers from Flanders who came to rob their masters house
or poultry in his absence, wherefore mere fear hereof, kept them from either
opening the doors, or looking out at windows. By this time the Gentlemen
hunters bring the criminal Judges on the place to view this dead body, and
with them come a great number of the Neighbors and Inhabitants of Salynes to
do the like, and amongst the rest, the Physician La Motte (of whom this
History has already made mention and he of all the rest knows the dead body,
and therefore with much passion and sorrow cries out: that it was a Goldsmiths
of Dijon named Monsieur De Laurier, who lay long sick in Adrians house, and
that he had formerly given him Physic there, and so he said and affirmed
that he perfectly knew him to be the same, and verily imagined that he was
brought to some untimely end, and so buried there, but by whom he knew not.

The Judges therefore believing the report of this honest Physician La Motte;
they cause the remainders of the flesh of this dead body to be searched and
visited, the which they find without any wounds. And yet nevertheless deeming
both Adrian, his wife Isabella, and their Servants to be the murderers of
this honest man; they break open the doors, and missing Adrian they seize on
his wife Isabella, as also on her Ostler Thomas, and his maid Graceta and then
bring them to the sight of this dead body with whose murder they flatly charge
them, and enquire what is become of Adrian himself. At this unexpected
sorrowful news and object, Isabella is all in Tears, yea she is so
extremely perplexed and afflicted, as wanting all other assistance and comfort
she implores that of God. She tells them that her Husband Adrian lay not at
home with her the last night, and freely and plainly affirms to them; that
that dead body was Monsieur De Laurier a Goldsmiths of Dijon, who lay long
sick in her house as he came from Frankford Mart, but how he came to his end
or by whom, she takes heaven and earth to witness she knows not, and with
this her deposition do her Ostler and maid concur and agree in all proofs
and circumstances. The Judges likewise causing a curious search to be made in
Salynes for Adrian, it was found out that that night he lay in father
Justinians house the Priest, and two whores in their Company drinking and
revelling all night, and upon the very first report they heard of De Lauriers
unburiall by a Wolf, they both (galled with guilty consciences) betake
themselves to their heels, and left both their two Strumpets to their
repentance. Their flight proclaims their guiltiness of this murder to all
the world especially to the Judges. Who upon knowledge thereof to find out the
truth of this deplorable disaster, they adjudge Isabella, Thomas and Graceta to
the rack: As for Thomas and Graceta, their innocence makes them brook their
torments with admirable patience and constancy, for they can never be drawn
to reveal that of which they are ignorant not to accuse themselves of that
whereof they are not guilty. But for Isabella the incessant prayers and
importunate requests and solicitations of many of her honest neighbors does
ingrave such deep impressions of her virtues and piety, and of her sweet
inclination and disposition in the hearts of the judges, as they change their
resolutions against her and so dispense with her for that torture. When sending
every way abroad to pursue Adrian and father Justinian they content themselves
to keep the Mistress, the man and the maid close prisoners. They are so advised
in their judgments, and so juditious in their advise, as they speedily send
away Poast to Dijon to acquaint Du Pont the Son, with this disasterous
accident which had betided his father De Laurier here in Salynes, who at the
first alarm of this sad unexpected news, seems now to drown himself in his
tears thereat, and so thereupon rather to fly than poast away from Dijon to
Salynes where he confers with the criminal Judges of that Town, who report to
him the flight of father Justinian and Adrian, as also of their imprisoning of
his wife Isabella, of her maid Graceta, and her Ostler Thomas, in whose house
his father lay sick. So Du Pont visits the dead, stinking, mangled body, and
finds it to be that of his father, whereat nature and duty prescribe him so
powerful a Law, as at the sight thereof, he bursts forth into many bitter
tears and lamentable cries and passions. When giving him a decent and solemn
burial in the next Church, he then informs the Judges, that to his knowledge
his father had good store of gold and jewels about him, so he entreats them,
that Adrian and father Justinians houses maybe curiously searched for the same,
which is performed, but finding no part thereof, and both of them fled, he is
confident in his heart, that their flight proclaims them guilty of his fathers
murder, and consequently that Isabella her Ostler and maid infallibly were
accessaries thereunto: Whereupon he repaires again to the Judges, and with
many importunities prays them that all three of them may be put to the rack
for the same, thereby to bolt and find out the truth of this lamentable
accident, the judges approve of Du Ponts living affection and zeal to his dead
father, but (as impartial Oracles and Officers of Justice) they tell him that
they have already caused Thomas and Graceta to be racked, and that they both
have strongly justified their innocence of his fathers Murder, by suffering
their torments with incredible fortitude and patience. And as for their Mistress
Isabella. They tell him they are fully resolved and assured, that she was
absolutely innocent, as well for that she was many days absent with her
father in the Country, when by all likelihood and circumstance, his father was
murdered, as also because the general votes and voices of all her neighbors
reported her to be a very virtuous and religious woman, and that therefore in
their hearts and consciences, they must needs exempt and free her from those
torments. But they told him farther, that in honor to justice, and to see what
God and time might produce, they would detain them all three in Prison for the
space of three or four months, in which mean time concurring with him in
opinion that father Instinian and Adrian undoubtedly were the murderers of his
father De Laurier, they therefore persuade him with all possible speed and
diligence to pursue them up and down the Country, until he had detected,
apprehended, and brought them to justice; the which Du Pont does, but with such
extraordinary zeal and have, that he forgot a singular circumstance, of no
mean importance, the omission where of might very well have made his research
of them vain. For he forgate at Salynes to take with him their Pictures and
Effigies whereby to find them out in the Country, with far the more ease and
facility, whereof he afterward much repented himself.

As for our two execrable wretches, father Instinian and Adrian their guilty
thoughts and consciences (like so many Ghosts and bloodhounds) so incessantly
pursued them and stupefied their judgments, that resolving to fly and save
themselves from the free County, into Switzerland, they hush themselves up the
day for shelter in some thick grove or Wood, and traveling all night from
Salynes, they notwithstanding, the next morning (to their unspeakeable fear
and vexation) saw themselves again within a little league thereof, and in this
manner they for some eight nights following, traveled a foore through unknown
ways and woods, and yet here let the Reader behold and observe the wonderful
Justice of God toward them, for at the end thereof, they are not as yet fully
gone seven leagues off from Salynes, and they could not ascend the least Hill
or Hillocke, but they looking back behind them, the Towers and Turrets of
Salynes were still apparent and conspicuous to them, as if they pursued and
followed them, the which indeed stroke extreme fear to their guilty hearts
and, and infinite terror and amazement to their foul and trembling
consciences. But this circumstance of Gods wrath and revenge toward them, is
forthwith seconded and followed by another, wherein his divine Providence and
justice miraculously appears and shines forth (with infinite luster and glory)
to all those who shall read, or hear this History. For the tenth evening
after their flight from Salynes, they being extremely wearied and tired with
their foot Travells (for horses they dared not buy any) and within a mile off
entering into a great wood, they in afaire plain, seeing no body present, they
at last espied an Erring Horse, without Rider, Saddle, or Bridle: which
resolving to seize on thereby to recreate their wearied limbs and bodies they
approach and surprise him. And then Adrian knowing him well to be De Lauriers
horse, which (we have heard they had formerly turned off in Salynes the same
night wherein they murdered his Master. They extreme joyful of this unlooked
for good fortue, make a halter of their girdles and garters, and so casting
their cloakes under them, they both ride away on him, and night drawing on,
they hope to recover the Town of Pontarlin before break of day; But God is
here strongly bent against them, so that this Horse which they took for the
cause of their joy, will very shortly prove the matter of their misery, and
that which they thought would be the matter of their safety will fall out to
produce their inevitable danger and confusion. For God (in his revenging
Justice) carring their horse, and he them a straying and masking that night
through contrary ways and Lanes, they the next morning at break of day to
their unspeakeable grief, do see themselves three great leagnes off from
Pontarlin, when their soul facts and consciences make them still so
tremblingly fearful, that every Bush they beheld, every bird they hear, and
every ^fe they found wagging, they think are so many Sergeants come to
arrest them, as also every tree they fast; they confidently believe are so many
Judges come to sentence and condemn them to death for this their cruel
murdering of De Laurier, such was their prodigious despair, such their
ominous and fatal fear for the same.

But here their horse (orecharged with this foul and monstrous burden)
begins to fail them, so the more he l^sseneth his pace the more it
increases their apprehension and fear: And here they consult what to do,
whether to retire with their horse into the next Wood till night, or else to
advance toward Pontarlin. But their Bread and Meat failing them, and they
seeing the coast clear, they therefore resolve to ride thither, and far the
sooner do they assume and embrace this resolution; because as yet they knew it
was timely in the morning, and consequently few or no people stirring. Now to
dispatch their journey the sooner, Adrian is content to walk on foot, and
father Justinian to ride, and both of them are equally resolved to put
cheerful faces on their perplexed and trembling hearts. And here as I will
not say it was their bad, but their just fortune, which conducted them within
less than one league of Pontarlin, without being espied or seen of any. So it
was likewise the providence and Justice of God, at that very hour and place
first to bring Du Pont in sight of them, who in two days was parted from
Salynes, and in all that time had left no Hamlet Village, or Town unsought to
find out and apprehend these murderers of his father; Now as he draws near
them, his eye tells him that the Horse whereon one of these two men rid, was of
the very same hair and shape as was that of his fathers, which struck some
suspicion and apprehension in his heart, that sure these were father Iustintan
and Adrian and far the more because by his habit he knew that he who rid
was a Priest. The better therefore to be fully assured hereof, he resolves to
outride them, thereby the more narrowly to observe both the horse and them, the
which he does. He passes by them and viewes them with his countenance
purposly composed more of neglect than of observation toward them. When
perfectly knowing the horse (by his two white feet, and white Star in his
forehead) to be his Fathers, and therefore they by all consequence and
appearance they to be his murderers, then I say Nature and Grace infused a
secret reluctation into his heart and soul, whether he should more grieve or
rejoice to see them; Now as he is loath to leave them behind him, so he
bethinkes himself of a pretty policy. For riding some hundred paces before
them, he descends from his horse, ties him up to the branch of a Tree, casts
down his sword and riding coat in the high way untrusseth his points, and
steps within the hedge, as if he purposly meant to ease himself; but indeed
it was to have them pass before him, that so he might incompasse them as two
murdering Wolves in a Toil; At his descent from his horse (as guilty
consciences are still afraid of all things) father Justinian and Adrian first
begin to fear this Stranger, as being sent to apprehend them, and so resolve
to trust to their heels and the woods for their safety, but when they see his
sword, and coat in the way, and himself within the hedge with his hose down,
then they again take courage and heart at grace and so proceed on in the way
toward the Town, but still they look back on him as if the foulness of
their fact continually made their fears and dangers the more eminent. This is
carefully and curiously observed of Du Pont. who (now comes after them a soft
^ot) contenting himself to see them a flight shot before him; as well knowing
that his horse was far nimbler and swifter than theirs, and that therefore he
might fetch them up at his pleasure. By this time they two arrive at Pontarlin,
which they enter; where (being hungry and fearful, and their horse weary
and hungry) they take up one of the next Ins, which is at the sign of the Tygre
where thinking themselves free of him who followed them, they recommend their
horse to the Ostler, and calling for some Mutton, Bread and Wine, they there
privately hush themselves up in their Chamber. But the vigilant eye and care of
Du Pont sees where they are entered, so he puts up his Horse to another Inn
close by, and presently with much silence and celerity, trippes away to the
Tygre Inn where they are; and knowing them to be above the stairs in their
chamber to breakfast, he calls for the Host thereof, takes him into a close
low room next the door; tells him that the Priest and the other man which
entered his house right now, had cruelly murdered his father in Salynes, and
therefore most courteously and earnestly prays him, to step presently and
fetch the Criminal officers of that Town to apprehend them for the same, and
till his and their return, that he will give him two of his servants to guard
the doors that they escape not away; The Host of this house in detestation of
this foul fact of theirs, and to the honor and reputation of himself and his
house, speedes away to the Officers who presently arrive with him, to whom Du
Pont sorrowfully and passionately relate, that this Priest named Justinian and
this Adrian who was an Innekeeper of Salynes and now above, had very lately in
his own house, murdered his father De Laurier, who was a Goldsmith of Dijon,
stripped and robbed him of much gold and Jewels, and then buried him in his
Orchard, and therefore (with tears in his eyes) conjures them to do him
justice by speedily apprehending them for the same, the which they as soon
grant him. So they all ascend to their Chamber where they find them deeply
tippling in their cups, as much devoid and insensible of danger as of grace.
Here Du Pont (with equal passion and sorrow) strongly charge them both with
the murder of his father De Laurier, as also for robbing of his gold and
jewels and for burying of him in the Orchard. But these two bloody factors of
Hell, with a world of stout looks, impious oaths and fearful asseverations,
vow and swear the contrary. So the Officers take them aside and examine them
severally hereon. But they can receive nothing from them but peremptory
denialls and profane execrations. The which Du Pont hearing and understanding
he (with much affection to his father, and discretion to himself) to
vindicate and know the truth hereof with the more facility and the less time;
entreats the Officers to search them both narrowly for his fathers gold and
Jewels, which by Gods direction they do, the one after the other, when they
find quilted up in their dublets and hose, store of gold, and some rich
jewels and rings, and yet these two bloody villains deny this murder of
theirs with much audacity and impudency, swearing that they found this treasure
in a Casket in the high way a little league beyond Salynes. But this lie of
theirs is as false, as their murder and robbery of honest old De Laurier was
too true, which God (in his mercy and Justice) will briefly bring to light and
punishment far sooner than these bloody Miscreants either think, or fear of.

Du Pont (all this notwithstanding) constantly assures these Officers, that all
this gold and jewels, and much and many more were his Fathers, and therefore
ate now his both by right and propriety, as being his only Son and child and
so demands possession thereof. But these Officers mildly deny this request of
his, tell him they must take them by an inventory, and so together with the two
prisoners to send them to the Judges of Salynes under whose jurisdiction they
affirmed they were. So for that night they commit father Justinian and Adrian
to two several prisons, where they shall find leisure though not enough to
repent this foul and lamentable fact of theirs. Which was no sooner done, but
Du Pont (having ^hanked these Officers of Pontarlin) sends away a Poast to
Salynes to acquaint the Judges thereof, of his apprehending of these the two
Murderers of his father, whom he earnestly besought to hasten their
executions; so according to his request at the end of two days these two
Prisoners are sent for, and brought from Pontarlin to Salynes, and there
imprisoned.

The very next morning the criminal Judges send for them to one of their
houses, and first severally private, and then publicly by confrontation,
examine them on this cruel murder and robbery, but the Devil is still so
strong with them, that with much courage and vehemence, they continue and stand
firm in their negative resolution and denial; But De Laurier being now found
and known to have layen some seven weeks sick in Adrians house, as well by the
confession of Isabella his wife of Graceta her maid and of Thomas their Ostler,
as also of the Apothecary La Motte, then his body found buried in his Orchard,
and Adrian and father Justinian their sudden flight upon the same, and now
lastly his horse, gold, and jewels found upon them in Pontarlin by the officers
of that Town, and his Son Du Pont, were evidences as bright and apparent as
the Sun that (in honor to justice and in glory to God from whom all true
justice is derived) these wise and grave Judges of Salynes, do reject these
denials of Adrian and father Justinian as false, profane, and impious, and
therefore that very instant adjudge them both to the rack, at the hearing of
which sentence they seem to be nothing apalled and daunted, but they being
advertised that Isabella his Wife was likewise imprisoned for this fact, she
for her part, by some friends of hers makes suit to the Judges, that she may be
permitted to speak with her Husband, and so does father Justinian that he
likewise may speak wirh her. But the Judges hold both of these their requests
to be vain and impertinent and therefore flatly contradict and deny them.

So Adrian is first brought to the rack, who though he be weak of
constitution yet he is still so strong in his villainy, as he will not be
persuaded or drawn to confess it, but with much courage of body, and
animosity of mind, suffers himself to be fastened thereto, whereof the Judges
being advertised, they in their discretion, hold it expedient to delay his
torments for a time, and so first to make trial of father Justinian, to see if
these his torments will make him less stout, and more flexible in the
confession thereof. Wherein (I write it with joy) their judgments nothing
deceive them, for at the very first wrench of the rack, God is so merciful to
his soul, and so propitious to his new conversion and repentance, that he
then and there confesses this lamentable murder, in all its branches and
circumstances (as we have formerly understood; Affirms only himself and
Adrian to be the Authors and Actors thereof; Swears that Isabella, Graceta and
Thomas were every way innocent thereof, and had no hand or knowledge therein
whatsoever. Whereupon the Judges send again for Adrian, and cause him a new to
be brought to the rack, but first they hold it fit to confront him with his
bloody companion father Justinian, who boldly affirming, and constantly
confirming all his former deposition to him in his face to be sincere and true
Adrian is amazed and daunted there at, as also at the sight of the rack which
was again prepared and brought for him, when the devil flying from him, and
he casting his heart and soul at the sacred feet of Gods mercy, he there
very sorrowfully confirmed all father Justinians confession to be true, and
then falling on his knees, he with many bitter sighs and tears) said again
and again aloud; that his wife his man, and his man were as truly innocent, as
father Justinian and himself were alone truly guilty of this fool and cruel
murder and robbery of De Laurier. When their Judges, as much rejoicing (...)
the detection and confession of these their crimes as they lamented and
detested their perpetrations thereof. They condemn them both to be hanged the
next morning and because father Justinian had violated his sacred Order, and
Adrian the humane and Christian Laws of Hospitality, their bodies after to
be burnt to ashes.

So as soon as Father Justinian was degraded of his Sacerdotall Order, and
Habit, and committed to the secular powers, he together with Adrian were for
that night returned to their prison and repentance, where two Priests, and one
Friar of the order of the Iacobyns prepare their souls for Heaven against the
next morning. It was a grief to Isabellas heart, to hear that he was guilty
of this foul and lamentable murder, but a far greater torment and Hell to
her mind to understand that he must suffer death for the same, and that she
should neither see nor speak with him any more either in this life, or this
world. Again looking from him to her self, as she could not hope for his
life, so she thought she had some small cause, or at least scruple to doubt
and fear her own, in regard it lay at the courtesy or cruelty of her Husband
and father Iustini^n, for that (as we have formerly understood) they acquainted
her with their intents and desires to murder De Laurier, and she revealed it
not. But yet (nevertheless) in the purity of her heart, and the can did
innocence of her soul, she commits the success both of her life, or death to
God, (...) not being able to sleep away any part of that night for sorrow,
she as a religious woman, and a most virtuous wife) passes out the whole
obscurity thereof, in the brightness of heavenly ejaculations and prayer,
which from the profundity of her heart, she proffereth up to Heaven both for
her Husband and her self.

Very early the next morning, before father Justinian and Adrian went to their
execution; Du Pont, and (at his request) the Judge repair to the Prison to
them; where he and they enquire of him, to what all^w of gold and jewels they
had taken from his dead father, who tell him, that in a letter which his Father
had written to him (...) ^jon, and the which they had suppressed and burnt; he
therein mentioned the vallew of one thousand seven hundred crowns. And being
again demanded by him, what and where was become of all that great sum in
gold and Jewels, they freely and ingeniously tell him, that one third part
thereof was taken from them, by him and the Officers of justice in Pontarlin,
and another third he should find hidden in such and such secret places of
their houses, and for the other third part, they ^shed not to confess and
aver, that they had since paid some old debts bought some new apparel, and
spent the rest thereof upon their whores, and other o^ their voluptuousness
and prodigalities. So the Judges and Du Pont speed away to Adrian and father
Justinians houses, where they find the gold and jewels according to their
confessions, the which together with the other former part taken from the (...)
(...) (both which amounted to some (...). (...)) (...) and honest judges
deliver up unto Du Pont, who received it from them with joy and
thankefullnesse, but as a good Son rejoices ^rre more at the now approaching
deserved deaths, of these two bloody and execrable wretches, (...) (...) and
Adrian, the murderers of his good old father De Laurier of whom some twenty
and five years before, he had the happiness to receive his life.

Some two hours after, which was about ten of the clock in the morning
these our two condemned malefactors are brought to the place of execution where
a great concourse of people of Salynes, and the country thereabout attend to
see them finish the last Scene and Catastrophie of their lives. The first who
ascends the Ladder is Adrian who speaks little; Only he takes it to his death,
that his decre wife Isabella, his servant maid Graceta, and his Ostler Thomas,
are as absolutely innocent of this murder of De Laurier, as he himself here
again confesses he is guilty thereof. He prays God to forgive him this
foul fact, and beseeches all that are present to pray to God for him, and for
his wretched and miserable soul, the which he knows has great need and want
of their prayers, when casting his handkerchiefe over his face, and privately
ending some few prayers to himself he is turned over. Instantly after him
rather Justinian mounts the Ladder, who (in his looks and countenance) seems
to be very repentant and penitent for this his soul and heinous fact, the
which he praves God to absolve and forgive him, he here again cleeres
Isabella, Graceta, and Thomas of this murder. He much lamenteth that he has
so highly scandalized the sacred order of Priesthood in his crime and person;
and therefore beseeches all Priests and Churchmen either present or absent to
forgive it him; when repeating some Ave Mary's, and often making the sign of
the cross, he was likewise turned over.

And thus was the miserable life and death of this impious Priest, and wicked
and bloody Host, and in this sharp manner did God justly revenge himself and
punish them with shame and confusion for this cruel and lamentable murder.
Immediately after which execution of theirs, the Judges set our virtuous and
innocent Isabella, and her maid, and Ostler free from their undeserved
indurance and troubles, whereat all the Spectators, do as much praise God for
the liberty of the three last, as they detest the foul crime, and rejoice at
the just punishments of the two first: If we make good use of the knowledge of
this sorrowful history, the profit, and confolation thereof will be ours, and
the glory Gods, which God of his best favor and merey grant us.

Amen.
GODS REVENGE, AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXVIII.
Hippolito murthereth Garcia in the street by night* for the which he is
hanged. Dominica and her Chambermaid Denisa, poysoneth her husband Roderigo;
Denisa afterward strangleth her own newborn Babe, and throws it into a
Pond, for the which she is hanged; on the ladder she confessed that she was
accessory, with her Lady Dominica in the poisoning of her Husband Roderlgo; for
the which Dominica is apprehended, and likewise hanged.

HOw easily does malice and revenge enter into our hearts, and how difficultly
do we expel and banish it thence, and what does thus promise, or rather
threaten un o us, but that it is a wretched ^gne and testimony that the Devil
has more power with ^s than God, that we more dearly af^ct Nature than Grace,
and Earth than Heaven. In many ^nnes there is some pretense or shadow of
pleasure, (...) in murder there is none except we desire that it should bring
grief and repentance to our hearts, horror and terror to our consciences,
and misery and confusion to our souls, which indeed despite of our earthly
policy and profane prevention it will infallibly both show and bring us. But
(to show our wickedness in in our weakness) through the ^e subtilty and
treachery of Satan, we think we act and perpetrate it so secretly, that it
cannot be found out of men, no^ detected or punished of God. Wherein what
(...) foo^es, and ^oolish madmen are we thus to deceive and betray ourselves
with false hopes and erroneo^ suggestions, for although men may be de^ded and
not ^ee (...), yet ^an God be mocked, or will he be blinded and deceived
herein. O no, his decrees and resolutions are secret and sacred, and though
invisible to our eyes, yet our designs and (...) are transpar^nt to his* For
he in his all-seeing providence) reserves (...) himself the manner and time,
how and where to punish it. A^ read we this approaching History, and it will
confirm as much in the lives and deaths of some bloody and inhumane
personages, who were bor^e to honor, and consequently to have lived more
happy, and died less ignominiously.

IN the rich and popu^us City of Gra^ado (which Ferdinand and Isabella King
and Queen of Sp^ine, Anno. 1492. so famously and fortunately conquered from
the Moors) there (within these few years) dwelt an ancient Lady, named Dona
Ali^a Serv^tella, who was descended o^ noble parentage, and by her late
Husban^, Do^ Pedro de Car^s (dying a chief Commander in the West Indyes) she
had two children, a son and a daughter, he named Don Garcia, and she Dona
Do^nica, he of some twenty years of age, and she of some eighteen, he t^l
of statur^ but some what hard favored and she short* but e^ceeding ^ir and
beautiful. Their mother Cervantella being not left rich by her de^eased
Husband, did yet bring up these her two children very hono^rably and
virtuously, and maintained them exceeding gallant in their apparel, though
she clad her self the worse for it for their sakes* She observes her Son
D^n Garcia to be of a mild disposition, and very witty and judi^ious; but for
her daughter Dominica, she sees with fear, and fears with grief, that her
wit will come short of her beauty, and her chastity of her wit; In which regard
and consideration she loves him better than her and yet bears sovigilant an
eye over her actions, that as yet s^e keeps her within the lists of Modesty,
and the bounds of obedience as holding i^ ^rre truer di^etion to make her more
beloved than feared of her, or rather that fear and love by ^urnes, might act
their several parts upon the Theater of her youthful heart, and resolutions.
There is an old rich gentleman of that City nobly descended, termed Don
Hippolito S^vino, commonly known and named only Don Hippolito; aged of some
threescore and ten years and much subject to the Gowt, a disease better
known than ^red, and which loves rich men as much as poor men hate it. And
this old Hippolito in the Frost and Winter of his age falls in love with our
^re young Lady Dominica, and so by the Lady the Mother seeks her daughter in
marriage. As for the Mother she loves Hippolito's gold better than her
daughter does his age and affects his lands as much as she hates his personage.
But Don Garcia at the often requests of his sister being at last vanquished by
her imortuni^e soon changes his mothers opinion and good esteem of
Hippolito, and so they all three give him the repulse and denial. But his
affection to this deli^ate fresh young beauty makes him more perverse and
obstinate than his age, so he will take no answer for an answer, nor a refusal
for a refuse from them but will or nill frequent their company daily, and their
house almost hourly they are all three tired with his sottish in^illity and
doting im^ortunacy* es^ecially Dominic^, who measuring his age, by her youth*
and knowing him to be far ^ter for his grave than a wife she therefore
scorns him as much as he loves her but vet say she what she will, or do her
Mother and Brother what they can yet they cannot free their house or shift
their hands of him; although they many times make him look upon bare walls,
content himself to converse with the meanest of their Servants and so to
return without seeing either of Mother, Son, or Daughter.

But Dominica, holding her beauty and years, now to be worthy of a husband,
she is so incivill and incontinent as she prays her mother to procure and
provide her one. For (to use her own words) she says she is weary to lie
alone, and live single, and fully resolved no longer either to triflle away her
time, or to cast away her youth and beauty; Her Lady Mother (in most virtuous
terms) checks her impudency, blames her impudicity, and concludes that if
she forsake those immodest humors and inclinations, and so serve and fear
God religiously then there is no doubt but in good time, he (of his propitious
favor and goodness toward her) will provide her one, when turning from her
Daughter, the very tears of sorrow fall abundantly from her old eyes, to see
her thus immodest, thus irregular and wanton, as doubting and fearing that in
the end it will prove ominous and fatal to her.

But her lascivious Daughter Dominica is not contented with this general
answer of her Mother, for she is yet so vainly impudent, and so vitiously
imprudent, as she importunately prays her brother Don Garcia, effectually and
speedily to solicit her Mother to provide her a husband, whereat he rather
laughes than gives ear. But when again he ruminates and considers with
himself this her foolish levity and wantonness, fearing the worst, and to the
end she might not hereafter prove a disgrace to her self, a scandal to their
house, and a dishonor to their blood, he (taking time at advantage) breaks
and treates with his mother hereon; who concurring in opinion with him,
returns him rather her consent than her denial, the which he reports to his
immodest sister Dominica, who is thereat as joyful as before she was
discontented.

Not long after it fell out that Dominica with her Mother going on a great
Holyday in the morning to the Church of the Benedictine Monks, and being
behind her on her knees to her Beads and Oraisons, her devotion was so cold
and her zeal so frozen toward God, as seeing a very proper young Gentleman
(richly apparreled) likewise there on his knees to his prayers not far from
her; she as a poor (I may say as a profane) Christian beckons her mothers
man to come to her, and whispers him in the ear, that he discreetly go and
enquire what that young Cavallier is, whom she describes to him by his apparel
and especially by a rich Diamond Ring which he wears on his finger; Her
mothers man demanding of the Gentleman's servants returns speedily to his young
Lady, and tells her in her ear, that it is Don Roderigo, Son and heir to
Don Emmanuell de Cortez, whereat her lustful affection makes her heart leap
and dance within her forjoy, for so incivilly unchaste is she in her desires
and wishes, that at his very first sight she desires him for her Husband
before any other man of the world, yea before any other earthly felicity.
Whereupon she vows that her Mother shall have no truce, nor her Brother any
peace of her before they powerfully make this motion of marriage for her to Don
Roderigo, who being often solicited and provoked by her importunate requests,
they consult hereon, and both of them approve and desire it, as holding it a
match equally honorable to them both. The Son will have his mother first to
break the ice of this motion to Don Roderigo, but the mother will have her
Son first to perform that office to him, and so to take a fair occasion to
invite him home to her house to speak with her, the which Don Garcia
performs, and deals herein so effectually with Don Roderigo that home he
comes with him. The Lady Cervantella (after many complements and speeches)
presents this motion to him. He sees the young Lady Dominica her daughter, and
finding her to be exceeding fair and witty, he likes and loves her and so
takes time to advise hereon with his father, for the Lady his Mother was
formerly gone to heaven. Roderigo breaks this motion to Don Emanuell his
father, who not pleased therewith seeks to divert his Son from it, in regard
he knows that her Mother Dona Cervantella is very poor. and of a weak
estate, as being much encumbered with the great depts of her deceased Husband.
Roderigo alleges to his Father, his true affection to the true beauty and
virtues of Dominica, and that her descent and blood is no way inferior to his.
But his father being of an exceeding covetous disposition, will have wealth to
oversway beauty, and not beauty wealth, and so is resolute to hear no more of
this motion, whereat his son Roderigo bites the lip, and is much
discontented. Yet nevertheless he has cast his affection so deeply and
firmly on the fresh and delicate beauty of Dominica, that holding it to be
the Gold of Nature, and she the Queen and Phoenix of Beauty, he cannot, he
will not refrain, but very often frequents Dona Cervantella's house, and her
daughters company. To whom (notwithstanding his Fathers distaste of her) he yet
gives far more hope than despair that he will be her Husband, which
ravisheth her with delight, her Mother Dona Cervantella, and her brother Don
Garcia with content.

But the order of our History envites us for a while to leave Don Roderigo to
feast his eyes and surfeit his thoughts and contemplations on the Roses and
Lillies of his Mistress beauty, and again to return to speak of our old
Dotard Hippolito. Who now (led by his lust and voluptuous desires, as they are
by the instigation of the Devil) comes to perform and act a bloody and
deplorable part on the stage of this History. He sees with grief and grieves
to see that he is refused of the Lady Dominica whom he loves far deerer and
tenderer then his life, and understanding that Don Roderigo de Cortez, does
still frequent her company, has gained her affection and shall shortly marry
her, he thereupon turns his reason into rage, converts his judgment into
revenge, and so resolves to murder him by night, as soon as he finds him to
issue forth of the Lady Cervantella's house, the Devil making him strong in
the vanity of this belief and confidence, that he being once dead,
undoubtedly the fair Dominica will fall for his share and wife. So he is
resolute in this his bloody and damnable design: and consults with himself
whether he should do it by himself, or by some second instrument, but
finding it dangerous to effect it by another, beeause he must then commit his
life to his courtesy, and seeing that his Gout had now forsaken him, he
therefore resolves to do it by himself. But first he thinks it not
improper, rather pertinent for him to write Roderigo a letter, the which he
does in these terms and sends it him by one of his own confident Servants.

HIPPOLITO to RODERIGO.
Were thou informed but of the hundred part of my dear affection to the fair
young Lady Dominica, and reciprocally of hers to me, thou would (if not out
of honor, yet out of Judgment) surcease thy suite to her, and not make thy
obstinacy ridiculons by thinking to obtain her to thy Wife, and although she
feed thee with the sugar o^ many sweet protestations and promises to the
contrary yet if I have any eyes in my head, or thou judgment in thine to
discern the truth hereof, thou have far more reason to rely upon the
integrity of my age, than the Vanity and inconstancy of her youth; And were
thou not a Gentle ^an whom I love for thine own and honor for thy Fathers
sake, I had not so long permitted thee to frequent her company, nor so often to
converse with her to the prejudi^e of my content and thy discretion, and if
this friendly Ambassador of my heart, my Letter, will not yet induce thee to
leave her to me, whom Heaven and Earth, God and her Mother have given me. I
will then either by thy Father, or by the usual course of Justice take that
order with thee therein, as shall red^d as much to my honor and fame, as to
thy infamy and disreputation,

HIPPOLITO.


Roderigo having received and read this Letter of Hippolito, he cannot
refrain from smiling and laughing to see his sottish error and ridiculous
ignorance herein, for he perfectly knows, that both Dominica, and the Lady
Cervantella her mother are long since resolved to hear no more either of him
or of his suit, and therefore he holds it more worthy of his laughter than of
his observation, likewise to see, that this old dotard, when nature is ready to
wed him to his grave, that his lust should yet be so forward to desire to
marry so young and beautiful a Lady as Dominica; The which considering, once
he thought to return him no other answer but silence, but at last respecting
his age and Quality more than his indiscretion or power, after he had shown
his letter to Cervantella, to Dominica, and her brother Don Garcia, who all
concur in opinion with him to make it the public object, as both it and
himself were the private cause of their general laughter, he calls for pen
and paper and (rather with contempt than choler) by Hippolito's own servant
returns him this answer.

RODERIGO to HIPPOLITO.
I Have as small reason to doubt of thy affecti^n to the young Lady Dominica,
as to believe that hers is reciprocally so to thee and therefore I see no just
cause in honor or solid ground in Judgment to surcease my suit toward ^er,
much less to deem my obstinacy ridiculous in hoping to obtain her to my
Wife; And although it be in thy pleasure, yet it is not in thy power to make
me doubtful of her fairewords, or to call in question, or suspicion her sweet
promises and protestations to me, since that were to profane the purity of my
zeal to her, and of her true and sincere affection to me, the which yet to
do thee a courtesy, I will rather excuse than condemn in thee, because I am
consident it exceeds thy knowledge, though not thy fear, and in this behalf
and assurance, thine eyes cannot so much prevail with my Judgment, but that I
will more rely upon the integrity of her youth, than the vanity of thy Age. As
for thy love to me or honor to my Father, when I find it so I will
acknowledge it to be as true, as now I conceive i^ feigned: but for thy
threats to me in thinking thereby to make me forsake the conversation and
company of that fair and virtuous young Lady, I do rather pity than esteem
them, and every may more contemn than care for them, assuring thee that I
cannot possibly refr^ from laughter to see thee so devoid of common sense, as
to think to be able, either to scarre me with the power of the Law, or to
daunt me with the prerogative and authority of my father in making me to
forsake her whom in life and death, I neither can nor will forsake, resolve
therefore henceforth to prevent thy infamy and disreputation, for I will be
left to my self to establish mine own content and honor, as I please.

RODERIGO.


Hippolito upon the receipt and consideration of this peremptory letter of Don
Roderigo, is so inflamed and incensed against him to see that (perforce) he
will make him wear a Willow Garland, as (without any more delays or
expostulations) understanding him to be that very same night which he
received his Letter with his Lady Dominica at her mothers house, the Devil
causes him to gather all his malice, wits and strength together about him that
night to murder him as he issues forth to go home, which bloody stratagem of
his to effect and finish, he charge a pistol with three bullets and he
waits his coming thence: but Don Garcia accidentally issuing forth all alone
privately to go visit a friend of his not far off, this wretched old
villain Hippolito taking him to be Roderigo lets fly at him, and all three
bullets pierce his body, so he falls down dead to the ground. The blow is
heard, and the breathless body of Don Garcia is found reeking in his blood,
whose mother, sister, and Don Roderigo are amazed and astonished at this
deplorable disaster, and ready to drown themselves in their tears for sorrow
thereof. So Roderigo leaving some Neighbors to comfort them, he takes order
to find out the murderers, and goes himself speedily throughout the street
to that effect; When the good pleasure and providence of God directs his course
to find out this old execrable wretch Hippolito going lirping and limping in
the street, having thrown away his Pistol, and only holding his dark
lantern in his hand, which then (the better to color out this damnable fact
of his) he opened to light him. Roderigo measuring things past by the present,
and finding Hippolito there in the streets all alone, at this undue and
unseasonable hour of the night. God prompts his heart with this suspicion,
that he in likelihood was the murderer of Don Garcia, and so lays hold of
him, and caus^th him to be committed to the prison, notwithstanding all the
entreaties, means and friends, which he could then possibly make to the
contrary. The next day all Granado rings and resounds of this murder, and of
the suspicion and imprisonment of Don Hippolito for the same, when the Lady
Cervantella goes to the Criminal Judges of the City and accuses him for the
same, and with grief, sorrow, and passion, follows it close against him; and
although Hippolito at his first examination denies it, yet being by his
cleeresighted Judges adjudged to the rack for the same, he at the very first
sight thereof confesses it, for the which bloody and lamentable crime of his,
he is sentenced the next day to be hanged, although he proffered all his
estate and means to save his life; But the zeal and integrity of his judges
was such to the sacred name of Justice as they disdained to be corrupted
herewith.

So the next Morning this old bloody wretch Hippolito is brought to the common
place of execution, where a very great concourse of people repair from all
parts of the City to see him take his last farewell of the world, most o^ them
pitying his age, but all condemning the enormity of this his foul and bloody
crime. He was dealt with by some Priests and Friars in prison, whose Charity
and Piety, endeavored to fortify his heart against the fear of death, and to
prepare his soul for the life and joys of that to come. But the Devil was
yet so strong with him that he could not be drawn to contrition nor would
not be either persuaded or enforced to repentance, or to ask God, or the
world forgiveness of this his bloody fact, but as he lived profanely so he
would dye wretchedly and desperately, for on the Ladder he made a foolish
speech, the which because it savoured more of beastly concupiscence and lust,
than of Piety or Religion, I will therefore bury it in oblivion, and silence,
and so he was turnedover.

Come we now to speak of Don Emanuell de Cortez the Father, who understanding
of his Son Roderigo his continual frequenting of Dona Cervantella's house,
and her daughter Dominica's company, and now hearing of this murder of her
Son to her door, his own Son being then therein present; he is much
discontented therewith; and because he will sequester him from her sight and
provide him another Wife, he sends him to Asnalos, a manor house of his, some
ten leagues off in the Country, with a strong injunction and charge, there to
reside till his farther order to return. Roderigo is wonderful sorrowful
thus to leave the sight of his fair and dear Mistress Dominica, and (to the
view of the world) no less is she, so he transporteth only his body to
Asnallos, but his heart he leaves with her in Granado. But a month is scarce
expired after his departure, But the Lady Cervantella (by the death of her
Son Don Garcia, wanting a man to conduct and govern her affairs, especially
her law suits, wherewith (as we have formerly heard) she is much encumbered,
she thereupon (as also at the instant request of her Daughter) writes Roderigo
this letter for his return.

CERVANTELLA to RODERIGO.
AS thou tenderest the prosperity of my affairs, and the content and joy of my
Daughter, I request thee speedily to leave Asnallos, and to return to reside
here in Granado, for I wanting my Son Garcia, who was the joy of my life,
and she her Roderigo who art the life of her joy, thou must not find it
strange if my age, and her youth, and if my Law suits and her love affections
and desires assume this resolution: Thy Father is a Noble man of Reason, and
his Son shall find this to be a request both (...) and reasonable, except
thou will so far publish thy weakness to the world, tha^ thou do more
fear thy Father than love my Daughter, for if thou should once ^mit thy
obedience to him so far to give a Law to thy affection to her, thou will then
make thy self as unworthy to be her Husband, as I desire it with zeal, and
she with passion. She is resolved to second this my letter with one of her
own to thee, to which I refer thee; God bless thy stay, and hasten thy
return.

CERVANTELLA.


Dominica resolving to make good her promise to her mother, and that of her
mother to Roderigo she withdrawes her self to her chamber to write and knowing
her mothers messenger ready to depart, charge him with the delivery of her
letter to her lover Roderigo, and to cast the better luster and varnish over
her affection, she takes a Diamond Ring from her finger, and likewise sends it
him for a token of her love.

DOMINICA to RODERIGO.
AS the death of my Brother Don Garcia made (...) extreme sorrowful, so thi^
of thy absence made me infinitely miserable, for as that nipt my joys and
hopes in their blossoms, so this kills them in their riper age and (...). When
I (...) received thy love, and gave and returned thee mine in exchange, I had
(...) thou had affected me too dearly so soon to leave my sight, and to ^sh
thy (...) my company, but now I see with grief, and feelewith sorrow that the
love thy F^er far bettter than ^ee, and delightest to prefer his content
bef^ (...) for else thou had not made me thus wretched by thy absence, who am
as (it were) but entering into the happiness of thy presence. If thou can
find in thy heart to obey his commands, before thou grant my requests, then
come not to Granado but stay still in Asnallos, but if the contrary, then leave
Asnallos, and come to me in Granado, w^ere I will chide thee for thy long
stay, and yet give thee a world of thanks and kisses for thy so soon return,
and as my heart and soul does desire it, so the prosperity of my Mothers
affairs does likewise want, and therefore crave it. Judge of the fervency of
my affection to thee, by thine to my self; and then thou will spe^dily resolve
to see thy Dominica, who desires nothing so much under Heaven as to have the
happiness of thy sight, and the felicity and Honor of thy Company.

DOMINICA.


Roderigo receives these their two Letters; reputes that of the mother to much
respect, and this of her Daughter to infinite affection, so as the very
knowledge and consideration thereof makes him rejoice in the first, and triumph
in the second, and therefore knowing himself to be a man, and past a child,
and that as he is bound by nature and reason to obey his farther, so he is not
tied to be commanded by him beyond it, wherefore he resolves to give content
to the mother for the daughters sake, and to the daughter for his own sa^e and
so by their own messenger returns them these answers; That to the Lady
Cervantella spoke thus.

RODERIGO to CERVANTELLA.
I So much tender the prosperity of thy affairs, and thy daughters content and
joy that my resolutions shall so dispose of my self toward my Father; as
very shortly I will see thee with respect and observance, and visit her with
affection and zeal; for this desire of hers and request of thine, is so
honorable so reasonable, as my Father should be guilty of unkindnesse, to deny
the one, and my self of ingratitude not to grant the other; Or if he will yet
continue to cross our affections I will then make it apparent to the world,
that I will not fear him the thousand part so much as I will love her, and
that I will ambitiously strive and resolve to make my affection to her; to
equalize thy zeal and her passion to me and that I cannot receive a greater
felicity and honor, than to see her my Wife and my self her Husband. I have
given an answer to her Letter, and very shortly I will give her my self every
way answerable to her merits, to thy expectation and my promise.

RODERIGO.


His Letter to Dominica was charged and fraughted with these lines.

RODERIGO to DOMINICA.
To deface thy sorrows for thy Brothers death, and thy miseries for my absence
and likewise to preserve thy joys in their blossoms, and thy hopes in their
riper age and maturity, I am f^ly resolved very shortly to grant thy request in
leaving Asnallos; to live and dye with thee in Granado, and thou do offer a
palpable wrong to the truth and an immerited disparagement to the purity and
candor of my affection, to think that I any wa^ prefer my obedience to my
Father, before my affection to thee, or consequently his content to thine.
Therefore prepare thy self to kiss not to chide me, for else I will resolve
to chide and not to kiss thee at my return. My best endevoure shall write on
the prosperity of thy Mothers affairs, and my best love and service shall
eternally attend on her Daughters pleasure and Commands, and judge thou if my
zeal to thee, do not exceed thine to my self, since Earth is not so dear to
me, as the Honor of thy sight, nor Heaven as the felicity of thy company.

RODERIGO.


He has no sooner dispatched these two Letters to his Mistress and her Mother,
but the very next day after he enters into a resolution with himself; that
he shall not do well so soon to disoblige and disobey his father, by so
speedily precipitating his return from Asnallos to Granado, as urging this
reason to his consideration, and proposing this consideration to his judgment,
that Dominica's affection and beauty can difficultly make him rich, but that
his Fathers discontent and displeasure toward him may easily make him poor:
Whereupon resolving to cherish his constancy to her, and yet to retain his
obedience to him, he holds it no sin if a little longer he dispense with
his content and promise to temporize for his discretion and profit, as
grounding his hope upon this confidence, and his confidence upon this presuming
infallibility, that his Lady and Mistress Dominica is as chaste as fair, and
will prove as constant to him as she is beautiful in her self. But she is a
woman and therefore she may deceive his hopes, and he is a man and therefore it
is possible that her beauty may betray his judgment, the which prediction and
prophecy (to his grief and sorrow, and to her shame and misery) we shall
shortly see made true and verified, the manner thus.

Dominica (as we have formerly understood) being of a wanton disposition and
carriage, and very unchastly and lasciviously inclined, she finding Roderigo's
stay in Asnallos to exceed his promise and her expectation, she cannot live
chaste, she will not remain constant in his absence, but has a friend or two,
I mean two proper young Gentlemen of Granado to whom she many times privately
imparteth her amorous favors and affection, the which she acts not so
closely, but the Lady her Mother (being a Lincy-eyed, and curious observer of
her actions) has notice thereof, and thinking to reclaim her from this foul
sin of fornication and whoredom, which threatens no less than the ruins of
her fortunes, and the shipwreck of her reputation; she first attempteth to
persuade her by fair means with tears and prayers; but seeing she could not
thereby prevail with her, then she gives her many sharp speeches and bitter
threats, and menaces as wholly to deprive her of her Fathers portion, and
either to make, her spend her days in a Nunnery, or end them in a Prison. That
she is not worthy to tread upon the face of earth, or look up to Heaven
because this her foul crime of fornication, makes her odious to God, and an
infinite shame and scandal to all her Parents and friends in general, and to
every one in particular, with many other reasons looking and conducing that
way, the which for brevities (...), I resolve to omit and bury in silence.

But this lectu^e of the Mother prevails not with the Daughter, but rather
inflames than quenches the fite of her inordinate and lascivious lust; the
which she perceiving, and to prevent her own scandal in that of her
daughters, she (as a careful Mother and a wise Matron) me weth her up in her
chamber, where Dominice (for mere grief and choler (to see her self thus
debard of her pleasures in the restraint of her liberty) she grows very
ficke, looks exceeding wanne, pale and thin, and sokeepes her bed, the which
the Lady Cervantella takes for a fit occasion and opportunity again
effectually to write to Roderigo to hasten his return to Granado, as doubting
least her Daughters Belly should chance to swell and grow big in his absence.
This her Letter to Roderigo, reported her mind, and represented her desires to
him in these terms.

CERVANTELLA to RODERIGO.
THou do thy self no right, but me and my Daughter infinite wrong in
staying so long from Granado, in regard it is contrary to thy promise, to my
expectation and to her deserts and merits; For her affection is so entire and
fervent to thee, because she conceives and hopes that thine (in requital) is
so to her, that she has this many months languished in expectation of thy,
return; whereof now beginning to despair, that despair of hers has struck
her into so dangerous a consumption, that I fear it will shortly prove fatal
to her, for already the Lillyes have banished the Roses of her cheeks yea her
cheeks are grown thin, and those sparkling stars her eyes have lost a
great part of their wonted luster and glory, so if thy affection will not, yet
pity should move thee to hasten thy return to see and comfort her; especially
since thou will scarce know her when thou see her, in regard I may (almost)
justly affirm that she is no longer Dominica, but rather the living Anotomy
of dead Dominica. How thou can answer for this her sickness to thine honor
(which is occasioned by thy unkindnesse, I know not, but sure I am if she go
to her grave before thou come to her, thou can never sufficiently answer it
to thy conscience, nor thy conscience to God. In her sick bed, thou art the
only Saint to whom she offers up her devotions, and therefore it will be a
miserable ingratitude in thee to permit her to dye thy Martyr.

CERVANTELLA.


At the receipt and perusal of this Letter Roderigo is infinitely sorrowful,
especially when he considers that it is only Dominicas dear affection to
him and his long stay from her, which has occasioned her sickness, whereupon
his love consulting with his honor, his honor with his conscience, and his
conscience with God, he conjureth the Messenger to return speedily to Granado
to the Lady Cervantella and her daughter Dominica from him and to assure them
that all business of the world set apart, he will be there with them the next
day, and bring them the answers of their letters himself; whereat at the
messengers return they both of them exceedingly rejoice, Roderigo now
(according to his promise) comes to Granado, visits Cervantella, and his
sick Mistress Dominica, salutes the one with complements, the other with
kisses. Dominica intending to give him her body, but not her heart, dissembleth
her affection to him, and frowns on him exceedingly, as if her love to him and
his to her were deerer to her than all the world, and far more precious than
her life. But contrariwise Roderigo intends as he speaks, and speaks as he
intends; yea he is so sincere and real in his affection to her, as she is
counterfeit and treacherous to him. So glorying in her beauty, and triumphing
in her youth, he with much difficulty, obtaines his fathers consent and
marries her, their Nuptials being solemnized in Granado with state and bravery
answerable to their descents and qualities, but he will find a wanton L^is for
a constant Lucrece, and a lascivious Phryne for a chaste Penelope. Never Husband
bore himself more respectfully, lovingly, and courteously to his Wife than
does Roderigo to his Dominica, for he thinks that her fare cannot be
curious, nor her apparel costly enough for her, yea such was his tender
respect to her, and affection of her, that he willingly permitted her to go
where she would, and to come when she pleased, contrary to the custom of
Spain, and generally of most Spaniards, who hold it far more folly than
affection to give this licentious freedom and liberty to their Wives, which
we do in England and France, the which we shall see verified in our young
Bride Dominica; for the more her husband Roderigo loves her, the more she
sleights him, and the more he respects her, the more she neglects and contemnes
him, whereat he grieves, his mother in law Cevantella storms, and his own
father Don Emanuell de Cortez re^ines and murmures: But as it is labor in
vain to think to make an Ethiopian white, so all of them cannot reclaim
Dominica to love her husband nor scarce to lie with him. He conceives infinite
grief hereat, which breeds him a lingering consumption in earnest, as his Wife
Dominica was formerly possessed of one in jest, whereat she the more hates him
in regard the extreamitie of his sickness and weakness will not permit him to
perform the rites and duties of a Husband toward her, but she need not care,
much less grieve thereat for she takes her obscene and lascivious pleasures
abroad, whiles her dear sick husband (for grief of body and mind) is ready
to dye at home. He bewailes his hard fortune in marying her, but yet loves her
so tenderly and dearly, as he will not speak ill of her himself, nor suffer
any other to do it either in his presence, or her absence. Yea, her love is so
frozen to him, though his be still constantly and fervently inflamed to her,
as she difficulty sees him once in three days, nor yet speak two words with
him when she sees him, and yet when he is so happy to obtain her sight and
company, he so exceedingly rejoices thereat, that it seems to him, his pain
for that time gives him peace, his sorrows truce, his sickness ease, his
heart comfort; and his thoughts consolation. But Dominica has not deserved,
the least part of all this true affection and courtesy from him heretofore,
much less will she requite it to him hereafter, except in a most ungrateful
and bloody manner, which is thus.

The Devil resolves to trouble the harmony and serenity of their marriage, or
rather our Dominica has hellishly derived and drawn this resolution from the
Devil, to poison her Husband, and the sooner she fixes her mind upon this
infernal Ingredient, and sets her barbarous cruelty upon this devilish
drugge, because the violence of his consumption having already made almost an
Anatomy of his body, she therefore flattereth her self with this opinion, that
no suspicion at all can seize upon the belief of any that he is poisoned,
much less of his Father, or her Mother. She cannot procure poison her self,
and therefore albeit she be very unwilling to acquaint or employ any other
herein, yet she is enforced thereunto. Of all her acquaintance she thinks she
may more safely entrust and repose this great secret with her Chamber maid
Denisa, for having formerly made her accessory to her sins of Fornication and
Adultery, she thinks she may with less difficulty, and more ease now draw
her to conceal and participate in this murder with her; the which the better
and sooner to effect, she gives her fifty Du^s, and adding thereunto many sweet
persuasions, and sugared promises, of her continual care and affection for her
preferment, this wretched miserable Wench yields her consent thereto so they
give their hands, and swear secrecy each to other, the Devil laughing at
this their bloody compact and capitulation.

So (without either the grace or fear of God) they are resolute in this their
rage, and outrageous in this their barbarous cruelty, thinking every minute a
month, and every day a year, before they have finished and perpetrated this
lamentable business: So this Fury, this shee-devill Dominica, being as
impatient in her lascivious lust to her self, as in her deadly malice to her
kind and honest Husband Roderigo, she makes Denisa secretly to procure some
strong poison, from some remote unknown Apothecary, and not only causes, but
sees her to put it into some white broth for him, which the Chambermaid
brings, and the Wife and Mistress gives to her Husband, in morning before he
was out of his bed, under pretense and color of some comfortable broth, and
hot meat; whereof (O grief to think it! O pity to report it!) before night he
died thereof; and Don Emanuel de Cortez his father, being at that time ridden
to the City of Sevil, in the Province of A^doulesia, about some important
business of his, she (taking the opportunity and advantage of his absence,
thereby the better to overvaile this her foul and bloody fact) does speedily
cause this his breathless body to be encoffined, and so buried somewhat
privately, but not in that solemn manner as was requisite either for his
quality, or her reputation, yea, contrary to the opinion of the Lady
Cervantella her mother, who much grieved and feared at this sudden death of her
son in law Roderigo, as doubting lest her daughter, his Wife, had too hastily
and untimely sent him to Heaven in a bloody winding sheet. This mournful
Tragedy thus acted, our wretched Dominica, of a discontented Wife, is now
become a joyful and frolike Widow; and now her exorbitant lust, and
lascivious desires, break pale, and range, both beyond the bounds of chastity,
and the limits of discretion, for she will hearken to no advise, nor follow
any counsel from the Lady Cervantella her mother, but forsakes her house and
her sight the greatest part of the day, and which is worse, many whole nights,
to keep company with those vicious Gallants, and deboshed young Gentlemen of
her former acquaintaince and familiarity, with whom she delights to lose her
honor, to cast away her chastity, and to shipwreck her reputation, if not her
soul; when neither thinking of God or her Conscience, of Heaven or Hell, of
her murdering self, or murdered Husband, she so incessantly (without any
intermission or repentance) abandons her self to her profane and beastly
whoredoms, that in a very short time she makes her self the laughture of the
worst, and the pity of the better and most virtuous sort of people of Granado,
yea, her actions are so devoid of Graces and repleat of impiety, that her own
Mother is ashamed to speak with her, and Don Emanuel De Cortez, her father in
law, to see her. And here, Christian Reader, let me request thy curiosity to
observe and thy piety to remarke, how (by degrees) the indignation, and Justice
of God falls upon this deboshed young Lady, for the foulness of these her
crimes, the very cry and sent whereof has pierced the windows of Heaven, and
are now ascended to the ears and nostrils of the Lord of Hosts, to draw down
condign vengeance on her for the same, yea, and at those times when she least
dreams or thinks thereof, and when she is in the very prime of her
prophanenes, and the chiefest ruff of her lascivious jollity, and voluptuous
sensuality. The manner whereof is thus:

Two months are scarce expired since she sent this her Husband Roderigo thus
untimely and cruelly to his grave, but having as it were drowned her Wits and
Senses, her Reason and Indgement, yea, her Heart and Soul in the Ocean of her
beastly lusts, and lustful desires and pleasures, (but to her own shame, to
the grief of her mother, and the contempt and anger of her father in Law De
Ca^tez) she marries Don Jews De Andrada, one of her former Favorites and
Paramours, for her lover I cannot, and therefore I will not term him; a very
proper Gentleman of his Personage, but every way as deboshed and vicious as her
self, and therefore a fit Husband for such a Wife. That she was honest, he
know the contrary, but hoping that her wealth should supply his wants, and
repair the ruins of his decayed fortunes, was that which soly induced him to
become her Husband. But at last when he saw her wealth to come short of his
expectation, and her lustful desires to exceed it; then he thinks it high time
to be wise, in not imitating the example of his predecessor Roderigo, in his
carriage and conduction toward this his lascivious Wife Dominica, so he holds
a strict hand over her, and in a manner makes her no better than a Prisoner to
her Chamber, and a Scholar to her Book and Needle, in such sort, that her
ranging unchaste thoughts are now bounded in her new Husbands jealousy, and
pent and immured up in her own grief and discontent; for thus he reasons
with himself, that although formerly he made her his Curtisan, yet now he
will not permit that she make him a Cuckold; then he was her friend, now her
Husband, and then she was answerable for her own life and actions to God, but
now he is both for his own and for hers. But this her present affliction and
misery is but the shadow and least part of her future; for Andrada her Husband
being as resolute in reforming her, as she was neither to digest or endure it,
he the better to curb her incontinencie, and to debar her from any more
returning to her former lewd pranks, and deboshed life and conversation, he
keeps her very short of money, takes from her most of her best apparel, and
all her Rings, Chains, and Jewels, which the Ladies of Spain (more than any
others of the world) hold to be a great part of their earthly felicity.

Dominica is amazed, yea all in tears to see this strange alteration of her
fortune, and difference of her two Husbands, and now (though too late) she
sees Rodorigo's love, in Andrada's hardness toward her; she speaks to her
Mother to reconcile her to her husband, but having shut u^ this her second
match without her knowledge or consent, she rejects and abandoneth her from
her favor to seek her own fortune, as holding her unworthy of the blood
which Nature, and the education which God and her self had given her. She was
cruel to her first husband, and therefore no marvel if the second prove
unkind to her, yet he doubting of her secret malice toward him he
apprehends her revenge as much as he condemns her lubricitie. He will not
add faith to her dissembling promises, nor hazard belief to her treacherous
tears and kisses but keeps her still rather as a prisoner than a wife, and
more like a criminal than a companion; and yet as close and retired as he
kept her in his house, his vigilance and jelousie was enforced to meet wih this
unknown misfortune that he was no sooner abroad, but she had another friend
or ruffian at home with whom she very often and very dishonestly familiarized,
in so much that she had infallibly murdered her second husband, as she had
formerly done her first, if God out of the inestimable treasure of his mercy
and goodness) had not prevented her rage, and disappointed and dissipated her
bloody design and revenge by another accident as mournful as miraculous* and
wherein the Justice and providence of God does equally resplend and shine forth
unto us for out instruction with a most divine power and heavenly influence.

For we must here know and understand that the fifty Ducats which Denisa had
given her of her Lady Dominica, for co^enting to poison her Master Roderigo,
gave her new app^ell, and they likewise procured her a new suitor or sweet
heart, named Hugo (who made show to marry her, but intented it not) with whom
she wantonized so often, as in a short time she became guilty of a great
Belly, the which she concealed from all the world, except from Hugo the father
of her unborne child, who upon notice thereof, either for fear of present
punishment, or of future danger, or that he should be constrained to marry
her, and so to maintain her and her child, when he had not means to maintain
himself, he fled from Granado to (...) without taking his leave of Denisa, or
any way acquainting her therewith, and now when it is too late, this wretched
wench exceedingly grieves thereat, when knowing his return uncertain, his
affection to her doubtful, her self poor and her Lady and Mistress Dominica,
as then not able to maintain her or her child; she assumes another bloody
resolution, which is, that as she was formerly accessory to the poisoning of
her Master, so she now will be a principal* Actor in murdering and making
away of her own child, as soon as it shall be borne, and neither conscience
nor her fear are able to divert her from this her bloody and damnable purpose.
For being provoked thereunto first by her shame, then by her necessity, but
chiefly and especially by her f^all* Counselor and instigatour the Devil,
she being delivered (almost a month before her time) of a fair young Son
as soon as it had cried once (to bewail his own misery and his inhumane
Mothers cruelty) she as an execrable fury of hell, strangles it, giving him his
mournful and untimely death, in that very same hour and instant, which God
and her self gave it life, and the very same evening, wrappes it in a clean
white li^in cloth, and with a Packthred ties a great stone thereunto and (the
devil giving her strength, the very same night caries it half a mile off to a
pondwithout the east gate of the City, where seeing no body present to see
her, she (not as a mother, no not as a woman, but rather as a fury of hell
there throws it in, which before her departure thence presently sunck to the
bottom.

And here let us behold and contemplate on the wonderful mercy and Judgment of
God in so speedily revealing this deplorable and cruel murder of this
harmless and innocent little newborn babe, whom being so newly brought from
the adulterate womb of his pitiless mother, she maliciously cast into that
Pond, giving it death for life, the Pond for its Cradle, a banck of mud and Oze
for its bed and pillow. For upon the instant of Denisas delivery and her
murdering and throwing of this her infant babe into the Pond; God (to revenge
this soul and bloody fact of hers) deprived her of discretion and judgment to
return for that night to her Masters house, for she thinking to make sure and
sound work for her own reputation and safety she that very night takes up her
lodging in the next poor Inn, which was at the sign of Saint Io^ head, where
to the Host and Hostess, she pretends ^amenesse by the receipt of a fall. But
God will give her but small time to rest and repose her self in the
guiltiness of this her cruel sin of murdering her own innocent newborn
babe, for with in one hour after, a Groom riding to water his horse in the
same pond, his Horse ^eth and starts exceedingly, pawing in the water with his
farther fore foot, and many times thrusts down his head therein. The Groom
gives him the (...) and switch to bring him off, but in vain, for the horse
the more pa^th with his foot, (...) ^eth with his nose, yea so long till at
last (it seems) the packthred being broken the white cloth appears and flotes
upon the water, which the groom upon the strange behavior of his horse (but
indeed by the immediate providence and pleasure of God, who then and there was
well pleased to make this reasonlesse Beast an instrument of his glory in the
detection of this cruel murder) causes to be fetched a shore, where opening
the cloth in presence of some others, who flock thither to the pond side to
see what this may be. They find a sweet young Infant boy, whose body was as
white as the snow, with a flaxen colored hair, a cheerful look, a cherrie
lip, and some blackness about his throat and neck, whereby they guessed it to
be newly borne and strangled of some Strumpet his mother, whom to detect and
find out, they search all the adjacent houses, and at last find out Denisa in
her Inn, when the Officers of Justice, setting a Midwife and some three or
four elderly women to search her, they (dispight of her resistance or prayers
to the contrary) give in evidence against her that she was that day delivered
of a child, so she is imprisoned, and the next day brought to her
arraignement, where (threatened with the rack) she confesses the strangling
of her child, and the throwing of it into this pond, for the which soul and in
humane fact of hers, she is the next day condemned to be hanged: When
desirous to save her soul though through the instigation of Satan) she has
miserably cast away her body; she entreats that father Eustace a Priest of
her acquaintance may be sent to her in Prison, to prepare her soul for her
spiritual journey to heaven, who is accordingly sent her. Who after a long and a
religious exhortation to her, falling on this point, that she should do well to
disburthen her conscience of any other capital crime which she in all the
whole course of her life might have committed, as affirming that the revealing
thereof, exceedingly tended to Gods glory, and the felicity of her own foul,
she (with tears and sighs) deeply thinks thereof that night in prison. Now
the next morning she is brought to the place of execution, where a great
number of people flock together to see her end, and there on the Ladder after
she had again confessed the strangling of her infant and her throwing of it
into the Pond, she likewise then and there confessed, That she was accessory
and consented with her Lady Dominica to poison her Master Roderigo, which she
affirmed they both effected in the same manner as we have formerly understood.
The confession of this her otherfoule murder, as also of her Lady Dominica,
does much amaze her Auditors and astonish her Judges, who to clear and
vindicate the truth hereof, they cause her to descend the Ladder, and to be
confronted with her said Lady Dominica who by this time in the midst of her
security is likewise apprehended and brought before the Criminal Judges, where
contrary to her expectation being enforced to understand the effect and tenor
of her Chamber maid Denisa's confession and accusation against her for the
poisoning of her Husband Roderigo, she with much passion and choler terms
her witch and devil, and curses the hour that ever she fostered up so
pestilent a Viper in her house to eat out her own heart and life when with
more confidence and boldness than contrition and repentance (being first by her
judges threatened with the torments of the rack) she confesses her self
likewise to be guilty of murdering her first Husband Roderigo. So Denisa's
sentence is altered, for she is condemned to be hanged for her first murder,
and her dead body after to be burnt to ashes for her second, and the Lady
Dominica to be hanged for poisoning her husband which news so resounds and
rattles through all the streets and corners of Granado, that almost all the
people of that City flock the next morning to the place of execution, to see
this cruel Mistress and her bloody Chambermaid, take their last farewell of
this world; for the Lady Dominica must likewise die, notwithstanding her Mother
Cervantella's tears, and her Husband Andrada's importunate requests and
passionate prayers to her Judges to the contrary.

And first Denisa is caused to ascend the Ladder, (who was a tall and comely
young woman) to whom God was so merciful to her soul, that there with many
bitter sighs and tears, she was wonderful sorrowful for these her two foul
murders, especially for that of her poor Infant babe, whom she had almost as
so one dispatched out, as she brought into the world: She earnestly besought
all her auditors and spectators to pray unto God to forgive her, and to be
merciful to her soul; she affirmed that her Lady Dominica's enticements and
Gold first drew her to be accessory to the poisoning of her Master Roderigo,
the which again and again from her heart and soul, she prayed God to pardon
her; when entreating all young people, especially all young women, to be more
wise and religious, and less profane and bloody minded, by her example; and
now recommending her soul into the hands of her Savior and Redeemer, she is
turned over. When immediately after this our wretched Lady Dominica is likewise
brought to her execution, whom the vanity of her heart, and the impurity and
profaneness of her soul, had purposely dighted in her best dress, and
richest apparel; which was a purple wrought Velvet Gown, and a curious great
laced Ruff, with all things else suitable to it; but which is lamentable to
see, and fearful to consider, she was as careless of her soul, as curious
of her body; for the Priests and Friars in her prison could not abate or beat
down her impiety, but as there, so here on the Ladder, she enters into many
deep execrations and curses, as well against her second Husband Andrada, as
against her Chambermaid Denisa, who she said was now rather gone to the Devil
than to God; but no spark of grace, no show of sorrow, or sign of repentance
could appear in her looks, or be heard in her speeches, for poisoning of her
first Husband Roderigo, but with much choler and vehemency, she there
uttered many other lewd and lascivious speeches, the which grieved her
Christian Auditors to hear, and therefore I will not defile my pen, or offend
the Readers religious and chaste hearts with the knowledge thereof; so this
miserable and wretched Lady was turned over the Ladder, who made her death
answerable to the foulness and enormity of her life, being not so happy in her
death as her bloody Chambermaid Denisa, and I fear me as exempt of grace and
goodness as the Devil could wish her. But God is the Lord of Justice, and
father of mercy, to whom I leave her.

They youth and beauty of this cruel and inhumane Lady Dominica, was pitied of
many, but her foul fact abhorred and detested of all who were present at her
death; may we who read her History, cherish our Virtues by the sight and
knowledge of her Vices, and fortify our souls with Religion and Piety, as she
ruined hers by the neglect and want thereof.

Amen.
GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXIX.
Sanctifiore (upon promise of marriage) gets Ursina with child, and then
afterward very ingratefully and treacherously rejects her, and marieth
Bertranna. Ursina being sensible of this her disgrace, disguiseth her self in
a Friars habit, and with a case of Pistolls kills Sanctifiore as he is walking
in the fields, for the which she is hanged.

IT is a poor profit, a wretched pleasure, for the satisfaction of choler and
revenge, to imbrue our hands in the innocent blood of our near kindred, since
in seeking to wound him, we more properly kill our selves in soul and body;
striking him (who is the figurative image of God) we presumptuously stab at
the Majesty of God himself, by whom our souls must, without whom they can
never be saved. Therefore if we will not know as we are men, yet we ought
firmly both to know and believe as we are Christians, that revenge and murder
are the two prodigious twins of Satan, the last being engendered and
propagated of the first, and both from Hell: For revenge is nothalfe so sweet
in the beginning as bitter in the end, nor murder by many degrees so pleasing
as it proves pernicious to her Authors; as this ensuing History will verify,
and make apparent unto us.

LEt your thoughts be carried over those high hills of Europe, the Alps, and
Appenins, to the noble and famous city of Naples, the head and capital of
that flourishing kingdom (and from whence it receives and derives its
denomination) a city exceeding rich, populous and fair, and graced and adorned
with more Nobility and Gentry of both sexes than any other of Italy
whatsoever. Wherein of very late years (when the Duke of Ossuna was Viceroy
thereof) there dwelt two rich and beautiful young gentlewomen, the one named
Dona Vrsina Placedo, the only daughter and child of Seignior Agustino Placedo,
and the other Dona Bertranna de Tores likewise the only child and daughter of
Seignior Thomaso de Tores, the first native of Ferenzolo, in Pulia, and the
second of Materana in Calabria, both of them being exceeding rich and well
descended Gentlemen, who with their wives and daughters for the most part built
up their residence in Naples, but especially all the winter time. Now because
these two young gentlewomen (whom henceforth we will term by their Christian
and not by their Surnames) are two of the chiefest personages, which give life
to this History, therefore I hold it not impertinent for me, superficially to
give the Reader their different caracters and delineations; Vrsina was past the
twentieth year of her age, and Bertranna entering into her eighteenth, Vrsina
was tall and slender, Bertranna short and somewhat crook-backed: Vrsina was the
fairer of the two, but Bertranna by far the subtiller and wiser. Vrsina was of
a deep Amber hair, but Bertranna of a coal black: and to conclude this
point, Vrsina was affable and courteous, but Bertranna coy, proud, and
malicious.

The truth and order of this History must here inform us, that although these
two rich young Gentlewomen had diverse brave Gallants, who were suitors to them
for marriage, yet none of them so dearly and passionatly loved Vrsina, as the
Baron of Sanctifiore of Capua, a very rich young Nobleman; but far more proper
than wise, and withal far more lascivious than rich, nor did or could
Bertranna in her heart and mind affect any other but the said Baron: neither
was it possible for her father De Tores to persuade or draw her to desire any
other Nobleman or Gentleman for her husband than him. Thus we see Sanctifiore
deeply to love Vrsina, and Bertranna him, but not he her; and we shall not
go far till we likewise see what effects these their different affections will
produce.

Whiles Vrsina is assured of Sanctifiores love to her, Bertranna contrariwise
by her self and her friends makes it her chiefest care and ambition to
persuade and draw him to forsake Vrsina, and to love and marry herself, but
she will find more opposition and difficulty therein than she expects. True
it is, that although the Baron of Sanctifiore do continually frequent Placedos
house, and his daughter Bertrannas company, yet understanding and considering
with himself, that Vrsina honored him with her constant love and affection,
he therefore held himself in a manner bound sometimes to see and visit her,
although indeed it was every way more to content and please her, than himself,
where albeit that her policy to her self, and her affection to him, gives him
many quips and jerkes of his Mistress Vrsina, yet his reputation and discretion
makes him comport his actions and speeches so equally toward Bertranna, that
although he give her little cause to hope, yet he gives her none to despaier
of his love and affection to her, in requital of hers to him, and upon these
and no other terms stand Sanctifiore and Bertranna. But as for Vrsina, her
hopes and heart of Sanctifiores affection to her, sayls on with a more pleasing
and joyful gale of wind, for she loving him as deeply as he does her dearly,
she accounts her self his, and he hers: as we may the more particularly and
perfectly perceive by four love letters of theirs, which secretly and
interchangeably past between them; the which for the Readers better
satisfaction I thought good here to insert and publish, whereof his first to
her spoke thus.

SANCTIFIORE to VRSINA.
THe Sweetness of thy beauty, and the excellency of thy Virtues have so fully
taken up my thoughts, and so firmly surprised and vanquished my heart, that I
am so much thine hoth by conquest and duty, as I know not whether I do more
affect or honor, or more admire or adore thee; Wherefore if thou art as
courteous as fair, and as loving to me as I am faithful to thy self, then
return me thy heart as I now give and send thee mine, and assure thy self
that my affection is so infinite and entire to thee, that I love and desire
thee^ thousand times more than mine own life, and will esteem my death both
sweet and happy, if thou will henceforth live mine by Purchase, as I am now
thine by Promise. Thy will shall be my law, and as there is a God in Heaven, so
Vrsina has not so fervent a lover, or constant a servant on earth as her

SANCTIFIORE.


Vrsinas answer hereunto was couched in these terms.

VRSINA to SANCTIFIORE.
IF thy heart be as full of affection, as thy letter is of flattery to me, I
should then have as just cause thankfully to believe that, as now I have to
suspect and fear this; For the iniquity of our times, and the misery of many
former examples do prompt and tell me, that most men love more with their
tongues, than with their hearts, and that they all know far better how to
profess than preserve their affections and fidelities to their Mistresses. As
for me, judge with thy self how courteous and loving I am to thee, for if I
perfectly knew that thy Letter were the true Ambassador, and unfeigned Echo
of thy heart, I would both say and promise thee, that I would love thee, and
none but thee: Make my self thy wife, when and as soon as thou will please to
be my Husband, for in life and death I here now promise thee to be more thine
than mine own: Resolve me of this doubt, and free me of this fear, and then
manage this affection and favor of mine with discretion, and requite it with
fidelity to thy

VRSINA.


The Baron of Sanctifiores second letter to her contained this language.

SANCTIFIORE to VRSINA.
AS I am not guilty, so I am not answerable for other men's crimes of
infidelity, but do as justly detest and scorn, as you unjustly fear them in
me. That my affection is pure and sacred, and shall be inviolable to thee,
be God my Judge, and my heart and conscience my witnesses: Therefore to
resolve thy doubt, and to free thy fear thereof, I vow by the pureness of thy
beauty, and by the dignity of thy virtues, that both my former letter and also
this, are the true Ambassadors and Echoes of my heart, and which is more, of
my soul. I will shortly kiss thee for thy love to me, then love thee for thy
kisses, and after embrace and thank thee for both, and when I fail of my
affection and fidelity to thee, may God then fail of his Grace and mercy to my
self. I will make my self thy dear Husband, and thee my sweet wife, when
thou please to crown and honor me with that sweet joy, and to ravish my
heart with this desired felicity.

SANCTIFIORE.


Vrsinas answer hereunto was traced in these terms.

VRSINA to SANCTIFIORE.
RElying on the Purity of thy affection, and the preservation and performance
of thy constancy to me, for the which thou have invoked God for Judge, and thy
heart and Conscience as witnesses thereof, I now freely acknowledge my self to
be thy wife by Purchase, and thou to be my Husband by Promise, and do
therefore wholly take me from my self, eternally to give my self to thee. I
desire the enjoyance of thy company and presence, with as much impatiency as
thou longest for mine, and thou shall find, that I will make it my chiefest
care and ambition to love thee, and my greatest glory to honor and obey thee,
and let both of us beware of infidelity each to other, for God will assuredly
punish it with justice, requite it with revenge, and revenge it with misery on
the Delinquents and Offenders.

VRSINA.


By the perusal and consideration of these four precedent Letters, we may
plainly perceive, what a firm promise, and secret contract there was past
between the Baron of Sanctifiore and the Lady Vrsina, and how servently and
sweetly they had given themselves each to other in the promise and assurance of
marriage, so not contented to have gotten the Daughters good will, he in very
honorable fashion and terms likewise seeks her Father Seignior Placedos
consent thereto; whom though for some few Months he found to be averse and
opposite to his desires therein, yet upon Sanctifiores importunate entreaties
and his Daughter Vrsinas frequent tears, he at last consents to this their
marriage, only he delayed the consummation thereof for some secret reasons, and
considerations best known to himself, the which I cannot publish, because I
could never gather or understand them. Whiles thus the Baron of Sanctifiore
remains in Naples, his long stay, great train, prodigal expenses there, and
his absence from Capua where his lands and means lay, made him be in some
distress and want of money, and not knowing how to procure it there, thereby to
support his fame and reputation with his pretended Father in law, and also with
his intended wife his Daughter, it greatly perplexed and troubled him; But at
last he saw himself reduced to this extremity, that he was enforced to
borrow of one Nobleman and Gentleman of his Friends to pay another; a Course
which he well saw could not long endure and subsist, without clamorously
calling his reputation in question; The which to prevent, knowing Seignior
Placedo to be a hide bound, and close fisted old Gentleman, who loved his gold
far better than his God, and that if he offered to borrow any of him, he
would absolutely refuse and deny to lend it him, and that it was not
impossible, but rather very probable, that hereby the prodigality of the one,
and the covetousnes of the other might prove a great blot and hinderance to
this his marriage, he therefore as a deboshed and vicious young Nobleman,
despayring of the fathers love, resolves to make sure work with the daughters
affection, who with a thousand amorous speeches, and lascivious lures,
daliances and temptations, he seeks to draw her to his lustful desires, and
so by usurping on her chastity (which is the honor of Ladies, and the glory of
Gentlewomen) to have carnali knowledge of her before he were married to her.
Vrsina (who loved her sweet heart Sanctifiore far dearer than the whole
world, and yet her honor and chastity a thousand times more dear and precious
than her own life) infinitely grieves and wonders at this his intemperancy and
obscenitie; when (as a chaste and virtuous Gentlewoman) she with sighs and
tears lays before his eyes and consideration, and represents to his heart and
soul, the lewdness of his desire, the impiety of his request, the foulnes and
odiousnes of this fact both to God and man, the loss of her reputation and
honor, both with her father and with all the world, and that in the end it
would assuredly prove the breake-necke of their marriage, and consequently the
ruin of both their contents and fortunes, as also that she is ready to be his
wife, but disdaineth to prove his strumpet, with many other wise and godly
reasons tending that way, and therefore utterly refuses to blemish or
shipwreck her chastity, by participating with him in the share of this
lascivious and impious sin of fornication; and indeed it had been a happiness
and glory, very worthy both of her self, and of her honorable old Father, if
she had lived in the purity, and continued in the piety of this chaste and
virtuous resolution.

But this lascivious Baron Sanctifiore seeing his lust so strongly opposed by
he chastity, he is so far from grace and from God, as he redoubleth his
violence and impetuositie thereof, as also of his lures and prayers, of his art
and policy, to enrich himself with her loss of that inestimable and
irrecoverable Jewel her Virginity; so that day and night she cannot be in
quiet for him, nor he without her; but still he follows her as her ghost and
shadow, and with many false oaths and feigned sighs and tears does bewitch
or rather minstralize into her ears and heart, that his desire of this sweet
pleasure which he requesteth from her, proceeds wholly from his tender
affection to her, and so with a thousand lascivious words he makes so large
and so impious an Apology to her for this his obscene request, that because
modesty cannot, discretion will not permit me to relate it; as well knowing
that the expression and publishing thereof, will every way prove unprofitable
to the Reader, and no way pleasing but displeasing to God, when this weak and
inconsiderate Gentlewoman, loving him far dearer than her own life, and
confidently relying on his sworn affection and fidelity to her, which he so
passionatly, and so often had reiterated to her, she so rashly and foolishly
permitted her self to be weighed down, overcome and vanquished with the
importunacy of his requests and oaths, that it was neither in her power or
will to deny him any thing, no not her self, but as she formerly had given him
the full command of her heart, now she likewise gives him the free use and
possession of her body. Thus Sanctifiore bereaves and unparadiseth his Mistress
Vrsina of the most precious Jewel which ever Lady Nature gave her, I mean her
chastity and honor, but both of them shall shortly pay dear for these their
bitter sweet pleasures (or rather sins) of sensuality and fornication; and
shall redeem and ransom them with no less than shame and repentance: The
manner whereof is thus.

After he had thus deflowred, and taken his obscene pleasure of his young and
beautiful Mistress, and stayed an hour or two complementing with her, he then
takes his leave of her, when triumphing more in the conquest of her shame, and
his folly, than in his own repentance for occasioning the one and committing
the other, he within a week or two after again makes her so flexible and
tractable to his desires, as he three or four times more familiarly
wantonizeth with her in this lascivious manner, and she with him, as not
contented to stain and blemish, but wholly to defile and pollute themselves in
this their beastly sin of concupiscence and fornication. But here now begins
his infamy, and her grief and misery: For (as a base Nobleman) he forgetting
his oaths and promises to her, and her extraordinary love and affection to
him, and which is more, his honor, and himself, and his soul, and his God,
he (by degrees) now begins to freez in his affection to her, visits her
seldom, and then but faintly and coldly, and when (with equal blushes and
tears) she motioneth him to marry her, he is either deaf to her requests,
or else answers her so impertinently and ambiguously, as (with much
perturbation of mind and affliction of heart) she begins to suspect and doubt
with her self, that she has more reason to fear, than cause to hope of his
future affection and fidelity toward her. Neither is her fear vain, or her
judgment and apprehension deceived of him herein: for as men love nosegayes in
the morn, and throw them away ere night, so this ignoble Nobleman Sanctifiore
after he had surfetted and satiated his desire of this his intended and
contracted wife Vrsina, he in less than three months after, is so
ungrateful and treacherous toward her, as in a manner he abandoneth her
fathers house, and forsakes her sight and company, leaving her nothing to
comfort her, but her sighs, tears, and repentance, and which is worse, a
growing great belly, as the true seal of her present grief and sorrow, and
the undoubted pledge and presager of her future shame and misery, which
torments and terrifies her heart and soul, but how to remedy it she knows
not. And now (with as much speed as vanity and infidelity) away goes
Sanctifiore to his other second sweet heart Bertranna, who not for her beauty,
but for her fathers great wealth, and his own pressing wants, he now seems
to affect and court a thousand times more familiarly and tenderly than before,
whereof she is infinitely glad and joyful. For having a long time loved him in
her heart and mind, and therefore desiring nothing so much under heaven, as to
see him her Husband here on earth, and having to that end her secret eyes and
spies every where abroad upon his life and actions, she is at last advertised,
that there is some great distaste and difference fallen out between him and
the Lady Vrsina, as also that being far from his home, he wants monyes to
defray his Port and expenses in Naples; she being of a sharp wit, and deep
judgment, thinks that the last of his defects was the cause of the first, and
that peradventure Sanctifiore having attempted to borrow some money of her
father Seignior Placedo, and received the repulse, he therefore was fallen
out, and become displeased and discontented with his daughter: And although her
conceit and judgment missed of the truth herein, yet the better to estrange
Sanctifiore from Vrsina, and consequently the more powerfully and strongly to
unite and tie him to her self, she well knowing that her own father De Tores
exceedingly loved him, and desired him for his son in law, as much as she
did for her Husband: she therefore as much in love to him, as in disdain and
malice to Vrsina, does under hand deal so politickly, and yet so secretly with
her Father to lend Sanctifiore some monyes, that he meeting him the very next
day in his house, he takes him aside in his study and told him, that in regard
of his absence from Capua, and his long stay and great expenses here in Naples,
it was rather likely than impossible that he might want some monyes, and
therefore he freely lent, and then and there laid him down 500 double
pistolls: adding withal, that if he needed more, he should have what he
pleased, and repay it him again when he pleased, and that if he would honor
him so much as to marry his daughter, he would give him all the lands and
wealth he had.

This great courtesy of De Tores to the Baron of Sanctifiore he held was
redoubled to him in the value, in that he lent it to him so freely and
undemanded, as also for that it came so opportunely and fitly to pay his debts,
and satisfy his wants, as after a long and respective complement between
them. Sanctifiores necessity so easily prevails with his modesty, that he
most thankfully takes this gold of De Tores, and likewise gives him more hope
than despair to his motion of marrying his daughter the Lady Bertranna;
wherewith the one rests well satisfied, and the other exceeding well contented.
This point of courtesy being thus performed between them, Sanctifiores joy
thereof was so great; I may say so boundless, as he presently finds out his
new Mistress Bertranna; and with a frolic countenance and cheerful voice,
relates her, how much her father had obliged him, and from point to point what
had past between them, and immediately after no less does her father, the
music of which news was so pleasing to her mind, and so sweet to her heart
and thoughts, that she hereupon flatters her self with a confident hope that
he will shortly marry her, and in this hope does he still feed and entertain
her, being seldom or never from her, but ever and anon both together billing
and kissing, drowning his judgment so wholly in her company, and his heart
ranging and dreaming so fully on her youth and beauty, and on her fathers great
wealth and estate, that he has not the grace, no nor which is less, the will
or good nature, once to think of his poor desolate and forsaken Vrsina, of
whom in her turn I come now to speak.

We have formerly understood with sorrow, and our sorrowful and unfortunate
Vrsina has to her grief too too soon seen, how unkindly Sanctifiore has
used, and how basely and treacherously abused her in the points of her honor,
and his infidelity; and yet all this notwithstanding, her love and affection is
still so dear and constant to him, and her hopes so confident of him, that all
this discourtesie of his to her, is only but to try her patience, and that
considering what familiarity has past between them, it is impossible for him
to be so cruel hearted toward her, as in the end not to marry her. She has
likewise acquainted him, that she is with child by him, and when all other
reasons and persuasions fail, she hopes this will prevail to reclaim his
affection to her, and to induce him to take pity of her, and compassion of his
unborne babe within her. But to resell and dissipate all these her flattering
and deceitful hopes, and which is worse to make her lose all hopes of this her
desired happiness and good fortune from him, his new contracted and incessant
familiarity between him and the Lady Bertranna, is not so privately carried and
hushed up in silence between them, but she has secret and sorrowful notice
thereof; which so inflames her mind with hot jelousie, and likewise afflicts
her heart with cold fear and apprehension, that she has seduced and drawn
his affection from her to himself, as also that he will utterly forsake her
to marry Bertranna, that she fully believes that the wind of his discourteous
absence from her proceeds from this point of the compass. Wherefore fearing
that which she already knows, but far more that which she knows not of this
their familiarity between them, all her hopes of Sanctifiore are almost
vanished and banished, and her heart is as it were wholly depressed and weighed
down with bitter grief and sorrow thereof. She dares acquaint no body with
her disgrace, much less her Father, and her looking on her great belly does
but infinitely augment her sorrows and increase her afflictions, in regard
that that which should have been the cause of her joy and glory, she now
knows will shortly prove the argument of her shame and misery. A thousand
times a day, yea I may truly say as many times an hour, she wishes she had
been more chaste and less fair, and not so easily to have hearkened to
Sanctifiores sugared oaths and temptations, as to have lost her honor and
fortunes in seeking to preserve them in her affe^tion to him, she would feign
draw comfort from all these ^er calamities, or from any one of them, and yet
she knows not from whom except from her Sanctifiore, when presently she
checks her folly and reproves her ambition for tearming him hers, when she
believes she has far more cause to fear than reason to doubt, that he
already is, or shortly will be Bertrannas husband. And yet again, because the
excess of her sorrows has more eclipsed her joys than her judgment, and
more dulled and obscured her heart than her understanding, therefore judging it
a master piece of her policy if she can sequester and reclaim her Sanctifiore
from Bertranna, and so retain him to her self in marriage, she to that end,
that very morning sends for Sebastiano her fathers coachman (whom she knew to
be faithful to her) and taking off a rich Diamond ring from her finger which
Sanctifiore well knew, she bade him find out the Baron of Sanctifiore at his
lodging, or elsewhere, to deliver that ring as a token of her love to him, and
to tell him that she infinitely desires him to honor her with his presence at
her Fathers house sometimes the forenoone. Sebastiano accordingly finds out
the Baron, and delivers him his young mistress ring and message, by whom he
returns this answer; Commend me to the Lady Vrsina, and tell her I will be
with her immediately after dinner. Whiles thus our sorrowful Vrsina (betwixt
hope and fear, grief and consolation) prepares to receive him, he arrives to
her in his own coach, and her Fathers servants attending for him, do conduct
him up to her chamber, where composing her countenance to affection, and yet to
sorrow, she meets him at the door, and conducts him to the window which
answers and looks into the garden, where he giving her only one slight
kiss, and she absenting her Fathers servants, she bursts forth into tears
and sighs.

She complains of the coldness of his affection, of his long absence from
her, of the violation of his oaths and vows to her, and of her great belly by
him, which she tells him he may better see than she conceal, but especially
of his deep promise to marry her, praying him to set down the time and place
when he will perform and consummate it, and that it would infallibly prove
his shame and infamy, if he forgot himself, his honor and conscience, to
forsake her, and marry the Lady Bertranna, whom she affirms to him with
tears, that she understands is the mistress of his thoughts and heart, and the
Queen Regent of his desires and affections. When this base Baron is so cruel
hearted to her, as (preferring his fury to his affection, and his passion to
his compassion) he replies not a word to all the former parts and branches of
her speeches and complaints, but only to the two last he gives her this
thundering and heart-killing answer: Know Vrsina that I have used all lawful
and possible means with my parents to draw their consents that I might marry
thee, but it is out of my power ever to obtain it of them, and without it I
will never marry: as for Bertranna, she is not so much thy inferior in
beauty, as she is thy superior in virtues, therefore provide thou for thy
fortunes, and so will I for mine, when with a look (which savored no way of
love, but wholly of contempt and indignation) he hastily throws her her
Diamond ring, and without once kissing her or bidding her farewell, suddenly
rusheth forth her chamber, wherein he leaves her to her self and her muses,
and so takes coach and away, vowing to himself as he went forth the doors,
that he will not be Father to a bastard, nor Husband to a whore.

Here let all virtuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, and all true hearted and
generous Noblemen and Gentlemen judge, if this Sanctifiore did not show
himself a most base Nobleman and a cruel hearted tyrant toward the sweet and
unfortunate Gentlewoman since the consideration of her youth and beauty in her
self, of her tender love and affection to him, of his oaths and promises to
be her husband, of the loss of her honor and fortunes, yea since the sight of
her lean and thin cheeks wherein the roses and lillies of her former beauty
were withered with her sorrows and his infidelities, and the sight and
consideration of her great belly which he had given her, together with her
birth, and quality, and the infiniteness of her sighs, prayers, sobs, and
tears could draw no more reason or compassion from him toward her.

And now it is, that at the sight and consideration of this his barbarous
cruelty toward her; her very heart and soul is wounded and pierced through
with sorrow, and now it is that she looks back on her former folly and error,
on her present affliction and grief, and on her future shame and misery, and
now it is that deeming him lost to her for ever, and her self consequently
ruined without him; that her sorrows and miseries are so great, so infinite,
that she is ready to drown her self in her tears, and most willingly
desirous to forsake this life and this world to fly up to heaven and to God
upon the wings of her sighs, and prayers. But ahlas poor soul, thou art too
unfortunate to be yet so happy, because these thy afflictions and sorrows do
as it were but now begin; therefore thou must prepare and arm thy self to
suffer them with patience and to end them in less passion, and more repentance
and piety.

Although this ignoble Baron triumph in this his cruelty toward his former
love Vrsina, and so speedily poast away and acquaint his new one Bertranna
therewith, who as much rejoices, as the other bitterly weeps and laments
thereat; yet (according to order) I must again speak of our sorrowful
Vrsina, who has other more mournful parts, and lamentable passions to act
upon the stage of this her History. Who having thus received the repulse and
refusal from her treacherous lover Sanctifiore, she (within a month after)
with a sorrowful heart and courage, resolves (as well as she may) to dispense
for a time with her tears, and to provide for her reputation, she has as yet
acquainted none but Sanctifiore with her disgrace of her great belly, for
neither her kinsfolks, friends, neighbors, father, or his servants do as yet
know it; she is of a weak body and feeble constitution, and therefore to
conceal this scandal from her father, as also from all the world, and to
provide for the lying down of her great belly, she holds it requisite to
discover this great and important secret but only to one, and so to crave the
aid and assistance of this confident bosom friend. To which end, she thinks
none so fit for her purpose, and therefore makes choice of no other, but of an
old aunt of hers, who was her mothers sister named Dona Mellefanta, who being a
wise and rich widow woman, dwelt at Putzeole some 10 small miles distant from
Naples, a place so famous for its sub^rianeamgrots, vaults, and water works,
when inventing an excuse to her Father. which was as worthy of her (...) and
policy as she was every way unworthy of these her crosses and afflictions;
she tells him that it is not unknown to him how she has a long time been
weak and sickly, that the air of Naples is neither wholesome for her, nor
pleasing to her, and because she has often dreamt she shall in a little time
recover her former health in Putzeole, she humbly beseeches him that he will
speedily and her thither to live some small time there with her Aunt Mellefanta
her Father Seignior de Tores, whose age, contentment, and joy lived chiefly in
the youth, prosperity and health of this his only child and daughter, makes her
will and desire herein to be his, when not knowing any thing of the distaste
that had past between his daughter, and the Baron of Sanctifiore, or of his
affection to the Lady Bertranna, he demanded of her when you are at Putzeole
what shall become of the Baron of Sanctifiore, to whom (rather from her
ap^strings than her heart) she returns this witty and speedy answer, if
Sanctifiore love me, he will then sometimes leave Naples and visit me, or if
he do not I will not love him; which reply of hers pleased her father so well
that he causes her to fit up her apparel and bagage, and within three days
after, (attended on by a chamber maid, and a man of his sends her away to
Putzeole in his coach to his sister Mellifanta, where being arived she
speedily and privately acquaints her aunt with this great secret of her great
belly, which so much imports her reputation, or disgrace, and also with all the
circumstances thereof, and so prays her best love and assistance to her
herein, the which she faithfully promises her, adding withal, that because
she is of her own blood, she will regard and love her as her own child,
telling her that she highly commended her policy, for thus blinding the eyes
of her father, and for leaving Naples, to come lay down her great belly with
her in Putzeole; yet she could not choose but blame her for the cause thereof
in suffering her self to be thus abused and betrayed, by so base a Nobleman
as the Baron of Sanctifiore, but then again she excuses that error of this
her niece upon the freshnes of her youth, and beauty, and bids her fear
nothing but to resolve to be here cheerful, courageous and merry with her.

Here we see our beautiful Vrsina safe at Putzeole under the wings and
protection of her aunt Mellifanta, and far of from the eyes of the known or
suspected rejoicing enemies of her disgrace; lodged in a dainty house, a
delicate a ire having variety of curious sweet gardens, and dainty ranckes and
groves of orange and lemon trees to walk in, well attended on, and f^ing most
delitiously; and who therefore would believe, that she would not now quite
abandon her former sorrows and tears, and wholly reject and cast of that base
Baron of Sanctifiore who so ingratfully had ruined, and so treacherously had
first forsaken and rejected her; but here in Putzeole we shall see her
perform nothing less; for although she yet hold him to be entangled in the
lures of Bertrannas beauty, and the temptations of her father de Tores wealth,
yet judging his heart and affections by her own, and measuring him by her
self, she still loves him so dearly that she nevertheless believes he
cannot hate her so deadly as to reject and repundiate her to marry the said
Bertranna, when the more to fortify her belief and resolution thereof, she
very often again reads over his two former letters which we have heard and
seen, and therein finding, that by his conscience and soul, and by heaven and
by God he had bound himself to marry her, and to love and die her faithful
husband; she then believes that no man, much less a Nobleman, and least of
all a christian will be so profane and impious (without any cause or reason)
to violate all these his great oaths and promises so deeply made, and so
religiously attested unto God, wherefore although this Baron of Sanctifiore
were absent from her, yet seeing him still present in her eyes and heart, she
therefore (in consideration of the promises) does yet continually so plead for
him against her self, and for his affection and fidelity to her against her
suspicion and disfidence of him, that she yet flatters her self with a conceit
that in the end his conscience will so call home his thoughts, and God his
conscience, that he will marry her self, and none but her self. Again
consi^ng him to be the Father of her unborne babe, she thinks her self a
very unkind and unnatural mother, if she should not love him for her child's
sake as well as for his own, and that God would neither bless her nor her
burden, it she should any way neglect or omit him; upon the foundations of
which reasons, (truly and courteously laid by her, but so falsely and
treacherously by him) she thinks it a good way and an excellent, expedient
for her, to seek to reclaim him to her by a letter, the proof whereof since
his defection from her, she had not as yet practiced or experienced, but as
she began to fall on this resolution, her hope and despair of Sanctifiore and
yet her love and affection to him, make her meet and fall on a doubtful
scruple, whether she should write kindly or cholerickly to him, but at last
her affection to him, declining and excusing his infidelity to her, and her
love, and courtesy giving a favorable construction to his cruelty toward
her, she holds it more behouefull for her desire, and his return, to write to
him passionately and effectually, but not harshly or severely, and so to take
the sweet and fair way which she desired, but not the sharp and bitter which
he deserved; when flying to her closet, she (full of grief and tears) writes
him this ensuing letter, the which without the knowledge of her Aunt Mellifanta
she sends him to Naples, by her trusty menssenger Sebastiano her Fathers
coachman.

VRSINA to SANCTIFIORE.
TO preserve thine honor, and prevent mine own disgrace and shame I have left
Naples to sojourne here for a time in Putzeole with the Lady Mellifanta mine
aunt, where thy presence will make me as truly joyful and happy, as I feel
and know my self infinitely miserable without it; For although of late (but for
what cause, or reason, God knows I know not) it has pleased thee to
exercise my affection and patience in thy discontent; yet in regard I am thy
wife by purchase, since thou art my Husband by promise, whereof the copies of
thy former letters will inform and remember thee, that thou made God the
judge, and the soul and consciences the witnesses, I cannot believe that thou
art so irreligious, or that thou bear me so little love, or so much malice,
to make thy self guilty of such foul infidelity to me, and impiety toward
God, and I appeal to them all if my tender and untainted affection to thee
have not every way deserved the contrary at thy hands. Again, as in hoping to
marry thee I gave thee my heart, so in assurance and counfidence thereof, thou
did likewise bereave me of my honor, and therefore if the conterpane of
that contract do anyway fade or dye in thy memory, yet rest confident, that
the Original lives still in Heaven, as the pledge and seal thereof does now
in my unhappie womb here on earth; mistake me not my dear Sanctifiore, for I
write not this out of any malice, but out of true affection to thee, to the end
that thou may thereby seriously consider, and religiously remember with thy
self, what I am to thee, thou to my self, and what that unfortunate Innocent
unborne babe in my belly is to us both. And although I am thy wife before God,
yet I will now in all humility make my self thy handmaid and with a world of
sighs and tears throw my self at thy feet (and lower if I could) to conjure
and beg thee; By my poor beauty which once thou did so much admire and
adore, by the memory of my lost virginity, which thou wrested'st from me with
so many amarous sighs and tears, by all thy deep oaths, vows and promises
which thou so religiously gave me to remain still loving to me, by thine
honor which should be dearer to thee than thy life, by thy conscience, and
soul which ought to be far more precious to thee than all the lives and
honors of the world, yea for thy poor infants sake, and lastly for Gods sake,
abandon thy unjust displeasure and immerited discontent conceived against me,
and my dear Sanctifiore come away to me to Putzeole, and there make me thy
wife in the sight of his Church and people, as I am already in that of heaven
and his Angels, I say again, come away to me my sweet Sanctifiore, for thy
sight will delight my heart, and thy presence and company ravish my soul with
joy. It is impossible for Bertranna, either to love or honor thee the thousand
part so dearly as thy Vrsina does, and till death resolves to do; I will
freely forget all thy former escapes and discourtesies toward me, and do
attribute them more to her foolish vanity, than any way to thy unkind
disposition or inclination, yea I will not knit my brows when thou come to
me, but will cheerfully and joyfully prepare my self to feast thee with
smiles, and to surfeit thee with kisses: But if contrariwise thou will not
hearken unto me, or this my letter, or regard these my just requests and
sorrows, nor obey and follow God and thy conscience herein, in speedily
repairing to me to make me thy joyful wife, then what shall I do or say,
but according as I am bound in affection and duty to thee, I will
notwithstanding still resolve to love thee dearly, though thou, hate me
deadly, and to pray for thee though thou curse me; yea I will then leave thee
to God, and religiously beseech his divine majesty, to be a just judge
between both of us, of my firm affection and constancy to thee, and of thy
cruel ingratitude and treachery to me. Live thou as happy, as thy constant
Vrsina knows that without thee, she shall assuredly live sorrowfully and die
miserably.

VRSINA.


Her messenger Sebastiano arives privately at Naples and finds out the Baron of
Sanctifiore in his chamber by the fire to whom he gives and delivers this
letter, who at first (knowing from whom it came) stood a pretty whiles musing
and consulting with himself, whether he should read or burn it, but at last
he breaks up the seals thereof, and with much ado affords himself the time
and patience to peruse it, which having done, although he no way merited to
receive so sweet and loving a letter from Vrsina, yet not blushing for shame,
but looking pale with envy and malice thereat, he darting forth a disdainful
frown, and tearing the letter in pieces, throws it into the fire, when
turning himself hastily toward Sebastiano who stood near him and saw all
that he had done, he in great choler spoke to him thus. Tell that proud and
foolish gigglet Vrsina, that I disdain her as much as she writes, she loves
me, and that as now so ever hereafter I will return no other answer to her,
and her letters but contempt and silence, when to express his greater fury,
Sebastiano was no sooner forth his chamber, but he very hastily throws fast
the door after him, and in this furious and choleric manner does this base
Sanctifiore receive the love, and entertain the letter of our sweet and
sorrowful Vrsina.

Sebastiano as much grieving as admiring at the incivill choler and rage of
Sanctifiore, presently leaves Naples, and carries home this poor news and
cold comfort to his young Mistress the Lady Vrsina at Putzeole, the which he
faithfully and punctually delivers to her, who expected nothing less but
derectly the contrary thereof. She is amazed to understand this his
disdainful, barbarous, and cruel answer, and infinitely perplexed in mind,
that he should first tear then burn her letter and for converting his pen
into Sebastianos tongue for his answer thereof; But above all that word of his
gigglet killed her very heart with sorrow, to think that for all her former
courtesies showed him, he should now at last repay her with this foul
ingratitude and scandalous aspersion, at the sorrowful thought and
consideration whereof, resolving to make her piety exceed his cruelty, she
could not refrain from bedewing her roseat cheeks with many pearled tears,
nor from evaporating this heavenly ejaculation from the profundity of her
heart, and the center of her foul; God forgive the Baron of Sanctifiore, and
be merciful to me Vrsina a great and wretched sinner, had she continued in
this godly mind and resolution she had done well, but ahlas (notwithstanding
the wholesome comfort and council of her aunt Mellefanta) we shall shortly
see her run a contrary course and cariere.

It is a common phrase, and proverb, that misfortune seldom comes alone, which
we shall now see our sorrowful Vrsina will verify by her deep sighs, and
confirm by her bitter tears for this discourtesie of Sanctifiore toward her,
for she has so deeply nailed it in her mind, and rive^ed it in her heart,
that it begins to impair her health and strength, and consequently to pervert
and alter the constitution of her body, so that whereas her poor unborne babe
had lived but one full month within her, she now finds so many sudden
throws, and unacustomed convulsions, that she is speedily constrained to
betake her self to her bed, when calling upon her aunt Mellefanta, and withal
possible have sending a way for the midwife, she after many sharp torments,
and bitter cries and groans (to the great perrill and eminent danger of her
life) is delivered of a very pretty little son, which God sends into the
world dead borne; now although she want no curious care, comfort and
attendance from her aunt, in this her sickness and extremity, yet she weeps
bitterly, and pitifully for the abortive birth, and untimely death of her
poor innocent babe, and infant, and because her aunt sees, that this last
affliction and sorrow of her niece does infinitely increase and revive her
former, and that she also conceives a wonderful fear in her heart, and
scruple in her conscience that it is only her immoderate grief and sorrow
which has killed her child, therefore as a discreet matrone and wise Lady, (to
remove this article out of her neeces belief and memory) tells her plainly and
freely, that she is extremly deceived in that point and doubt of fear, and
that it is not her sorrow, but the base ingratitude and treachery of her false
lover Sanctifiore to her self which killed her child within her; A tart and yet
a true speech, which Vrsina neither will so soon, nor can so easily forget, as
her aunt Mellefanta has spoken it, but shall I here term this to be
affection in Vrsina toward Sanctifiore, or a needless vanity, or superfluous
ceremony in her self: For she desires to kiss her breathless innocent babe
for his sake, which she does, when giving it a thousand kisses, then washing
his face with her tears, and lamenting and grieving that she could not breath
life into it with her sighs, she recommends it again to her aunt, and she
the same night to its secret and decent burial.

Whiles thus Vrsina remains very weak and sick in her bed, yet still her
heart and affection looks constantly on Sanctifiore as the needle of the
compass does to the north, notwithstanding all his base ingratitude, and
cruelty from time to time showed toward her, and because it is a thousand
grieses and pitties that ever he set his eyes on her, or she on him, and as
many shames for him; first to seduce and then to betray her, therefore who
would any way commend her for continuing of her love to him, or rather who
would not infinitely blame her of folly, and condemn her for want of wit, and
judgment, ever any more either to hope or hearken after him: And yet this silly
young Lady is so bewitched to him as in the very midst of her sickness and
sorrows, and contrary to all sense and reason here breaks forth a sparckle
and flash of her polley in her self, and of her affection toward him; She
neither can, nor dare trust any other but Sebastiano her coachman, with this
great secret which so much imports her honor or disgrace, or with this her
message with Sanctifiore from whom (though in vain) she expects some hope and
content, when exempting all from her chamber, she calls him to herbeds side,
and swearing him to secrecy, (for want of strength to write charge him
presently to ride poast to Naples again to find out the Baron of Sanctifiore
and to tell him from her, that she her self is extreme sick, and not like to
live, that she is delivered of his and her Son who is dead borne, and
therefore that she begs him, that for Gods sake he will speedily come over to
her, because for his good, and her content, she infinitely desires to discharge
her mind and conscience to him before she go to heaven; So Sebastiano, (in
discharge of his duty, and his Ladies commands) seems rather to fly than poast
to Naples, where ariving to Sanctifiores house, and finding him within; he
sends him up his name by one of his men, as also that he most earnestly
desires to speak a word with his Lordship: but Sanctifiore knowing who it was,
and therefore imagining from whom he came, bids his man carry Sebastiano back
this answer that he will neither speak with him nor see him. Sebastiano is
perplexed with this his short and sharp reply, but because his message is of
great importance, as also for that he exceedingly respects and honors his
young Lady and mistress, he resolves not to return to her as a fool; to which
end, at the foot of the stairs he enquireth of another of his servants when
he thinks his Lord will go forth, who tells him he will take coach within
half an hour; whereof Sebastiano being exceeding glad, he thinks it best to
stay for him in the street, where (with much vigilance and impatiency) he
attends his coming, so at last he sees him issue forth his gate; when
presently Sebastiano places him self betwixt him and his coach, and with his
hat in his hand, very resolutly and orderly delivers him his mistress her
message at full, the which Sanctifiore understanding, he at first smiles
thereat, but then presently again entering into choler, he rounds Sehastiano
this answer in his ear, tell that strumpet thy mistress Vrsina from me, that I
wish she were buried with her bastard, and that they were both with the
devil, and so without speaking any one word more, in a mighty fume of anger
and disdain, he throws himself a way from Sebastiano into his coach, and
speedily hurries away to his sweet heart Bertranna, from whom he is seldom or
never absent, to whom he revealed all that had past in this passage,
endeavoring as much as in him lies to make it to be as well her laughture, as
his own contempt and scorn.

Now here ere I proceed farther, I know there is no christian whatsoever, but
that his very heart and soul, will yearne within him, at the reading of these
cruel, barbarous and hellish speeches of this base hearted Nobleman against
our sorrowful and unfortunate Vrsina, and her poor harmless deceased babe,
and no less does Sebastiano in hearing and my self in penning and relating
them: do I term him Nobleman? O let me (with respect and repentance) revoke
that noble title from Sanctifiore, and to give him his due, let me term him
as he is a monster of men, or if he will, a noble deboshed villain, or
whether he will or no, a mere tyrant, or else a devil in the shape of a man,
to use such ungrateful cruelties, and hellish actions and speeches against
these two innocent persons, who contrariwise in the highest degree, deserved
from him all manner of affection, respect, charity, pity and compassion; but
let him look to him self as well as he can, yet (God being as just as
merciful) it is not impossible for him in the end to pay dear for these his
foul infidelities and cruelties.

Return we now to Sebastiano who (by this time) is returned to Putzeole
whereof he presently sends up notice to his young Lady and mistress Vrsina who
still keeps her bed through discontent and sickness, but at the news of his
arrival, or rather hopeing that he had brought her some good news from her
Sanctifiore; she (without any regard to her weakness and sickness) rises
from her bed by the fire, and calls her chamber maid for her night gown, which
having drawn on, thee bid^ her for a whiles to absent her self, and to send
up her coachman (...) to her, and although in his sorrowful looks and
countenance she may already tacitly read a large lecture of the bad news he
brings her from (...), yet she ^lls him to her, and bids him speak on; but
ahlas he speaks too soon for ^er, for (with a falt^ing and trembling voice)
he tells her the ^arsh entert^nment, which Sanctifiore gave to him and his
mess^ge in Naples, and the inhumane and cruel answer which he bad him return
to her in Putzeole, without any way adding or diminishing a word thereof; the
which as soon as she understood; she for the extremity of her grief and
sorrow hangs down her head, and crossing her arms utters this passionate
speech: good God is it possible that Sanctifiore will thus abuse me, or is
this the favor which I must expect of him in req^itall of those extraordinary
courtesies he has received from ^ee; when walking up and down her chamber,
she thanks Sebastiano, and giving him some gold for his pains, bids him to
leave her, and to send up her ^unt (...), and her chamber maid to bring her to
bed; who thereupon running up hastily to her, her aunt chides her for the
little care she had of her own health, but more for her foolish ^eares, and
indiscreet sorrows. Now after they had lain her in her bed, and that Vrsina
had purposly sent away her maid, she prays her aunt to shut her chamber
door, and then to sit down by her beds side for that she had some secrets of
importance to reveal unto her; when with a thousand sighs and tears,
bedewing the roses and lilies of her fresh and lovely cheeks, she acquaints her
from point to point, what had now again past between Sanctifiore and her
self, in this second journey of Sebastiano to him at Naples. Her aunt
Mellefanta laughes as much at this folly of her niece Vrsina, as she her self
weeps at her own sorrows and afflictions; and having a^ much wit as the
other had weakness, she makes bold to call her ^ot, and fool, to care for him
who contemned and scorned her, and for setting that to her heart which he did
at his heel, yea she advanced further in this her passionate c^oler to her
and said, fie, fie niece, sell your sorrows to buy more courage and wit, and
so because that base Baron Sanctifiore detests and defies you, pay him in his
own coin, and do the like to him, a sharp and bitt^r speech which Vrsina
(amidst her sorrows) now conveyes to her heart, and it may be we shall
hereafter see her to remember it, when her aunt Mellefanta has forgotten it:
for poor soul, she being as it were depressed and weighed down, with the
multitude of Sanctifiores affronts and disgraces, and of his treacheries and
cruelties to her, she has wept so much as she yet weeps because she can
weep no more thereat; as if the difference of their const^llations and
horoscopes were such, that as San^ifiore was borne to hate her, so was she
notwithstanding, (as yet) to affect and love him.

Ahlas Vrsina* It is true indeed, that the least of these treacheries, and
cruelties of Sanctif^e to thee, are causes enough of all thy tears and
sorrows* but yet the consideration and comparing of those with these, conducts
and le^s me to this di^ma; that I know not whether he be more to be bl^med
for committi^g the first, o^ thou for permitting the second, in regard they ^e
every way more worthy of thy scorn^ than of thy care and of thy contempt th^n
of thy affliction. His ingratitude, and crimes to thee I know are many in
quantity, and very base and odious in quality, yea their number is so great and
their nature so foul, that their recapitulation cannot be drawn within a
smaller nor their repetition contracted in a lesser or narrower volume than
this; he has betrayed his love, violated his faith, and falsified his oaths
and promises to thee* he has bereaved thee of thy virginity, to^e and burnt
thy letters, disdained to see thee, called thee gigglet and whore; thy innocent
babe bastard, and which is worst of all, he has wilfully and cholerickly
wished both of you to the devil; so judge with thy self Vrsina, if all these
be not fair motives for thee still to love Sanctifiore, or rather if they be
not just ^easons and provocations for thee now at last to hate him; or if thou
think they be not enough to work and establish this metamorphosis in thee,
have but a little patience, and it is not impossible for thee to find more to
affect and finish it; for now whiles her aunt Mellefanta is rating and rattling
her for not casting off her heart and hopes from Sanctifiore; and Vrsina (in
counterexchange) chi^ing her aunt because she cannot indu^e that she should
eternally love him, here falls out an unexpected accident (within a month
after she had prettily recovered her health and strength) which we shall
presently see will work and produce strange effects both in her heart and mind
as also in her affections and resolutions toward her Sanctifiore, ^r as yet
(privately toher self) she many times so terms and styles him.

On a fair afternoon, when the ^unne (that glorious lamp of heaven) had in
his fiery glistering chariot taken leave of the fouth* and was po^sting toward
the west, to view the Atlanticke seas, as the Lady Mellefanta carried her niece
Vrsina forth in her coach to take the air, and too recreate her sorrowful
spirits, in a great walk of orange trees, orderly and pleasantly growing upon
the banckes of a fine crystal brook about a mile from Putzeole, they a f^r
of (in the boot of the coach) espied two horsemen gallopping de^ctly toward
them, when Vrsina flattering her self with hope, and therefore blushing for
joy, that it was her Sanctifiore, who was purposely come from Naples toward
Putzeole to see her, she therefore cries out to her coachman Sebastiano to stay
the coach and to attend and expect them; when presently she sees her hopes
deceived, and her joys ended as soon as began, for the one was a servant of
Mellefantas who from Putzeole conducted thither to Vrsina a servant of her
father Placedo's who came from Naples with a letter from him to her, whereupon
the aunt much wondering, and the niece far more what this sudden business
might be, they both descend the coach, and Vrsina taking her fathers letter
from his man, she steps a little aside from her aunt Mellefanta, and breaking
up the seal thereof; (directly contrary to her expectation and desires) finds
these lines therein.

PLAC^DO to VRSINA.
HOping that by this time the sweet air of P^tzeole has recovered thy health,
my will and order therefore to thee now is, that thou speedily return home to
me to Naples (in thy coach) by the bearer hereof, whom I have purposely sent
to conduct thee hither. I believe that thy country absence* has lost thee a
good fortune here in the city, for yesterday morning the Baron of Sanctifiore
was (in the augustines Church) married to Dona Bertranna, daughter to Seignior
de Tores, with great state and solemnity, whom I had well hoped should have
been thy husband, I remember my best respects to my sister, thy aunt
Mellefanta, and my best prayers to God for thy virtues and prosperity, as being
thy loving father

PLAC^DO.


Vrsina has no sooner read this letter, but every member of her body trembles
for grief and vexation thereat, yea her sorrows are so great, as she cannot
speak a word, when being ready to fall to the ground, her aunt Mellefanta
steps to her assistance and so do the two men, but they have all of them much
ado to support her up, when at last wringing her hands, and looking up
steadfastly to heaven, she throwing her letter to her aunt to read, utters
forth this bitter exclamation against Sanctifiore; and has this base Nobleman
at last requited all my love, with this monstrous ingratitude and treachery! O
why do I live to suffer it? and O wherefore should he live for offering it to
me? her aunt reads her letter and in detestation of Sanctifiores baseness, she
adds fuel to the flame of her neeces choler against him, but she needs not,
for this very last act of his marriage with Bertranna, sets her all in fire and
revenge against him, yea her heart is so absolutely diverted, and taken away
from him, as heretofore she never loved him so much as now she hates him; she
swears to her self, that she will make him pay dear for this his
ingratitude and treachery toward her, and limits her revenge with no less
than his death for so basely abusing and deceiving her, she but now threw away
his letter for sorrow, but now she again takes it up for joy, because it
calls her home to Naples, where as soon as she arives she again and again
resolves and vows with her self that she will murder him her self, or
cause him to be murdered by some others, her aunt Mellefanta by all sweet
means and persuasions, seeks to pacify her discontent and fury, and so to
appease and cool the raging tempests of her heart; but she speaks to a deaf
woman, who is not capable, either of council consolation or reason, for her
malice and revenge against Sanctifiore have so sully taken up her heart and
soul, and so absolutely surprised her thoughts and possessed her resolutions,
that she neither resolves nor thinks of any thing else, but how and in what
manner she may murder him; to which end she takes coach for Putzeole, there
packes up her baggage, conceales her bloody intents and resolutions toward
Sanctifiore from her aunt Mellefanta, thanks her most lovingly and courteously
for all her care of her, and affection to her, the remembrance whereof she
affirms she will bear to her grave, and from thence to heaven, and so within
three days takes leave of her, and returns to Naples to her father, who
receives her with much content and joy, and is very glad of the recovery of her
health, and yet perceives some secret discontent lie lurking in the furrows of
her brows; but she dissembleth it both to him and the world, and so bears
her self fairly, modestly, and temperatly toward him in her speeches and
actions, who all this whiles is every way ignorant of her disgraceful great
belly, as also of the birth and burial of her infant child. She is no sooner
come to Naples, but her deadly malice and revenge to Sanctifiore will give no
truce to her thoughts, nor peace to her resolutions, for her heart having
conspired with the devil, and both of them against God to dispatch him to
heaven; so now from the matter she falls to the manner, and from her
consultation to the practice thereof. She first thinks it best to get him
poisoned, to which end within ten days after her arivall to Naples she sends
for her own Apothecary named Antonio Romancy, and having sworn him to secrecy
profers him two hundred duckatons to poison her mortal enemy the Baron of
Sanctifiore, but Romancy is too honest a man and too religious a christian to
undertake it, and so utterly refuses her, and rejects her profer; and then
and there with many godly reasons and pious speeches, endeavors to dissuade
her from this foul and bloody fact, but he speaks either to the wind or to a
deaf woman, for she is resolute not to retire but to advance in this her
cruel and inhumane design, only she here again strongly conjures this
honest Apothecary to secrecy, the which he solemnly promises.

Vrsina is still implacable in her malice and revenge against Sanctifiore, the
which revives with more violence, and flames forth with the greater
impetuositie, when she (by her secret spies) is given to understand that he
triumphs in her affliction and scandal, and reputes it his chiefest content
and felicity to have erected the trophies of his joy upon the ruins of her
honor and the demolitions of her reputation and fame, as also that she and
this her disgrace is now become the public laughter and private scorn and
glory of his proud and ambitious wife Bertranna: so she cannot endure the
thought, much less digest the remembrance and consideration hereof, and
therefore she speedily resolves to reduce her malicious contemplation into
bloody action toward him, and to try another experiment and conclusion
thereof. She in a pleasant morning somewhat sooner than accustomed, walks
alone with her waiting maid, in her fathers curious and dainty garden, but not
to please her eyes with the delicious sight and fragrant smell of the great
variety of rare and fair flowers wherewith it was richly adorned and diapred;
or to recreate and delight her ears with the mellifluous ditties and
madrigalls of those sweet quiristers of the air, the nightingalls, thrushes,
and lennots, who sat chaunting of some sweet division on some trees of this
garden, and on some branches of these trees; or to preserve her self from the
intemperate heat of the scorching sun beams; and therefore either to pass
her time, either in some shaddowed walks and arbours, or to sit her self
down by some curious crystal fountain, with all which delights and rarities
this her fathers garden was deliciously enriched and embelished; O no, nothing
less, for she was resolute to make her self more miserable, and not so
happy, because her thoughts were wholly bent on blood, and her resolutions on
the murder of Sanctifiore at what price or rate soever. Having therefore
formerly mist of her Apothecary Romancy to poison him, she else knows not any
so fit or proper to dispatch him as her trusty coachman Sebastiano, who (as we
have formerly understood) was both an eye and an ear witness of this his base
and ignoble cruelty toward her: wherefore she by her waiting maid, sends for
him into the garden to her, and with many ruthful looks, and sorrowful
sighs, having first commended and applauded his fidelity to her, and then
sworn him to secrecy to what she should now relate and deliver unto him, she
tells him, that she cannot live except that base Lord Sanctifiore dye, and
therefore she profereth him an hundred Spanish double pistolls of gold, if he
will either murder him by night in the streets with his rapier, or pistol him
to death abroad in the fields, at his first seeing, and meeting of him, to the
which she very earnestly prays and requests him. Sebastiano as amazed at this
bloody proposition and entreaty of his young Lady Vrsina, whom he ever held to
be more charitable, and not so cruel hearted to any one of the world, and
although he be poor, yet he is so honest, virtuous and religious, as he
highly refuses to distaine his heart, or dip his hands in innocent blood for
any silver or gold whatsoever. So in humble (and yet in absolute) terms, he
gives her the denial, and (with tears in his eyes) prays her to desist from
this her cruel purpose, because he affirms to her, that the end of murder
proves most commonly but the beginning of shame, repentance, misery, and
confusion to their authors; so she bites her lip, and hangs her head for
sorrow, at this his repulse and refus^ll; and yet is so cautious and wary in
her actions, as she makes him again swear secrecy to her in all things,
which now does, othereafter may concern this business, the which he
faithfully promises her, provided, that her commands and his service be every
way exempt of the effusion of innocent blood, and the perpetration of murder,
to the which he constantly vows to her, it is impossible for him ever to be
seduced or drawn, and so he takes leave of her, and leaves her solitarily
alone in the garden to her muses; but yet as he was issuing forth she again
calls him to her, and strictly charge him first carefully and curiously to
inform himself, and then he her, of Sanctifiores most frequent haunts, and
walks without the city, the which he likewise promises her to perform.

Our malicious and revengefull Vrsina is not contented to receive the denial
from her Apothecary Romancy, and the repulse from her coachman Sebastiano,
about the finishing of this deplorable business, but without making any good use
of their honest and religious disswasions of her from it, or without once
looking up to God, or thinking of heaven or hell, she as a fatal member, and
prodigious agent of Satan, is still resolute to proceed therein; for he is
still so strong with her heart, because her faith and soul are so weak with
God, that she sees not her self so often in her looking glass with delight,
as she both sees, and finds Sanctifiore in her heart and mind with
detestation; for her malice to him has quite expelled all reason, and
banished all charity and piety in her self, and consequently now made her
memorative and capable of nothing but of revenge and blood toward him; which
takes up every part, and usurpes every point both of her time, and of her
self, yea and works so strange (I may rather truly say so miserable) a
metamorphosis in her, as if she were now wholly composed of one, or both of
these two impious and diabolical vices, so that every moment seems a year,
and every day an age to her, before she has dispatched him for heaven; she
now sees that she cannot (with safety) employ any other herein but her self,
and therefore day by day calling upon Sebastiano to know of him, where
Sanctifiores usual haunts and walks were without the city, he at last
tells her that he is fully assured, that most mornings and evenings he takes
his coach and some times his page, but many times alone, and so goes a mile out
of the city beyond the gate which looks toward Saint Germans and there in
a dainty grove of olives and orange trees (near a small rivers side) he with
his book in his hand, and his spaniell dog at his heels passes an hour or
two alone in his private contemplations, his coach being sometimes out of sight
from him, and sometimes returns to the city, and so comes and fetches him
back again; which report is no sooner heard and understood of Vrsina from her
coachman, but she receives it with much joy, and entertaines it with infinite
content and delectation; she is therefore so cruel in her thoughts, and so
determinate and bloody in her resolutions, as she will protract no time, but
she speedily bethinkes her self of a hellish stratagem and policy (no less
strange than cruel) which the devil him self suggested and found out for
her, to wreake her inveterate malice and infernal revenge in murdering of
Sanctifiore, the manner whereof is thus.

She very secretly provides her self of a friars complete weed, as a sad
ruffer gown, and coule, with a girdle of a knottie rope, and wooden sandalls,
proper to the order of the Bonnes homes (which is the reformed one of that of
S. Francis) with a false negligent old beard, and hair for his head suitable to
the same, and in one of the pockets of this frocke, she puts a small begging
box, such as those friars use to carry in city, and country when they crave
the charitable alms and devotion of well disposed people, as also a new
breviary (or small mass book) of the last edition and form of Rome, boundup
in blew turkey leather richly guilt, but in the othor pocket thereof she puts a
couple of small short pistolls which she had secretly purloined out of her
father Placedo's armory, and had charged each of them with a brace of bullets,
fast rammed down, with priming powder in the pans, and all these fatal
trinckets, she (with equal silence and treachery) packes and ties up close in
the gown, expecting the time and hour to work this her cruel and lamentable
seat on innocent Sanctifiore, who little thinks or dreams what a bloody
banquet his old love, and now his new enemy Vrsina is preparing for him.

And here I write with grief that it was the tuesday after Palm Sunday, (a
time and week which the blessed passion of our Savior Christ Jesus, makes
sacred and famous, and which all true christians in his commemoration ought to
keep holy, and not to polute or defile it with barbarous and bloody
sacrifices) when our masculine monster, or rather our femall fury Vrsina, being
assured by Sebastiano that the Baron of Sanctifiore was that day about three of
the clock after dinner gone out alone in his coach to his aforesaid usual
place of walking a mile off the city in the fields; she infinite glad of
this desired occasion and longed for opportunity, bids Sebastiano make ready
his coach, and silently to leave him without the posterne gate of her fathers
garden, and so presently to come up to her chamber to her, the which he as
soon performs; to whom she now (profanely and treacherously says)
Sebastiano, (by the favor and mercy of God) I have now exchanged my cruelty
into courtesy toward the Baron of Sanctifiore, and do therefore presently
resolve to give him a merry meeting in the fields, whereat before our departure
and return, I know thou will rejoice and laugh heartely at the fight hereof;
the which indeed was very welcome and pleasing news to Sebastiano, to whom
she then gives this little fardell, and so purposely leaving her waiting maid
behind her, she cheerfully and speedily follows him to the coach, wherein
being seated and the little fardell likewise within by her; she bids him drive
away withal speed to find out Sanctifiore, the which (armed with his
innocence) he joyfully does. Now as they are come within two flight shots of
him, Vrsina bids Sebastiano not to proceed farther, but to drive in the coach
into some close shaddowed place out of the high way, where they might see
Sanctifiore, but not (as yet) to be either seen or espied of him; which
accordingly he does, where she descends her coach, draws off her (...)
apparel, and so puts on her false friars apparel as also the hair, and
beard, having made and prepared all things fit and ready before, and here
likewise she soldeth up the tresses and tramells of her own hair under it,
and has purposely shaved away the hair of a little part of the crown of her
head, and all this whiles her coachman Sebastiano turns her chamber maid here
in the fields to make her ready, where he cannot refrain from exceedingly
smiling and laughing to see what a strange metamorphosis this now is, that his
young Lady Vrsina is here become an old friar, but still she hides and
conceales her two pistolls carefully in her pocket from him, as also her bloody
designs and intents toward Sanctifiore, and whereof he as every way as
innocent, as she her self, and only her self is guilty thereof. Now being
all in a readiness, she out of her other pocket takes her almos box and holds it
in one of her hands, and her hours (or breviary) in her other, and so taking
leave of her coachman, and (with a diffembling cheerful countenance) charging
him to pray for her good fortune, and speedily to bring up her coach to her, as
soon as he sees her wave her white handkercher toward him; so, as a jolly
old friar, away this (...) ^vill so^y trips toward Sanctifiore, having piety
in her looks; but proph^ and ^barous cruelty in her heart and intentions, and
all the way as she go^; (...) cannot refrain from laughing to see this great
change, and alteration in his young Lady and mistress, but directly believing
that she in m^ent (...) maying or masking, such was his ignorance that he
least thought, o^ dream^ (...) she went to commit murder, or what devil was
here veiled and shrouded under this friars weed.

So (with more assurance than fear, and with far more impiety than g^e) she
goes on toward Sanctifiore, who was there alone walking and reading, to whom
approaching, and giving him a ducke or two, she holding up her begging box, and
counterfeiting an old friars vo^, prays him for the blessed V^rgin Mary's
sake, and also for holy saint Francis sake to bestow some thing on him for
their society and order; which Sanctifiore (being alone, as having sent b^e his
coach to the city) resolving to do, he seeing that fair new (...) the
friars hands, he fairly takes it from him, and carefully vieweth and peruseth
it, which being that which Vrsina aimed and looked for, she for (...) sake
(but indeed purposely and maliciously) steps behind him, and very ^oftly
drawing out one of her pistolls out of her pocket which was already (...); she
levels it at the very reins of his back, and so lets fly at him* whereof he
presently was falling to the ground, when (the devil making ^mble and
dexterious in her malice) in the turning of a hand, she whips but the other
pistol out of her pocket, and to make sure work with him likewise discharges
it in his breast, and to make her inveterate malice and revenge to* him the more
conspicuous and apparent to all the world, as near as she could gue^e to his
very heart, of which mortal wounds made by her four bullets Sanctifiore fell
immediately dead to the ground, having neither the power, grace o^ happiness to
speak a word; and then she pulling off her false beard, discovered her self
to him as he was dying, and spurning him most disdainfully and mali^usly with
her foot gave him this cruel farewell, such deaths such villains deserve, who
triumph and glory to betray harmless and innocent Ladies; which having acted
and said, she waving her hand kercher to her coachman, he comes up^o her with
her coach as (...) as the wind, who is all amazed and in tears to behold this
woeful accident and lamentable spectacle; for descending speedily from his
coach, he finds the Baron of Sanctifiore dead, and his soul already fled and
ascended from earth to heaven, to whom his Lady Vrsina (in a graceless
insulting bravery) says, rejoice with thee Sebastiano, that I have now so
b^vely and fortunately revenged my self on this base and treacherous Baron
Sanctifiore; but honest (...), (being as full of true grief, as she was of
fals^ny) replies and tells her, O^dame! what have you done? for this is no
cause, and therefore no time to rejoice but rather ^o ^ent and mourn, for this
lamentable fact and cri^e of yours, and not to disse^ble you the truth, as much
as yo^ (in this ^all frie^ ^cke) did ^e your bloody in^tions, I have fa^ more
reason to fe^e than cause to doubt, that your ^urthering of the Baron of
Sancti^, will p^ove the ruin and confusion of your self, except God ^ee
graciously p^ed ^o ^e more merciful to you, than you have (...) to him;
therefore look from his danger and misfortune speedily to provide for your
own safety; which as soo^e as he had said, he (in the ^riersweeds) spe^ly
takes her up in the coach, and then drives away a full gallop to the shadowed
thicke^ from whence ^hee (...), where she c^sts of her ^iers apparel, bea^,
(...), box and book^, as also the ^o pistolls, the which they two wrap up all
in the gown, and throw it into a deep ditch or precipice, and so he helps
her to put on all her own apparel and a ^ire and then with more have than
good speed drives home a maine toward Naples, and it was a disputable
question, whether our bloody and execrable wretch V^a more rejoiced, or her
honest coachman Sebastiano lamented and grieved at this unfortunate and
deplorable fact.

We have seen with what a malicious courage, and a desperate and profane
resolution, this cruel hearted Gentlewoman Vrsina has (in the habit of a
friar) murdered this unfortunate Baron Sanctifiore, and the reader shall not
go much further in this history before (if not in the same moment, yet in the
same hour) he see the sacred justice of God will surprise and bring her to
condign punishment for the same, as if the last (as indeed it is) were
co-incident and hereditary to the first, or as if it were wholly impossible for
her to rejoice so much here on earth for that, as God and his Angels do both
triumph and glory in heaven for this.

Gods judgments are as just as sacred, and as miraculous as justs: so that all
people should rather admi^ it with awful reverence, than any way neglect it
with a profane presumption. But our wretched Vrsina will not make her self so
happy to be of the first, but rather so miserable to be of this second
rank; for she wholly dispiseth Gods justice, and so absolutely forgets God
himself, as she neither thinks of that she has now done, what she now is,
or which is worst of all what hereafter she may be; but rather (as an
inconsiderate and wretched gypsy) laughes in her sleeve for joy, to have thus
happily bereaved Sanctifiore of his life, who so lately and so treacherously
had bereaved her of her honor and chastity. While^ thus sorrowful Sebastiano
is hurring away his joyful murtherous young mistress the Lady Vrsina in her
coach toward her Father Seignior Placedo's house in Naples, as (thinking to
make his way the shorter and securer) he drove his coach on a narrow path by
the side of a hill, it so pleased God (in his sacred providence) as of his two
coach horses, that of the out side fell sheare over the path and drew his
fellow horse, the coach, the Lady Vrsina, and her coachman Sebastiano down the
hill after him; with which sudden terrible ^ll the coach was shattered and
torn in pieces, she brake her right arm (wherewith she had discharged these
two pistolls) and he his left leg, so that she had the power but not the
will, and he the will but not the power to step to her assistance, only he
leaps from the coach box to the ground on his right leg, and with his knife
cuts off the stays and trappings of his horses, that they in their amazed fury
might not draw the coach and themselves after them; and yet such is her
impenitency and his affliction, as she here was not half so much terrified,
as he perplexed and astonished at this their misfortunate disaster; the which
though she slighted, as only looking down to her self, yet he deemed and
conceived it to be no less than a blow from heaven, as looking up to God, and
therefore that it was a fatal Omen, portending some dismal calamities and
afflictions which were immediately to surprise and betide them.

As thus distressed Vrsina, and her lame and sorrowful coachman Sebastiano,
^ate down on the b^e ground, rather able to behold, than to know how to help
one the other; and they both grieving to see their coachlye to^e on the lee
side and shore of the hill, and their two coach-horses (without hurt or fear)
licenti^sly playing their friskes and figuaries below in the valleies, neither
he nor she knew what co^se to take for their present consolation and safety,
and so to prevent the imminency of their danger, but at last she taking some
ten double pistolls of Spanish gold out of her pocket, and giying it him, she
again makes him swear secrecy, never to reveal what he had seen her
perform to Sanctifiore, the which (with more reluctance than willingness) he
does. Then as it was agreed between them, he by some loud cries and holla's
should call in some contadines (or country laborers) to their assistance, whom
they saw a good distance off very busily working in the vines, the which as he
was about to do, lo God (in his sacred providence) so ordained, that the
Baron of Sanctifiores coach came rattling above them, where they two sat
comfortless and sorrowful upon the ground; and in the coach was his page
Hieronymo, who therewith was going to fetch home the Baron his master, who
perfectly seeing and knowing the Lady Vrsina, and her coachman Sebastiano, and
seeing her coach lie by her all reversed, shattered and t^rne to pieces,
grieving at this her disaster, he for the respect he bore her for the Baron
his masters sake, (whom he knew formerly loved her) takes his coachman with
him, and so descends down to her assistance, where being more fully
acquainted, of the breaking of her arm, and her coachman Sebastiano's leg,
he very humanely and courteously profers her his Lords coach, and his best
service to conduct and carry them both home to her father Seignior Placedo's
house in the city, little thinking or dreaming, that she came from so
cruelly murdering his kind Lord and master Sanctifiore, or that his
breathless body lay now exposed as a prey to the fowls of the air in the
fields.

Sebastiano is much perplexed and grieved, but his Lady Vrsina infinitely more
at this unexpected encounter, and ominous, meeting of Sanctifiores page, coach,
and coachman, which threatened her no less than fear, and this fear no less
than imminent danger and confusion, especially to her self, if not to him,
when looking wistly and sorrowfully each on other, they know not how to bear
themselves in the unfortunacy of this accident, neither dare she accept, or
well knows how to refuse this proffered courtesy of the page Hieronymo. But at
last (despite of her self) she is enforced to embrace this opportunity, when
making a virtue of necessity, she (though much against her will) is
constrained, very thankfully to accept, and make use of this kindness of
Hieronymo, who leading the Lady Vrsina by her leftarme, and his coachman, hers
by his right, they softly bring them up the hill to the Baron their masters
coach, and so convey her home to her father Seignior Placedo's house in the
city, who was then gone forth to sup with the Prince of Salerno (who by the
mothers side, was his cosen Germane) where Vrsina (setting a good face upon her
bad heart) gives the page many hearty thanks, and the coachman three duckatons
for this their courtesy, so they take leave of her, and speedily return with
their coach into the fields to fetch home the Baron their master, to whom they
resolve at full to relate this accident; when Vrsinas fears far exceeding her
hopes, and knowing upon what ticklish ^earmes and dangerous points both her
self and her life now stood, she (in the absence of her father) speedily
resolves to provide her a swift coach and so to fly from Naples to her aunt
Mellefantas house in Putzeole, where she promised her self far more safety
and less danger than here at home with her father; but contrariwise, we shall
see that God is now resolved to deceive both her hopes, and her self herein,
to her utter shame and confusion.

The page Hieronymo being sorrowful for the Lady Vrsinas misfortune, and yet
exceeding glad that he had the happiness and good fortune to perform her this
fair office, and friendly courtesy to her, he now bids his coachman drive
away ore the fields to that pleasant grove to find out their Lord and master
Sanctifiore, where being arived he descends his coach, and with his vigilant
eye looks about every where for him, when ahlas he has scarce gone forty
paces off, but (directly contrary to his expectation) he finds him there dead
on the ground and most lamentably all gored, and engrained in his own blood,
at the sight whereof he bursts forth into many bitter tears and out cries,
yea he throws away his hat, and tears his hair for grief and sorrow
hereof, and no less does his coachman. They are here both of them so amazed
with grief and astonished with sorrow at this lamentable spectacle and
accident, as they (for a quarter of an hours time) know not what to think or
say hereof, as whether this their Lord and master had here killed himself, or
were murdered and robbed by thieves, but at last this sorrowful page
Hieronymo, will stay alone weeping by the breathless body of his Lord, and
master, and so sends away the coachman, in his coach speedily to Naples, to
acquaint their Lady Dona Bertranna, and her father Seignior de Tores with this
sad and sorrowful news, whereat she almost drownes her self in her tears,
and he very bitterly laments and sorroweth for it; so (being incapable of any
hope comfort or consolation) they do both of them take coach and drive away
into the fields, where she almost murthereth her eyes with her tears, to see
her dear Lord and husband lie thus murdered in his blood. They here see none
in sight of him, neither do they know any body but them selves that has seen
him; so by whom, or how he is killed they cannot as yet either conceive or
imagine, when the father leaving his daughter to wash and bedew her dead
husbands cheeks with her tears, he himself gallops away in his coach to
Naples and brings thence along with him the crimynall officers of justice,
first to know and then to be eye witnesses of this sad and deplorable
accident; at the hearing and sight whereof, (in nature and justice) they cannot
refrain from equally woondering and grieving at it, when (to act the part and
duty of themselves) they cause the coachman to spread his cloak on the ground,
then to remove the dead corpse from his blood, and to lay him thereon, and so
they make a surgeon (whom they had purposely brought with them) to
unapparell and search his body for wounds, who finds and shows them, that he
was shot with two pistol bullets in his back, and other two in his breast,
(when missing likewise of his purse) they all of them do confidently believe,
that undoubtedly he was murdered and robbed by thieves. The which the better
to discover, the judges send their sergeants, and servants, and De Tores
likewise sends the page and his coachman searching and scouring all over the
adjacent fields to apprehend and bring before them all those whom they find
there; who are so far from meeting of many persons, as they all of them bring
in but one poor ragged boy (of some twelve or fourteen years old) who some
two hundred paces off, kept a few cowes (which yielded milk to the city) and
him they find sitting within a hedge in a ditch whom they bring along with them
to the judges, where he sees this dead body lying on the ground before them,
where at poor silly boy he shakes and trembles for fear.

The judges demand his name of him, who tells them he is called Bartholomeo
Spondy, they further enquire of him what his father is, and where he dwells,
who replies that his father is a poor butcher named Pedro Spondy, and dwells at
Naples in Saint John's suburb (which the judges afterward find true) then these
grave judges perceiving the poor boy to be bashful and timorous, they
therefore bid him be of good cheer, and to fear nothing, for the which he
thanks them both with his cap and knee. Then they enquire of him if he saw
any one to come near and kill this gentleman, to whom in plain and rusticke
terms he answers them, that from the hedge within which he kept his fathers
cowes, he saw this gentleman walk alone by himself at least an hour with a
book in his hand reading, and that then he saw an old friar come to him, who
as he thought begged somealmes of him, whom he saw did shoot off two
pistolls to him, and therewith killed him, for he then, and thereupon presently
saw the gentleman fall to the ground, they again demand of him what
afterward became of this friar, who tells the judges, that a coach came up
instantly to him and carried him away, but where he knows not. They ask of
him why he had not cried out against the friar, when he saw he had killed this
gentleman, to whom he makes answer that he dared not do it, for fear lest
he would then likewise have killed him with his pistolls. The judges further
demand of him, whether this were a white, a black or a gray friar, to whom
he answers that he was neither of them, but that he wore a minime, or sad
russet gown and hood. Thereupon they thought it fit, again to demand of him
how many horses this coach had, and of what color they were, to whom he
affirms that they were two black coach-horses, when the judges to conclude
this their quaere and his examination, they demand of him what colloured cloak
this coachman wore, who tells them he wore a red cloak, and as he thought
some white laces upon it, the which this pregnant poor little boy Bartholomeo
had no sooner pronounced and spoken, but Sanctifiores page Hieronymo cries out
and relates to the judges, to his Lady Bertranna, and her father Seignior de
Tores, where and in what manner and accident he some two hours since found the
Lady Vrsina, and her coachman Sebastiano, whom he seriously affirmed wore a
red cloak with white laces, and that her two coach-horses which they saw
straying below in the valley were coal black, right as Bartholomeo had
described them; adding further that her coach was broken with a fal^, as also
her right arm and his left leg, and that out of respect and pity to her,
he had carried both her, and him, home to her father Seignior Placedo's house,
but he affirmed he saw no friar either in their sight or company, all which
relation of his, was likewise there confirmed to the judges by the Baron of
Sanctifiores own coachman, who was also there present, the which evidence of
theirs as soon as the Lady Bertranna over heard, she with a world of sighs
and tears, (as if she were suddenly inspired and prompted from heaven)
passionately cries out first to her father, and then to the judges, that God
and her conscience told her, that doubtless Vrsina was this divlish friar, and
her coachman Sebastiano the very same damnable fellow who had here thus cruelly
murdered her Lord and husband, when throwing her self on her knees to their
feet, she very earnestly begs justice of them, against them for the same, who
partly concurring in the opinion and beleese with them, they do here most
seriously and solemnly promise it her.

To which effect, these reverend judges, leaving her father, her self, and her
page and coachman decently to convey her husbands dead body home to their house
in Naples, they themselves make great have thither before, and presently send
their officers and sergeants to Seignior Placedo's house, there to apprehend
the Lady Vrsina his daughter, and their coachman Sebastiano, whom they both
opportunly find issuing forth his gate in a fresh hackney coach speedily
flying to Putzeole to her aunt Mellefunta for protection and Sanctuary, so
these fierce and merciless sergeants do presently divert and alter their
course, yea they furiously and suddenly rush upon them, apprehend and
constitute them close prisoners in the common goal of tha^ city, placing
them in two several chambers, to the end they should not prattle or tell tales
each to other; where they shall find more leisure than time, both to remember
what they have done, and likewise to know what hereafter they must do.

Whiles thus all Naples generally resound and talk of this mournful fact, and
deplorable accident, and Seignior Placedo particularly grieves at these his
daughters unexpected crosses and calamities, as also of those of his coachman
Sebastiano, the which he fears, he can far sooner lament than remedy; our
sorrowful widow Bertranna (with the assistance of her father De Tores) gives
her husband the Baron of Sanctifiore a solemn and stately burial in the
Fueillantes Church of Naples, correspondant to his noble degree and quality.
And then within two days after, at her earnest and passionate solicitation to
the judges; Vrsina and her coachman Sebastiano are severally convented before
them, in their chief Forum, (or tribunal) of justice, and there strongly
accused by her and charged to be the authors and actors of this cruel
murder, committed on the person of the Baron of Sanctifiore her husband, the
which both of them do stoutly deny with much vehemence and confidence, and
when the little boy Bartholomeo, is face to face called into the court to give
in evidence against them, he there maintains to the judges what he had
formerly deposed to them in the fields, but says he thinks not, that this
Lady was that friar, nor can he truly say that this was the coachman who
carried him, although when his cloak was showed him he could not deny but it
was very like it; but Bertranna having now secretly intimated and made known
to the judges, all the passages that had formerly past between Vrsina and her
husband Sanctifiore, as his getting of her with child, and then (contrary to
his promise) refusing to marry her, they do therefore more than half believe,
that it was her discontent which drew her to this choler, her choler to this
revenge, and her revenge to this murdering of him, as also (that in favor of
some gold) she had likewise seduced and drawn her coachman Sebastiano to be
consenting and accessory herein with her: whereupon the next day they will
begin with him, and so they adjudge him to the rack, the torments whereof he
endures with a wonderful fortitude and patience, so that (remembering his oath
of secrecy to his Lady Vrsina) he cannot thereby be drawn to confess any
thing, but denies all, whereof she having secret notice, does not a little
rejoice and insult thereat, now the very next ensueing morning Vrsina her
self, is likewise adjudged and exposed to the rack, the wrenches and torments
whereof, as soon as she sensibly feels, God proves then so propitious and
merciful to her soul, that her dainty body, and tender limbs cannot possibly
endure or suffer it, but then and there she to her judges and tormentors,
confesses herself to be the sole author and actor of pistolling to death the
Baron of Sanctifiore, in the same manner and form, as we have already
understood in all its circumstances, but in her heart and soul she strongly
affirms to them that her coachman Sebastiano was not accessory with her
herein, upon which apparent and palpable confession of hers, her judges (in
honor to sacred justice, and for expiation of this her foul crime) do
pronounce sentence of death against her, that she shall the next morning be
hanged at the place of common execution, notwithstanding all the power and
tears of her father, and kinsfolks to the contrary.

So she is returned to her prison where her father (not being permitted to see
her that night) sends her two Nuns, and two friars to prepare and direct her
soul for heaven, whom in a little time (through Gods great mercy, and their
own pious persuasions) they found to be wounderfull humble, repentant, and
sorrowful. She privately sends word to her coachman Sebastiano, that she is
thankful to him for his respect and fidelity to her on the rack, and wills
him to be assured and confident, that she being to die to morrow, her speech
at her death, shall no way prejudice, but strongly confirm the safety and
preservation of his life. Thus grieving far more at the foulnes of her crime
than at the infamy and severity of her punishment, she spends most part of the
night, and the first part of the morning in godly prayers and religious
meditations, and ejaculations, when, although her sorrowful old father
Seignior Placedo (by his noble kinsman the Prince of Salerno) made offer to the
Viceroy (the Duke of ossuna) the free gift of all his lands to save this his
daughters life, yet the strong solicitation of the first; and the great proffer
of the last proved vain, and fruitless, for they found it wholly impossible
to obtain it.

So about ten of the clock in the morning, our sorrowful Vrsina, is (between
two Nuns) brought to her execution; clad in a black wrought velvet gown, a
green satin petticoate, agreat laced ruff, her head dressed up with tuffes
and roses of green ribbon, with some artificial flowers, all covered over
with a white ciffres veil, and a pair of plain white gloves on her hands:
when ascending the ladder, she, to the great confluence of people who came
thither to see her take her last farewell of this life, and this world, (with a
mournful countenance, and low voice) delivered them this sorrowful and
religious speech.

Good people, I want words to express the grief of my heart, and the anxiety
and sorrow of my soul, for imbruing my hands in the innocent blood and death
of the Baron of Sanctifiore, although not to dissemble but to confess the pure
truth, he betrayed his promise to me of marriage, and me of my honor and
chastity without it, whereof I beseech Almighty God, that all men (of what
degree or quality soever) may hereafter be warned by his example, and all
Ladies and gentlewomen deterred and terrified by mine. I do likewise here
confess to heaven and earth, to God and his Angels, and to you all who are
here present, that I alone was both the author and actor of this foul murder,
and that my coachman Sebastiano, is no way consenting or accessory with me
herein, and that albeit I once promised and proffered him a hundred double
pistolls of Spanish gold to perform it, yet he honestly and religiously
refused both me and it, and strongly and pathetically dissuaded me from it,
whose good, and wholesome council I now wish to God (from the depth and center
of my soul) I had then followed, for then I had lived as happy, as now I die
miserable. And because it is now no time, but bootlesse for me either to
paliate the truth, or to flatter with God, or man, the worst of his crime he
being my servant was the least courtesy he owed to me I being his mistress,
which (after with mine own hands I had committed that deplorable fact) was to
bring me home from the fields to my fathers house, and for assisting me to
cast the friars frocke, the false beard and hair, the alms box, breviary, and
two pistolls, into the next deep pit, or precipice thereunto adjoining, where
(as yet) they still lie: for this my heinous offense, (the very remembrance
whereof is now grievous and odious unto me) I ask pardon first of God, then
of mine own dear father, and next of the Lady Bertranna, and if the words and
prayers, of a poor dying gentlewoman have any power with the living, then I
beseech you all in general, and every one of you in particular, to pray unto
God, that he will now forgive my sins in his favor, and hereafter save my
soul in his mercy, the which as soon as she had said, and uttered some few
short prayers to her self, she (often making the sign of the cross) takes
leave of all the world when pulling down her veil (in comely sort) over her
eyes and face, and erecting her hands toward heaven she was turned over, now
as some of her spectators rejoiced at the death of so cruel and bloody or
female monster, so the greatest part of them (in favor of her birth youth and
beauty) did with aworld of tears exceedingly lament and pity her, but all
of them do highly detest and execrate the base ingratitude infidelity and
treachery of this ignoble Baron of Sanctifiore toward her, which no doubt was
the prime cause, and chiefest motive which drew her to these deplorable and
bloody resolutions.

As for her honest coachman Sebastiano; although his own torments on the
rack, and now this solemn confession of his Lady Vrsina at her death had
sufficiently proclaimed and vindicated his innocence in this murder of
Sanctifiore; yet such was his widow Bertrannas living affection to her dead
husband and her deadly malice to living Sebastiano, for thinking him to be
guilty, and accessory hereunto with his Lady Vrsina, that her power and malice
so far prevailed with the integrity of the judges, for the further disquisition
of this truth, as they now again sentence him to the double torments of the
rack, the which he again likewise* endures with a most unparalleld patience
and constancy, without confessing any thing, the which his judges wondering to
see, and admiring to understand, and having no substantial proofs or real
and valable evidences against him, they now fully absolve and acquit him of
this his suspected crime, when being moved in charity justice and conscience to
yield him some reward, and satisfaction, for thus enfeebling his body, and
impairing of his health by these his sharp and bitter torments, they therefore
adjudge the plaintiff widow Bertranna to give him three hundred duckatons,
whereof she cannot possibly exempt or excuse her self.

And thus lived and died our unkind Baron Sanctifiore, and our cruel hearted
young Lady Vrsina, and in this manner did the sacred justice of God requite the
one and condignly revenge and punish the other. Now by reading this their
history, may God (of his best favor and mercy) teach us all, from our hearts
to hate this Barons levitie, and from our souls to abhor and detest this
Ladies cruelty and impiety.

AMEN.
GODS REVENGE AGAINST THE CRYING AND Execrable Sin of Murder.
HISTORY XXX.
De Mora treacherously kills Palura in a duel with two pistolls. His Lady
Bellinda with the aid of her gentleman usher Ferallo, poysoneth her husband De
Mora, and afterward she marries and then murthereth her said husband Ferallo
in his bed, so she is burnt alive for this her last murder, and her ashes
thrown into the air for the first.

IN the general depravation of this age, it is no wonder, that many sinful
fowls are so transported by Satan and their own outrageous passions, to
imbrue their guilty hands in the innocent blood of their christian brethren;
and it were a great happiness and felicity to most countries and kingdoms of
Europe, if they were not sometimes infected with the contagion of this bloody
and crying sin, which with a presumptuous hand seems to strike at the
majesty of God himself in killing man his creature, but because wishes avail
little, and for that examples are more powerful and prevalent, and prove the
best precepts to the living; therefore I here produce a lamentable one of so
inhumane a condition, that by the knowledge and consideration thereof we may
know how to detest the like, and avoid the temptations in our selves.

IN the famous kingdom of Portugal, and within a very little league of
Stremos, one of the sweetest and fairest cities thereof, there (within these
few years) dwelt a noble gentleman of some fifty six years old, named Don
Alonso De Mora, Issued and descended from one of the best and famous houses of
that kingdom, as being Nephew to that great and wise Don Christopher de Mora,
of whom the histories of Spain and Portugal make so often, and so honorable
mention, and although he were by his ancestors and parents, left very rich in
lands and possessions; yet his ambition and generosity carried him to serve his
king Phillip third of Spain, in his wars of Africa and Flanders, wherein he
spent the greatest part of his time, and of himself, won many renowned
laurells, and martial trophies of honor, and as an excellent cavalier left
behind him many approved marks and testimonies of his true valor, and
magnanimity. But (as all men are naturally constant in unconstancy; and subject
and co-incident to mutations, and that the world still delights to please us
with changes, and to feed our fancies and affections with different enterprises
and resolutions) so our De Mora at last, calls home his thoughts and himself
from war to peace, and resolves to spend the remainder of his age in as much
ease and pleasure as formerly he had done the heat and strength of his youth,
in tumults and combustions; he now sees that there is no life nor pleasure
comparable to that of the country, for here the sweetness of the imbalmed
air, the delicacy of the perfumed and enamelled fields, the unparalleld
pastime of hauking and hunting, and the free and uninterrupted access which
we have to arts in our study, and to God in religious prayers and meditations,
makes it to be, no less than either an earthly paradise, or a heaven upon
earth. For the camp (despite of commanders) abounds with all kinds of
insolences and impieties, the city, (despite of magistrates with all sorts
of vice, deceit, covetousnes and pride, and the court (despite of good kings
and Princes) too often with variety of hippocrisie, perfidiousnes, and vanity.
To his own great manor house near Stremos, therefore is our De Mora retired,
with a resolution for ever, there to erect and build up his residence, making
it his greatest delight to have his hounds and graihounds at his heels, and to
see his hawk on his fist. Now the Alarums of war no longer take up his
thoughts and time; neither do the drums and trumpets, or the rattling peales of
thunder of muskets and cannons, distract his day pleasures, or cut his nights
sweet sleeps and slumbers in pieces. He is not addicted to women, but hates
them as much as they love men, he spurns at love, and (in a disdainful
contempt thereof) terms venus a whore, and her son cupid a boy, and which is
worse a bastard, in a word, he professes himself to be as great, and as
mortal an enemy to beauty, as beauty is many times to chastity, and never
thinks himself happy, but either when he is out of women's company or they
not in his. He is so far from any affecting marriage, as he pittieth it in
others, and forever abjures and detests it in himself. He compares single
life to roses and lilies, and wedlock to briars and thistles, and therefore in
the highest and sublimest degree, scorns to have any wife or mistress in his
house to over master him.

But it is not for men to presume to point out their own destinies and
fortunes, since we are but the slaves of time, as time is the servant of God;
and therefore (in this regard) our actions are subject to heaven not to earth,
and to Gods appointment rather than our purposes; or to presupose or think the
contrary; is a presumption every way unworthy of a man, but far more of a
christian, since nature is subject to grace, and our earthly passions and
resolutions must still stoop to a sacred power, and ever submit and prostrate
themselves to a divine providence, and supernatural predominancy, it is
therefore folly not wisdom, and simplicity; not discretion in De Mora
generally to proclaim hate to women, for that he is the son of a woman; or
to malign and disdain marriage in regard he is the fruit and offspring of
marriage for thus to violate and pull down the temples and alters of love, is
obstinatlie to oppose nature, and profanely to subvert the institution of God
himself in paradise; but he shall not continue long in the clouds of this
error.

In a clear and sweet morning (as soon as Aurora lept from the watery bed of
Thetis, and purposely retired her self to give way to approaching Phoebus,
(who in his fiery chariot, with his glistering beams began to salute and guild
the tops of the highest woods and mountains) De Mora attended by half a dozen
of his domesticke servants goes into the fields to hawk and hunt, where having
killed one hare, and set up another, all his servants left him alone, and with
the hounds pursue the hare, who tripping through the launes and thickets, the
hills and valleies, at last leads them such a dance, that in less than an
hour his servants and his dogs were a little league out of his sight, whereat
being exceedingly offended and angry, and far the more for that he was left
all alone, he not knowing how to pass or delude away the tediousnes of the
time, sat himself down on the side of a fair hill, at the foot of a
pleasant grove of beech and chestnut trees, whose curled tops sheltred him from
the scorching rays of the sun, and there takes delight to behold how many
frequent windings, and turning meanders, the neighboring crystal river made
in that pleasant valley, as also to see how sweetly the troops of snow-white
feathered swans, proudly ruffled their plumes, and disported themselves
therein, in their majesticall and stately bravery, and how many malicious
Fowlers, both in boats and on the banks of that sweet river were curiously
watching with their fiery pieces to murder these innocent watery guests who
frequented there, and also how the patient Anglers (with their treacherous
hooks and baits) betrayed many harmless fishes to their undeserved deaths.
When De Mora (impatient of his solitarines) listening with his ear, if he
might either hear the loud cry and voices of his hounds, or else the shrill
rebounding echoes of his servants hunting horns, he looking up toward the
sky, beheld a heron softly soaring, and proudly hoovering over his head, as
if she came purposely to bid defiance to De Mora, and his goshauke which he
held on his fist, and consequently to dare, and challenge it to an airie
combat; whereat De Mora being exceeding glad, and disdaining that his hawk and
himself, should be thus outbraved by so ill shaped and unmannerly a sea foul;
he speedily rises up, and (betwixt choler and pleasure) lets fly his hawk
at her; but the heron stretches her pinnions, and packs on her feathered
sails so nimbly and proudly, that sometimes soaring aloft in the air,
sometimes descending, and still looking back with scorn on the goshauke, as
if she puposely took delight and sport, to see what infinite toil and pain
this malicious and ravenous hawk took to surprise and devour her, so the
swifter the heron flew from the hawk, the swifter the hawk redoubled her
flight, and tugged away after her, when it being impossible for De Mora to
reclaim his hawk, either with his hola's or lure, at last both hawk and
heron flew quite out of his sight, and which is worse he was so unfortunate,
as never after he could see either of them again.

De Mora being first highly displeased and offended for the absence of his
servants and hounds, he is now doubly enraged with grief and choler for the
loss of his goshauke, and therefore curses the heron for thus seducing and
betraying her away from him; when wearying himself to run from hill to vale to
have news of her, and in the end seeing both his labor and his hawk lost,
he betakes himself to the aforesaid grove, and (with much discontent and
choler) first casting his hat and lure to the ground, he then likewise casts
himself thereon to repose him; still attending and expecting his hunters.

He has not remained there above half an hour, but close by him passes an
aged country gentleman, indifferently well apparalled, with a very beautiful
young gentlewoman following him, clad in a crimson taffeta^ peticoate and
wastcoate trimmed with silver lace, with a large cut work plain band, her
flaxen hair adorned with many knots of white and crimson ribbon, covered with
a black ciffres veil, having a roling amarous eye, (the true index of desire
and lust) her snow white panting breasts open, but only a little hidden and
overvailed with curious tiffney, whose white purity her pure white paps
(enterveined with azure) infinitely outbraved and excelled. She had her waiting
maid attending on her, and he a serving-man bearing his cloak and rapier
after him, who that morning were come some three leagues from his own house to
take the fresh air in that pleasant and delitious grove, without the hedge
whereof he had left his coach, this country gentleman I say, passing by De
Mora, and well and perfectly knowing him, he according to his duty and the
others merrits, respectfully saluted him by his name, and the young gentlewoman
who followed him likewise gives him a very low and graceful courtesy. De
Mora, surprised with the suddenness of their arrival, and the sweetness of
these their salutations, rises up, and having first saluted him, and kissed
her, he prays his name, who tells him that he is a gentleman that dwelt some
three leagues off, termed Emanuell de Cursoro: De Mora demands of him if this
young gentlewoman be his kinswoman or his daughter, who tells him she is his
daughter; when De Mora again inquires of him, if she be married or no, and
what age and name she is of, Cursoro replies that she is unmaried of some
twenty years of age, and her name Bellinda. De Mora again tells him, that
he is very happy in having so sweet and fair a young gentlewoman to his
daughter, whereat the father smileth for joy, and the daughter blusheth for
bashfullnes and modesty. De mora again questioneth Cursoro, if any business
brought him thither that morning, who tells him he had no business, but only
came thither with his daughter to take the air, and that he had left his
coach without the hedge, so they walk together some turns in this pleasant
grove, and from thenceforth De Mora could not possibly refrain, from gadding
and gazing his inamoured eyes on the roses and lilies of Bellindas sweet and
delicate beauty, when De Mora acquaints Cursors with his misfortunes, how that
morning he came forth a hunting, that he had lost his men, his hounds, and
his hawk, and that this three hours he was there left alone and had no news
of them, they together make many walks, turns, and returns, when De Mora led
by the luster of Bellindas lovely atractive, and rolling eye, he ever and anon
proffereth to lead and conduct her by the arm, the which Cursoro modestly, and
respectfully excuses, as holding it too great an honor for De Mora to give,
and his daughter to receive: here Cursoro proferreth De Mora to lend him his
coach to carry him home to his house, but De Mora freely and thankfully
refuses it, and in counterexchange of this courtesy proferreth Cursoro and
his daughter to accompany and conduct them to their coach, the which undeserved
kindness, Cursoro modestly refuses of him. Thus (in point of honor, and
courtesy) they along time stand striving and complementing, till at last De
Mora heareing the cry of his hounds, his importunity vanquisheth Cursoro's
modesty, and so will, or nill, he conducts him to his coach, and likewise
leads his daughter Bellinda by the arm and hand, and by the way does at least
usurp, and steal many amorous kisses from the cheries of her sweet lips, and
damask roses of her pure and delicate cheeks, whereat she is more admired
then pleased. As they are thus going toward Cursoro's coach, De Mora's hounds
and servants arive all sweating and blowing, who (in redemption and requital
of their long stay) do present their Lord and master with a brace of hares,
and a wild white fawn which they had killed, whereof he being exceeding glad,
he very joyfully bestows the hares on Cursoro, and the white fawn on his
fair daughter Bellinda, who from thenceforth, he swears shall be his
mistress, and his love; Cursoro, is too modest, and his daughter too bashful to
accept hereof, so they along time refuse these his presents with many dilatory
and complementall excuses. But at last De Mora finds out a means and medium to
reconcile this difference, according to his own will and desire; for he
peremptorily swears to Cursoro, and his daughter Bellinda, that they shall
receive these poor presents from him, and that in requital hereof, he will
to morrow come over to his house, and eat his part of them to dinner with them;
upon which condition and terms, Cursoro thankfully receives the hares, and
likewise causes his daughter to do the same by the fawn, the which (with a
very low and observant courtesy) she does: so he conducts them on to their
coach, and by the way wrings her by her lilie white hand, plays with the loose
^esses of her sweet hair, her blushing cheeks, dimpled chinne, downie paps,
and Alabaster neck, when taking a friendly leave of Cursoro, and a solemn
conge of his fair daughter Bellinda, which he again seals and confirms
with many new kisses, they take coach and away; and De Mora with his servants
and hounds returns home to his house.

Thus in a little time we see an extraordinary alteration, yea a wonderful
change and metamorphosis in De Mora, but whether more strange or sudden I
know not, for in the morning he went forth a free man, and now before night
comes home a slave, and a captive. Heretofore he spurned at love, and
disdained beauty, and now the very first sight of our fair Bellinda sets fire
to his blood, and flames to his heart: so that his old blood is passionatly and
amorously inflamed with this new beauty; formerly he (in derision) termed
Cupid, alittle boy, now he holds him to be a great God; then he called Venus
a whore, but now he recants that Athiesme, and repents himself of that
blasphemy vomited forth against her diety; and terms her a Celestial and
facred Goddess: yea now in his heart and thoughts he erects altars to the
first, and consecrates all his vows to the second. The small and straight wast
of his honored Bellinda, together with her sparkling eyes, and sweet cheeks
and blushes, do amaze his mind, act wonders in his heart, and cast his
thoughts into a confusion of many amorous raptures and ecstasies, yea the
consideration of her sweet youth, and the remembrance of her fresh and delicate
beauty, do (in his conceit) seem to make his age young, and to give the lie
to those infinite number of white hairs, which time has snowed on his head,
and showred on his beard. He a thousand times repen's himself of his former
error and crime in living so long single, and is now assured and confident,
that there is no earthly pleasure or heavenly delight, comparable to the
heart-ravishing kisses and embraces of his sweet Bellinda: he is ready to lay
down all his lands, and life at the feet of her commands and service, and
esteems both of them too poor, for the purchasing of so inestimable a jewel;
whom (in his determinations and resolutions) he has already adopted the
Q^eene of his heart, and confirmed and crowned the Sovereign Empress of his
soul, and the sacred Goddess of his desires and affections. He thinks not of
the great disparity and Antithesis betwixt his de^ling age, and her fragrant
and flourishing youth; nor what an ^e quall difference, and disproportion there
is betwixt his fifty six, and her twenty years. He will not consider what a
poor simpathie and a palpable antipathy there is between such a January and
such a May, but disdaines to enter into consideration with himself, that he
is every way fitter for his grave than for her bed, and for death than
marriage; yea he flatters himself so far in his affection to her, as heehopes
he shall be the joyful father of many pretty children by her, so that he
is so deeply enamoured with the sweet youth of our Bellinda, and his heart so
fast chained and entangled in the tresses of her hair, and the lures of her
alluring beauty, that he upon his first sight of her incessantly thinks of
her by day, dreams of her by night, and neither thinks nor dreams of any thing
but of her, and of his love to her: so now he advances and raises the
standards of Venus and Cupid, as high as ever he formerly dejected them, and
delights in nothing more, yea Imay truly say in nothing else, but in feasting
his eyes and surfeting his heart upon the heavenly Idoea of her Angelical ^ace
and feature, he thinks so much of love, as if he were now wholly composed of
love, and therefore purposely made to love Bellinda, and none but Bellinda. His
hauks, and hounds are now as far out of his mind, as he is out of himself; and
no other delight or recreation whatsoever can take up any place in his heart or
thoughts, because love had already taken up all. He revokes to mind, how
Macare^ was transformed into a bird for speaking against Venus, and that it is
not his cause alone to be so deeply plunged and tormented in love, but that
the greatest Captains Philosophers, and Kings of the world, (and as poets
assirme the Gods themselves) have been subjected, and vanquished with this
passion, and so constrained to make it their chiefest delight and glory to
ador^e the temples and altars of Cupid, with the oblations of their sighs, and
the sacrifices of their tears.

Thus our De Mora being (at the first sight) wholly inflamed with love toward
his fair, and beautiful intended mistress Bellinda, he to seem far younger
than he is, he is so vain in his affection, as (contrary to his custom) he
shaves his beard, dights himself in an ash-collour satin suit and cloak,
with a white Beaver hat, a hat-band of Diamonds, a rich plain cut work band,
and a pair of green silk stockings with garters and roses laced with silver,
suitable thereunto, and so to perform his promise to Cursoro, takes coach the
next morning, and rides over to him, but not so much to taste of his good
cheer, as to feast his enamoured eyes on the dilicious rarities and dainties
of his daughter Bellinda's beauty; where he finds his entertainment and good
cheer, at least to equalize, if not to exceed his birth, rank, and
expectation: but this is not the end, and object of his visit, not the sum
and period of his desires; dinner being ended, he acquaints Cursoro with his
affection to his daughter Bellinda, and his suit to seek and obtain her for
his wife. Cursoro wonders that so great a Lord should des^nd so low from
himself to seek so mean a young Gentlewoman as his daughter in marriage. But
finding De Mora to be in earnest, and not in jest, and understanding that his
age was deeply and passionatly enamoured of her youth and beauty, he
therefore thanks him for that undeserved honor of his, promises him his best
assistance toward his daughter, and gives him no despair, but all hope and
assurance that he shall shortly obtain and enjoy her to his wife. De Mora
having thus won the affection and consent of the father, he now seeks that
of the daughter, he takes her apart in his parlour, where, of an old man he
plays the young orator and lover, and in sweet terms and sugared ph^ses and
speeches seek to gain her to his wife; but Bellinda more considering De Mora
his age, than the greatness of his nobility or estate, she bites the lip, and
hangs the head at this ^s motion, yea, and see^s to be a^ (...) as he was
forward in this his research and pursuit. Her father lai^s his commands on her
to embrace this match and no other he conjures her now to confirm, and not to
cast away her good fortunes in marrying this great* Nobleman, and vows that
he will for ever renounce her for his da^ghter, if she disobey him herein; so
he conducts her into the arbor of his garden, and there freely and cou^eously
again gives De Mora the opportunity and benefit to speak with her, and the
desired happiness to kiss her; but Bellinda is as much perplexed in mind, as
they are obstinate in their motion ^owards her; when (composing* her
countenance rather to sorrow than joy and to mourning than mir^h) she makes a
modest excuse to her father, gives no absolute or pe^ p^ie denial to De Mora,
but fairly and discreetly ^aves of both of them a months time of respi^e to
resolve on th^s great business, which she says, so much imports her happiness
or her misery, her content other affliction, which answer and request of hers,
both her father and De Mora finding so full of discretion and reason, they
severally grant and jointly consent to give her; but in all this interim, such
was De Mora's dear and tender affection to Bellinda, that he visits her many
times in person* and very often with his rich gifts and presents, as holding
it no irregular way, but a pertinent and prevalent course, first to make a
breach in a young Ladies mind and affection, and then to enter and take
possession, both of her body, and of her self.

But before I proceed further in the narration and progress of this history, I
must here unlocke and reveal a secret mystery to the reader of no small
consequence and importance, for he must understand, that our Bellinda is not so
chaste as fair, nor so honest, as her education, youth and beauty presuppose
and promise her to be; for her mother being dead, and her father giving her
too much liberty, and too little virtuous counsel and exhortation, she for
two whole years has been in love with a poor, yet with a very proper and
resolute young Gentleman of some twenty five years of age, being a neighbor
of her fathers, named Don Fernando Palura, who being deeply enamoured of her,
had lain so close, so constant and so strong a siege to her chastity, as (not
to conceal the truth) first unknown to her father, then to De Mora, and next
to all the world, he had unparadised her of her maidenhead, and under color
and hope of marriage had very often taken his lustful use and pleasure of her
body; but his means being very small, and her belly not growing great, she
was not yet fully resolved, but therefore still delaied to marry him; true it
is, that her father Cursoro was formerly acquainted with Palura's affection and
desire to marry his daughter, but as heretofore his poverty made him reject him
for his son in law, so now the consideration of De Mora's great wealth and
nobility makes him fully to disdain him, and commands his daughter likewise
to do the same. But she not considering the premises, and loving Palura's
youth, as much as she hated De Mora's age, she was nevertheless so
inconstant by nature, and so proud and ambitious by sex, as she could find in
her heart and resolution, rather to be a rich Lady, than a poor Gentlewoman,
and so to leave Palura to espouse and marry De Mora: but first her crime and
her conscience makes her send for Palura, and seriously to consider and debate
hereon with him, which they do; so Palura perceiving by Bellindas looks, and
observing by her s^eeches that De Mora's wealth was far more powerful with her
than his poverty; and that she notwithstanding still aimed to keep him for
her husband, and himself for her friend, he at last tells her, that he will
consent and content himself that she shall marry Don Alonso De Mora,
conditionally, that she will first ^aithfully promise him to grant and
perform him three requests, and art^les. So she bids him propose them to her,
the which he does to this effect: (...), that he shall still have the use and
pleasure of her b^dy, as here ^ofore, and a^ o^en as he pleases: secondly,
that from time to time she shall be ^ow some competency of De Moras wealth on
him, to support his weak estate and poverty: and thirdly, that if De Mora die
before him, that within three months after his death she shall then marry him.

Which three unjust demands* and ungod^y conditions of ^alura's, his sweet
heart Bellinda (betwixt sighs and smiles) immediately grants him, yea she
feales them with many oaths, and confirms them with a world of kisses, and to
add the more p^tie, (I may truly say the more profaneness) to this their
contract and atonement, they fall to the ground on their knees, and invoking
God and his Angels for witnesses hereof, they with their hands and kisses,
again ratify and confirm it: but poor sinful souls, how does Satan abuse
you, and your intemperate and lascivious lusts betray you? for God will not be
mocked, and his holy Angels cannot be deluded by these your blasphemies and
impie^ies, for you shall in the end see with grief, and feel with repentance,
that this vicious league, and obscoene contract of yours; will produce you
nothing but shame, misery, and confusion of all sides.

By this time is Bellinda's month expired, which she gave her father and De
Mora for her resolution of marriage; and now do they both of them repair to
her to understand and receive it, when her pride and ambition, having far more
prepared and disposed her tongue, than her affection, she (as if she were a
pure Virgin, yea a Diana for chastity) making a low reverence to her father,
and a great respectfull courtesy to De Mora, delivers her resolution to them
in these terms: that in humble obedience to her father, and true affection
and zeal to Don Alonso De Mora, God has now so disposed her heart and mind,
that she is resolved to wait on his commands, and to be his handmaid and
wife, whenever he shall please to make himself her Lord and husband. This
answer of Bellinda is so pleasing to her father, and so sweet and de^icious to
De Mora, that in acceptance of her love, and requital of her consent, he
gives her many kisses, and then claps a great chain of pearl, enterlaced with
sparks of Diamonds, about her neck, and an exceeding rich Diamond ring on her
finger, and so most solemnly contracts himself to her, and within eight days
after in great pomp, state and braverie marries her, whereat his kinsfolks
and friends, and all the nobility and gentry of these parts do very much
admire and wonder, some condemning his folly in marrying so poor and so young
a gentlewoman, others praising and applauding her good fortune in matching with
so rich and so great a Nobleman.

Here we see the marriage of De Mora, and Bellinda, but we shall not go far
before we see what sharp and bitter sweet fruits it produces: for here truth
gives a law to my will, and so commands me to relate and discover, that he is
too old for her youth, and she too young for his age, yea her I must crave
excuse of modesty to affirm, that she is so immodest, as she finds him not
to be so bold and brave a cavallier as she expected, in regard his best
performance to her consists only in desire. Thus being in bed together, whiles
he turns to his rest, so does she to her repentance, but she knows how to
repair and remedy this her misfortune; for whiles her husband De Mora only
kisseth her, she in her heart and mind, kisseth and embraces her young and
sweet Palura, who many times comes over in show to visit her husband (...)
effect to (...), and as formerly, so now he ^sciviously (...) and (...) (in a
word) very often performs and acts that (...) husband cannot. Now within less
than two months (...) seeing that he is not capable to deserve, much ^sse to
(...) dainties of his wives youth and beauty) and (...) ^ving al^ that by
(...) begins to disrespect and slight him, and yet that she (...) pleasant to
all gentlemen who a^oord and (...) his house, (...) on her, now he grows
jealous of her, and so far forget^ (...) self, that he curses all those who
(in right of the laws of (...) honor) come to kiss her, but more especially
Palura, (...) his house; and so frequently conversing with his young Lady,
(...) on makes him jealous, and his jealousy confident, that (with too (...)
and dishonestie) he usurps upon his free hold, and dishonors him in ^ing his
bed, and defiling his wife; the which to discover, (...) her of her liberty;
so that she sees (and grieves to see) her self to be (...) as much her
husbands prisoner, as his wife, yea he sets (...) ey^ (...), as so many,
Sentinells to watch her and her actions, and for himself, (...) jealousy
gives him more eyes than ever Argus had, to epsy out what familiarity (...)
between her and her sweet heart Palura. Bellinda takes this discourtesie and
hard measure of her husband in very ill part at his hands, yea she bites the
lip thereat, and though out wardly she seem to grieve and sorrow, yet
inwardly she vows to requite and revenge it; he is so jealous of her, and so
fearful that she plays false play with him, that as soon as ever Palura
comes to his house, he carries his eye and ear every where to see if he can
epsy and hearken out, (...) and his wives love-trickes together; yea he is so
eurious in this quest, and so vigilant and turbulent on this his research and
disquisition, as if he delighted to ^ow that, whereof it were his happiness to
be ignorant, or as if he had an ^ing desire to make his glory prove his shame,
and his content his affliction and ^serie. But as mild and sweet persuasion is
ever more capable and powerful to prevail with women than constraint, so our
fai^e Bellinda is so distasted with the lunacy, and with the frenzy and
madness of this her husbands jealousy, that she no sooner sees her Palura
arive in her sight and presence, but (despite ^f ^s suspicion and fear) she
is ^o (...) in her lust, and so lascivious in (...) affection toward him, that
she t^es pleasure to seek pleasure, and extremely delights to seek and ^d
delight with him, which (according to her former lew^ (...), and ungodly
contract) she often does. Now this foolish young couple (being the obliged
scho^ers of ^pid, and the devoted votaries of Venus) think to be as wise, as
they are lascivious in these their amorous pleasures, for knowing that
discretion makes lovers happy; and that secrecy is the true touch-^e, yea the
very life and sou^e of love, they therefore esteem and keep the secrets
thereof as if they were sacred, and think that no mortal eyes but their own
can (...) know it: but yet notwithstanding all this, De Mora's jealous fears
in the detection, are still as great, as their care in the prevention thereof,
for the very next night after Palura departure from his house, he purposely
absenteth an^eth his wife from his bed, and the next morning, calling her into
the garden after him, and causing the door to be ^ut, he then and there,
(with ligh^g i^ his looks and t^nder in his speeches) charge her of
adultery with (...) (...) this young strumpet his wife Bellinda, at the very
first hearing of this (...) and unexpected news, dissembles so artificially
with her husband, and so pro^ with God, as seeming to dissolve and melt into
tears, she purges her self hereof, with many strong vows, and cleereth
Palura with many deep asseverations. (...) this fanaticke Tyrant, and
frantic monster jealousy, (which for the most part, we can seldom or never
kill, before it kill us) had wrought such strange impressions in the brains,
and engraven such extravagant chimoera's in the heart and ^eleefe of old De
Mora, that (notwithstanding his wives oaths and tears to the contrary) he
yet still vows to himself, and her, that she is guilty of adultery with
Palura, and therefore charge her that henceforth she dare not see him, or
receive him into her house or company. Bellinda hereat (to give her ^and some
content in her own discontent) makes a great show of sorrow, and an extreme
apparition and exterior appearance of grief: she sends for her father Cursoro,
acquaints him with the unjust wrong and indignity which her Lord (...) husband
has offered her, and prays him to interpose his authority and judgment with
him for their reconciliation; who seeing himself solicited and sought to by
his own blood, and by his daughters hypocrisy, believes her to be as innocent
as her husband De Mora thinks her guilty of this foul crime of adultery with
Palura; and so undertakes to solicit and deal with his son in law De Mora to
that effect, which he does, but with no desired success, so that finding it
to be a knottie and difficult business, and upon the whole no less than a
Herculean labor, because of De Mora's wilful obstinacy, and perverse cre
dulity: he therefore prays for both of them, and thus leaves them and their
difference to time and to God: and upon these unfortunate terms does old De
Mora, his young wife Bellinda, and their marriage now stand.

In the mean time Bellinda, (who suffers doubly both in her pleasure and her
reputation) is not yet so devoid of sense, or exempt of judgment, but she
will speedily provide for the one and secure the other. To which effect
(seeming sorrowfully obedient to her husband,) she thinks it not fit that her
Palura should for a season approach her house or her self; wherefore by a
confident messenger she sends him this letter.

BELLINDA to PALVRA.
MY husband has discovered our affections, and is confident that I love thee
far better than himself, wherein as he is nothing deceived, so I conjure thee
by the preservation of thy fidelity, and my honor, to forbear my house and
sight for some two months, in which interim I will use my chiefest art, and
the utmost of my possible power to calm the storms and tempests that
jealousy has raised in him. So, be thou but as patient as I will be
constant, and I hope a little time shall end our languishing, and again work
our contents and desires; for though thou art absent from me, yet I am still
present with thee, and albeit my husband De Mora have my body, yet Palura, and
none but Palura has my heart, as knows God, to whose best favor and mercy,
I affectionately and zealously recommend thee.

BELLINDA.


Palura receives this letter, and although he fetch many deep fig^es at the
reading thereof, yet he gives it many sweet kisses for her sweet sake who writ
and sent it him, he knows not whether he has more reason to condemn De
Mora's jealousy, or to commend his Lady Bellinda's affection and constancy to
himself, and because he resolves to prefer her content and honor equally
with his own life, therefore he^ will dispense with his lustful, and
lascivious pleasures for a time, purposely to give her beauty and merrits their
due forever, so in requit all of her affectionate letter, he (by her own
messenger) returns her this kind and courteous answer.

PALVRA to BELLINDA.
I Am as sorrowful that thy husband De Mora has discovered our affections, as
truly joyful that thou love me far better than himself, wherefore to
prevent his jealousy and equally to preserve my fidelity with thy honor, and
thy honor with my life, know sweet and dear Bellinda that thy requests are my
commands, and thy will shall eternally be my law, in which regard I will
refrain thy house all thy long prefixed time, and so forbear to see thee, but
never to love thee, because thy sweet and devine beauty, is so deeply engraven
in my thoughts and imprinted in my soul, that the farther I transport my body
from thee, the nearer my affection brings my heart to thee. I will add my
chiefest wishes to thy best art, and my best prayers to thy chiefest power,
that a little time may work our content and desires: but because there is no
torment nor death to languishing, nor no languishing to that of love, therefore
I shall think every moment a month, and every hour a year before we again
kiss and embrace: conceal this letter of mine from all the world with as much
care and secrecy, as I send it thee with fervent zeal, and tender affection.

PALVRA.


The perusal of this letter and the affection of Palura demonstrated in this
his resolution, makes Bellinda as glad, as the jealousy of her Lord and
husband De Mora sorrowful; and now seeing his rage so reasonlesse, and his
malice and obstinacy so implacable toward her, she abandoneth her sighs and
tears, resolves to make trial of a contrary experiment, and so under a femall
face assuming a masculine courage and resolution, she sleights him and his
jealousy, as much as he does her and her levity, and bears her self more
highly and imperiously toward him than ever she did heretofore, but this
animosity of Bellinda produces not that good effect which he expects from her
husband De Mora, for he attributing this pride of hers to proceed from some
bad counsel given her by minion Palura, it does the more inflame his
jealousy, and exasperate and set fire to his indignation, both toward her and
him.

Whiles Bellinda stands upon these terms with her husband De Mora, his brains
(as so many wheels and spheres) are incessantly rolling and wheeling about
the Orb of jealousy, to find out the marrow and mystery of this lascivious
league between his wife and Palura, in the agitation and conduction whereof,
he is as secret, as she simple and inconsiderate, his policy is to find ou^
any letter or letters of Palura to her, and her closet and casket are the only
places as he supposes for her to hide and conceal them in. So on a monday
morning, as his Lady Bellinda is gone to the parish Church to hear mass, he
purposely stays at home to effect this his secret intent and purpose, and then
very privately enters her chamber, and his jealousy makes him so industrious
of lock-smithes hooks, and instruments to open any lock. So he first
resolves to try and open that of her closet, which when he was on the very
point to do, casting aside his eye, he sees the tawny Damask gown which his
wife wore the day before, wherefore he flies to it to search and rifle the
pockets thereof for her keys. Now Bellinda's have and devotion to the Church
was so great, as both she and her waiting Gentlewoman, had forgotten the keys
of her closet and cabinet, and left them in one of the pockets of her said
gown, where her husband De Mora finds them, whereat being exceeding joyful,
he claps up his hooks and instruments, and (with equal jealousy and haste)
opens first her closet then her cabinet, wherein leaving nothing unsearched,
he at last finds the very same letter of Palura to his wife Bellinda, which
we have fo^merly seen and understood, the which (as the richest relic of
her heart and the most precious jewel of her content and affection, she had
secretly enshrined and treasured up in a small crimson satin purse embroydered
with gold. He reads it over again and again, but for that which said, I
shall think every moment a month, and every hour a year before we again
kiss and embrace, this line, I say, his extreme jealousy makes him to read
over at least as often as it has sillables, for this letter and this branch of
this letter confirms his jealousy, and now makes him fully assured and
confident, that his wife and Palura have defiled his honor, and his bed, by
committing adultery together; when vowing a sharp and speedy revenge hereof,
he (with a panting heart, and trembling hand) lays the velvet purse again in
the cabynet, then locks it, as also her closet and chamber door, having first
left the keys again in the pocket of his Ladies gown, and so comes down
into the Hall among his servants, as if he were happy to know that, which it
is his misery, because he cannot be ignorant thereof.

By this time his wife the Lady Bellinda is returned from Church; he dines
with her, and yet he cannot dissemble his discontent and malice against her so
artificially, but that she observes some distemper in his looks, and
extravagancie in his speeches; but such is her pride, as she is no way either
curious o^ careful thereof, nor as much as once surmiseth of what he had now
performed and acted. Dinner being ended, as soon as she betakes her self to
walk in the allies, and arbours of her delicate garden, her husband De Mora,
and his jealous and bloody resolutions are walking a contrary way; he is so
netled with jealousy, and stung to the heart with malice and revenge; as he
ascends to his armoury, takes down an excellent sword and belt, a case of
pocket pistols, each whereof he charge with two bullets, calls for Emmanuell
de Ferallo his Ladies Gentleman Usher, who was a very proper young man both of
his person and hands, bids him to cause two of his best great sadle horses
speedily to be made ready, and wills him to accompany him to the town of
Arraiallos. Ferallo performs this order of his Lord, and then tells him that
he will go into the garden, and acquaint his Lady and mistress with his
absence, and to receive her commands before his departure, but his Lord
commands him to the contrary, and neither to see or speak with her; so they
take horse, and away. Now within half an hour after, the Lady Bellinda*
returns from the garden, and understanding of their departure, who (in regard
of the suddaynesse and unexpectation thereof) knows not what to say or think
thereof, or whither, or about what business they are gone; but she neither once
dreams nor conceives so much as a thought, that her husband De Mora had found
her sweetheart Palura's letter, much less that he had any malicious or
disparate attempt, so suddenly to put in execution against him for her regard
and cause, as to ride to Arraiallos to him, to fight with him.

The youth and beauty of his young wife and Lady Bellinda, arming him with
jealousy, and this jealousy with irreconcilable malice and revenge against
Palura, he cruelly resolving to make his body and life pay dear for it, rides
away toward his house near Arraiallos, and staying some half aquarter of a
league from it in a fair green meddow, sends him man Ferallo to him, and
prays him speedily to take his horse, and come speak with him there, about a
business which much imports his good. Ferallo (knowing least of this quarrel,
whereof his Lord and master De Mora thought most) finds out Don Palura at his
house, and in fair and respectfull terms delivers him his message, which
Palura understanding, his guilty conscience makes him exceedingly to doubt and
wonder of De Mora's intention and resolution herein; but his lustful heart and
affections, looking more on the young Lady Bellinda the wife; than on the old
Lord De Mora her husband, he speedily (without any servant of his) takes horse
and rides away with Ferallo to him in the meddow, where De Mora (on
horseback) impatiently attended his coming. Salutations being here ended
between them, (which Palura observes in De Mora to be more short than
ceremonious, and more abrupt than respectfull) De Mora calls his man Ferallo to
him, and privately commands him to ride a meddow or two off, and not to dare
offer either to stir or draw, whatsoever he see pass betwixt him and
Palura, the which his man Ferallo obeies, but with much wonder and admiration
what this business might mean or produce between them. Here De Mora very
passionately and cholerickly, charge Palura for abusing and dishonouring of
him, by committing adul, terie with his wife Bellinda, the which Palura retorts
to him as a foul scandal, and false aspersion, and (as an honorable
Gentleman) in his speeches and answers to De Mora, makes his own innocence,
and his wife the Lady Bellinda's chastity very apparent and probable: but these
feigned excuses and false oaths and speeches of Palura do no way satisfy,
but ^ather the more incense the jealousy, and inflame the malice and revenge
of De Mora against him, whereupon he shows him his own letter, and with much
bitterness and vehemence demands him if that his own hand writing do not
palpably convince him of adultery with his Lady. Palura is amazed at the sight
of this his letter, so that blushing for shame, he cannot here yet refrain
from looking pale with grief and anger thereat, nevertheless he will not be
so ungrateful to the beauty and affection of Bellinda to think that she has
betrayed him, by delivering up this his letter to her husband, but rather
(giving a good interpretation and construction to the purity of her intents and
affections toward him) he believes with confidence, that he had sinisterly
and surreptiously betrayed her thereof, whereupon to fortify her reputation,
and to vindicate and clear his own innocence, he (with high words and loud
crackes) protests this letter to be false, suborned, none of his, and that
it was written by some witch or devil, and sent by some treacherous enemy of
his, purposely to affront him, and to disgrace his virtuous chaste and innocent
Lady Bellinda; but these feigned paliating excuses of his, cannot pass current
with the jealousy and revenge of De Mora, who now (to reduce contemplation
into action) tells Palura that nothing but his death can expiate and satisfy
this his crime, and therefore (on horseback as he was) draws his sword, and
bids Palura do the like. The which Palura hearing and seeing, he equaly for
the preservation of Bellinda's honor, and his own life (as a brave and
generous Gentleman) likewise draws, as highly disdaining to have his youth and
courage outbraved by this old cavallier: but here before they begin to fight,
Palura with many strong reasons, and patheticall persuasions, again and again
prays De Mora to desist from the combat, and to rest satisfied with the truth
of his Lady Bellinda's honor, and his own innocence in this their supposed
and pretended crime of adultery: but he speaks to the wind, for De Mora
returns him blows for words.

The event, and fortune of this their combat on horseback is, that in two
several meetings and incounters, Palura has received no wound, but given De
Mora two, the one in his neck, and the other in his left arm, whereof he
bleeds so exceedingly as he begins to despair of the victory, and with his
pistols to provide for his own safety and life; they by a mutual consent
divide themselves a little distance off to breath. When Palura reining his
horse a little to strait, and his horse being hot and furious; and by mere
strength and force turning round, De Mora with his watchful and vigilant eye
taking the advantage of this favorable ^ident, (when Palura never once dreams
or thinks of pistols) speedily pulls his two pistols forth his pocket, and most
basely and treacherously, with the first shoots him through the head, and with
the second into the reins of his back, of which mortal wounds he presently
fell off from his horse dead to the ground, having neither the power to repent
his sins, nor the grace or happiness to pray unto God for the salvation of his
own soul, and thus was the untimely end, and lamentable death of this
valliant young cavallier Palura.

De Mora seeing Palura dead, and having more reason outwardly to rejoice in
this his victory, than inwardly in the cause and manner thereof, he waves his
handcherchiefe to his man Ferallo to come to him (who was an eye witness and
spectator and Co-mate) which he presently does to whom he speaks thus, first
acquaint Palura's servants in his house, that I have slain their master in a
duel, then ride home and tell my wife the Lady Bellinda, that I have sent her
Ruffian and adulterer Palura to heaven, and within six days after come a way
to me to Lisbone, whether I am now poas^ng, when throwing him some gold for
his journey he takes leave of him and away, and at the very next Town
dresseth his wounds which prove hopeful and not dangerous.

Now does Ferallo (according to his Lords commission, and order) inform
Palura's servants of his death, and of his said Lord and masters victory, but
(for his honor and reputations sake) conceales that he basely and
treacherously killed him with his pistols: they are extremely sorrowful for this
his misfortunate end: so whiles they fetch home his breathless body and
prepare for his decent burial; Ferallo returns home and truly and punctually
relates to his Lady Bellinda the issue of this combat; as also of his Lord De
Mora's speeches which he commanded him to tell her, who poor Lady is all in
tears for the death of her lover Palura, and well she might in regard she
loved him a thousand times dearer than her own life, so upon the receipt of
this sorrowful news, she shuts her self up in her chamber, and for many
days together, her grief and lamentations for his death are so infinite, as
she will admit of no company, counsel, or consolation whatsoever, she
considers how deeply the misfortune of this disaster will scandalously
reflect on her honor, and fall on her reputation, and therefore vows to
requite Palura's death severly, and to revenge it sharply on the life of her
husband De Mora who was his murderer, at least when she shall be so happy,
or rather so miserable to see him return to her from Lisbone. She exceedingly
wondereth at his secret malice, and sudden indignation and resolution toward
Palura, but more at the cause thereof, and from what point of the compass, or
part of hell this furious wind should proceed, when at last having nothing else
capable to comfort her, or to give truce to her tears, but the sight of
Palura's aforesaid letter sent to her, the which in tender affection to him,
she for his sake had so often perused and kissed; she therefore passionately
and pensively flies to her closet, and with affection and sorrow to her cabinet
to feast her eyes with the sight, and to delight and comfort her heart with the
perusal thereof when (contrary to her expectation) she finds the letter taken
away, her other papers displaced, and her jewels reversed in her cabinet, and
then she knows for certain, that it is her husband De Mora, who had thus
rifled her cabinet, and who had bereaved and robbed her of this sweet letter,
which (next to Palura's sight and presence) was the chiefest joy of her heart,
and the sweetest felicity and content of her mind, the which considering, she
therefore absolutely believes, that the detection and perusal of this letter,
was the sole cause of her Lord and husbands jealousy, as that was of her sweet
Palura's death, wherein indeed she is nothing deceived, for some six weeks
after, he feturnes home to her from Lisbone, where (in favor of his Noble
birth and descent, of his many great friends, and of a huge some of money) he
(in absence of the Viceroy) had obtained his pardon, from the chamber of that
city, and the very first salutations that he gave his Lady Bellinda, (the
which, I know not whether he delivered to her with more contempt, or choler)
was thus.

Minion (quoth he) how many prayers and oraysons have thou said for the soul
of thy Ruffion, and adulterer Palura, when she being exceedingly galled to the
heart with these his scandalous speeches, she yet to justify her own honor
and innocence, dissembles her grief for Palura's death, as much as her jealous
husband triumphs and insults thereat, and so frames him this short reply, that
Palara was not her adulterer, but a Gentleman of honor, and therefore she
besought God to forgive him his own heinous sin and execrable crime for so
foully and basely murdering of him. De Mora nettled with this his Ladies
apology and justification, which he knew to be as false as her and Palura's
crime of adultery was true, he produces this letter to her, then reads it
her, and in a great rage and fury immediately teres and burns it before her
face; now although the sight and knowledge of this letter, as also her husbands
burning thereof do exceedingly vex and perplex our Lady Bellinda, yet she was
herewith no way daunted but again very boldly tells him; that she cannot
prevent any Gentleman to write and send her a letter, and although in the
conclusion of this his letter to her had simply and sinisterly mentioned kisses
and embraces, yet she peremptorily vowed and swore to him, that the first had
not exceeded the bounds of civility, nor the last violated the laws and rules
of honor, so wise and politic was she in her answers, and so false and
hyppocriticall in her justification toward her husband.

The which he well observing, and understanding, as also with what a pleasing
grace she spoke it, his own lustful age, yet still doting on the freshnes of
the youth and beauty of this his young wife, seeing that Palura (who was the
cause and object of his jealousy) was now removed and dead, he therefore for
the preservation of his own honor and reputation in that of his Ladies, does
content himself so fat as to bury the greatest part of his discontent and
jealousy against her, in the dust of oblivion, or in that of Palura's grave,
and to that end, he afords her his table still, and his bed sometimes, as if
that obligation of courtesy, would reclaim her lascivious thoughts, and
again call home her wanton desires to chastity and honor, nevertheless the
better to effect and compass it, he much restraines her of her former
liberty, and debars her the company and sight of all Gentlemen whatsoever that
come to his house. A peevish custom, which the husbands of Spain, Portugal,
and Italy tirannically use toward their Ladies, whereas contrariwise the
Ladies and Gentlewomen of England and France, are far more happy, because more
chaste and honorable toward their husbands in using, and not abusing this
their liberty and freedom.

Bellinda with a watchful eye, and a wanton heart observes these passages and
comportments of her husband De Mora toward her, and in observing laughes at
them; but because her lascivious mind incessantly tells her, that there is no
hell to that of a discontented bed, therefore hating his age as much as he
loves her youth, her Paluro being dead, she forth with resolves to make choice
of another lover, and at what rate soever not to trifle away her time, and her
youth idly, but to pass it a way in the amorous delights of carnal
voluptuousnes and sensuality. To which effect missing of other Gentlemen (and
therefore enforced to make a virtue of necessity) she forgetting her self and
her honor makes choice of Ferallo her own Gentleman Usher, a man every way as
proper as she is fair, and as well timbred as she is beautiful, and near
of her own years, which as yet had not exceeded one and twenty: to Ferallo
therefore she freely imparts her affections and favors, who as freely
receives and as joyfully and amorously entertaines both her and them, so that,
to write the best of truth and modesty, I must here affirm, that as he was
formerly his Ladies usher, now he makes himself his Lords follower; and
(unknowen to him) very often ties her shooc-strings and takes up her mask and
gloves for her, and many times when the old Nobleman is a sleep, then this
ignoble couple of unchaste lovers are waking to their obscoene pleasures, and
secretly sacrificing up their lascivious desires to wanton Cupid the son, and
to lustful Venus the mother, but they shall find wormwood intermixed in this
honey, and gall in this sugar.

For three months together our Bellinda the mistress, and Ferallo the man,
drown themselves in the impiety of these their carnal delights and
pleasu^es, as if they made it their ^elicity and glory to continue the practice
and profession thereof, but at the end and expiration of this time as close as
they bear this their adulterous familiarity from De Mora, it comes to his
knowledge by an unexpected accident and means, for the reader must understand,
that Ferallo was heretofore dishonestly familiar, with his Lady Bellinda's
waiting Gentlewoman named Herodia, whom (under pretext and color of marriage)
he had many times used, at his lascivious pleasure, so that Herodia seeing
that Ferallo's affections were now wholly transported from her self to her
Lady Bellinda, and that he slighted and disdained her, to embrace and adore
the other, she is so enraged with jealousy at the knowledge and consideration
thereof, as she calls a counsel in her heart and thoughts, what to do herein,
how to prevent it, and again how to reclaim, and regaine Ferallo and his
affection, from her Lady to her self, and she is so inflamed with jealousy
toward them, as she can reap no peace by day of her mind, nor rest by night
of her heart before she have effected it; to which end, having ran over a
whole world of remedies and expedients, she at last resolves on this, to
acquaint her Lord and master De Mora with this unchaste and obscoene
familiarity, between his Lady Bellinda and her lover Ferallo, and her rage is
so outrageous as with infinite malice and celerity she performs it. At which
unexpected and unwell-comed news, our old Lord De Mora has now his heart a
new set on fire with jealousy and malice both toward his Lady, and her usher
Ferallo, so that he as soon believes as understands this their adultery
without ever making a stand either to consider the truth, or to examine the
circumstances thereof, whereupon to make short work, and to provide a speedy
remedy for this unfortunate disaster, and disease; he without speaking word of
it, either to his Lady Bellinda, or to Ferallo, suddenly casheereth him from
his house and service, and in such disgraceful manner, as he will not so much
as permit him to know the reason hereof, or to see, or take leave of his Lady
and mistress, and from thence forth De Mora looks on her with infinite contempt
and jealousy. For it galls him to the heart, first to remember her dishonor,
and dishonesty with Palura, and now far more to know that she is doubly guilty
thereof with her own domesticke servant and Gentleman Usher Ferallo; wherefore
he again restraines her of her liberty, and his jealousy so far exceeds the
bounds of judgment, and the limmits of reason, as he will difficultly permit
her to see any man, or any man to see her, but as rivers stopped do still
degorge with more violence, and overflow with more imperuositie, so Bellinda
takes this new jealousy of her old husband, and this sudden exile and
banishment of Ferollo her lover and Gentleman Usher in extreme ill part, and
(after she has wept and sighed her fill thereat, she then believes the prime
and original cause thereof, to proceed from the malice and jealousy of her
waiting Gentlewoman Herodia: wherefore being infinitely despighted and incensed
against her; she (in her dear love and affection to Ferallo) to requite her
husbands courtesy, very discourteously turns her away, and for ever banisheth
her, her house and service, and to write the truth, Ferallo likewise inhatred
and malice to Herodia, will from thence forth neither see nor speak with her
more. But to verify the English proverb, that love will creep where it cannot
go, although De Mora banisheth Ferallo from his house; and restrains his
Lady Bellinda of her liberty in his house, yet sometimes by day and many times
by night, they (by the assistance of some secret agents or Ambassadors of
love) do in the arbours of the gardens, and in some other out romes of the
house very amorously meet, and most lasciviously kiss and embrace together.
They hold many private conferences on their unlawful affections, and many
secret consultations upon their unjust discontents: so at last both of them
joining in one wicked heart and mind, and (as matters are still best
distinguished by their contraries) finding each others company sweet, and their
sequestration and separation bitter, they so much forget their selves and their
souls, and so much fly from heaven and God, to follow Satan and hell, as both
of them believe and resolve, they can have no true or perfect content on earth
before De Mora be first sent to heaven; now, upon this bloody design they
agree, and upon this hellish plot they fully resolve, only the gordian knot
which must combine and link fast this foul business is, that De Mora being
dead, Bellinda must shortly after marry her Gentleman Usher Ferallo, whereunto
with as much joy as vanity she cheerfully consents, when they are so
profane as they seal this their ungodly contract with many oaths, and
ratify and confirm it with a world of kisses, and then of all violent deaths,
they resolve on that drugge of the devil, poison, so without either the fear
or grace of God, they of Christians metamorphose and make themselves devils,
and Ferallo buying the poison, Bellinda very secretly and subtly in diet
drink and broth admmistereth it unto her Lord and husband De Mora, which being
of a languishing virtue and opperation, he within less then four months
dies thereof; when with much cost and a wonderful exterior show of grief and
sorrow, she gives him a stately funeral, every answerable to the luster of
his name, and the quality of his dignity and hono^r, but God in his due time
will pull off the mask of this her monstrous hippocrie, and infernal
profaneness.

Our jealous old Lord de Mora being thus laid and raked up in the dust of his
untimely grave, his joyful sorrowful widow the Lady Bellinda, according to
her promise, to the grief of her father Cursoro, to the wonder of Stremos, and
the admitation of all Portugal marries with this her Gentleman Usher Ferallo;
but such lustful and bloody marriages, most commonly meet with miserable ends.

For six months together, Ferallo day and night keeps good corespondancy in
the performance of his affections to his old Lady and mistress, and now his new
wife Bellinda, and although they are unequal in birth and rank, yet marriage
having now made them equal, they mutually kiss and embrace with as much
content as desire; but at the end of this small parcel of time; satiety of his
uxorious delights and pleasures makes him neglectfull, and which is worse
contemptible thereof, (a base ingratitude, but to often subject to men of his
inferior rank and quality, and which the indiscretion of Ladies of honor,
very often paies dear for, as buying it many times with infamy but still which
repentance) so that for ten nights, and sometimes for fifteen together he
never kissed or embraced her; which unkind ungratitude of his, and respectlesse
unvaluation of her youth and beauty, as also of her rank and means makes the
Lady Bellinda his wife to be as hot in choler toward him, as he is cold in
affection and love toward her. But to ascend to the head-spring of this his
discourtesie toward her, and so to fetch and derive it from its own proper
original, we must know that Ferallo was so vicious, inconstant, and base, as
now he is deeply in love with a new waiting Gentlewoman of his Ladies named
Christalina, a sweet young maiden, of some eighteen years of age, tall of
stature and slender of body, and whose beauty was every way as clear and pure
as her name, and yet whose maidenhead (with a few rich presents and many poor
flattering oaths and false promises) he had secretly purchased and gotten from
her; yea his affection was so fervent to her, that part of the day could not
content his lustful desires, but he forgets himself so far, as before his
Ladies nose, and almost in her sight, he must lie with her whole nights, and
which is worse, almost every night without so much as once thinking of his own
wife the Lady Bellinda, or either loving what she cared for, or caring for
what she loved.

But Bellinda esteems her self too good a Gentlewoman, and too great a Lady
to be thus outbraved and disgraced, by a Tailors son, (for so was Ferallo)
and therefore consequently her heart is too well lodged, and too high fixed and
seated in the degree of her high descent thus to receive and suffer an affront,
by a man of so low a beginning and so ignoble a quality and extraction as he
was, and whom she had raised from nothing, and conferred and honored him with
her affection, and bed, and of her servant made him her husband; when for the
space of six months together having continually used the best of her art, and
the chiefest of her power, her sweetest persuasions, and her most sugared
prayers and solicitations to make him abandon her maid Christalina, and so
again to reclaim him and his affection from her to her self; but seeing all
her care vain, and her prayers and entreaties toward him to prove frivoulous,
she at last (consulting with Satan, and not with God) begins to assume bad
thoughts and revengefull malice against him, for this hi^ foul disloyalty, and
base ingratitude and infidelity toward her: but first before she attempts it,
her turbulent and restless jealousy, makes her resolve to try another
conclusion, which is to put off this her waiting Gentlewoman Christalina from
her service and attendance, in hope that Ferallo her husband would then thereby
likewise put off himself and his affection from her, but this project and
resolution of hers reapes no succesfull issue according to her desires, but
receives end, as soon as beginning. For he is still so deeply enamoured and
so constantly affected to Christalina, as he will neither permit nor suffer
it, but in despite of his Lady Bellinda, and of all her sighs, tears, and
prayers to the contrary, he kisseth her in her sight, and (custom now making
him licenciously bold and impudent) he in this his sottish familiarity with
her, sets her at table with himself and his wife; and in her presence, and
before her face, terms her his dear, his love, and his sweetheart: a
disgrace of so unkind a nature, and discourteous a quality, as she highly
disdaines long to suffer or digest it at his hands. So that seeing no hope of
amendment, and therefore dispairing of any reformation thereof in him, she
resumes her former bad and bloody thoughts against him, and so peremptorily and
definitively resolves to murder him. Her jealousy makes her thus malicious,
her malice thus revengefull, and her revenge thus bloody hearted and handed
toward him. She cannot be content to pace, but she will ride poast to her
confusion by heapeing crime upon crime, and murder to murder; she has
formerly poisoned her first husband De Mora, and now she resolves to poinyeard
to death Ferallo her second, as if one of these two blood sins and crimes
were not enough capable, to make her as truly miserable, as she falsely thinks
her self happy, in the performance and execution thereof. But these are the
bitter fruits of jealousy and the sharp effects of choler, malice, and revenge
which most commonly stream and proceed from it,

Whiles thus her quondam Gentleman Usher, and now her unkind and disloyal
husband Ferallo (without fear or care) is wallowing in his beastly pleasures
and sensuality with his strumpet Christalina, this his ungodly wife, and
revengefull Lady Bellinda (with as much secrecy as treachery) is in requital
thereof prepareing of him a bloody banquet; yea so hasty is she in her rage,
and so outrageous in this her revenge toward him, as she will no longer be
abused or defrauded by him, but thinks every hour an age, before she have
dispatched him for heaven. She will no more be controuled and over mastred by
him who was formerly her servant, and who first reputed it his greatest
happiness to kiss her hand, before she vouchsafed him the honor to kiss her
lips, or which is more, the felicity to embrace her in her bed. She now sees
with grief, that he has betrayed her in betraying, and conveying his
affection from her to her maid Christalina, and therefore although she has
cast away her favors on him, yet of the two, she vows rather to cast away
him than her self. No grace, no religion, not her conscience, not her soul,
nor the consideration of heaven or hell can dissuade or keep her from this her
bloody purpose, or divert her from the perpetration of this inhumane and cruel
murder: but the very first night that he leaves her maid Christalina, and lies
with her self, she (being purposely provided of a very sharp and keen razor,
which she put in one of her gloves, and clapped it under her pillow) at break of
day as he lay in bed soundly sleeping and snoring by her, she as a devil
incarnate cuts his throat, and leaves him struggling in the bed, and weltering
in his blood, without once having the power to think, to speak of God.

Thus we have seen the bloody malice, and infernal fury and revenge of this
execrable young Lady Bellinda, in so lamentable and cruelly murdering her
first and old husband De Mora, and now her young one Ferallo, and because the
prepetration of these her inhumane crimes and facts are so odious to God, that
their knowledge has already pierced the clouds, and their sight ascended to
the sacred presence and tribunal of God, therefore his all-seeing, and
all-potent glorious Majesty, being as impartial in his judgments, as divine
in his decrees, has already sharpened his sword of justice, and made ready his
arrows of revenge, speedily to inflict and give her condign punishment for
the fame, yea and far sooner than either she thinks or dreams thereof.

She having thus dispatched this bloody business, and seeing her husband Ferallo
lie breathless in the bed by her, she rises up, and the better to color
out, and overvaile this her inhumane and monstrous villainy, she takes this her
dead husbands knife out of his pocket, and goring it all in his blood, she
leaves it on his pillow by him, thereby (with as much hippocrisie as treachery)
to insinuate a belief and confidence in the opinion of all men, that he had
there murdered himself, and that infallibly he was the author and actor of
this his own deplorable death, which having performed, she takes on a fine
clean holland smock, and puts off her cambricke one that she wore, which as a
fatal mark of her cruelty, and a prodigious banner of her inhumanity, was
all stained and engrained over with her husbands blood, and wrapping it up very
close together, she therein likewise envellops and enwraps her bloody razor,
and also a two pound brass weight, thereby the better to make it sink, for
she resolves that very morning to throw it into a pond; so secret is she in
contriving, and so politic in the concealing of this her cruel fact. The
morn advancing to six of the clock, which was dark, cloudy and obscure, as if
(by the secret appointment, and sacred providence of God) that the sun (with
his glistering beams) abhorred to behold so pitiful and lamentable a
spectacle. Bellinda has no sooner apparelled her self, but triumphing in this
her false victory and bloody conquest, and giving the murdered body of her
husband a farewell, composed of many curses and execrations, she softly issues
forth, clapping her bloody smock and razor in her pocket, the which (to make
sure work) she had tied fast with one of her blew silk garters, then locks
the chamber door, and very secretly and surely conveyes and throws in the key
within side, and then descends to the garden, where calling Hellena (another of
her waiting Gentlewomen to her) she bids her fetch her prayer book, and thus
away she goes toward their Parish Church of Saint Iulians on foot, which by
computation was some half a small league distant off their house, and forbids
any man servant to wait or attend on her thither. She is not a furlong off,
but the more closely to finish her design, she there purposely sends away her
maid Hellena to the Parish Church before her with this invented and colorable
errand to seek out her own Priest father Sebastian, and to prepare him then
to say mass to her, the which Hellena does. Now the midway between her house
and the Church is a great deep pond, by the which she is to pass; but a
little before she draws near it, a poor old maimed Soldier, being
cashiered from the Garrison of the castle of Castcayes (named Roderigo)
traveling toward his home, and seeing this Lady all alone, and observing the
sweetness of her beauty, and the richness of her apparel, and attire, his
poverty inforceth and incourageth him to request and beg an alms of her, the
which with much humility he does. But the Lady Bellinda's heart and thoughts,
were so much surprised and taken up with cruelty, as she knew not what
belonged to charity, and therefore having other business and windmils in her
head, she is so offended with Roderigo's begging importunity, as flatly
refusing to give him any alms, she forgets her self so far, as in steed
thereof, she gives him many harsh words and at last sends him away with some
unkind and foul speeches; the which poor Roderigo, took so ill at her hands,
that (in the fumes of a Soldier) he once thought to have requited it either
on her person, or her apparel; but then again (by her port and bravery)
deeming her to be some great neighboring Lady, who that morning had purposely
left her followers to take the sweetness of the air, and therefore fearing his
danger more than he loved his profit, he abandoneth that choleric and
insolent resolution of his, when taking his leave of her, he some two buts
lengths from her betakes him to sit down at the foot of a great Pine apple
tree, where he might see her, but not she him; and there looking after her
with an eye of discontent and indignation, he bewailes his wants and hard
fortune, and also condemns the obdurateness of this unknowen Ladies
uncharitable heart toward him, and inquiring afterward of a mike-maid which
passed by what she was, he is informed that she is the Lady Bellinda, widow
to the dead Lord Alonso de Mora, and now wife to Don Emanuell de Ferallo, who
hereat does not a little both grieve and wonder, that so rich and great a Lady
was guilty of so much uncharitablnes. By this time she being arived to the
pond, looking about her, and believing that no mortal eye had seen her, she
therein throws her bloody smock and razor (which as formerly I have said she
had tied fast together with one of her blew silk gatters) and the ponderosity
of the brass weight made it instantly to sink to the bottom, whereof she
being infinitely joyful, away she trip^ to the parish Church, and there hears
Mass, and mumbles out many Ave Mary's, and Pater nosters to her self; but the
whole world ingenerall, and the reade^ in particular may imagine with what a
foul conscience, and a profane and ulcerated soul, she then and there
performs this her devotion.

Now although this our wretched Lady Bellinda have murdered this her second
husband Ferallo, with wonderful secrecy, and buried these bloody evidences
thereof in the pond, with such admirable care and privacy, that she thinks it
wholly impossible for all the earth to reveal it; lo if earth cannot, yet now
heaven will. So hear before I proceed further, let me in the name and fear
of God, request the Christian reader here to admire and wonder with me, at the
mercy and goodness, and at the providence and pleasure of God in his miraculous
detection, and condign revenge and punishment thereof; for he must know and
understand, that it seems God had purposely brought, placed and seated this
poor old, weary maimed Soldier Roderigo at the foot of this Pine tree, to to
be a happy instrument of his praise, and a true Sentinel, and discoverer both
for his sacred justice and divine honor: for here although Bellinda carried
away her heart and charity from him, yet (as if guided by some heavenly power,
and celestial influence) Roderigo could not possibly carry away his eye from
her, but as closely as she threw this bloody cloth into the pond, he espies
it, and which is more, very plainly and palpably discernes the whitnes and
rednes thereof; when considering and thinking with himself that this gallant
proud Lady Bellinda might be as unchaste and lascivious as she was fair, and
as vicious as she was young; God (with his immediate finger) imprinted in his
thoughts and ingraved in his heart and mind, that either her self, or some one
of her waiting Gentlewomen had had some bastard, and that she had murdered
it, and now thrown it into the pond, and was so strongly possessed of this
conceit and belief, that neither day, or night, nor nothing under heaven could
possibly beat him from it, but for a whiles he resolves to conceal this
conceit to himself, as referring the truth thereof to time, and the issue to
God.

And here the order of our history calls us again from Roderigo to Bellinda,
who as soon as Mass is done, (with her waiting Gentlewoman He^) returns home
to her house, and by that time they arive there it is nine of the clock, where
(putting a pleasant face upon her false heart; and a sweet countenance upon her
soyled and sinful soul) she presently inquires for her husband Don Ferallo,
her servants make answer that they have not seen him to day, and that they
think he is still in bed, whereat she musing and wondering, in regard he was
not accustomed to sleep at so high an hour, she therefore sends some of her
servants to his chamber to see if he be stirring, but finding his chamber
door looked, and calling aloud to him they can get no answer from him, the
which they return and report to their Lady Bellinda, who seeming exceedingly
to doubt and grieve thereat, she (far more perplexed in countenance than
heart) ascends with them again to her husbands chamber, where they all call
and knock aloud at the door to him, and she far louder than them all, but in
vain, for still they hear no news either of him or from him, whereat she
begins (outwardly) to tremble with apprehension and fear, and so commands them
to force open the door of his chamber, which they instantly do, where they
see their Lord, and she her husband Ferallo to lie breathless in his bed, all
begored and reeking in his hot and warm blood, with his throat cut, whereat
his servants for true grief, and his Lady Bellinda for false sorrow, make a
lamentable cry, and a pitiful outcry in his chamber which is over heard in
all the house, but especially the Lady Bellinda her self, who so artificially
dissembleth her joy, and so passionately makes demonstration of extreme grief
and affliction, for this deplorable death of her Lord and husband, both to her
servants and to God, that she is all in tears, and cannot because she will
not be comforted thereat: they find the chamber door locked, the key within
side, and his own bloody knife on his pillow and therefore they easily resolve
and conclude that this their Lord and master Ferallo has wilfully made
himself away, and is undoubtedly the author of his own death; which opinion
and resolution of the servants, their Lady and mistress Bellinda (secretly to
her self) relisheth with much applause, and approbation, and to make her
afflictions and sorrows the more apparent to them, and in them consequently to
the world, she does not refrain from excessive weeping and sighing. They
leave the dead corpse untouched in the bed, to acquaint the criminal
Corigidores of Stremos with this pitiful accident, who come, and being amazed
at this bloody disaster and accident of Ferallo, they veiwing the infinity of
his Ladies tears, and the sorrowful complaints and exclamations of his
servants, as also considering their several depositions and examinations, and
seeing they found his chamber door fast locked, the key within side, and his
own bloody knife by him on his pillow, they all concur with them in opinion
about the manner and quality of his death, and do absolutely believe and
affirm, that he has desperately made himself a way, which opinion of theirs
is presently received, voyced, and rumored in Stremos, and in all the adjacent
parishes and country: and yet many curious wits (in regard of Bellinda's
youthful affections, and wanton disposition) speak very differently hereof.
And now does this our sorrowful young widow, (the better to support her fame
and reputation to the world) bury this her second husband Ferallo with all
requisite, ceremony, and decency.

But as the justice, and judgments of God (conducted by his divine pleasure,
and inscrutable providence) does many times go on slowly, but still soundly
and surely, so we must here again produce and bring forth our lame old
Soldier Roderigo to act another part on the stage and Theater of this
history. He is still the same man, and still retains his same former opinion,
that undoubtedly it was some dead child, or bastard which he saw the Lady
Bellinda to throw into the pond, and his heart incessantly prompted by his
suspicion, does still confidently suggest and assure him, that that bloody
cloth of hers contained some secret, and invelloped some shameful mystery
toward her, which he thinks all the water of the pond could not deface or
wash away: so that he now understanding of her husband Ferallo's disasterous
bloody end, does no way diminish but rather every way augment this his
suspicion and jealousy hereof. We must further understand, that Roderigo (the
better to refresh his body, to replenish his purse, and to repair his
apparel, stays so^e three weeks in Stremos, and although he be a Soldier
and have his sword by his side, yet being out of action and pay, he is not
ashamed to beg the alms and courtesies of the Gentlemen, Ladies and
Gentlewomen both in and ne ereabout that city. Among the rest understanding
of the Lady Bellinda's great wealth and dignity, he therefore hopes, that her
new sorrows and mourning for the untimely death of her husband, will now mak^
her as compassionate to his poverty in her house, as lately she was
discourteous and uncharitable to him in the fields: whereupon he repaires
thither to her, but for three days together, he is not so happy to speak
with her, or to see her, but being still pressed by his poverty, and again
emboldned by the consideration of what he saw her cast into the pond, he the
fourth day finds her walking in the next meadow adjoining to her house,
attended by two of her menservants, and two waiting Gentlewomen all clad in
mourning apparel: when (with a boldness worthy of a poor distressed
Soldier) he advances to the Lady Bellinda, where (interrupting her private
walks, and distracting her secret thoughts and meditations) he with much
observance again begges some charity of her, whereat she being offended,
because her heart and mind neither thought, nor cared for an old Soldier, but
were wholly fixed on some desired new Gallant young husband, she very
cholerikly disdaines him and his request, and with much passion and indignation
(to use her own words) commands her servants to see this bold beggarly
Soldier depart and pack away, both from her and her house. Roderigo hearing
these her harsh and discourteous speeches, and seeing her servants unkind usage
and enforcements toward him, he with much discontent and choler leaves her
house, but (in requital thereof) vows that his revenge shall not so soon
leave her: for this her second affront to him puts him all in choler and fire
toward her, so that he vows to God, and swears to himself to use the best
of his power, and to work the chiefest of his wits to perpetrate her disgrace.
When secretly and effectually informing himself from others, that Don Gaspar
de Mora, who was nephew, and general heir to her first Lord and husband Don
Alonso de Mora, was at great variance and bitter contention in suit of law with
his aunt Bellinda about some lands, and much rich movables and Utensils which
she unjustly detained from him, and therefore that he would be exceeding
glad to entertain any invention or proposition whatsoever, which might heave
her out of the quiet enjoying and possession thereof, and thereby procure her
utter disgrace and ruin. He repaires to him, and secretly (yet constantly)
acqaints him; that some three weeks since, and the very morning, that Don
Ferallo was found murdered in his bed, he saw the Lady Bellinda his wife to
throw a white and bloody linen cloth into the pond, which was some half
quarter of a league from her house: wherein God and his conscience told him,
she had wrapped and drowned some bastard infant either of hers, or of one of her
waiting Gentlewomans, adding withal that he could not possibly have any peace
of his thoughts before he had imparted it to him, to the end, that he might
reveal it to the criminal judges (or Corigidores) of Stremos to hunt out and
examine the truth thereof.

Don Gaspar de Mora does as much rejoice as wonder at this unexpected news,
and because his inveterate malice to his aunt (in law) Bellinda perswads him
rather to believe than doubt it, therefore (as malice is still naturally swift
and prone to revenge) being confident of the truth hereof, he leaves all other
business, rides over to Stremos and acquaints the Corigidores herewith, and
taking Roderigo likewise along with him, he also fails, not very resolutely
to affirm, and most constantly to confirm it to them; which these wise and
grave judges understanding, they in honor to Gods service and glory, and in
true obedience to his sacred justice (without any delay or procrastination)
take Don Gasper de Mora, the old Soldier Roderigo, and some three or four
expert Swimmers along with them, and with have and secrecy speed away to the
pond; wherein after those Swimmers had been a quarter of an hour, and
curiously busked and dived in most places thereof to find out this cloth, at
l^ (by the mercy and providence of God) one of them diving far better than the
rest, sees and finds it, and swimming with his left hand, brings it a shore in
his right hand to the Corigidores, who much admiring and rejoicing thereat,
cause it presently to be opened, where (contrary to all their expectations,)
they find no dead child, but (as we have formerly understood) a cambricke
smock, as yet all spotted and stained with blood, and tied fast with a blew
silk garter, and in it a very sharp and bloody razor, with a brass weight
tied in all this purposely to sink it in the pond. The Corigidores, Gaspar De
Mora, and all the rest, are amazed and astonished at the sight of these bloody
evidences: when Roderigo again constantly swearing to them, that he saw the
Lady Bellinda (with her own hands) throw this little linen fardell into that
pond, the very same morning that her husband Don Ferallo was found murdered
in his bed; and the malicious curiosity of Gaspar De Mora here finding the very
two first and last letters of her name in the cambricke smock; the Corigidores
then concur in one opinion (as so many lines which terminate in one Center)
that yet infalibly it was she and no other, who had so cruelly murdered her
husband Ferallo in his bed. Whereupon taking this bloody smock, razor, and
garter with them, they with much zeal and speed poast away to the Lady
Bellinda's house, to apprehend her for this her foul and lamentable murder,
where cruel hearted and lascivious Lady, she is so far from the consideration
of grace, or the thought and apprehension of any fear, as she fears none,
and which is worst of all, not the power and justice of God himself; for she
is so immodest in her heart, so lustful in her conversation, as
(notwithstanding her black mourning attire and apparel) that her first
husband was but lately dead, and now her second not as yet cold in his grave,
yet (with great variety of music) she is here now in her house singing,
dancing and revelling with diverse young Cavalliers, and Gallants both of the
city and country, as if she had no other care, thought or business, but how to
make choice of a third husband, who might amorously please her lustful eye and
heart, and of no less than a pair of Paramours and favorites who should
lasciviously content her wanton desires and affections.

But these wanton vanities, and vain and lascivious hopes of the Lady Bellinda
will now deceive her: for now the Lords appointed due time is come, wherein for
these her two horrible murders committed on the persons of her two husbands,
his divine and sacred Majesty is resolved to power down his punishments, and
to thunder forth his judgments upon her, to her utter shame and confusion. The
Corigidores resolutely enter her house, and then and there cause the Sergeants
to apprehend her prisoner, whereat being suddenly amazed, and infinitely
terrified, she weeps, sighs, and cries extremely. But those Cavalliers, (I
mean those her supposed lovers, and pretended favorites) who were there
singing and dancing with her, neither can or dare either affist, or rescue her.
Now the plumes of her pride and jollity are suddenly dejected and fallen to
the ground, yea her music is turned to mourning, her singing to sighs, and
her dancing triumph^ to tears. The enormity of her crime cause these officers
of justice, to see her conveyed to prison, without any respect of her beauty,
or regard of her sex and quality, where she has more leisure given her to
repent, than means how to remedy these her misfortunes.

The next morning she is sent for before her judges, who roundly charge her
for cruelly murdering her husband Don Ferallo in his bed, the which with many
tears and oaths she stoutly denies, then they show her those bloody
evidences, ^er cambricke smock, the razor, her blew garter, and the brass
weight, and also produce and confront Roderigo with her; who as before he had
affirmed, now he swears, he saw her throw this bloody linen fardell into the
pond, the very morning that her husband Don Ferallo was found murdered in his
bed: and although at the sight and knowledge hereof, she is at first
wonderfully appalled and daunted therewith, yet her courage is so stout, as
she again denies it with many profane and fearful asseverations, and
delights to hear her self make a tedious justification, and a frivolous
apology to her judges for her innocence. But those grave and prudent
Magistrates of justice, who (in zeal to Gods glory) have eyes not in vain in
their heads, will give no belief either to the sweetness of the Lady Bellinda's
youth, or to the sugar of her speeches and protestations, but for the
vindication of this crime, and of this truth, they adjudge her the very next
morning to the rack, where (such is her female fortitude) as she permits and
suffers her self to be fastened thereunto, with infinite constancy and
patience, as disdaining that the torments thereof, should extort any truth from
her tongue to the prejudice of her reputation, and to the shipwreck of her
safety and life, but herein she reckons too short of God, and beyond her self;
for she considers not that these torments are truly sent her from God, and
this her courage falsely lent and given her from Satan; for at the very first
wrench of the rack, and touch of the cord, finding it impossible that her
tender body and dainty limbs, can endure the cruelty of those tortures, God
puts this grace into her heart, that with many sighs and tears, she prays
her judges and tormentors to desist, and so publicly confesses, that it was
she, and only she who had murdered her husband Ferallo, and cut his throat
in his bed with that very same razor.

Upon which confession of hers; her judges (glorifiing God for the detection of
this cruel murder) they (for expiation thereof) do forthwith adjudge and
sentence this wretched and bloody Lady Bellinda, to be the next morning burnt
alive without the walls of Stremos, at the foot of the castle which is the
destined place of death for the like crimes and offenders, so she being by them
then again returned to prison, that night (in Christian charity) they send her
some Priests and Nuns, to direct and prepare her soul to heaved, for this
her bloody and unnatural crime was so odious to men, and so execrable to God,
that she could hope for no pardon of her life from her judges, although her
sorrowful old father Cursoro, with a world of tears threw himself to their
feet, and offered them all his lands and means to his very shirt to obtain it
for her.

All Stremos and the country there abouts resound and talk of this cruel
murdering of Ferallo, as also of his Lady Bellinda's condign condemnation to
death for the same, and the next morning at eight of the clock, they all
repair under the castle wall to see this execrable and unfortunate Lady there
in flames of fire, to act the last scoene and catastrophy of her life; she is
conducted thither by a Saint Claires Nun on her right hand, and a Saint Francis
Friar on her left, who jointly charge her upon peril of damnation, to
disburthen her conscience and soul before she dye, of any other capital
crime whereof she know^s (...) sel^ guilty, the which she solemnly and
religiously promises them; about nine of the clock she is brought to the
stake, where she sees her self empalled and surrounded first with many fagots,
and then with a very great concourse and confluence of people: here she is so
irreligious in her vanity, that she had cast of her blackes and mourning, and
purposely dighted her self in a rich yellow satin gown, wrought with flowers
of silver, a large set ruff about her neck, and her head covered over with a
pure white tiffney veil laced and wro^ht with rich cut-worke, as if she cared
more for her body than her soul, as if her pride and bravery would carry her
sooner to heaven, than her prayers and repentance: or as if the prodigal cost
and luster thereof, were able to diminish either her crime, or her punishment
in the eyes and opinions of her spectators. But contrariwise, the very first
sight of her sweet youth, and pure and fresh beauty, and then the consideration
of her foul crime, for murdering her own husband, do operate and work
differently upon all their affections and passions, some pitying her for the
first, but all more justly condemning her for the second. When as soon as
their clamorous sobs and speeches were past, and blown over, and that both the
Friar and Nun had taken their last leave of her, then (after she had shed many
tears on earth, and sent and evaporated many sighs to heaven) she wringing
her hands (whereon she had a pair of snow white gloves) and casting up her
eyes toward God, at last with a faltring, and fainting voice spoke thus.

It is my crime and your charity good people, which has conducted you hither
to see me a miserable Gentlewoman here to dye miserably. And because it is now
no longer time for me, to dissemble either with God or the world, therefore to
save my soul in heaven, though my body perish here in earth, I (with much
grief, and infinite sorrow) do truly and freely confess both to God and you,
that I am not only guilty of one murder, but of two: for as I now lately cut
my second husband Ferallo's throat, so I was so vild and wretched heretofore,
as to poison my first Lord and husband De Mora. At which report and confession
of this execrable Lady Bellinda (in regard of the greatness of her Lord De
Mora's descent and Nobility) all this huge concourse of people (who are
sensibly touched with grief and sorrow) make a wonderful noise and outcry
thereat, and now in regard of this soul and double crime of hers, they look
on her with far more contempt, and far less pity than before. But she being
as patient as they are clamorous hereat, and seeing their cries, now again
cried down, and wel^nigh drowned and hushed up in silence, recollecting her
thoughts, and again composiing her countenance, she again very sorrowfully
continues her speech to them thus. I well know, and indeed I heartily grieve
to remember, that these two foul and cruel murders of mine, make me
unworthy either to tread on the face of earth, or to look up to that of
heaven, and yet in the midst of these my miseries I have this consolation
left me, that in favor of my true confession, and religious repentance
thereof to God, that God can be as indulgent and merciful to me, as I have
been impious and sinful to him; the which that I may obtain, I beseech you
all who are here present, to join your prayers with me, and to God for me,
and this is the last charity which I will beg and implore of you. Now because
example is powerful, and no example so strong and prevalent, as the words of
the dying to the living, therefore (to Gods glory, and mine own shame) give
me leave to tell you that two things especially brought and induced me to
commit these foul ^ers, as they have now justly brought me ^er to suffer
death for committing them, first my neglect of prayer, and omission to serve
and fear God duly as I ought to have done. Secondly, the affecting and
following of my lascivious and lustful pleasures, which I ought not* to have
done. The neglect of the first proved the bane of my soul, and the performance
and practice of the last, the contagion and poison of my life, and both these
two sins conjoined and lincked together, enforce me now here to dye, with as
much misery and infamy, as without them I might have lived (and pe^chance
lived long^ in earthly happiness and prosperity. O therefore good people, beware
by my woeful example, let my crime be your integrity, my fall your rising,
and my shipwreck your safety. As I bear not hypocrisy in my tongue, so I
will not bear malice in my heart. Therefore from my heart I forgive Roderigo
for telling Gaspar de Mora he saw me cast some bloody linen in the pond. I
also forgive Gaspar de Mora for informing the Corig^dores thereof, and they for
so justly condemning me to death. I also pray my father and parents to forgive
me these my foul crimes, and both to pardon and forget the dishonor and
scandal which the infamy of my death may reflect and draw on them. And now I
recommend you all to Gods best favor and mercy, and my soul to receive
salvation in his blessed kingdom of glory.

The Lady Bellinda having finished this her speech, the hearing and
consideration thereof engendered much pity and compassion in the hearts, and
caused a world of tears in the eyes of the beholders; and now she prepares
her self for death. Here she takes off her rings from her fingers, and her
pearl bracelets from her arms, and (as a token of her love) gives them to her
waiting Gentlewoman Hellena, who is present and not far from her, most bitterly
sobbing and weeping because she can weep no more for the death of this her
dear Lady and mistress, who now repeates many private prayers and Ave Mary's to
her self, when taking a solemn, and sorrowful farewell of all the world, she
pulls down her veil over her snow-white cheeks, and then often crossing her
self with the sign of the cross, and saying her last in manus ^ua, the
executioner (with a flaming torch) sets fire to the straw and fagots, whereof
she presently dies, and in less than an hour after, her body is there
consumed and burnt to ashes, at which all that great concourse of people and
spectators, (in favor to her youth and beauty) as much affecting the piety of
her death, as they hate and detest the cause thereof, I mean the infamy and
cruelty of her life, do with far more sorrow than joy give a great shout and
outcry. When the judges of that city now upon knowledge of this Ladies first
horrible crime of poisoning her first Lord and husband Don Alons^ De Mora, they
in detestation thereof, being not able to add, either worser infamy, or more
exquisite, and exemplary torments to her living body, they therefore partly to
be revenged on her dead ashes, do cause them curiously to be gathered up,
and so in the same place (by the common hangman) before all the people, to be
scattered and thrown in the air, where at they rejoice, and praise God, to
see the world so fairly rid, of so foul and bloody a female monster.

And thus was the untimely, (and yet deserved) end of this lascivious and
cruel hearted Lady Bellinda; and in this sharp manner did the Lord of heaven
and earth triumph in his just revenge and punishments against her, for these
her two foul and inhumane crimes of murdering her two husbands. May God (of
his best and divinest mercy) make this her history and example, to serve as a
crystal mirror for all men, and especially for all women, (of what condition
and quality so ever.

And now Christian reader, having (by Gods most gracious assistance and
providence) here finished this entire, and last volume of my six books of
tragical histories, if thou find that thou reap any profit, or thy soul any
spiritual benefit by the reading and perusal thereof, then (in the name and
fear of God) I beseech thee to join thy prayers and piety with mine, that as
in Christian religion and duty we are bound, so for the same, we may jointly
ascribe unto God, all possible power, might, Majesty, thanksgiving, dominion,
and Glory both now and for ever.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
Augusti XVIII. 1634.
REcensui hunc librum cui titulus (The sixth book of the triumphs of Gods
revenge upon Murder) qui quidem liber continet folia 99 aut circiter, in
quibus (exceptis quae delentur) nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus
contrarium, quo minus cum publica utilitate imprimi queat, sub ea tamen
condition, ut si non intra annum proxime sequentem typis mandetur, haec
licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood Capell. domest. Archiep. Cant.


