THE WHOLE AND true discouerye of Terra Florida, (englished the Flourishing
land.) Containing as well the wonderful strange natures and manners of the
people, with the merueylous commodities and treasures of the country: As also
the pleasant Ports, Havens, and ways thereunto Never found out before the
last year 1562.

Written in French by Captain Ribauld the first that whollye discovered the
same. And now newly set forth in English the.xxx. of May. 1563.

printer's device: emblem showing a boy with wings on his right arm and with
his left hand holding or fastened to a weight; a crowned and bearded figure
with outstretched right arm appears in clouds above and to the right

Prynted at London by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Hacket.

The true discovery of terra Florrida.
WHere as in the year of our Lord God 1562. it pleased God to move your
honor, to choose and appoint us, to discover and vewe a certain long coast
of the West India, from the head of the land called Laflorida, drawyng toward
the N^^^^ ^^^t, unto the head of Brittons, dist^^^ ^^^m the said head of
Laflorida 900. leagues, or there about: to the end we might certify you and
make true report of the temperature, fertility, Ports, Havens, Ryuers, and
generally of all the commodities that be seen and found in that land, and also
to learn what people were there dwelling, which thing you have long time ago
desired, being stirred thereunto by this zeal. That France might one day
through new discoueries have knowledge of strange countries and also thereof
to receive (by means of continual trafique) rich and inestimable
commodities, as other nations have done by taking in hand such far nauigations,
both to the honor and prowess of their kings and princes, and also to the
increase of great profit and use to their common wealths, countries and
dominions, which is most of all without comparison to be considered and
esteemed. It seems well that ye have been stirred hereunto even of god above,
and led to it by the hope and desiere you have that a number of brutishe people
and ignorant of Jesus Christ, may by his grace come to some knowledge of his
holy laws and ordinances. So therefore it seems that it has pleased God by
his godly providence to reserve the care which he has had of their salvation
until this time, and will bring them to our faith, at the time by himself alone
forseen and ordained. For if it were needful to show how many from time to
time have gone about to find out this great land, and to inhabit there: who
nevertheless have always failed and been put by from their entention and
purpose: some by fear of shipwracks, and some by great winds and tempests that
drove them back to their merueylous grief. Of the which there was one a very
famous stranger named Sebastian Cobote an excellent Pylot sent thither by king
Henry, the year 1498. and many others, who never could attain to any
habitation nor take possession there of one only foot of ground, nor yet
approach or enter into these parties and fair rivers into the which God has
brought us. Wherefore, my lord, it may be well said that the living God has
reserved this great land for your poor servants and subjects as well to
the end they might be made great over this poor people, and rude nation: as
also to approve the former affection which our Kings have had unto this
discovery.

For the late king Fraunces the first (of happy memory) a prince endued with
excellent virtues. The year 1524. sent a famous and notable man a Florentine,
named Messire Iehan de Varran, to search and discover the West parts as far as
might be: Who departing from Deep with two vessels little differing from the
making and burden of these two Pinnaces of the kings, which your honor has
ordained for this present navigations. In the which land they have found the
elevation the Pole, an viij. degrees. The country (as he writes) goodly,
fruitful, and so good temperature, that it is not possible to have the better:
being then as yet of no man seen, nor discerned. But they being not able to
bring to pass at this first voyage that which he had intended, nor to arrive
in any Port, by reason of sundry inconveniences, which commonly happen, were
constrained to return into France: where after his arrival, he never ceased
to make suite until he was sent thither again, where at last he died. The
which occasion gave small courage to send thither again, and was the cause that
this laudable enterprise was left of, until the year 1534. at which time his
Majesty (desiring always to enlarge his kingdom, countries and dominions, and
thaduauncing and case of his subjects) sent thither a Pilot of S. Mallows, a
Briton, named James Cartiere, well seen in the art and knowledge of navigations,
and especially of the North parts, commonly called the new land, led by some
hope to find passage that ways to the South seas: Who being not able at his
first going to bring any thing to pass, that he pretended to do: was sent
thither again the year following, and likewise le sire Hemerall, and as it is
well known they did inhabit and bylde, and plant the kings arms in the North
part a good way in the land, as far as Tauadu and Ochisaon Wherefore my Lord
trust justly that a thing so commendable and worthy to be with good courage
attempted that God would guide and keep us, desiring always to fulfill your
commandment. When we had done your business, and made our preparations
the.xviij. day of February 1562, through the favor of God we departed with our
two vessels out of the haven of Claue de Grace into the road Caur: and the next
day hoysted up sail (the wind being in the East) which lasted so five days,
that we could not arrive at the nauch that is from between the coast of
Britton and England and the Isles of Surlinos and Wiskam: So that the Wind
blowyng with great furye and tempest out of the West, and West Southwest,
altogether contrary to our way and course, and all that we could do was to
none effect, besides the great danger of breaking of our Mastes, as also to
be hyndered in our other labors. Wherefore as well to shonne many other
inconveniences, which might follow to the prejudice and breach of our viage,
having regard also to the lykely danger of death, that some of our gentlemen
and soldiers being troubled with fevers and whot sickennesses, might have
fallen into: as also for other considerations, we thought good to fall into the
road of Breast in Britain, to set there our sick folk on land, and suffer the
tempest to pass. From whence (after we had tarried there two days) we
returned again to seaward to follow our navigations, so that (my Lord) albeit
the wind was for a long season very much against us, and troublesome: yet at
the end (God geuyng us through his grace and accustomed goodness a meetely
favorable wind) I determined with all diligence to prove a new course which
has not ben yet attempted: traversing ye seas of Octian 1800 leagues at the
least, which in deed is the true and short course that hereafter must be
kept, to the honor of our nation, reiectynge the old conserved opinion,
which to long time has been holden as true.

Which is, that it was thought a thing impossible to have the wind at East,
Northest, and keep the race and course we enterprised, but that we should be
driven toward the region of Africa, the Isles of Canaria, Madera, and other
lands thereabouts. And the cause why we have been the more provoked and assured
to take this new race, has been because that it seemed to every one that we
might not pass nor go in this navigations without the sight and touching of the
Antillies and Lucaries, and there soiourne and take fresh waters and other
necessaries, as the Spaniards do in their voyage to new Spain: whereof
(thanked be God) we have had no need, nor entered the channel of Roham: which
has been thought impossible. Forseing also that it was not expedient for us to
pass through the Islands, as well to shon many inconveniences that might happen
in passing that way (whereof springs nothing but innumerable quarrels
pleadings, confusions, and breach of all worthy enterprises and godly
nauigations, whereof ensues complaints and odious questions between the
subjects of the king and his friends and alies) as also to the end they might
understand that in the time to come (God having showed us such graces, as
these his wonderful benefits first showed to the poor people of this so
goodly new framing people, of so gentle a nature, and a country so pleasant
and fruitful, lacking nothing at all that may seem necessary for man's food)
we would not have to do with their Islands, and other lands: which (for that
they first discovered the^) they keep with much ielosye: trustyng that if God
will suffer the king (through your persuation) to cause some part of this
incomparable country to be peopled and inhabited with such a number of his
poor subjects as you shall think good, there never happened in the memory
of man so great and good commodity to France as this, and (my Lord) for
many causes, whereof a man is never able to say or write to the full, as under
the assured hope that we have always had in executing vprightlye that which I
had received in charge of you, God would bless our ways and nauigations.
After we had constantly and with diligence in time convenient determined upon
the way, we should have thought it noisome and tedious to all our company, if
it had before been known unto any without tourninge or wavering to or fro from
their first entention. And not withstanding that Satan did often what he
could to sow many obstractes troubles and lettes, according to his accustomed
subtelties, so it is come to pass, that God by his only goodness has given us
grace, to make the furthest art and trauars of the seas, that ever was made in
our memory or knowledge, in longitude from the East to the West: and
therefore was it commonly said both in France and Spain, and also among us,
that it was impossible for us safely to arrive thither, whither the Lord did
conducte us. All which persuaded but of ignorance and lack of attempting:
which we have not been afraid to give adventure to prove. Albeit that all
Mariners Cards do set the Coasts with shipwracks without Ports or Ryuers:
which we have found otherwise as it follows.

Thursdaye the last of Apryll at the break of the day, we discovered and
clearly perceived a fair coast, stretchynge of a great length covered with an
infinite number of high and fair trees, we being not past 7 or 8 leagues from
the shore, the country seeming unto us plain without any show of hills, and
approaching nearer within four or five leagues of the land, we cast an Anchor
at ten fadome water, the bottom of the Sea being plain with much Ocias
and fast hold on the Southe side, as far as a certain point or Cape
situate under that Latitude of nine and twenty degrees and a half, which we
have named Cape Francois.

We could espy neither River nor Bay, wherefore we sent our Botes furnished
with men of experience, to sound and know the coast nere the shore: who
retournyng to us about one of the clock at after noone, declared that they had
found among other things.viij. fadom of water at the hard bancke of the sea.
Whereupon having diligently wayed up our Ankers, and hoysted up our sails with
wind at will we sailed and vewed the coast all alonge with unspeakable
pleasure, of the odorours smell and beauty of the same. And because there
appeared unto us no sign of any Port, about the setting of the Sun we cast
anchor again: which done, we did behold to and fro the goodly order of the
Woods wherewith God has decked every way the said land. Then perceyuyng
toward the North a leaping and a breaking of the water, as a stream falling
out of the land into the sea. For the which we set up sails again to double
the same while it was yet day. And as we had so done, and passed beyond it:
there appeared unto us a fair entrye of a fair River which caused us to cast
Anchor again there nearer the land: to the end the next day we might see what
it was, and though that the wind blew for a time vehemently to the shoreward:
yet the hold and ankerage was so good, that one cable and one anchor held us
fast, with out danger or slydyng.

The next day in the morning, being the first of May, we assayed to enter this
Port, with two new Barges and a Boat well trymmed, fyndyng little water Barges
which might have astonished and caused us return back to shipborde, if God
had not speedely brought us in. Where fyndyng.536. fadome water, entered into a
goodly and great River, which as we went found to increase still in depth and
largenes, boiling and roryng through the multitude of all kind of fyshe. This
being entered we perceived a great number of the Indians inhabitants there,
coming alonge the sands and sea banckes, coming near unto us, without any
t-akyng of fear or doubt, showing unto us the easiest landyng place: and
thereupon we geuyng them also on our parts thanks of assurance and
frendlinesse. Forthwith one of appearaunce, out of the best among them, brother
unto one of their Kings, or governors, commanded one of the Indians to enter
into the water: and to approach our boats to show us the coasts landing
place. We seeing this (without any more douting or difficulty) landed, and the
messenger (after we had rewarded him with some lookyng glass, and other pretty
things of small value) ran incontinently toward his Lord: Who forth with
sent me his Gyrdle, in token of assurance and friendship, which Gyrdle was made
of red leather, as well covered and colored as was possible: and as I began to
go toward him, he set forth and came and received me gentlye, and raised after
his manner all his men, following with great silence and modesty: yea more then
our men did. And after we had a while with gentle usage congratulated with him:
we fell to the ground a little way from them, to call upon the name of God,
and to beseech him to continue still his goodness toward us, and bring to the
knowledge of our Savior Christ this poor people. While we were thus praying
(they sitting upon the ground, which was strawed and dressed with Baye bows)
beheld and harkened unto us, very attentiuelye without either speaking or
moving: and as I made a sign unto their king, lifting up mine arm, and
stretching forth one finger, only to make them look up to heauenward. He
likewise liftinge up his arm toward heaven put forth two fingers: whereby it
seemed that he made us to understand, that they worshipped the Sun and the
Moon for Gods: as afterward we understood it so. In the mean time their
numbers increased, and thither came the Kings brother, that was first with us,
their mother, wives, sisters and children, and being thus assembled, they
caused a great number of Baye boughs to be cut, and therewith a place to be
dressed for us, distant from theirs two fadom. For it is their manner to talk
and bargain sitting: and the chief of them to be aparte, from the meaner
sort, with a show of great obedience to their Kings, Superiors, and Elders.
They be all naked, and of a goodlye stature, mighty, fair, and as well shapen
and proporcioned of body, as any people in the world: very gentle,
curteyse, and of a good nature.

The most part of them cover their Raynes and priuities with fair Hearts
skynnes, painted most commonly with sundry colors: and the fore part of
their body and arms, be painted with pretye devised works, of Azure, red,
and black, so well and so properly as the best Painter of Europe could not
amend it. The women have their bodies painted with a certain Herb like unto
Moss, whereof the Ceder trees, and all other trees be always covered. The men
for pleasure do always trymme them selves therewith, after sundry fashions:
They be of Tauney color, Haulke nosed and of a pleasant countenance. The
women be well favored, and will not suffer one dishonestly to approach to
near them. But we were not in their houses for we saw none at that time.

After we had tarried in this North side of the River the most part of the day
(which River we have called May for that we discovered the same the first
day of the Month) we congratulated, made aliaunce, and entered into amity
with them, and presented the King and his brethren with Gowns of Blewe clothe
garnyshed with Yelowe Flouredeluces. And it seemed that they were sorye for our
departure: so that the most part of them entered into the water up to the
neck, to set our Boats a flote.

Putting into us sundry kind of fishes, which with merueylous speed they
ran to take in their paks, made in the water with great Reeds, so well and
conningly set together, after the fashion of a Laberinthe, or Maze, with so
many turns and crokes, as it is impossible to do it without much conning and
industry.

But desyring to imploye the rest of the day on the other side of this River,
to view and know those Indians that we saw there. We trauersed thither, and
without any difficulty landed amongst them, who received us very gently and
with great humanity: putting us of their fruits, even into our Boats,
Molberies, Raspis, and such other fruits, as they found ready by the way.

Soon after this came thither the king with his brethren and others with bows
and arrows in their hands, using therewithal a goodly and a grave fashion,
with their behavior right souldierlyke, and as warlyke boldness as may be. They
were naked and painted as the other, their hear likewise long, and trussed up
(with a lace made of herbs) to the top of their heads: but they had neither
their wives nor children in their company. After we had a good while louynglye
entertened and presented them with like gifts of habersher wares, cutting
hokes and hatchets and clothed the king and his brethren with like robes, as we
had given to them on the other side: we entered and viewed the country
thereabouts, which is the fairest, fruitfullest, and pleasantest of all the
world, aboundynge in honye, venison, wild foul, forestes, woods of al sorts,
Palm trees, Cypres, and Cedres, Bays the highest and greatest, with also the
fairest vines in all the world, with Grapes according, which without natural
art and without man's help or trimming will grow to tops of Oks, and other
trees that be of a wonderful greatness and heyght. And the sight of the fair
Meadows is a pleasure not able to be expressed with tongue: full of Hernes,
Curlues, Bitters, Mallardes, Egrepths, Wodkockes, and all other kind of small
birds: With Hearts, Hyndes, Buckes, wild Swyne, and all other kinds wild
beasts, as we perceived well both by their footyng there, and also
afterward in other places, by their cry and rorynge in the night.

Also there be Connies and Hares: Silk worms in merueylous number, a great
dell fairer and better, then be our silk worms. To be short, it is a thing
unspeakable to consider the things that be seen there, and shall be found
more and more, in this incomparable land, which never yet broken with Ploughe
yrons, brings forth all things according to his first nature, wherewith the
eternal God endewed it. About their houses they labor and till the ground,
sowyng their fields with a grain called Mahis, whereof they make their meal:
and in their Gardens they plant beans, gourds, cocumbers, citrous, peason, and
many other fruits and roots unknown unto us. Their spades and mattocks be
made of Wood, so well and fitly as is possible: which they make with certain
stones, oyster shelles and muscles, wherewith also they make their bows and
small lances: and cut and polyshe all sorts of Wood, that they imploye
about their byldings, and necessary use: There grows also many Walnut
trees, Hasell trees, Cheritrees, very fair and great.

And generally, we have seen there of the same Simples and herbs that we have
in France, and of the like goodness, savor and taste. The people be very
good Archers, and of great strength: Their bow strings are made of Leather,
and their Arrows of Reeds which they do head with the Teeth of fyshes. As
we now demanded of them concerning the land called Seuola, whereof some have
written not to be far from thence, and to be situate within the land, and
toward the Sea called the south Sea.

They showed us by signs that which we understood well enough, that they
might go thither with their Boats (by Ryuers) in twentye days. They that have
written of this kingdom and town of Seuola, and other towns and kingdoms
thereaboutes, say that there is great abundance of gold and silver, precious
stones, and other great riches: and that the people had their arrows headed
(instead of iron) with sharp poynted Turquesies. Thus the night approchynge,
it was convenient for us to return by day a shypborde. We took leave of
them much to their greief, but more to ours without comparison, for that we
had no mean to enter the ryuers with our ship. And albeit, it was not their
custom either to eat or drink from the Sun rising till his going down:
yet the king openly would needs drink with us, praying us very gently to give
him the cup where out we had dronk: and so making him to understand that we
would see him again the next day, we retired to our ships, which lay above
six leagues from the haven to the sea.

The next day in the morning we returned to land again, accompanied with the
Captains, Gentlemen, and Soldiers, and other of our small trope: carrying with
us a Pillour or Column of hard stone, our Kings arms graued therein, to
plant and set the same in the enterye of the Port in some high place, where it
might be easily seen, and being come thither before the Indians were
assembled, we espied on the south side of the River a place very fit for
that purpose, upon a little hill compassed with Cypres, Bays, Paulmes and
other trees, with sweet smelling and pleasant shrubbes. In the middle whereof
we planted the first bound or limitte of his Majesty. This done perceiving
our first Indians assembled, not without some mislyking of those on the South
part, where we had set the limet, who tarried for us in the same place where
they met with us the day before, seemyng unto us that there is some enimitie
between them and the others. But when they perceived our long tarying on this
side, they ran to see what we had done in that place where we landed first,
and had set our limit: which they viewed a great while without touching it any
way, or abassing, or ever speakinge to us thereof at any time after. Howebeit
we could skant depart but as it were with grief of mind from this our first
alliance, they rowing unto us al along the river from al parts and presenting
us with some of their heart skyns, painted and unpainted, meal, little cakes,
fresh water, roots like unto Rinbabe which they have in great estimation, and
make thereof a potion of medicine: also they brought little baggs of red colors
and some small spices like unto Vire, perceiving among them selves fair
things painted as it had been with grain of scarlet, showing unto us by signs
that they had in the land gold and silver and copper: whereof we have brought
some. Also lead like unto ours which we showed. Also turquesses and great
abundance of pearls which as they declared unto us they took out of oysters,
whereof there is taken ever along the river side, and among the reeds, and in
the marches: and so merueylous abundance as is skant credible: and we have
perceived that there be as many and as fair pearls found there as in any
country of the world. For we saw a man of theirs as we entered into our
Boats, that had a pearl hangyng at a collar of Gold and Silver about his
neck, as great as an Acorne at the least. This man as he had taken fish in
one of their fishing packs thereby brought ye same to our boats, and our men
perceiving the greatness thereof, one of them putting his finger toward it, the
man drew back, and would no more come near the Boat: not for any fear that
he had that they would have taken his Collar and Pearl from him, for he
would have given it them, for a lookyng Glass or a Knyfe:

But that he douted lest they would have pulled him into the Boat, and so by
force have carried him away. He was one of the goodliest men of all the
company. But for that we had no leisure to tarry any longer with them, the
day being well passed, which grieved us, for the commodity and great riches,
which as we understood and saw might be gotten there, desiring also to employe
the rest of the day with our second aliance the Indians on the Southsyde, as
we perceived them the day before, which still tarried looking for us: We passed
the river to their shore, where as we found them tarying for us, quietlye and
in good order, with new payntings upon their face, and feathers upon their
heads: the King with his Bow and Arrows lyinge by him, sat on the ground
strawed with boughs between his two brethren, which were goodlye men and well
shapen and of a wonderful show of actiuities, having upon their heads, one
here trussed upright of heyght, of some kind of wyld beast gathered and
wrought together with great conning, wrethed and fasted after the form of a
Diadem. One of them had hanging about his neck a round plate of red Copper
well polyshed, with one other lesser of Silver in the midest of it, and at his
ear a little plate of Copper wherewith they use to strype the sweet from their
bodies. They showed us that there was great store of this mettell within the
country, about five or six days journey from thence, both in the South side
and North side of the same Ryuers, and that they went thither in their Boats.
Which Boats they make but of one piece of a tree, working it whole so
conningly and featly, that they put in one of these Boats fiftene or twentye
persons, and go their ways very safely. They that row stand upright having
their ores short after the fashion of a Peele. Thus being among them they
presented us with meal dressed and baked, very good and well tasted, and of
good nourishment, also Beans, and fish, as Crabbes, Lobstars, Creuises, and
many other kind of good fishes, showing us by signs that their dwellyngs were
far of, and if their provision had been near hand, they would have
presented us with many other refreshynges.

The night now approchynge, we were feign to return to our ship, very
much to our grief: for that we durst not hazard to enter with our ship,
by reason of a Bar of Sand, that was at the enterye of the Port, how be
it, at a full Sea there is two fadome and a half of water at the least, and
it is but a leap over a surge to pass this Bar, not passing the length of
two Cables. And then forthwith every where within six or seven fadome water.
So that it makes a very fair haven, and ships of a mean burden from four
score to a hundred tons may enter therein at all floods, yea of a far
greater burden, if there were French men dwelling there that might skoure the
entrye as they do in France: for there is nothing lacking for ye life of man.
The situatio^ is under the elevation of xxx. degrees, a good climat healthful,
and of a good temperature, merueylous pleasant, the people good, and of a good
and amiable nature, which wyllingly will obaye: yea be content to serve those
that shall with gentleness and humanity go about to allure them, as it is
needful for those yt be sent thither hereafter so to do, and as I have charged
those yt be left there to do, to thend they may ask and learn of them where
they take their gold, copper, and turquesses, and other things yet unknown
unto us: by reason of the time we soiourned there. For if any rude or rigorous
means should be used toward this people, they would fly hither and thither
through the Woods and Forests, and abandon their habitations and countries.

The next day being the third day of May, desiring always to find out harbors
to rest in, we set up sail again: And after we had raunged the coast as near
the shore as we could, there appeared unto us about seven leagues of on this
side of the river of May a great opening or Bay of some river, whither with one
of our Boats we rowed, and there found one entry almost like that of the
river of May, and within the same as great a depth, and as large a deuidyng it
self into many great streams, great and broad stretchinges toward the high
land, with many other less, that divide country into fair and great lands
and great number of small and fair Meadows. Being entered into them about
three leagues, we found in a place very commodious, strong, and pleasant of
situation, certain Indians, who received us very gently: How be it, we being
somewhat near their houses, it seemed it was somewhat against their good
wylles that we went thither, for at their cries and noyses they made their
wives and children and household stuff to be carried into the Woods: How be it
they suffered us to go into their houses, but they themselves would not
accompany us thither. Their houses be made of Wod fitly and close, set upright
and covered with Reeds: the most part of them after the fashion of a Pauilion.
But there was one house amongs the rest very long and broad, with settels
round about made of Reeds trimly couched together, which serve them both for
beds and seats, they be of heyght two foot from the ground, set upon great
round pyllers painted with red, yelow, and blew, well and trimly polished:
some sort of this people perceiving that we had in no manner wise hurted their
dwellings nor gardens which they dressed very diligently, they returned all
unto us before our inbarking, seeming very well contented by their giving unto
us water, fruits and Heart skyns. It is a place wonderful fertile, and of
strong situation, the ground fat so that it is likely yt it would bring forth
Wheat and all other corn twice a year, and the commodities for liuelyhode, and
the hope of more riches, be like unto those we found and considered upon the
river of May, without coming into the sea: this arm does divide, and makes
many other Isles of May, as also many other great Islands: by the which we
travel from one Island to another, between land and land. And it seems ye
men may sail without danger through all the country, and never enter into
the great sea, which were a wonderful advantage. This is the land of Cherere
whereof some have written, and which many have gone about to find, for the
great riches they perceived by some Indians to be found there. It is set under
so good a climate, that none of our men (though we were there in the hotest
time of the year, the Sun entering into Cancer) were troubled with any
sickenesses. The people there live long and in great health and strength, so
that the aged men go without staves, and are able to go and run like the
youngest of them, who only are known to be old by the wrinckles in their
face, and decay of sight. We departed from them very friendly, and with their
contentation. But the night ouertakyng us, we were constrained to lie in our
ships all that night, till it was day, floting upon this River which we have
called Seen, because that the enterye of it is as broad as from Hauer degrace
unto Honesleue. At the break of the day we espied out of the South side one of
the fairest, pleasauntst, and greatest medowe ground that might be seen, into
the which we went, finding at the very entrye a long, fair, and great
Lake, and an innumerable number of foot steps of great Hearts and Hyndes of
a wonderful greatness, the steps being all fresshe and new, and it
seems that the people do nouryshe them like tame Cattle in great Heardes:
for we saw the steps of an Indian that followed them.

The channel and depth of this River of Seyne, is on the side of the meadow
that is in the I Will of May. Being returned to our ships, we sailed to know
more and more of this coast, goying as nere the shore as we could. And as we
had sailed about six or seven leagues, there appeared unto us another Bay,
where we cast anchor, and tarying so all the night, in the morning we went
thither, and finding (by our sounding) at the entry many bancks and beatings,
we durst not enter there with our great ship, having named ye river Sum, which
is 8. 9. 10. 11. fadom depth, dividing it self into many great Islands, and
small goodly meadow grounds and pastures, and every where such abundaunce of
fish as is incredible, and on the West Northwest side, there is a great River
that comes from the country of a great length over: and another on the
Northeast side, which return into the sea. So that (my Lord) it is a country
full of havens, rivers, and Islands, of such fruitfulnes as can not with tongue
be expressed: and where in short time great and precious commodities might be
found. And besides this we discovered and found also 7. rivers more, as great
and as good, cutting and dividing the land into fair and great Islands. The
India^s inhabitants there be like in manners, and the country in fertillitie
apt and commodious through out to bear and bring forth plentifully all that
men would plant or sow upon it. There be every where the highest and greatest
Firtrees that can be seen, very well smelling, and whereout might be gathered
(with cutting the only bark) as much Rosen, Turpentine, and Frankensence, as
men would desire. And to be short there lacks nothing. Wherefore being not
able to enter and lie with our great vessels there, we could make no long
abiding, nor enter so far into the ryuers and countries as we would feign
have done: for it is well known how many inconveniences have happened unto
men, not only in attempting of new discoueries, but also in all places by
leauyng their great vessels in the sea, far from the land, unfurnished of
the heads and best men. As for the other rivers we have given them names as
follows: and unto the Islands joining unto them, the same name that the next
river unto it has, as you shall see by the portratures or Cards that I have
made thereof. As to the fourth name of Loire, to the fifte Charnet, to the
sixte Caron, to the seventh river Belle, to the eight river Graunde, to the
ninth port Royal, and to the tenth Belle Virrir.

Upon Whitsonday the xxvij. day of May, after we had perceived and considered
that there was no remedy, but ts assay to find the means to harber our
ships, as well to amend and trim them, as to get us fresh water, Wood, and
other necessaries, whereof we having opinion that there was no fayrer or
fytter place for the purpose, then port Royal. And when we had sounded the
entrye and the Channel (thancked be God) we entered safelye therein with our
ships, against the opinion of many, finding the same one of the fairest and
greatest Havens of the world.

How be it, it must be remembered least men approchyng near it within seven
leagues of the land, be abashed and affrayde on the Eastsyde, drawing toward
the Southeast, the ground to be flat, for nevertheless at a full Sea,
there is every where four Fadome water, keepyng the right Channel.

In this part there are many Ryuers of mean bygnesse and large, where
without danger the greatest ships of the world might be harbered, which
we found, no Indian inhabityng thereaboutes. The Port and Ryuers side is
nearer then ten or twelve leagues vpwardes into the countries, although it
be one of the goodlyest, best, and fruitfullest countries that ever was
seen, and where nothing lacks, and also where as good and likely
commodities be found as in other places thereby. For we found there a great
number of Pepertrees, the Pepper yet green, and not ready to be gathered: Also
the best water of the world, and so many sorts of fishes that ye may take them
without net or angle so many as ye will. Also an innumerable sort of wild
foul of all sorts, and in little Islands at the entrye of this haven, on the
East Northest side, there is so great number of Egreps that the busshes be all
white and covered with them, so that one may take of the young ones with his
hand as many as he will carye away. There be also a number of other fowls, as
Hernes, Bitters, Cuxlues. And to be short, there is so many small birds that
it is a strange thing to be seen. We found the Indians there more doubtful
and fearful then the others before. Yet after we had been in their houses, and
congregated with them, and showed curtesey to those that we found to have
abandoned there through boats meal, victual, and small household stuff, and
both in, not taking away or touching any part thereof, and in leaving in ye
place where they dressed their meat, Knyues, Loking glasses, little Beads of
glass, which they love and esteem above Gold and Pearls, for to hang them
at their ears and neck, and to give them to their wives and children; they
were somewhat emboldened.

For some of them came to our Boats, of the which we carried two goodly and
strong abourde our ships, clothyng and using them as gently as it was
possible. But they seized not day nor night to lament, and at length they
escaped away. Wherefore albeit, I was willing (according to your commandment
and memorial) to bring away some of them with us, on the Princes behalf and
yours, I forbear to do so for many considerations and reasons that they told
me, and for that we were in dout that (leaving some of our men there to
inhabit) all the country, men, women, and children, would not have seized to
pursue them for to have theirs again: seeing they be not able to consider and
way to what intent we should have carried them away: and this may be better
done to their contentation, when they have better acquaintance of us, and know
that there is no such cruelty in us, as in other people and nations, of whom
they have been beguyled under color of good faith: which doing in the end
turned to the doers no good. This is the river of Iordain in mine opinion,
whereof so much has been spoken, which is very fair and the country good,
both for the easy habitation, and also for many other things, which should be
to long to write.

The.xx. of May we planted another column or pillor graven with the kings arms
on the south side, in a high place, of thentry of a great river, which we
called Libourne: where there is a lake of fresh water very good, and on the
same side a little lower toward thentry of yt haue^ is one of ye fairest
fou^tains yt a man may drink of, which falls by violence down to ye river
from an high place out of a red and sandy ground, and yet for all that
fruitful and of good air, where it should seem yt the Indians have had some
fair habitation.

There we saw the fairest and the greatest vines with grapes according, and young
trees, and small woods, very well smelling, yt ever were seen: whereby it
appears to be the pleasantest and most commodious dwelling of all the world.
Wherefore (my lord) trusting you will not think it amiss (considering the
commodities yt may be brought thence) if we leave a number of men there, which
may fortify and provide themselves of things necessary: for in all new
discoueries it is ye chiefest thing yt may be done, at the beginning to
fortify and people the country. I had not so soon set forth this to our
company, but many of them affrayed to tarry there, yet with such a good will
and iolye courage, that such a number did thus offer themselves, as we had
much to do to stay their importunity.

And namely of our shipmaisters and principal Pylotes, and such as we could
not spare. How be it, we left there but to the number of thirty in all,
gentlemen, soldiers and mariners, and that at their own suite and prayer,
and of their own free wills, and by the advice and deliberation of the
gentlemen sent on the behalf of the Prince, and yours. And have left unto the
forhead and Rulers (following therein your good will) Captain Albart de la
Pierria, a soldier of long experience, and the first from the beginning did
offer to tarry. And further by their advice, choice and will, inskaled and
fortified them in an Island on the Northside, a place of strong situation and
commodious, upon a river which we named Chenonceau, and the habitation and
Fortress Charlefote.

After we had instructed and duly admonished them of that they should do (as
well for their manner of proceeding, as for the good and louinge behavior of
them) the.xj. day of the month of June last past, we departed from port Royal
mynding yet to range and view the coast until the.xl. degrees of the
elevation: But for as much as there came upon us troublesome and cloudy
weather, very incommodious for our purpose, and considering also among many
other things, yt we had spent our cables and furniture thereof, which is the
most principal thing that longs to them that go to discover countries,
where continually both night and day they must lie at anchor: also our
victuals being perished and spylte, our lack of Boateswaines to set forth our
row barges, and leave our vessels furnished. The declaration made unto us of
our Pyllots and some others that had before been at some of those places, where
we purposed to sail, and have been already found by some of the kings
subjects, the danger also and inconveniences that might thereof happen unto
us: and by reason of the great mistes and fogges whereof the season was already
come, we perceived very well where as we were, that we could do no good, and
that it was to late, and the good and fit season for to undertake this thing
already past. All these things thus well considered and wayed, and also for
that we thought it meet and necessary that your honor should with diligence
be advertised (through the help of God) to return homewardes to make
relation unto you of the effect of our navigations. Praying God that it may
please him to keep you in long health, and prosperity.

FINIS.
Prynted at London by Rouland Hall, for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at
his shop.


