THE SHIELDES OF THE EARTH.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE REVEREND Judges, Sir RICHARD HUTTEN and Sir
GEORGE CROOK, at the Assizes holden at North-hampton: February 25. 1634.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, Rector of the Church of Braunston in North-hampton Shire.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Robert Bostock, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the King's Head, 1636.

PSALM. 47. 9. The Shields of the Earth belong unto God: He is Greatly exalted.
THe Psalm is a Psalm of shouting and triumph at the proclaiming of a King.
At which solemnity the use of the people has been to clap their hands, 1
Reg. 1. 39.
to sound the trumpets, 2 Reg. 11. 12.
and with united acclamations to profess both their joy and their subjection.
The Gentiles are here called upon unto this duty and triumph of obedience,
verse. 1. 6. and great reason for it, in two respects. 1. So great is the King,
who is here proclaimed, as that he is able to make all his subjects, Kings too.
He chooses the excellency of Jacob for their inheritance, verse. 4. And that
was the Primogeniture and right of Government, Genesis 49. 3, 4. 10. 2. So Great a
King he is besides, as that he is able to subdue all the Princes of the earth
to his obedience, and make them gather together, or resort unto him, which is a
phrase expressing subjection, Genesis 49. 10. Hos. 1. 11.

But you will say, Is it then so strange a thing for one Prince to conquer
another? No, the greatness of Christ's Kingdom is this; Zach. 4. 6.
That Princes do voluntarily become his Subjects, not by might compelling
them, but by his Spirit persuading them; Not by Arms, but by Arguments, not by
Conquest, but by Conviction: The princes, the Voluntaries of the people are
gathered together; that is, are become obedient to the God of Abraham.

But how come Princes to be so flexible to terms of subjection? How come they
to be willing, nay, ambitious to stoop to another Scepter? How come the
Grandies of the world to be caught by fishermen, and young Lions to be led by a
little child, Isai. 11 6.
as the Prophet speaks? The reason of that follows in my Text, The Shields of
the Earth belong to God, and when he will be pleased to exalt himself, he can
easily subdue and persuade them.

Few there are of those whom I have looked into, who retaining the original
word, Shields, do not understand it in the same sense with the first word of
the verse, Princes. Calvin, I confess, and from him some others, though
approving this exposition as consonant to the scope of the Text, do yet
understand it in Abstracto. The Protection of the earth is of the Lord. Or, the
Lord is the Shields, that is, the manifold Protection of the earth. And so much
do I honor the judgment of that most learned Interpreter, that as he
acknowledges the other exposition to be consonant to the Text, so I shall not
altogether neglect his; but take both the Abstract and Concrete together, the
Protection, and the Protectors, the Office, and the Persons protecting the
Earth belong all to God.

But because I find, 1. The learned Lexicographers in the Hebrew tongue,
Pagnin and Shindler, both noting out this place in special, where Princes and
Magistrates are called Shields. 2. The learned Expositors, Bucer, Melancthon,
Musculus, Illyrious, Tirinus, Muis, with the Hebrew Doctors, Aben Ezra and
Kimchi taking the word here to note Princes. 3. Because I find the harmony of
the Scriptures, making way, and giving full allowance to this exposition, Hos.
4. 8. where Rulers are expressly called by the name of Shields; I shall, I hope,
with clear satisfaction to better judgments choose chiefly to insist on that
sense, as being in all confessions very pertinent to the scope of the Text, and
most suitable to the business of the Time.

Here then we have the Rulers of the Earth set forth by a double relation. The
one upward, they are Scuta Deo, they belong to God: The other downward, they
are Scuta Terrae, the Shields of the earth; and both these noting two things,
their Dignity, and their Duty. They belong to God, it is their honor that he
has Sealed them; they belong to God, it is their duty to be subject to him.
They are the Shields of the earth, it is their Honor that they are above
others; they are the Shields of the Earth, it is their duty to protect others.
And surely great reason they should do their duty, when they have honor and
dignity of their own to encourage and to support them in it. But there is a
further reason than that in the Text, namely the Honor of God: for when the
Rulers of the people do not only by the sacredness of their persons, but by
the holiness of their lives belong to God; when they are above the people, not
in honor only, to overtop them, but in love and righteousness to protect them*
too, then, never more vehementer exaltatur, the God of Israel is highly exalted.

This then is the sum of the words. A twofold Dignity, a twofold Duty, and
Gods honor the end and ground of all. Of all which by Gods gracious
assistance, with due respect to the time and your great business. And first of
their relation Upward, They belong to God, their office to God, their persons
to God.

1. Their Office, the Protection of the Earth belongs to God. The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, and all the Princes in the world are but his
Deputles and Vicegerents, He the Supreme and the maine Protector. It is not in
man, he that runs, nor he that wills, but mercy comes from God, Romans 9.
16. It is not in the Church, he that planteth, or he that waters, but the
increase comes from God, 1 Cor. 3. 7. It is not in the battle, the horse or the
rider, but safety comes from God, Prove. 21. 31. It is not in the State, the
wise man, nor the rich man, nor the mighty man, but judgment and kindness
come from God, Ier. 9. 23. In matters of judicature, He the Lawgiver to rule
the cause, Iam. 4. 12. He the Judge to hear it, Psalm. 50. 6. He the pleader
to argue it, Psalm. 35. 1. He the witness to confirm it, Mal. 3. 5. He the
King to determine and overruled it, and all to the purposes of safety and
Protection. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King, he will save us, Isai. 33. 22. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thy help, I will be thy King, Hos. 13. 10. It is the devils style
to be (...), an Accuser, it is Christ's, to be (...) an Advocate and Comforter.
It is the devils work to be Abaddon, a Destroyer, it is Christ's to be Goel, a
Redeemer. When it comes to punishing and pulling down, then he calls it Opus
alienum, a work strange unto him, Ier. 28. 21. He is not willing to afflict,
it comes not from his heart, Lam. 3. 33. But when he is to build up, to
protect, to show mercy, to be a Shield of the earth, then he delights in
that, Mic. 7. 18.

You see the Protection of the Earth belongs to God. 1. By his Providence, he
supporteth it, the same virtue being required to conserve the world which was
to create it. 2. By his Ordinance, he sets up and establishes those Orders
of Government which are to administer it. 3. By his Assistance and benediction,
he encourages and prospers the just and honorable endeavors of those that
are dispensers of Peace and Justice. Lastly, By the powerful restraint of his
Law, over the consciences of evil men, by the sweet influence of his Grace on
the souls of good men, by planting an awefull reverence, toward Authority,
in the minds of all men, by his secret and wonderful wisdom tempering and
reducing the various events and contingencies in the world, to his own
merciful ends of peace. By these and the like powerful operations, are
Churches and Commonwealths marvellously protected, amidst so many machinations
of Satan, so many mutinous and turbulent affections of men, so many jealousies,
and antipathies of States, so many principles of commotion and dissolution, as
a piece of rich and beautiful Arrasse is curiously wrought out of the mixture
of various and contrary colors. That every one which looks on may say,
Verily He must needs be a God which judges the Earth.

O Therefore let us all learn to rest upon this Protection, not to trust in
our own counsels, purses, policies, and machinations, The Name of the Lord is
the only strong Tower, for persons or States to fly unto. Without this, walls
of sea, and towers of munition, mines of India, and horses of Egypt,
mountains of brass, and men of Iron would do no service, afford no succor
or help at all. All the defenses of men, without God, are but a shadow. Their
Defense, their shadow is departed from them. Numb. 14. 9. Thus their office
belongs to God.

Next, their persons, they belong to God too. His own they are, and so he
calls them. Touch not mine Anointed, Psalm. 105. 16.

And his they are diverse ways. 1. By a singular and more special Propriety.
Other things belong so to God, as that men also under him, and by subordinate
interest and indulgence from him, have a right over them too. Psalm. 24. 1.
The Earth is the Lords, Psalm. 115. 16.
and the fullness thereof, but he has given it to the children of men. The
beasts of the forest, Psalm. 50. 10.
and cattle on a thousand mountains all his, Genesis 1. 28.
but he has subjected them all to man. It is not so here. Princes do so
belong to God, as that he holds all the propriety solely in himself,
transferreth it not upon any other. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 30. 33, 34.
A Deo secundi, post Deum primi, soli Deo subjecti, says Tertullian. There is
not a man between them and God, but he only that is man and God: Every soul
must be subject, therefore no soul is above them, Romans 13. 1.

2 His by Unction, by the Royal character and sacred signature, wherewith he
has marked them for himself, by his own Dixi, the Word of God which came
unto them, as our Savior speaks, John 10. 35. Inde potestas unde and spiritus,
Tertul. Apolog. Iren. lib. 5. c. 24.
So Tertullian, Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 4. cap. 33. and lib. 5. cap. 1. 21.
and an Ancienter than he, Cujus jussu homines, eius iussu reges. So Irenaeus,
Romans 13. 1.
and an Ancienter than he, the Powers that are, Dan. 2. 37.
are of God. So Saint Paul: and yet further, The God of heaven has given thee
a kingdom, so Daniel. And if you will yet go to the Ancientest of all, By me
Kings reign. So God himself, Prove. 8. 16. Cyrus an Heathen King, Rex erat,
ergo alium praeter Deum non timebat. Hieron. ad Eustoch. de virgin. Ambros.
Apolog. David. cap. 10. Cassiod. in Psalm. 50.
Saul an evil King, David an holy King, all these were Anointed Shields (to
use the phrase of the Prophet, Isai. 21. 5.) so they are all called, the first
by the Prophet Esaias, Justin. Martyr. Quaest. 142.
the other by Samuel, and the third by God himself.

3 His by immediate Representation; this honor is given them (...) To be Gods
both by name and office: So they are called, The gods of the people, Exodus 22.
28. Their Throne Gods Throne, 1 Chronicles. 29. 23. Their Scepter Gods Scepter, Exo.
4. 20. Their Judgment Gods Judgment, Deuteronomy. 1. 17: Not only all from him, but
all for him, and in his stead.

4 His by special care, and more particular protection and provision, Touch
not mine anointed. Not tactu cordis, with so much as an evil thought, either
of jealousy to suspect their actions, or of injury to wish hurt unto their
persons. Eccles. 10. 20. Not tactu oris, with so much as a repining or
calumniating tongue, to gnaw the names or honors of the Rulers of the people,
Exodus 22. 28. Much less with the fist of violence or the instruments of blood.
If one Anointed do but touch the skirt of another, that touch of a garment
will cause a blow upon his own heart, 1 Samuel 24. 5. It Is noted of the
Persians, Xenoph. Hellenic^^. lib. 11.
when they came into the presence of their Prince, they drew their hands into
their sleeves, in token both of reverence and loyalty: they would not have an
hand stirring while Majesty was in presence. Cursed therefore for ever be
Mariana his Quacunque Art, Marian. lib. 6. de Principe. Bellarm. lib. 5. de
Pont. Romans c. 7.
and Bellarmines Omni Ratione (Terms as wide as Hell, or the grave, to
comprehend any contrivance of mischief) whereby they touch to the quick, or
rather to the death, both the persons, and power, the lives and Crowns of Gods
Anointed.

5 His by Domination and Sovereign influence over their persons, wills,
counsels, designs, to order, to alter, to turn them all as rivers of water.
Nemo Principi leges scripsit. Plin. in Panegyr.
It is not within the power, nor beseeming the distance and duty of inferior
men to bend and draw down the minds of Princes unto their wills. But the Kings
heart is in Gods hand, and he can turn and fashion it as it pleases him,
Prove. 21. 1. Job 12. 24. Therefore when Nehemiah was to petition the King, he
first prayed to the God of heaven, who only was able to incline the heart of
the King to favor him. Nehem. 2. 4. and so Mordecai and Ester, Cap. 4. 16. 5.
2. and Jacob for his sons, when they were to return to Joseph* Genesis 43. 14.

Lastly, The Princes in the Text belong to God in a more sweet propriety then
all the former, namely by Religion and subjection to the yoke of Christ.
Because they gather themselves to the people of the God of Abraham, not only to
be Rulers, so Cyrus was, but, which is a more heavenly privilege than that, to
be Members of the Church of God; Isai. 49. 23. 60. 11. 16.
to be nursing fathers to the household of Christ, to kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
10. 11.
and to bow to his Scepter. We call not those Kings happy, says Saint
Austen, who have reigned long and conquered enemies, Sed qui potestatem suam
divinae Maiestati famulam faciunt, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 5. c. 24.
Who make their power serviceable to the Majesty of God. And he tells us of
Theodosius, Ecclesiae s^membrum esse magis quam in Terru regnare gaudebat.
ibid. cap. 26.
that godly Emperor, That it was more joy to him to be a member of the Church,
than a Monarch of the world. On which place we find noted the like example of
Lewis the devout amongst the French Kings, who professed himself more honored
at the Font, where he had been baptized for a Christian, than in the Throne
where he was Anointed for a King.

Thus now we have brought their first Dignity and their Duty together.
Gerendarum rerum felicitatem and facultatem Justice suis Deus confert. Vide
Pinaed. in Job 1. 11.. 7.
For it is not the Honor only, but the Office of the Shields to belong to God.
You cannot well be The Shields of the Earth, except you learn of him who is
the great Master of Protection. And surely Religion is an excellent
Schoolmasters, to teach us our duties in our particular callings. The Prophet
tells us, that the very Husbandman is taught of God how to sow and thresh,
Isai. 28. 26. David, a great warrior, where learned he his skill? Thou
teach mine hands to fight, Psalm. 18. 34. Bezaleel, an excellent workman,
whose apprentice was he? God has filled him with wisdom and understanding,
Exodus 35. 21. Solomon an admirable shield for Government, who framed him? I,
says God; have given thee an understanding heart, 1 Reg. 3. 12. Religion makes
a man redeem the Time, and Time, you know, is Matter artium, the Mother of
skill. And Religion makes a man go to God; and God, you know, is Pater
luminum, the Father of every good gift. Therefore the Scholar when he prays
studieth hard: The Tradesman when he prays thrives apace; the Judge when he
prays executes judgment, as the mower when he whetteth cutteth down the
grass. Bishop Andrews. Mr. Sanderson on that Text.
The learned have made the Observation to my hand. Phineas stood up,
Vaiephallel, and he prayed, says one Translation, and he executed judgment,
says another. The Original word bears both, to note that Religion does
marvellously fit a man for works of justice. If you ask me who was the best
soldier in the armies of Israel against Amalek, certainly not he that lifted
up his sword against the enemies of Israel, but Moses who lifted up his hands
to the God of Israel. Be pleased ever to remember this, it is Scuta Deo, that
makes Scuta Terrae, It Is Religion ever that holds up Justice, it is from the
Temple that the two pillars of a Commonwealth, strength and stabilitie do
proceed, 1 Kings 7. 21. Therefore Plato would have the Palaces of Princes
joined unto Temples: Lib. 6. de legib.
to note that Government and Religion, Prayer and Justice, the Word and the
Sword should never be severed. And mark it ever in the whole course of story,
Senec. in Thyest. Lactant. de Ira. cap. 12.
Vbi non est sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum est. With Religion,
Arist. Polit. l. 7. Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 1.
the Arches of strength and steadiness have been ever endangered, and the
people have been shaken like a reed in the waters. 1 Reg. 14. 15. Hookers
Polity, lib. 5.. 1.
Therefore, ever let the Anointed ones, Zerubbabel and Joshua, the Prince and
the Priest, the Magistrate and the Minister stand always before the Lord, no
where else can they receive instruction for the Government of State or Church,
Zach. 4. 14.

And here again the doctrine of the Jesuits deserves a brand. Marian. cap. 10.
Vt nihil scilicet Princeps de Religione statuat. That matters of the Church
and the worship of God should be left only to Saint Peter's Apostolical
Successors, and that Princes should in no case have power, government, or
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. Bellarm. de Laici^. li. 3. cap. 7. de Pontif.
Romans lib. 1. cap. 7.
Bellarmine undertakes it, Quod non sit Ecclesiasticum Regimen penes Principes
seculares. Aequm est reges Pontificum Imperio subesse, inquit Sixth. Senens.
Bibl. lib. 5. Annot. 176.
Certainly the High Priests arrogated not so much in David's time, who did
himself order the courses and attendance of the Levites, 1 Chronicles. 9. nor yet
in Ezekiahs time, who himself appointed the services of the Priests and
Levites, and gave special order by Royal Edict for the celebration of the
great Passover, and that too at an unusual time, 2 Chronicles. 30. and 3^ So
Iehoshaphat and Josiah did not only make special provision for the service of
God, but gave the Priests and Levites their charge, as well as the judges and
people, 2 Chronicles. 19. and 34. 35. Yea, long since Saint Peter's time, it was a
prerogative which Constantine reserved unto himself (who yet honored his
Bishops as much as ever Prince did) to purge the Church of Idolatry, Euseh.
lib. 2. de vita (...) cap. 44.
and establish the worship of God by his own Imperial Edicts: yea, himself
to appoint judges in the cause of Cecilian Bishop of Africa, Optat. lib. 1.
and to convent a whole Council of Bishops to render an account of their
proceeding against Athanasius unto him, Eusebius. l 10. c. 9.
as Socrates notes. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 22.
So Iovinian and Theodosius by their Royal Edicts restored the Orthodox and
pure Religion which Julian (and Valens had disgraced. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap.
20.
Neither did Theophilus, Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 25.
Bishop of Alexandria, demolish the monuments of Idolatry in his own Church,
till first he had procured from the Emperor a special command so to do. And
this use of their power the godly Bishops of the Church did highly honor and
commend them for. The Rule of Saint Augustine is general, In hoc Reges Deo
serviunt^ in quantum Reges. August. contr. Crescon. Grammat. lib. 3. c. 51.
In this they show themselves Kings* Quatenus ipsum, in commanding good things,
and forbidding evil things, Non solum quae pertinent ad humanam soetetutem,
verum etiam quae ad divinam religionem. We know there is Ecclesiastical Power
fixed to the calling and character of Ecclesiastical persons. So the Church
has spiritual power to dispense holy things, and spiritual jurisdiction by
virtue of the Keys, to Censure, to bind, to keep back holy things from
swine. But jurisdiction coercitive, or the power of the sword, which under
external, secular, and corporal penalties makes provision for the defense of
truth, worship of God, and purity of Religion: This belongs only unto Princes
(and that independently, and unsubordinately to any higher power or person,
save God) and to those to whom from Princes it is communicated, and indulged.

We see The Rulers of the earth belong unto God. We the people should from
thence learn our duty of honor, reverence and loyalty toward The Shields
of the Earth. To honor them in our hearts, as those that are worth ten
thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 3. They were sons of Belial that despised Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 27. To honor them in our Cyprian. contr. Demetr. tract. 1. Tertul. ad
Scapulum, cap. 2. and Apolog. c. 30. 31. Dion. Alexandr. apud Eusebius. bist. lib.
7. cap. 10. Aphraotes apud Cassiodor. histor. Tripartit. lib. 8. cap. 4.
Prayers, for their persons, their lives, their crowns, their government,
their victories, their posterity, their salvation, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. To honor
them in our services, and with our substance, with cheerful obedience, and
with willing Tribute, Romans 13. 7. 1 Pet, 2. 13, 14, 15. Since without them one
man would but be bread for another, we should be as the fishes of the sea, the
great would devour the small, Hab. 1. 13, 14. Theophilus ad Autoliti, lib. 1.
Justin. Mart. Apolog. 2. page 64. Edit. Paris. 1615. and p. 101. Tertul. Apolg.
cap. 30. 34. Tatian. orat. contr. Graecos, page 144.
It was the dignity and practice of the ancient Christians thus to do, as they
who write their Apologies against the calumniations of Heathen adversaries do
still observe: whereby they did not only discharge the conscience of loyal
and dutiful subjects to their sovereign, but also of wise and wary Christians
toward their profession, thereby putting to silence the ignorance of foolish
men, who, either unable, or unwilling, to distinguish between the errors of
Christians and their Religion, would have undoubtedly laid the envy of such
disobedience, not upon the weakness of the men, but upon the doctrine which
they obeyed: as the Apostles, Saint Peter and Paul, do both observe, 1 Timothy 6.
1. 2 Cor. 6. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 15. From which prejudice, Christ has been so
careful to fence and mound the doctrine of Christian Religion, as that in the
case of personal liberty, and most natural and just exemption (where the
offense upon his not paying the De ista enim semisicli pensitatione locum hu^c
intelligant viri docti. Baron. Annal. Anno. 33.. 30. 32. Casaubon. Exercit. An.
33. number. 31. Marquardus Freberus apud Scultetum observat. in Matthew. cap. 60.
Camero Tractat, de Didrachmi^. Tom. 2. page 260. Schindler. Lexic. in vocab.
(...) quam v^ nonrite ipsam, Iudae^ jam subversa, a Romany stati^^ in Tributum
annuum mutatam dicat: non enim inter^ersum fuit a Romany hoc Tributum nisi
post deletam urbe^ a Tito. test Iosephade Bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 26.
Villapandus in Ezekiel. Tom. 3. lib. 2. de Ponderibus and mensuris, cap. 31. Lucas
Brugens. in Matthew. 17. 24. qubus ex veteribus suffragatur Hilarious. Quisquid
autem de Tributi genere statuatur (aliter enim, viz. de causa civililocum hunc
explicat dectiss. noster Monta^u^ius in Antidictib. ad Ano. 33. page 317. 318.)
patet Christum, qu^^vis personali and haereditarid dignitate., Heb. 1. 2.
I^^nunem (doceute Augustino quest. Evangelicarum, lib. 1. quaest. 23.) (...)
tamen in Doctrinae praedicium jus suum and libertatem asserere.
Tribute of the half shekel unto the Sanctuary would have been scandalum
acceptum, and not datum,) he yet chose rather to do that whereunto he was
not bound, than by standing upon the dignity and liberty of his person (being
the Son of God) to draw any envy and calumny upon the doctrine he taught:
notwithstanding such envy and imputation would have risen from a scandal
unduly taken, without any just reason or occasion given by him, Matthew. 17. 24.
27.

And you the Reverend judges and Magistrates, who are the Shields which our
Solomon has made, and the Lions about his Throne, since you all belong to God,
above all judge for God. Your Commission is from him, your power for him, your
support by him, your account unto him. The bench you sit on is his Tribunal,
the sentence you pronounce is his Judgment, the Master you serve, is His
Anointed, the Land you protect is Immanuels Land. He is with you to observe
your proceeding, to secure your persons, to back his Ordinance with his own
power, to be Soutorum scutum, a shield of Protection to the Shields of the
earth. Since then you have so high a Commission, so impartial a Master, so
strict a charge, so great a trust, so strong a fence, so severe a reckoning, so
sure a Reward: Above all things let the Causes of God, to whom you belong, be
dearest in your eyes. Those that most nearly concern the honor, safety, and
service of his Anointed, the succor and dignity of his Church, the purity
and support of his worship, the frequenting of his Temple, the punishing of his
enemies, the encouraging of his Ministers. As God shall have the glory, and his
Church the benefit, so your consciences shall have the comfort, your souls the
reward, and your names the honor of thus Belonging unto God. And so much of
their first Relation, their Relation Upward, they are Scuta Deo, they belong to
God.

Next, they are Scuta Terrae too, The Shields and protectours of the Earth. I
shall not need tell you that it notes their Dignity above others; No Military
instrument more honorable than a shield. When Solomon would setforth the glory
and magnificence of his Kingdom, this the way, two hundred Targets, and three
hundred Shields of beaten gold, 1 Kings 10. 16, 17. Power indeed it is to be
able to Hurt, but above all, Protection and mercy are the works of Honor. And
therefore Princes commit their power of punishing, and works of Justice to
their Instruments, and Ministers, but works of clemency and power of
pardoning, as a more sacred impresse, and more immediate character of royalty,
they reserve to themselves. God himself, who is glorious in all his
Attributes, yet singleth out his Goodness and Protection to show himself
glorious by: for Justice and Power make Majesty terrible; but Goodness and
mercy make it Amiable too. I beseech thee (says Moses) show me thy Glory: the
answer, I will make all my Goodness to pass before thee. Who is a God like
unto thee? Who so glorious, that pardons iniquity, and passes by
transgression, Mic. 7. 18. Great Dignity then it is to be Shields of the
Earth. It is so to God, and therefore so to Man too.

But it is safer for mortal men to hear of their Duty, than of their Honor.
Let us chiefly therefore consider it in that sense. Not your Honor only, but
your Office too it is to be the Shields of the Earth. Cicero pro Cluentio.
Non tantum potestas Iudici concessa, sed fides, says the Orator. Judges have
not only Honor and Power, but a Trust reposed in them for dispensation of a
Duty, and that so great a Duty, as that even offices of Religion do but
stink without it. I will not smell in your solemn Assemblies, except
Judgment run down as waters, Amos 5. 21. 24. To do Justice and Judgment,
is more acceptable to God than Sacrifice, Prove. 21. 3. When you make many
prayers, I will not hear: Go, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, be
Shields of the Earth, and then come and reason with me, or pray unto me,
Isai. 1. 15. What make thou on thy face Joshua before the Arc, get thee up,
and take away the accursed thing, or I will be with you no more, Josh 7. 10. A
great duty then sure it is to be Shields of the Earth, for the which God
himself is contented, in some cases, to have his sacrifices intermitted.

Shields then you must be. And indeed most of the Titles of Magistrates in the
Scripture run into this. They are called The Ezekiel. 31. 17. Jer. 48. 25.
Arms of the people, to bear them up, and to Psalm. 77. 20.
Lead them, Job 22. 8. Job 34. 17.
Binders, Healers, Chirurgians to cure their wounds and breaches, Isai. 3. 7.
Prove. 10. 25. (...) quosi (...) Etymolog. magn. and Rupert, in cap. 6. Mic.
Foundations of the Earth, Psalm. 82. 6. to support it from Ruin and sinking,
(Hence the Hebrews derive their word for Lord, and the Greeks their word for
King, from roots which signify a foundation.) Nahum 2. 5.
Coverings, Ezekiel. 28. 16. The word (as the learned have observed) signifies
Viget. de Re Militari, lib. 4. cap. 15.
that Engine under which Soldiers were wont to be protected in, in assaulting
the walls of an Enemy, against the stones and darts which were cast down
upon them. So Hezekiah, as a Type of CHRIST, is called Latibulum, an Hiding
place, Isai. 32. 2. They are called Paraphrast. Chaldaeus. Schindler. Tarnovius.
Vectes, the Bars of an house, to preserve it from breaking open, as the
learned have observed on Hosea 11. 6. The Judge. 20. 2. Jer. 51. 26. Pinedae in
Job 38. 6.. 8.
Coignes or Corners of a State, which is the strength and stay of a building,
Isai. 19. 13. Nails on which vessels were hanged for safety, Isai. 22. 24. In
one word, They are called Isai. 44. 28.
Pastors, to feed the people, 2 Samuel 14. 15.
Angels of GOD, which you know are all for Psa. 91. 11, 12. Hebr. 1. 14.
Protection, Job 29. 15.
Fathers, which is a Nomen pietati^ and potestatis. Tertul. in Orat. dominic.
cap. 2. notat potestatem salutarem and temperatissimam. Senec. de Clem. l. 1.
cap. 14.
name of Piety, as well as of Power. So all your Titles bend to this, That you
should be Scuta Terrae, The Shields and Protectours of the Earth.

A Shield is a kind of partition wall between a man and something which would
hurt him. And in two cases chiefly it concerns you. 1. To be Shields Inter
Reum and Terram, between Injury and the Land. 2. To be Shields inter Deum and
Terram, between Judgments and the Land.

And here since The Earth is the LORDS, leave not him out in your Protection:
See that the LORD of the Soil suffer no injury from his Tenants or Cottiers.
Surely GOD has many Things amongst us which must not be violated. His Temple,
Oratories, and Oracles, his Word, Worship and Sacraments. How many are there
which rob him of their attendance, how many Goliahs, which defy the armies and
congregations of this our Israel? His Name, a dreadful and glorious Name. How
many are there which rob him of their Reverence, How many Rabshakees, which
shoot out blasphemies against heaven, and tear in pieces this holy Name with
oaths and execrations? His Day, consecrated for his more solemn and peculiar
Service; How many are there which rob him of their due offices in his Church
upon it. How many presumptuous Repiners are there; who say of GODS worship
(whose service is perfect freedom) behold what a weariness it is? Malach. 1.
13. who forsake the assemblies of the Saints to gather sticks? Numb. 15. 32.
and had rather be selling of corn, than serving of God? Amos 8. 5. His
Portion, to encourage the Levites in the Law of the LORD, 2 Chro. 31. 4. How
many are there which rob him of his Dues, Malach. 3. 8. How many Zebahs and
Zalmunnahs are there, who say, let us take to our selves the Houses of GOD in
possession, Psalm. 83: 12. Facta imitantur, nec exitum perhorrescunt. His 2
Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassadors Romans 10. 15.
whose feet are beautiful with the tidings of peace, who are sent in CHRIST'S
stead, as Revel. 1. 20.
Angels, Obad. v. 21. 1 Timothy 4. 6. Jam, 5. 20.
nay, as Saviors to the Church, as Ioh. 3. 29.
friends of the Bridegroom, 2 Cor. 8. 23.
and the Glory of CHRIST. How many are there, who in them rob GOD of his
Honor? How many Hanuns are there that shave and Curtall them even unto shame?
Who make more use of a wicked Proverb, than of all their Ten Commandments, to
be sure to Pinch GOD on the Churches side? How many, who will not be taught by
GOD Himself not to forsake the Levite all their days? Deuteronomy. 12. 19. Nor by
Hezekiah, a godly King, to speak comfortably unto them? 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. His
Church, the beauty of Holiness, and praise of the whole Earth. How many are
there who therein rob him of their communion and obedience, of his truth and
worship? How many Tobiahs and Sanballats, who malign the peace and prosperity
of Sion? In one word, His servants, and Jewels, as he calls them, Malach. 3.
17. How many are there, who in them rob him of their Love? How many swine and
drunkards that trample on these pearls, and make songs upon them? Psalm. 69.
12. Job 30. 8, 9. In these cases you that are the Shieldes of the Earth, must
rise up to help the LORD: Either as Phineas, by lifting up the sword to
punish, or as Moses, by lifting up the hand to pray. There is a double curse,
and a bitter one too, against those which did not. Curse ye Meroz, and again
Curse, and do it bitterly, for he went not forth to help the LORD, Judges 5:
23. Thus then in the first place you are Scuta inter sacrilegos and Dominum
Terrae, between Sacrilege and the LORD of the Earth.

Secondly, you are Scuta inter Reum and Terram, between Injury and Innocence,
to protect the oppressed, and to punish the offender. Such a Shield Job was, An
eye to the blind, a foot to the lame, a father to the poor, whose cause he
diligently searched out, when happily the poor man had more sense to feel the
wrong he suffered, than skill to open it, Job. 29. 15. Such a Shield was
Constantine the Great: Brisson* de formulis, lib. 3.
Witness that golden Edict of his, Baron. Annal. An. 325.. 203.
worthy to be inscribed upon all the Shieldes of the Earth. If any of my
friends, Courtiers, or servants have wronged any man, let him without fear
come unto me my self, let him make his plaint, and produce his proofs, I will
not only right him, but reward him too. It was one of the miseries which
Solomon observed under the Sun, that such as were oppressed had none to
comfort them, Ecclesiastes 4. 1. Here then you shall have much use of your
Shield.

First, Inter Innocentem and Actorem, Between Innocence and the Accuser, who
many times out of malice, or obsequiousness, or a desire to squeeze money out
of simple men's purses, or some other purse end, does not inform, but
sycophantize and calumniate: Either forging crimes where there is no ground at
all, as in the case of Naboth and Mephibosheth, 1 Kings 21. 13. 2 Samuel 16. 3,
4. Or by cunning representing Innocent actions under the shape of crimes, as in
the case of David's messengers to Hanun, 2 Samuel 10. 3. It were well these men,
or rather these Wolves, would remember whose style it is to be the Accuser of
the Brethren, Revel. 12. 10. That they may speedily make use of Saint John
Baptists refuge from the wrath to come. Do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely, Luke 3. 14.

Secondly, Inter Innocentem and Testem, Between innocence and the witness:
Who happily may sometimes out of ill will, fear, or some base end, either forge
a Testimony, as Gashmu, Nehem. 6. 6, 7. or at least stretch, and tenter a
truth beyond measure, to do mischief with it, as Doeg, Psalm. 52. 3, 4. It
were well these men would remember too, that a witness should be Clypeus, not
Malleus, a Shield, not a Maule or Hammer, Prove. 25. 18.

Thirdly, Inter Innocentem and Advocatum. Between Innocence and Counsel
sometimes, who happily Per verborum aucupia and tendiculas, as Tully speaks, by
cunning construction either of Laws or actions, may unawares protect Injury,
and wrong Innocence. I hope they too will take GODS charge, not to speak in a
cause to wrest Judgment, Exodus 23. 2. But rather resolve with Saint Paul, I
can do nothing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. Remembering that Pleading
should be to bind and heal, not to wound or destroy, Ierem. 30. 13. It is a
noble Duty to be a Shield of the Earth, but a very ill office it is to be
(...), Scutum praedatorum, as the old Glossarie has it.

Fourthly, Inter Innocentem and Iudices facti, Between Innocence and the
jurie: for many times a Tame jurie (as one speaks) by the craft of one cunning
fellow in the company, who happily comes possessed with prejudice to the cause,
or ill will to the person, may swallow any thing, and give in a Verdict to the
oppression of Innocence. It were well they would learn too, not to go like
sheep one after another, (qua itur, non qua eundum,) but to be led by the
sacredness of their oath, and the light of their evidence, not blindly to
suffer their consciences to be overruled by another man's prejudice.

Lastly, Inter Innocentem and ministros. Between Innocence and the Officers
and servants of the Court. By whose Arts it may sometimes happen, as he said,
Vt tu victrix provincia plores, That a man's relief shall be as heavy as the
Injury it removes. I have heard of a Great Diana, called Expedition, by which
there is brought no small gain to the Crafts-men. It was a good speech of an
evil Emperor, That by bad servants Cautus and optimus venderetur Imperator*
Diochtianus apud Vopiscum in Aureliano.
The most wary and best Emperor might be sold. It were well these too would
Remember, under what terms they must receive their salvation. Nehem. 5. 15.
Well done good and faithful servant. Prove. 19. 10. 29. 12.
If evil, if slothful, take heed of what follows. It is no Date any longer
then, it is Auferte, all. Take away his Talent, and that sounds almost as
terribly to some men, as, Take away his soul. Thus you are Scuta inter Reum
and Terram, between Guilt and the Land.

Next, you must be Scuta inter Deum and Terram too; between Judgments and
the Land; To stand in the gappe, and to remove those calamities which public
sins do deserve and provoke. Such a Shield David was, In a public famine
for the cruelty of Saul against the Gibeonites, first he went to GOD, and
then he executed judgment, and so the famine ceased, 2 Samuel 21. Such a Shield
was Joshua, in a common flight of Israel before the Enemy, first he goes to
the Arc, and then to the Sword, and so Israel prevails again. Ios. 7. Such a
Shield was Moses, when GODS wrath waxed hot against Israel for the golden
Calfe, first he went to GOD to pray for the people, then Levi to the sword to
prune them, and by that means the breach was stopped, and the judgment
prevented, Exodus 32. 14. But when it came once to this, There is Robbery, and
oppression, and dishonest gain; and I sought out a man to stand in the gap,
and make up these breaches, and there was not one, Ezekiel. 22: 30. When to this
Once, Run to and fro through. Jerusalem, find me out a man that executes
judgment, and no answer returned but this: The poor are foolish and cannot,
the Great proud and will not; when thus bones out of joint, and no binders to
set them, public provocations, and none to prevent them, then GODS mercy was,
as it were, at a stand, Quomodo propitius esse potero? How shall I pardon thee
for this? Ierem. 5. 7. Now therefore, that the floodgates of GODS judgments
have been so long time open in the world, and the Countries of our neighbors
made drunk with the blood of its inhabitants, you that are Shields of the
Earth, by your zeal, piety, and execution of Judgment stand up between GOD
and this people (whose mighty sins have clamoured as loud for a scourge as
any) that GOD may be pleased still to delight in us.

And there is a Great emphasis in the word Terrae, Shieldes of the Earth. Your
protection must be general, your care and benignity universal, every member
of the Land, must find shelter under your shade. You must be like the Sun,
whose beams shine with as sweet a benignity on a garden of Cucumbers, as on
the Forest of Libanon. Your justice must extend it self like Salomons
wisdom, from the Cedar to the Hyssop. You shall hear the small as well as
the great, and not be afraid of the face of man, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. (...) is the
Apostles rule in Ecclesiastical, and it reaches to all Jurisdictions: observe
these things without prejudice, or preferring one before another, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
Laws should not be either like nets, to let out little fishes, and to catch
great ones: nor yet like Cobwebs, to be broken by greater offenders, and to
catch flies. Therefore, as Magistrates are here called Scuta Terrae, so the Law
is with us called Lex Terrae, to note the universal benignity thereof, and
the equal interest which each person is to have therein. To weigh one man's
cause by the Rule of Law, another by the Rule of favor, prejudice or partial
affection, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 21.
is like diverse weights and measures, which the LORD abhorres. This is not to
be Scutum, but Galea, a Helmet, only to protect the heads of the people. I
speak not as an accuser, GOD forbid, we heartily bless GOD for the
integrity of you our Reverend Judges. But as Saint Peter speaks, Though you
know these things, yet I put you in remembrance; so, though you do these
things, yet I put you in remembrance too, Vt quod facitis, faciatis; or rather
as Saint Paul, to the Thessalonians, That you would abound more and more.

And indeed give me leave to be your Remembrancer. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 24.
Very great Princes have had theirs. Philip of Macedon, a Page with a memento
for him. The Kings of Persia, Herodot. lib. 9.
a standing Officer with a memento for them. (...). And (...). Nay, GOD
himself bids us put him in Remembrance, Isai. 43. 26. There are, that are
called The Lords Remembrancers, Isai. 62. 6.

You are Shieldes. Remember: First, A Shield is a merciful weapon, none more:
Weapons are distinguished into Arma ad Tegendum, (...) Arist. ad Alexand.
and Arma ad nocendum. You are of the first sort, and that not Galea, only for
the Head, nor Lorica, only for the breast. But a Shield, which being a
moveable weapon, carries protection up and down to the whole body. Your Power
is like that of the Church for Edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8.
It is noted by Tacitus amongst the virtues of Agricola, Vid. Aug. Epist. 158.
Non poena semper, saepe poenitentia contentus fuit. And surely, if with
Abraham you can drive away the birds from the Sacrifice, though it be more
troublesome, yet it is more merciful than to shoot them. I confess some evils
must be scattered with the wheel, but where the eye can do it, Basil. Epist.
79. ad Eustachium.
it is far the better, Prove. 20. 8. 26. Basil the Great notes it in his
times as a custom in secular judicature, not to give sentence on a
malefactor, Nisi prius obductis velis. The judges withdrew themselves under a
Curten, considered weightily the merits of the fact, heard what could be
alleged in favor of the delinquent, Sic Succenseas iniqui^ati, ut consulas
Humanitati. August. Epist. 159.
used all merciful consultation, to let it appear that when they punished
sin, yet they pitied humanity. When you must needs pass sentence, yet
remember you do it on a man, whose nature is the same with yours, whose soul
as immortal and precious as yours: and therefore though the sinner must die,
do all you can that the soul may live.

Secondly, Nerva apud Plin. Ep. lib. 10.
Remember a Shield is a venturous weapon, a kind of surety, which bears the
blows, and receives the injuries which were intended to another, Iustitia
soras spectat, tota se ad alienas utilitates porrigit. Cicere.
ventures the cutting and tearing to do good, as a candle which wastes it
self to illighten others. Senec. Consolat. ad Polyb. c. 26. Arist. Ethic. lib.
8. cap. 10.
Such a Shield was David, Not against the sheep, Zenoph. de Mirabil. Socrat.
rather against me let thine hand be, 2 Samuel 24. 17. Such was Moses, Blot me
out of thy Book rather than not forgive thy people, Exodus 32. 32. And such
should all the Anointed ones, The Magistrates and the Ministers be, like
Joshua and Zerubbabel, who emptied themselves of the golden oil, and were
content to be diminished for the good of others, Zach. 4. 12.

Thirdly, Remember a Shield is a strong weapon, to repel the darts of
wickedness, and to break them in pieces. Your Tribunals should be Reorum
scopulus, as he said of Cassius, or as Solomon speaks, You should scatter the
wicked, Prove. 20. 26. If a man be Impius ad mortem, Guilty of high crimes,
capital both by municipall and divine Law too; there the rule is peremptory,
Non parcat oculus, non accipias pretium. No pity, no price must ransom there,
Deuteronomy. 13. 8. Numb. 35. 21.

Fourthly, Remember a Shield is an honorable weapon, none more. Taking away of
Shields was a sign of victory, Brisson. de form. lib. 4.
2 Samuel 8. 7. Preserving them a sign of glory, Ezekiel. 27. 10. They used to
inscribe their Arms and Ensigns of Honor upon their Shieldes: Plin. Hist.
Not. lib. 35. cap. 2, 3.
To raise their Princes, Petr. Crinitus, lib. 16. cap. 3.
and to show them to the people upon their Shields. Do you so too. The mercy,
righteousness, and piety of our dread Sovereign, can no better way shine
forth with sweet influence and gracious benignity upon his people, than by
your Justice. As CHRIST was crucified before the eyes of the Galatians in Saint
Paul's ministry, so, I may say, A Prince is honored before the eyes of all his
subjects in a Judges integrity.

Fifthly, Remember a Shield must ever have an eye to Guide it. You the
Shieldes, and the Law the Eye. GOD himself, when he judges, makes special
use of his Eye, Being I have seen, in the case of Israel, Exodus 3. 7. I will
go down and see, in the case of Sodom, Genesis 18. 20. He did it not to
inform himself, He did it to instruct you. There are many intricacies and
perplexities in business, wicked men are like harmefull beasts, they love
confusa vestigia. There are nimble and cunning Fencers, men that weigh
violence, Psalm. 58. 2. that they may do it within compass, men that plow
lies, as Syracides speaks, Psalm. 50. 19. 94. 20.
Ecclesiasticus. 7. 13. that are Artificers at it, and teach it their tongues,
Ierem. 9. 5. That lay nets and contrive injury with cunning. Ier. 5. 26. That
use all the art that may be, Job 13. 4.
as Tully boasted of himself, to cast a mist before the eyes of the Judges. In
this case Innocence may quickly suffer injury, except the Shields be guided
by a curious and perspicacious eye. Therefore Statesmen and Ministers of
Justice amongst the Persians, were called The eyes of the King, Brisson. de
Regno Persarum, lib. 1. page 125, 126.
by whom he did dispense the affairs of his Kingdom with wisdom and
righteousness: In this point, GOD is very strict in his charge to the Judges
of Israel, not to huddle or slubber businesses over with an half hearing, but
to inquire, and make search, and ask diligently, and find out the truth and
certainty of a thing, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. 17. 2. 19. 17.
before they proceed to sentence.

It were good to Remember you of one thing more before we leave this point, it
will preserve you humble, upright, and merciful, and that is this: As you are
Scuta Terrae, so you are Scuta Terrea too: Shieldes of the Earth, but yet
Shields of Earth. Nothing better in the war to dead the Cannon, than a mound
of Earth, but yet it will moulder and decay of it self. The gods of the Earth
must die like men, Psalm. 82. 6. The Kings of the Earth must vanish like foame
upon the waters, Hos. 10. 7. And when they are gone from their own Tribunals,
they must appear before a Greater.

I will now beg but one inch of your time and patience more, to Remember you
of our third particular, Exaltatus est, never better can the Trumpet sound, or
the people say Amen to any thing, then to that. When the Rulers of the Earth
do belong to God, do submit their Crowns and consciences to his Kingdom,
do countenance, restore, and advance his Truth and worship; when they are
Shields, to administer justice, and protect the Land, then never more,
Vehementer Exaltatus est. Is the GOD of Israel highly Exalted. When the Rulers
and Princes that rid on white Asses, and sat in Judgment, offered willingly
to the Lord, Then praise ye the Lord, Bless ye the Lord, Awake, awake
Debora, rise Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, Judge. 5. 2. 8. When David
and his Nobles offered willingly to the House of the Lord, Then, Vehementer
Exaltatus, Thine O Lord, is Glory, and victory, and Majesty, and thou art
exalted as Head above all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 6. 11. When Kings stand up, and Princes
worship, because of the Lord. Then sing O Heaven, and rejoice O Earth, and
break forth into singing O ye mountains, Isai. 49. 7. 13. When the Kings of
Tarshish and the Isles offer gifts, and fall down before him, Then let all the
world be filled with his glory, Amen, and Amen, Psalm. 72. 10. 19. As on the
other side, when it came to this, Aedificantes reprobarunt, And do any of the
Rulers believe on him? John 7. 48. When it came to Herod's Illusit, to Caiphas
his Expedit, to Pilats Tradidit, that they gathered together not unto him, but
against him, Act. 4. 26. Then I confess there was an Exaltatus still, but like
that of the Brazen Serpent, Ioh. 3. 14. On a Pole, not on a Throne; and we
know what a few years after produced even wrath to the uttermost. Consult the
Prophecies of it, Matt. 24. Or the story of it in Josephus, Joseph. de Bello
Iudaico. lib. 6* 7. Egesip. de Excidio Hierosolym. lib. 5.
and Egesippus, you shall find that there was never sorrow like the sorrow of
that Nation, who made their Messiah a man of sorrow.

If I should be asked the reason of that long, uninterrupted and most blessed
Tranquillity which these our Kingdoms have, to the envy and astonishment of
other Nations so long enjoyed, when our neighbors (doubtless, as good as we,
for we are a repining and unthankefull people) have had their Land fatted with
the blood, and dunged with the carcasses of its own inhabitants; next to the
most free, and most wonderful favor of our good God, other reason I would not
allege but this, Principes popa^i congregati sunt ad Dium Abraam. Our Gracious
Princes, our wholesome Laws, our Josiah, our Debora, our David, our Solomon,
have supported and maintained the Throne of Christ, and the faith of the
Gospel: Our Nobles, and Worthies of Church and State, have in their Assemblies
offered willingly, and made mounds about the worship and House of GOD, to
establish it in the Beauty of Holiness and of Peace, and therefore the (...)
has been the Shields of our Nation, because the Shields of our Nation have
belonged to the Lord.

And now what remains, but that we the people praise the LORD for these
mercies past: And make prayers and supplications for the Shields of the Earth,
that under them still we may lead an holy and peaceable life, and the GOD of
Abraham may be still exalted. And that you the Reverend Ministers of Justice
(who go about ad inquirendum fermentum, to search and purge out the leaven,
and to make up the breaches of the Land) may be so zealous for GOD, so
faithful to our Sovereign, so valiant for the Truth, so wise, righteous, and
merciful in Judgment, That the Eye which sees you, may bless you, and the
Ear which hears you may give witness to you, that all the people may see
that the wisdom of GOD is in you to do Judgment, and may return from your
Tribunals with songs and shouting* The Shields of our Country have showed
themselves to belong to GOD, and therefore, Vehementen Exaltetur, Let him in
the mouths and hearts of all good people be highly magnified and exalted
still.

The GOD of all Grace and Consolation grant these Mercies to you and us, be a
Shield to protect you, a Sun to guide you, an exceeding great reward to
comfort and honor you in all your Counsels, Judgments, Iourneyes, and
Returns.

To this one GOD in Three Persons, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
be all Glory, Praise, Majesty and Dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Maii 2. 1636.
Perlegi eruditam hanc Concionem cui Titulus (The Shieldes of the Earth) quae
continet paginas manuscriptas 25. in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut
bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus publica cum utilitate imprimi possint; ita
tamen ut si non intra sex menses proxime sequentes typis mandentur, haec
Licentia sit omnino irrita.

GUILIELMUS HAYWOOD R R. P. Archiep. Cant. Capell. Domest.


