AN EXPLICATION OF THE HVNDRETH AND TENTH PSALM: WHEREIN The several Heads of
CHRISTIAN Religion therein contained; touching the Exaltation of Christ, the
Scepter of his Kingdom, the Character of his Subjects, His Priesthood,
Victories, Sufferings, and Resurrection, are largely explained and applied.

Being the Substance of several Sermons preached at LINCOLNS INN; By EDWARD
REYNOLDES sometimes Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, late Preacher to the
foresaid Honorable Society, and Rector of the Church of Braunston in
Northhampton-shire.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Kings Head. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, LORD COVENTRY, Baron of Ailsborough, and Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, etc.
Most Noble Lord,
IT was the devout profession which Saint Austin once made of himself, when
speaking of the great delight which he took in Ciceroes Hortensius (as
containing a most liberal exhortation to the love of wisdom, Confess. li. 3.
ca. 4.
without any bias or partiality toward sects) he affirms, that the heat of
this his delight, was by this only reason abated, because there was not in
that book to be found the Name of Christ; without which Name, nothing, though
otherwise never so polite and elaborate, could wholly possess those
affections, which had been trained to a nobler study. And Gregory Nazianzen,
that famous Divine, Orata.
sets no other price upon all his Athenian learning (wherein he greatly
excelled) but only this, that he had something of worth, to esteem as
nothing in comparison of Christ; herein imitating the example of S. Paul, Gal.
1.14, 16.
who though he profited in the Jewish Religion above many others, yet when the
Son of God was revealed in him, Phil. 3.8.
laid it all aside as loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus his Lord. The consideration of which sacred affections in those
holy men, together with the many experiences of your Lordships abundant favor,
has put into me a boldness beyond my natural disposition, to prefix so
great a name before these poor pieces of my labors in Gods Church. Other
argument in this book there is none to procure either your Lordships view or
patronage, than this one, (which that good Father could not find in all the
writings of Plato or Cicero) that it has that High and holy Person for the
Subject thereof, the knowledge of whom is not only our greatest learning, but
our Eternal Life. In this confidence I have presumed to present unto your
Lordship this public Testimony of my most humble duty, and deep obligations
for your many thoughts of favor and bounty toward me, not in my self only,
but in others, unto whom your Lordships goodness has vouchsafed under that
respect to overflow. The Lord Jesus, our eternal Melchisedek, meet your
Lordship in all those honorable affairs which he has called you unto, with
the constant refreshment and benediction of his holy Spirit, and long preserve
you a faithful Patron of the Church which he has purchased with his own
blood; and a worthy instrument of the justice, honor and tranquillity of this
kingdom.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, Ed. Reynolds.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, when I was first persuaded to communicate some of my poor
labors to the public, my purpose was to have added unto those Treatises which
were extant before so much of these which I now present unto thy view, as
concerns the Elogies of the Gospel of Christ, the instrument of begetting
the life of Christ in us: for little reason had I considering mine own
weakness, the frequent returns of that service wherein these pieces were
delivered, and the groaning of the press of late under writings of this nature,
to trouble the world a second time with any more of my slender provisions
toward the work of the Sanctuary, in this abundance which is on every side
brought in. But finding that work grow up under mine hand into a just volume,
and conceiving that it might be both more acceptable and useful to handle a
whole Scripture together (especially being both of so noble a nature, and at
first view of so difficult a sense, as this Psalm is) than to single out some
verse and fragment by it self; I therefore resolved once more to put in my
Mite into the Treasury of the Temple, which (though for no other reason) may
yet I hope be for this cause accepted, because it bears the Image and
Inscription of Christ upon it. Some passages therein are inserted which were
delivered in another order, and on other Scriptures, and some likewise which
were delivered in other places, and on other occasions; which yet being
pertinent to the series of the discourse, I thought might justly seem as
natural parts, and not as (...)* incoherent and unsuteable pieces. Such errors
as have escaped in the press, and the unfitness of some of the Titles of the
Pages (which in my far absence from the press, while most of the book was
under it, were ordered by others who attended upon it) I shall desire thee
courteously to pass by: those greater slips which may happily perturbe the
sense, I have noted together. So submitting my poor labors to thy favorable
Censure, and commending thee to the Blessing of God. I rest.

E. R.

A Table of the Contents.
CHrist Jesus the sum of Holy Scriptures. Page 1 The Ordination of Christ
unto his Kingdom. 6 The Qualifications of Christ for his Kingdom. 7 The
Quality of Christ's Kingdom. 9 How the will is drawn unto Christ. 11
Subjection unto the Kingdom of Christ. 12 How Christ is a Lord to his people,
and to his forefathers. 17 The right hand of God. 22 Christ's sitting at Gods
right hand notes, 1 His glorious Exaltation. 23 All strength from his exciting
and assisting grace. 25
2 His accomplishing all his works on earth. 29 3 The actual Administration
of his Kingdom. 33 4 The giving of gifts unto men. 34
The Arc how a Type of Christ. 35 How the Spirit was given before Christ, and
how after. 37 The difference was in the Manner of his mission. page 39. The
difference was in the Subjects to whom he was sent. page 39. The difference
was in the Measure of his grace in regard of knowledge. p. 42 The difference was
in the Measure of his grace in regard of strength. p. 42
The Reason of the Spirits Mission. How the Spirit is a comforter to the
Church. 43 1 By being our Advocate and how. 44 2 By representing Christ absent
to the soul. 47 3 By a sweet and fruitful illumination. 4 By unspeakable and
glorious joy. 48
How the Spirit works this joy in the heart. 49 By his Acts of Humbling. By
his Acts of Healing. By his Acts of Renewing. By his Acts of Preserving. By his
Acts of Fructifying. By his Acts of Sealing.
Enmity against Christ in all his Offices. 56 Grounds of misperswasion
touching our love to Christ: 1 The countenance of Princes and public Laws. 59
2 The Rules of tradition and education. 60 3 Self love, and furtherance of
private ends. 61 4 An Historical assurance of his being now in glory. 66 5 A
false and erroneous love to his ordinances. 68
True love unto Christ is grounded on the Proportion that is in him to our
souls. 69 True love unto Christ is grounded on the Propriety that our souls
have unto him. 69
This true love will manifest it self, 1 In an universal extent to any thing
of Christ his Spirit. 71 1 In an universal extent to any thing of Christ his
Ordinances. 71 1 In an universal extent to any thing of Christ his Members. 71
2 In a right manner it is love Incorrupt. 74 2 In a right manner it is love
Superlative. 74 2 In a right manner it is love Vncommunicated. 74 3 In the
genuine effects thereof Universal obedience. 75 3 In the genuine effects
thereof Cheerful suffering. 75 3 In the genuine effects thereof Zeal of his
glory. 76 3 In the genuine effects thereof Longing after his appearance. 77
The continuance and limitation of Christ's Kingdom. 77 The stability of the
Church grounded upon An unalterable Decree. 79 The stability of the Church
grounded upon A free gift of God to Christ. 80 The stability of the Church
grounded upon A growing Nature of its own. 81
Papal Monarchy raised upon inevident presumptious. 82 The stability of the
Church a ground of comfort against the violence of the enemy. 89 The present
inconsummatenesse of Christ's victories over his Enemies, with the reasons of
it. 91 Gods patience has fixed bounds. 93 The wicked shall be punished by
Gods immediate power. 98 The easiness of Christ's victory over his Enemies.
108 The folly of nature to Judge of God or our selves by things in the present.
110 The punishment of the wicked brings order and beauty on the face of the
World. 113 What it is to be under Christ's feet. 114 Christ suffers in the
sufferings of his Church. 115 Christ's Triumph over his enemies, and the
comforts thereof to us. 118 Footstool notes Shame. 122 Footstool notes
Burden. 123 Footstool notes Recompense. 124 Footstool notes Usefulness.
126
The Gospel with the Spirit is full of power and strength: 135 1 Toward those
that are saved, in their Conversion. 137 1 Toward those that are saved, in
their Justification. 140 1 Toward those that are saved, in their
Sanctification. 141 1 Toward those that are saved, in their Perseverance. 142
1 Toward those that are saved, in their Comforts. 143 1 Toward those that are
saved, in their Temporal blessings. 144 2 Toward those that perish in
Convincing them. 145 2 Toward those that perish in Affrighting them. 150 2
Toward those that perish in Judging them. 151 2 Toward those that perish in
Ripening their sins. 153 2 Toward those that perish in Enraging them. 153 2
Toward those that perish in Altering them. 155
The Gospel to be preached with authority. 156 The Gospel to be received
in the power thereof. 157 The Gospel only able to hold up in extremities. 158
No acquaintance with God but in the Gospel. 159 The Gospel is not sent in
vain. 161 The Gospel with the Spirit is full of glory. 162 1 In regard of
Author of it. 165
The Gospel a mystery unsearchable by humane reason. 167 Contempt of the
Gospel preached is contempt of Christ in his glory. 171 Expect to hear Christ
speaking from heaven in his word. 173 2 In the promulgation thereof. 176
Evangelicall knowledge the measure of grace. 179
3 In the matters therein contained. 180 His Wisdom, Goodness, Power, Grace,
Kingdom. 182 Gods glory can no where be looked on with comfort but in Christ.
184
4 In ends and purposes for which it serves. 186 To illighten the conscience.
187 To be a ministration of righteousness. 189 To be a ministration of life.
190 To be a spiritual Judge in the heart. 191 To be an abiding ministration.
192 To enoble the heart, 195 With Magnanimity. 196 With Fortitude. 198 With
Luster and majesty. 200 With Liberty and joy. 201


The dispencers of the Gospel are therein to use Liberty. 201 The dispencers
of the Gospel are therein to use Sincerity. 205
The Gospel to be received with all honor and acceptance. 208 And to be
adorned in a suitable conversation. 214 We adorn the Gospel of Christ.
1 When we set it up in our hearts as our only rule. 216 2 When we walk in
fitting obedience thereunto. 219 3 When we continue therein. 219 4 When we
hold it in the unity of the Spirit. 221 5 When we seriously seek the
knowledge of Christ and heaven in it. 222 6 When we make it our only Altar
of refuge in trouble. 223
Christ in the ministry of his Gospel is full of care over his Church. 228
This care seen in his Love. 233 Study and inquisitivenesse. 233 Constancy and
continuance. 234 Emptying of himself. 235 Laying down his life. Grace and
Spirit. 236 Preparations for the future.
The effects of his care Food. 237 The effects of his care Guidance. The
effects of his care Health. 238 The effects of his care Comfort. 239 The
effects of his care Protection. The grounds of this care. He is our Kinsman.
240 He is our Companion. 241 He is our Head. He is our Advocate. 242 He is
our Purchaser. 244

A right Judgment of God in Christ does much strengthen faith. 245 The Gospel
is Christ's own strength. 249 Christ then is to be preached and not our
selves, 250 With Authority. 254 With Wisdom. 254 With Meekness. 256 With
Faithfulness. 256
Christ preached is to be received, 257 With Faith. 257 With Love. 259 With
Meekness. 259

Gods ordination gives life and majesty to his ordinances. 260 There is a
natural Theology, no natural Christianity. 261 Gods Judgment unsearchable
in hiding the Gospel from former ages. 262 The Gospel an heavenly invitation
unto mercy. 263 The Gospel not to be preached but by those that are sent. 264
Three things requisite to an ordinary mission Gods providence casting upon the
means. 265 Three things requisite to an ordinary mission Meet qualification of
the person sent Fidelity. 265 Three things requisite to an ordinary mission
Meet qualification of the person sent Ability. 268 Three things requisite to an
ordinary mission Ecclesiastical ordination by imposition of hands. 269 The
Church of the Jews was the chief Metropolitan Church. 269 The calling of the
gentiles to be Daughters of that Mother Church, 271 The Church is the seat of
saving Truth. 273 The office of the Church concerning Holy Scriptures. 275 The
stabilitie of the Church, with the grounds thereof. 278 Whether the Church may
fail. 281 Whether the Church be always visible. 282 Christ's Kingdom is a
Hated Kingdom. 284 Christ has enemies there where his Kingdom is set up 286
Christ's Kingdom stronger than all adverse opposition. 287 Christ's Kingdom
quiet in the mids of enemies. 290 The faithful are Christ's own people, By a
right of Donation. 296 By a right of Purchase 297 By a right of Conquest. 297
By a right of Covenant. 297 By a right of Communion. 298
We may belong unto Christ by External profession. 299 We may belong unto
Christ by Real Implantation. 299
Christ brings selfe-evidencing properties into the soul. 300 Christ's
propriety to us the ground of his Caring for us. 305 Christ's propriety to us
the ground of his Purging of us. 306 Christ's propriety to us the ground of his
Sparing of us. 307 Christ's propriety to us the ground of his Praying of us.
307 Christ's propriety to us the ground of his Teaching of us. 308 Christ's
propriety to us the ground of his chastising us in mercy 308
Christ's people military men. 308 Satan's ways and Methodes of assaulting the
Church. 309 Christ's people are willingly subject unto him. 312 By nature men
are utterly unwilling. 312 Apt to charge the ways of God as Grievous. 313 Apt
to charge the ways of God as Unprofitable. Apt to charge the ways of God as
Unequal. 314

The Spirit of Bondage compels many to unwilling services. 314 The power of
the word in natural men works a velleitie or incomplete will. 315
Willingness in Christ's people wrought by the Evidence and sense of their
natural estate. 320 Willingness in Christ's people wrought by the Spiritual
illumination of mind. 321 Willingness in Christ's people wrought by the
Com^union and adspiration of the Spirit 324 Willingness in Christ's people
wrought by the Apprehension of Gods dear Love. 324 Willingness in Christ's
people wrought by the Beauty and pretiousnesse of heavenly promises. 325
Willingness in Christ's people wrought by the Experiences of peace, comfort,
and security in Gods ways. 326 Willingness in Christ's people wrought by the
Beauty of holiness. 327 Such as the will is such is the service. Because the
will is the first mover. 328 Because God esteems himself most honored
thereby. 330
Whether those who are truly Christ's people may not have fears and
unwillingnesse in his service* 330 1 They may have a fear of Suffering Gods
wrath. 331 1 They may have a fear of Of meddling with his service. 331 2 They
may have deadness, weariness, and a mixture of unwillingnesse in his service,
332 From the Strength of corruptions. 333-334 From the Weakness of graces.
333-334 From the Importunity of Temptations. 333-334 From the Weight of some
fresh sin. 333-334 From the Spiritual desertions. 333-334
3 Yet still their wills are sincerely carried toward God. 335
Christ's people are made willing to obey him by an act of power. 337 The ground
hereof is the universal fleshlinesse and reluctance of the will naturally
against grace. 344
The more earnest should we be to serve Christ when we are his. 347
Holiness a glorious and beautiful thing. 349 In regard of the Author of it.
351 In regard of the Nature of it. 352 Properties of it, Rectitude. 354
Properties of it, Harmony. 354 Properties of it, Maturitie. 356 Properties of
it, Indeficiency. 357
In regard of the Operations of it. 357
All Christ's people are Priests unto God. 359 Holiness the character of
Christ's subjects. 359 None willing to come to Christ till they see beauty in
his service. 363 Multitudes borne unto Christ by the Gospel. 365 Whether
universality and visible pomp be a note of the Church. 369 All Christ's
subjects are withal his Children. 374 And should express the affections of
Children. 376 The Birth of a Christian is a heavenly work. 377 Therefore the
seed must be received with heavenly affections. 379 Therefore we must look
unto God in his Ordinances. 380 The Birth of a Christian a secret and
undiscerned work. 380 The Birth of a Christian is a sudden Birth. 381 How the
Lord swears. 384 Why the Lord confirmed the priesthood of Christ by an oath.
385 Christ's solemn Ordination unto the office of a Priest. 387 Which is the
foundation of all the Churches Comfort, 388 in regard of Christ's Fidelity. 390
in regard of Christ's Mercy. 391 in regard of Christ's Power. ibid. in regard of
Christ's Propriety. ibid. in regard of Christ's Sympathy. 393 in regard of
Christ's Consanguinity. ibid.

How God is said to repent. 393 Whether God has repented him of the law. 395
Why the Covenant of Grace is immutable 398 What a priest is. 402 Grounds
tending to discover the necessity of a priest for man. 403 A discovery of that
necessity, 408 With the Application thereof. 411


Qualifications of the person which was to be our Priest. 416 He was to be all
in the unity of one Person. 420 a Mediator, 417 a Surety, 418 a Sacrifice,
ibid. an Altar. 419
Wherein the Acts of Christ's Priesthood consisted, namely, Oblation. 424
Wherein the Acts of Christ's Priesthood consisted, namely, Intercession. 424
Christ's will made his death a Sacrifice. 425 Christ's Intercession or Appearing
in Heaven for us. 428 Christ's death did merit, and his life confer
Redemption. 429 Wherein Christ's Intercession consists. 431 No Mediators of
Intercession. 433 The great benefits which come to us by Christ's Intercession.
434
What is the fruit and virtue of Christ's Priesthood, namely, Satisfaction for
our debt, 438 What is the fruit and virtue of Christ's Priesthood, namely,
Acquisition of our inheritance. 438 An Explication of the Doctrine of
justification by righteousness imputed. 440 How Christ being innocent might
justly suffer the punishment of our sins. 444 1. God may cast pains upon an
innocent person. 445 2. It is not against general equity for one to suffer
another sin. 446 3. This Equity in the present case is, that all parties are
both Willing and 446 3. This Equity in the present case is, that all parties
are both Glorified. 446 4. In the innocent person thus suffering as a sacrifice
for the nocent is required, 1. An intimate conjunction with him that is nocent.
447 2. A full dominion over that from which in suffering he parts. 448 3. A
strength to break through the sufferings. 449


How sin thus punished may be said to be pardoned. 449 A double use of the
doctrine of Righteousness imputed. Self-denial. 450 A double use of the
doctrine of Righteousness imputed. Confidence. 452
Redundancie of Christ's merit, purchasing for us Immunity from evils. 455
Redundancie of Christ's merit, purchasing for us Privilege of Union with him
whence our Unction, 456 Redundancie of Christ's merit, purchasing for us
Privilege of Union with him whence our Adoption, 456 Redundancie of Christ's
merit, purchasing for us Privilege of Union with him whence our Exaltation.
456 Duties growing out of the consideration of Christ's priesthood. 457 Of
Melchisedek his Person, Order, Bread and Wine, Benediction, Tithes,
Genealogy. 461
Christ is a King of Righteousness. 465 Christ is a King of Canaanites. 467
Where Christ is a King of Righteousness, he is a King of Peace. 469 Christ's
forwardness to meet and to bless his people. 471 Christ a Comforter and
Refresher of his people. 472 Christ a Receiver of Homage and Tribute. 473
Liberal maintenance due unto the Ministers of the Gospel. 475 Christ's
priesthood is everlasting. 482 Why the Lord is said to be at the Right Hand of
his Church. 485 Christ's enemies kings. 487 All praise and honor to be given
unto God for the Power and Office of Christ. 489 Christ is present and prepared
to defend his people from their enemies. 491 Christ in his appointed time will
utterly overthrow his greatest enemies. 493 Satan's enmity is in Tempting. 494
Satan's enmity is in Accusing. 495 How the Spirit of judgment overcommeth
corruptions. 495 How Christ overcommeth his potent adversaries in the world.
498 There is a constituted time wherein Christ will be avenged of his enemies.
502 1. When sin is grown to its fullness, 503 which is known by its
Universality, 504 which is known by its Impudence, 504 which is known by its
Obstinacy. 504
2. When the Church is thoroughly humbled and purged. 506 3. When all humane
hopes and expectations are gone. 506
Christ's victories are by way of pleading and disceptation. 509 A torrent of
curses between man and Salvation. 515 The Necessity of Christ's Sufferings. 522
The Greatness and Nature of Christ's Sufferings. 521, 522 The Power, and virtue
of Christ's Resurrection. 524
AN EXPOSITION OF THE HVNDRETH AND TENTH PSALM.
PSALM 110. verse. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand;
until I make thine enemies thy footstool.


CHRIST JESUS the Lord is the Sum and Center of all divine revealed truth,
neither is any thing to be preached unto men, as an object of their faith, or
necessary element of their salvation, which does not, some way or other, either
meet in him, or refer unto him. All Truths, especially divine, are of a noble
and precious nature; and therefore whatsoever mysteries of his Counsel God
has been pleased in his Word to reveal, the Church is bound in her ministry
to declare unto men. And Saint Paul professes his faithfulness therein, Act.
20.27. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. 2 Cor. 4.5. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Ephesians. 4.20. T^tum Christiani
nominis poud^ and fruct^^s M^rs Christi. Tertull. 2 Cor. 3.6, 14. Heb. 1.1.
I have not shunned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God. But yet all
this Counsel (which elsewhere he ca^s (...), the testimony of God) he gathers
together into this one conclusion, I determined not to know any thing amongst
you, that is, in my p^eaching unto you to make discovery of any other
knowledge, as matter of consequence or faith, but only of Jesus Christ, and
him crucified. And therefore Preaching of the Word is called preaching of
Christ, and Ministers of the Word, Ministers of Christ, and learning of the
Word, Learning of Christ, because our Faith, our Works, and our Worship (which
are the three essential elements of a Christian, the whole duty of man, and
the whole will of God) have all their foundation, growth, end, and virtue only
in and from Christ crucified. There is no fruit, weight, nor value in a
Christian title, but only in and from the death of Christ.

The Word in general is divided into the Old and New Testament, both which are
the Quid est quod di^itur Testamentum vetus, nisi occultatio novi? and quid
aliud quod dicitur novum nisi veteris Revelatio. Aug. De Civ. Dei, l. 16^ c.
26. hoc occultabatur in veteri Testamento pro temporum dispensatione
justissima, quod revelatur in novo. Id. De pec. incrit. and remiss. l. 1. c.
11. Et tom* 4. De Catech. rud cap. 4. (...). Justin. Ma^tyr. Mat. 5.17. Mat.
7.12. Luke 16.16, ^1. Luk 9.28. Hilar. ca^. 17. in Math. S. Ambr. li. 7. in
Luc. Ioh. 1.17.
same in substance, though different in the manner of their dispensations, as
Moses veild differed from himself unveild. Now that Christ is the substance of
the whole New Testament, containing the History, Doctrine, and Prophesies of
him in the administration of the latter ages of the Church, is very manifest to
all. The old Scriptures are again divided into the Law and Prophets (for the
historical parts of them do contain either typical prefigurations of the
Evangelicall Church, or inductions and exemplary demonstrations of the general
truth of Gods justice and promises, which are set forth by way of Doctrine and
Precept in the Law and Prophets.) Now Christ is the sum of both these, they
waited upon him in his transfiguration, to note that in him they had their
accomplishment. First, for the Law, he is the substance of it, he brought
Grace to fulfill the exactions, and Truth to make good the prefigurations of
the whole Law. The ceremonial Law he fulfilled and abolished, the moral Law
he fulfilled and established; that his obedience thereunto might be the ground
of our righteousness, and his Spirit and grace therewith might be the ground
of our Obedience. And therefore it is called the Law of Christ. 2 For the
Prophets, he is the Sum of them too, Gal. 6.2. Act 10.43. 1 Pet. 1.10.11.
Ioh. 5.39.
for to him they give all witness. He is the Author of their Prophesies, they
spoke by his Spirit; and he is the object of their Prophesies, they spoke of
the grace and salvation which was to come by him. So that the whole Scriptures
are nothing else but a Testimony of Christ, and faith in him, of that absolute
and universal necessity which is laid upon all the world to believe in his
name. It is not only necessitas praecepti, 1 Ioh 3.23.
because we are thereunto commanded, but necessitas medii too, because he is
the only Ladder between earth and heaven, the alone mediator between God and
man, in him there is a final and unabolishable covenant established, Act. 4.12.
and there is no name but his under heaven by which a man can be saved.

In consideration of all which, and for that I have formerly discovered the
Insufficiency of any either inward, or outward principle of man's happiness,
save only the Life of Christ, I have chosen to speak upon this Psalm, and out
of it to discover those ways, whereby the Life of Christ is dispensed and
administered toward his Church. For this Psalm is one of the cleerest and most
compendious prophesies of the Person and Offices of Christ in the whole Old
Testament, and so full of fundamental truth, that I shall not shun to call
it Symbolum Davidicum, the Prophet David's Creed. And indeed there are very few,
if any, of the Articles of that Creed, which we all generally profess, which
are not either plainly expressed, or by most evident implication couched in
this little model. First, the Doctrine of the Trinity is in the first words;
The Lord said unto my Lord. There is Jehovah the Father, and My Lord, the
Son, and the sanctification or consecration of him, which was by the Holy
Ghost; by whose fullness he was anointed unto the Offices of King and Priest,
for so our Savior himself expounds this word Said, by the sealing and
sanctification of him to his office, Ioh. 10.34, 35, 36. Then we have the
Incarnation of Christ, in the word, My Lord, together with his dignity and
honor above David (as our Savior himself expounds it, Matthew. 22.42.45.) Mine,
that is, my Son by descent and genealogy after the flesh, and yet my Lord
too, in regard of a higher sonship. We have also the S^fferings of Christ, in
that he was consecrated a Priest, v. 4. to offer up himself once for all, and
so to drink of the brook in the way. We have his Eluctation and conquest
over all his enemies, and sufferings, his resurrection, he shall lift up his
head, his Ascension and Intercession, sit thou on my right hand. And in that is
comprised his Descent into Hell by S. Paul's way of arguing, That he ascended,
what is it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth? Ephesians.
4.9. We have a Holy Catholic Church, gathered together by the Scepter of his
Kingdom, and holding in the parts thereof a blessed, and beautiful Communion
of Saints, The Lord shall send forth the Rod of thy strength out of Sion; Rule
thou in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning, thou
have the dew of thy youth. We have the last Judgment, for all his enemies must
be put under his feet, (which is the Apostles argument to prove the end of
all things, 1 Cor. 15.25.) and there is the day of his wrath, wherein he shall
accomplish that judgment over the heathen, and that victory over the Kings of
the earth, ( who take counsel and bandie themselves against him,) which he
does here in his word begin. We have the Remission of sins, comprised in
his Priesthood, for he was to offer Sacrifice for the remission of sins, and
to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, Ephesians. 1.7. He. 9.26. We have
the Resurrection of the Body, because he must subdue all his enemies under his
feet, and the last enemy to be subdued is death, as the Apostle argues out
of this Psalm, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26. And lastly, we have life everlasting, in the
everlasting merit and virtue of his Priesthood, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedek, and in his sitting at the right hand of God,
whither he is gone as our forerunner, and to prepare a place for us, Heb. 6.20.
Ioh. 14.2. and therefore the Apostle from his sitting there, and living ever
infers the perfection and certainty of our salvation, Romans 6.8.11. Romans
8.17. Ephesians. 2.6. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15.49. Phil. 3.20, 21. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
Heb. 7, 25. 1 Ioh. 3.2.

The Sum then of the whole Psalm, (without any curious or artificial
Analysis, wherein every man according to his own conceit and method will
vary from other) is this; The Ordination of Christ unto his Kingdom, together
with the dignity, and virtue thereof, v. 1. The Scepter or Instrument of that
Kingly power, v. 2. The strength and success of both, in recovering, maugre
all the malice of enemies, a Kingdom of willing subjects, and those in
multitudes unto himself, v. 2, 3. The Consecration of him unto that
everlasting Priesthood, by the virtue and merit whereof he purchased this
Kingdom to himself, v. 4. The Conquest over all his strongest, and most
numerous adversaries, v. 5, 6. The proof of all, and the way of effecting it,
in his sufferings and exaltation. He shall gather a Church, and he shall
confound his enemies, because for that end he has finished, and broken through
all the sufferings which he was to drink of, and has lifted up his head
again.

Verse. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool.

Here the Holy Ghost begins with the Kingdom of Christ, which he describes
and magnifieth; ^ By his unction and obsignation thereunto, The Word or Decree
of his Father. The Lord said. 2 By the Greatness of his person in himself,
and yet neernesse in blood and nature unto us. My Lord. 3 By the Glory, power,
and heavenlinesse of this his Kingdom, for in the administration thereof he
sits at the right hand of his Father. Sit thou at my right hand. 4 By the
Continuance and Victories thereof. Until I make thy foes thy footstool.

The Lord said. Some read it, certainly or assuredly said, by reason of the
affinity which the original word has with Amen (from which it differs only
in the transposition of the same radical letters.) Which would afford this
observation by the way; That all which Gods says of or to his Son is very
faithful and true. For which cause the Gospel is by special Emphasis called,
The Word of Truth, Ephesians. 1.13. and (...), A faithful saying, worthy of all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. Or most worthy to be believed, and embraced. (For so
the word (...) and (...), being applied unto the Gospel, signify, Ioh. 1.12.
Ioh. 3.33. Act. 17.11. Being opposite unto (...), Act. 13.46.)

But the principal thing here to be noted is, The Decree, appointment,
Sanctification, and sealing of Christ unto his Regal Office. For the Word of
God in the Scripture signifies his Blessing, Power, P^easure, Ordination. Man
lives not by bread alone but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth
of God, Matthew. 4.4. That is, by that command which the creatures have received
from God to nourish by, that Benediction and Sanctification which makes every
Creature of God good unto us, 1 Timothy 4.5. Gods saying is ever doing something,
his words are operative, and carry an unction and authority along with them.

Whence we may note, That Christ's Kingdom belongs to him not by usurpation;
intrusion, or violence, but legally, by order, decree, investiture from his
Father. All Kings reign by Gods providence, but not always by his
approbation. They have set up Kings but not by me; they have made Princes, and
I knew it not, Amos 8.4. Tertull. Apolog. Ca^. 30. and ad Sc^pulam, cap. 5.
Dan. 7.14. Matthew. 11.27. Ioh. 17.2.
But Christ is a King both by the providence, and by the Good will and
immediate Consecration of his Father. He loves him and has given all things
into his hand, Ioh. 3.35. He judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
his Son, Ioh. 5.22. That is, has entrusted him with the oeconomie and
actual administration of that power in the Church, which originally belonged
unto himself. He has made him to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36. He has
ordained him to be Judge of quick and dead, Act. 10.42. He has appointed
him over his own house, Heb. 3.2.6. He has crowned him and put all things in
subjection under his feet, Heb. 2.7, 8. He has highly exalted him, and given
him a name above every name, Phil. 2.9. Therefore he calls him My King, set
up by him upon his own holy hill, and that in the virtue of a solemn decree,
Psalm. 2.6, 7.

But we must here distinguish between Regnum natural, Christ's natural
Kingdom which belongs unto him as God coessentiall, and coeternall with his
Father: and Regnum oeconomicum, his Dispensatory Kingdom, as he is Christ the
Mediator, which was his, not by Nature, but by Donation and unction from his
Father, that he might be the Head of his Church, a Prince of Peace and a King
of Righteousness unto his people. In which respect he had conferred upon him
all such meet qualifications as might fit him for the dispensation of this
Kingdom. 1 God prepared him a Body, or a Humane nature, Heb. 10.5. and by the
grace of personal and Hypostatica^l union caused the Godhead to dwell Bodily
in him, Col. 2.9. 2 He anointed him with a fullness of his Spirit; not such a
fullness as John Baptist and Stephen had, Luke 1.15. Act. 7.55. which was still
(...), the fullness of a measure or vessel, a fullness for themselves only,
Ephesians. 4.7. 1 Cor. 12.11. Romans 1^.3. But a fullness without measure, like the
fullness of light in the Sun, or water in the Sea, which has an unsearchable
sufficiency and redundancie for the whole Church, Ioh. 3.34. Ephesians. 3.8. Mal.
4.2. So that as he was furnished with all Spiritual Endowments of Wisdom,
judgment, power, love, holiness, for the dispensation of his own Office,
Esai. 11.2.61.1. So from his fullness did there run over a share and portion
of all his graces unto his Church, Ioh. 1.16. Col. 2.19. 3 He did by a solemn
and public promulgation proclaim the Kingdom of Christ unto the Church, and
declare the decree, in that heavenly voice which came unto him from the
excellent glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye
him, Psalm. 2.7. Matthew. 3.17.17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. 4 He has given him a Scepter
of Righteousness, and has put a sword in his mouth and a rod of iron in his
hand, made him a Preacher and an Apostle, to reveal the secrets of his bosom,
and to testify the things which he has seen and heard, Heb. 1.8. Revel.
1.16.2.16. Psalm. 2.9. Esai. 16.1. Heb. 3.1. Ioh. 1.18. Ioh. 3.11, 12.32, 34. 5
He has honored him with many Ambassadors, and servants to negotiate the
affairs of his Kingdom, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the Edifying of his Body, 2 Cor.
5.20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 6 He has given him the souls and consciences of men
even to the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, and for the
territories of his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.8. Ioh. 17.6. 7 He has given him a power
concerning the Laws of his Church. A power to make Laws, the Law of Faith,
(as S. Paul calls it, Romans 3.27.) Mark. 16.15, 16. A power to expound Laws, as
the moral Law, Matt. 5. A power to abrogate Laws, as the Law of Ordinances,
Col. 2.14. 8 He has given him a power of judging and condemning enemies, Ioh.
5.27. Luke 19.27. Lastly, he has given him a power of remitting sins, and
sealing pardons, which is a royal prerogative, Matthew. 9.6. Ioh. 20.23. And
these things belong unto him as he is (...), as well Man as God, Ioh. 5.27.
For the works of Christ's mediation were of two sorts. Opera ministerii, works
of service, and ministry, for he took upon himself the form of a servant,
and was a Minister of the Circumcision, Phil. 2.8. Romans 15.8. and Opera
Potestatis, works of Authority and government in the Church. All power is
given unto me in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.18.

The Quality of this Kingdom is not Temporal or Secular, over the natural
lives or civil negotiations of men; He came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, his Kingdom was not of this World, he disclaimed any civil power in
the distribution of lands and possessions, he withdrew himself from the
people when by force they would have made him a King, and himself, that in
this point he might give none offense, paid tribute unto Caesar, Matthew. 20.28.
Ioh. 18.36. Luke 12.13, 14. Ioh. 6.15. Matthew. 17.27. But his Kingdom is
Spiritual, and heavenly over the souls of men, to bind and loose the
conscience, to remit and retain sins, to awe and overruled the hearts, to
captivate the affections, to bring into obedience the thoughts, to subdue and
pull down strong holds, to break in pieces his enemies with an iron rod, to
hew and slay them with the words of his mouth, to implant fearfulness and
astonishment in the hearts of hypocrites, and to give peace, security,
protection and assurance to his people.

The way whereby he enters upon his Kingdom is ever by way of Conquest. For
though the Souls of the Elect are his, yet his enemies have the first
possession, as Canaan was Abraham's by Promise, but his seeds by Victory. Not
but that Christ proclaims peace first, but because men will not come over nor
submit to him without war. The strong man will not yield to be utterly
spoiled and crucified upon terms of peace.

Hence then we may first learn the great Authority and Power of this King,
who holds his Crown by immediate tenure from heaven, and was after a more
excellent manner than any other Kings thereunto decreed and anointed by God
himself. Much then are they to blame who find out ways to diminish the
Kingdom of Christ, and boldly affirm, that though a King he could not but
be, yet he might have been a King without a Kingdom, a King in personal
right, without subjects or territories to exercise his regal power in; A King
only to punish enemies, but not a King to govern or to feed a people. But
shall God give his Son the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession,
and shall men withhold it? shall God give men unto Christ ( Thine they were and
thou gave them unto me. Ioh. 17.6.) and shall they detain themselves from
him? what is it that he gives unto his Son but the souls, the hearts, the
very thoughts of men to be made obedient unto his Scepter? 2 Cor. 10.5. and
shall it then be within the compass of humane power to effect, as it is in
their pride to maintain, fieri posse ut nulla sit Ecclesia? We know one
principal part of the Kingdom and power of Christ is to cast down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and that not only unto conviction, but unto obedience, as the Apostle
shows: to send such gifts of the Spirit unto men as should benefit the very
Rebellious, that God might dwell amongst them, Psalm. 68.18. for in as much as
Christ came to destroy the works of the devil, that is, sin (as the Apostle
shows, 1 Ioh. 3.8. Ioh. 8.41.44.) and in their place to bring in the work of
God, which is faith in him (for so that grace is frequently styled, Ioh. 6.29.
Phil. 1.29. Col. 2.12.) Therefore it is requisite that none of Satan's
instruments, and confederates, such as the hearts of natural men are, should
be to strong for the grace of Christ.

But what then, Illud n^scio quo mo^o dica^ur fr^st^a Deu (...) nisi vos (...):
si ^nim Deus (...) volu^^us; Ad c^^d^m quippe misericu^diam per^in^: ut (...).
A^g. Tom. 4. Ad (...). Lib 1. qu. 2. Ag (...) in cordibus ^word minum e^iam
motum (...) Id. de Great. and I^b. A^^. c. 21.
does Christ compel men against their wills to become subject unto him? No, in
no wise. He has ordered to bring them in by a way of voluntarinesse and
obedience. And herein is the wisdom of his power seen that his grace shall
mightily produce those effects in men, which their hearts shall most obediently
and willingly consent unto; that he is able to use the proper and genuine
motions of second causes to the producing of his own most holy, wise, and
merciful purposes. As we see humane wisdom can so order, moderate, and make
use of natural motions, that by them artificial effects shall be produced; as
in a clock the natural mo^ion of the weight or plummet causes the artificial
distribution of hours, and minutes; and in a mill the natural motion of the
wind or water, causes an artificial effect in grinding the corn: How much
more then shall the wisdom of Almighty God, whose weakness is stronger, and
whose foolishness is wiser than men, be able so to use, incline and order the
wills of men, without destroying either them or their liberty, as that thereby
the Kingdom of his Son shall be set up amongst them? so that though there be
still an habitual, radical, fundamental indetermination and indifferency
unto several ways (unto none of which there can be a Compulsion) yet by the
secret, ineff^ble, and most sweet operation of the Spirit of grace, opening
the eyes, 2 Cor. 4 6. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Act. 26.18. 1 Ioh. 2.77. Ioh. 16 8. Genesis
9.27 Act. 16 14. Ier. 3^.18.33. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. 1 Ioh. 5.20. Psalm. 119.34.3^
convincing the judgment, persuading the affections, enclining the heart,
giving an understanding, quickening and knocking the conscience, a man shall be
swayed unto the Obedience of Christ, and shall come unto him so certainly as
if he were Drawn, and yet so freely as if he were left unto himself. For in
the calling of men by the word there is a Trahere, and a Venire. The Father
draws, and the man comes, Ioh. 6.44. That notes the efficacy of grace,
Nol^^^ cogitar^ invitum trahi, trahitur animus, and amore. Aug. Tract 26. in
Johan.
and this the sweetness of grace. Grace works strongly, and therefore God is
said To Draw, and it works sweetly too, and therefore man is said to Come.

Again, from hence we learn our Duty unto this King, the honor and
subjection which is due unto him. The Father commits all Judgment to the
Son, that is, has anointed him with the office, and abilities of a King (for
judgment stands for the whole duty of a King. Psalm. 72.1. and is therefore
frequently attributed unto the Messiah, Esai. 42.1.4. Ier. 23.5. Ier. 33.15.)
And from thence our Savior inferres that all men should honor the Son, even
as they honor the Father, Job. 2.22, 23. with the same worship, reverence and
subjection. For God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, That at the name of Jesus, that is, unto that holy thing, unto the power
and Scepter of that divine Person, which is unto us so comfortably manifested
in a name of salvation, Every knee should bow, etc. Phil. 2.9, 10. This Duty
the Psalmist expresses by kissing the Son. Which denotes unto us 3 things:
I Love. For a kiss is a symbol and expression of love, and therefore used by
the primitive Christians in their Feasts of Love, and after prayer unto God,
and oftentimes enjoined by S. Paul as an Expression of Christian Love. Act
3.16. (...). Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. Osculum pacis orationis signaculum, quae
oration cum di^ortio Sancti ^sculi integra, etc. Tertull. de Orat.
Insomuch that it was a proverbiall speech amongst the Heathen, see how these
Christians do love one another. And this is a Duty which the Apostle
requires, under pain of the extremest curse that can light upon a man, to Love
the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22. Ephesians. 6.24. And if any man, says our
Savior, Loves Father or mother more than me, he is not worthy of me, or Son
or Daughter more than me, he is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37. That is, he
is utterly unqualified for the benefit of my mediation. For he that has good
by me cannot choose but love me, Luke 7.47. 2 To kiss in the Scripture phrase
notes (...), ut vulgus super fli^^osus ^olet, m^num ori adm^v^ns, osculum
labiis pre^^it. M^nut. Felix, in Octavio. In adorando d^xtram ad osculum
res^imus. ^li^. lib. 28. cap. 2. (...), etc. Lucian. de Saltatio^e.
Worship and Service. Let the men that Sacrifice kiss the Calves, Hos. 13.2.
Job 31.26, 27. And thus we find the four beasts, and the four and twenty
Elders, and every Creature in heaven and on earth, and under the earth,
worshipping the Lamb, and ascribing blessing, honor, glory, and power unto
him, Revel. 5.8.14. 3 To kiss is an expression of Loialtie and Obedience, thus
Samuel kissed Saul when he had anointed him King over Israel, 1 Samuel 10.1. And
therefore the (...). A^ tutoris impe ium cunctus populus obediet. Hieron.
Septuagint, and Hierom, and from them our Translators, render the word which
signifies to kiss, by being obedient or ruled by the words of Joseph, Genesis
41.40. And this likewise is a duty which we owe unto Christ to be obedient to
him, to be ruled by his mouth, and by the Scepter of his mouth, that is, by
his word, which is therefore called the Law of Christ, because it has a
binding power in it. We are commanded from heaven to hear him, Matt. 17.5.
And that too under pain of a curse, every soul which will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people, Act. 3.23. We should learn
therefore to take his Commands as from God, for he speaks his Fathers words,
and in his name, Deuteronomy. 18.19. Ioh. 3.34. When Ahasuerus Commanded Haman to put
on the Crown upon Mordecai, he presently executed the Kings pleasure, and
honored his greatest enemy, because the King required it: Now God has made
Christ our King, and has crowned him with honor and Majesty (as the Apostle
speaks) and requires of us to kiss this his Son, and to bow unto his name;
and therefore be we what we will, Princes, or Judges, or great men of the
world, (who rejoice in nothing more than in the name of wisdom) this is our
Wisdom, and duty, Psalm. 2.10, 12. It is too ordinary with great men to be
regardlesse of God and of his ways. Yet we see the wrath of God in his
creatures, fire, tempest, pestilence, sword, sickness, makes no distinction
between them and others, how much less will God himself make, when all
crowns, and scepters, and dignities shall be resigned to him, and all men
shall stand in an equal distance and condition before the tribunal of Christ,
when no titles of honor, no eminency of station, no treasures of wealth, no
strength of dependencies, no retinue and train of servants will accompany a
man into the presence of the Lamb, or stand between him and the judgment of
that great day. We know he was a King that feared the presence of a
persecuted Prophet, and he was a Prince that trembled at the preaching of an
Apostle in chains. The word of God cannot be bound, nor limited, it is the
Scepter which his Father has given him, and we cannot without open
contestation against God resist his government therein over us. He that
despises you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me, says our Savior. It is Christ himself whose Ambassadors we are, and
with whom men have to do in our ministry. And he will have it so: First,
For our Peace: If God should speak again by the Ministry of Angels, in
thunder, and fire (as he did on mount Sina) we would quickly call for Moses and
Ministers again, Exodus 20.19. Secondly, For his own glory, that the
Excellency may be of God and not of men, 2 Cor. 4.7. That it may not be in him
that planteth, nor in him that waters, but in God which gives the blessing,
and increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. That it may not be in him which wills, nor in him
which runs, but in God which shows mercy, Romans 9.16. That the service,
cooperation, and help of the Churches joy might be ours, but the Dominion
over men's faith, and the teaching of their inner man might be Christ's, 2 Cor.
1.24. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Very bold therefore and desperate is the contumacie of
those men who stand at defiance with the power of Christ speaking in his
servants. The Apostle says, there is no escape left for those who neglect so
great salvation, Heb. 2.3. And yet this is the constant folly and cry of
natural men, We will not have this man to reign over us. Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

But First, Every man must be subject to some King, either Christ or sin (for
they two divide the world, and their Kingdoms will not consist.) And the
subjects of sin are all slaves and servants, no liberty amongst them, Ioh.
8.34. Whereas Christ makes all his subjects Kings, like himself, Revel. 1.6.
and his is a Kingdom of Righteousness, peace, and joy, Romans 14.17. Secondly,
If men by being the subjects of sin could keep quite out from the judgment
and Scepter of Christ, it were something: Eris sub pedibus aut adoptatus aut
victus; locum habebis vel gratiae vel poenae A^g.
but all men must one way or other be subdued unto him, either as sons or as
captives, either under his grace, or under his wrath. As I live says the Lord
every knee shall bow to me, Romans 14.10, 11. He must be either a savor of
life or of death, either for the rising or the fall of many in Israel, either
for a sanctuary or for a stumbling block; All must either be saved by him, or
judged by him. There is no refuge, nor shelter of escape in any Angle of the
World, for his Kingdom reaches to the uttermost corners of the earth, and
will find out, and fetch in all his enemies. Thirdly, the matter were not
great, if a man could hold out in the opposition. But can thine heart endure,
or thine hands be strong, says the Lord, in the day that I shall deal with
thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Esai. 10 3. Iere. 4.30.
What will ye do in the desolation which shall come from far? when you are
spoiled what will ye do? where will you leave your glory? what will become of
the King whom you served before? It may be thy money is thine idol, and thou
art held in thraldom under thine own possessions. But what will remain of a
man's silver and gold to carry him through the wrath to come, but only the rust
thereof to join in judgment against him? It may be thou servest the times,
and fashions of the world, rejoices in thy youth, in the ways of thy heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: But thou must not rise out of thy grave in thy
best clothes, nor appear before Christ like Agag gorgeously apparelled. Thou
must not rise to play, but to be judged. It may be thou servest thine own
lust, and another beauty; but what pleasure willt there be in the fire of
lust when it shall be turned into the fire of Hell? or what beauty will thou
find on the left hand of Christ, where the characters of every man's hellish
conscience shall be written in his face? Thou servest thine own vainglorie
and affectations; but what good will it be to be admired by thy fellow
prisoners, and condemned by thy Judge? In one word, thou servest any of thine
own evil desires; foolish man, here they command thee, and there they will
condemn thee, they are here thy Gods, and they will be there thy devils.

The Second particular in the description of Christ's Kingdom is the
greatness, and neernesse of his person unto David. My Lord. David calls him
my Lord upon a double reason, by a Spirit of Prophecy, as foreseeing his
incarnation and nativitie out of the tribe of Judah, and stock of Iesse; and so
he was David's Son: and by a Spirit of Faith as believing him to be his
redeemer, and salvation: and so he was David's Lord. A virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son, there we see his incarnation and descent from David; and
shall call his name Immanuel, God with us, there we see his Dominion over
David. As man so he was his Son, and as Mediator so he was his Lord. As Man
so he was subject unto Mary his Mother; and as Mediator so he was the Lord and
Savior of his Mother, Luke 2.51. Luke 1.46, 47. As Man he was made for a
little while lower than the Angels, that he might suffer death, but as
Mediator, God and Man in one person, so he was made much better than the
Angels, all the Angels of God were his subjects to worship him, and his
Ministers to wait upon him, Heb. 2.7.9. Heb. 1.4.6.7. So then the pronoune
Mine, leads us to the Consideration of Christ's Consanguinity with David, as he
was his Son: and of his Dignity above David, as he was his Lord.

From hence we learn, That though Christ was Man, yet he was more than a
bare man. For jure naturae no Son is Lord to his Father; Domination does
never ascend. There must be something above nature in him to make him his
Fathers Sovereign, as our Savior himself argues from these words, Matthew.
22.42, 45. Christ then is a Lord to his people; he had Dominion, and was the
salvation of his own forefathers.

A Lord.] First, By right of the Creation. For he is before all things, and by
him all things consist, Col. 1.17. which the Apostle makes the argument of his
Soveraignitie. To us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things
and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6.

Secondly, By a right of Sonship and Primogeniture, as the chief, the first
borne, the Heir of all things. He is not in the House as Moses was, a
Servant, but a Son over his own House, Heb. 3.5, 6. That is, he was not a
Servant but Lord in the Church, as the Apostle else where gives us the same
distinction. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves Servants, 2 Cor.
4.5. For in the Scripture phrase the first borne notes Principality,
Excellency, and Dominion. I will make him, says God, my first borne, higher
than the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. So in Job, The first borne of death
is the same with the King of terrors, Job 18.13, 14. and so the Apostle says,
That the Heir is the Lord of all, Gal. 4.1. and therefore from his Christus
vocatur Primageni tus omni^ c^eaturae, hoc est, Dominus. Schindler in v^ce
(...). So^e in scripturis primogenitu^ votari quodcunque in suo genere
excellens atque summun est -- Ego P^imogenitum consti^uam ^um, hoc est, mirum
in modum exaltabo and glorificabo cum. Gloss. in (...) Messiae, Clas. 8. Appel.
7. page 308.
primogeniture, and designation to the inheritance of all things, he infers
his preeminence, and honor even above the Angels, Col. 1.18. Heb. 1.2.4.

Thirdly, By the right of his Unction, Office, and mediatorship, unto which he
was designed by his Father. He was to have in all things the preeminence, For
it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1. 18, 19.
Where by fullness either we must understand fullness of the God head bodily,
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.9. Or fullness of the Spirit of Grace, which S.
John speaks of Job. 1.16. Ioh. 3.34. And in both respects he is a Lord over
all: in one, by the Dignity of his Hypostaticall union; in the other, by the
grace of his heavenly unction; and in both as Mediator, and head in the Church.
Therefore the Apostle says, That God has made him Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36.
and by the accomplishment of his office, in dying, rising* and reviving he
became Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14.9. Revel. 5.12.

And thus he is Lord in two respects: First, A Lord in Power and strength.
Matthew. 9.6. John 5.25, 26. 1 Cor. 6.11. John 6.40. Heb. 2.18. Heb. 7.25. John
6.39. and 10.28. Revel. 12.10. Phil. 3.21.
Power to forgive sins; Power to quicken whom he will; Power to cleanse,
justify, and sanctify; Power to succor in temptations; Power to raise from
the dead; Power to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him; Power
to hold fast his sheep; Power to cast out the accuser of the brethren; Power
to put down all his enemies, and to subdue all things unto himself. Secondly,
A Lord in Authority; To judge, to anoint, to employ, to command whom and what
he will. He only is Lord over our persons, over our faith, over our
consciences: To him only we must say, Lord, save us lest we perish; to him
only we must say, Lord, what will thou have me to do?

And such a Lord Christ was to his own forefathers. They all did eat of the
same Spiritual meat, and all drank of the same Spiritual drink, even of
that rock which was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. He was the substance of the
Ceremonies, the Doctrine of the Prophets, the accomplishment of the Promises,
the joy and salvation of Patriarchs and Princes, the desire and expectation of
all flesh. The Gospel to us a History, and narration, Colos. 2.17. Luke. 1.69,
70. Act. 3.18. and 20.24.
and therefore delivered by the hand of witnesses; to them a promise and
prediction, and therefore delivered by the hand of Prophets. 2 Cor. 1.20. John
8.56* Genesis 49.18. 2 Sem. 23.5. Hag. 2.7. Act. 26.16. 1 John 1.2, 3. 1 Pet.
1.10, 11, 12.
The Apostles entered into the Prophets Labors, and were servants in the same
common salvation, these as sowers, and they as reapers, these as preachers of
the seed hoped, and they as preachers of the same seed exhibited. The ancient
Jews then were not saved by bare temporal promises, neither was their faith
ultimately fixed upon Ceremonies or earthly things; but as their preachers had
the same Spirit of Christ with ours, so the Doctrine which they preached, John
4.38. Aug. de civ. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 25. and epist. 157. ad Optat. Et epist.
49. ad^De great. de Catech. Rud. cap. 3. etc. 19. de peccat merit. and remiss.
lib. 2. c. 29. de peccat. Orig. c. 24 et 25. de nupt. and concupis. l. 2, c. 1^.
the faith and obedience which they required, the salvation which they
foretold, was the same with ours. As the same Sun illightens the stars above,
and the earth beneath, so the same Christ was the Righteousness and salvation
both of his forefathers, and of his seed. They without us could not be made
perfect, that is, (as I conceive) their faith had nothing actually extant
amongst themselves to perfect it, but received all its form and accomplishment
from that better thing which was provided for, and exhibited unto us. For the
Law, that is, the carnal Commandment, and outward Ceremonies therein
prescribed, made nothing, no grace, no person perfect; but the bringing in of a
better hope, that is, of Christ, (who as he is unto us the hope of glory, so
he was unto them the hope of deliverance, for he alone it is by whom we draw
nigh unto God,) does perfect for ever those that are sanctified, Heb. 7.19.
Heb. 10.14.

If Christ then be our Lord we must trust in him, and depend upon him for all
our present subsistence, and our future expectations. For he never fails
those that wait upon him. He that believes in him shall not be ashamed. And
indeed faith is necessary to call Christ Lord. No man can call Jesus Lord but
by the Spirit. Because other Lords are present with us, they do with their own
eye oversee, and by their own visible power order and direct us in their
service. But Christ is absent from our senses; Though I have known Christ
after the flesh, yet henceforth (says the Apostle) know I him no more.
Therefore to fear, and honor, and serve him with all fidelity, to yield more
absolute and universal obedience to his commands, though absent, though
tenderd unto us by the Ministry of mean and despicable persons, than to the
threats, and Scepters of the greatest Princes, to labor that not only
present, but absent we may be accepted of him, to do his hardest works of
self-denial, of overcomming, and rejecting the assaults of the World, of
standing out against principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickedness, of
suffering and dying in his service, needs must there be faith in the heart to
see him present by his Spirit, to set to our seal to the truth, authority,
and Majesty of all his commands, to hear the Lord speaking from heaven, and to
find by the secret and powerful revelations of his Spirit out of the word to
the soul, evident and invincible proofs of his living by the power of God,
and speaking mightily in the Ministry of his Word to our consciences.
Therefore when the Apostle had said, We are absent from the Lord, he
presently adds, We walk by faith, That is, we labor to yield all service and
obedience to this our Lord, though absent, because by faith (which gives
presence to things unseen, and subsistence to things that are yet but hoped)
we know that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek
him.

And indeed though every man call him Lord, yet no man does in truth and
sincerity of heart so esteem him, but those who do in this manner serve him,
and by faith walk after him. If I be a Master, says the Lord, where is my
fear? Malach. 1.6. It is not every one that says Lord, Lord, but he that
does my will, that trembles at my word, that labors in my service, who
declares himself to be mine indeed. For the heart of man cannot have two
Masters, because which way ever it goes, it goes whole and undivided. We
cannot serve Christ and any thing else which stands in Competition with him:
First, because they are Contrary Masters, one cannot be pleased, or served,
without the disallowance of the other. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts
to envy, that is, grudgeth, and cannot endure that any service should be done
to the Lord. For the Friendship of the World is enmity against God, Iam. 4.4,
5. And therefore says the Apostle, If any man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him; and the reason is, 1 John 2.15.
because they are contrary principles, and have contrary Spirits, and lusts,
and therefore must needs overruled unto contrary services. Secondly, because
both Masters have employments enough to take up a whole man. Satan and the
World have lusts to fill the whole head and heart of their most active and
industrious servants; for the Apostle says, that all which is in the World is
lusts. And the heart of man is wholly, or most greedily set in him to do that
evil which it is tasked withal, Eccle. 8.11. The (all) that is in man, all
his faculties, all his affections, the whole Compass of his created abilities,
are all gone aside, or turned backward, there is no man, no part in man, that
does any good, no not one, Psalm. 14.3.53.3. Christ likewise is a great Lord,
has much more business than all the time, or strength of his Servants can
bring about. He requires the obedience of every thought of the heart, 2 Cor.
10.5. Grace and edification and profit in all the words that proceed out of our
mouth, Ephesians. 4.29. a respect unto the glory of God in whatsoever works we go
about, 1 Cor. 10.31. The whole soul, body and Spirit should be Sanctified
throughout, and that even till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23. Christ has service much more than enough to take up all the might,
strength, studies, abilities, times, callings of all his servants. Businesses
toward God and himself, worship, fear, Communion, love, prayer, obedience,
service, subjection: businesses toward and for our selves, watchfulness,
repentance, faith, sincerity, sobriety, growth in grace: business toward
other men as instruments and fellow members, exhortation, reproof, direction,
instruction, mourning, rejoicing, restoring, releeving, helping, Praying,
Serving in all ways of love. So much evil to be avoided, so many slips and
errors to be lamented, so many earthly members to be crucified, so much
knowledge and Mysteries to be learned, so many vain Principles to be
unlearned, so much good to be done to my self, so much service to be done to
my brother, so much glory to be brought to my Master; every Christian has his
hands full of work. And therefore Christ expostulateth it as an absurd thing,
to call him Lord, Lord, to profess and ingeminate a verbal subjection, and
yet not to do the things which he requires, Luke 6.46.

(...).

Dam^s^ lib. 4 de Orthodox: fid: cap. 2.


The third thing observed touching the Kingdom of Christ is the Glory and
Power thereof, intimated by his sitting at the Lords right hand. Gods right
hand in the Scripture is a Metonymicall expression of the strength, power,
majesty and glory that belongs unto him. This is mine infirmity, says the
Psalmist, but l will remember the years of the right hand of the most high,
Psalm. 77.10. Where we find Gods power under the metonymie of a right hand,
opposed to the infirmity of his servant. My infirmity, and weak faith made
me apt to sink under the sense of Gods displeasure, but when I called to mind
the experiences of Gods former power in alike distresses, I recollected my
Spirits, and was refreshed again. So the right hand of the Lord is said to
spanne, or extend the heavens, Esai. 48.13. And the Psalmist expresses the
strength and salvation of the Lord by his right hand, Psalm. 118.14, 15, 16. and
his fury is the Cup of his right hand, Hab. 2.16. And he strengthens, and
helps, and upholdeth his people by the right hand of his Righteousness, that
is, by his Power, and faithful promises, which in their weakness strengthens
them, in their fear and flagging, helps them, in their sinking and falling
upholds them, Esai. 41.10. So the Psalmist says of wicked men that their right
hand is a right hand of falsehood, Psa. 144.11. that is, either confidence in
their own power will deceive themselves, or they will deceive others to whom
they promise succor and assistance. Therefore Gods right hand is called the right
hand of Majesty, Heb. 1.3. and the right hand of power, Luke 22.69. To sit then
at Gods right hand notes that great Honor, and Judiciarie Office, and
plenitude of power, which God the Father has given to his Son; after his
manifestation in the flesh, in his nativity; and justification by the Spirit,
in his resurrection; he was then, amongst other dignities, received up into
glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. Verb^m sedere Regni significat potestatem. Hieron, in Ephesians.
cap. 1. Sedere quod dicitur Deus non membrorum positionem sed judiciariam
significat potestatem Aug. de Fide and symbol. cap. 7. Ier. 52.12. Luke 1.19. 2 Chronicles. 18.18* 1 King. 17.1.
This we find amongst those expressions of honor which Solomon showed unto
his Mother that she sat at his right hand, 1 King. 2.19. And herein the
Apostle puts a great difference between Christ and the Leviticall Priests,
that they stood daily Ministering, but Christ after his Offering, Sat down on
the right hand of God, Heb. 10.11, 12. noting two things: First, That Christ
was the Lord, and they but Servants, for standing is the posture of a Servant
or Minister, Deuteronomy. 10.8.17.12. Ezekiel. 44.24. and not sitting, Luke 17.7.
Secondly, that their work was daily to be repeated, whereas Christ's was
consummate in one offering once for all, after which he rested or sat down
again.

This fitting then of Christ at the right hand of Majesty and glory notes
unto us first, The great Exaltation of the Lord Christ, whom God has highly
honored and advanced and given a name above every name.

First, his Divine nature, though it cannot possibly receive any intrinsecall
improvement or glory (all fullness of glory essentially belonging thereunto)
yet so far forth as it was humbled, (...). Basil. Mag. Homil. de Fide. Vt sol
cum in nube tegitur claritas ejus comprimitur, non caecatur -- sic Homo ille,
quem Dominus salvaterq^^ roster, is est, Deus, Dei Filius induit, Deitatem in
illo non intercepit, sed abscondit. Greg. Nazim. Orat. 49. de fide.
for the oeconomie and administration of his office, so far it was readvanced
again; Now he emptied and humbled himself, not by putting off any of his
divine glory, but by suffering it to be overshaddowed with the similitude of
sinful flesh and to be humbled under the form of a Servant, as the light of a
candle is hidden in a dark and close Lantern. So that Declaratorily, or by
way of Manifestation, he is in that respect magnified at Gods right hand, or as
the Apostle speaks, declared to be that Son of God by Power in rising from
the dead, and returning to his glory again, Romans 1.4. Again, how ever in
Abstracto we cannot say that the Deity or Divine nature was exalted in any
other sense than by evident manifestation of it self in that man who was
before despised, and accused as a blasphemer, for that he made himself equal
with God: yet in Concreto, and by reason of the Communication of properties
from one nature to another in the unity of one person, it is true that as God
saved the World by his blood, and as it was the Prince of life that was
crucified, and the Lord that lay in the grave; so God likewise was in the form
of a servant humbled, and at the right hand of Majesty exalted again.

Secondly, the humane nature of Christ is most highly exalted by sitting at
Gods right hand; (...). Th^ophilact. in Ioh. 17. Accepit ut (...) quae habebat
ut Deus. Theodoret. in Phil. 2.
for in the right of his Hypostaticall union he has an ample and immediate
claim to all that glory which might in the humane nature be conferred upon
him. So that though during the time of his conversation amongst men, the
exigence and oeconomie of the Office which he had for us undertaken made him a
man of sorrows, and intercepted the beams of the Godhead and Divine glory
from the other nature; yet having finished that dispensation, there was in the
virtue of that most intimate association of the natures in one person, a
communicating of all glory from the deity which the other nature was capeable
of. For as by the Spirit of Holiness he was filled with treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, and grace, and thereby fitted for the Office of a Mediator, and
made the first fruits, the first borne, the heir of all things, the head, and
Captain of the Church; furnished with a residue and redundancie of the Spirit
to sanctify his brethren, and to make them joint heirs, and first borne with
himself; so by the Spirit of glory is he filled with unmatchable perfections,
beyond the capacity or comprehension of all the Angels of Heaven; being not
only full of glory, but having in him all the fullness of glory, which a
created nature joined to an infinity and bottomless fountain could receive.

From hence therefore we should learn to let the same mind be in us which
was in Christ, to humble our selves first that we may be exalted in due time,
to finish our works of self-denial, and service which we owe to God, that
so we may enter into our Masters glory. For he himself entered not but by a
way of blood. We learn likewise to have recourse and dependence on him for
all supplies of the Spirit, Phil. 1.19. Phil. 4.13. Ephesians 4.16.
for all strength of grace, for all influences of life, for the measure of
every joint and member, He is our treasure, our fountain, our head; it is his
free grace, his voluntary influence which habituateth and fitteth all our
faculties, which animateth us unto a heavenly being, which gives us both the
strength and first act, whereby we are qualified to work, and which concurreth
with us in actu secund^ to all those works which we set our selves about. As
an instrument, even when it has an edge, cutteth nothing, till it be assisted
and moved by the hand of the artificer; so a Christian when he has a will,
and an habitual fitness to work, yet is able to do nothing without the
constant supply, assistance, and concomitancie of the grace of Christ,
exciting, moving, and applying that habitual power unto particular actions. He
it is that gives us not only to will but to do, that goes through with us,
and works all our works for us by his grace. Without him we can do nothing,
all our sufficiency is from him. But it may be objected, if we can do
nothing without a second grace, to what end is a former grace given? or what
use is there of our exciting that grace and gift of God in us which can do
nothing without a further concourse of Christ's Spirit? To this I answer, first,
that as light is necessary and requisite unto seeing, and yet there is no
seeing without an eye: so without the assisting grace of Christ's Spirit
concurring with us unto every holy Duty, we can do nothing, and yet that
grace does ever presuppose an implanted, seminall and habitual grace,
fore-disposing the soul unto the said Duties. Secondly, as in the Course of
natural Effects, though God be a most voluntary Agent, yet in the ordinary
Concurrence of a first Cause he works ad modum naturae, measuring forth his
assistance proportionably to the Condition and Preparation of the second
Causes: so in supernatural and holy operations (albeit not with a like
certain and unaltered constancy) though Christ be a most voluntary head of
his Church, yet usually he proportioneth his assisting and second grace, unto
the growth, progress and radication of those Spiritual habits which are in
the soul before. From whence comes the difference of holiness, and
profitablenesse amongst the Saints, that some are more active, and unwearied in
all holy conversation than others, as in the natural body some members are
larger, and more full of life and motion than others, according to the
different distribution of Spirits from the heart, and influences from the head.
This then affords matter enough both to humble us, and to comfort us. To humble
us that we can do nothing of our selves, that we have nothing in our selves,
but sin. All the fullness of grace is in him, and therefore whosoever has
any must have it from him; as in the Egyptian famine whosoever had any corn had
it from Joseph, to whom the granaries and treasures of Egypt were for that
purpose committed. And this Lowliness of heart, and sense of our own
Emptiness is that which makes us always have recourse to our fountain, and
keep in favor with our head, from whom we must receive fresh supply of
strength for doing any good, for bearing any evil, for resisting any
temptation, for overcomming any enemy. For beginning, for continuing, and for
perfecting any Duty. For though it be man's heart that does these things, yet
it is by a foreign and impressed strength; as it is iron that burns, but not
by its own nature (which is cold) but by the heat which it has received from
the fire. It was not I, says the Apostle, but that grace of God which was with
me.

To comfort us likewise when we consider that all fullness and strength is in
him as in an Officer, an Adam, a treasurer and dispencer of all needful
supplies to his people, according to the place they bear in his body, and to
the exigence and measure of their condition, in themselves, or service in his
Church. Sure we are that what measure soever he gives unto any, he has
still a residue of Spirit, nay he still retains his own fullness, has
still enough to carry us through any condition, and according to the
difficulties of the service he puts us upon, has still wisdom to
understand, compassion to pity, strength to supply all our needs. And that all
this he has as a merciful and faithful depositarie, as a Guardian, and
husband, and elder brother, to employ for the good of his Church; that he is
unto this office appointed by the will of him that sent him, to lose nothing of
all that which is given him, but to keep, and perfect it unto the resurrection
at the last day. That God has planted in him a Spirit of faithfulness, and
pity for the cheerful discharge of this great Office, given him a propriety
unto us, made us as near and dear unto him as the members of his sacred body
are to one another; and therefore whosoever comes to him, with emptines, and
hunger, and faith, he will in no wise cast them out* it is as possible for him
to hew off, and to throw away the members of his natural body, to have any of
his bones broken, as to reject the humble and faithful desires of those that
duly wait upon him.

Again, from this Exaltation of Christ in his humane nature we should learn
to keep our vessels in holiness and in honor, as those who expect to be
fashioned at the last like unto him. For how can that man truly hope to be
like Christ hereafter, that labors to be as unlike him here as he can? Shall
I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? says the
Apostle. So may I say, shall I take the nature of Christ, that nature which he
in his person has so highly glorified, and make it in my person the nature of
a devil? If a Prince should marry a mean woman, would he endure to see those
of her nearest kindred, her brethren and sisters live like scullians or
strumpets under his own eye? Now Christ has taken our nature into a nearer
union with himself than marriage; for man and wife are still two persons, but
God and man is but one Christ. Death it self was not able to dissolve this
union; for when the soul was separated from the body, yet the Deity was
separated from neither: it was the Lord that lay in the grave, and he that
ascended, was the same that descended into the lower part of the earth, Matt.
28.6. Ephesians. 4.10. and shall we then defile this nature by wantonness,
intemperance, and vile affections, which is taken into so indissoluble an
unity with the Son of God? Christ took it to advance it, and it is still by
his Spirit in us so much the more advanced, by how much the nearer it comes to
that holiness which it has in him. We should therefore labor to walk as
becomes those that have so glorious a head, to walk worthy of such a Lord
unto all well pleasing, in fruitfulness and knowledge; to walk as those that
have received Christ, and expect his appearing again, Phil. 1.27. Col.
1.10.2.6.3.4, 5.

Secondly, the sitting of Christ on the right hand of God notes unto us the
Consummation of all those Offices which he was to perform here on the earth
for our redemption. For till they were all finished he was not to return to
his glory again. He that has entered into his rest has ceased from his own
works, says the Apostle, Heb. 4.10. first he was to execute his Office before
he was to enter into his rest. Though he were a Son, and so Iure naturali
the inheritance were his own before, yet he was to learn Obedience by the
things which he was to suffer before he was made perfect again, Heb. 5.8, 9.
After he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, that is, after he had
made such a complete expiation as should never need be repeated, but was able
for ever to perfect those that are sanctified, he then sat down on the right
hand of God, expecting till his enemies be made his footstool, Heb. 10.12,
13, 14. This is the argument our Savior uses when he prays to be glorified
again with his Father; I have glorified thee on earth, or revealed the glory
of thy truth and mercy to thy Church, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do, and now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self,
etc. Ioh. 17.4, 5. He humbled himself, says the Apostle, and became obedient
to death, even the death of the cross, wherefore God has highly exalted him,
etc. Phil. 2.8, 9. Noting unto us the Order of the Dispensation of Christ's
Offices, some were works of Ministry and service in the Office of Obedience
and suffering for his Church: Others were works of power and Majesty in the
protection and exaltation of his Church, and those necessarily to precede
these. He ought to suffer, and to enter into his glory, Luke 24.26, 46.
Necessarily I say; First, by a Necessity of Gods Decree, who had so
fore-appointed it, Act. 2.23, 24. Secondly, by the Necessity of Gods Justice,
which must first be satisfied by obedience, before it could be appeased with
man, or in the person of their head and advocate exalt them to his glory
again, Romans 3.25. Romans 5.10. Romans 6.6, 11. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Thirdly, by the
Necessity of Gods Word and will, signified in the predictions of the Prophets,
Luke 24.46. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Fourthly, by the Necessity of Christ's infinite
Person, which being equal with God, could not possibly be exalted without some
preceding descent and humiliation. That he ascended, says the Apostle, what
is it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9.
Therefore it is that our Savior says, The Spirit should convince the World of
Righteousness, because he was to go to the Father, and should be seen here
no more, Ioh. 16.10. The meaning of it is, that the Spirit shall in the
Ministry of the Word reveal unto those who are fully convinced of their
sinful condition, and humbled in the sense thereof, a treasure of full and
sufficient Righteousness by my obedience wrought for sinners. And the reason
which is given of it stands thus. Our Righteousness consists in our being able
to stand in Gods presence. Now Christ having done all as our surety here, went
up unto glory as our head and advocate, as the first fruits, the Captain, the
Prince of life, the author of salvation, and the forerunner of his people, so
that his going thither is an argument of our justification by him. First,
because it is a sign that he has finished the work of our redemption on
earth, a sign that he overcame death, and was justified by the Spirit, from
the wrongs of men, and from the curse of the Law. Therefore he said to Mary
after his resurrection, Go tell my Disciples, I ascend to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God, Ioh. 20.17. that is, by my death, and victory
over it, you are made my brethren, and reconciled unto God again. Secondly,
because he has Offices in heaven to fulfill at the right hand of his Father
in our behalf, to intercede, and to prepare a place for us, to apply unto us
the virtue of his death and merits. If he had ascended without fulfilling all
Righteousness for the Church, he should have been sent down, and seen
again, but now, says he, you see me no more, for by once dying, and by once
appearing in the end of the world, I have put away sin by the Sacrifice of my
self, Heb. 9.26.7.27. Romans 6.9, 10. He was taken, says the Prophet, from
Prison and judgment, to note that the whole debt was paid, and now who shall
declare his generation? That is, he now lives unto numberless generations,
he prolongeth his days, and has already fulfilled Righteousness enough to
justify all those that know him or believe in him, Esai. 53.8, 10. Thus we
see that Christ's deliverance out of prison, and exaltation at the right hand of
God is an evident argument, that he is fully exonerated of the guilt of sin,
and curse of the Law, and has accomplished all those works which he had
undertaken for our Righteousness.

And this likewise affords abundant matter both to humble, and to comfort the
Church of Christ. To humble us in the evidence of our disabilities, for if we
could have finished the works which were given us to do, there would have
been no need of Christ. It was weakness which made way for Christ. Our
weakness to fulfill obedience, and that weakness of the Law to justify
sinners, Romans 5.6. Romans 8.3. Heb. 7.18, 19. All the strength we have is by the
power of his might, and by his grace, Ephesians. 6.10. 2 Timothy 2.1. and even this God
dispenceth unto us in measure, and by degrees, driving out our Corruptions as
he did the Canaanites before his people, by little and little, Exo. 23.30.
because while we are here he will have us live by faith, and fetch our strength,
as we use it, from Christ, and wait in hope of a better condition, and
glorify the patience and forbearance of God who is provoked every day. To
comfort us likewise; First, against all our unavoidable and invincible
infirmities; every good Christian desires to serve the Lord with all his
strength, desires to be enriched, to be steadfast, unmovable, abundant in the
work of the Lord, to do his will as the Angels in heaven do it: yet in many
things they fail, and have daily experience of their own defects. But here is
all the comfort, though I am not able to do any of my duties as I should, yet
Christ has finished all his to the full, and therefore though I am compassed
with infirmities, so that I cannot do the things which I would, yet I have a
compassionate advocate with the Father, who both gives and craveth pardon for
every one that prepares his heart to seek the Lord, though he be not
perfectly cleansed, 1 Ioh. 2.2. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. Secondly, Against the
pertinacie, and close adherence of our corruptions, which cleave as fast unto
us as the very powers and faculties of our soul, as heat unto fire, or light
unto the Sun. Yet sure we are that he who forbad the fire to burn, and put
blackness upon the face of the Sun at midday, is able likewise to remove our
corruptions as far from us as he has removed them from his own sight. And
the ground of our expectation hereof is this, Christ when he was upon the
earth, in the form of a servant accomplished all the Offices of suffering and
obedience for us: Therefore being now exalted far above all heavens, at the
right hand of Majesty and glory, he will much more fulfill those Offices of
Power which he has there to do. Which are by the supplies of his Spirit to
purge us from sin, by the sufficiency of his grace to strengthen us, by his
word to sanctify and cleanse us, and to present us to himself a glorious
Church without spot or wrinckle. He that brought from the dead the Lord Jesus,
and suffered not death to hold the head, is able by that power and for that
reason, to make us perfect in every good work to do his will, and not to
suffer corruption for ever to hold the members. It is the frequent argument of
the Scripture, Heb. 13.20, 21. Col. 2.12. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Romans 6.5, 6. Romans
8.11. Thirdly, against all those fiery darts of Satan, whereby he tempts us to
despair, and to forsake our mercy. If he could have held Christ under when he
was in the grave, then indeed our faith would have been vain, we should be yet
in our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 17. But he who himself suffered, being tempted, and
overcame both the sufferings and the temptation, is able to succor those that
are tempted, and to show them mercy and grace to help in time of need, Heb.
2.17, 18. Heb. 4. 15, 16. Lastly, against death it self. For the
Accomplishment of Christ's Office of redemption in his resurrection from the
dead, was both the Merit, the Seal, and the first fruits of ours, 1 Cor.
15.20, 22.

Thirdly, The sitting of Christ on the right hand of his Father notes unto us
the actual Administration of his Kingdom. Therefore that which is here said
sit at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool, the Apostle
thus expounds, He must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet, 1
Cor. 15.25. And he therefore died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of dead and living, namely, by being exalted unto Gods right hand, Romans
14.9. Now this Administration of Christ's Kingdom implies several particulars:
First, (...), The publication of established Laws. For that which is in this
Psalm called the sending forth of the rod of Christ's strength out of Sion, is
thus by the Prophets expounded, Out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Esai. 2.3. Mich. 4.2. Secondly, The conquering
and subduing of subjects to himself, by converting the hearts of men, and
bringing their thoughts into the obedience of his Kingdom. Ministerially, by
the word of reconciliation, and effectually, by the power of his Spirit,
writing his Laws in their hearts, and transforming them into the image of his
word from glory to glory. Thirdly, Ruling, and leading those whom he has
thus converted in his way, continuing unto their hearts his heavenly voice,
never utterly depriving them of the exciting, assisting, cooperating grace of
his holy Spirit, but by his divine power giving unto them all things which
pertain unto life and godliness, after he had once called them by his
glorious power, Esai. 2.2. Ioh. 10.3, 4. 1 Cor. 1.4, 8. Esai. 30.21. 1 Pet.
2.9. 2 Pet. 1.3. Fourthly, Protecting, upholding, succouring them against all
temptations and discouragements. By his compassion pitying them, by his power
and promises helping them, by his care and wisdom proportioning their
strength to their trials. By his peace recompencing their conflicts, by
patience and experience establishing their hearts in the hope of deliverance,
Heb. 2.17. Ioh. 16.33. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 1.5. Phil. 4.7, 19. Romans 15.4.
Fifthy, Confounding all his enemies. First, Their projects, holding up his
Kingdom in the midst of their malice, and making his truth, like a tree,
settle the faster, and like a torch, shine the brighter for the shaking.
Secondly, Their Persons. Whom he does here gall and torment by the Scepter of
his word, constraining them by the evidence thereof to subscribe to the Justice
of his wrath; and whom he reserveth for the day of his appearing, till they
shall be put all under his feet. In which respect he is said to stand at the
right hand of God, as a man of war ready armed for the defense of his Church,
Act. 7.56.

Fourthly, the sitting of Christ on the right hand of God notes unto us his
giving of gifts, and sending down of the Holy Ghost upon men. It has been an
universal custom both in the Church, and elsewhere, in days of great joy and
solemnity to give gifts and send presents unto men. Thus after the wall of
Jerusalem was built, and the worship of God restored, and the Law read and
expounded by Ezra to the people after their captivity, it is said, that the
people did eat and drink and send portions, Nehem. 8. 10, 12. The like form
was by the people of the Jews observed in their feast of Purim, Ester. 9.22.
Tiberius in triumpho Germanico congiarium tricenos nummos viritim dedit.
Sueton. Di^isit in populum congiarium, ut mos est Imperium suscipientibus.
Herodian. lib. 5. and de Septimio Severo initio imperii magno congiario populum
prosecutus est. I^eml. 3. vid. Sueton. Aug. cap 41. and Aelium Lamprid. in
Antonino. Observatum fuit ut principes assumpto Imperio, ad conciliandum
^avorem, congiarium d^rent populo, etc. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. di^r. lib. 5. c
24.
And the same custom has bin observed amongst heathen Princes upon solemn
and great occasions to distribute donations and congiaries amongst the people.
Thus Christ in the day of his Majesty and Inauguration, in that great and
solemn triumph, when he ascended up on high and led captivity captive, he did
withal give gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.10.

Christ was notably typified in the Ark of the Testament. In it were the Tables
of the Law, to show that the whole Law was in Christ fulfilled, and that he was
the end of the Law for Righteousness to those that believe in him. There was
the golden pot which had Manna, to signify that heavenly, and abiding
nourishment which from him the Church receives. There was the Rod of Aaron
which budded. Signifying either the miraculous incarnation of Christ in a
Virgin, or his sufferings which are expressed by stripes, Esai. 53.5. and our
resurrection with him, noted in the budding of a dry rod. Or lastly, noting the
sanctifying and fruitful virtue of his word which is the rod of his strength.
Upon it also was the Mercy seat, to note that in Christ is the foundation of
all that mercy and atonement which is preached unto men. But in two things
principally did it signify Christ unto our present purpose: First, It was
overlaid within and without with gold, and had a Crown of gold round about it,
Exodus 25.11.37.2. denoting the plentiful and glorious Kingdom of Christ, who
was crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2.7. Secondly, it had rings by which it
was carried up and down, till at last it rested in Salomons Temple, with
glorious and triumphall solemnity, Psalm. 132.89. 2 Chronicles. 5.13. So Christ
while he was here upon earth, being anointed with the Holy Ghost and with
power, went about doing good, Act. 10.38. and having ceased from his works did
at last enter into his rest, Heb. 5.10. which is the heavenly Temple, Revel.
11.19.

Now this carrying of the Ark into his resting place denotes two things: First,
a final conquest over the enemies of God. For as the moving of the Ark
signified the acting and procuring of victory, Josh. 6.11, 20. So the Resting
of the Ark noted the Consummation of Victory. And therefore the Temple was
built, and the Ark set therein in the days of Solomon, when there was not an
emendicated or borrowed peace, depending upon the courtesy of the neighbor
nations, but a victorious and triumphall peace, after the great victories of
David, and tributarie subjection and homage of all the Canaanites which were
left in the Land, 2 Chro. 8.7, 8.9.26. 2 Samuel 7.9.12. Psalm. 68.29. Secondly, it
notes the conferring of gifts, as we see in that triumphall song at the
removal of the Arc, being also a prediction both of that which literally
happened in the raig^e of Solomon, and was mystically verified in Christ, Psalm.
68.18. Thus Christ our Prince of peace, being now in the Temple of God in
heaven, has bound hell, sin and death captive, and has demolished the walls
of Jericho, or the Kingdom of Satan, thrown him down from heaven like
lightning, and passed a sentence of judgment upon him. And has received of the
Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, and given gifts unto men, Act. 2.32, 35.
before his entering into his rest it was but a promise, and they were to wait
at Jerusalem for it, Act. 1.4 but after his departure, and intercession at his
Fathers right hand it was powered forth in abundance upon them, Ioh. 14.16.16.7.

And we are to note that as it began with his sitting there, so it continues
as long as he shall there sit. It is true all Holy Scripture which God ordained
for the gathering of his people, and for the guidance of them in the militant
Church, is already long since by the Spirit dictated unto holy and selected
instruments, for that purpose inspired with more abundance of grace, and guided
by a full, and infallible Spirit: but yet we must note, that in those holy
writings there is such a depth of heavenly wisdom, such a sea of mysteries,
and such an unsearchable treasure of purity and grace, that though a man
should spend the longest life after the severest and most industrious manner to
acquaint himself with God in the revelations of his word, yet his knowledge
would be but in part, and his holiness after all that come short of maturity;
as the enemies are not all presently under Christ's feet, but are by degrees
subdued: so the Spirit is not presently conferred in fullness unto the members
of Christ, but by measure and degrees according to the voluntary influences of
the head, and exigences of the members. So much of the Spirit of grace and
truth as we have here is but the earnest and hansell of a greater sum, Ephesians.
1.14. The seed and first fruits of a fuller harvest, 1 Ioh. 3.9. Romans 8.23.
Therefore the Apostle mentions a growing change from glory to glory by the
Spirit of God, 2 Cor. 3.18. We must not expect a fullness till the time of the
restitution of all things, till that day of redemption and adoption wherein the
light, which is here but sown for the Righteous, shall grow up into a full
harvest of holiness and of glory.

But here arises a question out of the seeming contradiction of Holy
Scripture. It is manifest that the Spirit of Christ was in the Church long
before his Ascension. The Prophets spoke by him, 1 Pet. 1.11. The ancient Jews
vexed him, Esai. 63.10. John Baptist was even filled with the Spirit, to note a
plentiful measure for the discharge of his Office, Luke 1.15. and yet S. John
says, That the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Christ was not yet
glorified, Ioh. 7.39. To this I answer, that the Fathers were sanctified by
the same Spirit of Christ with us, difference there is none in the substance,
but only in the accidents and circumstances of effusion and manifestation. As
light in the Sun, and light in a star, is in it self the same original
light, but very much varied in the dispensation. It was the same truth which
was preached by the Prophets, and by Christ, but the Apostle observes in it a
difference, sundry times, and in sundry manners has God spoken by the
Prophets, but unto us by his Son, that is, more plentifully, and more plainly
unto us than unto the Fathers, Heb. 1.1. Ioh. 16.25. Therefore though it be
true that Abraham saw Christ's day, as all the Fathers did (though he happily
being the Father of the faithful more than others) in which respect Eusebius
says of them that they were Christians really and in effect though not in
name: (...). Eusebius. hist* lib. 1. cap. 5.
yet it is true likewise, that many Prophets and Righteous men did desire to
see and hear the things which the Apostles saw and heard, but did not, Matt.
13.17. namely, in such plain and plentiful measure as the Apostles did. They
saw in glimpses and morning stars, and prefigurations, but these the things
themselves. They saw only the promises and those too but afar off, Heb.
11.13. these the substance and gospel it self, near at hand, in their mouth,
and before their eyes, and even amongst them, Romans 10.8. Gal. 3.1. Ioh. 1.14. 1
Ioh. 1.2, 3. They by Prophets who testified beforehand, these by eyewitnesses,
who declared the things which they had seen and heard, Act. 1.8.22.10.41.
Therefore it is said that Christ was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, and yet in the end of the world that he appeared to take away sin by
the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. to note that the Fathers had the benefi^,
but not the perfection of the promises, Heb. 11.40. for the Apostle every where
makes perfection the work of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2.7. Ephesians. 4.13. Heb. 6.1.

So then after Christ's sitting on the right hand of power the Holy Spirit was
more completely sent both in regard of manifestation and efficacy, than ever
before. The difference is chiefly in three things: First, In the manner of his
mission. To the old Church in dreams and visions, in figures and latent ways:
But to the Evangelicall Churches in power, evidence and demonstration, 1 Cor.
2.4, 5. Therefore it is called the spirit of revelation, and knowledge, which
discovers, and that unto principalities and powers by the Church, the
manifold and mysterious wisdom of God in Christ, Ephesians. 1.17.3.10. Therefore
the Spirit was sent in the latter days in wind, Act. 2.2, 3. Act. 4.31.
and fire, and tongues, and earthquake, all which have in them a
selfe-discovering property, which will not be hidden. Whereas in the time of
the Prophets God did not in any such things, save only in a low and still
voice reveal himself, 1 Kings. 19.11, 12.

Secondly, In the subjects unto whom he was sent. Joel 2.28.
Before only upon the enclosed garden of the Jews did this wind blow, but
now is the Spirit powered upon all flesh, and this heavenly dew falls not upon
the fleece, but upon the whole earth. And therefore our Savior opposes
Jerusalem and the Spirit, Romans 2.29.
Ioh. 4.21, 23. Every believer is of the Israel of God, every Christian a
Temple of the Holy Ghost; no people of the earth secluded, But in every nation
he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted; no place unclean,
Gal. 6.15, 16.
but every where pure hands may be lifted up. Coloss. 2.11. Phil. 3.3. 1 Cor.
6.19. Act. 10.35. 1 Timothy 2.8.


Thirdly, In the measure of his grace. At first he was sent only in drops and
dew, but after he was powered out in showers and abundance, Tit. 3.6. and
therefore (as I have before observed) the grace of the Gospel is frequently
expressed by the name of Riches, to note not only the pretiousnesse, Ephesians.
1.7.2.7 3.
but the plenty thereof in the Church. And it is here worth our observation
that the Spirit under the Gospel is compared to things of a spreading,
multiplying, and operative nature.

First, To water, and that not a little measure to sprinckle or bedew, Col.
1.27.
but to Baptize the faithful in, Matthew. 3.11. Act. 1.5. and that not in a font
or vessel, which grows less and less, but in a springing and living river,
Ioh. 7.39. Now water besides its purging property, is first of a spreading
nature: It has no bounds nor limits to it self, as firm and solid bodies
have, but receives its restraint by the vessel or continent which holds it: so
the Spirit of the Lord is not straightned in himself, but only by the narrow
hearts of men into which he comes. Ye are not straightened, says the Apostle, in
us, that is, in that ministry of grace, and dispensation of the Spirit which
is committed to us, but in your own bowels, which are not in any proportion
enlarged unto that abundance and fullness of heavenly grace, which in the
Gospel of salvation is offered unto you. Secondly, Spring water is a growing
and multiplying thing; which is the reason why rivers which rise from narrow
fountains, have yet by reason of a constant and regular supply a great breadth
in remote channels, because the water lives. Whereas in pits and torrents it
grows less and less: so the graces of the Spirit are living and springing
things, the longer they continue, the larger they grow, (like the waters of the
sanctuary, Ezekiel. 36.25.) and the reason is, because they come from a fountain
which is all life, Ioh. 4.10. Ioh. 14.6. Col. 3.4. Thirdly, as water multiplies
in it self, so by insinuation and mollification it has a fructifying virtue
in other things. Fruitful trees are planted by the waters side; so the Spirit
searching and mollifying the heart, makes it fruitful in holy obedience,
Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Fourthly, water is very strong in its own stream: we see
what mighty engines it moves, what huge vessels it rouleth like a ball, what
walls and bulwarks it overthrowes: so the spirit of God is able to beat down
all strong holds, which the wit of man, or the malice of Satan, can erect
against the Church. The horses of Egypt are flesh, and not Spirit, says the
Lord, not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, noting that that which
might and created power could not do, the Spirit of the Lord was able to
effect. And this strength of water serves to carry it as high as its own
spring and level: so the Spirit will never cease to raise the hearts of his
people, till it carries them up to their fountain and springhead in heaven.

Secondly, The Spirit is compared to the rushing of a mighty wind. The learned
observe that before Christ's time God spoke unto men in a soft still voice,
which they called Bath Koll; but after in the time of the Gospel by a mighty
wind: noting thereby both the Abundance of his Spirit which he would power out
in the latter days; and the strength thereof, as of a rushing wind. Though a
man have walls of brass, and bars of iron upon his conscience, though he set
up fortifications of fleshly reason, and the very gates of hell to shut out the
Spirit of grace, yet nothing is able to withstand the power of this mighty
rushing wind. Who art thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall
become a plain, etc. Zech. 4.7. No mountains, no difficulties can prevent the
power of Gods Spirit. He has strength to pull down the strongest oppositions,
and to enable the weakest condition unto the service which he will have done.
Though there be mountains between Israel and their deliverance, yet the
blind, and the lame, and the woman with child, and her that travelleth with
child together, will he strengthen to climb over the precipices of the
highest mountain, Ier. 31.8.

Thirdly, The Spirit is compared to Fire, noting likewise both the multiplying
or diffusive property thereof, turning every thing into its own nature: and
the mighty strength thereof, whereby it either cleanses or consumes any thing
that it meets with. If thou art stubble it will devour thee, if stone it will
break; if gold it will purge thee. The hard heart it can melt, and the foul
heart it can purify. Lay down thine heart under the word, and yield it to the
Spirit, who is as it were the artificer which does manage the word, he can
frame it into a vessel of honor: but if thou resist and be stubborn against
the Spirit in the word, know that it is but the crackling of a leaf in the
fire, if thou will not suffer it to purge thee, thou can not hinder it to
torment thee; nothing is more comfortable, nothing more consuming than fire;
nothing more comfortable than the light, warmth, and witness of the Spirit,
nothing more terrible than the conviction, condemnation, and bondage of the
Spirit.

Now this difference in the measure of the Spirit, may be seen in two things.
First, in a greater measure of knowledge; They shall all know me from the least
of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, Ier. 31.34. And the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Esai.
11.9. Our Savior told his Disciples that all things, which he had heard of his
Father he had made known unto them, Ioh. 15.15. and yet a little after he
tells them that many other things he had to say unto them, which they could
not bear, till the Spirit of truth came who should guide them into all truth,
Ioh. 16.12, 13. noting that the Spirit when he came should enlarge their
hearts to a capacity of more heavenly wisdom than they could comprehend
before. For we may observe before how ignorant they were of many things, though
they conversed with Christ in the flesh. Philip ignorant of the Father, Ioh.
14.8. Thomas of the way unto the Father, Ioh. 14.5. Peter of the necessity of
his sufferings, Matthew. 16.22. The two Disciples of his resurrection, Luke
24.45. all of them of the quality of his Kingdom, Act. 1.6. Thus before the
sending of the Holy Ghost, the Lord did not require so plentiful knowledge
unto salvation, as after; as in the valuations of money, that which was plenty
two or three hundred years since, is but penury now. Secondly, in a greater
measure of strength for Spiritual obedience. They who before fled from the
company of Christ in his sufferings, did after rejoice to be counted worthy of
suffering shame for his name, or as the elegancie of the original words import,
to be dignified with that dishonor of Christians* Act. 5.41. For suffering of
persecution for Christ, and the trial of faith by diverse temptations is in
the Scriptures reckoned up amongst the gifts, and hundred fold compensations of
God to his people, Mark. 10.30. Phil. 1.29. Heb. 11.26. Iam. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.6,
7. No man, says our Savior, puts new wine into old bottles, that is,
exacteth rigid and heavy services of weak and unqualified Disciples, and
therefore my Disciples fast not while I am amongst them in the flesh: But the
days will come when I shall be taken from them in body, and shall send them my
holy Spirit to strengthen and prepare them for hard service, and then they
shall fast, and perform those parts of more difficult obedience unto me,
Matthew. 9.15, 17.

Now farther touching this sending of the Holy Spirit (which together with
Christ's intercession was one of the principal ends of his ascending up unto
the right hand of power) it may be here demanded, why the Holy Spirit was not
before this exaltation of Christ sent forth in such abundance upon the Church?
The maine reason whereof, next unto the purpose and decree of God into which all
the acts of his will are to be resolved, Ephesians. 1.11. is given by our Savior, Ioh.
14.16. Ioh. 16.7. Because he was to supply the corporal absence of Christ, and
to be another comforter to the Church. Of which Office of the Spirit, (because
it was one of the maine ends of his mission, and that one of the chief works
of Christ's sitting at Gods right hand) I shall here, without any unprofitable,
or impertinent digression, speak a little.

First, then the Spirit is a comforter, because an Advocate to his people; for
so much the word signifies, and is else where rendered, 1 Ioh. 2.1. Now he is
called another comforter or Advocate, to note the difference between Christ
and the Spirit in this particular. There is then an Advocate by Office, when
one person takes upon himself the cause of another, and in his name pleads it.
Thus Christ by the Office of his Mediation, and intercession is an Advocate for
his Church, and does in his own person in heaven apply his merits, and further
the cause of our salvation with his Father. There is likewise an Advocate by
energie and operation, by instruction and assistance, which is, not when a
work is done by one person in the behalf of another, but when one by his
counsel, inspiration, and assistance enableth another to manage his own
business, and to plead his own cause. And such an Advocate the Spirit is,
Interpellare dicitur pro nobis, quia nobis gemendi and interpellandi imponit
affectum. August. Quod dicitur Spiritus Sanctus intercedere pro nobis, hoc non
est ita intelligendum ac si ipsa persona spiritus immediate intercederet.
Intercedit enim per gemitus: porro non gemit spiritus, sed nos gemimus; itaque
docendo hoc facit, efficiendo ut gemamus. Cameron. de Eccles. page 98.
who does not intercede, nor appear before God in person for us, as Christ
does: but makes interpellation for men in and by themselves, giving them an
access unto the Father, emboldning them in their fears, and helping them in
their infirmities, when they know not what to pray, Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 10.15.19.
Romans 8.26. Ephesians. 3.16.

First then, the Spirit as our Advocate justifies our persons, and pleads
our causes against the accusations of our spiritual enemies. For as Christ is
our Advocate at the tribunal of Gods justice to plead our cause against the
severitie of his Law, and that most Righteous and undeniable charge of sin
which he lays upon us: so the Holy Spirit is our Advocate at the tribunal of
Gods mercy, enabling us there to clear our selves against the temptations,
and murtherous assaults of our Spiritual enemies. The world accuses us by
false and slanderous calumniations, laying to our charge things which we never
did; the Spirit in this case makes us not only plead our innocence, but to
rejoice in our fellowship with the Prophets which were before us, to esteem
the reproaches of Christ greater riches than the treasures of the world, to
count our selves happy in this, that it is not such low marks as we are which
the malice of the world aims at, but the Spirit of glory and of God which
rests upon us, who is on their part evil spoken of, 1 Pet. 4.14. Satan, that
grand accuser of the brethren, does not only load my sins upon my
conscience, but further endeavoreth to exclude me from the benefit of Christ by
charging me with impenitencie and unbelief. But here the Spirit enableth me to
clear my self against the Father of lies. It is true indeed I have a naughty
flesh, the seeds of all mischief in my nature; but the first means which
brought me hereunto was the believing of thy lies, and therefore I will no
longer entertain thy hellish reasonings against mine own peace. I have a
Spirit which teaches me to bewail the frowardness of mine own heart, to
deny mine own will and works, to long and aspire after perfection in Christ,
to adhere with delight and purpose of heart unto his Law, to lay hold with all
my strength upon that pla^ck of salvation, which in this shipwreck of my soul
is cast out unto me. These affections of my heart come not from the earthly
Adam, for whatsoever is earthly, is sensual and devilish too. And if they be
holy and heavenly, I will not believe that God will put any thing of heaven
into a vessel of Hell. Sure I am, he that died for me when I did not desire
him, will in no wise cast me away when I come unto him. He that has given me a
will to love his service, and to lean upon his promises, will in mercy accept
the will for the deed, and in due time accomplish the work of holiness which
he has begun. Thus the Spirit like an Advocate secureth his clients title,
against the sophistical exceptions of the adversary, and when by temptations
our eye is dimmed, or by the mixture of corruptions our evidences defaced, he
by his skill helps our infirmities, and brings those things which are
blotted out, and forgotten, into our remembrance again.

Secondly, an Advocate admonishes and directs his client how to order and
solicit his own business, what evidences to produce, what witnesses to
prepare, what offices to attend, what preparations to make against the time of
his hearing: so the Spirit does set the hearts of believers in a right way of
negotiating their Spiritual affairs, makes them to hear a voice behind
them, furnishing them with wisdom and prudence in every condition. How to
grapple with temptations, how to serve God in all estates, when to reprove,
direct, counsel, comfort, when to speak and when to be silent, when to let
out and when to chain up a passion, when to use, and when to forbear
liberty, how to prosecute occasions, and apply occurrences unto Spiritual
ends, every where, and in all things strengthening and instructing us to manage
our hearts unto the best advantages of peace to our selves, and of glory to our
Master, Esai. 30.21. Col. 1.9, 10. Phil. 4.12, 13. Ephesians. 4.20, 21.

Thirdly, an Advocate makes up the failings of his client, and by his
wisdom, and observation of the case, picketh out advantages beyond the
instructions, and gathers arguments to further the suite which his client
himself observed not. So the Spirit, when we know not what to pray, when with
Iehoshaphat we know not what to do, when it may be in our own apprehension
the whose business of our peace and comfort lies a bleeding, does then help
our infirmities, and by dumb cries, and secret intimations, and deep, and
unexpressible gronings, presents arguments unto him who is the searcher of
hearts, and who knows the mind of the Spirit, which we our selves cannot
express. Thus as an infant cries and complains for want of sleep, and yet
knows not that it is sleep which he wants: as a sick man goes to the
physician, and complains that some physic he wants, but knows not the
thing which he asks for: so the soul of a Christian by the assistance of the
Spirit is enlarged to request things of God which yet of themselves do pass
the knowledge and understandings of those that ask them, Romans 8.26, 27. Ephesians.
3.19. Phil. 4.7. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Secondly, the Spirit is a comforter by applying and Representing Christ absent
unto the soul again. For first, the Spirit carries a Christian heart up to
Christ, in heavenly affections, and conversation, Col. 3.1, 3. Phil. 3.20. as a
piece of earth when it is out of its place, does ever move to the whole earth:
so a sparkle of Christ's Spirit will naturally move upward unto him who has the
fullness in him. A stone, though broken all to pieces in the motion, will yet
through all that peril and violence move unto the center: so though the nature
of man abhor, and would of it self dec^ine the passages of death, 2 Cor.
5.4. yet the Apostle desired to be dissolved, and to be taken asunder, that by
any means he might be with Christ, who is the center of every Christians
desire, Phil. 1.23. Secondly, the Spirit brings Christ down to a Christian,
forms him in his heart, evidenceth him, and the virtue of his passion, and
resurrection, unto the conscience in the powerful dispensation of his holy
ordinances. Therefore when our Savior speaks of sending the holy Spirit, he
adds, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you when the world
sees me not, yet ye see me. This notes the presence of Christ by his Spirit
with the Church: but there is more than a presence, there is an inhabitation,
At that time you shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you, Ioh. 14.18, 20.

Thirdly, the Spirit is a comforter by a work of sweet and fruitful
illumination, not only giving the knowledge, but the love and comfort of the
truth unto a Christian, making him with open face behold as in a glass the
glory of God, and thereby transforming him into the same image from glory to
glory. The light of other sciences is like the light of a candle, nothing but
light: but the knowledge of Christ by the Spirit is like the light of the
Sun^e, which has influences and virtue in i^. And this is that which the
Apostle calls the Spirit of Revelation in the knowledge of God, for though there
be no Prophetical, nor extraordinary revelations, by dreams, visions,
ecstasies, or enthusiasmes; yet according to the measure of spiritual
perspicacie, and diligent observation of holy Scriptures, there are still
manifold revelations, or manifestations of Christ unto the soul. The secret
and intimate acquaintance of the soul with God, the heavings, aspirings, and
harmony of the heart with Christ, the sweet illapses and flashes of heavenly
light upon the soul, the knowledge of the depths of God and of Satan, of the
whole armor of God and the strong man, of conflicts of Spirit, protection of
Angels, experiences of mercy, issues of temptation, and the like, are heavenly
and constant revelations out of the word manifested to the souls of the
faithful by the Spirit.

Lastly and principally, the Spirit is a comforter in those effects of joy and
peace which he works in the heart. For joy is ever the fruit, and Companion
of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Act. 13.52. and the joy of the Spirit is like the
intercession of the Spirit, unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. not like the
joy of the world, which is empty, false, and deceitful, full of vanity,
vexation, insufficiency, unsu^eablenesse to the soul, mingled with fears of
disappointment and miscarriage, with tremblings and guilt of conscience, with
certainty of period and expiration: but clear, holy, constant, unmixed,
satisfactory, and proportionable to the compass of the soul, more gladness
than all the world can take in the increase of their corn and wine, Psalm. 4.7.

And this joy of the Spirit is grounded upon every passage of a Christian
condition, from the entrance to the end. First, the Spirit works joy in
discovering, and bending the heart to mourn for corruption. For it is the
Spirit of grace and supplications which makes sinners mourn, and loath
themselves, (...). Arist. Rhet.
Zech. 12.10, 11. Ezekiel. 36.27.31. and such a sorrow as this is the seed, and
the matter of true joy; our Joseph's heart was full of joy, when his eyes powered
out tears upon Benjamins neck. As in wicked laughter the heart may be
sorrowful, so in holy mourning the heart may rejoice, for all Spiritual
afflictions have a peaceable fruit. This was the first glimpse and beam of
the Prodigals joy that he resolved with tears and repentance to return to his
Father again. For there is a sweet complacencie in an humble and Spiritual
heart to be vile in its own eyes, as to the hungry soul every bitter thing is
sweet. Sacrifices we know were to be offered up with joy, Mal. 2.13. and of
all Sacrifices a broken heart is that which God most delights in, Psalm.
51.16, 17. there is joy in heaven at the repentance of a sinner, and therefore
there must needs be joy in the heart it self which repents, in as much as it
has heavenly affections begun in it. Therefore as the Apostle says, Let a
man become a fool that he may be wise, so may I truly say, let a man become a
mourner, that he may rejoice.

If it be objected how one contrary affection can be the ground and inducement
of another, and that he who feels the weight of sin, and displeasure of God
can have little reason to boast of much joy. To this I answer, First, that we
do not speak of those extraordinary combats, and grapplings with the sense
of the wrath of God, breaking of bones, and burning of bowels, which some have
felt, but of the ordinary humiliations and courses of repentance, which are
common to all. Secondly, that such Spiritual mourning and joy are not contrary
in regard of the Spirit, nor do one extinguish or expel the other. As black
and white are contrary in the wall, but meet without any repugnancie in the
eye, because though as qualities they fight, yet as objects they agree in
communi conceptu visibilis: so joy and mourning though contrary in regard of
their immediate impressions upon the sense, do not only agree in the same
principle the grace of Christ, and in the same end the salvation of man, but
may also be subordinated to each other; as a dark and muddie color is a fit
ground to lay gold upon; so a tender and mourning heart is the best preparation
unto spiritual joy. Therefore our Savior compares Spiritual sorrow unto the
pains of a woman in travel; other pains growing out of sickness and
distempers, have none but bitter ingredients, and anguish in them; but that
pain grows out of the matter of joy, and leads unto joy: so though godly
sorrow have some pain in it, yet that pain has ever joy both for the root,
and fruit of it, Ioh. 16.21. and though for the present it may happily intercept
the exercise, yet it does strengthen the habit and ground of joy: as those
flowers in the spring rise highest and with greatest beauty, which in winter
shrink lowest into the earth. I trembled, says the Prophet, in my self, that
I might rest in the day of trouble, Hab. 3.16.

Secondly, the Spirit does not only Discover, but heal the corruptions of the
soul, and there is no joy to the joy of a saved and cured man. The lame man
when he was restored by Peter, expressed the abundant exultation of his heart,
by leaping, and praising God, Act. 3.8. for this cause therefore amongst others
the Spirit is called the oil of gladness, because by that healing virtue
which is in him, he makes glad the hearts of men. The Spirit of the Lord,
says Christ, is upon me, because the Lord anointed me to preach good tidings
to the meek, he has sent me to bind the broken hearted, Esai. 61.6. and
again, I will bind that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was
sick, Ezekiel. 34.16. Now this healing virtue of Christ is in the dispensation of
his word and Spirit; and therefore the Prophet says, the Sun of
Righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. where the
Spirit in the word, by the which he comes, and preaches unto men, Ephesians. 2.17.
1 Pet. 3.19. is called the wing of the Sun, because he proceeds from him,
and was sent to supply his absence, as the beam does the Suns; and this Spirit
the Apostle calls the strengthner of the inner man, Ephesians. 3.16.

Thirdly, the Spirit does not only heal, but renew, and revive again: when
an eye is smitten with a sword there is a double mischief, a wound made, and a
faculty perished: and here though a Chirurgian can heal the wound, yet he can
never restore the faculty, because total privations admit no regresse or
recovery: but the Spirit does not only heal, and repair, but renew, and
reedifie the spirits of men. As he heals that which was torn, and binds up
that which was smitten, so he reviveth and raises up that which was dead
before, Hos. 6.1, 2. and this the Apostle calls the Renovation of the Spirit,
Tit. 3.5. whereby old things are not mended and put together again, ( for our
fall made us all over unprofitable, and little worth, Romans 3.12. Prove. 10.20.)
but are done quite away, and all things made new again, 2 Cor. 5.17. The
heart, mind, affections, judgment, conscience, members, changed from stone to
flesh, from earthly to heavenly, from the image of Adam to the image of Christ,
Ezekiel. 11.19. 1 Cor. 15.49. Now this renovation must needs be matter of great
joy. For so the Lord comfort his afflicted people, Esai. 54.11, 12, 13.

Fourthly, the Spirit does not renew and set the frame of the heart right, and
then leave it to its own care and hazards again; but being thus restored, he
abides with it to preserve, and support it against all Tempests and batteries.
And this further multiplieth the joy and comfort of the Church that it is
established in Righteousness, so that no weapon which is formed against it can
prosper, Esai. 54.14.17. (...). Arist.
Victory is ever the ground of joy. Esai. 9.3. And the Spirit of God is a
victorious Spirit. His judgment in the heart is sent forth unto victory, Matthew.
12.20. and before him mountains shall be made a plain, and every high thing
shall be pulled down, till he bring forth the head stone with shoutings, Ezekiel.
4.6, 7. To Stephen he was a Spirit of Victory against the disputers of the
World, Act. 6.10. To the Apostles a Spirit of liberty in the prison, Act.
16.25, 26. To all the faithful a Spirit of joy and glory in the midst of
persecutions, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.

Fifthly, the Spirit does not only preserve the heart which he has renewed,
but makes it fruitful and abundant in the works of the Lord, Gal. 5.22. Romans
7.4. And (...). Arist.
fruitfulness is a ground of rejoicing, Esai. 54.1. 1 John 3.8, 9.
Therefore they which are borne of God cannot commit sin, that is, they are
not Matthew. 7.23. Luke 13.27. The whole phrase (...) is as much as the Latin
Opera^ius Iniquitati^, one that makes a trade of sin, or professes
iniquity, whose service is altogether incompatible with the profession or hope
of a Christian. Doctor Iackson of ^^stif faith. sect. 2. c. 8.
(...), workers or artificers or finishers of iniquity, because they have the
seed of God, that is, his Spirit in them, which fitteth them (as seed does the
womb or the earth) to bring forth fruit unto God. Partly, by John 14 26. 1
John 2.20. Esaias 54.13. Ierem. 31.33. 2 Cor. 3 3. (...). Arist.
teaching the heart, and Vid. Beza Annotat. in Romans 6.17. ler. 32.39, 40. Ezekiel.
36.27. Rom 8.14. Ephesians. 4.30. Gal. 4.5, 6. Ephesians. 1.14. 1 Pet 1.3.
casting it as it were in the mould of the world, fashioning such thoughts,
apprehensions, affections, judgments in the soul as are answerable to the
will and Spirit of God in the word, so that a man cannot but set his seal, and
say Amen to the written Law: partly by moving, animating, applying, and most
sweetly leading the heart unto the Obedience of that Law which is thus written
therein.

Lastly, those whom he has thus fitteth, he seals up unto a final and full
redemption by the Testimony of their adoption, which is the hansell and earnest
of their inheritance; and thereby begets a lively hope, an earnest
expectation, Romans 8.19, 23. Romans 9.23. 2 Cor. 5.4. Phil. 4.7. 1 Pet. 1.8. Ioh.
16.22, 24. (...). Arist.
a confident attendance upon the promises, and an unspeakable peace and
security thereupon; by which fruits of faith and hope there is a glorious joy
shed abroad into the soul, so full, and so intimately mingled with the same,
that it is as possible for man to annihilate the one, as to take away the
other. For according to the evidence of hope, and excellency of the thing
hoped, must needs the joy there from resulting receive its sweetness and
stability.

By all this which has been spoken of the mission of the Spirit in such
abundance after Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, we should learn
with what affections to receive the Gospel of salvation, for the teaching
whereof this Holy Spirit was shed abroad abundantly on the Ambassadors of
Christ; and with what heavenly conversations to express the power which our
hearts have felt therein, to walk as children of the light, and as becomes
the Gospel of Christ, to adorn our high profession, and not to receive the
grace of God in vain* Consider first, that the word thus quickened will have an
operation, either to convince unto Righteousness, or to seal unto
condemnation; as the Sun, either to melt, or to harden; as the rain, either
to ripen corn, or weeds; as the Scepter of a King, either to rule subjects, or
to subdue enemies; as the fire of a Goldsmith, either to purge gold, or devour
dross; as the waters of the sanctuary, either to heal places, or to turn
them into salt pits, Ezekiel. 47.11. Secondly, according to the proportion of the
Spirit of Christ in his word revealed shall be the proportion of their judgment
who despise it. The contempt of a great salvation, and glorious Ministry shall
bring a sorer condemnation, Heb. 2.2.4. If I had not come and spoken unto them
(says our Savior) they had not had sin, Ioh. 15.22. Sins against the light
of nature are no sins in comparison of those against the Gospel. The earth
which drinks in the rain that falls often on it, and yet bears nothing but
thorns and briars, is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.7, 8. Thirdly,
even here God will not always suffer his Spirit to strive with flesh, there is
a Day of Peace, which he calls our day, a day wherein he entreats and
beseeches us to be reconciled: but if we therein judge our selves unworthy of
eternal life, and go obstinately on till there be no remedy, he can easily
draw in his Spirit, and give us over to the infatuation of our own hearts,
that we may not be cleansed any more till he have caused his fury to rest upon
us, Ezekiel. 24.13.

We see likewise by this Doctrine whereupon the comforts of the Church are
founded; namely, upon Christ as the first comforter, by working our
Reconciliation with God: and upon the Spirit as another comforter, testifying
and applying the same unto our souls. And the continual supply and assistance
of this Spirit is the only comfort the Church has against the dominion and
growth of sin. For though the motions of lust which are in our members, are
so close, so working, so full of vigor and life, that we can see no power nor
probabilities of prevailing against them; yet we know Christ has a greater
fullness of Spirit than we can have of sin, and it is the great promise of
the new covenant, that God will put his Spirit into us, and thereby save us
from all our uncleanesses, Ezekiel. 36.27, 29. for though we be full of sin, and
have but a seed, a sparkle of the Spirit put into us, and upheld and fed by
further, though small supplies, yet that little is stronger than legions of
lust; as a little salt or leven seasoneth a great lump, or a few drops of
Spirits strengthen a whole glass full of water. Therefore the Spirit is called
a Spirit of judgment and of burning, because as one Judge is able to condemn a
thousand prisoners, and a little fire to consume abundance of dross: so the
Spirit of God in and present with us, though received and supplied but in
measure, though but a smoking and suppressed fire, shall yet break forth in
victory and judgment against all that resist it. In us indeed there is nothing
that feeds, but only that which resists and quenches it. But this is the
wonderful virtue of the Spirit of Christ in his members, that it nourishes it
self. Therefore sometimes the Spirit is called fire, Esai. 4.4. Matthew. 3.11.
and sometimes Oil, Heb. 1.9. 1 Ioh. 2.27. to note that the Spirit is nutriment
unto it self, that that grace which we have received already, is preserved and
excited by new supplies of the same grace. Which supplies we are sure shall be
given to all that ask them, by the virtue of Christ's prayer, Ioh. 14.16. by
the virtue of his and his Fathers promise, Ioh. 16.7. Act. 1.4. and by the
virtue of that Office which he still bears, which is to be the head, or vital
principle of all holiness and grace unto the Church. And all these are
permanent things, and therefore the virtue of them abides, their effects are
never totally interrupted.

Fifthly and lastly, this sitting of Christ at the right hand of God notes his
intercession in the behalf of the whole Church, and each member thereof. Who
is he that condemns? says the Apostle, it is Christ that is dead, yea rather
that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8.34. But of this Doctrine I shall speak more fitly
in the fourth verse, it being a great part of the Priesthood of Christ.

I now proceed to the last thing in this first verse, the continuance and
Victories of Christ's Kingdom, in these words, until I make thy foes thy
footstool: Wherein every word is full of weight. For though ordinarily
subdivisions of holy Scripture, and crumbling of the bread of life, be rather a
loosing than an expounding of it; yet in such parts of it as were of purpose
intended for models and summaries of fundamental Doctrine, (of which sort this
Psalm is one of the fullest and briefest in the whole Scriptures,) as in
little maps of large countries, there is no word whereupon some point of weighty
consequence may not depend. Here then is considerable the term of duration or
measure of Christ's Kingdom; Until. The Author of subduing Christ's enemies
under him; I, the Lord. The manner thereof, ponam, and ponam scabellum; Put thy
foes as a stool under thy feet. Victory is a relative word, and presupposes
enemies, and they are expressed in the text. I will but touch that particular
because I have handled it more largely upon another Scripture, and their
enmity is here not described, but only presupposed. It shows it self against
Christ in all the Offices of his Mediation. There is enmity against him as a
Prophet. Enmity against his Truth. In opinion, by adulterating it with humane
mixtures and superinducements, teaching for Doctrines the traditions of men: In
affection, by wishing many divine truths were razed out of the Scriptures, as
being manifestly contrary to those pleasures which they love rather than God.
In conversation, by keeping down the truth in unrighteousness, and in those
things which they know, as brute beasts, corrupting themselves. Enmity against
his Teaching, by quenching the motions, and resisting the evidence of his
Spirit in the word, refusing to hear his voice, and rejecting the counsel of
God against themselves. There is Enmity against him as a Priest, by
undervaluing his Person, Sufferings, Righteousness, or Merits. And as a King;
Enmity to his Worship, by profanesse neglecting it, by idolatry communicating
it, by superstition corrupting it. Enmity to his ways and service, by
ungrounded prejudices, mis-judging them as grievous, unprofitable, or unequal
ways; and by wilful disobedience forsaking them to walk in the ways of our
own heart.

And this is a point which men should labor to try themselves in, for the
enemies of Christ are not only out of the Church, but in the midst where his
kingdom is set up. v. 2. Esaias 8.14. And indeed by how much the more dangerous
it is, by so much the more subtle will Satan and a sinful heart be to deceive
it self therein; for this is a certain truth, that men may profess and
falsely believe that they love the Lord Jesus, and yet be as real enemies unto
his Person and Kingdom, as the Jews that accused, and the Heathen that
crucified him: He was set up for a sign to be spoken against, for a rock of
offense, and a stone of stumbling, which the very builders themselves would
reject. False brethren amongst the Philippians there were, who professed the
name of Christians, and yet by their sensual walking and worldly mindedness,
declared themselves to be enemies to the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19. To
honor the bodies of the Saints departed with beautiful sepulchers, is in it
self a testimonial of sincere love and inward estimation of their persons and
graces; and therefore the Holy Ghost has recorded it for the perpetual honor
of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, that they embalmed the body of Jesus, and
laid it in a new sepulcher, Ioh. 19.38-41. yet our Savior pronounces a woe
against the Scribes and Pharisees, because they built the tombe^ of the
Prophets, and garnished the sepulchers of the righteous, Matthew. 23.29. The
fault was not in the fact it self, but in the hypocrisy of the heart, in the
incongruitie of their other practices, and in that damned protection, which by
this plausible pretext of honor to the Prophets, they labored to gain to
their persons, and approbation to their attempts against Christ, in the minds
of the people, who yet ordinarily esteemed Christ (whom they persecuted) a
Prophet sent from God. They profess, If we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have done as they did: But our Savior reproves this
hypocritical persuasion, by showing first, that it was no strange thing with
them to persecute Prophets, but a national and hereditary sin, and therefore
they had no reason to boast of their descent (as their manner was, Luke 3.8.
Ioh. 8.39.) or to think that Gods mercies were entailed unto them, since, by
their own confession, they were the posterity of those that had killed the
Prophets; and secondly, that they did fulfill the measure of their Fathers,
that is, that which their Fathers had been long and leasurely a doing, they
now did altogether in one blow; for it was the same Christ whom they persecuted
in his person, and their fathers in his Prophets; and therefore though they
seemed to honor and revive the memory of those holy martyrs, yet upon them
should light the guilt of all the righteous blood which had ever been shed in
the Land, inasmuch as their malice was directed against that fullness, of which
all the Prophets had but a measure: If by several enemies a man be severally
mangled, one cuts off a foot, another an hand, another an arm, and after all
this, there come one who cuts off the head, and yet bestows some honorable
ceremonies upon those members which the rest had abused, he shall justly suffer
as if he had slain a whole man, inasmuch as his malice did eminently contain
in it the degrees of all the rest, and that pretended honor shall be so far
from compensating the injury, that it shall add thereunto an aggravation of
base hypocrisy. Thus, as the Jews, when they thought they did honor and
admire the Prophets, did yet harbor in their breasts that very root of fury,
and had that selfsame constitution of soul, which was in their forefathers
who shed their blood: so in our days, men may say and think that they love
Christ, and court him with much outside and empty service, may boast that if
they had lived in the days of those unthankful Jews, they would not have
partaked with them in so execrable a murder, and yet interpretatively and at
second hand show the very same root of bitterness, and rancorous constitution
of heart against him in his Spirit and ordinances, which was in those men when
they cried, Away with him, crucify him, crucify him.

Many grounds there are of this grand misperswasion of the heart in its love to
Christ, which I will but touch upon. The first is the general acceptance and
continuance which the Gospel of Christ receives amongst the Princes of this
world, who in Christian Commonwealths do both by their own voluntary and
professed subjection, and by the vigor of their public laws establish the
same. Now this is most certain, that as in all other sciences there cannot be
transitus a genere in genus, the principles of one will not serve to beget the
conclusions of another: so here especially, if a spiritual assent and
affection be grounded upon no other than humane inducements, it is most
undoubtedly spurious and illegitimate. That reason which the Pharisees used to
dissuade men from believing in Christ, Have any of the rulers or the Pharisees
believed on him? Ioh. 7.48. is one of the principal arguments which many men
have now why they do believe him, because the Rulers, whose examples and laws
they observe more upon trust than trial, do lead them thereunto: and
therefore we find amongst the Jews, that those very men, who when the
Government of the whole twelve Tribes was one, did all consent in an unity of
religion; upon the distraction of the kingdom under Jeroboam, were presently
likewise divided in their observance of Gods worship; and they who before were
zealous for the Temple at Jerusalem, were after as superstitious for Dan and
Bethel: the Prophet gives the reason of it, They willingly walked after the
commandment, namely, of Jeroboam, Hos. 5.11. no sooner did the Prince
interpose his authority, but the people were willing to pin their opinions and
practices upon his word: If Omri make statutes, and Ahab confirm idolatrous
counsels by his own practices; the Prophet shows how forward the people are
to walk in them, Mich. 6.16. Therefore it is that our Savior says of the
best sort of wicked men, Those who with gladness (and that is ever a symptom
of love) received the Gospel, that yet in time of persecution they were
offended and fell away, Matthew. 13.21. To note unto us that when Christ is
forsaken because of persecution, the imaginary love which was bestowed upon him
before was certainly supported by no other ground than that was, is contrary to
persecution, namely, the countenance and protection of public power.

Secondly, a great part of men profess faith and love to Christ merely upon
the rules of their Education. The maine reason into which their religion is
resolved, is not any evidence of excellency in it self, but only the
customs and traditions of their forefathers, which is to build a divine faith
upon an humane authority, and to set man in the place of God: certain it is
that contrary religions can never be originally grounded upon the same reason;
that which is a true and adequate principle of faith or love to Christ, can
never be suitable to the conclusions of Mahumetisme or idolatry: now then when a
professed Christian can give no other account of his love to Christ, than a
Turk of his love to Mahumet; when that which moves an Idolater to hate
Christ, is all that one of us has to say why he believes in him, certainly
that love and faith is but an empty presumption, which dishonors the Spirit
of Christ, and deludeth our own souls. There is a natural instinct in the
mind of man to reverence and vindicate the traditions of their progenitors,
and at first view to detest any novell opinions which seem to thwart the
received doctrine wherein they had been bred: and this affection is ever so
much the stronger, by how much the tradition received is about the nobler and
more necessary things. And therefore it discovers it self with most violence
and impatiency, in matters of Religion, wherein the eternal welfare of the
soul is made the issue of the contention. We find with what hea^e of zeal
the Jews contended for the Temple at Jerusalem, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 6.
and with how equal and confident emulation the Samaritans ventured their
lives for the precedencie of their Temple on mount Gerazim; and took an oath to
produce proofs for the authority thereof, and yet all the ground of this
will worship was the tradition of their Fathers. For our Savior assures us that
they worshipped they knew not what, Ioh. 4.20 22,
and only took things upon trust from their predecessors. The Satyrist has
made himself merry with describing the combat of two neighbor towns amongst
the Egyptians in the opposite defense of those ridiculous idols, Immortale
Odium, et nunquam sanabile vulnus; Ardet adhuc combos and tentyra; summus
u^rinque Ind. furer vulgo, quod (...) v^^morum Odit ^terque locus, cum solos
cr^d^t hab^n^os Ess Deos, quos ipse col^t. I^venal. Satyr. 15.
the several worship of which they had been differently bred up unto: And
surely, if a profane Christian, and a zealous Mahumetan should join in the
like contention, notwithstanding the subject it self, on the one side
defended, were a sacred and precious truth, yet I doubt not but the self same
reasons might be the sole motive of the Christian to vindicate the honor of
Christ, and of the other to maintain the worship of Mahomet. I mean a blind
and pertinacions adhering to that Religion in which they had been bred, a
natural inclination to favor domestical opinions, a high estimation of the
persons of men from whom by succession they have thus been instructed, without
any Spiritual conviction of the truth, or experience of the good which the
true members of Christ resolve their love unto him into. And this we find was
ever the reasons of the Jews obstinacy against the Prophets, they answered all
their arguments, with the practice and traditions they had received from their
Fathers, Ier. 9.14.11.10.44.17. Act. 7.51.

Thirdly, the heart may be misperswaded of its love to Christ, by judging that
an affection unto him, which is indeed nothing but a self love and a desire o^
advancing private ends. The rule whereby Christ at the last day will measure
the love or hatred of men unto him, is their love or hatred of his brethren and
members here, A^ro paricies, au^o laquearia, auro fulgent capita co^^mnarum,
and (...) atque ^suricus ante sores nos^ras Christus in paupere moritur.
Hieron. ad Gaudentium.
Mat. 25.40, 45* for in all their afflictions Christ himself is afflicted.
Peter love thou me? feed my sheep; make proof of thy love to me by thy
service and compassion to my people. And how many are there everywhere to be
found whose love unto themselves has devoured all brotherly love? who take no
pity either upon the souls, or temporal necessities of those with whom they
yet pretend a fellowship in Christ's own body? who spend more upon their own
pride and luxury, upon their backs and bellies, (...). Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
Qui Christiano vocabul^ gloriantur and perdite vivunt, non absurd possunt
videri medio Noe filio figurari; passionem quippe Christi, quae illius hominis
nuditate significata est, and annunciant profitendo, and male agendo
exhonorant. August. de Civit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 2. (...), etc. Ignat. epist.
ad Tral.
their pleasures and excesses, yea bury more of their substance in the mawes of
hawks and dogs, than they can ever persuade themselves to put into the bowels
of the poor Saints? surely at the day of judgment, how-ever such men here
profess to love Christ, and would spit in the face of him who with Justin
Martyr should say, they were not Christians, it will appear that such men did
as formally and ^^properly deny Christ, as if with Peter they had publicly
sworn, I know not the man. The Apostle plainly intimates thus much, when he
shows that the experiment of the Corinthians ministration to the necessity of
the Saints was an inducement unto the Churches to praise God for their
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. Again, as Christ
is present with us in his poor members, so likewise in the power of his
ordinances, and in the light and evidence of his Spirit shining forth in the
lives of holy men; If then we are as impatient of the edge of his word, when it
divides between the bone and the marrow, when it discerns and discovers
our secret thoughts, our bosom sins, our ambitions, unclean, and
hypocritical intents: if the lives and Communion of the Saints be in like
manner an eyesore unto us in shaming and reproving our formal and fruitless
profession of the same truth, as Christ's was unto the Jews; certainly the same
affections of hatred, reproach, and disestimation which we show unto them, we
would with so much the more bitterness have expressed unto Christ himself, if
we had lived in his days, by how much that Spirit of grace, against which the
Spirit which is in us envieth, was above measure more abundantly in him than in
the holiest of his members. If you were of the world (says our Savior) the
world would love their own, but now I have called you out of the world, I have
given to you a Spirit which is contrary to the Spirit of the World, therefore
the world hates you. And this is evident when men hate another merely for that
distinction which differenceth him from them, they much more hate him from whom
the difference it self originally proceeds. We see then that they who openly
profess Christ, may yet inwardly hate him, because the ground of their
profession is not any experimental goodness which they have tasted in him
(for by nature men have no relish of Christ at all) but only self-love and
private ends, Si quis Christo ^emporalia p^eponat, no^ esl in cofundam^ntum
Christus. ^ug, de civit Dei, lib 21. cap. 26. Mu^^^ ^missa (...) prop^ ^^anon
(...), and (...) quaere. ^es, (...) quae Jesus Christi, non a Christi unitate,
sed a suis commodis (...). Aug de Baptismo cent. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 10.
whereby Christ is subordinated to their own commodities. Men are herin just
like the (...). etc. l^s. Antiq. lib. 12. c. 7. (...), etc. Joseph. Antiq. lib.
11. cap. 8.
Samaritans, of whom Josephus reports that when Antiochus persecuted the Jews,
they then utterly disavowed any consanguinity with them, denied their Temple on
mount Gerosim to be dedicated to the great God, and declared their lineage from
the Medes and Persians: but when before that, Alexander had showed favor unto
the Jews, and remitted the tribute of every seventh year, they then claimed
kindred with that people, and counterfeited a descent from the tribes of
Ephraim and Manasse, that thereby they might enjoy the ^uos vi^es petulanter
and ^iocac^^er insul^^re (...) Chri^^^, (...) in e^s (...) que non evasissent,
nisi se^vos Christi se esse finxissent, et nunc ingrata superbia, atque
im^itssima insania ejus nomini resistunt cord perverso, ut sempiternis
tenebris pu^iantur, ad quod ^omen, ore vel subdola consugerunt, ut temporali
luce ^rucrentur. Aug. de civ. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 1.
privileges of those people whom otherwise they mortally hated. And so we
find that in the Vastation of the City of Rome by the Goths and Barbarians,
when there was but one only refuge allowed the Romans for the safety of their
lives, namely to fly unto the Christians Churches, those very enemies of Christ
and his profession, who before had persecuted him, and after returned to their
malice again, were yet then as hasty to fly unto his Temples, and to assume
the Title of his Servants, as they were after ungratefully malicious in
reproaching Christian Religion as if that had been the provocation of those
calamities. And may we not still observe amongst Christians at this day many
men who contrary to the evidence of their judgment, and peace of their
consciences, conform themselves unto the vanities, courses, and companies of
this evil world, and like cowards are afraid to adventure on a rigorous and
universal subjection to the truth of Christ, dare not keep themselves close
to those narrow rules of S. Paul, to abstain from jesting which is not seemly,
to avoid all appearances of evil, to reprove the unfruitful works of
darkness, to speak unto Edification that their words may minister grace unto
the hearers, to rejoice always in the Lord, to give place unto wrath, to
recompense evil with good, to be circumspect and exact in their walking before
God, and all this merely out of suspicion of some disrespect and disadvantages
which may hereupon meet them in the world, of some remoraes, and stoppage in
the order of those projects which they have contrived for their private ends?
Now if such purposes as these do sta^tle men from a punctual and rigorous
profession of the Gospel of Christ and his most holy ways (notwithstanding
our vow in Baptism do as strictly bind us thereunto, as unto the external
title of Christianity) suppose we that the same or greater disadvantages should
now (as in the primitive times) attend at the naked and outward profession of
Christ; would not such men as these fall into downright apostasy, and deny the
Lord that bought them? certainly our Savior has so resolved that case in the
very best sort of unregenerate men, noted in the stony ground; when times of
persecution happen, that they are brought to the trial who it was whom in
their profession they loved, Christ or themselves, the excellency of the
knowledge of him, or the secure enjoyment of secular contentments, they will
then certainly fall away, and be offended, Matt. 13.21. so profound and
unsearchable is the deceitful heart of man, that by that very reason for which
men contend for the outward face and profession of Religion, because they love
their pleasures and profits which without such a profession they cannot
peaceably enjoy, they are deterred from a close, spiritual, and universal
obedience to the power thereof, because thereby likewise those pleasures and
profits are kept within such rules of moderation as the nature of a boundless
and unsatisfiable lust will not admit. This is a certain rule in love, that
the motions and desires thereof are strong, and therefore in any thing which
the soul loves, it therein strives for excellency and perfection; and this rule
holds most true in religion, because when the so^^e loves that, it loves it
under the apprehension of the greatest good, and therefore by consequence sets
the strongest and most industrious desires of the soul upon it. Therefore the
Apostle says, that the Love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
namely that love of him which is by the Holy Ghost shed abroad in our hearts,
constrains us to live unto him, and to aspire after him who died for us and
rose again. Love is as strong as death, it will take no denial. It is the
wing, and weight of the soul, which fixes all the thoughts, and carries all
the desires unto an intimate unity with the thing it loves, stirs up a
zeal to remove all obstacles which stand between it, works a languor or
failing of nature in the want of it, Amor concupiscentiae non requiescit in qua
cunque extrinseca aut superficiali adeptione amati, sed quaerit amatum perfect
habere, quasi ad intima i^^ius pervenieus etc. Aquin. 12 ae. qu. 28. art. 2.
vid. ibid. art. 4. and 5. Cant 2.5. Psalm. 119.20. Esaias 26.8. Psalm. 42.2. Romans
8.23. Psalm. 119.5.10.31.47.54.81. etc.
a liquefaction and softness of nature to receive the impressions of it, an
egresse of the Spirits, and as it were an have of the soul to meet and
entertain it. Whence those expressions of the Saints in holy Scripture,
Comfort me with apples, stay me with flagons, for I am sick of love, my soul
breaks for the longing which it has unto thy judgments at all times. The
desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. My soul
thirsts for God, yea for the living God, when shall I come and appear before
God? We that have the first fruit of the Spirit groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of our Bodies. O that my ways
were directed that I might keep thy commandments, with my whole heart have I
sought thee, I have stuck unto thy testimonies, I will delight my self in thy
commandments, thy statutes have been my songs; my soul faints for thy
salvation, etc. By all which we see that a true love of Christ does excite
strong desires, and an earnest aspiring and ambition of the soul to walk in
all well-pleasing, and to be in all things conformable unto him. What the
Apostle says of Spiritual hope, we may truly say of love, (which is the
fundamental affection, and root of all the rest) He that has it indeed in
him, purges himself even as Christ is pure. The Love of the World, and the
things and lusts of the world may indeed consist with the formal profession,
but no way with the truth or power of a true love to Christ or his government.
For love is ever the principle and measure of all our actions, Quodlibet agens
propter amorem agit quodcunque agit. Aquin. 12 ae. qu. 28. art. 6.
such as it is, such likewise will they be too.

Fourthly, something like love there may be in natural men unto Christ,
grounded upon the historical assurance and persuasion of his being now in
glory, attended by mighty Angels, filled with all the treasures of wisdom,
knowledge, grace, power, and other excellent attributes, which can attract love
even from an enemy; and that he has and still does procure such good things
for mankind, in their deliverance from the guilt of sin, and from the wrath to
come, as of which, might they but have an exemption from his spiritual
government, and a dispensation to live according to their own lusts still, no
man should be more greedily desirous. As Sampson met the Lion as an enemy,
when he was alive, but after he was slain, he went unto him as to a table;
there was only terror while he lived, but honey when he was dead: so
doubtless many men, to whom the bodily presence of Christ, and the mighty
power and penetration of his heavenly preaching, whereby he smote sinners unto
the ground, and spoke with such authority as never man spoke, would have been
unsufferably irksome, and full of terror (as it was unto the Scribes and
Pharisees) can yet, now that he is out of their sight, and does not in person,
but only by those who are his witnesses torment the inhabitants of the earth,
pretend much admiration, and thankful remembrance of that death of his, which
was so full of honey for all that come unto him; Securus licet Aeneam Rutilumque
ferocem Committas, nulli gravis est percussus Achilles. Quid ^^fert dictis
ignoscat Mutius, annon? Pone Tigillinum, taeda lucebis in illa Qua stantes
ardent qui fixo gutture fumant, etc. Iuvenal. Satyr. 1.
for as particular dependencies and expectations may make a man flatter and
adore the greatness of some living Potentate, whose very image notwithstanding
the same man does professedly abominate in other tyrants of the world who are
dead, or upon whom he has not the same ends: so the selfsame reason may make
men in hypocritical expressions flatter and fawn upon Christ himself who is
absent, and yet hate with a perfect hatred the very image of his Spirit, in the
power of his Word, and in the lives of his people. The very Scribes and
Pharisees, who blasphemed his Spirit, and contrived his death, could yet be
contented to be gainers thereby; for see they confess, It is expedient for us
that one die for the people.

Lastly, a false love to Christ may be grounded upon a false conceit of love to
his ordinances: For as it is certain that he who loves the Word and worship of
Christ, as his, does love him too who is the Author of them: so it is certain
likewise that that love which is sometimes pretended unto them, may indeed in
them fix upon nothing but accidental and by-respects. This people, says the
Lord to his Prophet, come, and sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy
words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love,
but their heart goes after their covetousness. Here is love in pretense, but
falsehood in the heart: what then was it which in the Prophet they did thus
love? That presently follows, Thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument, Ezekiel. 33.31,
32. that is, it is not my will which in thy ministry they at all regard, but
only those circumstantiall ornaments of graceful action and elocution which
they attend with just alike proportion of sensual delight, as an ear does the
harmony of a well tuned instrument: for as a man may be much affected with the
picture of his enemy, if drawn by a skillful hand, and yet therein love
nothing of the person, but only the cunning of the workman who drew the piece:
So a man who hates the life and Spirit of the Word of God it self, as being
diametrically contrary to that spirit of lust, and of the world, which rules in
him; may yet be so wonderfully taken with that dexterity of wit, or delicacie
of expression, or variety of learning, or sweetness of speech, and action, or
whatsoever other perfection of nature or industry in the dispencers of that
Word are most suitable to his natural affections, as that he may from thence
easily cheat his own conscience, and ground a misperswasion of his love to
Gods Word, which yet indeed admireth nothing but the perfections of a man. Nay
suppose he meet not with such lenocinia to entice his affection, yet the very
pacification of the conscience, which by a notorious neglect of Gods ordinances
would happily be disquieted, or the credit of bearing conformity to
Ecclesiastical orders, and the established service of God in his Church, or
some other the like sinister respect may hold a man to such an external fair
correspondence, as by a deceitful heart may easily be misconstrued a love of
Gods ordinances. Nay further, a man may externally glory in the privilege of
Gods oracles, he may distinctly believe, and subscribe to the truth of them,
he may therein hear many things gladly, and escape many pollutions of the
world, and yet here hence conclude no cleerer evidence of his love to Christ in
his word, than the unbeleeving Jews, or Herod, or Ahab, or Simon Magus, Ier.
7.4. Romans 2.17.20. Hos. 2.2, 3. Mark. 6.20. 1 King. 21.27 -- 29.
or the foolish Virgins and apostates (all which have attained to some of these
degrees) could have done.

For the clearing then of this great case touching the evidence of a man's love
to Christ, we must first know that this is not a flower of our own garden,
Act. 8.13. 2 Pet. 2.20.
for every man by nature is an enemy to Christ and his Kingdom, of the Jews
mind, we will not have this man to reign over us; and the reason is because
the image of the old Adam which we bear, is extremely contrary to the heavenly
image of the second Adam, unto which we are not borne, but must be renewed.
And this is certain, our love is according to our likeness, he who has not
the nature and Spirit of Christ, can never love him or move toward him. For
love is like fire, congregat homogenea, it carries things of a nature to one
another. Our love then unto Christ must be of a spiritual generation: and it
is grounded upon two causes; First, upon the Proportion which is in him unto
all our desires or capacities, upon the evidence of that unsearchable and
bottomless goodness which is in him, which makes him the fairest often
thousand, even altogether lovely. For that heart which has a spiritual view
of Christ, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
will be able by faith to observe more dimensions of love, and sweetness in
him than the knowledge of any creature is able to measure. In all worldly
things though of never so curious and delicate an extraction, yet still even
those hearts which swim in them, and glut upon them, can easily discover more
dregs than Spirits; nothing was ever so exactly fitted to the soul of man,
wherein there was not some defect, or excess, something which the heart could
wish were away, or something which it could desire were tempered with it. But
in Christ and his kingdom there is nothing unlovely. For as in man the all
that is, is full of corruption, so in Christ the all that he is, is nothing
but perfection. His fullness is the center and treasure of the soul of man,
and therefore that love which is thereupon grounded must needs be in the soul
as an universal habit and principle, to facilitate every service whereby we
move unto this center, for love is the weight or spring of the soul, Amor meus
pondus meum, eo feror quocunque feror. Aug.
which sets every faculty on work, neither are any of those commandments
grievous which are obeyed in Love. And therefore it is called the fulfilling of
the Law. True love unto Christ keeps the whole heart together, and carries it
all one way, and so makes it universal, uniforme, and constant in all its
affections unto God (for unstedfastnesse of life proceeds from a divided or
double heart, Iam. 1.8.) As in the motions of the heavens, there is one common
circumvolution which ex aequo carries the whole frame daily unto one point
from east to west though each several sphere has a several cross way of
its own, wherein some move with a swifter, and others with a slower motion: So
though several Saints may have their several corruptions, and those likewise
in some stronger than in others, yet being all animated by one and the same
Spirit, they all agree in a steady and uniforme motion unto Christ. If a stone
were placed under the concave of the moon, though there be fire, and air,
and water between, yet through them all it would hasten to its own place; so
be the obstacles never so many, or the conditions never so various through
which a man must pass, through evil report and good report, through terrors
and temptations, through a sea and a wilderness, through fiery Serpents and
sons of Anak, yet if the heart love Christ indeed, and conclude that heaven is
its home, nothing shall be able totally to discourage it from hastening
thither, whither Christ the forerunner is gone before.

Secondly, Cant. 2.16. Ioh. 14.23. Ioh. 1^.21.23.
the true Love of Christ is grounded upon the evidence of that Propriety which
the soul has unto him. And of that mutual inhabitation and possession which
is between them. So that our love unto him in this regard is a kind of self
love (and therefore very strong) because Christ and a Christian are but one.
And the more persuasion the soul has of this unity, the more must it needs
love Christ. For we love him because he loved us first, 1 Ioh. 4.16.19. And
therefore our Savior, from the woman's apprehension of Gods more abundant love
in the remission of her many and great sins, concludes the measure and
proportion of her love to him. But says he, To whom little is forgiven the
same loves little, Luke 7.47.

Now True Love of Christ and his Kingdom thus grounded will undoubtedly
manifest it self, first in an universal extent unto any thing wherein Christ
is present unto his Church. First, the soul in this case will abundantly love
and cherish the Spirit of Christ. Entertain with dearest embraces, as worthy
of all acceptance, the motions, and dictates, and secret illapses of him into
the soul; will be careful to hear his voice always behind him, prompting
and directing him in the way he should walk, will endeavor with all readiness
and pliablenesse of heart to receive the impression of his seal, and the
testimony which he gives in the inner man unto all Gods promises; will fear
and suspect nothing more than the frowardness of his own nature, which daily
endeavors to quench, grieve, resist, rebel against this Holy Spirit, and to
fling off from his conduct again. Secondly, the soul in this case will
abundantly love the Ordinances of God (in which by his Spirit he is still
walking in the midst of the Churches) for the Law is written in it by the
finger of God, so that there is a suteablenesse and coincidencie between the
Law of God and the heart of such a man. He will receive the word in the purity
thereof, and not give way to those humane inventions which adulterate it, to
that spiritual treason of wit and fancy, or of heresy and contradiction,
which would stamp the private image and superscription of a man upon Gods own
coin, and torture the Scriptures to confess that which was never in them. He
will receive the word in the power, majesty, and authority thereof, suffering
it like thunder to discover the forest, and to drive out all those secret
corruptions which shelterd themselves in the corners, or deceit of his heart.
He will delight to have his imaginations humbled, and his fleshly reasonings
non plus'd, and al his thoughts subdued unto the obedience of Christ. He will
receive the word as a wholesome potion, to that very end that it may search his
secret places, and purge out those tough and incorporated lusts which hitherto
he had not prevailed against. He will take heed of hardening his heart that
he may not hear, of rejecting the counsel of God against himself, of
thrusting away the word from him, of setting up a resolved will of his own
against the call of Christ, as of most dangerous down-fals to the soul.
Lastly, he will receive the word in the spiritualnesse thereof, subscribing to
the closest precepts of the Law, suffering it to cleanse his heart unto the
bottom, he will let the consideration of Gods command preponderate and
overruled all respects of fear, love, profit, pleasure, credit, compliancy, or
any other charm to disobedience; he will be contented to be led in the
narrowest way, to have his secretest corruption revealed and removed, to expose
his conscience with patience under the saving, though severest blows of this
spiritual sword. In one word he will deny the pride of his own wit, and if
it be the evident truth of God which is taught him, though it come naked, and
without any dressings, or contributions of humane fancy, he will distinguish
between the author and the instrument, between the treasure and the vessel
in which it comes, and from any hand receive it with such awefull submission of
heart, as becomes Gods own word. Thirdly, the soul in this case will most
dearly love every member of Christ. For these two, the love of Christ, and of
his members, do infallibly accompany one another. For though there be a far
higher proportion of love due unto Christ than unto men, yet our love to our
brethren is quoad nos and a posteriori, not only the evidences, but even the
measure of our love to Christ. He that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? (says the Apostle) 1 Ioh.
4.20. he that has not love enough in him for a man like himself, how can he
love God whose goodness being above our knowledge requires a transcendency in
our love? This then is a sure rule; He that loves not a member of Christ,
loves not him, and he who grows in his love to his brethren, grows
likewise in his love to Christ. For as there is the same proportion of one to
five as there is of twenty to an hundred, though the numbers be far less: as
the motion of the shadow upon the dial, answers exactly to that proportion
of motion and distance which the Sun has in the firmament, though the Sun
goes many millions of miles when the shadow it may be moves not the breadth
of a hand: so though our love to Christ ought to be a far more abundant love,
than to any of his members, yet certain it is that the measure of our
progress in brotherly love is punctually answerable to the growth of our love
to Christ.

Secondly, a true grounded love unto Christ will show it self in the right
manner or conditions of it. Which are principally these three: First, it must
be an incorrupt and sincere love. Grace be upon all those that love the Lord
Jesus (...), in incorruption or sincerity, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.24. that
is, on those who love not in word or outward profession and stipulation only,
but in deed and truth, or in the permanent constitution of the inner man; which
moves them to love him always and in all things, to hate every false way, to
set the whole heart, the study, purpose, prayer and all the activity of our
Spirits against every corruption in us which stands at enmity with him and
his Kingdom. Secondly, it must be a principal and superlative love, grounded
upon the experience of the soul in it self, that there is ten thousand times
more beauty and amiablenesse in him, than in all the honors, pleasures,
profits, satisfactions which the world can afford; that in comparison or
competition with him, the dearest things of this world, the parents of our
body, the children of our flesh, the wife of our bosom, the blood in our
veins, the heart in our breast, must not only be laid down and lost as
sacrifices, but hated as snares when they draw us away from him. Thirdly, it
must be an unshared and uncommunicable love, without any corrivals; for Christ
as he is unto us all in all, so he requires to have all our affections fixed
upon him: As the rising of the Sun drowneth all those innumerable Stars
which did shine in the firmament before; so must the beauty of this Sun of
righteousness blot out, or else gather together unto it self all those
scattered affections of the soul, which were before cast away upon meaner
objects.

Lastly, true love unto Christ will show it self in the natural and genuine
effects of so strong and spiritual a grace: some of the principal I before
named, unto which we may add, First, An universal, cheerful, and constant
obedience to his holy Commandments: If a man, says Christ, love me, he will
keep my Commandments; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
him, and make our abode with him, Job. 14.24. There is a twofold love, a love
which descends, and a love which ascends, a love of Bounty and beneficence, and
a love of Duty and service: so then, as a father does then only in truth love
his child, when with all care he provideth for his present education and
future subsistence; so a child does then truly love his father, when with all
reverence and submission of heart he studieth to please and to do him service:
And this love if it be free and ingenuous, by how much the more not only pure
and equal in it self, but also profitable unto him the commandment is, by so
much the more carefully will it endeavor the observation thereof. And therefore
since the soul of a Christian knows that as God himself is good, and does
good, Psalm. 119.68. Psalm. 19.7-11. Mic. 2.7. Esaias 45.19. Psalm. 119.140.
so his Law (which is nothing but a ray and glimpse of his own holiness) is
likewise good in it self, and does good unto those which walk uprightly, it
is hereby enflamed to a more sweet and serious obedience thereunto, in the
keeping whereof, there is for the present so much sweetness, and in the future
so great a reward: Thy Word, says the Psalmist, is very pure, therefore thy
servant loves it.

Secondly, A free, willing, and cheerful suffering for him and his Gospel.
Unto you, says the Apostle, it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29. Tertul. Apolog.
cap. ult.
We see how far a humane love either of their country, or of vainglory has
transported some heathen men to the devoting and casting away their own lives:
How much more should a spiritual love of Christ put courage into us to bear
all things, and to endure all things (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 13.7.) for
him, who bare our sins, and our stripes, and our burdens for us, which were
heavier than all the world could lay on? And this was the inducement of that
holy martyr (...). Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Polycarp, to die for Christ, notwithstanding all the persuasions of the
persecutors, who by his apostacy would feign have cast the more dishonor upon
Christian Religion, and as it were by sparing him, have the more cunningly
persecuted that; This eighty six years, says he, I have served him, and he
never in all that time has done me any hurt, why should I be so ungrateful as
not to trust him in death, who in so long a life has never forsaken me? I am
persuaded, says the Apostle, that (...). Ignat. ep. ad Romans (...), etc. Ibid.
neither death, nor life, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able
to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans
8.38, 39. Nothing able to turn away his love from us, and therefore nothing
should be able to quench our love to him. Many waters, that is, by the usual
Psalm. 69.1, 2. Psalm. 124.4, 5. Esaias 8.7.
expression of the holy Scriptures, many afflictions, persecutions,
temptations, cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8.7.

Thirdly, A zeal and jealous contention for the glory, truth, worship and
ways of Christ: wicked men pretend much love to Christ, but they indeed serve
only their own turns; as Ivy, which claspes an Oak very close, but only to
suck out sap for its own leaves and berries; but a true love is full of care
to advance the glory of Christ's kingdom, and to promote his truth and worship,
fears lest Satan and his instruments should by any means corrupt his truth,
or violate his Church, as the Apostle to the Galatians professes, the fear
which his love wrought in him toward them; I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.11-16. So we find what contention,
and disputation, and strife of spirit the Apostles and others in their
ministry used, when Christ and his holy Gospel was any way either injured by
false brethren, or kept out by the idolatry of the places to which they came,
Act. 15.2. Act. 17.16. Act. 18.25. and 19.8. Gal. 2.4, 5. Jude v. 2.

Lastly, A longing after his presence, a love of his appearing, a desire to be
with him which is best of all, a seeking after him, and grieving for him, when
for any while he departs from the soul, a waiting for his salvation, a delight
in his Communion, and in his spiritual refreshments, a communing with him in
his secret chamber, in his houses of wine, and in his galleries of love. By
which lovely expressions the Wiseman has described the fellowship which the
Church desires to have with Christ, and that abiding and supping of Christ
with his Church, feasting the soul with the manifestations of himself and his
graces unto it, Psalm. 42.3. and 105.4. 2 Cor. 5.2. 2 Timothy 4.8. Phil. 1.23.
Cant. 3.1, 2. Cant. 5.6-8. Genesis 49.18. Psalm. 119.131. Cant. 1.4. and 2.4. Cant.
7.5. Ion. 14.21-23. Revel. 3.20.

Having thus by occasion of the enemies of Christ, spoken something of the true
and false Love which is in the world toward him: we now proceed to the
particulars mentioned before. And the first is the term of Duration, or
measure of time in the Text, Until. It has a double relation in the words,
unto Christ's Kingdom, and unto his Enemies. As it looks to the kingdom of
Christ, it denotes both the Continuance and the Limitation of his kingdom. The
continuance of it in his own person, for it is there fixed and intransient. He
is a King without successors, as being subject to no mortality, nor defect
which might be by them supplied. The kingdom of Christ (as I observed) is
either Natural, as he is God, or Dispensatory, and by Donation from the
Father, as he is Mediator, and not only of the former, but even of this
likewise the Scripture affirms that it is Eternal. It is a kingdom set up by
the God of heaven, and yet it shall never be destroyed, but stand for ever,
Dan. 2.44. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, that notes the unction
and donation, Psalm. 2.6. and in mount Sion where God has set him, he shall
reign from henceforth even for ever, Mic. 4.7. Though he be a child borne,
and a son given, yet of the increase of his government and peace there shall
be no end; upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and justice, from henceforth for ever and ever,
Esaias 9.6, 7. unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,
Heb. 1.8. And here we must distinguish between the substance of Christ's
kingdom, and the form or manner of administering and dispencing it. In the
former respect it is absolutely eternal, Christ shall be a head and rewarder
of his members, an everlasting Father, a Prince of peace unto them for ever. In
the latter respect it shall be Eternal according to some acception, that is,
it shall remain until the consummation of all things, as long as there is a
Church of God upon the earth, there shall be no new way of spiritual and
essential government prescribed unto it, no other Vicar, Successor, Monarch,
or Usurper upon his office by God allowed, but he only by his Spirit in the
dispensation of his ordinances shall order and overruled the consciences of his
people, and subdue their enemies: yet he shall so reign till then, as that he
shall then cease to rule in such manner as now he does, when the end comes he
shall deliver up the kingdom to God the Father, and when all things shall be
subdued unto him, he also himself shall be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24-28. He shall so
return it unto God, as God did confer, and as it were, appropriate it unto
him, namely, in regard of judiciary dispensation and execution, in which
respect our Savior says, that as touching the present administration of the
Church, The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment, and has
given authority to execute it unto his Son, Ioh. 4.22, 27. Now Christ
governs his Church by the ministry of his Word and Sacraments, and by the
effusion of his Spirit in measure and degrees upon his members; by his mighty,
though secret, power he fights with his enemies, and so shall do till the
resurrection of the dead, when death, the last enemy shall be overcome, and
then in these respects his kingdom shall cease, for he shall no more exercise
the offices of a Mediator in compassionating, defending, interceding for his
Church; but yet he shall still sit and reign for ever as God, coequall with
his Father, and shall ever be the Head of the Church his body. Thus we see
though Christ's kingdom in regard of the manner of dispensation, and present
execution thereof, it be limited by the consummation of all things; yet in it
self it is a kingdom which has neither within the seeds of mortality, nor
without the danger of a concussion, but in the substance is immortal, though
in regard of the commission and power which Christ had as Mediator to
administer it alone by himself, and by the fullness of his Spirit, it be at
last voluntarily resigned into the hands of the Father, and Christ as a part of
that great Church become subject to the Father, that God may be all in all.

Now the grounds of the Constancy of Christ's government over his Church, and by
consequence of the Church it self which is his kingdom, are amongst others
these: First, the Decree and promise of God sealed by an oath, which made it an
adamantine and unbended purpose, James 1.17. Non mutat voluntatem, sed vult
mutatati^nem, Aqu. part. 1. qu. 19. art. 7. Aug. Confess. lib. 12. c. 15.
deciv. Dei, lib. 14. c. 11. lib. 22. cap. 1. de Trin. lib. 5. c. 16.
which the Lord would never repent of nor reverse. All Gods Counsels are
immutable (though he may alter his works, yet he does never change his will,)
but when he seals his Decree with an oath, that makes their immutability past
question or suspicion. In that case it is impossible for God to change, because
it is impossible for God to lie, or deny himself, Hebr. 6.18. Now upon such a
Decree is the Kingdom of Heaven established. Once have I sworn by my
Holiness that I will not lie unto David, says the Lord, Psalm. 89.35. Once,
that notes the constancy and fixednesse of Gods promise; By my Holiness, that
notes the inviolablenesse of his promise; as if he should have said, Let me no
longer be esteemed an Holy God than I keep immutably that Covenant which I
have sworn unto David in my truth.

Secondly, the free gift of God unto his Son Christ, whereby he committed all
power and judgment unto him. And Power is a strong argument to prove the
Stability of a kingdom, especially if it be on either side supported with
wisdom and righteousness, as the power of Christ is: And therefore from his
power he argues for the perpetuity of his Church to the end of the world, All
power is given me in heaven and earth; Go ye therefore and preach the
Gospel to all nations; and lo I am with you always to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28.18-20. And the argument is very strong and emphaticall, for though
kingdoms of great power have been and may be subdued, yet the reason is,
because much power has still remained in the adverse side; or if they have
been too vast for any smaller people to root out, yet having not either
wisdom enough to actuate so huge a frame, or righteousness to prevent or
purge out those vicious humors of emulation, Vid. Arist. Polit. lib. 5. In se
magna ruunt, laetis hunc numin^ rebus Crescendi posuere modum, Lucan.
sedition, luxury, injustice, violence and impiety, which like strong diseases
in a body, are in states the preparations and seminaries of mortality, they
have sunk under their own weight, and been inwardly corrupted by their own
vices. But now first, the power of Christ in his Church is universal, there is
in him all power and no weakness, no power without him or against him; and
therefore no wonder if from a fullness of power in him, and an emptiness in
his enemies, the argument of continuance in his kingdom does infallibly
follow; for what man, if he were furnished with all sufficiency, would suffer
himself to be mutilated and dismembered, as Christ should, if any thing should
prevail against the Church, which is his fullness. Again, this power of
Christ is supported with wisdom, it can never miscarry for any inward defect,
for the wisdom is proportionable to the power; this, All power, and that, All
the treasures of wisdom; Power able by weakness to confound the things which
are mighty, and wisdom able by foolishness to bring to naught the
understanding of the prudent; and both these are upheld by righteousness,
which is indeed the very soul and sinews of a kingdom, upon which the
thrones of Princes are established, and which the Apostle makes the ground of
the perpetuity of Christ's kingdom, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom, Hebr. 1.8.

Thirdly, the quality of Christ's kingdom is to be a Growing kingdom, though
the originals thereof be but like a grain of mustard seed, or like Eliahs
cloud to a humane view despicable, and almost below the probabilities of
subsistence, the object rather of derision than of terror to the world; yet at
last it grows into a wideness, which makes it as catholic as the world.
And therefore that which the Prophet David speaks of the Sun, the Apostle
applies to the Gospel, Romans 10.18. to note that the Circle of the Gospel is
like that of the Sun, universal to the whole world. It is such a kingdom as
grows into other kingdoms, and eats them out. The little stone in
Nebuchadnezzars vision (which was the Kingdom of Christ, for so Jerusalem is
called a stone, Zech. 12.3.) brake in pieces the great Monarchies of the earth,
and grew up into a great mountain which filled the world, Dan. 2.34, 35. for
the kingdoms of the earth must become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his
Christ, Revel. 11.15. Therefore the Prophets express Christ and his kingdom
by the name of a Branch, which grows up for a standard and ensign of the
people, Esaias 11.1.10. Zech. 3.8. A branch which grows, but never withers. It
has no principles of death in it self; and though it be for a while subject
to the assaults of adversaries, and foreign violence, yet that serves only to
try it, and to settle it, but not to weaken or overturne it: The gates of
hell, all the powers, policies, and laws of darkness, shall never prevail
against the Church of Christ: he has bruized, and judged, and trodden down
Satan under our feet. He has overcome the world; he has subdued iniquity,
he has turned persecutions into seminaries and resurrections of the Church;
he has turned afflictions into matters of glory and of rejoicing; so that in
all the violence which the Church can suffer, it does more than conquer,
because it conquers not by repelling but by suffering.

And this shows the sacrilege and sauciness of the Church of Rome, which in
this point does with a double impiety therefore pervert the Scriptures, that it
may derogate from the honor of Christ and his kingdom: And those things which
are spoken of the infallibility, authority, and fullness of power which Christ
has in his body, of the stability, constancy, and universalitie of his Church
upon earth, does arrogate only to the Pope and his See at Rome. As the
Donatists in S. Augustines time from that place of the Spouse in the Canticles,
Aug. Epist. 48. and to. 7. de unitat. Eccles. c. 16.
Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flock to rest in Meridie, excluded all the world from being a Church, save
only a corner of Africa, which was at that time the nest of those hornets: So
because Christ says, his Church is built upon a rock, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it; therefore the Romanists from hence conclude all
these privileges to belong to them, and exclude all the famous Churches of the
world besides from having any communion with Christ the Head. B. Jewels Defense
of the Apology, part 4. page 360.
That scornful expostulation which Harding makes with that renowned and
incomparable Bishop (under whose hand he was no more able to subsist, than a
whelpe under the paw of a Lion) shall we now change the song of Micheas the
Prophet, Out of Sion shall come the Law, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; and sing a new song, out of Wittenberg is come the Gospel, and the
Word of the Lord from Zurich and Geneva? may most truly and pertinently be
retorted upon himself and his faction, who boldly curse and Idem a Romano
pontifice dividi, quod ab universa Ecclesia separari, Baron, to. 2. A. 254..
100.
exclude all those Christian Churches from the body of Christ, and the hope of
salvation, who will not receive laws from Rome, nor esteem the Cathedral
determinations of that Bishop (though happily in himself an impure, diabolical
and intolerable beast, as by their own confessions many of them have been) to
be notwithstanding the infallible Edicts of the Spirit of God, and as
undoubtedly the Word of Christ, as if S. Peter or Saint Paul had spoken it; an
arrogancy than which there is scarce any more express and characteristicall
note to discern Antichrist by. It is true that Christ's regal power does
always show forth it self in upholding his Catholic Church, and in revealing
unto it out of his sacred Word such necessary truths as are absolutely
requisite unto its being and salvation; but to bind this power of Christ to
one man, and to one See, (as if like the Pope he were infallible only in S.
Peter's chair) is the mere figment of pride and ambition without any ground at
all, raised out of a heap and aggregation of monstrous presumptions of humane
and some most disputable, Crantzius in Metropol. l. 5. c. 1. in Bonifacio 6.
Stephano 6. Theodoro, Christophoro, Ioanne 12. Sylvestro 2. Sigon. de Regno
Italiae, lib. 7. Anno 964. Guicciard. de Alex. 6. lib. Hist. 1. page 3, 4. Pet.
Bembus de eodem in Hist. Venet. lib. 6. Platina in Christophero 1. Joan. 13.
Sylvestro 2. etc.

Vid. Mornaeum de Ecclesia, ca. 9. Reynol. Conser. c. 7. divis. 1. and 5. B.
Carleton of Jurisdict. cap. 7. B. Usher de statu Ecclesiae, cap. 3, 4, 5.


others most false conceits, of which though there be not the least vestigia in
sacred Scriptures, yet must they be all first wrested in for indubitate
principles, and laid for sure foundations before the first stone of Papal
authority can be raised. As first, that the external and visible regiment of
the whole Church is Bellarm. lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans cap. 9.
Monarchical, and that there must be a predominant mistress Church set over
all the rest, to which in all points they must have recourse, and to whose
decisions they must conform without any hesitancie, or suspicion at all,
whereas the Apostle tells us that the unity of the Church is gathered by many
Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. for as if several needles be touched
by so many several Loadstones (all which have the selfsame specificall
virtue in them) they do all as exactly bend to one and the same point of
heaven, as if they had been thereunto qualified by but one: so in as much as
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, come all instructed with
one and the same spiritual truth and power toward the Church, therefore all
the faithful, who are any where by these multitudes of Preachers taught what
the truth is in Jesus, do all by the secret sway and conduct of the same
Spirit of Grace (whose peculiar office it is to guide his Church in all
necessary and saving truth) with an admirable consent of heart, and unity of
judgment incline to the same end, and walk in the same way, acknowledging no
monarch over their consciences but CHRIST, nor any other ministerial
application of his regal power in the Catholic Church, but only by several
Bishops and Pastors, who in their several particular compasses are endowed
with as plenary and ample ministerial power, as the Pope and his Consistory
within the Sea of Rome. Secondly, that Peter was Prince and Monarch, Rock and
Head in this Universal Church, and that he alone was custos clavium, and all
this in the virtue of Christ's promise and commission granted unto him. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, Baron. An. 33. sect. 17.
Bellar. de Pontif. Romans lib. 1. c. 10.
feed my sheep, feed my Lambs, unto thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom
of heaven: In which respect Baronius calls him Quod non audet Bozius. Praeter
Christum (inquit) non potest aliud fundamentum poni, quod sit itemprimarium
design. Ecclesie, l. 18. c. 1. ob. 5.
Lapidem primarium, the chief stone; and again, though Christ, says he, be
the Author and moderator of his Church, yet the Princedome and Monarchy he
has conferred upon Peter Sicut (quod certum est) nemo potest aliud ponere
fundamentum, prae^erid quod positum est, quod est Christus; ita etiam nec aliud
quispiam ponet, quam quod posui^ Christus, neque convellet quod ipse firmavit,
dicens, Tu es Petrus, etc. Baron. An. 33 sect. 20.
; and therefore as no man can lay any other foundation than that which is laid,
namely Christ, so no man can lay any other than that which Christ has laid,
namely Peter. And it is wonderful to consider what twigs and rushes they catch
at to hold up this their monarchy. Baron. A. 34. sect. 247. Bozius de fignis
Ecclesiae, lib. 18. cap. 1.2. Bellarm. de Roman. Pontifice, lib. 1. cap. 17.25.
Because Peter did preach first, therefore he is Monarch of the Church. By which
reason his monarchy is long since expired, for his pretended successors scarce
preach at all. And yet if that may be drawn to any argument, it proves only
that he was Lapis primus, the first in order and in forwardness to preach
Christ (as it became him who had three times denied him) but not Lapis
primarius, the chief in dignity, and jurisdiction over the rest^ and why
should it not be as good an argument to say that James had the dignity of
precedence before Peter, because Paul first names James, and then Cephas, and
that in a place where he particularly singles them out as pillars and
principal men in the Church, as to say that Peter has jurisdiction over James
and the rest, because in their Synods and assemblies he was the chief
speaker? Baron. An. 34. sect. 264.
Because Peter cured the lame man that sat at the gate of the Temple, therefore
he is universal monarch. By which reason likewise Paul who in the self same
manner cured a creeple at Lystra, should fall into competitio^ with Peter for
his share in the monarchy. But the people there were not so acute disputants
as these of Rome, for though they saw what Paul had done, yet they concluded
the dignity and precedence for Barnabas, they called him Jupiter and Paul
Mercury. Again, because Peter Baron. Ibid. sect. 269.
pronounced sentence upon Ananias, therefore he is monarch of the universal
Church: and why Paul should not here likewise come in for his share, I know
not, for he also passed judgment upon Elimas the sorcerer (and we no where
find that he derived his authority, or had any commission from Peter to do
so.) And surely if by the same Apostolical and infallible Spirit of Christ,
(which they both immediately received from Christ himself) S. Paul did adjudge
Elimas to blindness, by the which S. Peter adjudged Ananias to death, I see
not how any logic from a parity of actions can conclude a disparity of
persons, except they will say that it is more monarchical to adjudge one to
death, than another to blindness. Again, because Peter healed the sick by his
shadow, Baron. Ibid. sect. 274.
therefore Peter is monarch of the universal Church: and even in this point
Paul likewise may hold on his competition, for why is not the argument as good
that Paul is Monarch of the Church because the handkerchiefs and aprons which
came from his body did cure diseases, and cast out Devils, as that Peter is
therefore monarch because by the overshaddowing of his body the sick were
healed? But the truth is there is no more substance in this argument for Peter's
principality, than there is for their supposed miraculous virtue of images and
relics of Saints, because the shadow (which was the image of Peter) did heal
the sick, for that also is the Cardinals great argument. Again, because Peter
was sent to Samaria to confirm them in the faith, Ibid. sect. 275. An. 35.
sect. 9.25.
and to lay hands on them that they might receive the holy Ghost, and to
confound Simon Magus the sorcerer, therefore he is primate of the Catholic
Church, and has monarchical jurisdiction. And yet the Pope is by this time
something more monarchical than Peter, for he would think skorne to be sent
as an Ambassador of the Churches from Rome to the Indians, amongst whom his
Gospel has been in these latter ages preached; and doubtless they would be
something more confirmed than they are by the sovereign virtue of his prayers
and presence. But alas, what argument is it of monarchy to be sent by others
in a message, and that too not without an associate, who joined with him in the
confirmation of that Church? and if the confuting, or cursing of Simon Magus
were an argument of primacy, why should not S. Paul's cursing of Elimas, and
Hymeneus, and Alexander, and S. John's of Cerinthus be arguments of their
primacie likewise? Again, Baron. An. 39. sect. 6.
because Paul went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, therefore Peter was monarch of
the Catholic Church. And why should not by this argument Elizabeth be
concluded a greater woman than the virgin Marie, and indeed the lady of all
woman, because the blessed Virgin went up into the hill country of Judea, and
entered into the house of Zacharias and saluted Elizabeth? but we find no
argument but of equality in the Text, for he went to see him as a brother, but
not to do homage to him, or receive authority from him as a monarch, else why
went he not up immediately to Jerusalem, but stayed three years, and preached
the Gospel by the commission he had received from Christ alone? and how came
S. Paul to be so free, or S. Peter to be so much more humble than any of his
pretended successors as the one to give with boldness, the other with silence
and meekness to receive so sore a reproof in the face of all the brethren as
many years after that did pass between them. Certainly S. Paul in so long
time could not but learn to know his distance, and in what manner to speak to
his monarch and primate. By these particulars we see upon what sandy
foundation this vast and formidable Babel of Papal usurpation and power over
the Catholic Church is erected (which yet upon the matter is the sole
principle of Romish religion, upon which all their faith, worship and obedience
depends.) But we say that as Peter was a foundation, so were all the other
Apostles likewise, Ephesians. 2.20. Revel. 21.14. and that upon the same reason. For
the Apostles were not foundations of the Church by any dignity of their
persons, as Christ the chief corner stone was, but by the virtue of their
Apostolical office, which was universal jurisdiction in governing the people
of Christ, universal commission in instructing them, and a Spirit of
infallibility in revealing Gods will unto them throughout the whole world. And
therefore as Peter had the keys of the Kingdom of heaven to remit or retain
the sins of men; so likewise had the other Apostles, Ioh. 20.23. That Christ's
charge to Peter, feed my sheep, feed my lambs, is no other in substance than
his commission to them all, go teach all nations baptizing them in the name of
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. And that the particular directing of
it unto Peter, and praying for him, was with respect unto his particular only
by way of comfort and confirmation, as being then a weak member, not by way of
dignity, or deputation of Christ's own regal power to him in the visible
Church. For all the offices of Christ are intransient and uncommunicable to any
other, in as much as that administration and execution of them depends upon
the dignity of his person, and upon the fullness of his Spirit, which no
mortal man or immortal Angel is capable of. But all this is not enough to
be granted them for the raising their authority. But then thirdly, we must
grant them too that Peter, thus qualified, was Bishop of Rome, for proof
whereof they have no Testimony of Holy Scriptures, but only humane tradition,
Cui impossible non est subesse falsum. So that in this which is one of the
maine principles they build upon, their faith cannot be resolved into the word
of God, Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 12. Baron. An. 39. sect. 16.26.
and therefore is no divine faith. Fourthly, that he did appoint that Church
to be the monarchical and fundamental see to all other Churches; for he was
Bishop as well of Antioch as of Rome, by their own confession. And I wonder
why some of his personal virtue should not cleave to his chair at Antioch,
but all pass over with him to another place. Fifthly, that he did transmit
all his prerogatives to his successors in that chair. By which assertion they
may as well prove that they all (though some of them have been sorcerers,
others murderers, others blasphemous atheists) were inheriters of S. Peter's
love to Christ, for from thence our Savior inferres, feed my sheep, to note
that none feed his sheep, but those that love his person. Lastly, that that
long succession from S. Peter until now has ever since been legal, and
uninterrupted. Or else the Church must sometimes have been a monster without a
head. We grant that some of the Ancients argue from succession in the Church;
but it was while it was yet pure, Tertull. depraescript. cap. 19.22. Aug.
Epist. 165. de dissidio Donatist.
and while they could by reason of the little space of time between them and
the Apostles, with evidence resolve their Doctrine through every medium into
the preaching of the Apostles themselves. But even in their personal
succession who knows not what Simonies and Sorceries have raised diverse of
them unto that degree? and who is able to resolve, that every Episcopal
ordination of every Bishop there has been valid, since thereunto is requisite
both the intention and Orders of that Bishop that ordained him. These and a
world of the like uncertainties must the faith of these men depend upon, who
dare arrogate to themselves the prerogatives of Christ, and of his Catholic
Kingdom. But I have been too long upon this argument.

Again this point of the stabilitie of Christ's Kingdom is a ground of strong
confidence and comfort to the whole Church of Christ, against all the violence
of any outward enemies wherewith sometimes they may seem to be swallowed upon.
Though they associate themselves, and gird to the battle, though they take
counsel, and make decrees against the Lords anointed and against his spouse,
yet it shall all come to naught, and be broken in pieces, all the smoke of
hell shall not be able to extinguish, nor all the power of hell to overturne
the Church of God, and the reason is, Immanuel, God is with us, Esai. 8.9, 10.
That anointing which the Church has received shall deliver it at last from the
yoke of the enemy, Esai. 10.27. Though it seem for the time in as desperate a
condition as a dry stick in the fire, or a dead body in the grave, yet this is
not indeed a sepulture, but a semination. Though it seem to be cast away for
a season, yet in due time it will come up and flourish again, Zechariah 3.2.
Ezekiel 37.11. And this is the assurance that the Church may have, that the
Lord can save and deliver a second time, Esai. 11.11. that he is the same God
yesterday, and to day, and for ever; and therefore such a God as the Church has
found him heretofore, such a God it shall find him to day, and for ever, in
the returns and manifestations of his mercy. Which discovers the folly, and
foretells the confusion of the enemies of Christ's Kingdom, they conceive
mischief, but they bring forth nothing but vanity, Job 15.35. They conceive
chafe, and bring forth stubble, Esai. 33.11. They imagine nothing but a vain
thing, their malice is but like the fighting of briars and thorns with the
fire, Esai. 27.4. Nahum 1.10. like the dashing of waves against a rock, like a
mad man's shooting arrows against the Sun, which at last return upon his
own head; like the puffing of the fan against the corn, which drives away
nothing but the chafe, like the beating of the wind against the sail, or the
foming and raging of the water against a mill, which by the wisdom of the
artificers are all ordered unto useful and excellent ends. And surely when the
Lord shall have accomplished his work on mount Sion, when he shall by the
adversary, as by a fan have purged away the iniquity of Jacob, and taken away
his sin, he will then return in peace and beauty unto his people again.
Look on the preparation of some large building, in one place you shall see
heaps of lime, and mortar, in another piles of timber, every where rude, and
indigested materials, and a tumultuary noise of axes and hammers, but at length
the artificer sets every thing in order, and raises up a beautiful structure:
such is the proceeding of the Lord in the afflictions and vastations of his
Church, though the enemy intend to ruin it, yet God intends only to repair
it. Thus far as Donec respects Christ's Kingdom in it self.

Now as it respects the enemies of Christ, it notes, First, The present
inconsummatenesse of the victories, and by consequence the intranquillity of
Christ's Kingdom here upon the earth. All his enemies are not yet under his
feet, Satan is not yet shut up; the rage of hell, the persecutions and
policies of wicked men, the present immunity of desperate sinners, are
evidences that Christ has yet much work to do in his Church. But does not
the Apostle say, that all things are put under his feet? Ephesians. 1.22. It is true
quoad judiciariam potestatem, but not quoad exercitium potestatis. He shall
not receive any new power to subdue his enemies, which he has not already;
but yet he can execute that power when and how he will. And he is pleased to
suffer his enemies in this respite of their reprivall to rage, and revile, and
persecute him in his members. Every wicked man is condemned already, and has
the wrath of God abiding upon him, Job. 3.18.36. Only Christ does suspend the
execution of them for many weighty reasons. As first, to show his patience and
long suffering toward the vessels of wrath, for he ever comes first with an
offer of peace, before he draws the sword, Romans 2.4. Romans 9.22. Deuteronomy.
20.10-13. Luke 10.5, 11. Secondly, to magnify the power of his protection and
providence over the Church in the midst of their enemies, for if the Lord were
not on the Churches side when man rises up against it, if he did not rebuke
the proud waves, and set them their bounds how far they should go, there
could be no more power in the Church to withstand them, than in a level Ier.
5.22. Aegyptus mari concavitate depressior, and tamen praecep to creatoris
tanquam compe dibus coercetur mare Rubrum ne in Aegyptum irrumpat. Basil, Mag.
Hexamer. Homil. 4.
of sand to resist an inundation of the Sea, Psalm. 124.1.5. Thirdly, to reserve
wicked men unto the great day of his appearing, and of the declaration of his
power and righteousness, wherein all the world shall be the spectators and
witnesses of his just and victorious proceedings against them, Act. 17.31.
Fourthly, to show forth his mighty power in destroying the wicked all together.
They who here carried themselves with that insolence as if every particular man
meant to have plucked Christ out of his throne, shall there all together be
brought forth before him. That as the righteous are reserved to have their full
salvation together, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. so the wicked may be bound up in bundles,
and destroyed together, Psalm. 37.38. Esai. 1.28. Fifthly, to fill up the
measure, and to ripen the sins of wicked men: for the Lord puts the
wickedness of men into an Epha, and when they have filled up their measure, he
then seals them up unto the execution of his righteous judgments. And hence
it is that the Scripture calls wicked men Vessels fitted for destruction, for
they first fill themselves with sin, and then God fills them up with wrath
and shame. Sixthly, to fill up the number of his Elect, for he has many
sheep which are not yet within his fold, and they many of them the posterity
of wicked men, Ioh. 10.16. Seventhly, to fill up the measure of his own
sufferings in his members, that they may follow him unto his kingdom through
the same way of afflictions as he went before them, Col. 1.24. Revel. 6.11.
Eighthly, to exercise the faith of his Church, to drive the faithful with the
Prophet Habakuk into their watchtower, and with David into the Sanctuary of
the Lord, thereto wait upon him in the way of his judgments, to consider that
the end of the righteous man is peace, and that the pride and prosperity of the
wicked is but as the fat of Lambs, and as the beauty of grass; that God has
set them in slippery places, and will cast them down at the last, Hab. 2.1, 3.
Psalm. 37.2.10.20. Psalm. 73.18. Lastly, to weane the faithful from earthly
affections, and to kindle in them the desires of the Saints under the altar,
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? Revel. 6.10.

Secondly, as donec notes the Patience of Christ toward his enemies, so it
notes likewise that there are fixed bounds and limits unto that patience,
beyond which he will no longer forbear them. There is an appointed day,
wherein he will judge the world with righteousness, Act. 17.31. There is a
year of vengeance, and of recompenses for the controversies of Sion, Esai.
34.8. The wild ass that sucketh up the wind at her pleasure may be found in
her month, Ier. 2.24. The Lord sees that the day of the wicked is coming. It
is an appointed time, though it tarry, yet if we wait for it, It will surely
come, it will not tarry, Psalm. 37.13. Hab. 2.3. Well then, let men go on with
all the fierceness and excess of riot they will, let them walk in the way of
their heart, and in the sight of their eyes, yet all this while they are in a
chain, they have but a compass to go, and God will bring them to judgment
at the last. When the day of a Drunkard and riotous person is come, when he
has taken so many hellish swallows, and has filled up the measure of his
lusts, his marrow must then lie down in the dust, though the cup were at his
mouth, yet from thence it shall be snatched away, and for everlasting he shall
never taste a drop of sweetness, nor have the least desire of his wicked heart
satisfied any more. A wicked man's sins will not follow him to hell to please
him, but only the memory of them to be an everlasting scourge, and flame upon
his conscience. O then take heed of ripening sin, by custom, by security, by
insensibility, by impudence and stoutnesse of heart, by making it a mock, a
matter of glory and of boasting, by stopping the ear against the voice of the
Charmer, and turning the back upon the invitations unto mercy, by resisting
the Evidence of the Spirit in the Word, and committing sin in the light of
the Sun: for as the heat of the sun does wither the fruit which falls off,
and ripen that which hangs on the tree; so the Word does weaken those lusts
which a man is desirous to shake off, and does ripen those which the heart
holds fast and will not part with. When was Israel overthrown, but when they
mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Word, and misused his Prophets,
and rejected the remedy of their sin? and when was Juda destroyed, but when
they hardened themselves against the Word, and would not take notice of the day
of their peace? Alas, what haste do men make to promote their own damnation,
and to go quickly to hell, when they will break through the very Law of God,
and through all his holy Ordinances, that they may come thither the sooner, as
if the gate would be shut against them, or as if it were a place of some great
preferment; as if they had to do with a blind God which could not see, or
with an impotent God which could not revenge their impieties. Well, for all
this, the Wise man's speech will prove true at the last, Know, that God will
bring thee unto judgment.

Thirdly, donec notes the infallible accomplishment of Christ's victories and
triumph over his enemies at the last, when the day is come wherein he will be
patient toward them no longer. The Prophet gives three excellent reasons
hereof in one verse, Esai. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. He is our Judge, and
therefore certainly when the day of trial is come he will plead our cause
against our adversaries, and will condemn them, Mich. 7.9. But a Judge cannot
do what pleases himself, but is bound to his rule, and proceeds according
to established laws. Therefore he is our Lawgiver likewise, and therefore he
may himself appoint Laws according to his own will, but when the Will of the
Judge, and the Rule of the Law do both consent in the punishing of offenders,
yet then still the King has a liberty of mercy, and he may pardon those whom
the Law and the Judge have condemned. But Christ, who shall judge the enemies
of his Church according to the Law which himself has made, is himself the
King, and therefore when he revengeth, Oportet eum ad tantam evidentiam regnum
suum perducere, donec inimici eius nullo modo audeant negare quod regnat, Aug.
there is none besides nor above him to pardon. So at that day there shall be
a full manifestation of the Kingdom of Christ, none of his enemies shall move
the wing, or open the mouth, or peep against him.

The second thing formerly proposed in this latter part of the verse was, The
Author of subduing Christ's enemies under his feet [ I the Lord.] Wicked men
will never submit themselves to Christ's Kingdom, but stand out in opposition
against him in his Word and ways. When Gods hand is lifted up in the
dispensation of his Word and threatenings against sin, men will not see, Esai.
26.11. And therefore he says, My spirit shall not always strive with men, to
note that men would of themselves always strive with the spirit, and never
yield nor submit to Christ. Though the patience and goodness of God should
lead them to repentance, and forewarne them to fly from the wrath to come, yet
they after their hardness and impenitent heart do hereby treasure up against
themselves the more wrath, Romans 2.4, 5.
and because judgment is not speedily executed, Eccles. 8.11.
their heart is wholly set in them to do mischief. Let favor, says the
Prophet, be showed unto a wicked man, yet will he not learn righteousness,
Esai. 26.10.
in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the
majesty of the Lord. Certainly if a wicked man could be rescued out of hell
it self, and brought back into the possibilities of mercy again, yet would
he in a second life fly out against God, and while he had time take his fill
of lusts again. We see Clay will but grow harder by the fire, and that metal
which melted in the Furnace, being taken thence will return to its wonted
solidity. When Pharaoh saw that the rain, and the hail, and the thunders were
ceased, (though in the time of them he was like melted metal, Exodus 9.27,
28.34, 35.
and did acknowledge the righteousness of God and his own sin, and make
strong promises that Israel should go) yet then he sinned more, and hardened
his heart, he and his servants, and would not let the children of Israel go.
Do we not see men sometimes cast on a bed of sickness, brought to the very
brinke of hell, and to the smell of that sulphurie lake, when by Gods
wonderful patience they are snatched like a brand out of the fire, and have
recovered a little strength to provoke the Lord again, when they should now
set themselves to make good those hypocritical resolutions of amendment of
life, wherewith in their extremity they flattered God, and deceived themselves,
suddenly break forth into more filthiness than before, as if they meant now
to be revenged of God, and to fetch back that time which sickness took from
them by an extremity of sinning, as if they had made a Covenant with hell to
do it more service, if they might then be spared? All the favors and methods
which God uses are not enough to bring wicked men home unto him of their own
wills. Though I redeemed them, Hos. 7.13, 14.
says the Lord, yet have they spoken lies against me, they have not cried unto
me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds. The people turns not
unto him that smites them, Esai. 9.13. Amos 4.6* 8, 9, 10, 11.
neither do they seek the Lord of hosts. So many judgments did the Lord send
upon Israel in the neck of one another, and yet still the burden of the
Prophet is, Yet have you not returned unto me, says the Lord. Damme up the
passage of a river, and use all the Art that may be to overruled it, yet you
can never carry it backward in its own channel; you may cut it out into other
courses and diverticles, but no Art can drive it unto a contrary motion, and
make it retire into its own fountain: So though wicked men may happily by
diverse reasons which their lusts will admit, be so far wrought upon as to
change their courses, yet it is impossible to change themselves, or to turn
them quite out of their own way into the way of Christ. There is but a bivium
in the world, a way of life, and a way of death, and the Lord in the Ministry
of the Word gives us our option, I have set before you this day life and death,
blessing and cursing, and he that believes shall be saved, he that believes
not shall be damned. To the former he invites, beseeches, enticeth us with
promises, with oaths, with engagements, with prevention of any just objection
which might be made; We beseech you, says the Apostle, in Christ's stead that
you be reconciled unto God. From the other he deterres us by forewarning us of
the wrath to come, and of the period which death will put to our lusts with our
lives. And as Tertullian once spoke of the Oath of God, so may I of his
entreaties, and threatenings. O blessed men whom the Lord himself is pleased to
solicit and entice unto happiness, but, O miserable men they who will not
believe nor accept of Gods own entreaties: And yet thus miserable are we all
by nature. There is in men so much atheism, infidelity and distrust of Gods
Word, so close an adherencie of lust unto the soul, that it rather chooses to
run the hazard, and to go to hell entire, than to go halt and maimed unto
heaven; yea, to make God a liar, to bless themselves in their sins, when he
curses, and to judge of him by themselves, as if he took no notice of their
ways. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
It is not therefore without just cause that God so often threatens to
remember all the sins of wicked Psalm. 50.21.
men, and to do against them whatsoever he has spoken. Hos. 5.2, 3. Hos. 7.2,
12. Amos 8.7. Deuteronomy. 31.34, 35. Psalm. 50.21. Ier. 17.1.
We see then that men will never submit themselves unto the Scepter of Christ,
nor prevent the wrath to come by a voluntary subjection. It remains therefore
that God take the work into his own hands, and put them perforce under
Christ's feet. They will not submit to his kingdom of grace and mercy, they
will not believe his kingdom of glory and salvation, but they shall be made
subject to the sword of his wrath, and that without any hope of escape, or
power of opposition, for God himself shall do it immediately by his own mighty
power. He will interpose his own hand, and magnify the glory of his own
strength in the just confusion of wicked men. So the Apostle says, that The
Lord will show his wrath, and make his power known in the vessels fitted for
destruction, Romans 9.22. Two means the Apostle shows shall be used in the
destruction of the wicked, to effect it. The presence or countenance, and the
glorious power of the Lord, 2 These. 1.9. The very terror of his face, and the
dreadful Majesty of his presence shall slay the wicked. The kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the
mighty men, those who all their life time were themselves terrible, and had
been acquainted with terrors, shall then beg of the mountains and rocks
to fall upon them and to hide them from the Face of him that sits upon the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Revel. 6.15, 16. Esai. 2.10. whence
that usual expression of Gods resolution to destroy a people, I will set my
face against them. O then how sore shall the condemnation of wicked men be,
when therein the Lord purposes to declare (...), the glorious strength of his
own almighty arm. Here when the Lord punishes a people, he only shows how
much strength and edge he can put into the Creatures to execute his
displeasure. But the extreme terror of the last day shall be this, that men
shall fall immediately into the hands of God himself, who has said, Vengeance
belongs unto me, and* I will recompense, Heb. 10.30, 31. And therefore the
Apostle uses this expostulation against Idolaters, Do we provoke the Lord to
jelousie? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. Dare we meet the Lord in his
fury, do we provoke him to power out All his wrath? Psalm. 78.38. He will at
last stir up all his wrath against the vessels that are fitted for it. And for
that cause he will punish them himself. For there is no Creature able to bring
all Gods wrath unto another, there is no vessel able to hold all Gods
displeasure. The Apostle tells us that we have to do with God in his Word,
Heb. 4.13. but herein he uses the ministry of weak men, so that his Majesty
is covered, and wicked men have a veil upon their hearts, that they cannot see
God in his Word. When thy hand is lifted up, namely in the threatenings and
predictions of wrath out of the word, they will not see: for it is a work of
faith to receive the word as Gods word, and therein beforehand to see his
power, and to hear his rod, Mic. 6.9. Other men belie the Lord, and say it is
not he. But though they will not acknowledge that they have to do with God in
his word, though they will not see when his hand is lifted up in the
preparations of his wrath, yet they shall see and know that they have to do
with him in his judgments, when his hand falls down again in the execution
of his wrath. So the Lord expostulateth with them, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thine heart
endure or thine hands be strong in the days that I shall deal with thee? The
Prophet Esaias resolves that question, The sinners in Sion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites, (namely a fearful looking for of
judgment* and fiery indignation, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.27.) Who
amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire, who amongst us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? Esai. 33.14. that is, in the words of another Prophet,
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of
his anger. His fury is powered out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down
by him, Nahum 1.6.

Confirmations of this point we may take from these considerations: First, the
quarrel with sinners is Gods own, Levit. 26.25. Hos. 12.2. Psalm. 2.2. Esai.
65.3.
the controversy his own, the injuries and indignities have been done to
himself and his own son, the challenges have been sent unto himself and
his own Spirit: And therefore no marvel if he take the matter into his own
hands, and the quarrel so immediately reflecting upon him, if he be provoked to
revenge it by his own immediate power.

Secondly, revenge is his royalty and peculiar prerogative, Deuteronomy. 32.35.41.
from whence the Apostle inferres, That it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, Heb. 10.30, 31. And there are these arguments of
fearfulness in it; First, it shall be in Judgment without mercy, Iam. 2.13.
there shall be no mixture of any sweetness in the cup of Gods displeasure, but
all poison and bitterness; there shall not be affoorded a drop of water to a
lake of fire, a minute of eafe to an eternity of torment. Secondly, it shall be
in fury without compassion: In humane judgments where the law of the state
will not suffer a Judge to acquit or show mercy, yet the law of nature will
force him to co^passionate and grieve for the malefactor whom he must condemn.
There is no Judge so senseless of another misery, nor so destitute of humane
affections as to pronounce a sentence of condemnation with laughter. But the
Lord will condemn his enemies in vengeance without any pity. I will laugh,
says the Lord, at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, Prove.
1.26. Thirdly, it shall be in revenge and recompense, in reward and
proportion, that is, in a full and everlasting detestation of wicked men, the
weight whereof shall peradventure lie heavier upon them, than all the other
torments which they are to suffer, when they shall look on themselves as
scorned and abhorred exiles from the favor and presence of him that made them.
For as the wicked did here hate God, and set their hearts and their courses
against him in suo aeterno in all that time which God permitted them to sin
in: so God will hate wicked men, and set his face and fury against them in suo
aeterno too, as long as he shall be Judge of the world.

Thirdly, this may be seen in the inchoations of hell in wicked men upon the
earth. When the door of the conscience is opened and that sin, which lay there
asleep before, rises up like an enraged Lion to fly upon the soul, when the
Lord suffers some flashes of his glittering sword to break in like lightening
upon the Spirit, and to amaze a sinner with the pledges and first fruits of
hell, when he melts the stout hearts of men, and grindeth them unto powder,
what is all this but the secret touch of Gods own finger upon the conscience?
For there is no creature in the world whose ministry the heart does discern,
in the estuations and invisible workings of a guilty and unquiet spirit.

Fourthly, the torments of wicked angels whence can they come? there is no
Creature strong enough to lay upon them a sufficient recompense of pain for
their sin against the Majesty of God. And for the disputes of Schoolmen
touching corporal fire in hell, and the manner of elevating and applying
corporal agents to work upon spiritual substances, they are but the
intemperate nicities of men ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the terror of
the Lord, who is himself a consuming fire. The devils acknowledge Christ their
Tormentor, and that when he did nothing but rebuke them: there was no fire,
nor any other creature by him applied, but only the Majesty of his own word,
power, and person, which wrung from them that hideous cry, Art thou come to
torment us before the time? Matthew. 8.29.

Lastly, consider the heaviness of Christ's own soul, his agony and sense of
the curse due unto our sin when he was in the garden, Mat. 26.37. Luke 22.44.
Ioh. 12.27. Mark. 14.33, 34.
the trouble, astonishment, and extreme anguish of his soul, which wrought out
of his sacred body that woeful and wonderful sweat. Whence came it all? we
read never of any devils let loose to torment him, they were ever tormented at
his presence. We read of no other Angels that had commission to afflict him,
we read of an Angel which was sent to strengthen him, Luke 22.43. There is no
reason to think that the fear of a bodily death, which was the only thing
that men could inflict upon him, was that which squeezed out those drops of
blood, and extorted those bitter and strong cries from him. There were not in
his innocent soul, in his most pure and sacred body any seeds or principles of
such tormenting distempers; his compassion toward the misery of sinners, his
knowledge of the guilt and cursednesse of sin, was as great at other times as
now: What then could it else be, but the weight of his Fathers justice, the
conflict with his Fathers wrath against the sins of men, which wrought such
extremity of heaviness in his soul? And he was our surety, he stood in our
stead, that which was done to the green tree, should much more have been done
to the dry; If God laid upon him the strokes which were due unto our sin, how
much more heavy shall his hand be upon those whom he thoroughly hates?

But shall not the Angels then be executioners of the sentence of Gods wrath
upon wicked men? I answer, The Angels shall have their service in the coming
of the Lord. First, as Attendants, to show forth the majesty and glory of
Christ to the world, 2 These. 1.7. Matthew. 24.31. Secondly, as executioners of
his will, which is to gather together the Elect and the reprobate, to bind up
the wicked as sheaves or faggots for the fire. Matthew. 13.30.24.31. But yet
still the Lord interposeth his own power. As a Schoolmaster sets one
scholar to bring forth another unto punishment, but then he lays on the
stripes himself.

But why is it said that the Father shall put Christ's enemies under his feet?
does not Christ himself do it as well as the Father? yes doubtless. God has
given the Son authority to execute Judgment also, and put into his hands a
rod of iron, to dash his enemies to pieces like a potters vessel; for
whatsoever things the father does, these also does the son likewise, Ioh.
5.19.27. Psalm. 2.9. But we are to note that the subjecting of Christ's enemies
under his feet is a work of divine power. And therefore though it be
attributed to Christ as an Officer, yet it belongs to the Father, as the
Fountain of all divine operations. So God is said to have set forth his Son
as a propitiation, Romans 3.25. and yet the Son came down and manifested
himself, Phil. 2.7, 8. Heb. 9.26. The Father is said to have raised him from
the dead, Act. 2.32 Romans 6.4. and yet the Son raised himself by his own
power, John 10.18. the Father is said to have set Christ at his own right hand
in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20. and Christ is said to have sat down himself
on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3.10.12. The Father is said
to give the holy Ghost, Ioh. 14.16. and yet the Son promises to send him
himself, Ioh. 16.7. so here, though the Son have received power sufficient
to subdue all his enemies under his feet (for he is able to subdue all things
unto himself, Phil. 3.21.) yet the Father to show his hatred against the
enemies of Christ, and his consent to the victories of his Son, will likewise
subdue all things unto him, 1 Cor. 15.27, 28.

O then that men would be by the terror of the Lord persuaded to fly from the
wrath to come, to consider the weight of Gods heavy hand, and when they see
such a storm coming to hide themselves in the holes of that Rock of mercy.
It is nothing but Atheism and infidelity which bewitcheth men with desperate
senselessness against the vengeance of God. And therefore as the Lord has
seconded his Word of Promise with an oath, that they might have strong
consolation who fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope which is set before
them, Heb. 6.17, 18. So has he confirmed the Word of his threatenings with an
oath too. If I lift up my hand to heaven and say, I live for ever -- I will
render vengeance to mine enemies, I will reward them that hate me, Deuteronomy. 32.40
41. and again, The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, surely I will
never forget any of their works, Amos 8.7. and again, I have sworn by my
self, that unto me every knee shall bow* Esai. 45.23. and this he does that
secure and obdurate sinners might have the stronger reasons to fly from the
wrath which is set before them. O nos miseros, qui nec juranti Deo credimus!
How wonderful is the stupidity of men, that will neither believe the words,
nor tremble at the oath of God? He warns us to fly from the wrath to come,
and we make haste to meet it the rather: we fill up our measure, and commit
sin with both hands greedily, with unclean and intemperate courses, we bring
immature deaths upon our selves, that so we may hasten to hell the sooner, and
make trial whether God be a liar or no. For this indeed is the very direct
issue of every profane exorbitancy which men rush into. Every man has much
Atheism in his heart by nature, but such desperate stupidity does wonderfully
improve it, and bring men by degrees to the hellish presumption of those in the
Prophets, The Lord will not do good, Ier. 5.11, 12.
neither will he do evil; It is not the Lord, neither shall evil come upon
us, the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them. The days are
prolonged and the vision shall fail; Ezekiel. 12.22.
this man prophesies of things afar off, of doomes day, of things which
shall be long after our time. Unto these men, I say, in the words of the
Apostle, though they sleep, and see nothing, and mock at the promise of
Christ's coming, yet their damnation sleeps not, 2 Pet. 23.
but shall come upon them soon enough, even like an armed man. Be not ye
mockers, says the Prophet, lest your bands be made strong. Esai. 28.22.
Atheism, and scorn of Gods judgments will make him bind them the faster
upon us, he will get the better of the proudest of his enemies. We may mock,
but God will not be mocked. Gal. 6.7, 8.
He that shoots arrows against the Sun, shall never reach high enough to
violate it, but the arrows shall return upon his own head. Contempt of God,
and his threatenings does but tie our damnation the faster upon us, and make our
condition the more remediless. 2 Chro. 36.16.
The rage and wrestling of a beast with the rope which binds him, does make
the knot the faster. Nay, there is no Atheist in the world, but some time or
other feels by the horrors of his own bosom, and by the records of his
own conscience, that there is a consumption decreed, and a day of slaughter
coming for the bulls of Bashan.

Again, others I have known acknowledge indeed the terror of the Lord, but
yet go desperately on in their presumptions, and that upon two other dangerous
downefals: First, they thus argue, peradventure I belong to Gods Election of
Grace, and then he will fetch me in, in his time, and in the mean time his
mercy is above my sins, and it is not for me to hasten his work till he will
himself. O what a perverseness is this for the wickedness of man to perturbe
the Order of God? His Rule is, that we should argue from a holy conversation to
our Election, and by our diligence in adding one grace unto another to make it
sure unto our selves; not to argue from our Election to our calling, nor to
neglect all diligence till our Election appear. It is true, the mercy of
Christ is infinitely wider than the very rebellions of men, and it may be he
will snatch such a wicked disputer as this like a brand out of the fire. But
then know withal, that every desperate sin thou do now wilfully run into,
will at last cost thee such bitter throws such bloody tears, as thou would
not be willing with the least of them to purchase the most sweet and constant
pleasure which thy heart can now delight in. And in the mean time it is a
bloody adventure upon the patience of God, Medium interim surantur tempus and
commeatum faciu^t delinquendi. Tertull. Ion. 3.8, 9.
for any man upon expectation of Gods favor to steal time from his service,
and to turn the possibility of the mercy of God into an occasion of sinning.
The Ninivites gathered another conclusion from those premises; Let man and
beast be covered with sackecloth and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn
every one from their evil way, and from the violence which is in their hands:
and the ground of this resolution was this, Who can tell if God will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? And the
Prophets teach us to make another use of the possibility of Gods mercy; Rent
your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, Joel 2.12,
14.
for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Who knows if he will return and repent, and
leave a blessing behind him, etc. and again, Seek ye the Lord all ye meek
of the earth, Zeph. 2.3.
seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of
the Lords anger.

But then secondly, there are not wanting desperate wretches who will thus
hellishly argue against the service of God. It may be the decree is gone forth,
and I am rejected by God, and why should I labor in vain, and go about to
repeal his will, and not rather, since I shall have no heaven hereafter, take
the fill of mine own ways and lusts here? Thus we find the wicked Epicures
conclude, We shall dye tomorrow, and therefore let us eat and drink to day.
1 Cor. 15.32.
Nay, but who art thou, O man, who disputest against God? who rather choosest
to abuse the secrets of God, that thou may dishonor him, than to be ruled
by his revealed will, that thou may obey him? Let the potsheards strive with
the potsheards of the earth, but let not the Clay dash it self against him
that made it. Remember and tremble at the difference which our Savior makes
even amongst the wicked in hell. It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah,
and for Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for those cities which
have heard and despised him. Wicked men are treasuring up of wrath, and
hoording up of destruction against their own souls, every new oath or
blasphemy heaps a new mountain upon their conscience; every renewed act of
any uncleanness plungeth a man deeper into hell, gives the devil more hold
fast of him, adds more fuel unto his Tophet, squeezes in more dregs and
woeful ingredients into the cup of astonishment which he must swallow.
Doubtless a sinner in hell would account himself a blessed creature if he
did not feel there the weight and worm of such and such particular sins,
which with much easiness he might have forborne, nay which without pain and
labor he could not commit. We see Dives in hell begged for but a drop of
water to cool his tongue in that mighty flame. Now suppose a man in a burning
furnace; what great comfort could he receive from but a drop of water against a
furnace of fire? Certainly the abatement of so much pain as the abiding of
one drop would remove, could in no proportion amount to the taking away the
punishment of the smallest sin, of the least idle word, or unprofitable
thought; and yet in that extremity there shall not be allowed a drop of
refreshment against a lake of fire. O that men would therefore in time consider
what a woeful thing it is to fall into the hands, and to rowze up the
jealousy of the living God; that because he will do thus and thus unto
obdurate sinners, they would therefore in time humble themselves under his
mighty hand, and prepare to meet him in the way of his judgments. For
certainly no sooner does the heart of a Sinner yield to God, but he meets
him in his return and preventeth him with goodness, his heart likewise is
turned within him, and his repentings are kindled together. With much more
delight will he put a man into the arms of Christ, than for^e him under his
feet. He does not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men; he takes
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but he delights in mercy.

The last thing observed was the Manner of this victory, expressed in those
words, Ponam, and ponam scabellum. To put, and to put as a stool under Christ's
feet. Now this expression, that the conquest of Christ's enemies shall be but
as the removing of a stool into his place, notes unto us two things:

First, the easiness of Gods victory over the enemies of Christ. They are
before him as nothing, less than nothing, Esai. 41.15.
the drop of a bucket, the dust of a balance, a very little thing. What thing
is heavier than a mountain, what thing easier than a touch, what lighter than
chafe, or softer than wax? and yet they who in the eyes of men are as strong
and immovable as mountains, if God but touch them they shall be turned into
chafe, and flow at his presence. Esai 64.3.
If a man had a deadly pestilence and of infallible infection, how easily might
that man be avenged on his enemy with but breathing in his face? Now the breath
of the Lord is like a stream of brimstone to devour the wicked. Esai. 30 33.
As easily as fire consumes flax or stubble, Esai. 27.4. Esai. 47.14. Zech.
12.3, 6. Psalm. 2.9.
as easily as poison invadeth the spirits of the body, as easily as a rod of
iron breaks in pieces a potters vessel, as easily as a burdensome stone
bruizeth that which it falls upon; so, and much more irresistibly does the wrath
of the Lord consume his enemies.

Not to insist long on so certain and obvious a truth. Far easier we know
it is to destroy than to build up, there is no such art required in
demolishing, Corpora tarde augescunt cito extinguuntur. Tac.
as there is in erecting of an edifice, those things which are long and
difficultly growing up, are suddenly extinguished. Since therefore God had power
and wisdom to make the creature, no wonder if he can most easily destroy him.

Again, Gods power is as it were set on by his jealousy and fury against
sinners. Anger we know is the whetstone of strength, in an equality of other
terms it will make a man prevail. Nothing is able to stand before a fire
which is once enraged. Now Gods displeasure is kindled, and breaks forth into
a flame against the sins of men, Deuteronomy. 29.20. like a devouring Lion, or a
bereaved Bear, like the implacable rage of a jealous man, so does the fire of
the Lords revenge break forth upon the enemies of his Son.

Add hereunto our disposition and preparedness for the wrath of God. Hos.
13.7, 8. Prove. 6.34. Cant. 8.6. Ezekiel. 36.5.
Strength it self may be tired out in vain upon a subject which is incapable
of any injury therefrom. But if the paw of a Bear meet with so thin a
substance as the kall of a man's heart, how easily is it torn to pieces? Every
action is then most speedily finished when the subject on which it works is
thereunto prepared. Far easier is it to make a print in wax than in Adamant,
to kindle a fire in dry stubble, than in green wood. Now wicked men have
fitted themselves for wrath, and are the procurers, and artificers of their
own destruction. They are vessels, Romans 9 22. Esai. 3.9. Ier. 2.17. Ier. 4.18.
Hos. 13.9.
and God is never without treasures of wrath, so that the confusion of a wicked
man is but like the drawing of water out of a fountain, or the filling of a
bag out of a heap of treasure.

Lastly, add hereunto our destitutenesse of all help and succor. Even fire
amongst pitch might be quenched, if a man could power down water in abundance
upon it. But the wicked shall have no strength either in or about them to
prevent or remove the wrath to come. Here indeed they have some helps (such as
they are) to stand out against God in his word. Weatlh and greatness to be
the provisions of their lusts, the countenance of the wicked world to encourage
them in their ways; Satan and the wisdom of the flesh to furnish them with
arguments, and to cast a varnish upon uncleanesse: but when the lion comes the
shepherd can do the sheep no good, when the fire comes the rotten post shall
perish with the varnish which covered it. He that was here strong enough to
provoke God, shall at last be bound hand and foot, and so have no faculty
left either to resist him or to run from him.

There is a foolish disposition in the hearts of men to think that they shall
ever continue in that estate which they are once in. The proud and wicked man
has said in his heart, Psalm. 10.6.11.
I shall never be moved, I shall never be in adversity. God has forgotten,
he hides his face, he will never see it. And the Prophet David was overtaken
with this gross error, I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved. Luke
12.19. Mic. 3.11. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Esai. 56.12. Esai. 38.12. Ezekiel. 37.11.
This was the vain conceit of the fool in the gospel, thou have much laid
up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. This ever has
been the language of secure and wicked men, No evil shall come upon us, I
shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of mine heart. To morrow
shall be as this day and much more abundant. And so also in afflictions; Has
the Lord forgotten to be gracious and shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure? from day even to night will thou make an end of me. I said my
hope is left and I am cut off for my part. I shall never overcome such an
affliction, I shall never break through such a pressure. And both these come
from want of faith touching the power of God to subdue all enemies under
Christ's feet. If men would but consider how easily God can break down all
their cobwebs, and sweep away their refuge of lies, how easily he can spoil
them of all the provisions of their lusts, and leave them like a lamb in a
large place, they would be more fearful of him* and less dote upon things
which will not profit, they would take heed how they abuse their youth,
strength, time, abilities, as if they had a spring of them all within
themselves, and consider that their good is not in their own hand, that the
seithe can get as well through the green grass as the dry stubble, that
consuming fire can as well melt the hardest metal as the softest wax. What is
the reason why men in sore extremities make strong resolutions, and vow much
repentance and amendment of life, and yet as soon as they are off from the
rack return again to their vomit, and wallow in their wonted lusts, but
because their sense made them feel that then, which if they had faith they
might still perceive, and so still continue in the same good resolutions,
namely that Gods hand was near unto them? But what, is not God a God afar
off as well as near at hand? does not he say of wicked men, Job 20.22. Amos
4.7. Hos^. 2.9. Hag. 1.9. Hos. 9.2. Psalm. 78.30, 31.
that in the fullness of their sufficiency they shall be in straites? cannot
he blast the corn in the blade, in the harvest, in the barn, in the very
mouth of the wicked? Did he not cut off Belshazzar in his cups, and Herod in
his robas, and Babylon and Tyrus in their pride, and Haman in his favor, and
Iezabel in her paint? Have but faith enough to say I am a man, and therefore no
humane events should be strange unto me, and even that one consideration may
keep a man from outrage of sinning. It may be I have abundance of earthly
things, yet am I still but a gilded potsheard: It may be I have excellent
endowments, but I have them all in an earthen vessel. And shall the potsheard
strive with the potter, and provoke him that made it? This would teach us to
fear and tremble at Gods power. Though we look upon death and judgment as
a-farre off, yet God can make them near when he will, for he has said that
the damnation of wicked men is swift, and that they are near unto cursing. 2
Pet. 2.1. Heb. 6 8. Host. 8.1. Zech 5.1. Hos. 5.7. Hos 10.15. Esai. 47.9.
Eccle. 8.12, 13.
His judgments are like lightning, and have wings suddenly to overtake a
sinner. He requires but a month, nay but a morning, nay but a moment to
consume his enemies, and bring desolation upon those who said they should ^it
as a Lady for ever, and did never remember the latter end. Though a sinner do
evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, namely by the patience and
permission of God, in whose hands his days are, yet it shall go well at last
only with those that fear God; The wicked are not able to prolong their own
days.

Again, for Afflictions and Temptations, it is a great fruit of the infidelity
of men's hearts, and a foolish charging and chiding of our Maker, to account our
selves swallowed up of any present pressure. If we did but consider that it is
as easy with God to subdue our enemies, and to rebuke our afflictions as it is
with us to put a stool under our feet, we would then learn to wait on him
in all our distresses, and when we cannot answer difficulties, nor extricate
our selves out of our own doubts or fears, to conclude that his thoughts are
above our thoughts, and his ways above our ways, and so to cast our selves
wholly upon his power. Esai. 55.8, 9.
It Is an argument which the Lord every where uses to establish his Church
withal: Esai. 8.12, 13.
Fear not the fear of men, nor be afraid, but sanctify the Lord of hosts
himself, and let him be your fear. Who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of Man which shall be made
as grass; Esai. 51.12, 13.
and forgettest the Lord thy maker, and have feared every day because of the
fury of the oppressor? Zech. 8.6, 7.
And where is the fury of the oppressor? If it be marvailous in the eyes of
the remnant of this people, should it be marvailous in mine eyes, says the
Lord of hosts? Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh, is there any thing
too hard for me? Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope
the Lord is. He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, Ier. 32.27. Genesis
18.14. Ier. 17.7, 8. Esai 41.17, 18. Hab. 3.17*19.
which shall not be careful in the year of drought. When the poor and needy
seek water and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. Though the fig tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the
olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut
off from the fould, and there shall be no heard in the stals: yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. He is able to do
abundantly above all that we can ask or think. God would never so frequently
carry men to the dependence upon his power, if they were not apt in extremities
to judge of God by themselves, and to suspect his power.

Secondly, as this Putting of Christ's enemies like a stool under his feet
notes Easiness, so also it notes Order or Beauty too. When Christ's enemies
shall be under his foot, then there shall be a right Order in things, then
it shall indeed appear that God is a God of Order, and therefore the day
wherein that shall be done, is called the Time of the Restitution of all
things, Act. 3.21. The putting of Christ's enemies under his feet is an Act of
Justice, and of all other, (...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Justice is the most orderly virtue, that which keeps beauty upon the face of
a people, as consisting it self in a symmetrie, and proportion. Again, every
thing out of its own place is out of order, but when things are all in their
proper places and due proportions, then there results a beauty and comeliness
from them. In a great house there are many vessels, some of wood and brass,
others of gold and silver. some for honorable, others for base and sordid uses;
Now if all these were confusedly together in one room a man would conclude
that things were out of order, but when the plate is in one place, the brass
and wood in another, we acknowledge a decency and cleanliness in such a
house. Let a body be of never so exact temperature and delicate complexion,
yet if any member therein be misplaced, the eye in the room of the ear, or
the cheek of the forehead, there can be no beauty in such a body: So in the
Church, till God set every one in his right place, the order thereof is but
imperfect. Therefore when Judas was put under Christ's feet, he is said to
have gone (...), unto his own place, Act. 1.25.

Why then should any man murmr at the prosperity of wicked men, Ezekiel. 18.25.
Mal. 3.14, 15.
or conceive of Gods proceedings as if they were irregular and unequal, as if
there were no profit for those who walk mournfully, but the proud, and wicked
workers were set up? This is to revile the workman while he is yet in the
fitting of his work. The pieces are not yet put together in their proper
joints, and therefore no marvel if the evennesse and beauty of Gods works be
not so plainly discovered. For every thing is beautiful in its time; what
though the corn in the field hang down the head, and the weeds seem to
flourish and overtop it; stay but till the harvest, and it will then appear
which was for the garner, and which for the fire. Go into the Sanctuary of the
Lord, and by faith look unto the day of the revelation of Gods righteous
judgments, and it will appear that the ways of the Lord are right, Hos. 14.9.
though the transgressors stumble in them, or be offended at them.

Secondly, from hence every man may learn how to bring beauty and order into
himself, namely by subduing those enemies of Christ, those lusts and evil
affections which dwell within him. Laws we know are the ligaments and sinews
of a state, the strings as it were which being touched and animated by skillful
governors do yield that excellent harmony which is to be seen in well
constituted common wealths; the more they prevail so much the more unity is
preserved and faction abated, and community cherished in the minds of men:
Even so where the Scepter of Christ, the Law of the mind, the royal Law of
Liberty and grace do more prevail over the lusts of the heart, by so much the
more excellent is the harmony and complexion of such a soul.

Now the last thing in this verse is, Psalm. 8.6.
Scabellum pedibus tuis. A stool under thy feet. Things are under Christ's
feet two manner of ways: Either by way of subjection as Servants unto him,
and so he has dominion over all the works of Gods hands, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.
and has all things put under his feet. So the Apostle says, that God has
set him at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion and every name that is named,
not only in this world but also in that which is to come; 1 Pet. 3.22.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church. Which S. Peter expresses in a like manner: He is gone
into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels and authorities and powers
being made subject to him: Or secondly, by way of victory and insultation, and
so all Christ's enemies are put under his feet. Which is the most proper way.
For the members of Christ are indeed under the head. So we find that the
sheep of Christ are in his hands. Ioh. 10.28. Esai. 40.11. Esai. 63.1^3. Joel
3.13, 14. Revel. 14.20.
No man shall pluck them out of my hand. And the Lambs of Christ are in his
arms, and bosom. He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in
his bosom. But the enemies of Christ are under his feet to be trampled upon,
till their blood be squeezed out, and his garments stained with it. All the
multiplied multitudes of the wicked in the world shall be but as so many
Clusters of ripe grapes to be cast into the great winepresse of the wrath of
God, and to be trodden by him who went forth on a white horse conquering and to
conquer, till the blood come out of the winepresse even unto the horse bridles.
And this is an usual expression of a total victory in holy Scripture, the
laying of an adversary even with the ground, that he may be crushed and
trampled upon. This was the curse of the Serpent that he should crawle with
his belly upon the dust of the earth, Genesis 3.14. Luke 10.19. Romans 16.20. Psalm.
68.23.
and that the seed of the woman should bruize his head. And it is the curse of
Gods enemies, that they should lick the dust, and that the feet of the Church
and the tongue of her dogs should be dipped in the blood of her enemies. Thus
David put the people of Rabbah under harrowes; and Iehu trod Iezabel under his
horses feet. 2 Samuel 12.31. 2 Kings 9.33. Lam. 1.15.
And therefore the Church chooses that phrase to express the greatness of
her calamity by. The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the
midst of me; he has called an assembly against me to crush my young men. The
Lord has trodden the Virgin, the Daughter of Judah as in a wine press.

Now this putting of Christ's enemies as a stool under his feet, notes unto us
in regard of Christ two things: First, his Rest; and secondly, his Triumph. To
stand, in the Scripture Phrase (as I have before observed) denotes Ministry,
and to Sit, Rest; and there is no posture more easy than to sit with a stool
under ones feet. Till Christ's enemies then be all under his feet, he is not
fully in his Rest. It is true, in his own person he is in Rest, he has
finished the work which was given him to do, and therefore is entered into his
rest. He has already ascended up on high, and led captivity captive; yet in
his members he still suffers, though not by way of pain or passion, yet by way
of Sympathy or compassion, he is touched with a feeling of our infirmities,
Heb. 4.15. As by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5.8. Heb. 2.17, 18.
he learned obedience toward God, so by the same sufferings he learned
compassion, and thereupon mercy and fidelity toward his members; for no man
can be more tenderly faithful in the business of another, than he who by his
own experience knows the consequence and necessity of it. And therefore he
is said to be afflicted in all the afflictions of his people; Esaias. 63.9.
Coloss. 1.24.
and the Apostle tells us that the afflictions of the Saints fill up the
remainders, or that which is behind, of the sufferings of Christ; for as the
Church is called the fullness of Christ, who yet of himself is so full, as
that he fills all in all (neither does the Church serve to supply his
defects, but to magnify his mercy:) so the Churches sufferings are esteemed
the fullness of the sufferings of Christ, although his were of themselves so
full before, as that they had a consummatum est to seal up both their measure
and their merit; and therefore our sufferings are called his, not by way of
addition, or improvement unto those, but by way of honor and dignity unto us,
they show Christ's compassion toward us, and our union and conformity to him,
but no way either any defect of virtue in his, or any value of merit in ours,
or any ecclesiastical treasure, or redundancie out of a mixture of both, very
profitable they are for the edification of the Church, but very base and
unworthy for the expiation of sin: very profitable for the comfort of men,
but very unprofitable to the justice of God. So then, though Christ rest from
suffering in himself, yet not in his Saints; though the Serpent cannot come to
the head, yet it is still bruizing of his heel. Here then the Apostles
inference is good, there remains therefore rest unto the people of God, and
that such a glorious rest as must arise out of the ruin of their enemies, when
the wicked perish they shall see it and rejoice, and shall wash their feet in
the blood of their adversaries. The revenge of God against his enemies is such,
as shall bring an ease with it: Ah, says the Lord, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, Esaias 65.13. Esaias 66.5.
I will avenge me of mine enemies, Esaias 1.24. This is the comfort which the
Lord gives his people, that they shall be full when their enemies shall be
hungry, and that he will appear to their joy, when their enemies shall be
ashamed.

This must teach wicked men to take heed of persecuting the members of Christ,
for they therein are professed enemies to him whom yet they would seem to
worship. This is certain, that all the counsels and resolutions which are made
against the subjects or laws of Christ's kingdom, are but vain imaginations
which shall never be executed; He will at last avenge the quarrel of his
people, and in spite of all the power or malice of hell, make them to sit
actually in heavenly places with him, whom he has virtually and
representatively carried thither already. And it should comfort the faithful
in all their sufferings for Christ's sake: Because hereby they are, first,
Conformable unto him: Secondly, they are Associates with him: Thirdly, they are
assured that they are in a way to rest: for, says the Apostle, it is just with
God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7.
and to you who are troubled rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven. And inasmuch, says Saint Peter, as you are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, when his glory shall be revealed, ye shall be glad also with
exceeding joy: 1 Pet 4.13.
And this joy shall be so much the greater, because it shall grow out of the
everlasting subjection of the enemy under Christ's feet, and those whom here
they persecuted and despised, shall there with Christ be their judges. 1 Cor.
6.2, 3.


Secondly, as it notes the Rest, so likewise the Triumph of Christ, Alex. ab
Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 6. cap. 6. Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 10. c. 29.
when he shall set his feet on the neck of his enemies. The Apostle says,
that he triumphed over them in his Cross, Coloss. 2.15. And there are two
words which have an allusion unto the forms of triumph, Expoliation and
Publication, or representation of the pomp unto the world of the faithful. He
spoiled principalities and powers, that is, He took from them all their armor
wherein they trusted, and divided the spoils, Luke 11.22. The armor of Satan
was principally the handwriting of the Law which was against us, or contrary
unto us, so long as we were under the full force and rigor of that, so long
we were under the possession and tyranny of Satan; but when Christ nailed that
unto the Cross, and took it out of the way, then all the other panoply of
Satan was easily taken from him: he was then spoiled of all his weapons and
provisions of lust, for the world, and therewithal the things which are in the
world, Gal. 6.14.
were unto us crucified in the Cross of Christ; so that now by faith in him
we are able to overcome the world, to value it aright, 1 John 5.4, 5.
to esteem the promises thereof thin and empty, and the threatenings thereof
vain and false; Heb. 11.26.
the treasures thereof baser than the very reproaches of Christ, Romans 8.18.
and the afflictions thereof not worthy to be compared with the glory which
shall be revealed in us, 2 Cor. 17.
as being in their measure but light, and but momentary in their duration. The
power and wisdom of Satan was likewise in the Cross of Christ most notably
befooled and disappointed; for when he thought that he had now swallowed up
Christ, he found a hook under that bait, he found that which neither
himself, nor any of his instruments could have suspected, that Christ
crucified was indeed the wisdom of God, and the power of God, and that through
death he chose to destroy him who had the power of death, 1 Cor. 1.24. Heb.
2.14. Again, he made a show, or public representation of this his victory,
and of these his spoils openly unto the world. As the Cross was his
triumphall chariot, so was it likewise ferculum pompae, the pageant, as it
were, and table of his spoils, for though to a carnal eye there was nothing
but ignominy and dishonor in it, yet to those that are called, there is an eye
of faith given to see in the Cross of Christ Hell disappointed, Satan
confounded, his kingdom demolished, the earthly members of the old man
crucified, affections and lusts abated, and captivity already led captive. And
indeed what triumph of any the most glorious Conqueror was ever honored with
the opening of graves, the resurrection of the dead, the conversion of enemies,
the acclamation of mute and inanimate creatures, the darkness of the Sun,
the trembling of the earth, the compassion of the rocks, the amazement of the
world, the admiration of the Angels of heaven, but only this triumph of Christ
upon the Cross? And if he did so triumph there, how much more at the right
hand of the Majesty on high, where he is crowned with glory and honor; and at
that great day, which is therefore called the Day of the Lord Jesus, because
he will therein consummate his triumph over all his enemies, when he shall
come with the attendance of Angels, in a chariot of fire, with all the
unbeleevers of the world bound before his Throne, and with the clamor,
applause, and admiration of all the Saints.

And this is a plentiful ground of comfort to the faithful in all their
conflicts with Satan, sin, temptations, or corruptions, they fight under his
protection, and with his Spirit who has himself already triumphed, who
accounts our temptations his, and his victories ours; who turned the sorest
perplexities which the world shall ever see, into a doctrine of comfort unto his
Disciples, Luke 21.25-28. When ever then we are assaulted with any heavy
temptation to discomforts, fears, fainting, weariness, despair, sinful
conformities or the like; let us not toss over our own store, nor depend upon
any strength or principles of our own, but look only by faith unto the
victories of Christ, and to this great promise which is here made unto him, as
Head and Captain of the Church, by whom we shall be able to do all things,
and though we were surrounded with enemies, to escape, as he did, through the
midst of them all. We know the Cats unum magnum, in the fable, was more worth
than the Foxes thousand shifts, notwithstanding all the which he was caught at
the last. Our enemies come against us in armies, with infinite methods and
stratagems to circumvent us, this only is our comfort, that we have unum
magnum, one refuge which is above all the wisdom of the enemy, to climb up
unto the Cross of Christ, and to commit the keeping of our souls unto him,
out of whose hands no man can take them. When David went forth against Goliath,
he did not grapple with him by his own strength, but with his Sling and his
stone at a distance overthrew him. It is not good to let Satan come too close
unto the soul, to let in his temptations, or to enter into any private and
intimate combat with him (this was for our Captain only to do, who we know
entered into the field with him, as being certain of his own strength) but our
only way to prevail against him, is to take faith as a sling, and Christ as a
stone, he will undoubtedly find out a place to enter in and to sink the
proudest enemy: we are beset with enemies, yea, we are enemies unto our
selves, the burden of the flesh, the assaults of the world, the fiery darts of
Satan, treason within, and wars without, swarms of Midianites, troops of
Amalekites, the Sea before us, the Egyptian behind us, sin before, Satan
and the world behind, either I must run on and be drowned in sin, or I
must stand still and be hewed in pieces with the persecutions of wicked men, or
I must revolt and turn back to Egypt, and so be devoured in her plagues. In
these extremities the Apostle has given us our unum magnum, Look unto Jesus,
he that is the Author, will be the finisher of our faith: Heb. 12.1, 2. Heb.
10.36, 37.
It is yet but a little while, he will come and will not tarry, he is within
the view of our faith, he is within the cry of our prayers, he sits at
the right hand of power, nay, he there stands, and is risen up already in
the quarrel of his Saints, Act. 7.56. The nearer the Egyptian is to Israel,
the nearer he is to ruin, and the nearer Israel is to deliverance. Though
Moses have not Chariots, nor multitudes of weapons, Esaias 11.1. Zech. 3.8. Exodus
33.14, 16.
yet he has a Rod, a Branch, an Angel of Gods presence, which can open the
Sea, and give an issue to the greatest dangers, which can turn the enemies
rage into his own ruin. There is no enemy so close, so dangerous, so
unavoidable as our own lusts. Now the Lord promises to deal with the sins
of his people, as he did with the Egyptians; we know their tyranny he subdued
with many plagues, their firstborn, the strength and flower of the Land, he
slew before, and those who afterward joined themselves against his people, he
drowned in the bottom of the Sea; so says the Prophet, He will subdue our
iniquities, he will purge them away, Mic. 7.19, 20. Psalm. 65.3.
the power and strength of them he will abate by his Spirit; and as for those
remainders thereof, which are yet behind, and rebel against his grace, he
will cast all of them into the depths of the Sea, Q^od in prosundum maris
abjicitur penitus non extat* Theodoret. Psalm. 103.12. Esaias 43.25. Esaias 44.22.
that is, he will remove them utterly away from us, he will drown them in
everlasting forgetfulness, he will not only blot them out that they may not
be, but he will not remember them neither, which is in some sort to make them
even not to have been. And, which yet makes the assurance of all this the
stronger, the ground of it all is only in God himself, his Covenant and
Mercy. Now though our condition alters, yet his mercy is still the same: If the
root of the Covenant were in us, then as we change, that also would vary too,
but the root is in Gods own grace, whose mercy is therefore without repentance
in himself, Mal. 3.6.
because it is without reason, or merit in us.

Now lastly, this Footstool under Christ's feet, in regard of his enemies,
notes unto us four things: First, The extreme shame and confusion which they
shall everlastingly suffer, Esaias. 2.11.
the utter abasing and bringing down of all that exalts it self against
Christ. In victories amongst men, the part conquered goes many times off upon
some honorable terms; at the very worst when they are led captives, yet they
go like men still; but to be made a stool for the Conqueror to insult over,
Psalm 72.9. Mic. 7.17. Esaias 49 23. Qui Constantini toties p^rterrunt urbem, Sub
Tamberlano sella canisque suit.
to lick the dust like a serpent, and move out of holes like the worms of the
earth, to be so low, as not to have any further degree of calamity or dishonor
left unto which a man may be debased; this is the extremity of shame. It is
noted for the greatest indignity which Bajazet the grand Signior ever suffered,
when Tamerlane his adversary trampled upon his neck; and of Aurel. Victor and
Eutropius.
Valerian, that cruel persecutour of the Church, that he was trod under foot
by Sapores the Persian King, and after stayed like a beast. It notes the
extremest degree of revenge, which has no mixture of mercy or compassion in
it: So that by this we see the enemies of Christ and his kingdom shall be put
to utter and everlasting shame: That as the faithful in that great day of
their redemption shall lift up their heads, and have boldness in the presence
of the Lamb; so the wicked shall fall flat upon their faces, and cleave unto
the dust; when the books shall be unsealed and the consciences of men opened,
and the witnesses produced, and the secrets of uncleanness revealed on the
housetop, and the mouths of the wicked, who here for a little while dispute
against the ways of Christ, and cavil at his commands, shall be everlastingly
stopped, when men shall be like a deprehended thief (as the Prophet speaks)
then shall their faces be as a flame, Ier. 2.26. Ezra 9.6. Dan. 9.7, 8. Rom,
6.21.
full of trembling, confusion and astonishment. The very best that are find
shame enough in sin, how much they who give themselves over unto vile and
dishonorable affections?

Secondly, hereby is noted the Burden which wicked men must bear: The
footstool bears the weight of the body, so must the enemies of Christ bear
the weight of his heavy and everlasting wrath upon their souls. Sin in the
committing seems very light, no bigger than the cloud which the Prophet showed
his servant, but at last it gathers into such a tempest, as, if the soul make
not haste, it will be swept away, and overwhelmed by it: weighty bodies do
with much difference affect the sense according to the difference of places
wherein they are. That vessel or piece of timber, which when it is on the
water, may be easily drawn with the hand of man, on the land cannot be stirred
with much greater strength: So is it with sin upon the conscience, in the time
of committing it, nothing more easy, but in the time of judging it, nothing
more unsupportable. A wild Ass in the time of her lusting traverseth her
ways with much petulancy, and snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, no man
can turn her, but in her month, that is, when she is burdened with her foale,
Ier. 2.24.
she then feels the event of her former lustfulnesse, and will easily be
overtaken: so the wicked in sin, however for the time they may bear it out
with much mirth, and cheer up their hearts in the days of their pleasure, yet
when sin is come to the birth, and so fully finished, that it is now ready to
bring forth death unto the soul, they shall then find that it is but like the
roll which the Prophet swallowed, sweet to the palate, but bitter in the belly,
like a cup of deadly poison, pleasant in the mouth, but torment in the bowels.
On whomsoever the Son of man shall fall with the weight of his heavy
displeasure he will grind him to powder. Matthew. 21.44.
That must needs be a heavy burden which men would most joyfully exchange for
the weight of rocks and mountains to lie everlastingly upon their backs: And
yet the wicked at that great day shall all in vain beg of the mountains and
rocks to fall upon them, Revel. 6.16.
and to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, shall rather choose to live
eternally under the weight of the heaviest creature in the world, than under
the fury of him that sits upon the Throne.

Thirdly, herein likewise is noted the relation of a just and equal Recompense
unto ungodly men. The Lord uses often to fit punishments to the quality and
measure of the sins committed. He that on the earth denied a crumb of bread
in hell was denied a drop of water. Man who being in honor would needs affect
to be as God, was thereby debased to become like the beasts that perish. Nadab
and Abihu offered strange fire and perished by strange fire from the Lord.
(...) Chrysostom. Hom. 20. ad pop. Antioch.
Sodom and Gomorra burnt in unnatural lusts, and they were drowned in an
unnatural tempest of fire. Inde paena caepit unde caepit and Crimen. Cyprian.
de Lapsis.
That Apostate in S. Cyprian, who opened his mouth against Christ in
blasphemy, was immediately smitten with dumbness that he could not open it
unto Christ for mercy. Socrat. Histor. lib. 6. cap. 5. and Sozom. lib. 8. cap.
7.
Eutropius the Eunuch when he persuaded the Emperor to take from malefactors
the benefit of refuge at the Altars, did therein prevent his own mercy, and
beg away the advantage of an escape from himself, the privilege whereof he
did afterward in vain lay hold on. And thus will Christ deal with his
enemies at the last day. Here they trample upon Christ, in his word, in his
ways, in his members. They make the Saints Esai 51.23. Heb. 10.29. Esai.
63.18. Revel 11.2. Heb. 6.6. Judge. 1.7. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Romans 16.20. Esai 14.2.
Mic. 4.11, 12, 13. Mich. 7.10.
bow down for them to go over, and make them as the pavements on the ground.
They tread under foot the blood of the covenant, and the Sanctuary of the
Lord, and put Christ to shame here: and there their own measure shall be
returned into their own bosom, they shall be constrained to confess as
Adonibezek, as I have done, so God has requited me. Yea, this they shall
suffer from the meanest of Christ's members, whom they here insulted over. They
shall then as witnesses, and as it were co-assessors with Christ, judge the
very wicked Angels, and tread them under their feet. They shall take them
captives whose captives they were, and shall rule over their oppressors. All
they that despised them shall bow themselves at the soles of their feet. They
who gathered themselves against Sion, and said, let her be defiled, and let
our eye see it: shall themselves be gathered as sheaves into the floor, and
the Daughter of Sion shall arise and thresh them with horns of iron, and with
hooves of brass. Then (says the Church) she that is mine enemies shall see
it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God?
Mine eyes shall behold her; Now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the
streets. Even so let all thine enemies perish O Lord; but let them which love
thee be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might.

Lastly, herin we may note the great Power and wisdom of Christ in turning
the malice and mischief of his enemies into his own use and advantage; and in
so Voluntas Humana, perverse utendo bonis, fit mala: ille Ordinate etiam malis
^tendo, permanet bonus. Aug. Episi. 120. Sicut ergo ipsi benignitate, and
patientia, id est Bon^s Dei male ut untur, dum non corriguntur, sic contra Deus
etia^ malis eorum been utitur, non solum ad justitia^ suam, qua eis digna in
fine retribuet, sed etiam ad exercitationem and profectum sanctorum suorum, ut
ex ipsa ^tiam ma^orum perversitate, boni proficiant, and probentur, and
manifestentur. Idem, epist. 141.
ordering wicked men that though they intend nothing but extirpation and ruin
to his Kingdom, yet they shall be useful unto him, and, against their own
wills, serviceable to those glorious ends, in the accomplishing whereof he
shall be admired by all those that believe. As in a great house there is
necessary use of vessels of dishonor, destinated unto fordid and mean, but
yet daily services: so in 2 Timothy 2.20.
the great house of God, wicked men are his utensils and household instruments,
as footstooles, and staves, and vessels wherein there is no pleasure, though of
them there may be good use. The Esai. 10.5, 6, 7.
Assyrian was the Rod of his anger, his axe wherewith he pruned, and his Saw
wherewith he threatened his people. Romans 9.17.
Pharaoh was a vessel fitted to show the glory and power of his name. Matthew.
18.7.
It is necessary, says our Savior that offenses come, and there 1 Cor. 11.19.
must be heres^es, says the Apostle. Because as a skillful Physician orders
poysonfull and destructive ingredients unto useful services: So the Lord by
his wisdom does make use of wicked men's persons and purposes to his own most
righteous and wonderful ends, Esa. 37.28, 29.
secretly and mightily directing their wicked designs, to the magnifying of
his own power and providence, and to the furthering of his people in faith and
godliness.

VERSE 2. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy strength out of Sion: Rule thou in
the mids of thine enemies.


THis Verse is a continuation of the former touching the Kingdom of Christ;
and it contains the form of its spiritual administration. Wherein is secretly
couched another of the Offices of Christ, namely his Prophetical Office. For
that is as it were the dispensation and execution of his regal Office in the
militant Church. The sum of this Administration consists in two principal
things: First, in matters military, for the subduing of enemies, and for the
defense and protection of his people. Secondly, in matters civil and judicial
for the government, preservation and honor of his Kingdom. And both these are
in this Psalm, The former in the latter part of this verse, Rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies. The other in the third verse, Thy people shall be
willing, etc. and the way of compassing and effecting in the former words of
this verse, The Lord shall send forth the Rod of thy strength out of Sion.

Every King has his jura Regalia, Greg. Tholos. de Repub. lib. 9. cap. 1.
certain royal prerogatives and peculiar honors proper to his own person,
which no man can use but with subordination unto him. And if we observe them
we shall find many of them as exactly belong unto Christ in his Kingdom as
to any secular prince in his. First, unto Kings do belong Armamentaria
publica, the Magazins for military provision, and the power and disposition of
public arms. Therefore he is said by the Apostle to Bear the sword, because
arms properly belong unto him, and unto others under his allowance and
protection. Romans 13.4. 1 Samuel 10.16, 17.
So to Christ alone does belong, and in him only is to be found the public
armorie of a Christian man. The weapons of our warfare are mighty only through
him. Nay, he is himself the armor and panoply of a Christian, and therefore
we are commanded to put on the Lord Jesus. Again, via publica is via regia;
the high way is the King^ way, wherein every man walks freely under the
protection of his Sovereign. So that Law of faith and obedience under which
we are to walk, which S. Paul calls the Law of Christ, Gal. 6 2. Iam. 2.8.
Iam. 1.25. Psalm. 91.11. Prove. 10.29.
is by S. James called Lex Regia, a royal Law, and a Law of Liberty, in which
while any man continues he is under the protection of the promises and of the
Angels of Christ. Again, Bona adespota seu incerti Domini, Lands that are
concealed and under the evident claim of no other person or Lord, do belong
unto the Prince, as he that has the supreme and universal dominion in his
countries. And this is most certainly true of Christ in his Kingdom, if any
man can once truly say, Lord, I am not the servant of any other Master, no
other King has the rightful dominion, or peaceable possession of my heart,
he may most truly from thence infer; Therefore Lord I am thy servant, and
therefore Lord my heart is thine. True it is Lord our God, that other Lords
besides thee have had dominion over us: but now by thee only will we make
mention of thy name. Esai. 26.13.
Again, Vectigaliae, and Census, Tributes, and Customs, and Testifications of
homage and fidelity are personal prerogatives belonging unto Princes, Romans 13
6, 7.
and as the Apostle says, Due unto them, for that Ministry and Office which
under God they attend upon. So in Christ's Kingdom there is a worship which the
Psalmist says is Due unto his name. Psalm. 56 8.
They which came unto the Temple, which was a type of Christ, were not to come
empty handed, but to bring Testimonies of their reverence, and willing
subjection unto that worship. When Abraham met Melchisedek, a figure of Christ,
as from him he received a blessing, so unto him he gave an expression of a
loyal heart, the tenth of the spoils. When the people of Israel entered into
the land of Canaan (which was a type of Christ's Church which he should conquer
unto himself) if any people accepted of the peace which they were first to
proclaim, Deuteronomy. 20.11.
they were to become tributaries and servants unto Israel. So it is said of
Solomon (whose peaceable kingdom was a type of Christ's after his many
victories) that he 1 King. 4.21.
levied a tribute of bond-service upon all the nations about Israel; and 1
King. 9.21. 10.10.
that those princes with whom he held correspondence brought unto him presents,
as testimonies of his greatness and wisdom. So Matthew. 2.11. Primitiae
Gentium sacramentalia munera pr^ferunt de thesauris, etc. Cyprian. sermon. de
stell. and Magis Brisson. De Reg. Persarum. l. 1.26.
when the wise men, (the first fruits of the Gentiles, after Christ exhibited)
came to submit unto his kingdom, they opened their treasure and presented him
with gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh. Again, Monetarum leges and valores,
the authorizing and valuations of public coins belong unto the prince only,
it is his image and inscription alone which makes them current. Even so unto
Christ only does belong the power of stamping and creating as it were new
ordinances in his Church, nothing is with God, nor should be current with us
which has not his image or express authority upon it. Neither can any man
falsify or corrupt any constitution of his without notable contempt against his
royal prerogative. Again, Iudicium or potestas judiciaria, a power of judging
the persons and causes of men is a peculiar royalty, the administration whereof
is from the prince as the fountain of all humane equity (under God) deposited
in the hands of inferior officers, who are as it were the mouth of the prince
to publish the laws, and to execute those acts of justice and peace, which
principally belong to his own sacred breast. And so Christ says of himself,
Ioh. 5.22, 27.
The Father has committed all judgment unto the Son, and has given him
authority to execute judgment. Again, Ius vitae and necis. A power to pardon
condemned persons, and deliver them from the terror of the Laws sentence, is
a transcendent mercy, a gemme which can shine only from the diadems of
Princes. Now unto Christ likewise belongs in his Church a power to forgive
sins, it is the most sacred roialty of this prince of peace, not only to
suspend, but for ever to revoke, and as it were, annihilate the sentence of
malediction under which every man is borne. There are likewise Ornamenta Regia*
regal Ornaments, a Crown, a Throne, 2 King. 11.12. 1 King. 10.18.
a Scepter, and the like. Thus we find the Romans were wont to send to those
foreign kings with whom they were in league, as testimonies and confirmations
of their dignity, Live. lib. 30. Tacit. Ann. l. 4. Dionys Hallicar. lib. 3.
scipionem eburneum, togam pictam, sellam curulem, an ivorie scepter, a royal
robe, and a chair of state. And the like honors we find in the Scriptures
belonging unto Christ, that he was crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2.9.
and that he had a Throne and righteous scepter belonging to his kingdom.
Psalm. 45.6, 8.
Thus we have seen in several particulars how Christ has his Royalties
belonging to his kingdom. Some principal of them we find in this place; A
throne, a scepter, ambassadors, armies for the right dispensing of his sacred
power. We will first consider the words, and then raise such observations as
shall offer themselves.

First, what is meant by the Rod of Christ's Strength, or his Strong Rod? It
notes a thing which a man may lean upon, or lay the whole weight of his body
on in his weariness. Insigne majestatis regiae. Hieron.
But being spoken of Christ's kingdom we take it for a scepter or rod of
majesty. I will not hold you with the variety of acceptions in Expositors.
Some take it for the branch that grows out of that root of Iesse. Theodoret.
Arnobius. Aug. and Prosp.
Some for the wood of the cross. Some for the body of Christ borne of a
Virgin. Some, for the kingdom of Christ's power, Euthymius.
taking the sign for the thing signified. Some for the power of his mighty
works and preaching. That of the body, and of the cross of Christ, except by
them we understand the virtue of Christ crucified, I conceive to be not so
pertinent to the purpose of the Prophet. The rest agree in one. But for the
more distinct understanding of the words we may consider out of the holy
Scriptures what things were sent out of Sion. And we find there two things:
First, the word of the Lord, or his holy Gospel. The Law shall proceed out of
Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Mic. 4.2. Secondly, the spirit
of the Lord, which was first sent unto Sion: for at Jerusalem the Apostles
were to wait for the promise of the Father, Act. 1.4. and from thence was shed
abroad into the world upon al flesh, Act. 2.17. and both these are the power or
strength of Christ. His word, a Gospel of power unto salvation, Romans 1.16. 2
Cor. 4.7.10.4. and his spirit a spirit of power, 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Timothy 1.7. which
is therefore called the finger and the arm of the Lord, Luke 11.20. Matt.
12.28. Esai. 53.1. so by the Rod is meant the Gospel and the Spirit of Christ.

Secondly, what is meant by Gods sending this Rod of Christ's strength? It
notes, the manifestation of the Gospel, we knew it not before it was sent. The
donation of the Gospel, we had it not before it was sent; the invitations of
the Gospel, we were without God in the world, and strangers from the Covenant
of promise, before it was sent. The Commission of the Dispensers of the
Gospel, they have their patent from heaven, they are not to speak until they
be sent.

Thirdly, what is meant by sending it out of Sion? It is put in Opposition to
mount Sina, from whence the Law was sometimes sent with thunders and fire, and
much terror unto the people of Israel. Ye are not come, says the Apostle,
unto the mount that burned with fire, nor unto blackness and darkness, and
tempest, etc. but ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, and to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, etc. Heb. 12.18.24. and the Apostle
elsewhere shows us the meaning of this Allegorical opposition between Sina
and Sion, between Sarah and Hagar, namely the two covenants of the Law and of
Grace, or of bondage and liberty, Gal. 4.24, 25. Sion was the place whither the
tribes resorted to worship the Lord, the place toward which that people
prayed, the place of Gods merciful residence amongst them, the beauty of
holiness, the place upon which first the gift of the holy Ghost was powered
forth, and in which the Gospel was first of all preached after Christ's
Ascension. We may take it by a Synechdoche for the whole Church of the Jews,
unto whom the Lord first revealed his Covenant of Grace in Christ, Act. 3.26.
Act. 13.46. Romans 2.10.

Rule Thou] that is, Thou shall rule, which is a usual form to put the
Imperative for the future Indicative. It is not a command, which has relation
unto any service: but it is a promise, a commission, a dignity conferred upon
Christ.

In the midst of thine enemies.] Some understand it of changing the hearts of
his enemies, Qui alieni erant, tui esse incipient. Dignare esse Dominus
inimicoru^ tuorum. Hieron.
and converting them as captives unto his obedience. Other understand the
wonderful effect of the power of Christ's kingdom, that he can by his Word and
Spirit hold up his Church in despite of all the enemies thereof round about.
The Church ever was and will be pestered with diverse kinds of adversaries,
heretics and hypocrites, and false brethren, with profaneness, temptations,
persecutions, spiritual wickednesses; and in the midst of all these the Church
of Christ grows as a Lily amongst the thorns. Now this In medio, notes two
things; Dominium plenum, and dominium securum, A perfect and full government,
without mutilation, without impediment, the Church being amongst the wicked as
a rock in the midst of the sea, or as a garrison in an enemies town. Media
dominantur in urbe, is an expression of such a rule as can no way be hindered
or removed. The Church of God is a burdensome stone, they who go about to
remove it out of that place where Christ will plant it shall be cut in pieces,
though all the people of the earth should gather together against it, Zech.
12.3. A secure and confident government, so in the Scripture phrase, In the
midst notes confidence and security. When the Prophet asked the Shunamite,
would thou be spoken for to the king, or to the Captain of the host? she
answered, I dwell amongst mine own people, that is, I am safe and have enough
already, 2 King. 4.13. When they of the Synagogue would have cast Christ down
headlong from the brow of a hill, it is said, that he passed through the midst
of them and went his way, that is, with much confidence, safety, and assurance
he withdrew himself, Luke 4.29, 30. As the Prophet was full of security and
quietness in the midst of the Syrian siege, 2 King. 6.14-16.

The words being thus unfolded, we may observe in them Three of Christ's
principal Regalities, Sceptrum, Solium, and Imperium. The Scepter, the Throne,
and the Power or government of his kingdom. His Scepter is the Word of his
Gospel animated by the Power of his holy Spirit, and accompanied with the
blessing and authority of God the Father, who sends it abroad into the world.
His Throne, from whence this his Scepter is extended, Sion, the Church of the
Jews; His victorious, plenarie, and secure government, Rule thou in the midst
of thine enemies.

First, the Scepter here is the Gospel and the Spirit of Christ. Christ is a
Shepherd toward his Flock the Church, Esai. 40.11. A great Shepherd, Heb.
13.20. that notes his Power and Majesty over them: and a good Shepherd, Ioh.
10.14. that notes his care and tenderness toward his Sheep. Kings in the
Scripture are called Shepherds to lead and to feed, and to govern the people.
So David is said to have been taken from the sheepfolds, to feed Jacob and
Israel, Psalm. 78.71. 2 Samuel 5.2. and thus Christ is a Shepherd and a King. I
will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, Even my servant
David -- I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among
them, Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. Prophets and Teachers are in the Scripture likewise
called Shepherds, Ier. 23.1, 4. and so Christ is a Shepherd and a Bishop. Ye
were as sheep going astray, but now ye are returned unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of your souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. And therefore we find in the Scripture
that Christ has two pastoral staves, to note his great care and double office
in his Church. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want - I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff they comfort me, Psalm.
23.4. I took unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I
called Bands, and I fed the flock, Zech. 11.7. So then the Rod of Christ's
strength or his strong staff does in these several relations note unto us
three things: As it is a staff of strength, so it notes the power of Christ.
As it is the Scepter of a King, so it notes the majesty of Christ. As it is
the staff of a Bishop or Prophet, so it notes the care and superintendencie of
Christ over his Church. So then this first particular of the Rod of Christ's
kingdom affoords unto us three observations: First, that Christ in his Gospel
and Spirit is full of power and strength toward the Church. Secondly, that
Christ in his Gospel and Spirit is full of Glory and Majesty toward his
Church. Thirdly, that Christ in his Gospel and Spirit is full of care and of
tenderness toward his Church.

First, the words of the Gospel with the spirit is full of power and strength.
No man will deny that Christ in his own person is full of power. And as the
power of a Prince is principally seen in his laws, edicts, pardons, and
gracious patents: so is the power of Christ wonderfully magnified toward the
Church in his Gospel, which unto us is both a Covenant of mercy, and a Law of
obedience. We may observe how Christ is frequently pleased to honor his Gospel
with his own titles and attributes. And therefore the Apostle speaks of him
and his word, as of one and the same thing. Heb. 4.12, 13.
The word of God is quick and powerful -- a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, neither is there any Creature which is not manifest in
his sight, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do. That which is the word in one verse is Christ himself in another,
which has given occasion to some learned men (without any constraining reason
(as I conceive) to take the Word there for the essential Word of God, or the
person of Christ himself, to whom I think that appellation is not given by
any of the sacred Writers, but only by his beloved Disciple Saint John. We
know that Christ was crucified at Jerusalem, and yet the Apostle says, that he
was crucified amongst the Galatians. Certainly, in that he died he died but
once unto sin. Gal. 3.1.
S. Paul could not do that himself, which he curses others for doing,
Crucify again the Lord of Glory. So then at Jerusalem he was crucified in his
person, and at Galatia in the ministry of his Word. One and the same
crucifying was as lively set forth in Saint Paul's preaching, as it was really
acted upon Christ's person: for Christ is as really present to his Church now in
the spiritual dispensation of his ordinances, as he was corporally present
with the Jews in the days of his flesh. And therefore I say it is that we
find the same attributes given to both. 1 Cor. 1.24.
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God; and the Gospel elsewhere
the Romans 1.16.
Power of God and the 1 Cor. 2.6, 7.
wisdom of God in a mystery to them that are perfect. Again, 1 Cor. 28.
Christ the Lord of glory, and the Gospel the 1 Timothy 1.11.
Gospel of glory, or the glorious Gospel. Act. 3.15.
Christ the prince of life, yea the 1 Ioh. 1.1.
Word of life, and the Phil. 2.16.
Gospel the Word of life too. Ioh. 5.27.
Christ a Judge, and the Ioh. 12.48.
Word of Christ a Judge too. The word which I have spoken the same shall judge
you at the last day. Luke 1.69, 77. Luke 2.30. Esai. 62.11. Genesis 49.18.
Christ a Savior and Salvation unto men, Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation:
And the Ioh. 4.22.
Gospel of Christ a Salvation too; we know, says Christ to the woman of
Samaria, what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews. The force of the
reason leads us to understand by Salvation the Oracles of God which were
committed unto that people, for out of them only it is that we know what and
how to worship, and this is not unusual in holy Scriptures. Heb. 2.2, 3. 2
Cor. 3.9.
If the Word, says the Apostle, spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, etc? Where we find Salvation set in opposition to the Word
spoken by Angels, which was the Law of God, or the ministry of condemnation,
and therefore it must needs signify the Gospel of Christ. Act. 18.28.
Be it known unto you, says the Apostle to the unbeleeving Jews, that the
salvation of God, that is, the Gospel of God (as appears plainly by the
like parallel speech in Act. 13.46.
another place) is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it. So the
Apostle says that Iam. 1.21.
the engraffed Word is able to save the souls of men. All which and many other
the like particulars note unto us, That as Christ is the Power and Image of his
Father, so the Gospel is in some sort of Christ: For which reason the Apostle,
as I conceive, calls the Gospel 2 Cor. 4.6.
the Face of Jesus Christ: God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. Where is it that we behold the
glory of God but 2 Cor. 3.18.
in a glass? and what is that glass? but the word of God as S. James calls it?
Iam. 1.23. Christ is not pleased any other ways ordinarily to exercise his
power, or to reveal his glory, but in these ordinances of his which we
dispense. Therefore he walks in his Church with a Revel. 1.16.
sword is his mouth, and with a Esai. 11.4.
Rod in his mouth, to note that he gives no greater testification of his
strength than in the Ministry of his Gospel; which is therefore sometimes
called a Ephesians 6.17.
sword, a Ier. 23.29. Ier. 5.16.
hammer, a fire, sometimes only a 2 Cor. 2.16.
savor of life and death, to note the mighty working thereof, that can kill as
well by a sent as by a wound, as well by a breath as by a blow.

To consider this point a little more distinctly. This Power of the Gospel of
Christ appears in both those regards, as it is a savor of life unto life, and
as it is a savor of death unto death. Toward his Church who shall be saved,
and toward his enemies who shall perish. Many ways is the Gospel of Christ
and his Spirit a Rod of strength unto his Church.

First, Luke 11.20, 21. Ephesians. 3.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.
in their Calling and conversion from the power of Satan unto God. Satan is a
strong man, and he is armed, has a whole panoply and full provision of
military instruments, and (which is a great advantage) has both the first
possession* and the full love of the hearts of men before Christ attempts any
thing upon them. And therefore that which pulls a man from under the paw of
such a Lion, and forces him away from his own palace, must needs be much
stronger than he. Ephesians. 6.12.17.
And therefore the Apostle commends the power of the word by this argument
that it is a sword fit to overcome principalities and powers and rulers of the
darkness of this world, and spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places.
Again, the old Man in our nature is a strong man too, a Reigning King, which
sets himself mightily against the word and will of Christ, and cherishes
the disease against the remedy. And by that likewise the Apostle commends
the power of the Gospel, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. Mark. 4.39, 41.
that it is mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, and
imaginations or fleshly reasonings. When Christ stilled the winds and the Sea
with but two words, Peace, be still, they were exceedingly amazed at his
power, and said one to another, what manner of man is this, that even the
winds and the Sea obey him? Esai. 57.20.
The conversion of a man is a far greater work than the stilling of the Sea,
that will be sometimes calm of it self when the fury of the wind cease.
The wicked indeed are like the Sea, but not at any time, but like a troubled
Sea when it cannot rest. The Sea we know is subject unto several motions. An
inward boiling and unquietness from it self, its ordinary fluxes and refluxes
from the influence of the moon, many casual agitations from the violence of
the winds, and from its own waves, one wave precipitating, impelling, and
repelling another: So are the hearts of wicked men by the foaming, estuations,
and excesses of natural concupiscence, by the provisions and materials of
sinful pleasures, by the courses of the world, by the solicitations and
impulsions of Satan, by a world of hourly casualties and provocations so
tempestuous that they always cast out upon the words and actions of men mire
and dirt. Now in the dispensation of the word by the ministry of a weak man
Christ stilleth the raging of this Sea, quels the lusts, corrects the
distempe^s, scatters the temptations, works a smoothness and tranquillity
of Spirit in the soul of a man. Surely when this is done the soul cannot but
stand amazed at its own recovery, and admire that wonderful and invisible
power which could so suddenly rebuke such raging affections and reduce them
unto calmness and beauty again. What ailed thee O thou Sea, that thou
fleddest, and thou Jordan that thou were driven back? Psalm. 114.5, 6.
ye mountains that ye skipped like Rams, and ye little hills like Lambs? It
is an expression of Gods power toward his people in their triumphall entrance
into the Land of Canaan. We may apply it to the conquest and possession which
the word takes of the souls of men. What ailed a man that he was driven back
from his own channel, and made suddenly to forget his wonted course? what
ailed those strong and mountainous lusts, which were as immoveably settled upon
the soul as a hill upon his base, to fly away at the voice of a man like a
frighted sheep? what ailed those smaller corruptions and intemperancies, which
happily had before lost their names, and were rather customs, and infirmities,
than sins, to fly away like lambs from the word of Christ? A man went into
the Church with a full tide and stream of lusts, every thicket in his heart,
every reasoning and imagination of his soul did before shelter whole flocks of
evil affections: when he came out the tide was driven back, the stream
turned, the center of his heart altered, his forest discovered, his lusts
scattered and subdued. What ailes this man? He has but heard an hours
discourse, the same which others hear and their tide rises the higher by it.
Certainly these Devils were not cast out, Act. 17.32, 34.
these streams were not turned back but by the finger of God himself. When
the minister of Christ shall whisper in the ears of a dead man, whom no thunder
could have awakened, and he shall immediately rise up and give glory to God,
when Christ shall call men to deny themselves, to get above themselves, to
hate Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and their own life, to sell all
that they have, to crucify, and be cruel to their own members, to pull out
their right eyes, to cut off their right hands, to part from those sins which
before they esteemed their choicest ornaments, and from those too which before
they made their chiefest support and subsistence; to stand at defiance with the
allurements or discouragements of the world, to be set up for signs and
wonders, for very proverbs of skorne, and objects of hatred to those of their
own house; to receive persecutions as rewards, and entertain them not with
patience only but with thankfulness and rejoicing; to be all their life long
in the midst of enemies, put to tedious conflicts with the powers of the world
and of darkness; to believe things which they have not seen, and to hope for
things which they do not know; and yet maugre all this to refuse to consult
with flesh and blood, to stand still more in awe of Gods word, than of any
other thing: certainly that which with the voice of a weak man brings such
great things to pass, must needs be Virga virtutis, a Rod of strength. A Rod
like the Rod of Moses which can lead us through such seas as these, to one whom
we have never seen nor known before, Esai. 55.5.

Secondly, the Gospel of Christ is a Rod of strength in the justification of
men, as it is Sceptrum Iustitiae, a Heb. 1.8.
Scepter of Righteousness, a 2 Cor. 5.19.
word of reconciliation, Ephesians. 1.13.
a Gospel of salvation, Romans 8.2, 3.
a Law of the Spirit of life, 2 Cor. 3.6.8.9.
a ministration of the Spirit, of life, and of Righteousness, an Esai. 61.1.
opening of prisons and a proclaiming of liberty unto captives, in these
respects likewise it is full of power. There was a mighty power in the Law of
God typified in those thundrings and terrors with which it was administered upon
mount Sina; the Apostle calls it a Gal. 3.24.
Schoolmaster to scourge and drive us unto Christ, and the Psalmist an Psalm.
2.9.
iron Rod able to break in pieces all the potsherds of the earth. And we know
boys in a School do not apprehend so much terror in the King as in their
Master. Yet in comparison of the Power of the Gospel, the Law it self was
very Romans 8.3. Heb. 7.18, 19.
weak and unprofitable, able to make nothing perfect. The Power of the Law was
only to destruction, the Power of the Gospel for edification. The Law could
only hold under him that was down before, it could never raise him up again.
Now the power is far greater to raise than to kill, to forgive sins, than
to bind them. Herein is the mighty Exodus 34.5, 6, 7. Mich. 7.18, 19. Matthew. 9.6.
strength of Gods mercy seen that it can pass by iniquities, transgressions
and sins. To Matthew. 28.18, 19.
preach the Gospel of Christ in his name and authority is an evident argument
of that plenary power which is given unto him both in heaven and earth. And the
very dispensing of this word of reconciliation which is committed unto the
Ministers of the Gospel (how basely soever the ungrateful world may esteem
of them) has honored them with a title of as great power as a man is capable
of, Obad. v. 21. Ioh 20.23. 1 Timothy 4.16. Iam. 5.20.
to be called Saviors, to have the custody of the keys of heaven,
ministerially and instrumentally under Christ and his Spirit to save the
souls, and to cover the sins of men. Now then that word which from the mouth
of a weak man is able to reconcile a child of wrath unto God, and by the words
of one hour to cover and wipe out the sins of many years, which were
scattered as thick in the souls of men as the stars in the firmament, must
needs be virga virtutis, a Rod of strength.

Thirdly, the Gospel of Christ is a Rod of strength in the sanctification of
men, as it is Sceptrum cum unctione, Ioh. 17.17. Esai. 54.13. Gal 4.19. 2 Cor.
3.2.
a Scepter which has ever an unction accompanying it. As it is a Sanctifying
Truth, an heavenly teaching, a forming of Christ in the soul, a making of the
heart as it were his Epistle by writing the Law therein, and manifesting the
power and image of Christ in the conscience. If a man should touch a marble or
adamant stone with a seal, and taking it off should see the print of it left
behind, he could not but conceive some wonderful and secret virtue to have
wrought so strange an effect. Now our hearts are of themselves as hard as the
nether millstone; when then a holy word, so meekly and gently laid on upon them,
shall leave there an impression of its own purity, when so small a thing as a
grain of mustard seed shall transform an earthy soul into its own nature,
when the eyes and hands, and mouth of Christ being in the ministry of his
word spread upon the eyes and hands and mouth of a Child shall revive the same
from death, when by looking into a glass we shall not only have a view of
our own faces, but shall see them changed into the image of another face which
from thence shines upon us, how can we but conclude that certainly that word
by which such wonders as these are effected is indeed virga virtutis, a Rod of
strength?

Fourthly, the Gospel of Christ is a Rod of strength, in the Perservation and
Perseverance of the Saints, as it is Virga germinans, a Rod like Aarons Rod,
which blossomed and the blossoms perished not, but remained in the Ark for a
Testimony of Gods power. For as those buds, or the Manna in the Ark did not
perish, so neither does the word of the Gospel in the hearts of the faithful.
The Apostle says, that we are kept by the power of God unto salvation. and S.
Jude that Gods power keeps the Saints from falling, 1 Pet. 1.5. Iud. v.24.
and presents them faultlesse before the presence of his glory; and what is
this power of God whereby he does it, but the Gospel of Christ, which S.
Peter calls semen incorruptibile, uncorruptible seed; 1 Pet. 1.24. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
and the Spirit of Christ, which S. John calls semen manens, an abiding seed?
If I should see a tree with perpetual fruit, without any variation from the
difference of seasons, a tree like that in S. John's Paradise which every month
did bring forth fruit of twelve several kinds, I should conclude that it had
an extraordinary vital power in it: so when I find Christ in his word
promising, and by the planting and watering of his Laborers in the vineyard,
making good that promise unto his Church; That every branch bringing forth
fruit in him, shall not only be as Aarons Rod, have his fruit preserved upon
him, but shall bring forth more fruit and shall have life more abundantly* Ioh.
1^ 2. Ioh. 10.10.
how can I but conclude, that that word which is the Instrument of so
unperishable a condition, is indeed Virga virtutis a Rod of strength, a Rod cut
out of the tree of life it self?

Fifthly, the Gospel of Christ is a Rod of strength in comforting and
supporting of the faithful, as it is Virga pulchritudinis and colligationis, a
Rod of Beauty and of Binding, as it is a word which does bind that which was
broken, and give unto them which mourn in Sion beauty for ashes, Esai. 61.1.3.
and the garment of praise for the Spirit of heaviness: as it quenches all
the fiery darts, and answers all the bloody reasonings of Satan against the
soul, as it is a staff which gives comfort, and subsistence in the very
vallie of the shadow of death. Psalm. 23.4.
The shadow of death is an usual expressio^ in the Scripture for all fears,
terrors, affrightments, or any dreadful calamities either of soul or body.
The whole misery of our natural condition is thereby signified, Luke 1.79.
Many ways does the Prophet David set forth the extremities he had been driven
unto, my bones are vexed, and dried like a potsheard, and turned into the
drought of summer; my couch swimmeth with tears, mine eye is consumed and
waxen old with grief. I am powered out like water, all my bones are out of
joint, my heart is like melted wax in the mids of my bowels. Thine arrows
stick fast in me, thine hand presses me sore, there is no soundness in my
flesh, my wounds stink and are corrupt, I am feeble and fore broken, I have
roared by reason of the disquietnesse of my heart. Innumerable evils compass
me about, I am not able to look up. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon
me and horror has overwhelmed me. My soul is among lions, I lie amongst them
that are set on fire. The waters are come in unto my soul. I sink in deep
mire; the floods overflow me, etc. These all, and the like are comprehended in
that one word, The shadow of death. And in that, it was only the word, and the
Spirit of God which did support him; Psalm. 119.50.92.
This is my comfort in my affliction, says he, for thy word has quickened
me. When my afflictions had brought me to the very brinke and darkness of the
grave, thy word revived me again, and made me flourish. Unless thy Law had
been my delights, I should have perished in mine affliction. Now then when I
see a man upon whom so many heavy pressures do meet, the weight of sin,
the weight of Gods heavy displeasure, the weight of a wounded Spirit, the
weight of a decayed body, the weight of skorne and temptations from Satan and
the world, in the mids of all this not to turn unto lying vanities, not to
consult with flesh and blood, nor to rely on the wisdom or help of man, 2 Chronicles. 32.8.
but to lean only on this word, to trust in it at all times, and to cast all
his expectations upon it, to make it his only Rod and staff to comfort him in
such sore extremities, how can I but confess that this word is indeed Virga
virtutis, a Rod of strength?

Math. 4.4. 1 Timothy 4.5.
Lastly, the Gospel of Christ is a Rod of strength in sanctifying and blessing
of our Temporal things. As it is Baculus Panis, A staff of bread; Man lives
not by bread alone, but by the word which proceeds out of Gods mouth, not by
the creature, but by the blessing which prepares the creature for our use. Now
it is the word of God, namely his promises in Christ of things concerning this
life as well as that which is to come, that does sanctify the creatures of God
to those wh^ with thankfulness receive them. The fall of man b^ought a
pollution upon the creatures, a curse upon the stone and timber of a man's
house, a snare upon his table, a poison and bitterness upon his meat,
distractions and terrors upon his bed, emptiness and vexation upon all his
estate; which cleaves as fast thereunto as blackness to the skin of an
Ethiopian, or sin to the soul of man. For all the creatures of God are by
sin mischievously converted into the instruments and provisions of lust. Romans
13.14. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
The Sun, and all the glorious lights of nature but instruments to serve the
pride, covetousness, adultery, vanity of a lustful eye. All the delicacies
which the earth, air or Sea can afford but materials to feed the luxury and
intemperance of a lustful body. All the honors and promotions of the world but
fuel to satisfy the haughtiness and ambition of a lustful heart. That word
then which can fetch out this leprosy from the creatures, and put life,
strength, and comfort into them again must needs be Virga virtutis, a Rod of
strength.

Secondly, the Gospel and Spirit of Christ is a rod of strength, in regard of
his and his Churches enemies. Able both to repel, and to revenge all their
injuries; to disappoint the ends and machinations of Satan, to triumph and get
above the persecutions of men, to get a treasure which no malice nor fury of
the enemy can take away, a nobleness of mind which no insultation of the
adversary can abate, a security of condition, and calmness of spirit, where
no worldly tempests can any more extinguish than the darkness of a cloud, or
the boisterousnesse of a wind can blot out the luster, or perturbe the order of
celestial bodies; a heavenly wisdom able to prevail against the gates of
hell, and to stop the mouths of every gain-sayer. 2 Cor. 10.6. Ier. 1.8, 9.
Ier. 6.27. Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. Mat. 21.44.
The Word has ever a Readiness to revenge disobedience, as the Apostle
speaks; it hardens the faces of men, and arms them, that they may break all
those who fall upon them.

This power of the Word toward wicked men, shows it self in many
particulars: First, in a mighty work of Conviction. The Spirit was therefore
sent into the world to convince it by the ministry of the Gospel, which one
word contains the ground of the whole strength here spoken of; for all, which
the word brings to pass, it does it by the conviction of the Spirit. This
Conviction is twofold: A Conviction unto conversion, whereby the hearts of men
are wonderfully overruled ruled by that invincible evidence of the Spirit of
truth, to feel and acknowledge their woeful condition by reason of sin, so
long as they continue in unbeleefe, to take unto themselves the just shame and
confusion of face which belongs unto them, to give unto God the glory of his
righteous and just severity if he should destroy them, and hereupon to be
secondly by the terror of the Lord persuaded to count worthy of all acceptance
any deliverance out of that estate which shall be tendered unto them: To admire,
adore, and greedily embrace any terms of peace and reconciliation which shall
be offered them. To submit unto the righteousness, and with all willing and
meek affection to bend the heart to the Scepter of Christ, and to whatsoever
form of judicature and spiritual government he shall please to erect therein.
And this magnifies the strength of this Rod of Christ's Kingdom, that it makes
men yield upon any terms: when we see the little stone grow into a mighty
mountain, and eat into all the Kingdoms of the world; when we see Emperors
and Princes submit their necks and scepters to a doctrine at first every where
spoken against, and that upon the words of a few despicable persons, and that
such a doctrine too, as is diametrally contrary to the natural constitution of
the hearts of men, and teaches nothing but self-denial, and this for hope of
reward from one whom they never saw, and whom if they had seen, they should
have found by a natural eye no beauty in him for which he should be desired;
and this reward too, whatever it be, deferred for a long time, and in the
interim no ground of assurance to expect it, but only faith in himself that
promises it, and in the mean time a world of afflictions for his names sake;
How can we think that a world of wise and of great men, should give ear most
willingly unto such terms as these, if there were not a demonstrative and
constraining evidence of truth and goodness therein, able to stop the mouths,
and to answer the objections of all gain sayers? Of this point I have spoken
more copiously upon another Scripture. Secondly, there is a Conviction unto
condemnation of those who stand out against this saving power of the Gospel
and Spirit of grace, driving them from all their strong holds, and constraining
them perforce to acknowledge the truth which they do not love. Matthew. 22.46.
Thus we find our Savior disputing with the Jews, till no man was able to
answer him a word; and as he did so himself, so he promised that his
messengers should do so too, I will give you a mouth and wisdom, Luke 21.15.
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist: And this
promise we find made good; Act 6.10.
the enemies of Steven were not able to resist the Spirit by which he spoke:
Act. 18.28.
And Apollos mightily convinced the Jews, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus
was Christ: And this the Apostle numbreth amongst the qualifications of a
Bishop, that he should be able by sound doctrine to convince the gainsayers,
Tit. 1.9, 11.
and to stop the mouths of those unruly deceivers, whose business it is to
subvert men, for this is the excellent virtue of Gods Word, that it concludes
or shuts men in, Gal. 3.22.
and leaves not any gap or evasion of corrupted reason unanswered, or
unprevented. Thus we find how the Prophets in their ministry did still drive
the Jews from their shifts, and press them with Dilemma's, the inconveniences
whereof they could on no side escape: either there must be a fault in you, or
else in God who rebukes you; but now what iniquity, says the Lord, have your
fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? Ier. 2.5 31.
Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, or a land of darkness, wherefore say
my people we are lords, Mic. 6.3, 4.
we will come no more unto thee? O my people, what have I done unto thee, and
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. I raised up of your sons
for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites: Is it not even thus, Amos
2.11.
O ye children of Israel? Here the Scripture uses that figure which is called
by the Rhetoritians Communicatio, a debating and deliberation with the adverse
party, an evidencing of a cause so clearly, as that at last a man can
challenge the adversary himself to make such a determination, Ier. 5.7. Ier.
9.7.
as himself shall in reason judge the merits of the cause to require: How
shall I pardon thee for this? and how shall I do for the daughters of my
people? Set me in a way, determine the controversy your selves, and I will
stand to the issue which your own consciences shall make. O inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Esai. 5.3.
and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my Vineyard, that is, do
you your selves undertake the deciding of your own cause. When a band of armed
men came against Christ to attach him, and at the pronouncing but of two words,
Ioh. 18.6.
I am he, fell all down backward to the earth; we must needs confess that
there was some mighty power and evidence of Majesty in him that uttered them:
what think we can he do when he reigns and judges the world, Quid
judicaturus faciet qui judicandus hoc fecit? quid regnaturus poterit, qui
moriturus hoc potuit? Aug.
who did let out so much power when he was to die and to be judged by the
world? Now Christ reigns and judges the world by his Word, and that more
mightily after his ascending up on high, and therefore he promises his
Apostles that they should do greater works than himself had done. When I
shall see a man armed with scorn against Christ in his Word, Ioh. 14.12.
standing proudly upon the defense of his own ways by his own wisdom, and
wrapping up himself in the mud of his own carnal reasonings, by a few
postulata, and deductions from Gods Word, Tit. 3.11. Wisd. 17.11, 16. Luke
19.22.
to be enforced to stop his own mouth, to be condemned by his own
witness, to betray his own succors, and to be shut up in a prison without
bars; when I shall force such a man by the mighty penetration and invincible
evidence of Gods Word, to see in his own conscience a hand subscribing to the
truth which condemns him, and belying all those delusions which he had framed
to deceive himself withal; who can deny but that the rod of Gods mouth is
indeed Virga virtutis, a rod of strength, an iron rod, Ier. 19.11.
able to deal with all humane reasonings, as a hammer with a potsherd, which
though to the hand of a man it may feel as hard as a rock, yet is too brittle
to endure the blow of an iron rod? Strange it is to observe how boldly men
venture on sins under the names of custom, or fashions, or some other
pretenses of corrupted reason, contrary to the clear and literal evidence of
holy Scriptures ( Aquin. part. 1. qu. 1. art. 10. ad primum. Alphons. a Castro
contra Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 3. Glass. Philolog. Sacra. lib. 2. page 338. Hooker
lib. 5. sect. 59. (...). A. Gell. Esaias 5.23. Exodus 23.2.7.
the most immediate and grammatical sense whereof, is ever soundest, where
there does not some apparent and unavoidable error in doctrine, or mischief
in manners, follow thereupon.) Men will justify the cause of the wicked for
reward, and by dexterity of wit put a better color upon a worser business,
(as has been observed of Protagoras and Carneades) and yet the Lord says
expressly, Thou shall not speak in a cause to wrest judgment, thou shall
keep thee far from a false matter, for God (whom thou ought to imitate)
will not justify the wicked. Men will follow the sinful fashions of the
world, in strange apparel, in prodigious hair, in lustful and unprofitable
expense of that precious moment of time, upon the abuse or right improvement
whereof depends the several issues of their eternal condition: though the
Lord say expressly, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 2.2. Zeph. 1.8. Hieron. Theodoret. Ribera.
Be not conformed to this world; they that walk according to the course of
the world, walk according to the Prince of the power of the air. The Lord
will punish all such as are clothed with strange apparel, who take up the
fashions of idolaters, or other nations, or other sexes (as that place is
differently expounded) 1 Cor. 11.14.
Nature it self teaches that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair; nay
Nature it self taught that honest Heathen to stand at defiance with the sins
of his age, and not comply with the course of the world, upon that slight
apology, as if the Nec virtutem aut vitium seculum vocavit. Tac. in Agric.
Homicid^^m came admittunt si^g^li crim^n est, virtus vocatur cum publ^ce
geritur, Cypr. l. 2. epist. 2.
commonnesse had taken away the illness, and that which committed by one would
have been a sin, being imitated after a multitude were but a fashion. To
conclude this particular: The Apostle is peremptory, 1 Cor. 6.9* Esaias 41.21.
Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, nor covetous, nor thieves,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of
God: and the consciences of many men, who yet will never yield to the
conclusion, cannot choose but subsume, as the Apostle goes on, such are some of
we, nay, and such we will be too. But now if we should bespeake these men in
the word of the Prophet, Produce your cause, says the Lord, bring forth your
strong reasons, Esaias 28.17.
says the King of Jacob, they should find at the last their reasons to be
like themselves, vanity and lighter than nothing, that the Word of the Lord
will at last prevail, and sweep away all their refuge of lies.

Secondly, the power of the Word toward wicked men is seen in Affrighting of
them; 2 Cor. 2.16.
there is a spirit of bondage, and a savor of death, as well as a spirit of
life and liberty which goes along with the Word. Guilt is an inseparable
consequent of sin, and fear of the manifestation of guilt: If the heart be
once convinced of this, it will presently faint and tremble, even at the
shaking of a leaf, at the wagging of a man's own conscience; how much more at
the voice of the Lord, which shakes mountains, Levit. 26.36.
and makes the strong foundations of the earth to tremble? If I should see a
prisoner at the bar pass sentence upon his Judge; and the Judge thereupon
surpised with trembling, and forced to subscribe and acknowledge the doom, I
could not but stand amazed at so inverted a proceeding; yet in the Scripture
we find presidents for it, Micatah, a prisoner, pronouncing death unto Ahab,
a King: Jeremy, a prisoner, pronouncing captivity unto Zedekiah, 1 King.
22.27, 28. Ier. 37.16, 17. Act. 24.25.
a King: Paul in his chain preaching of judgment unto Felix in his robes, and
making his own Judge to tremble. It is not for want of strength in the Word,
or because there is stoutnesse in the hearts of men to stand out against it,
that all the wicked of the world do not tremble at it, but merely their
ignorance of the power and evidence thereof. The Devils are stronger and more
stubborn creatures than any man can be, yet because of their full
illumination, and that invincible conviction of their consciences from the
power of the Word, they believe and tremble at it. Though men were as hard as
rocks, James 2.19. Ier. 23.29. Ier. 5.14. Ezekiel. 2.6. Deuteronomy. 33.2. Ier. 1.10.
Psalm. 91.13.
the Word is a hammer which can break them; though as sharp as thorns and
briars, the Word is a fire which can devour and torment them, though as strong
as kingdoms and nations, the Word is able to root them up, and to pull them
down, though as fierce as Dragons and Lions, the Word is able to trample upon
them, and to chain them up.

Thirdly, the power of the Word is seen toward wicked men, in that it does
judge them. Son of man, Ezekiel. 22.2.
will thou judge, will thou judge the bloody City, says the Lord? yea, thou
shall show them their abominations. To note that when wicked men are made to
see their filthiness in the Word, they have thereby the wrath of God, as it
were sealed upon them. He that rejects me, John 12.48.
the Word which I have spoken the same shall judge him at the last day, says
our Savior: And if all prophecy, says the Apostle, and there come in one
that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of
all, 1 Cor. 14.24.
and the secrets of his heart are made manifest. Nay, the Word does in some
sort execute death and judgment upon wicked men. Therefore it is said that the
Lord would smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, Esaias 11.8.
and with the breath of his lips would slay the wicked: And again, I have
hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth. Hos.
6.5.
And therefore the Word of the Lord is called fury by the Prophet, Ier. 6.11.
to note that when wrath and fury is powered out upon a land, they are the
effects of Gods Word. If a pestilence devour a city, and a sword come and
gleane after it, it is the Word only which flayes, they are but the
instruments, which are as it were actuated and applied by the Word of God to
their several services. Therefore it is that the Prophet says, Mich. 6.9.
that wise men see the voice of God, and hear his rod. A rod is properly to be
seen, and a voice to be heard, but here is a transposition, and as it were, a
communication of properties between the Word of God, and his punishments, to
note that toward wicked men there is a judging, and tormenting virtue in the
Word; For judgment, says our Savior, am I come into this world, John 9.39.
that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made
blind. If it be here objected that Christ says of himself, The Son of man is
not come to destroy men's lives, Luke 9.56
but to save them, and that he came not to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved; I answer, that there are two events of
Christ's coming, and by consequence of his Gospel. The one principal, and by
him intended, the other accidental and occasional, growing out of the ill
disposition of the subject unto whom he was sent. The maine and essential
business of the Gospel is to declare salvation, and to set open unto men a
door of escape from the wrath to come; but when men wilfully stand out, and
neglect so great salvation, then secondarily does Christ prove unto those men a
stone of offense, and the Gospel a savor of death unto death, as that potion
which was intended for a cure by the Physician, may upon occasion of the
indisposednesse of the body, and stubborn radication of the disease, hasten a
man's end sooner than the disease it self would have done: So that to the
wicked the Word of God is a two-edged sword indeed, an edge in the Law, and an
edge in the Gospel, they are on every side beset with condemnation, if they
go to the Law, that cannot save them, because they have broken it, if they go
to the Gospel, that will not save them, because they have contemned it.

Fourthly, the power of the Word toward wicked men is seen in this, that it
does ripen their sins, John 15.22.
and make them so much the more sinful, and so much the sooner fill up their
measure. If I had not come, says Christ, and spoken unto them, they had had no
sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin. A tree which is fastened unto
a wall, in which the heat of the Sun is more permanent and united, will bring
forth ripe fruit before the ordinary season* so a people upon whom the light of
the Gospel has constantly shined, Heb. 6.8.
and which does often drink in the rain which falls upon it, must needs
bring forth Summer-fruit, sins speedily ripe, Amos 8.1. Luke 13 8, 9.
and therefore be so much the nearer unto cursing. There is but a year
between such a tree and the fire: we shall never find that the sins of
Israel, and of Juda (for which they were at any time plagued with captivity)
were so long in ripening as the sins of the Canaanites, upon whom there did
no light shine. The Land had rest sometimes forty years, and sometimes
fourscore years, but we never find that they were suffered to provoke the
Lord to his face four hundred years together: We find when to Ninive he sent
a Prophet to reveal unto them the guilt and merit of their sins, he then set
them a very short time, in which they should either forsake or ripen them, Yet
forty days and Ninive shall be destroyed.

Fifthly, the power of the Word toward wicked men is seen even in the rage
and madness which it excites in them. It is a sign that a man has to do
with a strong enemy when he buckleth on all his harness, and calls together
all his strength for opposition. When I see a river without any sensible noise
or motion, I am ready to esteem it a standing poole, but when I look further
and there observe what huge engines it carries about, and what weighty bodies
it rouleth before it, I then believe a strength in it which I did not see: so
when I see the Word of Christ rouse up the rage and lusts of men, and force
them to set up against it strong holds, and high imaginations, even the
wisdom and strength of the gates of ^ell to keep it out, I must needs then
conclude that it is indeed Virga virtutis, a Rod of strength. The most calm
and devout hypocrites in the world have by the power of this word been put out
of their demure temper, and mightily transported with outrage and bitterness
against the majesty thereof. One time filled with wrath; another time filled
with madness; another time filled with envy and indignation, another time
filled with contradiction and blasphemy; Luke 4.28. Luke 6.11. Act. 5.17. Act.
13.45. Act. 7.54. Ioh. 8.59. Act. 6.10, 11. Act. 7 57, 58.
another time cut to the heart, and like reprobates in hell, gnashing with
their teeth. Such a searching power, and such an extreme contrariety there is
in the Gospel to the lusts of men, that if it do not subdue, it will
wonderfully swell them up, till it distemper even the grave, prudent men of the
world with those brutish and uncomely affections of rage and fury, and drive
disputers from their arguments unto stonds. Sin cannot endure to be disquieted,
much less to be shut in and encompassed with the curses of Gods word.
Therefore as a hunted beast, in an extremity of distress will turn back, and
put to its utmost strength to be revenged on the pursuers, and to save its
life: so wicked men to save their lusts will let out all their rage, and open
all their sluices of pride and malice to withstand that holy truth which does so
closely pursue them. Thus as beggarly masters deal with their servants, or
bankrupts with their creditors, when they should pay them their money (which
they are unable to do) they then pick quarrels, and create pretenses to
withold it; or as froward men in suits of law, when their cause fails,
endeavor to piece it out with rage and passion; so do wicked men deal with
God in his word, when they should pay him that service which he therein
requires of them, and which they have neither will nor power to do, when he
produces his cause, and enters into controversy with them, convincing them
in the court of their own consciences, so that they are not able to stand out,
they have then no other refuge left, but either to submit (which they will in
no wise endure) or to fly into the face of the word, and withstand it with
malice when they cannot with reason. Till men can be persuaded to lay apart all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, they will never receive the
engraffed word with meekness. For till then it is a binding word, Iam. 1.21.
Mat. 18.1^. Mark. 16.16.
which seals their guilt and condemnation upon them.

Lastly, the mighty power of the word toward wicked men is seen in altering
them: in their semiperswasions and semiconversions unto goodness, in
restraining them from those lusts which they dearly love, and in forcing them
to those external conformities which have no inward principles to support
them. The humiliation of Ahab, the observation of Herod, 1 King. ^1.27. Mark.
6.20. Act. 26.28. Psalm 78.34, 36* Luke 9.57.61.
the incomplete persuasion of Agrippa, the forced obedience and flatteries of
the dissembling Jews, the essaies and offers of hypocrites toward religion,
the velleities and hankerings of unresolved wills after Christ, are notable
evidences of the power and majesty which is in the Gospel. If I should see a
millstone in the air not falling constantly and swiftly down, but swag, and
waver, and floate about in a kind of unresolved motion, as if it were in a
deliberation which way to go, one while yielding to its own weight, another
while lingering, and by fits attempting to ascend, how could I sufficiently
wonder at that secret virtue, and those strange impressions which did retardate
the natural descent of so weighty a body? so when I see men, who still
retain the principles of their own corrupt nature, which carry them with as
strong an impulsion to sin and hell, as a millstone is moved unto its Center,
hanker notwithstanding after goodness, and when they yield unto their lusts,
do it not without much hesitancy and conflict of a natural conscience, I must
needs acknowledge a mighty strength in that word which sets bounds to the
raging of so proud a sea.

From hence then the Messengers of Christ who are entrusted with the
dispensation of this Rod of strength, may be instructed how to behave
themselves in that ministry. Few men will lose any thing of that power which is
given them, for every thing in its kind does affect power. Now Christ has
committed unto us the custody of his own power, and therefore we ought to
manage it as a word of power, able alone by it self without the
contemperations of humane fancies, or the superstruction of humane opinions to
work mightily to the Salvation of those that believe, and to the conviction of
gaine-sayers. Our Commission is to charge even the great men of the world. It
is true the ministers of the Gospel are servants to the Church; 1 Timothy 6.17. 2
Cor. 4.5.
In compassion to pity the diseases, the infirmities, the temptations of Gods
people: in ministry, to assist them with all needful supplies of comfort, or
instruction, or exhortation in righteousness; in humility, to wait upon men
of lowest degree, and to condescend unto men of weakest capacity. And thus the
very Angels in heaven are servants to the Church of Christ. But yet we are
servants only for the Churches good, to serve their souls, not to serve their
humors. And therefore we are such servants as may command too. These things
command and teach, Let no man despise thy youth. 1 Timothy 4.11, 12. Tit. 2.15.
And again, These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority,
Let no man despise thee. No ministers are more despicable than those who by
ignorance, or flattery, or any base and ambitious affections betray the power
and majesticall simplicity of the Gospel of Christ. When we deliver Gods
message we must not then be the servants of men; 1 Cor. 7.23.
If I yet please men, I were not then the servant of Christ, says the Apostle.
To captivate the truth of God unto the humors of men, and to make the Spirit
of Christ in his Gospel to bend, comply and complement with humane lusts, is
with Jonah to play the runnagates from our office, and to prostrate the Scepter
of Christ unto the insultation of men. There is a wonderful majesty and
authority in the word when it is set on with Christ's Spirit. He taught men
(...), as one who had power and authority, or privilege to speak, Matthew.
7.29. Matthew. 22.16. 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 13.17. 2 Cor. 3.10. 2 Cor. 4.2. Ier.
1.6, 7, 8. Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. Psalm. 110.3. Ephesians. 6.20.
as one that cared not for the persons of men, and therefore where ever his
spirit is, there will this power and liberty of Christ appear, for he has
given it to his ministers, that they may commend themselves in the consciences
of those that hear them, that they may harden their faces against the pride
and scorn of men, that they may go out in armies against the enemies of his
kingdom, that they may speak boldly as they ought to speak, that they may
not suffer his word to be bound, or his Spirit to be straitened by the humors
of men.

Again, we should all labor to receive the word in the power thereof, and to
expose our tender parts unto it. A Cock is in comparison but a weak Creature,
and yet the crowing of a Cock will cause the trembling of a Lion. What is a
Be to a Bear, or a Mouse to an Elephant? and yet if a Be fasten his sting in
the nose of a Bear, or a Mouse creep up and gnaw the trunk of an Elephant,
how easily do so little Creatures upon such an advantage torment the greatest?
Certainly, the proudest of men have some tender part into which a sting may
enter. The conscience is as sensible of Gods displeasure, as obnoxious to his
wrath, as subject to his word in a prince as in a beggar. If the word like
David's stone find that open and get into it, it is able to sink the greatest
Goliath. Therefore we should open our consciences unto that word, and expect
his spirit to come along with it, and receive it as Josiah did with humility
and trembling. We should learn to fear the Lord in his word, and when his
voice cries in the city, to see his name and his power therein. Will ye not
fear me, faith the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence, who make the sand
abound to the sea. Ier. 5 22.
No Creature so swelling and of it self so strong and incroaching as the sea,
nothing so small, weak, smoothe, and passable as the sand, and yet the sand (a
creature so easily removed, and swept away) decreed to hold in so raging an
Element. What in appearance weaker than words spoken by a despised man? and
what in the experience of all the world stronger than the raging of an army of
lusts? and yet that has the Lord appointed to tame and subdue these, that men
might learn to fear his power.

Again, it should teach us to Rest upon God in all things, as being unto us
all-sufficient, a sun, a shield, an exceeding great reward in the truth and
promises of his Gospel. The word of God is a sure thing, that which a man may
cast his whole weight upon, Psalm. 19 7. 2 Pet. 1.19. Act. 13.34.
and lean confidently on in any extremity. All the Creatures in the world are
full of vanity, uncertaineties and disappointments, and then usually do
deceive a man most when he most of all relies upon them; and therefore the
Apostle charge us not to trust in them. But the word of the Lord is an
abiding word, 1 Timothy 6.17.
as being founded upon the Immutability of Gods own truth, he that makes it
his refuge, relieth on Gods omnipotency, and has all the strength of the
Almighty engaged to help him. Asa was safe while he depended on the Lord in
his promises against the hugest host of men that was ever read of, 2 Chro.
16.8, 9.
but when he turned aside to collateral aides he purchased to himself
nothing but perpetual wars. And this was that which established the throne
of Iehoshaphat, and caused the fear of the Lord to fall upon the kingdoms of
the lands which were round about him, 2 Chr. 17.9, 10.
because he honored the Word of God, and caused it to be taught unto his
people. Whenever Israel and Judah did forget to lean upon Gods word, and
betook themselves to humane confederacies, to correspondence with Idolatrous
people, to facility in superstitious compliances, and the like fleshly
counsels, they found them always to be but very lies, like waxen and wooden
feasts, made specious of purpose to delude ignorant comers; things of so
thin and unso^id a consistence as were ever broken with the weight of those
who did lean upon them. Let us not therefore rest upon our own wisdom, nor
build our hopes or securities upon humane foundations, but let us in all
conditions take hold of Gods Covenant, of this staff of his strength, Esai.
56.2, 4, 6.
which is able to stay us up in any extremities.

Again, since the Gospel is a word of such sovereign power, as to strengthen
us against all enemies and temptations, to uphold us in all our ways and
callings, to make us strong in the Grace of Christ, (for ever a Christian man's
knowledge of the Word is the measure of his strength and comfort) we should
therefore labor to acquit our selves with God in his Word, to hide it in our
hearts, and grow rich in the knowledge of it. In heaven our blessedness shall
consist in the knowledge and communion with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ. So that the Gospel and the Spirit, are to us upon earth, the preludes
and supplies of heaven, for by them only is this knowledge and communion
begun. And that man does but delude himself and lie to the world who
professes his desire to go to heaven, and does not here desire to know so
much of God as he is pleased to afford to men on the earth. The Gospel is the
Patent and Charter of a Christian, all that he has to show for his Salvation;
the treasure of his wealth and privileges, all that he has to boast in either
for this life or another; the armory of a Christian, all that he has to hold
up against the temptations and conflicts of his sorest enemies; the only tool
and instrument of a Christian, all that he has to do, any action of piety,
charity, loyalty, or sobriety withal; the only glass of a Christian wherein
he may see his own face, and so learn to deny himself, and wherein he may
see the face of God in Christ, and so learn to desire and to follow him. So
that upon the matter for any man to be ignorant of the Gospel is to
unchristian himself again, and to degenerate into a heathen. Power out thine
indignation upon the heathen that know thee not. Ier. 10.25.
Ignorance makes a man a very heathen. This I say and testify, says the
Apostle, that you henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of
their mind: Ephesians. 4.17, 20
for you have not so learned Christ. It is not the title, nor the profession
which makes a man a real Christian, and distinguishes him from other heathen
men, but the learning of Christ in his Spirit and Gospel. For as he who was
only outwardly and in the flesh a Jew, Romans 2.28, 29. Col. 2.11. Philip. 3.3.
might be uncircumcized in his heart: so he who is only in title and name a
Christian, may be a heathen in his heart; and that more fearfully than Sodom
and Gomorrah, or Tire and Sydon, because he has put from himself the
Salvation of the Lord, and judged himself unworthy of eternal life.

Lastly, if there be indeed such power in the Gospel, we should labor to
bear witness unto the testimony which God gives of his Word in a holy
conversation. It is a reproach cast upon the ordinances of God when men do in
their lives deny that virtue which God testifies to be in them. Wicked men
are said to crucify Christ again, to put him to shame, to make God a liar;
not that these things can so really be, but because men in their evil lives
carry themselves, as if indeed they were so. And in this sense the Gospel may
be said to be weak too, because the pride of men holds out against the
saving power thereof. But these men must know that the word returns not empty
unto God, but accomplisheth some work or other, either it ripeneth weeds or
corn. There is thunder and lightning both in the word, if the one break not a
heart, the other will blast it, if it be not humbled by the word, it will
certainly be withered, and made fruitless. Shall the clay boast it self
against the fire, because, though it have power to melt wax, yet it has not
power to melt clay? Is it not one and the same power which hardneth the one and
which softneth the other? Is not the word a sweet Savor unto God as well in
those that perish as in those that are saved? Certainly there is as wonderful
a power in adding another death to him who was dead before (which upon the
matter is to kill a dead man) as in multiplying and enlarging life. And the
Gospel is to those that perish a Savor of death unto death, such a word as
does cumulate the damnation of wicked men, and treasure up wrath upon wrath. If
it do not convert it will certainly harden, if it do not save it will
undoubtedly judge and condemn. The Lord does never cast away his Gospel, he
that gave charge to gather up the broken meat of loaves and fishes that
nothing might be lost, will not suffer any crumme of his spiritual manna to
come to nothing. Yet we find the Lord gives a charge to his Prophets to
preach even there where he foretold them that their words would not be heard.
Thou shall speak all these words unto them, but they will not hearken to
thee; Ier. 7.27. Ezekiel. 2.3, 4.7.
thou shall also call unto them, but they will not answer thee. Son of Man I
send thee to the Children of Israel, to a rebellions nation, Ezekiel. 3.7.
they are impudent Children and stiff hearted. Yet thou shall speak my words
unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are
rebellion it self. They will not hearken unto thee, for they will not hearken
unto me: For all the house of Israel are impudent and hard hearted. Certainly
when the Lord takes pains by his Prophets to call those who will not hear,
he does it not in vain, they shall know at length that a Prophet has been
amongst them. Therefore as the Apostle says that the Gospel is a sweet Savor
even in those that perish. So we find those messages which have contained
nothing but curses against an obstinate people have yet been as honey for
sweetness in the mouth of those that preached them. I did eat the roll, Ezekiel
3.3.2.10.
says the Prophet, and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness, and yet
there was nothing in it written, but lamentations, and mourning, and woe.
Jeremy did not desire the woeful day, Ier. 17.16.28.6. Ier. 15.16.
but did heartily say Amen to the false Prophets in their predictions of
safety; yet in regard of his ready service unto God, and of that glory which
God would work out unto himself in the punishment of that sinful people, the
word of Prophecy which was committed unto him was the joy and rejoicing of his
heart; so that in all respects the Gospel of Christ is a word of power, and
therein we do and must rejoice.

We observed before that this Rod of strength is both Sceptrum Majestatis, and
Pedum Pastorale. Both the Scepter of Christ as he is a King, and his Pastoral
staff as he is a Bishop. It denotes the Administration of Christ's Kingdom,
which consists in the dispensing of his Gospel, as it is a word of Majesty,
and of care. So then here are (as I before observed) two observations yet
remaining to be noted out of these words, Virga Virtutis, the Rod of thy
strength.

The first, that the Gospel of Christ accompanied with his Spirit is a word of
great glory and Majesty. For we must ever make these concomitants, we preach
the Gospel says S. Peter with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, 1 Pet.
1.12. And indeed the Spirit is peculiar to the Gospel, and not belonging to
the Law at all, if we consider it alone by it self, under the relation of a
distinct covenant. For though as it proceeds out of Sion, that is, as it is
an appendix and additament unto the Gospel, it tend unto liberty, Mic. 4.2.
Romans 8.3. Iam. 1.25. Gal 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.67.
and so comes not without the Spirit; yet by it self alone it gendreth
nothing but bondage. And therefore when the Apostle shows the excellency of
the Gospel above the Law, he calls one a ministration of death, and of the
letter, the other a ministration of the Spirit and life. To show that properly
the Spirit belongs unto the Gospel of grace. Now then this Spiritual
Gospel of Christ is the Scepter of his Kingdom, and therefore as it is
insigne regium, an ensign of roialty it imports Glory and Majesty. It is a
Gospel full of glory. We may observe that the very Typical prefigurations of
that mercy, which is the sole business of the Gospel of Christ are in the
Scriptures honored with the name of Glory. The garments of the Priests, being
types of the Evangelicall Revel. 6.11.7.14 19.8.
Righteousness of the Saints, were Exodus 28.2.40.
made for glory and beauty. The Tabernacle, which was ordaind for an evidence
and seal of Gods Evangelicall presence with that people, is called by the
Prophet David a Psalm. 26.8. Exodus 40.34.
Tabernacle of honor, the place which God did use to fill with his own glory.
The Ark of God, which was nothing else but Evangelium sub velo, the Gospel
under vailes and shadows, is called by an excellency 1 Samuel 4.22.
The Glory of Israel, which is the attribute of Christ, Esai 62.2.
All Kings shall see thy glory. The Temple at Jerusalem was the place of Gods
Rest, Psalm. 132.8.14. 2 Chro. 6.41.
This is my Rest for ever, here will I dwell. Arise O Lord God into thy Resting
place, thou and the Arc of thy strength. It was so called to note, first the
Esai. 55.3.54.9.10. Heb. 8.6.13.
stability of Gods Evangelicall covenant in Christ, it was not to be changed,
nor to be repented of; but to be sure and fixed in Christ for ever. His
Kingdom, Heb. 12.28.
a Kingdom which was not to be shaken, his Priesthood a Heb. 7.24.
Priesthood which was not to pass away, his teaching Matthew. 28.20.
a teaching which was to continue to the worlds end. And secondly, to note the
Matthew. 3.17.
delight of God in Christ, and in the mercy which through him was unto the
world revealed; Therein the Lord ^esteth and reposeth himself, Ier. 9.24. Mic
7.18.
as in the crown and accomplishment of all his works. And this Esai. 11.10.
Ier. 17.12. Esai. 60.7. Esai. 64.11. 1 Kings. 8.11.
Temple is called a glorious Rest, a glorious high throne, a house of glory, of
beauty and of holiness. It is said at the first Dedication thereof that the
Glory of the Lord filled it. It was not the gold or silver (wherewith before
that Dedication it was beutified) wherein the glory thereof did consist, but in
the evidence of Gods presence; which at that time was but a cloud, whereas the
true glory thereof himself was Mal. 4.2.
a Sun as the Prophet calls him. And with this did the Lord fill the second
Temple, which for this cause is said to have been Hag. 2.7.9.
more glorious than the former, though in the magnificence of the structure
far inferior. Now then as the Apostle in a case of just alike proportion,
uses a (...), a term of excess, when he speaks of the substance in
comparison of the type. Heb. 9.13, 14.
If the blood of bulls and goats did Sanctify to the purifying of the flesh,
How much more shall the blood of Christ; So may we in this case, If the Types
of Evangelicall things were thus glorious, how much more glorious must the
Gospel it self needs be. And therefore, as I before observed in other
things, so in this is it true likewise, that Christ and his Gospel have the
same attribute of glory frequently given unto them. Esai. 40.5. Esai. 66.18.
Luke 2.32.
Christ is called the Glory of the Lord, and of his people Israel: And the Col.
1.27. Iam. 2.8. 2 Cor. 3.8 9. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
Gospel a glorious mystery, a Royal Law, a ministration of glory; Nay glory
it self, for so I understand that place of the Apostle, that ye would walk
worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and glory, that is, unto
the knowledge of his Gospel, for of that in all the antecedent parts and in
the verse immediately following does the Apostle speak. A 1 Pet. 1.12.
glory which draws the study and amazement of the most glorious creatures of
God unto it.

To consider this point more particularly: The glory and majesty of the Gospel
of Christ appears principally in four things: in the Author of it: in the
Promulgation and publishing of it: in the Matter which it contains: and in the
Ends, purposes, or uses for which it serves.

First, in the Author of it: Many things of small worth have yet grown famous
by the authors of them, and like the unprofitable children of renowned
progenitors, hold their estimation and nobility from the parents which begat
them. And yet from men who are unclean, there will ever descend some
uncleanness upon the works which they do. But the Gospel is therefore
indeed a glorious Gospel, because it is the Gospel of the blessed God. There
is glory in all the works of God, because they are his, for it is impossible
that so great a workman should ever put his hand to an ignoble work: And
therefore the Prophet David uses his glory and his handy work promiscuously
for the same thing; The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work: to note that there is an evidence of glory in any
thing which he puts his hand unto: And yet the Prophet there shows that
there is more glory in the law of his mouth, than in the works of his hands.
The Lord is better known by Sion, and his name greater in Israel, than in all
the world besides: the more God does communicate himself unto any of his
works, the more glorious it is. Now there is nothing wherein God has so much
put himself, wherein he may be so fully known, communicated with, depended
upon, and praised, as in his Gospel. This is a glass in which the blessed
Angels do see and admire that unsearchable riches of his mercy to the Church,
which they had not by their own observation found out from the immediate view
of his glorious presence. In the Creatures we have him a God of power and
wisdom, working all things in number, weight, and measure, by the secret
vigor of his providence upholding that being which he gave them, and ordering
them to those glorious ends for which he gave it. In the law we have him a God
of vengeance and of recompense, in the publication thereof threatening, and in
the execution thereof inflicting wrath upon those that transgress it. But in
the Gospel we have him a God of bounty and endless compassion, humbling
himself that he might be merciful to his enemies, that he might himself
bear the punishments of those injuries which had been done unto himself,
that he might not offer only but beseech his own prisoners to be pardoned
and reconciled again. In the Creature he is a God above us, in the Law he is a
God against us; only in the Gospel he is Immanuel, a God with us, a God like
us, a God for us.

There is nothing does declare God so much to be God as his mercy in the
Gospel. He is invisible in himself, we cannot see him but in his Son. He
is unapproachable in himself, we cannot come unto him but by the Son.
Therefore, when he makes himself known in his glory to Moses, he sends
him not to the Creation, nor to mount Sinai, but puts him into a rock
(being a resemblance of Christ) and then makes a proclamation of the Gospel
unto him. Moses his prayer was, Exodus 33.18, 19:
I beseech thee show me thy glory. How does the Lord grant this Prayer? I will
make all my goodness to pass before thee, and then reveals himself unto
him almost all by mercy. Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, to note unto us that the glory of God is in nothing so
much revealed as in his goodness. Who is a God like unto thee, Mich. 7.18.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his people?

Besides, though the Law be indeed from God, as from the Author of it, so that
in that respect there may seem to be no difference of excellency between that
and the Gospel, yet we must observe that by the remainders of Creation,
though God should not have revealed his Law again unto Moses in the mount,
much of the Law, and by consequence of God himself might have been discovered
by humane industry, as we see by notable examples of the philosophers and
grave heathen. But the Gospel is such a mystery as was for ever hidden from
the reach and very suspicion of nature, and wholly of divine revelation. Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 2.7 9.
neither have entered into the hearts of men the things which God has prepared
for them that love him; the Apostle speaks it of the mystery of the Gospel;
noting that it is above the observation, or learning, or comprehension of
nature, so much as to suspect it; nay, the natural inquiry of the Angels
themselves could never have discovered it, Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
even unto them it is made known by the Church; that is, if it had not been
for the Churches sake that God would reveal so glorious a mystery, the Angels
in heaven must have been for ever ignorant of it. So extremely desperate was
the fall of man, that it wanted the infinite and unsearchable wisdom of God
himself to find out a remedy against it. If the Lord should have proceeded
thus far in mercy toward man and no farther. Thou art a wretched Creature,
and I am a righteous God; yea, so heavy is my wrath, and so woeful thy
condition, that I cannot choose but take compassion upon thee; and therefore I
will put the matter into thine own hands; requisite it is that my pity
toward thee should not swallow up the respects to mine own justice and
honor, that my mercy should be a righteous and a wise mercy. Consult
therefore together all ye children of men, and invent a way to reconcile my
justice and mercy to one another, set me in a course to show you mercy,
without parting from mine own right, and denying the righteous demands of mine
offended justice, and I will promise you to observe it; I say, if the mercy of
the Lord should have confined it self within these bounds, and referred the
method of our redemption unto humane discovery, we should for ever have
continued in a desperate estate, everlastingly unable to conceive, or so much
as in fancy to frame unto our selves a way of escape. As the Creatures before
their being could have no thought or notion of their being educ'd out of that
nothing which they were before. So man fallen could not have the smallest
conjecture or suspicion of any feaseable way to deliver himself out of that
misery into which he fell. If all the learning in the world were gathered into
one man, and that man should employ all his time and study to frame unto
himself the notions of a sixth or seventh sense, which yet are as expressly
fashioned amongst those infinite Idea's of Gods power and omniscience, as these
five which are already created, he would be as totally ignorant of the
conclusion he sought at last as he was at first. For all humane knowledge of
natural things is wrought by a reflection upon those Phantasmes or Idea's,
which are impressions made from those senses we already use, and are indeed
nothing else but a kind of notionall existence of things in the memory of man
wrought by an external and sensible perception of that real existence which
they have in themselves. And yet in this case a sixth or a seventh sense would
agree in genere proximo, and so have some kind of Cognation with those we
already enjoy. But a new Covenant, a new life, a new faith, a new salvation are
things toto genere, beyond the strain and sphere of nature. That two should
become one, and yet remain two still, as God and man do in one Christ, that
he who makes should be One with the thing which himself has made; that he
who is above all should humble himself, that he who fills all should empty
himself; that he who blesses all should be himself a curse; that he who
rules all should be himself a servant, that he who was the prince of life,
and by whom all things in the world do consist, should himself be dissolved
and dye, that mercy and justice should meet together, and kiss each other,
that the debt should be paid and yet pardoned, that the fault should be
punished and yet remitted, that death like Sampsons Lion should have life and
sweetness in it, and be used as an instrument to destroy it self; these and
the like Evangelicall truths are mysteries which surpass the reach of all the
princes of learning in the world. Non humana ratione possibile, sed spiritus
efficacia credibile. Ambros.

Ideo certum quia i^possibile. Tert.


It is to be believed by a spiritual light, which was not so much as possible
to a humane reason: We may observe that every person in the Trinity sets
himself to teach the mystery of the Gospel. The Matt. 16.17. Ioh* 6.45.
Father reveals it unto men, Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee,
but my Father which is in heaven. It is written in the Prophets, They shall be
all taught of God, Every man therefore that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes unto me. The Son likewise teaches it unto men, therefore he
is called the O^ficii non naturae vocabula quia magnum cogitatum patris super
hominis restitutione ^n^un^i^vit sec^l^. Tertull.
Angel of Gods Covenant and Counsel, that is, the Revealer thereof, because
unto the world he made known that deep project of his Fathers counsel
touching the restoring of mankind. Ioh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him. He only it is who opens the
bosom of his Father, that is, who reveals the secret and mysterious
counsels, and the tender and compassionat affections (for the bosom is the
seat of secrets and of Love) of his Father unto the world. And therefore he is
said to be a Ioh. 3.2.
Teacher sent from God, and to be Heb. 12.25.
the Lord which speaks from heaven in the ministry of his Gospel; and the
doctrine which he teaches is called a Ioh. 3.12.
heavenly doctrine, and a Heb. 3.1.
heavenly calling* and a Philip. 3.14.
high calling, and often by the Apost. to the Hebrews Heb. 8.5. Heb. 9.23.
(...) heavenly things, to note that they are not of a natural or earthly
condition, and therefore not within the comprehension of an earthly
understanding. Iam 3.17.
It is a wisdom which is from above. The holy Ghost likewise is a Revealer of
the Gospel unto the faithful. He was sent that he might John 16.8, 11.
Convince the world not only of sin, but of righteousness and judgment
too, which are Evangelicall things. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12.
The spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God, that is, his
unsearchable love, wisdom and counsel in the Gospel. Therefore the Gospel
is called Romans 8.2.
The Law of the spirit of life, and the 2 Cor. 3.8.
ministration of the spirit, and the Ephesians. 1.17. Ephesians. 3.16* 19. 1 Pet. 1.11,
12.
Revelation of the spirit, and 1 Cor. 12.3.
No man can call Jesus Lord but by the holy spirit, that is, though men may out
of external conformity to the discipline and profession under which they live,
with their mouths acknowledge him to be the Lord; yet their hearts will never
tremble, nor willingly submit themselves to his obedience, their conscience
will never set to its seal to the spiritual power of Christ over the
thoughts, desires, and secrets of the soul, but by the overruling direction
of the holy Ghost. Nature taught the Pharisees to call him Mat. 12.24. John 8.48.
Beelzebub and Samaritan, but it is the Spirit only which teaches men to
acknowledge him a Lord. 1 Cor. 1.24.
Christ is not the power nor the wisdom of God to any, but to those who are
called, that is, to those unto whose consciences the Spirit witnesses the
righteousness which is to be found in him. So then the Publication of the
Gospel belongs unto men, 2 These. 2.13, 14 Act. 16.14.
but the effectual teaching and revelation thereof unto the soul is the joint
work of the holy Trinity, opening the heart to attend, and persuading the
heart to believe the Gospel, Deus nos adjuvat and ut sciamus, and ut amemus,
Aug. Epist. 143.
as a thing worthy of all acceptance. Thus the Gospel is a Glorious thing in
regard of the Original and Author of it.

From whence we may infer, that whatever men think of the ministry and
dispensation of the Word, yet undoubtedly the neglect and scorn which is
showed unto it, is done unto Christ himself, and that in his glory: he that
receives not his Word, Ioh. 12.48.
rejects his person; and the sin of a man against the words which we speak
in the name and authority of Christ, and in the dispensation of that office
wherewith he has entrusted us, is the same with the sins of those men who
despised him in his own person. You will say Christ is in heaven, how can any
injuries of ours reach unto him? Surely though he be in heaven, (which is now
the Court of his royal residence) yet he has to do upon earth, as one of
the chief territories of his dominion, and, in the ministry of his Word, he
speaks from heaven still. He it was, who, by his Ambassador Saint Paul, Heb.
12.25. Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Pet. 1.11. 2 Cor. 13.3.
came and preached Peace to the Ephesians, who were afar off. His spirit it
was which in the Prophets did testify of his sufferings and glory. He it was
who gave manifest proof of his own power, speaking in his Apostles. He then
who refuses to obey the words of a Minister in the execution of his office,
when he forewarneth him of the wrath to come, and does not discern the Lords
voice therein, but in despite of this ministerial citation unto the tribunal
of Christ, will still persist in the way of his own heart, and as he has
been, so resolves to continue, a swearing, blasphemous, luxurious, proud,
revengefull, and riotous person, thinking it baseness to mourn for sin, and
unnecessary strictness to humble himself to walk with God; and yet, because
all men else do so, will profess his faith in the Lord Jesus; that man is a
notorious liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10.
yea (as the Apostle speaks) he makes God a liar too, in not believing the
record which he gives of his Son, which is, that he should wash away the
filth, Esai. 4.4.
and purge out the blood of his people with a spirit of judgment, and a spirit
of burning: Mal. 3.3.
that he should sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, purging his priests,
that they might offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. He walks
contrary to that Covenant of mercy which he professes to lay hold on; for this
is one of the great promises of the Covenant, I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, Ezekiel. 36.25, 27.
and you shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your idols
will I cleanse you. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes. He walks contrary to the quality of that fear of God, which
yet he professes to feel as well as others: For the fear of the Lord is a
clean thing. He walks contrary to the virtue of that blood, Psalm. 19.9.
with which notwithstanding he professes to be sprinkled: Heb. 9.14.
for the blood of Christ cleanses not only the lives, but the very
consciences of men from dead works: that is, makes them so inwardly labor for
purity of heart, as that they may not be conscious to themselves of any, though
the most secret allowed sin. He walks contrary to the fruitfulness of that
grace which alone he professes to boast in: for the Spirit of grace which is
powered from on high makes the very wilderness a fruitful field. Esai. 32.15.
He walks contrary to the properties of that faith, by which alone he hops
to be saved. Act. 15.9.
For true faith purifieth the heart; and therefore a pure heart and a good
conscience are the inseparable companions of an unfeigned faith. 1 Timothy 1.5.
And therefore whatever verbal and ceremonious homage he may tender unto
Christ, yet in good earnest he is ashamed of him, and dares not prefer the
yoke of Christ before the lusts of the world, or the reproaches of Christ
before the treasures of the world.

Why should it be treason to kill a Judge in his ministry on the bench? or
esteemed an injury to the state to do any indignity to the Ambassador of a
great prince? but because in such relations they are persons public and
representative, ut eorum bona malaque ad Rempublicam pertineant? why should the
supreme Officer of the kingdom write Test meipso in the name and power of his
Prince, but because he has a more immediate representation of his sacred
person, and commission thereunto? Surely the case is the same between Christ
and his Ministers in their holy function. And therefore we find the
expressions promiscuous: sometimes (...), the Gospel of Christ; Romans 15.19.
Romans 2.16. Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Cor. 6.1. Iam. 5.20. John
20.23. Ezekiel. 20 4. 2 Cor. 5.20.
and sometimes (...), My Gospel; sometimes (...), The preaching of Jesus
Christ; and sometimes (...), My preaching; In the virtue of which synergie and
co-partnership with Christ and with God, as he saves, so we save; as he
forgiveth sins, so we forgive them; as he judges wicked men, so we judge
them; as he beseeches, so we also beseech, says the Apostle, that you be
reconciled, and receive not the grace of God in vain. We by his Grace, and
(...). Chrysostom.
he by our ministry. He therefore that despises any conviction out of the
Book of God (and he that obeys not does despise, for the Lord calls
disobedience, rebellion, stubbornenesse, and a rejecting of his word, 1 Samuel
15.22, 23.) He that persisteth in any known sin, or in the constant omission
of any evident duty, fights against Christ himself, throws away his own
mercy, stops his ears at the entreaties of the Lord, and commits a sin
directly against Heaven. And if he so persist God will make him know, that
there is flaming fire prepared for those that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.8.

Therefore whenever we come unto the Word read or preached we should come
with an expectation to hear Christ himself speaking from heaven unto us, and
bring such affections of submission and obedience as becomes his presence.
Revel. 2 7.
Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says unto the Churches. I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85.8.
for he will speak peace unto his people. Ioh. 10.4, 5.
Christ's sheep discern his voice in the dispensation of the Gospel, and will
not know the voice of strangers. 1 These. 2.13.
And this was the honor of the Thessalonians and the men of Berea, Act. 17.11.
that in the preaching of the Word they did set themselves as in Gods presence,
expecting in it his authority, and receiving it in his name. Dares any man to
rush with a naked weapon into the presence of his prince, and with scorn to
throw back his own personal commands into his face again? And shall we
dare to come armed with high thoughts, Ier. 13.15, 17.
and proud reasonings, and stubborn resolutions against the majesty of the
Lord himself, who speaks from heaven unto us? Receive with meekness, says
the Apostle, the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your souls. The word
does not mingle nor incorporate, Iam. 1.21.
and by consequence does not change nor save the soul, but when it is received
with meekness, that is, when a man comes with a resolution to lay down his
weapons, to fall down on his face, and give glory to God; he that is swift to
wrath, that is, to set up stout and fretfull affections against the purity and
power of the Word, to snuff against it, and to fall backward like pettish
children which will not be led, Mal. 1.13. Mal. 3 13. (...). Act. 7.51. Iam.
1.19, 20.
will be very slow to hear or to obey it, for the wrath of man does not work
the righteousness of God. A proud hearer will be an unprofitable liver. Ever
therefore come unto the word with this conclusion. It may be this day will God
strike me in my master vein. I am an usual profaner of his glorious name; a
name which I should fear for the greatness, and love for the goodness, and
adore for the holiness of it; he will peradventure lay close to my conscience
that guilt which himself has declared to be in this great sin; that
whatsoever is more than yea and nay is sin unto me, and whatsoever is sin, is
Hell to my soul. I am a vain person, a companion of loose and riotous men; It
may be the Lord will urge upon my conscience the charge of his own word, not
to company with fornicators, to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, not to follow a multitude to do evil, and that though hand
join in hand, yet sin shall not go unpunished. I am unprofitable, loose,
and rotten in my discourse, and he will ply me with his own authority, that
for every idle word I must render an account. I am full of oppression and
unjust gain, and the Lord will now urge the instructions of Nehemiah, and the
restitution of Zacheus upon me. Nehem. 5.11, 12 Luke 19.8. Gal. 1.16. Act. 9.6.
1 Samuel 3.10. Act. 10.33.
In these or any other the like cases, if a man can come with Saint Paul's
temper of heart, not to consult with flesh and blood, but Lord what will thou
have me to do? or with the answer of Samuel, Speak Lord for thy servant
hears; or with the resolution of Cornelius, I am here present before God to
hear all things that shall be commanded of God. I am come with a purpose of
heart to cleave unto thy holy will in all things. Here I am in my sins,
strike where thou will, cut off which of mine earthly members thou will, I will
not arm it, I will not extenuate it, I will not dispute with thee, I will not
rebel against thee, I will second thee in it, I will praise thee for it; This
is to give God the glory of his own Gospel. It is not to part from a little
money toward the maintenance of the word, or to vouchsafe a little countenance
to the dispencers of it (and yet alas how few are there who repay unto the
ministers of the Gospel that double honor which God and not they has given
unto them?) but to part from our lusts, and to suffer our old man to be
crucified, which gives honor to the Word If a man had thousands of rams,
and ten thousand rivers of oil, and would be content to part from them all
for Gods worship: If a man had children enough, and in a famine of the word,
would buy every sermon which he hears with the sacrifice of a Son: yet all
this would not give glory enough to the ordinance of God. Men naturally love
their lusts, the issue of their evil hearts, better than their lands, or the
children of their body (if Herod's son stand in the way of his ambitious
security, it were better to be his Hog than his child. The loss of cattle,
and fruits, and water, and light, and the firstborn of all the land, was not
enough to make Pharaoh let go his sin, he will once more rush into the
midst of a wonderful deliverance of Israel, and venture his own and his
peoples lives, for but the bondage of his enemies, and the satisfaction of his
lust.) To do justly then, to love mercy, and to walk humbly before God, to
acknowledge his name in the voice of the minister, and to put away the
treasures of wickedness out of our hands, this only is to give God the glory
which is due unto his Word, Mic. 6.6, 10.

Secondly, the Gospel is glorious in the promulgation and publishing of it
unto the world. And this may appear whether we consider the initiall
Promulgation in Christ's own personal preaching. Or the plenary Revelation
thereof in the sending of the holy Ghost to those selected vessels who were to
carry abroad this treasure unto all the world. For the former we may note that
there was a resemblance of state and glory observed in the preaching of Christ.
A Forerunner sent to prepare his way, Esai. 40.3, 4, 5.
and to bear his sword before him, as a Herald to proclaim his approach, Mal.
3.1, 4, 5.
and then at last is revealed the Glory of the Lord. And thus we may observe
how we sent his Harbingers before his face into every City and place whither
he himself would come: Luke 10.1.
that so men might prepare themselves, and lift up their everlasting gates
against this Prince of Glory should enter in. When one poor ordinary man
intends to visit another, there is no state nor distance, no ceremonies nor
solemnities observed; but when a prince will communicate himself unto any
place, there is a publication, and officers sent abroad to give notice thereof,
that meet entertainements may be provided. So does Christ deal with men, he
knows how unprepared we are to give him a welcome, how foul our hearts, how
barren our consciences, and therefore he sends his Officers before his face
with his own Provision, his Graces of Humiliation, Repentance* Desire, Love,
Hope, Joy, hungring and thirsting after his appearance; and then when he is
esteemed worthy of all acceptance, he comes himself.

Look upon the more consummate publication of the Gospel (for Christ in his
own personal preaching is said but to have begun to teach, Act. 1.1. Hebr.
2.3.
) and we shall see that as Princes in the time of their solemn Inauguration
do some special acts of magnificence and honor, open prisons, proclaim
pardons, create nobles, stamp coin, fill conduits with wine, distribute
donatives and congiaries to the people: So Christ to testify the glory of his
Gospel, did reserve the full publication thereof unto the day of his
instalment and solemn readmission into his Fathers glory again. When he
ascended up on high he then led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men,
namely, the Holy Ghost, who is called the Gift of God, Act. 2.38. Act. 8 20
Ioh. 4.10. and in the plural number Gifts, as elsewhere he is called seven
spirits, Revel. 1.4. to note the plenty and variety of graces which are by him
shed abroad upon the Church. Wisdom, and faith, and knowledge, and healings,
and prophecy, and discerning, and miracles, and tongues, All these work one
and the selfsame spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will. 1 Cor.
12.8, 11. Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
And these gifts were all shed abroad for Evangelicall purposes, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying
of the body of Christ. And this spirit Saint Peter tells us is a spirit of
Glory, 1 Pet. 4.14.
and therefore that Gospel, for the more plentiful promulgation whereof he was
shed abroad, must needs be a Gospel of Glory too.

And this further appears, because in this more solemn publication of the
Gospel there was much more Abundance of glorious light and grace, shed abroad
into the world. The Sun of Righteousness in his estate of humiliation was
much ecclipsed, with the similitude of sinful flesh, the Communion of our
common infirmities, the poverty of a low condition, the grief and vexation of
the sins of men, the overshadowing of his divine virtue, the form and
entertainment of a servant, the burden of the guilt of sin, the burden of
the Law of God, the ignominy of a base death, the agony of a cursed death.
But when he ascended up on high, like the Sun in his glory, he then
dispelled all these mists, and now sends forth those glorious beams of his
Gospel and Spirit, which are the two wings, by which he comes unto the
Churches, and under which the healing and salvation of the world is treasured.
Mal. 4.2. Ezekiel. 47.8, 9. Esai. 35.5, 6, 7. Mat. 11.11, 13.
John Baptist was the last and greatest of all the Prophets who foretold of
Christ, a greater had not been borne of women, and yet he was less than the
least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, than the least of those upon whom the
Promise of the Spirit was shed abroad, for the more glorious manifestation of
the kingdom of his Gospel. All the Prophets and the Law prophesied until
John; but at the coming of Christ they seemed to be taken away, not by way of
abrogation and extinguishment, as the ceremonies, but by way of excess and
excellency, ut stellae exiliores ad exortum solis, as the Orator speaks; so
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.10.
Even that which was made glorious, had no glory in this respect, by reason of
the Glory that excels. Therefore the full Revelation of the Gospel is
called an effusion of the spirit, not in dew, but in showers of rain, which
multiply into rivers of living water (for the rain of the spirit flows from
heaven as from a spring) and into wels of Salvation, Tit. 3.6. Heb. 6.7. Ioh.
7.38. Ioh. 4.14. Esai. 11.9.
and into a sea of knowledge. Which attributes note unto us two things: First,
the abundance of spiritual grace and knowledge by the Gospel, it should be a
River: Secondly, the growth and increase thereof, Esai. 44.3. Ezekiel 47.3, 4, 5.
it should be living water, multiplying and swelling up like the waters of the
Sanctuary, till it came to a bottomless and unmeasurable sea of eternal
life. And, to touch that which was before spoken of, very glorious are the
virtues of the Spirit in the Gospel intimated in this similitude of living
water. To quench the wrath of God, that otherwise consuming and
unextinguishable fury, Esai. 33.14. Ioh. 4.10. Ezekiel. 47.12. Zech. 12.10.
which devoureth the adversaries with everlasting burnings. To satisfy those
desires of the thirsty soul which it self begets: for the Spirit is both
for medicine and for meat; for medicine, to cure the dull and averse appetites
of the soul; and for meat, to satisfy them. The Spirit is both a Spirit of
supplication and a Spirit of grace or satisfaction. A Spirit of supplication,
directing us to pray; and a Spirit of Grace, supplying those requests and
satisfying those desires which himself did dictate. Ezekiel. 36.25.
To cleanse, to purify, to mollify, to take Esai. 35.6, 7. Ezekiel. 11.19.
away the barrenness of our natural hearts. To Mal. 3.16. Gal. 6.1, 2.
overflow and communicate it self to others. To Gal. 5.17. Phil. 1.27.
withstand and subdue every obstacle that is set up against it. To continue and
to multiply to the end.

By this then we learn the way how to abound in grace and glory, and how to
be transformed into the Image of Christ. The beam and light of the Sun is
the vehiculum of the heat and influence of the Sun; so the light of the
Gospel of Christ is that which conveieth the virtue and gracious workings of
his Spirit upon the soul. And therefore we are to seek those varieties of
grace, which are for meat to satisfy the desires, and for medicine to cure
the bruizes of the soul, Ezekiel. 47.12.
only upon the banks of the waters of the Sanctuary, that is, in the
knowledge of the word of truth, which is the Gospel of Salvation. The more of
this glorious light a man has, the more proportion of all other graces will he
have too. And therefore the Apostle puts the growth of these two together, as
contributing a mutual succor unto one another, Grow in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Your Grace will enlarge your
desires of knowledge, and your knowledge will multiply your degrees of Grace.
And Saint Paul makes the knowledge of the will of God in wisdom, and after a
spiritual manner to be the ground of fruitfulness in every good work, Col.
1.9, 10.
and that again an inducement to increase in knowledge, as in the twisting
together of two cords into one rope, they are by art so ordered that either
shall bind and hold in the other. As in the heavens the inferior orbs have the
measure and proportion of their general motion from the supreme: so in the
motions of grace in the soul, the proportion of all the rest a rises from the
measure of our spiritual and saving light. The more distinctly and thoroughly
the spirit of a man's mind is convinced of the necessity, beauty, and
gloriousness of heavenly things, the more strong impressions thereof will be
made upon all subordinate faculties; for we move toward nothing without
preceding apprehensions of its goodness, which apprehensions as they more
seriously penetrate into the true and intimate worth of that thing, so are the
motions of the soul thereunto proportionably strengthened. As the hinder
wheels in a Coach ever move as fast as the former which lead them; so the
subordinate powers of the soul are overrul'd in their manner and measure of
working toward grace, by those spiritual representations of the truth and
excellency thereof, which are made in the understanding by the light of the
Gospel. Thus the Apostle tells us that the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ was that which made him so earnest to win him; Phil. 3.8, 14.
the knowledge of the power of his resurrection, and fellowship of his
sufferings was that which made him reach forth and press forward unto the
mark and price of that high calling which was before him.

Thirdly, the Glory of the Gospel of Christ with his Spirit may be considered
in regard of the matters which are therein contained, namely the Glory, the
Excellencies, the Treasures of God himself: 2 Cor. 3.18.
We all, says the Apostle, with open face behold as in a Glass (that is, in
the spiritual ministration of the Gospel, having the veil of carnal
stupidity taken away by the Spirit) The glory of the Lord. What glory do we
here behold, but that which a glass is able to represent? Now in speculo nisi
imago non cernitur, nothing can be seen in a glass but the image of that
thing which sheddeth forth its species thereupon; and therefore he immediately
adds, we are changed into the same image from glory to glory; and he
elsewhere puts these two together, 1 Cor. 11.7.
Man is the image and the glory of God, for nothing can have any thing of God
in it, any resemblance or form of him, but so far it must needs be glorious.
But how do we in the Gospel see the Image of God who is invisible? The
Apostle expresses that elsewhere, God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, 2 Cor. 4.4, 5, 6.
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. Christ is the Image and express Character of his Fathers glory, as the
impression in the wax is of the form and fashion of the seal, there is no
excellency in God which is not completely, adequately, and distinctly in
Christ; so that in that glass wherein we may see him, we may likewise see the
glory of the Father. Now the Gospel is the face of Jesus Christ, that which as
lively sets forth his grace and Spirit to the soul, as if he were present
in the flesh amongst us. Suppose we that a glass could retain a permanent and
unvanishing species of a man's face within it, though he himself were absent,
might we not truly say this glass is the face of that man, whose image it so
constantly retains? So, in as much as Christ is most exactly represented in
his Gospel (so that when we come into his personal and real presence, to
know even as we are known, we shall be able truly to say, this is indeed the
very person who was so long since in his Gospel exhibited to my faith, sic
ille manus, sic ora gerebat) it is therefore justly by the Apostle called the
face of Jesus Christ; and therefore the Glass wherein we see the Image and
glory of God; as it is the same light which shines from the Sun upon a
glass, and from a glass upon a wall, so it is the same glory which shines
from the Father upon the Son, and from the Son upon the Gospel; so that in
the Gospel we see the unsearchable treasures of God, because his treasures are
in his Son: Therefore that which is usually called Romans 15.19. 1 Cor. 15.1.
Preaching the Gospel, is in other places called Act. 20.25.
Preaching the Kingdom, and Ephesians. 3.8.
the riches of Christ, to note the glory of those things which are in the
Gospel revealed unto the Church.

It contains the glory of Gods wisdom, and that wisdom is Ephesians. 3.10.
(...), a manifold and various wisdom, as the Apostle speaks, who therefore
calls Christ and his Gospel by the name of 1 Cor. 1.24. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7.
Wisdom; we preach Christ crucified, to those that are called the power of
God, and the wisdom of God, and we speak wisdom amongst them that are
perfect: wisdom to reconcile his own attributes of mercy and truth,
righteousness and peace, which by the fall of man seemed to be at variance
among themselves, wisdom in reconciling the world of obstinate and rebellious
enemies unto himself, wisdom in sanctifying the whole creation by the blood
of the cross, and repairing those ruins which the sin of man had caused;
wisdom in concorporating Christ and his Church, things in their own distinct
natures as unapt for mixture, as fire and water in their remotest degrees;
wisdom in uniting the Jews and Gentiles, and reducing their former jealousies
and disaffections unto an intimate fellowship in the same common mysteries: In
one word, wisdom above the admiration of the blessed Angels, in finding out a
way to give greater satisfaction to his offended justice, by showing mercy and
saving sinners, than he could ever have received by either the confusion or
annihilation of them. It contains the Glory of Gods goodness and mercy, Romans
5.8.
of that (...), good will toward men, which brought glory to God, and to the
earth peace: for the Gospel is as it were a Love-token or commendatory Epistle
of the Lord unto his Church. Act. 14.16, 17.
God left not himself without witnesses of his care, and evidences of some
love even to those whom he suffered to walk in their own ways without any
knowledge of his Gospel; he did them good, he gave them rain from heaven and
fruitful seasons; so even they had experience of some of his goodness, the
goodness of his providence, for he is the Savior of all men; but the Gospel
contains all Gods goodness, as a heap and miscellany of universal mercy: I
will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of
the Lord before thee, and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I
will show mercy to whom I will show mercy. Gods special and gracious mercy,
the mercy of his promises in Christ, does convey unto the soul an interest in
all his goodness, nay, it makes all things good unto us, so that we may call
them ours, as gifts and legacies from Christ. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
He has given to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, the
world, and life, and death, and things present, and things to come; all are
yours, 1 Cor. 3.18.
says the Apostle. Death it self and persecutions are amongst the legacies of
Christ unto the Church, and a portion of all that goodness with which in the
Gospel she is endowed. It contains the glory of Gods power and strength, for
it is the Power of God unto salvation, as has been declared. It contains
the glory of Gods grace. The grace of his favor toward us, and the grace of
his Spirit in us. The Law was given by Moses, John 1.17.
but grace came by Christ, that is, favor in stead of Gods fury, and strength
in stead of man's infirmity; for because man was unable to fulfill the Law,
therefore the Law came with wrath and curses against man; but in the Gospel of
Christ, there is abundance, even a whole kingdom of grace (the Apostle says,
Romans 5.21.
that by Jesus Christ grace reigned) there is grace to remove the curse of the
Law, by Gods favor toward us: (so that on all sides the Law is weak, unable,
by reason of man's sin, to save; and unable, by reason of Gods favor, to
condemn) and there is grace to remove the weakness of man by Gods Spirit in
us: James 4.5, 6.
for though our own spirit lust unto envy, or set it self proudly against
the Law of God; yet he gives more grace, that is, strength enough to overcome
the counterlustings of the flesh against his will, and to enable us in
sincerity, and evangelicall perfection to fulfill the commands of the Law.
Lastly, it contains in some sort the glory of Gods heavenly kingdom, in that
therein are let in the glimpses and first fruits, the seals and assurances
thereof unto the soul by the promises, testimonies, and comforts of the
Spirit. And therefore it is frequently called the Gospel of the kingdom,
Matthew. 13.19. Mark 1.14. Luke 8 10.
and the mysteries of the kingdom of God, namely, that kingdom which
begins here, but shall never end. As if a man borne in Ireland be
afterward transplanted into England, though he change his country, he does
not change his King, or his Law, but is still under the same government: so
when a Christian is translated from earth to heaven, he is still in the same
kingdom, in heaven it is the kingdom of glory (mended much by the different
excellency of the place and preferment of the person) in earth it is the same
kingdom, though in a less amene and comfortable climate, the kingdom of the
Gospel. These and many other the like things are the glorious matters which
the Gospel contains.

Here then we see how and wherein we are to look upon God, so as that we may
abide his glory, and be comforted by it; we must not look upon him in his
own immediate brightness and essence, nor by our saucy curiosities pry into
the secrets of his unrevealed glory, for he is a consuming fire, an invisible
and unapprochable light; Deuteronomy. 29.29. Exodus 19 21. Exodus 33.23.
we may see his back-parts, in the proclaiming of his mercy; and we may see
the horns or bright beams of his hands, in the publishing of his Law; but yet
all this was under a cloud, Habak. 3.4.
or under the biding of his Power; His face no man can see and live: We must
not look upon him only in our selves. Though we might at first have seen
him in our own nature, for we were created after his Image in righteousness
and true holiness; yet now that Image is utterly obliterated, and we have by
nature the Image only of Satan and the old Adam in us: we must not look upon
him only in mount Sinai, in his Law, lest the fire devour us and the dart
strike us through; we can find nothing of him there but rigor,
inexorablenesse, wrath and vengeance. But we must acquaint our selves with him
in his Son, John 17.3. 1 John 1.3.
we must know him, and whom he has sent together, there is no fellowship with
the Father, except it be with the Son too: we may have the knowledge of his
Hand, that is, of his works, and of his punishments, without Christ: but we
cannot have the knowledge of his bosom, that is, of his counsels, and of his
compassions, John 1.18. Col. 1.15. John 14 6. Ephesians. 2.18.3.12. Heb. 10.19.22.
nor the knowledge of his Image, that is, of his holiness, grace and
righteousness; nor the knowledge of his presence, that is, of his comforts
here, and his glory hereafter, but only in and by Christ: we may know God in
the World, for in the Creation is manifest (...), that which may be known of
him, namely his eternal power and Godhead. But this is a barren and
fruitless knowledge, which will not keep down unrighteousness; for the wise
men of the world when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became
vain in their imaginations, and held that truth of him which was in the
Creation revealed, in unrighteousness. We may know him in his Law too, and
that in exceeding great glory when God came from Teman, Habak. 3.3, 4. Deuteronomy.
1.1.
and the Holy One from mount Paran (whereabout the Law was the second time
repeated by Moses) his glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his
praise, his brightness was as the light, etc. But this is a killing knowledge,
a knowledge which makes us fly from God, and hide our selves out of his
presence, and fight against him as our sorest enemies, and come short of his
glory: therefore the Law is called a fiery Law, or a fire of Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2.
Deuteronomy. 5.22. Gal. 3.10. Romans 12.20.
to show not only the original thereof, for it was spoken out of the midst
of the fire; but the nature and operation of it too, which of it self is to
heap fire and curses upon the soul; and therefore it is called the
ministration of Death, 2 Cor. 3.7. But now to know the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, is both a fruitful and a comfortable knowledge; we know the
pattern we must walk by, we know the life we must live by, we know the
treasure we must be supplied by, we know whom we have believed, we know whom
we may be bold with in all straits and distresses, we know God in Christ full
of love, full of compassion, full of ears to hear us, full of eyes to watch
over us, full of hands to fight for us, full of tongues to commune with us,
full of power to preserve us, full grace to transform us, full of fidelity to
keep covenant with us, full of wisdom to conduct us, full of redemption to
save us, full of glory to reward us. Let us therefore put our selves into this
Rock, that Gods goodness may pass before us, that he may communicate the
mysteries of his kingdom and of his glory unto us, that by him our persons may
be accepted, our prayers admitted, our services regarded, our acquaintance and
fellowship with the Lord increased, by that blessed Spirit which is from them
both shed abroad in his Gospel upon us.

Now lastly, the Gospel of Christ is glorious in those ends, effects, or
purposes for which it serves: And in this respect principally does the Apostle
so often magnify the glory of the Gospel above the Law. The Law was a
glorious ministry, Exodus 19.16-21.
as appears by the thunderings and lightnings, the shining of Moses his face,
and trembling at Gods presence, the service of the Angels, and sound of the
trumpet, the ascending of the smoke, and the quaking of the mountain: Hebr.
8.6.
but yet still the glory of the Gospel was far more excellent, a better
Covenant, a more excellent ministry. The Law had weakness and
unprofitablenesse in it, Hebr. 7.18, 19.
(both terms of diminution from the the glory thereof) and therefore it could
make nothing perfect: But that which the Law could not do, in as much as it
was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.2, 3.
the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus (which is a periphrasis of the
Gospel, as appears, 2 Cor. 3.6.) did do for us, namely, make us free from
the law of sin and death. So then the Law was glorious, but the Gospel in many
respects did excel in glory, 2 Cor. 3.10.

To take a more particular view of the spiritual glory of the Gospel of
Christ in those excellent ends and purposes for which it serves: First, It is
full of light, to inform, to comfort, to guide those who sat in darkness and
the shadow of death, into the way of peace. Light was the first of all the
creatures which were made, and the Apostle magnifieth it for a glorious thing
in those other luminaries which were after created, 1 Cor. 15.41. How much more
glorious was the light of the Gospel? The Apostle calls it (...), A
mavelous light: 1 Pet. 2.9. (...). Greg. Naz. Or. 3.
and therefore the kingdom of the Gospel is expressed by light and glory
together, as terms of a promiscuous signification, Esaias 60.1, 2, 3. Of all
other learning the knowledge of the Gospel does infinitely excel in worth,
both in regard of the object thereof, which is God, manifested in the flesh,
and in regard of the end thereof, which is flesh reconciled, and brought unto
God. Ephesians. 3.18.
A knowledge which passes knowledge, a knowledge which brings fullness with
it, even all the fullness of God, a knowledge so excellent, Phil. 3.8.
that all other humane excellencies are but dung in comparison of it. What
Angel in heaven would trouble himself to busy his noble thoughts (which have
the glorious presence of God, and the joys of heaven to fill them) with
metaphysicall, or mathematical, (...). Greg Naz. Orat. 1. 1 Pet. 1.12.
or philologicall contemplations, which yet are the highest delicacies which
humane reason does fasten on to delight in? And yet we find the Angels in
heaven, with much greediness of speculation stoop down, and as it were turn
away their eyes from that expressesse glory which is before them in heaven, to
gaze upon the wonderful light, and bottomless mysteries of the Gospel of
Christ. In all other learning a Devil in hell (the most cursed of all
creatures,) does wonderfully surpass the greatest proficients amongst men; but
in the learning of the Gospel, and in the spiritual revelations and evidences
of the benefits of Christ to the soul from thence, there is a knowledge which
surpasses the comprehension of any angel of darkness; for it is the Spirit
of God only which knows the things of God. It was the devilish flout of
Julian the Apostate against Christian Religion, (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 3.
that it was an illiterate rusticitie, and a naked belief, and that true
polite learning did belong to him and his Ethnic faction; and for that reason
he interdicted Christians the use of Schools and humane learning, as things
improper to their believing religion (a persecution esteemed by the Ancients as
cruel as the other bloody massacres of his predecessors.) To which slander,
though the most learned Father might have justly returned the lie, and given
proofs both in the canonical books of holy Scripture, and in the professors
of that religion, of as profound learning, as invincible argumentation, and as
forcible eloquence as in any Heathen Author (for I dare challenge all the Pagan
learning in the world to parallel the writings of Clemens of Alexandria,
Origin, Justin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Minutius, Augustine, Theodoret, Nazianzen,
and the other champions of Christian Religion against Gentilisme) yet he rather
chooses thus to answer, that that authority, which the faith he so much
derided was built upon, came to the soul with more selfe-evidence, and
invincible demonstration, than all the disputes of reason or learning of
Philosophy could create. (...) Greg. Naz ibid.
Though therefore it were to the Jews an offense, as contrary to the honor of
their Law, and to the Greeks foolishness, as contrary to the pride of their
reason; yet to those that were perfect, it was an hidden and mysterious
wisdom, able to convince the gainsayers, to convert sinners, to comfort
mourners, to give wisdom to the simple, and to guide a man in all his ways
with spiritual prudence; for, what ever the prejudice of the world may be,
there is no man a wiser man, nor more able to bring about those ends which his
heart is justly set upon, than he who being acquainted with God in Christ by
the Gospel, has the Father of wisdom, the Treasurer of wisdom, the Spirit
of wisdom, and the Law of wisdom to furnish him therewithal. It is not for
want of sufficiency in the Gospel, but for want of more intimate acquaintance
and knowledge thereof in us, that the children of this world are more wise in
their generation, than the children of light.

Secondly, another glorious end and effect of the Gospel is to be a
ministration of Righteousness, a publication of a pardon to the world, and
that so general, that there is not one exception therein of any other sin than
only of the contempt of the pardon it self. And in this respect likewise the
Gospel exceeds in glory. If the ministration of condemnation (says the
Apostle) be glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed in
glory, 2 Cor. 3.9. It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, and the
Lord proclaims his glory to Moses, in that he would forgive iniquity,
transgression and sin, that is, multitudes of sins, and sins of all
degrees, Exodus 34.7. And thus the Lord magnifies his mercy, and thoughts
toward sinners, above all the ways and thoughts of men, even as the heavens
are higher than the earth, because he can abundantly pardon, or multiply
forgivenesses upon those who forsake their ways and turn to him, Esaias 55.7,
8, 9. and therefore justifying faith whereby we rely upon the power of God to
forgive and subdue our sins, is said to give glory to God. Abraham staggered
not at the Promise through unbeleefe, but being strong in faith he gave glory
to God, namely, the glory of his power and fidelity, Romans 4.20, 21. Numb. 20.12.
Ye shall not bring this congregation into the Land which I have given them,
says the Lord to Moses and Aaron, because ye believed me not, to sanctify
me in the eyes of the children of Israel, that is, to give me the glory of my
power and truth (for to sanctify the Lord of hoasts, signifies to glorify
his power, by fearing him more than men, and by relying on him against the
power and confederacies of men, Esaias 8.12, 13. And therefore in the same
argument touching the happiness of the Saints, if they suffer for
righteousness sake, or be reproched for the name of Christ: 1 Pet. 3.14, 15. 1
Pet. 4.14.
Saint Peter uses in one place sanctifying of the Lord in our hearts, and in
another glorifying of him, as terms equivalent;) And therefore unbeleefe is
said to make God a liar, 1 John 5.10.
that is, to dishonor him, Genesis 4.13.
and to rob him of the glory of his truth; And despair to rob God of his
mercy, and to make the guilt of sin greater than the power of God: And
therefore murmurers, and unbeleevers are said to speak against God, Psalm
78.18, 19.40.41.
and to grieve him, to tempt, to limit him, that is, to call into question the
glory of his power and truth. Herein then consists another glorious effect of
the Gospel of Christ, that being a ministration of righteousness, it is a
glass of that power, truth, mercy, and fidelity of God, which by faith we rest
upon, for the forgiveness and subduing of sin.

Thirdly, another glorious end of the Gospel is to be a ministration and a law
of life. If the ministration of death (says the Apostle) were glorious, how
shall not the ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.
The Law alone by it self is toward sinners but a dead letter, only the rule
according unto which a man ought to walk, not any principle enabling him to
walk. If Moses alone should speak unto men, he could only tell them what
they ought to do, Quod operum lex minando imperat, hoc fidei lex credendo
impetrat. -- lege operum dicit* Deus, Fac quod jubeo; l^ge fidei dicitur Deo,
Da quod jubes. Aug. tom. 3. lib. de spiritu and litera. copp. 13.19. 2 Cor.
3.18.
he could in no wise enable them to do it: nay, further the Law has
occasionally from the sin of man a malignant property in it, to irritate and
exasperate lust the more, to beget an occasional rage and fierceness in our
nature. As the Sun shining on a dunghill exhaleth noisome vapors, and
makes it stink the more. But now the Gospel by the Spirit does not only
teach, but help too, shows us what we should do, and gives us strength to
do it; we do not only therein see the glory of God, but are withal changed
into the same Image, even from glory to glory, that is, (as I conceive from
that allusion to a glass) the glory of the Lord shining upon the Gospel, and
from the Gospel shining upon our hearts, does change them into the Image of
the same glory; even as the glory of the Sun shining upon a glass, and from
that glass reflecting on a wall, does therein produce a more extraordinary
image of its own light: so that the Apostles (...), is the same with the Poets
e speculo in speculum* from the glory of the Gospel which is one glass of
Gods Image, there is sh^ped the same glory in the heart, which is another
glass of his Image. This is that which the Apostle calls the forming of
Christ in the soul, and the planting of it into the likeness of his death and
resurrection.

Fourthly, it is a glorious Gospel in the Judicature thereof. The Spirit i^
the Gospel does convince not of righteousness only, but of Judgment too;
that is, the Spirit shall erect a throne in the hearts of men, Ioh. 16.11.
shall pull down the prince of this world, and dispossess him; shall enable
men's own hearts to proceed like upright Judges with truth and with victory
(which are two of the principal honors of judgment) against their own
lusts, Esaias 42 3. Matthew. 12.20.
to censure, to condemn, to crucify them, though before they were as dear as
their own members; to throw all their idols away as menstruous rags, and to
judge and revenge themselves. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more
with idols? 1 Cor. 11.31. 2 Cor. 7.11. Hos. 14.8. Esaias 31.7. Ier. 31.19.
In that day, says the Lord, every man shall cast away his idols of silver,
and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin. I
have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself: After that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh. Thus the
government of the Gospel in the heart, makes a man severe to sentence every
sin, to hang up his Haman, his favorite lusts, to give up himself to the
obedience of Christ, and to have his conversation, Phil. 3 20.
his trading, his treasure, his privileges, his freedom, his fellowship in
heaven, as being now constituted under the gracious and peaceable government of
an heavenly Prince.

Fifthly, it is a glorious Gospel, in that it was to be a continuing
ministration, and an Immortal seed. If that which was done away, says the
Apostle, was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious* 2 Cor. 3.11.
Now the Gospel is able to preserve a man blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus; it will not suffer a man to be shaken nor overturned by all the
powers of darkness; there is strength enough in it to repel, and wisdom to
answer all the temptations and assaults of the enemies of our salvation: If the
world set upon us with any temptations on the right hand, or on the left, with
disgraces, persecutions, discomforts, exprobrations, l^e this was the man who
made God his help, and would needs be more excellent than his neighbors; the
Gospel furnishes us with sure promises, and sure mercies; this is answer
sufficient against all the discouragements of the world, I know whom I have
believed, I know that he has overcome the world, I know that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him, until the last day, and in the
mean time the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, that is, we
are at an equal point of distance and defiance, the world contemnes me, and I
am as careless of the world. If with pleasures, honors, and gilded baits to
draw us away from God, Faith in the Gospel easily overcommeth the world, for
it gives both the Promises and first fruits of such Treasures as are
infinitely more precious and massy than all the world can afford; the very
reproaches of Christ (how much more his Promises, how infinitely more his
Performances at the last?) are far greater riches, than the treasures of
Egypt. The daily sacrifice of a godly life, and the daily feast of a quiet
conscience put more sweetness into the afflictions of Christ, than is in all
the profits, pleasures or preferments of the world, being made bitter with the
guilt of sin. If Satan, or our own reasonings stand up against the kingdom
of Christ in us, the Gospel is a storehouse which can furnish us with armorie
of all sorts to repel them. Faith can quench fiery darts, the weapons of the
spirit can captivate the very thoughts of the heart unto the obedience of
Christ, no weapon which is formed against it can prosper, and every tongue
which rises up against it in judgment, it shall condemn, it is a staff which
can carry a man over any Jordan, and can support and comfort him in any shadow
of death. This is the honor of the Word that it does not only sanctify men,
but preserve their holiness in them. If it were not for the treasure of the
word in the heart every little thing would easily turn a man out of his way,
and make him revolt from Christ again. How easily would afflictions make us
mistrust Gods affection to us, and so change ours unto him (for this is
certain, His Love to us is the original of our love to him) make us murmr,
repine, struggle, fret under his hand, if in the Gospel we did not look upon
them as the gentle corrections of a Father, who loves us, as the pruning and
harrowing of our fowls that they may bring forth more fruit? Except thy Law
had been my delight, Psalm. 119.92.
I should have perished in mine affliction. My affliction would have destroyed
me, and made me perish from the right way, if it had not been tempered and
sanctified by thy Word. It wrought so with that wicked king of Israel, Behold
this evil is of the Lord, 2 King. 6.33. Mal. 3.14. Esai. 58.3.
what should I wait upon the Lord any longer? what profit is there to walk
humbly before him, or to afflict our selves before him, who will not see, nor
take knowledge of it, but continue to be our enemy still? But the Gospel
teaches a man's heart to rest in God, assures it that there is hope in Israel,
and balm in Gilead, that they which believe should not make haste to limit, or
to misconstrue God, but wait for his Salvation, which will ever come in that
due time, wherein it shall be both most acceptable and most beautiful. Again,
how easily would Temptations over-turne the faith of men, if it were not daily
supported by the Word? what is the reason that the sheep of Christ will not
follow strangers, nor know their voice, that is, will not acknowledge any
force, John 10.4, 5.
nor subscribe in their hearts to the conviction or evidence of any temptation
which would draw them from God, but only because they hear and know the voice
of Christ in his Gospel, and feel a spirit in their own hearts setting to
its seal and bearing witness to that truth from whence those solicitations
would seduce them? The Apostle foretold the Elders of Ephesus at his solemn
departure from them, that grievous wolves would enter in amongst them, and that
some of themselves would arise speaking perverse things to draw away disciples
after them. Act. 20.29, 32.
And the maine remedy which the Apostle gives them against this danger was, I
commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace which is able to build you up,
etc. Noting, that it is the Word of God which keeps men from being drawn
away with perverse disputes. And the same intimation he gives them in his
Epistle unto them, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. -- That we henceforth be no more
children, Ephesians. 4.11-14.
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
The more richly the word of God, in the love and evidence thereof, 1 These. 5.21.
does dwell in any man, and enable him to prove all things, the more steadfastly
will he hold that which is good, and stand immovable against the sleights and
solicitations of men. Again, how easily would our own evil hearts gather a
rust and unaptnesse for service over themselves, if they were not daily whet
and brightned upon the Word of God. That only it is which scrapeth away that
leprosy and mossinesse which our souls are apt to contract out of themselves.
2 Ioh. 8.9.
A man may lose all that he has wrought, all the benefit of what he has
done already, and all the strength to do any more, Iam. 1.23.25.
only by not abiding in the Doctrine of Christ. He only is no doer of the
Word, who looks in it as a man on a glass, and presently forgets the
image and state of his conscience again; it is only he that continues
therein, who is a doer of the work, and blessed in his deed. He that
treasureth up the Gospel in his heart, and labors to grow rich in the
knowledge thereof, can never be turned quite out of his way, or become an
Apostate from the grace of Christ.

Lastly, it is a glorious Gospel in regard of those noble and majesticall
endowments with which it qualifieth the soul of a Christian: Ioh. 1.12. 1 Ioh.
3.1. Revel 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.
for there is no nobility to that of the Gospel. It gives men the highest
privilege in the world to be called the Sons of God, to be kings and
priests before him, to be a Royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar
people, a nation of priests. Nothing does so honor a land as to be the seat
of the Gospel. It was the honor of the Jews that unto them were committed
the Oracles of God. Romans 3.1, 2.
Therefore the Arc is called the Glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22.
and Christ the glory of Israel, and the excellency of Jacob, Luke 2.32. Amos
8.7. Ier. 9.24.
neither is there any thing else allowed a man to glory in save only this that
he understands and knows the Lord in his word. It puts magnanimity into
the breasts of men, high thoughts, regal affections, public desires and
attempts, a kind of heavenly (...). Romans 15.20.
ambition to do and to gain the greatest good. The maine ends of a Christian
are all high and noble. The favor of God, the fellowship of the Father and the
Son, the Grace of Christ, the peace of the Church; his traffic and
negotiation is for heaven, his language the Dialect of heaven, his order a
heavenly order, innumerable companies of Angels, and the spirits of just men
made perfect. A holy man, who has the spirit of his mind raised and ennobled
by the Gospel, is an Agent in the same affairs, and does in his thoughts,
desires, prayers, emulations pursue the same high and heavenly ends, for the
advancement of the glory of Christ, and demolishing the kingdom of Satan, with
the blessed Angels of God. His desires look no lower than a kingdom, a weight
of massy, and most superlative exceeding glory. That which other men make the
utmost point even of their impudent and immodest hopes, the secular favors and
dignities of the world, these put lowest under their feet; but their wings, the
higher and more aspiring affections of their soul, are directed only unto
heaven and heavenly things. They no sooner are placed in the body of Christ but
they have public services, some to preach, some to defend, all to pray, to
practice, to adorn the profession they have under-taken. For indeed every
Christian has his talent given him, his service enjoined him. The Gospel is a
Depositum, a public Treasure, committed to the keeping of every Christian,
each man having, as it were, a several key of the Church, a several trust for
the honor of this kingdom delivered unto him. As in the solemn Coronation of
the Prince every Peer of the Realm has his station about the Throne, and
with the touch of his hand upon the royal Crown declares the personal duty
of that honor which he is called unto, namely to hold on the Crown on the
head of his Sovereign, to make it the maine end of his greatness, to study,
and by all means endeavor the establishment of his Princes Throne: so every
Christian as soon as he has the honor to be called unto the kingdom, and
presence of Christ, has immediately no meaner a depositum committed to his
care than the very Throne and Crown of his Savior, than the public honor,
peace, victory, and stability of his masters kingdom. The Gospel is
committed to the custody of the Bishops, and Pastors of the Church, to preach
it. 2 Timothy 1.14.2.2.
They are, as it were, the Heralds and Forerunners of Christ to prepare his
way into the souls of men. To the custody of the Princes and Judges of the
earth to defend it, to be a guard about the person and truth of Christ, to
command the obedience, and to encourage the teaching of it. The Gospel is the
Law of Christ's Throne, and the princes of the world are the lions about his
Throne, set there to watch, and guard it against the malice of enemies. And
therefore it is recorded for the honor of David that he set in order the
courses of the Priests, and appointed them their forms and vicissitudes of
Service. 1 Chronicles. 23.24.
Of Solomon that he built, adorned, and dedicated a Temple for Gods solemn
worship. Of Josiah that he made the people to serve the Lord their God; Of
Ezekiah, that he restored the service, 2 Chro. 34.33. 2 Chro.
29.3.30.1.22.31.2, 3, 4.
and repaired the Temple of God, that he spoke comfortably to the Levites, who
taught the good knowledge of the Lord, that he proclaimed a solemn passover,
that he ordered the courses of the Priests and Levites, that he gave
commandment concerning the portion of their due maintenance, that they might
be encouraged in the Law of the Lord (a pattern worthy the admiration and
imitation of all Christian princes, in spite of the sacrilegious doctrine of
those men who would rob them of that power and office which God has given them
for the establishment of his Gospel, Eusebius. de vit. Constantini, li 2. cap.
37, 38, 39. Act. 13.26. Jude v.3. 2 These. 2.15.
and it was imitated by the first Christian Prince that ever the world had.)
Lastly, the Gospel is committed to the keeping of every Christian to practice
it, to adorn it, to pray for it, to be valiant and courageous in his place and
station for the truth of it. And for a man to neglect these duties is to betray
and dishonor the Kingdom of Christ, and to degenerate from that high and
public condition in which God had placed him.

Again, it puts a spirit of Fortitude and boldness into the hearts of men.
Boldness to withstand the corruptions of the times, to walk contrary to the
courses of the world, to outface the sins and the scorns of men, to be
valiant for a despised truth or power of religion, not to be ashamed of a
persecuted profession, to spread out contra torrentem brachia* to stand alone
against the power and credit of a prevailing faction, Act. 13.46.28 28. 1 These
2.2. Act. 2.14.23.36. Act. 4.8-12, 13, 19. Act. 5.29, 32.
as Paul against the contradiction of the Jews, and Peter and John against a
Synod of Pharisees, and those invincible champions of Christ, Athanasius
against the power of Constantius, the frequent synodicall conventions of
countenanced heretics, and the general deluge of Arrianisme in the world.
Ambrose against the wrath and terror of the emperor of the world, to whom,
having imbrued his hands in much innocent blood, that holy Father durst not
deliver the blood of Christ. Chrysostom against the pride and persecution of
the Empress Eudoxa. Luther against the mistress of fornications, the
princess of the earth, and as himself professed, if it had been possible,
against a whole city full of devils. The Christians of all ages against the
fire, fury, and arts of torment executed by the bloody persecutors of the
Church. Nay further, the Gospel gives boldness against that universal fire
which shall melt the Elements, and shrivell up the heavens like a role of
parchment; Herein, says the Apostle, is our love made perfect, 1 Ioh. 4.17.
that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so we
are in this world; that is, we have his image in us, and his love shed abroad
in our hearts, and therefore we are able to assure our hearts before him, and
to have confidence toward him. Now he who has boldness to stand before God,
to dwell with consuming fire, and with everlasting burnings; who can get the
Lord on his right hand, and put on the Lord Jesus, though he be not out of the
reach, or beyond the blow, yet is he above the injury of the malice of men,
they may kill, but they can never overcome him. I am he that comfort you,
Esai. 51.12* 13.
who art thou (says the Lord) that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall dye, and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, etc? What an invincible courage
was that of Eliah, which retorted the slander of Ahab upon his own face: 1
King. 18.18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house? And that of
Micaiah, against the base request of a flattering Courtier, who thought God to
be such an one as himself, that would magnify and cry up the ends of a
wicked king, 1 King. 22.14.
As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. And that
of Amos against the unworthy instructions of Amaziah, the priest of Bethel,
Thou say prophecy not against Israel, Amos 7.16, 17.
and drop not thy words against the house of Isaac; therefore thus says the
Lord, Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy
daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, and
thou shall dye in a polluted land, and Israel shall surely go into captivity
forth of his land. And that of Jeremiah, who boldly gave the lie to Irijah the
captain of the ward; It is false, I fall not away to the Caldeans. Ier. 37.13,
14.
The time would fail if I should speak of the unbended constancy (or as the
Gentiles styled it, Tertull. Apolog. cap. ult. Baron. A. 179. number. 27. Eusebius.
Hist. l. 5. c. 1.

Christiani sumus, Christiani, and Deos tuos imperator non colemus. Baro. A.
301 number. 46. A. 165. n. 4.


obstinacy) of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, Cyprian, Pionius, Sabina, Maximus,
as those infinite armies of holy martyrs, who posed the inventions, tired out
the cruelties, withstood the flatteries, and with one word (Christiani sumus)
overcame all the tyrannies, quenched the fire, and stopped the mouths of their
proudest persecutors.

Again, the Gospel puts a kind of luster and terror on the faces of
those in whom it reigns, and makes them, as the Law did Moses, to shine as
lights in the world, and to be more excellent than their neighbors; works
in others toward them a dread and awfulnesse. Though Jeremy were a prisoner,
cast-into the dungeon, Ier. 37.16, 17.38.15, 16.
and in such extremity as he was there likely to perish: yet such a majesty
and honor did God even then put upon him, and that in the thoughts of the king
himself, that he could not be in quiet till he consulted with him about the
will of the Lord, and by his many conferences with him made it plainly appear
that he stood in awe of his person and prophesies. So it is said, That Herod
feared John, Mark 6.20.
knowing that he was a just and a holy man, and observed him; to note that
Holiness makes men's persons and presence dreadful to the wicked, by reason
of that grace and majesty which God has put into them. The whole Council of
Scribes and Pharisees, they who afterward gnashed on Stephen with their teeth,
were forced to acknowledge the majesty of holiness shining upon him, Act.
6.15.
They steadfastly looked on him, and saw his face as it had been the face of an
Angel. The mighty power of the Gospel of Christ makes unbeleevers fall on
their faces, and confess of a truth that God is in those who preach it. 1 Cor.
14 24, 25. Act. 16*29, 30.
This we find verified in the poor astonished keeper of the prison into
which Paul and Silas had been cast, he sprang in and came trembling and fell
down before them, and brought them forth, and said, (...), Sirs (which is an
honorable appellation, fit rather for Princes than for prisoners) what must I
do to be saved? It is true that naturally men hate Christ and his servants,
but this is not as a man hates a Toade (which he can easily crush) with a
simple hatred; but as a man hates a Lion, or as a Malefactor hates his Judge,
or as a Thief hates the light, with a compounded hatred, mixed with a fear
and dread of that majesty within them. Which Majesty has sometimes shined so
brightly even under torments and persecutions, that it has forced from Heathen
Emperors a desire of the Christians Prayers, sometimes not astonished only,
but Adjectos ideo vocabant, quia cum in eo essent ut torquerent martyrs, ipsi
martyrs fuerunt, verbo Dei, and constantia martyrum permoti. Cameron De
Ecclesi pa. 83.
converted the adversaries.

Lastly, the Gospel brings liberty and joy into the hearts of men with it.
The liberty a Glorious liberty, Romans 8.21. and the joy a glorious joy, 1 Pet.
1.8. therefore the Gospel is called a Gospel of great joy, Luke 2.10. Liberty
is so sacred a thing, that indeed it belongs in the whole compass of it only
to the Prince: for though other men be free from servitude, yet they are not
free from subjection. Now the Gospel gives a plenary freedom to the
consciences of men; they may be commanded by their own consciences, but their
consciences cannot be commanded by any but by Christ. The Son has made them
free from all others, that he only might be the Lord over them. These are
those noble effects of the majesty of the Gospel in the hearts of men, and
all, so many several evidences of that glory which belongs unto it.

Now then, to draw some inferences from this most useful and excellent
doctrine of the glory of the Gospel, we learn from thence first what liberty,
and what sincerity the Ministers of Christ ought to use in the administration
of this his Kingdom in the Word. First, What Liberty. The Officers of a
Prince who go before him to prepare his way, make bold to strike, and to
scatter those unruly throngs of men, who press too near upon his sacred
person. We are the Messengers of Christ sent beforehand with his royal
proclamation of peace to make room in the hearts of men for him, and to open
their everlasting doors, that this King of Glory may enter in. We may
therefore boldly smite with the Rod of his mouth, we must cry aloud, and not
spare, Ier. 1.17, 18. Ezekiel. 3.8, 9. 1 Timothy 4.11. 2 Cor. 4.1, 2.
pull down mountainous lusts, subdue strong holds, take unto us iron pillars,
and brazen walls, and faces of flint, to root up, to pull down, to batter and
destroy, not to teach only, but to command with all authority, and to commend
our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. This use the Apostle
makes of the Glory of the Gospel, seeing we have such Hope, 2 Cor. 3.12.
that is, seeing in this glorious Gospel we have the dispensation of a blessed
Hope unto men; or the revelation of Christ, who is unto us the Hope of Glory,
or the assured confidence of doing excellent works by the virtue of this so
glorious a word; (...), We use great boldness or liberty of speech; for why
should he, who brings unto men glad tidings of glorious things, which
offers unto them the blessed Hope of Eternal life, be afraid or ashamed of
his Office? Though Rome were the seat, and that Tertull. Apol. c. 5.
emperor the first Dedicator of the persecutions of the Church, yet even unto
that place the Apostle was not ashamed to preach the Gospel of Christ, Romans
1.16.
because it was the Power of God unto Salvation. There is no shame in being a
Savior. And therefore it is both the honor and duty of the dispencers of the
Gospel to speak boldly as they ought to speak; Ephesians. 6.20.
and of the people to pray that that excellent Spirit might ever accompany so
glorious a message. This was the prayer of the Primitive Saints for the
Apostles of Christ, Grant unto thy servants, that with all Boldness they may
speak thy Word. Act. 4.29.
And this duty lies upon us with an heavy necessity.

For first, we are dispensers of all Gods counsel, Act. 20.27. Josh. 8.35.
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Act. 5.20.
there must not be a Word which God has commanded that we should refuse to
make known unto the people, for the things revealed are for them and their
children. Thus we find when the Angel of the Lord brought forth the Apostles
out of prison, he gave them this command, Go stand and speak in the temple to
the people all the words of this life: and certainly some of these words will
require boldness. When we lay the axe to the root of the tree, when we how
off men's very members, when we snatch them like brands out of the fire, when
we make them to see their own faces in the Law of liberty, the face of a
guilty, and therefore cursed conscience, there will be need of much boldness.
A Chirurgian who is to search an inveterate wound, and to cut off a putrified
member, had not need to be faint-hearted, or bring a trembling hand to so great
a work.

Secondly, the severest message we are sent withal, and which men are most
unwilling to hear, is for them expedient. No news could be so unwelcome to
the Apostles as to hear of Christ's departure, Ioh. 16.6, 7.
Because I have said these things sorrow has filled your heart, nevertheless I
tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away. The first news
which we bring unto men is of Christ's absence, of their false conceits and
presumptions of their being in him, of the distance, and unacquaintance which
is between them, of our fear of them and their condition, and in all this we
are not their enemies, because we tell them the truth. As it is our office to
speak, Gal. 4.16.
so it is the peoples duty and profit to hear all things which shall be told
them of God, for all Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Deuteronomy. 12.28. Psalm. 119.128.
Iam. 2.10, 11.
as well that which reproves and corrects, as that which teaches and
instructs in righteousness is profitable, and tends to the perfection of the
Saints. All his precepts concerning all things are right. The contempt of one
is virtually and interpretatively, in the constitution and preparation of
heart, the violation of all, because they are all grounded upon the same divine
authority, and directed unto the same saving ends: and therefore we ought not
to pick, and choose either in the preaching or practicing thereof.

Thirdly, we are to answer for the blood of the people if we prevaricate, if
we let their sins alone they will have a double edge, to kill them and us
both, like the mutual embracements of two in a river, which is the means to
drown them both. Speak unto them all that I command thee; Ier. 1.17.
be not dismayed at their faces, says the Lord to his Prophet, lest I confound
thee before them. If thou warn not the wicked from his wicked way that he may
live, Ezekiel. 3.18.
he shall dye in his wickedness, (thy bashfulnesse shall do him no good) but
his blood will I require at thy hands. Is it at all congruous that men should
have boldness enough to declare their sins, to speak them, to proclaim
them, to wear them, to glory in them, and that those officers, who are sent
for no other business, but in the name and authority of Almighty God to fight
against the corruptions of the world, should in the mean time hang down the
head and be tongue-tied? that men should have more boldness to destroy
themselves, and to do Satan's works, than we to save them, or to serve God?

Fourthly, we are to speak in the person of Christ, and in the virtue of his
Spirit. We must speak as the 1 Pet. 4.11.
Oracles of God, and Ezekiel. 3.4.
with his words, 2 Cor. 5.20.
as if he himself did by us speak unto the people. We must give manifestation
of 2 Cor. 13.3.
Christ speaking by us, that men may be 1 Cor. 14.25.
convinced that God is in us of a truth, and that we are Mic. 3.8.
full of power by his spirit, that his spirit sets to his seal to authorize
our commission, and to countenance our ministry: and therefore we must use
judgment and might, that is, spiritual discretion, and inflexible constancy
against the sins of men (for these two are contrary to the two grand props of
Satan's kingdom, which are (...), and (...), his craftiness, and his weapons
of power:) 2 Cor. 3.17.
for where the spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, Mic 2.7.
his spirit will not be straightned, neither will the Lord keep silence; he
that speaks by the spirit of Christ, must speak, though not in equality
(which is impossible) yet in some similitude and proportion, as he spoke, that
is, as those that have Mat. 7.29.
Authority and power committed to them for the edification of the Church.

Lastly, a partial, unsearching and unreproving Minister is one of Gods curses
and scourges against a place, the forerunner of a final and fearful
visitation. Hos. 9.7.
The days of visitation and recompense come, says the Lord. The Prophet is a
fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the
great hatred. Mich. 2.11.
If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood, that is, professing the work of
a spiritual man, and yet betraying his office, or in a false and lying spirit
prophesying of wine and strong drink, that is, cherishing and encouraging
sensual livers in their pernicious courses, he shall even be the prophet of
this people. And therefore when the Lord will punish with an extreme revenge
the rebellion of a people against his Gospel, who judge themselves unworthy of
so great a salvation, he either Revel. 2.5. Mat. 21.41-43.23.37, 38. 1 These.
2.16.
removes their Candlestick and takes it away from them, or else Ezekiel. 3 26.
Ezekiel 24.13.
seals up the mouth of his Prophets, that they may be dumb and reprove them
no longer, and that they may not be purged any more from their filthiness, or
else infatuates their Prophets, and suffers Satan to seduce them, and to be a
lying Spirit in their mouths, that he may destroy them, as we see in the 2
King 22.20.23.
ruin of Ahab, and in the Ier. 4.10. Ier 14.13. Ier. 23.13.33.40. Lam. 2.14.
captivity of Judah.

Again, as the Ministers of the Gospel must use liberty, so must they
likewise use sincerity in the dispensation thereof, because it is a glorious
Gospel. This likewise is the Apostles inference, for having spent a whole
chapter in this one argument of the glory of the Gospel, he presently
concludes, 2 Cor. 4 1, 2. 2 Cor. 2.17. (...) -- (...), etc. Greg. Naz. Orat.
1. and Isid. Pelut. lib. 1. epist. 169.
Therefore seeing we have this ministry, that is, the dispensation of such a
Gospel committed unto us, we faint not, but have renounced the hidden things
of dishonestie; that is, as I conceive, the arts of dawbing, and palliating,
and covering over unclean courses with plausible reasonings, and fleshly
apologies ( Ezekiel. 13.10. Ier. 14.13.
which is the use of false prophets) not walking in craftiness, that is, not
using Ephesians. 4.14. Col. 2.4.8.
humane sleights or cogging, to carry men about with every wind of false
doctrine (as sinners are very willing to be deceived, Ier. 5.31.
and love to have it as false prophets say it is) nor handling the Word of God
deceitfully, that is, falsifying and adulterating it with corrupt glosses, and
so tempering it to the palate of sinners, that the working and searching virtue
thereof, whereby of it self it is apt to purge out and wrestle with the lusts
of men, may be deaded, and so it may well consist with the power of lusts still
(as Physicians use so to qualify and allay poison by other correctives, and
cross ingredients, that it shall serve as an instrument to strengthen us, not
extinguish life: or as immodest Poets may so tamper with the chaste expressions
of Virgil or Homer, as by them both to notify, and, in corrupt minds, to
kindle unclean lustings) but by manifestation of the truth, (...)

1 Cor. 2.4. Demonstratio autem nihil relinquit aut inevinentiae in re, aut
formidini^ in intellectu.


that is, by such spiritual and perspicuous demonstrations, as under which
there cannot subesse falsum, there can no falsitie nor deceit lurk, commending
our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, that is, working not
the fancies, or humors, or fleshly conceits of men (which always take the
part of sin) but their very consciences (which always is on Gods side) to
bear witness unto the truth which we speak, to receive it not as the wit or
learning of a man, but as the Word and wisdom of God, to acknowledge the
conviction, the judicature, the penetration thereof, and so to fall down upon
their faces, and to glorify God, and report that he is in us of a truth; and
all this in the sight of God, that is, so handling the Word as that we may
please and approve our selves to his eye, whose servants we are, and whose
work we do. This is that which the Apostle calls, (...), Tit. 2.1.7.8.
Vncorruptnesse, gravitie, sincerity, soundness of doctrine, such as the very
adversaries themselves shall not be able to pick quarrels withal, or to
speak against: we must not then make account to adorn the Gospel with our
own inventions, or with superstructions of humane wit and fancy; though these
things may to fleshly reason seem full of beauty, yet indeed they are but
like the mingling of glasse-beads with a chain of diamonds, or of lime with
pure and generous wine; they are indeed but latebrae dedecoris, lurking places
for unclean lusts to hide themselves under, or to escape away, while the
corrupt fancies of men stand gazing at that which pleases them; as Agag, when
he was gloriously arrayed, thought nothing of the bitterness of death, or
Sisera of the nail and the hammer, while he saw nothing but the milk and the
butter. Some there are not unlike Praxiteles the Painter, Clem. Alex. in
Protrept.
in Clem. Alex. who made the silly people worship the image of his strumpet,
under the title and pretense of Venus; who by sleight and cunning craftiness
impose upon weak and incautelous hearers, the visions of their own fancy,
the crude and unnourishing vapors of an empty wit (things infinitely unsuitable
to the majesty and seriousness of the foundation in the Gospel) for the
indubitate truth of God in his Word; which (with reverence may it be spoken) is
nothing else but to put the holy Prophets and Apostles into a fooles-coat: But
how-ever these men may please and puff up themselves in the admiration of
their own wind, yet certain it is that the Gospel of Christ does as much
scorn humane contemperations, as a wall of marble does a roof of straw, or
the Sun at noone does the light of a candle. And therefore the palate of
those who cannot away with the naked simplicity of the Gospel, without the
blandishments of humane wit, who must needs have Quails to their Manna, 2 Timothy
4.3. 2 Cor. 4.3.
is hereby discovered to be manifestly distempered with an itch of lust, and
their eyes blinded by the god of this world.

Secondly, this glory of the Gospel may teach us what admiration and
acceptance it should find amongst men, even as it does with the blessed
Angels themselves. 1 Timothy 1.15.4.9, 10. Act. 17 11. Matthew. 2.10.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, worthy to be
received with all readiness of mind, worthy to be gazed upon, like the Star
of the Wisemen, with exceeding great joy, worthy to be enameled in the crowns
of Princes, and to be written in the soul of every Christian with a beam of
the Sun; Romans 10.15.
That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. And indeed the
faithful have ever found beauty in the feet of those that bring them glad
tidings of this their King, Romans 1.10. Ephesians. 2.17. Col. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.
2.1. Romans 10 6, 7, 8. Ier. 26.4. Esaias 65.1.
that is, in the coming of this Word of grace and salvation unto them, which
is the usual phrase of the Scripture (setting forth more abundantly the mercy
of the Lord, who did not choose one fixed place for his Gospel to reside in,
and unto which all nations, who would have benefit by it, should take the
pains to resort (as he did for the Jews at Jerusalem) but has made it an
itinerary salvation, and has sent it abroad to the very doors of men, who
else would never have gone out of doors to seek it) what man in a sad and
disconsolate estate would not spread wide open his heart, and let out his
spirits, to run upon the embraces of that man who was coming unto him with a
message of more lovely and acceptable news, than the very wishes of his heart
could have framed to himself? When Joseph was sent for out of prison unto
Pharaohs Court, when Jacob saw the chariots which were brought to carry him
unto Joseph his son, how were they revived and comforted after their
distresses? When Caligula the Emperor sent for Agrippa (the same which was
afterward smitten by the Angel) whom Tiberius had bound in chains, and cast
into prison, caused him to change his garments, and cut his hair (it seems
that long and ugly hair was then the fashion of discontented prisoners) and
placed a Diadem on his head, made him Tetrarch of Iturea and Trachonitis, and
Governor of Judea, and for his chain of iron, gave him another of gold, of
equal weight, as the Historian relates, he says that men were (...), Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 8.
they could not believe so wonderful a change; for things of extraordinary
goodness are very difficultly believed. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.1.
we were like them that dream, the thing was so incredibly suitable to their
desires, that it seemed rather the imaginary wish of a dream, than a
deliverance really acted: as Peter, when he was delivered out of prison,
thought he had seen a vision; Act. 12.9. Genesis 45.26. Luke 24.41.
Jacob could not at first believe the news of the life and honor of Joseph
his son; and the Disciples for very joy were not able to believe the
Resurrection of Christ. Now what are all the good tidings to the Gospel? which
is a Word of salvation, which opens prisons and lets out captives, which brings
our King unto us, and makes us kings too, which gives us such a joy, as the
whole world cannot rob us of? Your joy* shall no man take from you. The joy
which Caligula gave unto Agrippa, Claudius might have taken from him, as he did
after from Agrippa his son, and, though he did not, yet we see the Angel
did. But the joy of the Gospel is unvariable, the Angels themselves, (to whom
one might think the joys of men should seem but small) call it (...), a
great joy, Luke 2.10. It is the joy of a treasure, infinitely more worth than
all which a man has besides. A joy of a triumphall harvest, and of victorious
spoils, wherein there is not only an escape from dangerous hazard, Matthew.
13.44. Esaias 9 3, 4. John 15.11. Romans 15.13.
but a large reward of peace and plenty. It is a full joy, there is no sorrow
mingled with it, nay, it is all joy, and therefore there is nothing but sorrow
without it. All joy in it self, and all joy in the midst of opposition too.
A joy in the heart like gold in the mine, which turns every thing about it
into joy. Diverse temptations take not away one scruple of it, no more than fire
does of gold, James 1.2. Hebr. 11.26. Mic. 5.5. Romans 5.3.
it is all joy still. My brethren, says the Apostle, count it all joy when you
fall into diverse temptations. It turns the reproaches of men into riches, nay,
in the midst of all other tribulations it is our peace, and our glory:
Therefore being so full of joy when once a right apprehended, needs must it
likewise be worthy of all acceptance too. And therefore the Prophet calls
the time of the Gospel tempus acceptabile, Esaias 61.2.
the acceptable time or year of the Lord, which Baronius falsely understands
of the first year of Christ's preaching only, Baron. An 31. number. 78. 2 Cor.
6.2.
since the Apostle uses the same phrase for the whole time of evangelicall
dispensation.

And indeed if we look into the Church, we shall see what worthy acceptance
this Gospel has found. Zacheus made haste, Luke 19.6.
and received Christ into his house gladly; Act. 21.17.
so did the brethren at Jerusalem receive the Apostles; so did the men of Berea
receive the Word, (...), Act. 17.11.
with all readiness of mind, or forward affection; so did the Galatians
receive Saint Paul with the honor of an Angel, Gal. 4.14.
yea, even as Christ Jesus himself (for indeed Christ and his Gospel go
still together: Mark 10.29.
) the man in the Gospel sold all he had for it; the Saints did earnestly
contend for it, and take the kingdom of heaven by violence. Though they
suffered the loss of all for Christ, yet they counted godliness great gain
still. In a shipwreck I throw my goods overboard, and get my life for a prey;
in this case I come no loser to heaven; vita sibi merces, a man's life is
sufficient treasure in such an adventure. We are all by nature in maligno
positi, every man is a sea and a tempest to himself, as impossible to escape
ruin, as to put off himself. Now in the Gospel, Christ shows a man a way
to get out of himself, and so to escape the tempest, shows a way how with
him he shall walk upon the sea and not sink, how he shall be in the world,
and not of it, nor swallowed by it. O how willingly will the man who is
convinced of his danger, cast off every thing which would press him down, and
account it a plentiful deliverance to have his soul saved from such a tempest
of wrath as was falling upon him? We see what hazards men run to get
temporary riches, to the bottom of rocks for diamonds, to the bowels of the
earth for gold and silver: such affections have the Saints had toward the
Gospel. If they must dig in mines for Christ (as it was an usual
condemnation, Christiani ad metalla) they were most willing so to do, they had
a treasure there which the Emperor knew not of, they had infinite more
precious wealth from thence than he: If they must fetch Christ in the fire, or
wrestle for him, as for a precious price, with the wild beasts of the earth;
if they be not suffered to wear Christ, except they put off themselves, how
willing, how thankful are they for so rich a bargain? Look to your life,
said the Governor to Saint Cyprian that blessed martyr, be not obstinate
against your own safety, but advise well with your self, Baron. An. 261.
number. 30.
fac quod tibi praeceptu^ est, says the holy man, in re tam justa nulla est
consultatio; Sir, you are my Judge, you are none of my counselor, do the
office which is committed to you, in so righteous a cause there is no further
need of consultation. Take pity upon your self, and sacrifice and save your
life, said the officers to Polycarpe; no, says the martyr, Eusebius. lib. 4.
hist. cap. 14.
this eighty six years I have served Christ, and he has done me no harm, I
will not do what you persuade m^. That rich and blessed Virgin in Basil, who
was for Christianity condemned to the fire, and was offered, if she would
worship idols, to have her life and state safe restored unto her, Scultet.
Exercitat. Evangel. lib. 2. cap. 5.
was obstinate in her resolution, Valeat vita, pereat pecunia; I shall have
more life in Christ, than in my self; all the Emperors, all the Physicians in
the world cannot make my life, which I have in my self, so long to morrow as
it is to day; but in Christ my life is not only an abiding, but an abounding
life, I shall have more of that by losing mine own; my life in him is an
hidden life, free from all injuries and persecutions of men: I shall have more
riches in him than in my self, even unsearchable riches, which can never be
stolen away, because they can never be exhausted. It is as possible for
thieves to draw out the mines of India, or to steal away the Sun out of his
orb, as for any humane violence to take away Christ from a man. Alike
honorable was the answer of Frederick the Elector of Saxony, who being
prisoner to Charles the fifth, was promised enlargement and restitution of
dignity, if he would come to Mass, Summum in terris Dominum agnosco Caesarem
in coelis Deum, In all Civil accommodations I am ready to yield unto Caesar,
but for heavenly things I have but one Master, and therefore I dare not serve
two; Christ is more welcome to me in bonds, than the honors of Caesar without
Christ. Such acceptance has the Gospel found amongst renowned Worthies
heretofore: and the like entertainment should we all give unto it, even
prefer it above our greatest glory, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6.
and, as the Thessalonians did, receive it with joy in the midst of
afflictions, abide with Christ in his temptations, Luke 22.2^, 29.
esteem his Gospel glorious as the Stars are, in the darkness of the
night, or as a torch, which blazeth most when it is most shaken.

This alone it is which proves our love to Christ to be (...), sincere and
incorrupt, when we embrace his Gospel for it self, and can therein in any
condition see Christ full of glory, grace and truth: when a man can with Saint
Paul not rejoice only in the name and profession of the Cross of Christ, Gal.
6.14.
but in conformity and obedience thereunto, in that virtue of the Gospel
which crucifies him unto the world and the world unto him. In days of peace
and religion men may easily afford to magnify the Gospel, because they get by
it. The Persians, who, had the bloody decree held, would have been the
slaughterers of the Jews, yet when leave was given to that people to deliver
themselves from the malice of Haman, even many of them turned Jews themselves,
John 4.14.
because the fear of that people fell upon them. We may observe this affection
in the woman of Samaria, the first reason why she gave some heed to Christ,
speaking of his water of life unto her, was, because she should thirst no
more, nor come thither to draw. So long as Ephraim might have her work and her
wages together, she was contented to do God some service, like an Heifer
which loves to tread out the corn, Hos. 10.11.
that is, while she has no yoke on her neck, no muzzell on her mouth, while
she is not put to plow, but to easy and pleasant service, she is willing to
yield unto it. To note, that it is but base and hypocritical obedience, which
is supported by no other than present rewards. They seek me daily, Esaias 58.2,
3.
says the Lord of the hypocrites among his people, and delight to know my
ways, as a nation that did righteousness. But the end was that they might
have their own wills, and as it were oblige God to reward them: and therefore
as soon as God seems to neglect them and their services, they proudly
expostulate with him, and even twit him with their works, Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou see not? etc. This then is the proof of our sincere love
unto Christ, which is not raised upon mercinarie respects, when we can receive
the Gospel with persecution. Mark 10.30.
Persecution is amongst Christ's legacies, a part of the Churches portion Phil.
1.29.
and of Gods gifts unto her; 2 Timothy 3.12.
no man that will live godly can be without them. Even in Abraham's house, which
was at that time, if not the sole, yet the most glorious Church on the earth,
there was a Persecutour, and Gal. 4 19.
as it was then, so is it now, says the Apostle. The Saints of God ever have
been, and ever will be to the worlds end esteemed for Zech. 3.8. Esaias 8.18. 2
King. 9.11. Ier. 29.26. Wisd. 5.6.
wonders, and marks, and madmen, and proverbs of reproach. And hereby the Lord
does provide to make his Gospel more glorious, because he gives men hearts
to suffer scorn and reproach for it. To receive the word in affliction, and yet
with joy, is an exemplary thing, which makes the sound and glory of the
Gospel to spread abroad. Now then, if persecution be thus an appendant to the
Gospel, every man must resolve to receive it in some affliction, when he must
be put to discard his wicked companies, to shake off his flattering and
sharking lusts, to forsake his own will and ways, to run a hazard of
undeserved scorn, disreputation, and misconstructions in the world, and yet
for all this to set an high price upon the precious truths of the Gospel
still, is not this to receive the Word in much affliction? And surely till a
man can resolve upon this conclusion, I am ready to be bound, and to die for
the name of Jesus, I count not my life, much less my liberty, peace, credit,
secular accommodations dear, so I may finish my course with joy; Lord, my will
is no more mine, but it shall be in all things subject unto thee; he can never
give such entertainment to the Word as becomes so glorious a Gospel. All his
seeming profession and acceptance, is but like the Gadarens courtesy in
meeting of Christ, which was only to be rid of him, Matthew. 8.34.

Lastly, we should from hence learn a further Christian duty, which is to
adorn this glorious Gospel in an holy conversation. Phil. 1.27. Tit. 2.10.
This use the Apostle every where makes of the Gospel of Christ; that we
should walk as becomes the Gospel, that we should in all things adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior, that we should walk worthy of him who has called
us unto his kingdom and glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
that we show forth the virtues of him who has called us out of darkness into
his mavelous light, that we should not receive so great a grace, 1 Pet. 2.8.
2 Cor. 6.1-3.
as the ministry of reconciliation in vain, but that we should walk
sittingly to the holiness and efficacy of so excellent a rule, as becomes a
royal nation, Gal. 6.16.
Tit. 2.14.
a people of glory, a peculiar and selected inheritance, even zealous of good
works. It was once the expostulation of Nehemiah with his enemies, Nehem. 6.11.
should such a man as I fly from such men as you? 1 Pet. 4.3-6.
such should be our expostulation with Satan and our own lusts, should such
men as we are, who have the Gospel of Christ for our rule, conform our
selves unto another Law? Is not this the end why the Gospel is preached, that
we should live unto God? Does it become the son of a King to go in rags,
or to converse with mean and ignoble persons? Now by the Gospel we have that
great honor and privilege given us to be called the sons of God; and shall we
then walk as servants of Satan? Would any Prince endure to see the heir of
his crown live in bondage to his own vassal and most hated enemy? Herein is
the greatest glory of the Gospel above the Law, that it is a Law of life and
liberty, a Word which transformeth men into the Image of Christ, and makes
them such as it requires them to be. So that to walk still according to the
course of the world as we did before, is, as much as in us lies, to make the
Gospel as weak and unprofitable as the Law. How do you say we are wise;
says the Prophet, and the Law of the Lord is with us? Ier. 8.8.
Certainly in vain made he it, the pen of the Scribe is in vain: That is,
the privilege of having the oracles and ordinances of God committed unto us,
will do us no more good, if we walk unworthy of so great a grace, than if
those ordinances had never been written or revealed to men.

Here then it is needful to enquire in what manner we are to adorn and set
forth the glory of the Gospel? To this I answer, that the first and greatest
honor we can do unto the Gospel, is, to set it up in our hearts, as our
only rule, by which we are to walk, that we prefer it above all our own
counsels, and venture not to mingle it with the wisdom and reasonings of the
flesh; that we raise up our conversation unto it, and never bend it unto the
crookedness of our own ends or rules. Col. 2.6.
As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, says the
Apostle, that is, fashion your conversation to the doctrine of Christ, let that
have the highest room, and the overruling suffrage in your hearts. There is
all wisdom in the Gospel, it is able to make men wise unto salvation, Col.
1.28.
that is, there is wisdom enough in it to compass the uttermost and most
difficult end. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Psalm. 119.98, 99. Ier. 8.9.
And what can the reasonings of the flesh contribute to that which was all
wisdom before? and which can thoroughly furnish a man unto every good work?
This glory Saint Paul (though a man of great learning, of strong intellectuals,
of a working and stirring spirit, qualities very unapt to yield and be silent)
did, at the very first revelation thereof, give unto the Gospel, Gal. 6.16.
Immediately, says he, I conferred not with flesh and blood, I did not compare
the Gospel of Christ with the principles of my carnal wisdom, I did not
resolve to dispute against Gods grace, or to conform unto this mystery no
farther than the precepts of mine own reason, or the coexistence of mine own
secular ends and preferments would allow; but I captivated all my thoughts, and
laid down all the weapons of the flesh at Christ's feet, resting only on this
Word, as a treasury of wisdom, and yielding up my whole heart to be in all
things ordered by this rule. It is an horrible boldness in many men to wrest,
and torture, and distinguish the Gospel into all shapes for their own lusts
sake. As we see what shifts men will use, to make the way of life broader than
it is, by looking upon it through their own multiplying glasses, what evasions
and subterfuges sin will find out to escape by, when the letter of the Word
presses sore upon them. O how many sins might men escape, how wonderfully
might they improve the Image of Christ in their hearts; Psalm. 119.24.
if they did with David make the Law their counselor, and weigh every action
which they go about, those especially which they have any motions of
reluctancie in the spirit of their mind unto, Non in statera dolosa
consuetudinum, Aug. contr. epist. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.
sed in recta statera scripturarum, not in the deceitful balance of humane
custom, but in the balance of the Sanctuary, the holy Scriptures: If they
would seriously remember that they must always walk in Christ, Coloss. 2.6.
make him the rule, the way, the end, the Judge, the companion, the assistant in
all their works, that as the members of the body do nothing at all but in the
fellowship of the body, and as they are thereunto applied by the same common
soul which animates them all: so Christian men should do nothing but as parts
of Christ, and as actuated by the same gracious Spirit which is in him. This is
the meaning of our being Christians, and of that consent which in our Baptism
we yield unto the Covenant of Christ, that we will not follow nor be led by
Satan, the world, or the flesh, that is, by that wisdom which is earthly,
sensual, or devilish, but that we will be ordered by that Spirit of
regeneration, the seal of whose Baptism we receive in our sacramental
washing. O then what is become of the Christianity of many men, who forget that
they have been purged? who live as if they had never been baptized into
Christ, who lived as if they had never learned Christ? What a prodigy and
contradiction is it, that that tongue, which even now professed it self to be
Christian, and said Amen to a most clean and holy prayer, should, like those
beasts which Seneca speaks of, which by but turning aside their head to some
other spectacle, do immediately forget the meat which they seemed most
greedily to eat before, break forth presently into blasphemies, oaths, lies,
revilings, clamours, obscenities, which are the very fumes and evidences of
hell in the heart? That those hands which even now were reached forth to
receive the sacred pledges and most dreadful mysteries of salvation, which
were even now employed in distributing alms to the members of Christ, or in
helping to heave and lift up a prayer unto heaven, which seemed like the hands
of Ezekiels living creature to have wings of devotion over them, should
suddenly have their wings melted off, and fall down to covetous and cruel
practices again? that those feet which in the morning carried men into the
Lords Sanctuary, and into the presence of Christ, should the same day turn the
backs of the same men upon the Temple of the Lord, and carry them to stews and
stages, the nurseries of uncleanness? that those eyes which even now seemed to
have been nailed unto heaven, and to have contended with the tongue and the
hand which should more earnestly have presented the prayers of the soul to
God, should almost in the space of their own twinkling, be filled with
sparkles of uncleanness, gazing and glutting themselves upon vain or
adulterous objects? What is this but for men to renounce their Baptism, to
tear off their seal, and dash out their subscription from the covenant of
grace, to deny the Lord that bought them, to repent of their bargain which
they had made for salvation, and really to dishonor that Gospel which they
hypocritically profess? This then is the first honor which we can do unto
the Gospel of Christ, when we set it up in our hearts as a most adequate rule
of all wisdom, and the alone principle of every action.

Secondly, we continue to honor the Gospel of Christ by walking in Obedience
thereunto as our perfect Rule. First, in the Obedience of faith, receiving it,
and leaning upon it, laying hold on the covenant which is therein revealed, as
on the only hope which is set before us: for this is a great acknowledgement
of the glory and praise of God when we trust in him for salvation. Therefore
the Apostle having showed the Glory of Christ above Moses, makes this
principal use of it, Hebr. 3.3-12.
that therefore we should hear his voice, and take heed of an evil and
unbeleeving heart, in departing from him, We, says he, are to the praise of
Gods Glory, Ephesians. 1.12.
who trust in Christ.

Secondly, in Obedience of life and Holiness. When for the honor of the
Gospel we can deny our selves, and dishonor our lusts, and part from all
that we had before as from dung and dross, and express the image of Christ
in our conversations. Ephesians 4.20.22. 1 Ioh. 2.6. 1 Ioh. 4.17. Phil. 2.5. Esaias
58.13. Ioh. 15.8.
This is indeed the true learning of Christ when we show forth his life in
ours, when we walk as he also walked, when as he was so we are in this world,
when the same mind, judgment, affections are in us which were in Christ. Thus
the faithful are said to honor God, when they sanctify his Sabbath, and to
glory him when they bring forth much fruit.

Thirdly, we honor the Gospel of Christ by constancy and continuance in our
faith and obedience thereunto; for standing fast, or persisting immoveably in
our course without sorrow or repentance is an argument of the excellency of
the Gospel. Phil. 1.27.
Walk, says the Apostle, as becomes the Gospel -- that I may hear of your
affairs, that you stand fast in one spirit. Non stant uno loco vitia, sed
mobilia and inter se dissidentia tumultuantur, pellunt invicem, fugantur.
Senec. de Benes. l. 1. c. 16
Lusts ever bring inconstancy with them, and make the soul like weary and
distempered bodies never well in any posture or condition; wicked men fly like
Bees from one flower to another, from one vanity to another, can never find
enough in any to satiate the endless intemperancie of unnatural desires:
only the Gospel, being spiritually apprehended, has treasures enough for the
soul to rest in, and to seek no farther. And therefore falling away from the
truth, power, or purity of the Gospel is said to expose Christ to shame, and
to crucify him again. For as in (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 40. de Baptismo. Romans
2.23, 24.
Baptism when we renounce sin, and betake our selves to Christ, we do as
it were, expose sin unto public infamy, and nail it on the Cross of
Christ: So when we revolt from Christ unto sin again, and in our hearts
turn back unto Egypt, and thrust him from us, we do then put him to shame
again, as if he were either in his power deficient, or unfaithful in those
promises which before we pretended to rely upon. If Israel, as they consulted,
should likewise actually have rebelled against Moses, and returned in body as
well as in heart unto Egypt again, what a scorn would it have wrought in that
proud nation, that their vassals should voluntarily resume their thraldom,
after so many boasts and appearances of deliverance? If a man should relinquish
the service of some noble person, and apply himself unto some sordid matter
for subsistence, would not the mouths of men be quickly open, or their minds
jealous to suspect that however such a man carry an high name, and there be
great expectations from attending on him, yet in truth he is but a dry matter,
whom his own servants do so publicly dishonor? So when any men turn
Apostates from the power and Profession of the Gospel of Christ, presently
wicked men are apt to blaspheme, and to conceive desperate prejudices against
our high and holy calling. If any man make a boast of the Law, and yet break
it, he dishonoreth God the more, for (says the Apostle) The name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written, so then constancy
in Christ's service gives him the glory of an honorable master, and his Law of
a royal law, 1 Pet. 2.15, 16.
puts to silence the ignorance of those foolish men, who lie in wait to
take advantages that they may blaspheme the name of God, 2 Cor. 6.3. 1 Timothy 6 1.
and his doctrine.

Fourthly, the Gospel of Christ is honored by the unity of the Spirit, and
concurrent judgments and affections of men toward it. When all the sincere
prosessors thereof, do unanimously strive together, Phil. 1.27. Iud. v. 3.
and earnestly contend for it; when all that ever have been or are acquainted
therewith do glorify it with their suffrages and subscription, Nemo omnes,
neminem omnes fefellere, it must needs be a glorious Gospel, if all that ever
looked on it do so conclude: Nothing was ever able to deceive all men, neither
did so many ever combine to deceive others. When the Philosophers severally
strove for the precedence of their several sects, and every man, after his
own order, gave the next place unto Plato, it was undoubtedly concluded that
his was the most excellent, because after their own prejudice and personal
respects, it was honored by the equal suffrages of all the rest. How much
more must the Gospel needs be glorious which has the joint attestation of
Angels and all holy men since the world began to honor it withal? Therefore
when the Apostle proves the greatness of this heavenly mystery, he uses a
word which imports the consent of men, (...), without any doubt, or by an
universal confession, Great is the mystery of Godliness. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Does it not much set forth the Glory of a Law, that there should be so much
wisdom, power, equity, majesty, beauty in the face of it, that every true
subject in a Realm should concur in a constant and uniforme love and
obedience to it? Let us therefore express the glory of the Gospel, not only in
our joint confessions, but in our united obedience thereunto, and in our
unanimous zeal and contention for it, in our brotherly affections and
compassions to one another thereby: for the schisms and disaffections of
Christians bring much dishonor upon their holy profession, which in all their
miscariages does ever by occasion of the unreasonablenesse of wicked men suffer
together with them. Therefore the Apostle from the unity of Christ in himself
concludes that such he should be in his members too. Is Christ divided? has
he diverse opinions, or has he the truth of God in respect of persons? such as
he is such should you be likewise, lest by your contentions you seem to make
another Christ, or another Gospel, than that which you have received.

Fifthly, the Gospel of Christ is honored in our studying of it, and digging
after it in our serious and painful enquiries into the mysteries of it. Saint
Paul despised all other knowledge, and shook off every weight that he might
press forward with the more unwearied affections toward so excellent a
treasure. Surely if men had the spirit of the Apostle, or of those blessed
Angels which desire to pry into the Gospel of Christ, they would not
misse-spend so much precious time in frothy and fruitless studies, nor waste
away that lamp of reason in their bosoms, in empty and unnourishing blazes;
but would set more hours apart to look into the patent of their salvation
(which is the book of God) and to acquaint themselves with Christ beforehand,
that when they come into his presence they may have the entertainment of
friends and not of strangers. Men that intend to travail into foreign
kingdoms with any advantage to their parts, or improvement of their
experience, do beforehand season and prepare themselves with the language,
with some topographicall observations of the Country, with some general
notions of the ingenie, manners, forms, civilities, entertainements of the
natives there, do delight to converse with those men who are best learned in
these or the like particulars. Surely we al profess a journey to heaven, a
pilgrimage in this present world, to have our conversation now where we look
to have our everlasting abode with the Lord hereafter. Now in the Gospel of
Christ we have as it were a map, a topographicall delineation of those glorious
mansions which are there prepared for the Church, we have a taste and
description of the manners of that people, we have some rudiments of the
heavenly language, in one word, we have abundantly enough, not only to
prepare us for it, but to inflame all the desires of our soul unto it, even as
exiles or captives desire to return to their native Country. Now then if we
no way regard to study it, or acquaint our selves with it, if we seem to
desire the sight of Christ in heaven, and when we may every day have a most
blessed view of his face in the Glass of his Gospel, we turn away our eyes,
and regard it not, we do as good as proclaim to all the world, that either
our hopes of heaven are very slender, or our care thereof little or none at
all. And this I take for a most undoubted truth, that there is so much of the
knowledge, grace, and spirit of Christ, and through him of the Father in the
holy Scriptures (and those only are the things which make heaven to be the
home and the hope of men) as that whosoever neglects the study of them, and
suffers the Scriptures to lie by him as a sealed book, would be every whit
as unwilling if heaven gates were wide open unto him, to relinquish his portion
in the earth, and to spend his time in the fruition or contemplation of that
glorious Country.

Lastly, we honor the Gospel when in our greatest distresses we make it our
Altar of refuge, our door of escape, the ground of all our hope and comfort,
the only anchor to stay our souls in any spiritual tempest, the only staff to
lean upon in our greatest darkness. What ever other carnal comforts men may
for a time rejoice in, they will all prove but as a fire of sparks, or as a
blaze of thorns, which can yield no solid or abiding light unto the soul.
When sinners in Sion begin once to be afraid, and to be surprised with the
fearfulness of a guilty soul, when the affrighted conscience shall put that
dreadful question in the Prophet to it self, How can I dwell with devouring
fire? Esai. 33.14, 24.
how can I dwell with everlasting burnings? there will no other answer allay
the scorching terror thereof but that in the end of the same Chapter, The
people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. A man may as soon
drink up the water of the sea with spunges, or remove mountains with one of
his fingers, as be able to draine out these close and incorporated sorrows
which together with sin do soake through the whole substance of the soul,
with vain company, worldly employments, or youthful pleasure. All these do
but respite them for a time that they may return the stronger. But if thou will indeed be comforted, sue out thy pardon, fly to the court of mercy which
is erected in the Gospel; This was our Saviors argument to the man that was
sick of the Palsy, Mat. 9.2.
Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. There is no worldly
affliction goes closer to the life of a man than sickness, and yet as in the
midst of laughter the heart of a wicked man is sorrowful, because it is still
under the guilt of sin, so in the midst of pain and sorrow the heart of a
godly man may be cheerful, because his sins are forgiven.

To conclude this point, we may for our better encouragement in so necessary a
duty lay together these considerations: First, in point of honor we should
learn to walk as becomes the Gospel, for the Gospel is a Christians
Glory, and therefore ought to be preserved in his heart, as his chiefest
privilege. The Spirit of God will not endure to have holy things profaned as
if they were common or unclean. Belshazzer converted the consecrated vessels
of the Temple into instruments of luxury and intemperance; but the Lord
tempered his wine with dregs, and made them prove unto him as cups of
trembling and astonishment. Herod polluted the sepulchers of the Saints with a
sacrilegious search of treasures presumed to have been there hidden, Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 16. ca. 11. 2 Mac. 3.5.
and God made fire rise out of the earth to devour the over-busie searchers.
Antiochus ransacked the Temple of the Lord; Heliodorus emptied the treasures of
their consecrated moneys; Pompey defiled the Sabbath and the Sanctuary;
Crassus robbed the house of God of ten thousand talents. Tacit. Hist lib. 5.
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 12. cap. 13.
But inquire into the event of these insolences, and we shall find that true
then, of which latter ages have given many examples, and are still likely to
give more, that stolen bread has gravel in it to choke those that devour
it, that ruin is ever the child of sacrilege, that mischief sets a period
to the lives and designs of profane men. Now then if the Lord were thus
jealous for the types of his Gospel, how, think we, can he endure to see the
Gospel it self dishonored by an unsuteable profession, or the blood of the
Covenant trampled under foot, as if it were a common or unclean thing? In the
contempt of the Gospel there is more dishonor done unto every person of the
blessed Trinity, than can be by any other sin. An undervaluing of the Fathers
wisdom, that great mystery and counsel of redemption which was hidden from
former ages: and what an indignity is it unto him, for a man to shut out the
light of the sun, that so he may enjoy that pitiful benefit of darkness,
to gaze upon the false glistering of rotten wood, or of earthly slime, the
deceit whereof would be by the true light discovered? And undervaluing of his
wonderful love, as if he had put himself unto a needless compassion, and
might have kept it still in his own bosom. A scorn unto the Son of God,
when we suffer him to stand at our doors with his locks wet with the dew of
heaven, to put his finger into the hole of the lock, as if he desired to
steal an entrance upon the soul; to empty, to humble, to deny himself, to
suffer the wrongs of men, and the wrath of God, and after all this to have that
precious blood which was squeezed out with such woeful agonies, counted no
other than the blood of a common malefactor, nor that sacred body which was
thus broken, discerned from the bodies of the thieves which were crucified with
him. An indignity beyond all apprehension to the spirit of Grace, when we
suffer him to wait daily at our Bethesda, our houses of mercy, and all in
vain, to spend his sacred breath in the ministry of reconciliation, in
doubling and redoubling his requests unto our souls, that we would be
contented to be saved, and we shall harden our hearts, and stop our ears, and
set up the pride and stoutnesse of our own reasonings, till we do even
weary him and chide him away from us. Now this is a certain rule, God will
not lose any honor by men's sins; if they refuse to give him the glory of his
mercy, he will show the glory of his Power and justice, in treading down the
proud enemies of Christ under his feet. As they that honor him shall be
honored; so they who cast any disgrace upon his truth and covenant, shall be
sure to meet with shame and dishonor at the last.

Secondly, to avoid Scandal. The Gospel is the light of a nation: And sins
in the light as they are committed with more impudence, so likewise with more
offense. An offense or scandal tending unto sin in misguiding the weak, in
heartening and confirming the obdurate, in opening the mouths of adversaries
to revile our holy profession; and a scandal tending unto sorrow in wounding
the hearts of the godly, and vexing their righteous spirits with a filthy
conversation.

Thirdly, we should learn to walk as becomes the Gospel, even in respect
to the state, for the Gospel is the foundation of true peace and tranquillity
in a commonweal, and those who show forth the power thereof are, as it were,
Lions about the Throne of their King. By righteousness the Throne is
established, but sin is a reproach unto any people. Prove. 16.12.20.28.25.5.
One Joseph in Egypt is a storehouse to all the kingdom; one Elisha an army
of chariots and of horsemen unto Israel; one Moses a fence to keep out an
^oundation of wrath which was breaking in upon the people; one Paul an haven,
an anchor, a deliverance to all that were in the ship with him. And now Si
stellae cadunt venti sequentur: Arist. Prob. sect. 2^. qu. 25.
If the stars fall we must needs look for tempests to ensue, if the salt be
infatuated we cannot look that any thing should be long preserved. If
Christians live as if they had no Gospel, or as if they had another Gospel,
what can we expect but that God should either plague us, or forsake us, either
send his judgments, or curse his blessings?

Lastly, the Gospel makes sin more filthy, if it do not purge it; as a
taper in the hand of a Ghost makes him seem more ghastly than he was before.
Sweet ointment causes rank and strong bodies to smell worse than they did
before. Qui hircos redolent, foedius olent cum se unguea taverint. Arist. Prob.
Heb. 6.4-7, Heb. 10.26.
So the sweet savor of the Gospel makes the sins of men more noisome and
odious in the nostrils of the Almighty. And therefore we see what a fearful
doom the Apostle pronounces against those, who having tasted of the good
Spirit of God, and been illightened, and in some sort affected with his grace
do yet afterward^ fall away, even an impossibility of repentance or
renovation. From which place, perversely wrested, though the Novatians of old
did gather a desperate and uncomfortable conclusion, Vid. Sixth. Senens.
biblioth. l. 7. Melch. Can. loc. Theolog. l. 2. c. 10. Greg Tholos. de Rep.
lib. 12. ca. 7.
that sin committed after regeneration was absolutely unpardonable (to avoid
the danger of which damnable and damning doctrine, some have boldly questioned
both the Author and authenticalnesse of that Epistle) yet, all these inferences
being denied, we learn from thence this plain observation, That precedent
Illumination from the Gospel of Christ, does tend much to the aggravation of
those sins which are committed against it. And therefore in all these
considerations we should labor to walk worthy of so glorious a Gospel, and of
so great a salvation.

Thus have we at large spoken of the Rod of Christ's strength, as it is Insigne
regium, or Sceptrum majestatis, an Ensign and Rod of Majesty: we are now to
speak a little of it as it is Pedum pastorale, an episcopal Rod, which
denotes much heedfulnesse and tender care. This is the Precept which the
Apostle gives unto the Pastors of the Church that they should (...), Take
special heed to all the flock over which the holy Ghost had made them
overseers. Act. 20.28.
And the Apostle again reckons Vigilancie or care over the flock amongst
the principal characters of a bishop: 1 Timothy 3.2.
and he professes of himself, that there did daily lie upon him (...), The
Care of all the Churches. And this consideration affords us another note out
of the words, 2 Cor. 11.28.
namely, That Christ in the ministry of his Gospel and dispensation of his
spirit, is full of care and tenderness toward his Church. This Christ makes
one maine point of opposition between himself and hirelings, that these Care
not for the flock, Ioh. 10.12, 13. Ioh. 17.11, 12.
but suffer the Woolfe to come, and to scatter them while they fly away;
whereas he keeps them, that none may be lost, and prays unto the Father
to keep them through his own name. The Lord committed the Church unto Christ
as their Head, gave them into his hands, not as an ordinary gift, wherein he
did relinquish his own interest in them or care of them (for he cares for
them still) but as a blessed depositum entrusted them with him, 1 Pet. 5.7.
as the choicest of his Jewels, as the most precious casket amongst all the
treasures of the Creation, Mal. 3.17.
that he should polish, preserve, present them faultlesse, and without spot
before the presence of his glory at the last day. Iud. v. 24.
And for this purpose he gave Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
him a Commandment of the greatest care and tenderness that ever the world
knew, that he should lay down his life for his sheep, Ioh. 10.18. Ioh 6 39.
Heb. 2.17.3.2.
and should lose nothing of all that was given him, but should raise it up at
the last day. So that now want of care or compassion of Christ toward his
Church, would be an argument of unfaithfulness; If he had not been a merciful
high priest, neither could he have been faithful to him that appointed him,
for he was appointed to be merciful, and was by the Spirit of God filled with
most tender affections, and qualified with an heart fuller of compassion than
the sea is of waters, that he might commiserate the distresses of his people,
and take care of their salvations.

Notably does this Care of Christ show it self: First, in the apportioning and
measuring forth to every o^e his due dimensum, and in the midst of those
infinite occasions and exigencies of his several members in providing such
particular passages of his Word as may be thereunto most exactly suitable; for
this shows that his Care reaches unto particular men. 2 Timothy 2.15.
It is the duty of a faithful bishop, (...), Iud. v. 22, 23.
to make such a difference between men, and so to divide or distribute the
word aright, as that every one may have the portion which is due unto him: some
are but Lambs in Christ's flock, young, tender, weak, easily offended or
affrighted; others sheep, grown up to more strength and maturity: some in his
garner are but Cummin seed, Ioh 20.15, 16.
others Fitches, and some harder corn, some can but bear a little Rod, others
a greater staff or flaile, Esai. 28.27, 28.
and some the pressure of a Cart wheel, that which does but cleanse some would
batter and break others into pieces: some are great with young, in the pangs
of a loaded conscience, in the travail under some sore affliction, Esai. 40.11.
or in the throws of a bitter repentance, as it were in fits of breeding or
new forming of Christ in their soul: and these he leads with a gentle hand.
Others are, as it were, newborn, past their pains, but yet very tender,
weak, and fearful; and these he gathers with his arm, and carries in his
bosom, shows them that his care does not only reach unto the least of his
kingdom, but that his compassions are most enlarged to those that are too
weak to help themselves, Esai. 66.11.
that he has breasts of consolation to satisfy and delight with abundance the
smallest infant of his kingdom. Some are brokenhearted, and those he binds;
some are captives, Esai. 61.1, 2, 3.
to those he proclaims liberty; some are mourners in Sion, and for them he
has beauty, and oil of joy, and garments of praise* some are bruized reeds,
whom every curse or commination is able to crush, and some are smoking flax,
whom every temptation is able to discourage, and yet even these does he so
carefully tend, and furnish with such proportionable supplies of his Spirit of
grace, as makes that seed and sparkle of holiness, which he began in them,
get up above all their own fears, or their enemies machinations, Esai. 42.3.
Mat. 12.20.
and grow from a judgment of truth, and sincerity (as it is called by the
Prophet) unto a judgment of victory and perfection, as it is turned by the
Evangelist. In one word, some are strong and others are weak; the strong he
feeds, the weak he cures, the strong he confirms, the weak he
restores, he has trials for the strong to exercise their graces, and he
has cordials for the weak to strengthen theirs. According unto the several
estates, and unto the secret demands of each members condition; so does the
Care of Christ severally show it self toward the same in his Word: there is
provision for any want, medicine for any disease, comforts for any distress,
promises for any faith, answers to any doubt, directions in any difficulty,
weapons against any temptation, preservatives against any sin, restoratives
against lapse; garments to cover my nakedness, meat to satisfy my hunger,
physic to cure my diseases, armor to protect my person* a treasure to
provide for my posterity. If I am rich, I have there the wisdom of God to
instruct me; and if I am poor, I have there the obligations of God to enrich
me. If I am honorable, I have there the sight of my sins to make me vile; and
rules of moderation to make me humble: If I am of low degree, I have there the
Communion and consanguinitie of Christ, the participation of the divine nature,
the adoption of God the Father to make me noble. If I am learned, I have there
a law of charity to order it unto edification, and if I am unlearned, I have
there a Spirit which searches the deep things of God, which can give wisdom
unto the simple, which can reveal secrets unto babes, which can command light
to shine out of darkness, which can give the light of the knowledge of the
glory, fullness, and love of God in the face of Jesus Christ, which can make
me, though ignorant of all other things, to learn Christ, in whom there is
more wisdom, more various and admirable curiosity, more filling and
plentiful satisfaction, more proportion to the boundless desires of a soul
once rectified, more fruit and salvation (which should be the end of every
Christian man's learning) than in all other knowledge which either past or
present ages can afford. In one word, every where and in all things I am there
taught how to want, and how to abound, and how to do all things through Christ
that strengthens me. A Christian can be set in no estate, wherein the abundant
Care of Christ over him is not in the Gospel wonderfully magnified. And
commonly in the greatest straits he shows the greatest care, as waters run
strongest in the narrowest passages: when we walk in darkness and have no
light, when we seek water and there is none, and our tongue fails for
thirst, then is his fittest time to help us, and then is our fittest time to
stay upon him. Israel were deliverd by miracles of mercy from their Egyptian
bondage, and in the wilderness conducted by a miraculous presence, and fed
with Angels food. Isaak was upon the Altar, and then in the mount was the Lord
seen, and his mercy stepped in between the knife and the sacrifice. Jacob in
great fear of his brother Esau, Mark 16.7. (...).
and then comforted by prevailing with an Angel which was stronger than Esau.
Peter in sorest distress for denying Christ, and he the first man to whom
Christ sent news of his Resurrection. Paul in the ship visited by an Angel.
Peter in prison delivered by an Angel. The distressed woman at Christ's
Sepulcher comforted by an Angel. Such as the extremities of the Saints are,
such is Christ's care for their deliverances.

And this Care is further commended, that it proceeds solely from the grace
and compassion of Christ: there is no affection naturally in us to desire it,
Ezekiel. 16.6.
there is no virtue in us to deserve it: when we were in our blood, well
pleased with our own pollution, he doubled his goodness, and used a kind of
violence and importunity of mercy to make us live, when we did not seek after
him, when we did not so much as ask whether he were fit to be sought, when
we were aliens from his Covenant, and strangers to his name, he even then
multiplied his invitations unto us, I said, behold me, behold me, Esaias 65.1.
unto a people that were not called by my name. When we were weak, full of
impotencie; when we were sinners, full of antipathy; when we were enemies,
full of obstinacy and rebellion; Romans 5.6.8.10.
when we cared not for him, but turned our backs, and stopped our ears, and
suffered him to throw away in vain so many Sermons, so many Sacraments, so
many mercies, so many afflictions upon us; when we cared not for our selves, no
man repented, or said, what have I done; even then did he magnify his
compassion toward us; he cared for us, when we neglected our selves, and
despised him; he bestowed his mercy not only upon the unthankful, but upon
the injurious.

But then a little compassion is enough for those that had deserved none, for
those that had provoked scorn and displeasure against themselves: but herein
is the care and tenderness of Christ abundantly magnified, that it has in it
all the ingredients of a most sovereign mercy, that nothing more could have
been done, Esaias 5.4.
than he has done for us. First, Hos. 11.8. Ier. 31.20. Ephesians. 3.19. Esaias.
55.9. Ier. 29.11.
for the foundation and original of al mercy, there is in him an overflowing of
love, without stint or measure, a turning of heart, a rouling and sounding of
bowels, a love which surpasses all knowledge, which is a^ much beyond the
thoughts or comprehensions, as it is above the merits of men.

Secondly, there is a study and inquisitivenesse how to do good, a debating
within himself, a consulting and projecting how to show mercy, an arguing, as
it were, of his grace with man's sin, and his own severitie; How shall I give
thee up Ephraim? Hos. 11.8. Esaias 1.10.
How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I
set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. True it is, thou have been unto me as the Rulers of Sodom, and as
the people of Gomorrah: But shall I be unto thee, as I have been unto them? Am
I not God, and not man? shall I change my Covenant, because thou have
multiplied thy backslidings? The Lord uses such humane expressions of his
proceedings with men, as if their sins had put him to a stand, and brought
him to difficulties in showing mercy. I said, how shall I put thee amongst the
children, Ier. 3.19.
and give thee a pleasant Land? etc. Thy case is very desperate, and thou have
stopped up the courses of my mercy toward thy self; how then shall I make
good my resolutions of compassion toward those that reject and nullify it to
themselves? surely there is no way but one, to overruled the hearts of
obstinate sinners, that they may not turn away any more. Thou shall call me,
my Father, that is, I will put filial affections, awful thoughts, constant
resolutions into thy heart, and thou shall not turn away from me. I will melt
them and try them, says the Lord, Ier. 9.7.
for how shall I do for the daughter of my people? The Lord sets himself
to study and contrive mercy for his people, that as they set up their sins,
as it were, in pride to pose his Covenant; so he gathers together his
thoughts of mercy, as it were, to conquer their sins.

Thirdly, there is constancy and continuance in this his Care: Lament. 3.22,
23.
His mercy endures, his compassions fail not, but are renewed every morning.
And therefore the mercies of David, that is, of Christ, for so he is called, or
the mercies of the Covenant made with David, Act. 13.34.
are called Sure mercies, they have a foundation, the everlasting love and
counsel of God upon which they are built, 2 Timothy 2.19. Psalm. 89.2. Mal. 3.6.
Esaias 64.5. Hebr. 13.8.
they have many seals by which they are confirmed, the faithfulness, the
immutabilitie, and the oath of God: If there were not continuance in his
mercies, if he were not the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever in his
truth and fidelity to his Church; if he should change and turn from us, as
often as we forsake him, if he should leave us in the hand of our own counsel,
and not afford us such daily supplies of his Spirit, as might support us
against the ruinous disposition of our own nature, we should be children of
wrath every day anew. But herein does the abundant care of Christ in the
Gospel declare it self unto us, that though we are worms in our selves, Esaias
41.10-14.
full of weakness, and of earthly affections, yet God has a right hand of
righteousness, which can uphold us; that though we are bent to backsliding,
yet he is God and not man, unchangeable in his Covenant with the Persons,
almighty in his power and mercy toward the sins of men, both to cover them
with his righteousness, and to cure them by his Spirit, both to forgive for
the time past, Hos. 11.7-11.
and to heal and prevent backslidings for the time to come.

Fourthly, that he might be fit for so mean and humble a service, there was a
lessening and emptying of himself; he was contented to be subject to his own
Law, Phil. 2.7, 8.
to be the child of his own creature, to take upon himself not the
similitude only, Gal. 4.5.
but the infirmities of sinful flesh, to descend from his throne, and to put
on rags, Romans 8.3.
in one word, to become poor for us, that we through his poverty might be
made rich. Amongst men, 2 Cor. 8.9.
many will be willing to show so much mercy as will consist with their state
and greatness, and may tend to beget a further distance, and to magnify their
height and honor in the minds of men; but when it comes to this exigent,
that a man must debase himself to do good unto another, that his compassion
will be to a miserable man no benefit, except he suffer ignominy, and undergo
a servile condition for him, and do, as it were, change habits with the man
whom he pities; what region of the earth will afford a man who will freely make
his own honor to be the price of his brothers redemption? yet this is the
manner of Christ's Care for us, who though he were the Lord of Glory, the
brightness of his Fathers Majesty, and the express Image of his Person, did
yet humble himself to endure shame, and the contradiction of sinners, that he
might be the Author and finisher of our faith.

Fifthly, There was not only an humbling or metaphorical emptying of
himself, in that he made himself of no reputation; but there was likewise a
real and proper emptying of himself, he therein testified his wonderful Care
of the businesses of man, that for them he put himself to the greatest
expense, and to the exhausting of a richer treasure, than any either heaven or
earth could afford besides: ye were not redeemed, says the Apostle, with
corruptible things, as silver and gold from your vain conversation, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot:
That which no man will bestow upon himself, and that which was in nature, and
might justly in love have been nearest to Christ himself, even the soul in
his body, and the blood in his veins, he was contented to make a sacrifice for
them, who powered it out as the blood of a malefactor.

Sixthly, besides this great price which he paid to his Father for us, he has
opened another treasure of his Grace and Spirit, out of which he affords us
daily supplies, and puts into our hands, as it were, an heavenly stock, for
the better negotiating and improvement of our salvation. He sets up his
Spirit in our hearts, thereby conversing and communing with us, teaching us the
trade of the citizens of heaven, and of laying up treasures there, where our
final abode must be, of having our conversation and commerce with innumerable
companies of Angels, and with the spirits of just men made perfect, and withal
that general assembly or Church of the firstborn, which is enrolled in
heaven.

Lastly, to all this he adds Preparations and provisions for the future for
us, 1 Cor. 2.9. Phil. 4.19.
he does not only give, but he prepares things for those that love him, and
what ever is wanting now, he will make it up unto us in the riches of his
glory. It was for our expediencie that he left the Church on earth (in regard
of his carnal presence) and went unto his Father again: He was not beholden
to change o^ place for his own glory, for his heaven was within him as a
fountain, and indeed it is his presence which makes heaven to be the place of
glory; therefore Saint Paul desired to depart, and to be with Christ (noting
that it is not heaven, but Christ's presence which is the glory of the Saints:)
Therefore, I say, it was for us, Phil ^ 23. John 7^9. John 1^.7.
that he went to heaven again; for their sakes, says he, I sanctify my
self; it is expedient for you that I go away. Exp^dient, to seal and secure
our full and final redemption unto us; for as the Leviticall Priest entered not
into the holiest of all without blood, so neither did Christ into heaven
without making satisfaction, he first obtained eternal redemption for us,
Hebr. 9.12.
and then he entered into the holy place, and expedient to prepare a place for
us, that the glory which is given to him, he may give unto us, that being
raised up together, John 14 2, 3.
we may likewise sit together with him in heavenly places; for when the head is
crowned, John. 17.22.
the whole body is invested with royal honor: He by the virtue of his
Ascension opened the kingdom of heaven for all believers; Ephesians. 2.6.
even the Fathers before Christ entered not in without respect unto that
consummate redemption which he was in the fullness of time to accomplish for
his Church. As a man may be admitted into an actual possession of land, only
in the virtue of covenants, and under the intuition of a payment to be
afterward performed. Thus we see in how many things the abundant Care of
Christ does show it self toward the Church.

And as there are therein all the particulars of a tender care, so by the
Gospel likewise, do all the fruits and benefits thereof redound unto the
faithful. First, in the Gospel he Psalm. 23 5. Mica 7.13.15. Ezekiel. 34.14, 23.
Matthew. 15.26. Phil. 4.12. Heb 6.12. Ioh. 15.4.
feeds and strengthens them, even in the presence of their enemies he
prepares them a table, and feeds them with his rod, and according to their
coming out of Egypt he shows unto them mavelous things. And therefore our
Savior calls his Gospel, The childrens bread. It is that which quickneth,
which strengthens them, which makes them fruitful in spiritual works.

Secondly, He upholdeth them from fainting; if their strength at any time
fail, he leads them gently* and teaches them to go. Genesis 33.14. John
10.3. Psalm. 78.52. Esaias 63.13. Deuteronomy. 1.31. Esaias 40.11. Esaias 41.13. Hos 11 3, 4.
Deuteronomy 32.11, 12.
As Jacob led on his cattle and his children softly, according as they were
able to endure: so Christ does lead out his flock, and hold his children by
the hand, and teach them to go, and draws them with the cords of a man, that
is, with meek and gentle institution, such as men use toward their children,
and not to their beasts, and with bands of love. As an Eagle sluttereth over
her young, and spreads abroad her wings, and takes them and bears them on
her wings: so does the Lord in his Gospel sweetly lead on and institute the
faithful unto strength and salvation: he deals with them as a compassionate
nurse with a tender infant, condescendeth to their strength and capacity; when
we stumble, he keeps us; when we fall he raises us; when we faint, he
bears us in his arms; when we grow weary of well-doing, the Gospel is full
of encouragements to hearten us, full of spirit to revive us, full of promises
to establish us, full of beauty to entice us; when we seem to be in a
wilderness, a maze, where there is no issue, Hos. 2.14, 15.
nor view of deliverance, even there he opens a door of hope, and allureth,
and speaks comfortably unto us.

Hos. 14.4.
Thirdly, he heals our diseases, our corruptions, our backslidings; easily
are the best of us misled out of the right way, drawn and enticed away by our
own lusts, driven away by the temptations of Satan, the frowns or follies of
the world, possessed with carnal prejudices against the ways of God, as if they
were John 6.60. Matthew. 25.24.
grievous, Job 21.1^ 15. Mal 3.14, 15.
unprofitable, and Ezekiel. 18.25.
unequal ways; apt to take every pretense to flinch away, and steal from the
eye of God; apt to Ier. 11.10. Act. 7.39. Psalm 14.3.
turn aside into every diverticle which a carnal reason, and a crooked heart
can frame unto it self; for a corrupt heart is like Animalia quaedam, ne
invenir^ possint, vestigia sua circa cubile ipsum consun^um. Senec. epist. 68.
(...). Clem* Alex.
a wild beast, that loves confusa vestigia, to have intricacies and windings
in his holes, it cannot away with strait paths, Gal. 1 7. 2 Pet. 3.16.
but loves to wrie and pervert the ^ule of life. In these cases it is the care
and office of Christ to Ezekiel. 34 16. Gal 8.1. Ezekiel. 47.12.
gather that which was scattered, to seek that which was lost, to bring again
that which was driven away, to bind up that which was broken, to strengthen
that which was sick, and to restore by his Spirit of meekness those which are
overtaken with a fault; his Gospel is like the trees of the Sanctuary, not for
meat only, but for medicine too.

Fourthly, as he heals our diseases, and gives us strength, so in the mids
of enemies and dangers he removes our fears, and gives us comfort and
refreshment. Ezekiel. 34 25.
I will make with them, says he, a Covenant of peace, and I will cause evil
beasts to cease out of the Land, and they shall dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods. Mica 5.5.
When the Assyrian shall be in our Land, and shall tread in our Palaces, then
shall he raise up seven shepherds, and eight principal men, namely, the
Ministers of his Gospel, in abundance, to establish the hearts of his people
against all dangers. This is that Scultet exercit. Evang. l. 1. cap. 4.
Shilo who should bring tranquillity and peace into the Church, even when the
Scepter should depart from Judah. When the heart is full of doubts and
distresses, disquieted with the fear of Gods displeasure, accused by the Law,
pursued by the adversary, and condemned by it self; then does he still the
raging of the sea, and command the evil spirit to be dumb; then Revel. 7.17.
does he wipe away tears from the conscience, and refresh it with living
waters, even with the sweet communion of his Spirit, and with the abundance of
his graces.

Lastly, he keeps a continual watch over us by his spiritual presence and
protection: As Genesis 31.40.
Jacob testified his great care for the good of Laban, that the drought
consumed him by day, and the frost by night, and that sleep departed from his
eyes: Psalm. 121.4.
so does the Lord commend his care toward the Church, in that he is the keeper
or the watchman of Israel, Exodus 33.14.
which does neither slumber nor sleep. His presence is with his people to
guide them in their pilgrimage, and unto which they have daily recourse for
comfort and establishment. In that great tempest when Christ was asleep in the
ship, his Disciples awaked him and expostulated with him, Master, Mark 4.38.40.
carest thou not that we perish? But when he had rebuked the wind and the sea,
he then rebuked them likewise, he had another storm of fear and unbeleefe
to calm in their hearts, who could not see him in his providence watching over
them, when his body slept.

The grounds of this great Care, which Christ in his Gospel testifies toward
his Church, are these: First, He is our kinsman, Deuteronomy. 25 5. Ruth 3.9.4 5.
Levit. 25.25.
there is affinity in blood, and therefore a natural care and tenderness in
affection: we know amongst the Jews when a woman had buried an husband
without fruit of his body, the next of the kindred was to take care of her, and
to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance: And if any man had waxen
poor, and sold any of his possession, the nearest kinsman was to have the
first option in the recovery and redemption of it: And from hence the Apostle
argues to prove the mercifulness and fidelity of Christ, in sanctifying or
bringing many sons unto glory (for I take those phrases to be in that place
equivalent) because he was not ashamed to call us brethren, Heb. 2.11.17.
but was made in all things like unto us. And we may observe that in the
Scripture he has almost all the relations of consanguinitie, to note that his
care is universal and of all sorts. He is a Father, Behold, I and the children
which thou have given me: Esaias 8 18.
and the care of a father is to govern, to nourish, to instruct, to lay up for
his children. He is as a mother, Esaias 49.15. Esaias ^0.11. Matthew. 23.37. Esaias
66.11. Ioh 20.17. Prove. 17.17. Romans 7 4. Ephesians. 5.25.32.
he carries his young ones in his bosom, he gathers them as a hen her
chickens, he milketh unto them out of the breasts of consolation. And thus he
has a care of indulgence and compassion. He is a Brother, Go to my brethren
and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and unto my God,
and your God. And the care of a brother is to counsel, advise, and comfort. A
brother is borne for adversity. Lastly, he is a Husband; ye are married to
him who is raised from the dead, and that word compriseth all care, to love, to
cherish, to instruct, to maintain, to protect, to compassionate, to adorn, to
communicate both his secrets and himself. A father may maintain his child,
but he cannot suckle it; a mother may give it a breast, but she cannot
ordinarily provide it a portion; a brother can give counsel, but he cannot
give himself unto his brother: A husband may comfort his wife, but it becomes
him not to correct her. There is no degree of neerenesse that has power enough
to answer all the offices of love, but in one point or other it will be
defective: Therefore Christ is set forth unto us under all relations of blood
and unity; to note that there can no case or condition of the Church be
supposed, wherein the care of Christ shall be impotent or deficient toward it,
wherein he is not able to correct, to nourish, to instruct, to counsel, to
comfort, to provide for it.

Secondly, He is our Companion in sufferings, he himself suffered and was
tempted, and this the Apostle makes a maine ground of his care toward us,
Heb. 4.15.
and of our confidence in him: we have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with a feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 2.17.
but was in all points tempted as we are, only without sin; Hebr. 5.2.
and therefore he is able to succor those that are tempted, and to take
compassion on those that are out of the way, because he was compassed with such
infirmities, as were much less grievous than the weight of sin.

Thirdly, He is our Head, and so is One with us in a nearer relation than that
of affinity, in a relation of Unity, for he and his members make but one
Christ. And being head, he is the seat of Care, and the fountain of
influences into the rest of the body; all the wisdom, spirits, senses, which
are in the head, are there placed as in a Watchtower, or Councell-chamber, to
consult and provide for the good of the whole; the eye sees, the ear hears,
the tongue speaks, the fancy works, the memory retains for the welfare
of the other members, 1 Cor. 12.25.
and they have all the same care one for another.

Fourthly, He is our Advocate, and Mediator, he is the only practicer in the
court of heaven, 1 John 2.2.
and therefore he must needs be full of the businesses of his Church: It is his
office to dispatch the affairs of those that come unto him, and crave his
favor and intercession to debate their causes, and he is both faithful and
merciful in his place, Hebr. 3.2.
and besides, furnished with such an unmeasurable unction of Spirit, and vast
abilities to transact all the businesses of his Church, that whosoever comes
unto him for his counsel and intercession, John 6.37.
he will in no wise cast them out, or refuse their cause: And this is one
great assurance we may take comfort in, that be our matters never so foul and
unexcusable in themselves, yet the very entertaining him of our counsel, and
the leaning upon his wisdom, power, fidelity, and mercy to expedite our
businesses, to compassionate our estate, and to rescue us from our own
demerits, does, as it were, alter the property of the cause, and produce a
clean contrary issue to that which the evidence of the thing in trial would
of it self have created. And as we may observe that men of extraordinary
abilities in the Law, delight to wrestle with some difficult business, and to
show their learning in clearing matters of greatest intricacie, and perplexity
before; so does Christ esteem himself most honored, and the virtue and
wisdom of his Cross magnified, when in cases of sorest extremity, of most
hideous guilt, of most black and uncomfortable darkness of soul, which pose
not only the presumptions, but the hope, faith, conjectures, thoughts,
contrivances which the hearts of men can even in wishes make to themselves for
mercy, they do yet trust him whose thoughts are infinitely above their
thoughts, Esaias 55.8. Esaias 50.10.
and whose ways above their ways; who is there among you that fears the
Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has
no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: When
the soul can go unto Christ with such complaints and acknowledgements as
these; Lord, when I examine my cause by mine own conscience and judgment of
it, I cannot but give it over as utterly desperate, and beyond cure, my bones
are dried, my hope is cut off, I am utterly lost, my sins, and my sorrows are
so heavy that they have broken my spirit all to pieces, and there is no sound
part in me: But Lord, I believe that thou know a way to make dead bones
live, that thy thoughts and ways are above mine, Ezekiel. 37.3. Ier. 29.11.
Ephesians. 3.8.19.
that thou know thine own thoughts of peace and mercy, though I cannot
comprehend them, that thy riches are unsearchable, that thy love is above
humane knowledge, that thy peace passes all created understandings, that
though I am the greatest of all sinners, and feel enough in my self, 1 Timothy
1.16.
to sink me as low as Judas into hell, yet thou have not left me without
patterns of all long-suffering, of thy royal power in enduring, and in
forgiving sins. And now Lord, though thou afford me no light, though thou
beset me with terrors, though thou make me to possess the sins of my youth,
yet I still desire to fear thy name, to walk in thy way, to wait upon thy
counsel, I know there is not in men or Angels so much wisdom, compassion, or
fidelity as in thee, and therefore if I must perish, I will perish at thy feet,
I will starve under thy table, I will be turned away and rejected by thee, who
have promised to cast away none that come unto thee; I have tried all ways,
and I here resolve to rest, and to look no further, thou that have kept such a
sinner as I am out of hell thus long, can by the same power keep me out for
ever; upon thy wisdom and compassion (who can make dried bones to flourish
like an herb, and broken bones to rejoice and sing) I cast the whole weight of
my guilty spirit, Esaias 66 14. Psalm. 51.8. 1 Pet. 5.7.
into thy bosom I empty all the fears, cares and requests of my distracted
and sinking soul: I say, when a man can thus power out himself unto Christ,
he esteems the price and power of his blood most highly honored, when men
believe in him against reason and above hope, and beyond the experience, or
apprehensions they have of mercy; for Christ loves to show the greatness of
his skill in the salvation of a Manasse, a Mary Magdalen, a crucified Thief, a
persecutour and injurious blasphemer, in giving life unto them that nailed him
to his Cross; the more desperate the disease, the more honorable the cure.

Ioh. 17.6.
Fifthly, He is our Purchaser, our Proprietary, we belong unto him by grant
from the Father, Thine they were, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and thou gave them unto me; and by payment from him unto the Father, ye are
bought with a price. There is no good that concerns the Church that he has
not fully paid for with his own precious blood: And Christ will not die in
vain, he will take order for the accomplishing of that redemption which
himself has merited. And this is the greatest argument of his care and
fidelity, that he is not as a servant, but as a Lord, and his care is over His
own house. Hebr. 3.6.
An ordinary advocate is faithful only ratione officii, because the duty of
his office requires it; but the businesses which he manageth, come not close
unto his heart, because he has no personal interest in them: but Christ is
faithful, not as Moses, or a servant only, but ratione Dominii, as Lord in
his own house; so that the affairs of the Church concern him in as near a
right, as they concern the Church her self, so that in his office of
intercession he pleads his own causes with his Father, and in the
miscarriages of them, himself should lose that which was infinitely more
precious than any thing in the world besides, even the price and merit of his
own blood. These are the grounds of the great care of Christ toward his
people.

And from hence we should learn faith and dependence on Christ in all our
necessities, because we are under the protection and provision of him who
cares for us, and is able to help us. 2 Timothy 1.12.
A right judgment of God in Christ, and in his Gospel of salvation, will
wonderfully strengthen the faith of men. Paul was not ashamed of persecutions,
because he knew whom he had believed, he doubted neither of his care or power,
and therefore he committed the keeping of his soul unto him against the last
day, and therefore when all forsook him, he stood to the truth, 2 Timothy 4.16,
17, 18.
because the Lord forsook him not. The reason why men trust in themselves, or
their friends, is, because they are assured of their care and good will to
help them: But if men did compare the affections of Christ to other succors,
they would rather choose to build their hopes and assurances on him. This
consideration of the care and the power of God, made the three Children at a
point against the edict of an idolatrous King, Our God is able to deliver us,
Dan. 3.16, 17. Hebr. 11.17-19. Romans 4.20, 21.
and he will deliver us: And this made Abraham at a point to offer his son
without staggering, because he rested upon the promise and the power of God,
who was able to raise him from the dead, from whence, in a sort, he had
received him before, namely, from a dead body, and from a barren womb. Ier.
17.5-8.
And this is the ground of all diffidence that men consider not the power and
the care of God toward them, but conceive of him as if he had forgotten to be
gracious, as if he had cast them out of his sight, as if he had given over his
thoughts of them, and that makes them fear second causes, and seek unto
things which cannot profit. And therefore the Lord suffers second causes to
go cross, to fail and disappoint a man, because he loves to be glorified by
our dependence on his all-sufficiencie and protection. He suffers friends to
fail, to be off and on, promises to be uncertain, assurances to vanish,
projections and frames of businesses to be shattered, that men may know how to
trust him; for man being impotent in himself, must needs have something
without himself to subsist upon. Now when a man finds the creatures to be
deceitful, and second causes vain, Hebr. 11.6. Psalm. 73.^8. 1 Pet. 5.7.
and considers that God is I Am, a most certain rewarder of those that
diligently seek him, then the soul finds it good to draw near to God, to
live under his fidelity, and to cast all its care on him, because he cares
for it.

And indeed a right judgment of God will help us to employ our faith in any
condition. In wealth men are apt to trust in their abundance, to stand upon
their mountain, and to say, I shall never be moved. But now in this estate, if
a man conceive aright of God, that it is he who gives strength to be rich, and
who gives riches strength to do us good, that he can blast the greatest
estate with an imperceptible consumption, and in the midst of a man's
sufficiency make him be in straits, that he can embitter all with his sore
displeasure, and not suffer the floor nor the winepresse to feed him: In great
wisdom and deep counsels, if a man consider that the counsel of the Lord
shall stand, and that he can turn the wisdom of oracles into foolishness,
and catch the wise in their own craftiness: In great provisions of worldly
strength, and humane combinations, if he consider that God can take off the
wheels, and amaze the fantasies, and dissipate the affections, and melt the
spirits, and way-lay the enterprises of the hugest hosts of men, that he can
arm flies, and lice, and dust, and wind, and stars, and every small
unexpected contingencie against the strongest opposition; it must need make him
set his rest, and hang his confidences and assurances upon an higher principle.
Again, in poverty and the extremest straits which a man can be in, if he
consider that God is a God as well of the valleys as of the hills, that he will
be seen in the mount, when his people are under the sword, and upon the Altar;
that the Lord knows the days of the upright, and will satisfy them in the
time of famine, that when the young Lions famish for hunger, (they which live
not by the fruits on the earth, but by their prey, they which can feed of the
dead bodies of those other creatures whom a famine had devoured) yet even then
he can provide abundantly for his; that when things are mavelous unto us,
Zech. 8.6.
then they are easy unto him; that when they are impossible unto us, then they
are possible with him; Mark 10.27.
that he can lead in a wilderness, Psalm. 136.16.
and feed with an unknown and an unsuspected bread; that when the light of the
Sun and the Moon shall fail, Ier. 2.6.
he can be an everlasting light and glory to his people; that as a Father, so
he pitieth; Amos 2.10.
and as an heavenly Father, so he knows, and can supply all our needs; Deuteronomy.
8.15, 16.
that when we are without any wisdom to disappoint, or strength to withstand
the confederacies of men, when they come with chariots of iron, Esaias 60.19.
and walls of brass, Matthew. 6.32.
even then the eyes of the Lord run to and fro to show himself valiant in
the behalf of those that walk uprightly, that he can then order some
accident, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
produce some engine, discover some way to extricate and to clear all; Phil.
4.6.
then will a man learn to be careful or distracted in nothing, but in every
thing by prayer and supplication, with thankesgiving, make his request known
unto him who is at hand, and who cares for him.

The like may be said of men's spiritual condition; when men despair, as Cain,
that their sin is greater than can be forgiven? the only ground is, because
they judge not aright of God in Christ, they look not on him in his Gospel as
a God that cares for them, they do not lean upon the staff of his strength.
Despair is an affection growing out of the sense of sin and wrath, as it is,
malum arduum, instans, and ineluctabile, an evil too heavy to be borne, and
yet impossible to be removed. All victory arises either out of an inward power
of our own, or by the assistance of foreign power, which is more than our own.
Now then when we despair because of sin, this comes first from the
consideration of our own everlasting disability to break through sin by our
own strength; and this is a good despair, which helps to drive men unto
Christ.

Secondly, it comes from a misconceiving either of the Power or Care of those
which might assist us, sometimes from the mis-judging of Gods power, for the
forgiveness of sins is an act of omnipotency, and therefore when the Lord
proclaims himself a forgiver of iniquity, transgression, and sin, he
introduces it with his titles of power, The Lord, the Lord God, Gracious and
merciful, Exodus 34.6.
etc. To pardon malefactors is a power and royalty which belongs only unto
Princes. There is much strength required in bearing burdens, and therefore
patience especially toward sinners, is an act of power, and impatiencie ever a
sign of impotencie. And therefore (...). Arist. Rhet. lib. 2. cap. 2.
the weakest affections are ever most revengefull, children, old men, sick or
indigent persons, are ever most subject to anger, and least able to concoct an
injury: so that to conceive sin greater than can be forgiven, is to mis-judge
the omnipotency of God, but ordinarily despair proceeds from the
mis-judging of Gods affection and good will toward men; the soul conceives of
him, as of one that has utterly cast off all care or respect toward it. This
is an error of Gods benevolence, and the latitude of his mercy, and height of
his thoughts toward sinners. He has declared himself willing that all men
should be saved, he has set forth examples of the compass of his
long-suffering, 2 Pet. 3 9. John 5.34. 1 Timothy 1.16.
his invitations run in general terms, that no man may dare to preoccupate
damnation, but look unto God, as to one that cares for his soul. Let a man's
sins be never so crimson, and his continuance therein never so obdurate (I
speak this for the prevention of despair, not for the encouragement of
security or hardness) yet as soon as he is willing to turn, God is willing
to save, as soon as he has an heart to attend, God has a tongue to speak
salvation unto him. We see then the way to trust in Christ is to look upon
him as the Bishop of our souls, as the Officer of our peace, as one that
cares and provideth for us, as one that has promised to save to the
uttermost, to give supplies of his Spirit, and Grace in time of need, Heb.
7.25. Heb. 4.16. Ioh. 10.10. Heb. 13.9.
to give us daily bread, and life in abundance, to be with us always to the
end of the world, never to fail us nor forsake us.

And we may hereby learn our duty one to another, Col. 3.12, 13. Ephesians. 5.2.
Phil. 2.4, 5. Romans 14.7.15.15.2, 3.
to put on the affections of members, and the mind of Christ, in
compassionating, considering, and seeking the good of one another, in bearing
one another burdens, in pleasing not our selves but our neighbor for his
edification, for even Christ pleased not himself; that man cannot live in
honor, nor dye in comfort, who lives only to himself, and does not by his
prayers, compassions, and supplies imitate Christ, and interest himself in the
good of his brethren.

Now the ground of all this power, majesty, and mercy of the Gospel is here
set forth unto us in two words. First, it is the strength of Christ; Secondly,
it is sent by God himself. The Lord shall send the Rod of Thy strength out of
Sion.

Here then we may first note, That the Gospel is Christ's own Power and
strength, and the Power of God his Father, by whom it is sent abroad; So the
Apostle calls it, The Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
Power of God unto Salvation, and the demonstration of the Spirit, and of
Power; that our faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the Power
of God. Therefore in one place we are said to be Ioh. 6.45.
taught of God, and in another to be Ephesians. 4.20, 21.
taught of Christ; in one place it is called the 1 Timothy 1.11.
Gospel of the blessed God, and in another the Rom 15.19.
Gospel of Christ, to note that Ioh. 5.19.
whatsoever things the Father does in his Church, the same the Son does also,
and that the Father does not make known his will of mercy, but by his Son;
2 Cor. 5.19.
that as in the Son he did reconcile the world unto himself; so in the Son
he did Ioh. 1.18. Ioh. 14.17.
reveal himself unto the world. No man has seen the Father at any time, but
the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him. Christ is both the
Matter and the Author of the Gospel. As in the work of our Redemption he was
both the sacrifice, and the Priest to offer, and the Altar to sanctify it: So
in the dispensation of the Gospel, Christ is both the Sermon, and the
Preacher, and the Power, which gives blessing unto all. He is the Sermon, 1
Cor. 1.23. 2 Cor. 4.5. Col. 1.28.
We preach Christ crucified, says the Apostle, we preach not our selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord. And he is the Preacher, Heb. 12.25. Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Pet.
3.19.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks -- He came, and preached peace to
those afar off, and to those that were nigh. And lastly, he is the Power
which enliveneth his own word; Ioh. 5.25, 26. Ioh. 10.27, 28.
The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and they that hear shall
live; for as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to
have life in himself. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, etc. 2 Cor. 1.24.
He is the Lord of your faith, we are but the Helpers of your joy. He is the
Ioh. 13.13, 14.
Master in the Church, we are but 2 Cor. 4.5.
your servants for Jesus sake. 1 Pet. 5.3, 4.
He is the chief Shepherd, the Lord of the sheep, Ioh. 21.15.
the sheep are his own; we are but his 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 3.2. 2 Timothy 1.14.
Depositaries, entrusted with the ministry of reconciliation, unto us is
committed the dispensation of the Grace of God. So then the Word is his, but
the service ours.

From whence both the Ministers of the Word, and they which hear it may learn
their several duties. First, we should learn to 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2
Cor. 5.19, 20.
speak as the Oracles of God, as the Servants and Stewards of a higher Master,
whose Word it is which we preach, and whose Church it is which we serve. We
should therefore do his work, as men that are set in his stead, preach him,
and not our selves. There can be no greater sacrilege in the world, than to
put our own image upon the Ordinances of Christ, than to make another Gospel
than we have received. Saint Paul durst not Gal. 1.10.
please men, because he was the servant of Christ; neither durst he preach
himself, because he was the servant of the Church. For hereby men do even
justle Christ out of his own throne, and, as it were, snatch the Scepter of
his kingdom out of his own hand, boldly intruding upon that sacred and
uncommunicable dignity which the Father has given to his Son only, which
is to be the Author of his Gospel, and the total and adequate Object of all
Evangelicall Preaching. This sacrilege of selfe-preaching is committed three
manner of ways: First, when men make themselves the Authors of their own
preaching, when they preach their own inventions, and make their own brains
the seminaries and forges of a new faith; when they so gloss the pure Word of
God, as that withal they poison and pervert it. This is that which the Prophet
calls lying visions, and dreams of men's own hearts, which Saint Peter calls
perverting, Ezekiel. 13*3, 9, 17. Ier. 14.14. Ier 23.16. 2 Pe^. 3.16. 2 Cor. 2.17.
2 Cor 4.2. Hos. 9.8.
or makes crooked the rule of faith, and Saint Paul the huckstering,
adulterating, and using the Word of God deceitfully. Which puts me in mind
of a speech in the Prophet, The Prophet is the snare of a fowler in all his
ways. Birds we know use to be caught with the same corn wherewith they are
usually fed, but then it is either adulterated with some venomous mixture which
may intoxicate the bird, or else put into a ginne which shall imprison it; and
such were the carnal Preachers in the Prophets and in Saint Paul's time, Gal.
2.4.
who turned the truth of Christ into a snare, that by that means they might
bring the Church into bondage; The occasions and originals of this perverse
humor are, first, Mic. 3.5, 6. 1 King. 22.23.
without men, the seducements of Satan, unto which by the just severity of God,
they are sometimes given over for the punishment of their own and others
sins. ^ These. 2.10, 12.
Secondly, within them (upon which the other is grounded) as Matter omnium
Haereticorum superbia. Aug. de Genesis contr. Manich. l. 2. cap. 8. and Confess.
li. 12. c. 24.
Pride of wit, joined with ambition and impatiencie of repulse in vaste
desires, which has anciently been the ground of many heresies and schisms:
Nothing has ever been more dangerous to the Church of God than greatness of
parts unsanctified and unallaid with the love of truth, and the Grace of
Christ. Secondly, Theodor. Eccle. Histor. l. 1. c. 2. vid. Petr. Aerod. Decret.
l. 1. Tit. 6. sect. 12.
envy against the pains and estimation of those that are faithful. This was
one of the originals of Arrius his cursed heresy, his envy against Alexander
the good bishop of Alexandria, as Theodoret reports. Thirdly, impatiencie of
the spiritualnesse and simplicity of the holy Scriptures, which is ever joined
with the predominancie of some carnal lust, whereby the conscience is
notoriously wasted or defiled. He that has once put away a good conscience,
and does not desire truth in order and respect to that, that thereby his
conscience may be illightened, purified, and kept even toward God, will
without much ado make shipwreck of his faith, and change the truth for any
thriving error. And this impatiencie of the Spirit of truth in the Scriptures
is that which caused Tertull. con. Marc. l. 4. c. 6. and 43. and li. 5. c. 4.
heretics of old to reject some parts and to add more to the Canon of sacred
Scriptures, and in these days to super-adde traditions and apocryphal
accessions thereunto; and in those which are pure and on all sides confessed to
use such licentious and carnal glosses, as may hale the Scripture to the
countenancing and conformity of their lusts and prejudices rather than to the
rectifying of their own hearts by the Rule of Christ.

Secondly, men preach themselves when they make themselves the Object of their
preaching, when they preach selfe-dependencie and selfe-concurrencie, making
themselves, as it were, joynt-saviours with Christ: such was the preaching of
Simon Magus, who gave out that himself was some great one, even the great
Power of God. Of Montanus and his scholars who preached him for the Comforter
that was promised. Of Pelagius and his associates, G^atiae vocabulo frangens
invidi^am, off^nsionemque declinans, Aug. de Great. Christ. l. 1. c. 37. and
Epist. 105.
who though they did acknowledge the Name of Grace, to decline envy, and
avoid the curse of the great Council of Carthage, yet still they did but
shelter their proud heresies under equivocations and ambiguities. Of the
Massilienses in the times of Prosper and Hilarie, and of some ancient
Schoolmen touching pre-existent congruities for the preparations of Grace, and
co-existent concurrencies with the Spirit for the production of Grace. Of the
papists in their doctrines of indulgences, authoritative absolution, merits of
good works, justification, and other like, which do all in effect outface
and give the lie unto the Apostle, when he calls Christ an able or
sufficient Savior. Hebr. 7.25.


Thirdly, men preach themselves when they make themselves the end of their
preaching, when they preach their own parts, passions, and designs, and seek
not the Lord; when Ier. 10.21. Phil. 1.16. Ezekiel. 34 2, 3. Esaias ^6.11. Mic. 3.5.
2 Pet. 2.14, 15. Iud v. 11. 3 Ioh v. 9* Amos 7.12, 13.
out of envy, or covetousness, or ambition, or any other servile or indirect
affection, men shall prevaricate in the Lords Message, and make the Truth of
God serve their own turns. When men shall stand upon Gods holy mount as on a
theater, to act their own parts, and as on a step to their own advancement;
when the truth of God, and the death of Christ, and the kingdom of heaven, and
the fire of hell, and the souls of men, and the salvation of the world shall
be made bas^ly serviceable and contributary to the boundless pride of an
Atheistical Diotrephes. Such as these were they, who in the times of
Constantius the emperor, poisoned the world with Arrianisme, and in the times
of S. Cyprian provoked persecutions against the Church; Sulpit S^ve^. l. 2.
Cypria. a^ (...).
and in the times of Israel ensnared the ten Tribes till they were utterly
destroyed, and blinded the two Tribes till they were led away captive by the
Babylonians: Hos. 5 1.9.7, 8. Ier. 23.2, 29.
so horrid are the consequences of taking away the Gospel of Christ from him,
and making it the Rod not of his strength, but of our own pride or passion.
We must therefore always remember that the Gospel is Christ's own, and that
will encourage us to speak it as we ought to speak.

First, with authority and boldness, without silence or connivence at the
sins of men. Though in our private and personal relations we are to show all
modesty, humility, and lowliness of carriage toward all men, yet in our
masters businesses, we must not respect the persons, nor be daunted at the
faces of men; Paul a prisoner was not afraid to preach of righteousness and
temperance, and judgment to come before a corrupt and lascivious Prince,
though it made him tremble.

Secondly, with wisdom; as a Scribe instructed to the kingdom of heaven.
This was Saint Paul's care to work as a wise master builder: Mat. 13 52. 1 Cor.
3 10.
When Christ's enemies watched him to pick something out of his mouth, whereby
they might accuse him, we find so much depth of wisdom in the answers and
behaviors of Christ, as utterly disappointed them of their expectations, Mat.
22.22, 46.
and struck them with such amazement that they never durst ask him questions
more: So should we endeavor to behave our selves in such manner as that our
ministry may not be blamed, 2 Cor. 6.3.
nor the truth of God exposed to censure or disadvantages: for sacred truths
may be sometimes either so unseasonably, or so indigestedly, and uncoherently
delivered, as may rather open than stop the mouths of gainsayers, and sooner
discredit the truth than convert the adversary. The Apostle says that we are
to make a difference to save some with compassion, Iud. v. 22, 23.
others with fear. This is to speak a word in due season, and as our Savior
did, to speak as men are able to hear; to press the Word upon the conscience
with such seasonable and suitable enforcements as may be most likely to
convince those judgments, and to allure those affections which we have to do
withal. It is not knowledge in the general, but the right use thereof, Prove.
11.30. Prove. 15.2. 2 Cor. 12.16. Act. 17.23, 28.
and wise application unto particulars which wins souls. The tongue of the
wise uses knowledge aright. This is that heavenly Craft wherewith the Apostle
caught the Corinthians as it were by guile: such Art he uses toward the
Philosophers of Athens, not exasperating men who were heady and confident of
their own rules, but seeming rather to make up the defects which themselves in
the inscription of their Altar confessed, and to reveal that very God unto
them, whom they worshipped, but did not know. Therefore we find him there
honoring their own learning, and out of that disputing for a resurrection,
and against idolatry, to show that Christian Religion was no way against that
learning or rectified reason which they seemed to profess. The like art he
used toward king Agrippa, Act. 26.2, 3, 27, 29.
first presuming of his knowledge and credit which he gave to the Prophets, and
then meeting and setting on his inclinable disposition to embrace the Gospel;
like the wisdom of the servants of Benhadad unto Ahab, They did diligently
observe whether any thing would come from him, 1 King. 20.33.
and did hastily catch it; and they said, Thy Brother Benhadad. And the like
wisdom he used every where, he denied himself his own liberty, and made
himself a servant unto all; 1 Cor. 9.19-23.
to the Jew as a Jew, to the Greek as a Greek, to the weak as weak, and all
things to all, that by all means he might save some, and so further the
Gospel. One while he used Circumcision that he might thereby gain the weak
Jews, another while he forbade Circumcision, that he might not misguide the
converted Gentiles, nor give place by subjection unto false brethren. Who is
weak, says he, and I am not weak? who is offended, 2 Cor. 11 29.
and I burn not? His care of men's souls made him take upon him every man's
affection, and accommodate himself unto every man's temper; that he might not
offend the weak, nor exasperate the mighty, nor dis-hearten the beginner, nor
affright those which were without from coming in, Eadem omnibus debetur
charit^s, non eadem medicina, etc. Aug de Catechi. Rudib. ca. 15.
but be All unto All for their salvation. The same love is due unto all, but
the same method of cure is not requisite for all: With some Love travelleth in
pain, with others it rejoices in hope, some it labors to edify, and
others it fear^th to offend; unto the weak it stoopeth, unto the strong it
raises it self; to some it is compassionate, to others severe, to none an
enemy, to all a mother. But all this it does non mentiendo, sed compatiendo,
not by belying the truth, but by pitying the sinner. It is not the wisdom of
the flesh, nor to be learned of men. The Scripture alone is able to make the
man of God wise unto the work of Salvation.

Thirdly, with meekness, for that is the child of wisdom; Who is a wise
man, says Saint James, let him show out of a good conversation his works
(...), with meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3.13, 17.
and again, the wisdom which is from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy. The Gospel is Christ's Gospel, and it must be
preached with Christ's spirit, which was very meek and lowly; Matthew. 11.29.21.5.
When the Disciples would have called for fire from heaven upon the Samaritanes
for their indignity done unto Christ, he rebuked them in a mild and
compassionate manner, Luke 9.55.
Ye know not what spirit ye are of. A right Evangelicall Spirit is ever a meek
and a merciful Spirit. If a man (says the Apostle) be overtaken in a fault,
ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness: Gal.
6.1. 2 Timothy 2.25.
and again, In meekness, says the Apostle, instruct those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth.

Lastly, with faithfulness, in as much as the Gospel is none of ours, but
Christ's whose servants and stewards we are. Christ was faithful, Heb. 3.2. 1
Cor. 4.2. 2 Timothy 2.2.
though he were a Son over his own house, and therefore might in reason have
assumed the more liberty to do his own will: much more does it become us who
are but his Officers, to be faithful too, not to dissemble any thing which the
estate and exigence of those souls committed to our charge shall require us to
speak, not to add, diminish, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Gal. 1.6. Act. 20.27. Heb. 13.17.
or deviate from our commission, preaching one Gospel in one place, and
another in another; but to deliver only the Counsel of God, and to watch over
the souls of men, as they that must give an account.

Again, since the Gospel is Christ's own Power, we must all learn from
thence two duties: first, to receive it as from him with the affections of
subjects which have been bought by him, that is, first in hearing of the word
to expect principally his voice, and to seek him speaking from heaven. This is
the nature of Christ's sheep, Ioh. 10.4, 5, 27.
to turn away their ears from the voice of strangers, and to hear him. Two
things principally there are which discover the voice of Christ in the
ministry of the word: First, it is a spiritual and heavenly doctrine, full
of purity, righteousness, and peace, touching the soul, John 3.12. Iam. 3.17.
with a kind of secret and magneticall virtue, whereby the thoughts,
affections, conscience, and conversation are turned from their earthly center,
and drawn up unto him as Eagles to a carcass. Secondly, it is a powerful, an
edged, a piercing doctrine. Heb. 4.12.
If the word thou hear speak unto thy conscience, if it search thy heart, if
it discover thy lusts, if it make thy spirit burn within thee, if it cast thee
upon thy face, and convince and judge thee for thy transgressions, if it bind
up thy sores, and cleanse away thy corruptions, then it is certainly Christ's
word, and then it must be received with such affections as becomes the word
of Christ.

First, with Faith: if we confer with flesh and blood, we shall be apt ever
to cavil against the truth; For he that rejects Christ, does never receive
his word. A fleshly heart cannot submit unto a heavenly Doctrine. Christ and
his Apostles did every where endure the contradiction of sinners. Ioh. 12.4^.
Romans 8.7. Heb. 12.3. Act. 13.45. Act. 28.23. 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2. Gal. 1.12.
But yet he claims this honor over the consciences of men to overruled
their assents against all the mists, and sophistical reasonings of the flesh.
The Apostles themselves preached nothing but either by immediate commission
from him, or out of the Law and the Prophets. But his usual form was, Verily
I say unto you, Matthew 5.22.
noting that he only was unto the Church the Author and fountain of all
heavenly Doctrine, that unto him only belongs that authoritative and
infallible Spirit which can command the subscription and assent of the
conscience, that he only can say with boldness to the soul, as he did to
the Samaritan woman, Believe me. And that therefore no authority either of
men, Ioh. 4.21.
or Churches, either Episcopal, Papal, or Synodicall can without open
sacrilege usurp power to overruled the faith of men, or impose any immediate
and Doctrinall necessity upon the conscience in any points which are not
ultimately and distinctly resolved into the evident authority of Christ in his
word. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. ^.3.
S. Paul himself durst not assume Dominion over the faith of men; nor S. Peter
neither suffer any Elders (amongst whom he reckons himself as an Elder
also) (...), to overruled, or prescribe unto the heritage of God. It is only
Christ's word which the hearts of men must stoop and attend unto, and which
they must mingle with faith that it may be profitable unto them; Heb. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
that is, they must let it into their hearts with this assurance, that it is
not the breath of a man, but the message of Christ, who is true in all his
threatenings, and faithful in all his promises, and pure in all his precepts,
that he sends this ministry abroad for the perfection of the Saints, and
the edification of his Church, Ephesians. 4.12. Esai. 55.11.
and therefore if they be not hereby cleansed, and built up in his body, they
do as much as in them lies make void the holy ordinance of God, which yet
must never return in vain. The word of God does effectually work only in
those that believe. It works in hypocrites, and wicked hearers, (according to
the measure of that imperfect faith which they have) but it works not
effectually, that is, it does not consummate nor accomplish any perfect work
but only in those that believe; in the rest it proves but an abortion, and
withers in the blade.

Secondly, 2 These. 2.10. Act. 2.41. Act. 17.11. Act. 21.17. 1 Samuel 3.18. 1 Samuel
25.32. Gal. 4.14. Esai. 11.6.
with love, and readiness of mind, without despising or rejecting it. No man
can be saved who does not receive the truth in love, who does not receive it
(as the primitive Saints did) with gladness, and readiness of mind, as Eli,
though from the hand of Samuel a Child, as David, though from the hand of
Abigail a woman, as the Galatians, though from the hand of Paul, an infirm and
persecuted Apostle. For herein is our homage to Christ the more apparent, when
we suffer a little child to lead us.

Thirdly, Iam. 1.21. Levit. 26.2. Act. 10.33. 1 These. 2.13, 14. Ephesians 4.20-22.
with meekness and submission of heart, reverencing and yielding unto it in
all things. Wresting, shifting, evading, perverting the word is as great an
indignity unto Christ, as altering, interlining, or rasing a patent which the
King has drawn with his own royal hand, is an offense against him. Patience
and effectual obedience even in affliction, is an argument that a man esteems
the word to be indeed Gods own word, and so receives it. He only who
puts off the old man, the corrupt deceitful lusts of his former
conversation, and is renewed in the Spirit of his mind, is the man that has
heard, and been taught by Christ, that has received the Truth in him.

Again, in as much as the Gospel is the Rod of Christ's own strength, Esai.
53.1.
or the instrument of his arm (who has believed our report and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed) and the instrument is no further operative or
effectual than according to the measure of that impressed virtue which it
receives from the superior cause: therefore we should learn always to
repair unto Christ for the success of his word. For he only is the teacher
of men's hearts, and the author of their faith. To him only it belongs to
call men out of their graves, and to quicken whom he will. We have nothing
but the ministry, he keeps the power in his own hands, that men might
learn to wait upon him, and to have to do with him, who only can send a
blessing with his word, and teach his people to profit thereby.

Another ground of the power of the word is, that it is sent from God. The Lord
shall send forth the Rod of thy strength. From which particular likewise we
may note some useful observations, as,

First, that Gods appointment and ordination is that which gives being, life,
majesty, and success to his own word, authority, boldness, and protection to
his servants. When he sends his word he will make it prosper. When Moses
disputed against his going down into Egypt to deliver his brethren, Esai.
55.11. Exodus 3.4.
sometimes alleging his own unfitness and infirmity, sometimes the unbelief
of the people, this was still the warrant with which God encouraged him, I will
be with thee, I have sent thee, do not I make man's mouth? I will be with thy
mouth and teach thee what thou shall say. I was no Prophet, neither was I a
Prophets Son (says Amos) but I was an heardsman and a gatherer of sycamore
fruit: Amos 7.14, 15.
And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and said unto me, Go,
prophecy unto my people Israel. And this made him peremptory in his office to
prophecy against the idolatry of the Kings Court, and against the flattery of
the Priest of Bethel. And this made the Apostles bold, Act. 4.13. 5.29.35, 36.
though otherwise unlearned and ignorant men, to stand against the learned
council of Priests and Doctors of the Law, We ought to obey God rather than
men. Upon which, Grave was the advice of Gamaliel; If this counsel or work
be of men, it will come to naught; But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God. For to withstand the
power or progress of the Gospel, is to set a man's face against God himself.

Secondly, in as much as the Gospel is sent forth by God, that is, revealed
and published out of Sion, we may observe, That Evangelicall learning came not
into the world by humane discovery or observation, but it is utterly above the
compass of all reason or natural disquisition, neither men nor Angels ever
knew it but by divine revelation. And therefore the Apostle every where calls
it a Mystery, a great and a hidden Mystery, which was kept secret since the
world began. Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 2.7^9. Romans 1.20.2.14.15.
There is a Natural Theology, without the world, gathered out of the works
of God, out of the resolution of causes and effects into their first originals,
and out of the Law of nature written in the heart. But there is no natural
Christianity. Nature is so far from finding it out by her own inquiries,
that she cannot yield unto it when it is revealed without a Spirit of faith to
assist it. The Jews stumbled at it as dishonorable to their Law, and the
Gentiles derided it, as absurd in their Philosophy; It was a Hidden and secret
wisdom, Revel. 14.16. 1 Pet. 1.20. 1 Cor. 2.7.10. Ephesians. 1.9.10. Ephesians. 3.9.11.
the execution and publication whereof was committed only to Christ. In God it
was an Eternal Gospel, for Christ was a lamb slain from before the
foundations of the world, namely in the predeterminate counsel and decree of
his father; but revealed it was not till the dispensation of the fullness of
time, wherein he gathered together in one all things in Christ. The purpose and
ordination of it was eternal, but the preaching and manifestation of it
reserved until the time of Christ's solemn inauguration into his Kingdom, and
of the obstinacy of the Jews, upon whose defection the Gentiles were called
in. Act. 14.16.17.30.


Which might teach us to adore the unsearchablenesse of Gods judgments unto
former ages of the world, whom he suffered to walk in their own ways, and
to live in times of utter ignorance, destitute of any knowledge of the Gospel,
or of any natural parts, or abilities to find it out. For if these things be
true: First, that without the knowledge of Christ there is no salvation. Ioh.
17.3. Esai. 53.11.
This is eternal life to know thee and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ.
By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justifye many. 1 Cor. 2.14.
Secondly, that Christ cannot be known by natural, but Evangelicall and
revealed light. The natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God,
because they are spiritually discerend. The light shined in darkness, Ioh. 1.5.
and the darkness was so thick and fixed that it did not let in the light nor
apprehend it. Thirdly, Exodus 4.22.
that this light was at the first sent only unto the Jews, as to the first
borne-people, (excepting only some particular extraordinary dispensations and
privileges to some few first fruits and preludes of the Gentiles. Psalm.
147.20. Vide Cameron. de Eccl. page 81.
) He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.
He has not dealt so with any nation. He has not afforded the means of
salvation ordinarily unto any other people; the world by wisdom knew him not.
Fourthly, that this several dispensation toward one and other, the giving of
saving knowledge to one people, and withholding it from others, was not
grounded upon any preceding differences and dispositions thereunto in the
people, but only in the Love of God. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7.
The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself,
above all people that are upon the face of the earth. The Lord did not set his
love upon you nor choose you because ye were more in number than any people
(for ye were the fewest of all people) but because the Lord loved you, Deuteronomy.
9.6.
etc. The Lord thy God gives thee not this good land to possess it for thy
righteousness, for you art a stiff-necked people. Ios. 24.2, 3.
Your Fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood mold time, and they served
other gods. There was no difference between them and the Gentiles from whom I
gathered them. Fifthly, that the Gospel was hidden from others in God, Ephesians.
3.9. Math. 10.5. Ephesians. 3.7, 8. Math. 11* 25, 26. Ephesians. 3.9.11. Romans 11* 33.
his own will and counsel was the cause of it. He forbad men to go into the
cities of the Gentiles, neither were they to go unto them without a special
gift, and commission. The same Beneplacitum was the reason of revealing it to
some, and of hiding it from others; Even so o father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight. If all these particulars be true, needs must we both admire the
inscrutablenesse of Gods judgments toward the Gentiles of old, (for no humane
presumptions are a fit measure of the ways and severities of God toward
sinners.) And also everlastingly adore his Compassions toward us, whom he
has reserved for these times of light, and, out of the alone unsearchable
riches of his grace, has together with principalities and powers in heavenly
places, made us to see what is the fellowship of that great mystery which from
the beginning of the world was hidden in himself.

Thirdly, Gal. 3.1. Col. 1.6. Revel. 3.20. Ier. 26.4. Deuteronomy. 30.19. Romans 10.8. 2
Cor 5.20. Matthew. 11.28. Mic. 6.8. 1 Ioh. 3.23. Luke 14.23.
in that the Lord does send forth the Gospel of Christ out of Sion into the
world, we may further observe that the Gospel is a Message, and an invitation
from heaven unto men. For, for that end was it sent that thereby men might be
invited and persuaded to salvation. The Lord sends his Son up and down,
carries him from place to place; he is set forth before men's eyes, he comes,
and stands, and calls, and knocks at their doors, and beseeches them to be
reconciled. He sets his word before us, at our doors, and in our mouths
and ears. He has not erected any standing sanctuary or city of refuge for men
to fly for their salvations unto, but has appointed Ambassadors, to carry this
treasure unto men's houses where he inviteth them, and entreats them, and
requires them, and commands them, and compels them to come into his feast
of mercy. And this must needs be (...), an unsearchable riches of grace, for
mercy, pardon, preferment, life, salvation to go a begging, and sue for
acceptance; and very unsearchable likewise must needs be the love of sin,
and madness of folly in wicked men, to trample upon such pearls, and to
neglect so great salvation when it is tendered unto them. O what a heavy charge
will it be for men at the last day, to have the mercy of God, the humility of
Christ, the entreaties of his Spirit, the proclamations of pardon, the
approches of salvation, the days, the years, the ages of peace, the ministers
of the word, the book of God, the great Mystery of Godliness, to rise up in
judgment, and to testify against their souls?

Lastly, in that the Gospel is sent from God, the Dispencers thereof must
look unto their mission, Heb. 5.4.
and not intrude upon so sacred a business before they are thereunto called by
God. Gal. 1.12.
Now this call is twofold: Extraordinary by immediate instinct, and revelation
from God, which is ever accompanied with immediate and infused gifts (of this
we do not now speak:) And Ordinary, by imposition of hands, and
Ecclesiastical designation. Whereunto there are to concur three things.
First, an Act of Gods providence casting a man upon such a course of studies,
and fashioning his mind unto such affections toward learning, and disposing
of him in such Schools and Colleges of the Prophets, as are congruons
preparations, and were appointed for nurseries and seminaries of Gods Church.
It is true many things fall under Gods providence, which are not within his
allowance, and therefore it is no sufficient argument to conclude Gods consent
or commission in this office, because his wisdom has cast me upon a
collegiate education. But when therewithal, he in whose hands the hearts of
all men are as clay or wax, to be molded into such shapes as the counsel of
his will shall order, has bended the desires of my heart to serve him in his
Church, and has set the strongest delight of my mind upon those kinds of
learning which are unto that service most proper and conducent; when measuring
either the good will of my heart, or the appliablenesse of my parts, by this,
and other professions of learning, I can clearly conclude that that measure and
proportion which the Lord has given me is more suitable unto this, than other
learned callings, I suppose, other qualifications herewith concurring, a man
may safely from thence conclude, that God, who will have every man live in some
profitable calling, does not only by his providence permit, but by his secret
direction lead him unto that service, whereunto the measure of gifts which he
has conferred upon him are most suitable and proper. And therefore secondly,
there is to be respected in this Ordinary mission, the meet qualification of
the person who shall be ordained unto this ministry: For if no Prince will
send a mechanic from his loome, or his sheers, in an honorable Embassage to
some other foreign Prince, shall we think that the Lord will send forth
stupid and unprepared instruments about so great a work as the perfecting of
the Saints, and Edification of the Church? It is registered for the perpetual
dishonor of that wicked King Jeroboam (who made no other use of any Religion
but as a secondary bye thing, 1 Kings. 12.31.
to be the supplement of policy) that he made of the Lowest of the People,
those who were really such as the Apostles were falsely esteemed to be, the
scumme and offscouring of men, to be Priests unto the Lord. Now the Qualities
more directly and essentially belonging unto this office are these two;
Fidelity and Ability. The things, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.^.
which thou have heard of amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to
Faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.

We are stewards of no meaner a gift than the Grace of God, and the Wisdom
of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. Ephesians. 3.10.
that grace which by S. Peter is called (...), a manifold Grace; and that
wisdom which by S. Paul is called (...), the manifold wisdom of God. We
are the depositaries and dispencers of the most precious treasures which were
ever opened unto the Sons of men, the incorruptible and precious blood of
Christ, the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, the word of
the Grace of God and of the unsearchable riches of Christ. 1 Cor. 4.2.
Now it is required of stewards that a man be found faithful, that he
defraud not Christ of his purchase, which is the souls of men, nor men of
their price and privilege, which is the blood of Christ; that he neither
favor the sins of men, nor dissemble the truth of God; that he watch,
because he is a seer, that he speak, because he is an oracle, that he feed
because he is a shepherd, that he labor because he is a husbandman, that
he be tender because he is a mother, that he be careful, because is a
father, that he be faithful, because he is a servant to God and his Church,
in one word that he be instant in season and out of season, to exhort, rebuke,
instruct, to do the work of an Evangelist, to accomplish and make full proof
of his ministry because he has an account to make, because he has the
presence of Christ to assist him, the promises of Christ to reward him, the
example of Christ, his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops and Martyrs of
the purest time, who have now their palms in their hands, to encourage him.
Luk 4.16.31.
It was Christ's custom to enter into their Synagogues on the Sabbath-dayes,
and to read and expound the Scriptures, to the people. Act. 17.2 18.4.
It was S. Paul's manner to reason in the Synagogues, and to open the Scriptures
on the Sabbath days. (...) Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. Tertull. Apol. C^^ 3.9.
Upon Sunday says Justin Martyr, All the Christians that are in the cities or
countries about meet together, and after some Commentaries of the Apostles,
and writings of the Prophets have been read, the Senior or President does by a
Sermon exhort the people, and admonish them to the imitation and practice of
those divine truths which they had heard read unto them. Eum in populo verbum
veritatis recte tractantem omni die Dominico audiebam. Aug. Confess. lib. 6.
cap. 3.
And S. Austen tells us of Ambrose, that he heard him rightly handling the
word of God unto the people every Lords day. Yea it should seem by the
Homilies of S. Chrysostom that he did oftentimes preach daily unto the
people, and therefore we frequently meet with his (...), yesterday this and
this I taught you. Sia^ Ecclesiam frequenter venias, aurem divinis liter^s
admoveas, explanationem mandatorum caelestium capias, sicut cibis car^, ita
spiritu^ verbis divinis convalescet. Origin. Hom. 9 in Levit.
And Origin intimates this frequency of expounding the Scriptures in his time,
if, says he, you come frequently unto the Church of God, and there attend
unto the sacred Scriptures and to the explication of those heavenly
commandments, thy soul will be strengthened, as thy body with food. And
Canon. 45.59
our Church in her Ecclesiastical Constitutions has provided for the
continuance of so faithful and pious a custom, injoining every allowed
Preacher to have a Sermon every Sunday in the year, and in the afternoon
besides to spend half an hour in Catechizing the younger and ruder sort in the
Principles of Christian Religion. The neglect of which most necessary duty no
man can more bewail, nor more urge the necessity thereof, than those who
looking abroad into the world, have experience of more thick and palpable
darkness in the minds of men, concerning those absolutely necessary Doctrines
of the passion, merits, and redemption of Christ and of faith in them, than men
who have not with their own eyes observed it can almost believe. And that too
in such places where Sermons have been very frequently preached. I will close
this point with the as^ertion and profession of Holy Austen. Nihil in hac vita
laeti^s aut hominibus acceptabilius, Episcopi, aut presbyteri, aut Di^coni
officio, si persunitorie atque adulatorie res agatur, etc. Aug. Epist. 1.8
Nothing, says he, is in this life more pleasant and ^asie than the life of a
Bishop or Minister if it be perfunctorily and flatteringly executed, but then
in Gods sight nihil turpius, miserius, damnabilius, and it was his profession,
Illud noverit dilectio vestra, nunquam me absentem ^uissi licentios a
liberate, se^n^^ssaria servitut^. Aug. Epist. 138.
that he was never absent from his Episcopal service and attendance, upon any
licentious and assumed liberty, but only upon some other necessary service of
the Church.

Touching the ability required in the discharge of this great office, there
are (as I conceive) two special branches thereunto belonging. First, Learning
for the right information of the consciences of men, that men may not pervert
the Scripture. Secondly, Wisdom or spiritual prudence for seasonable
application of the truth to particular circumstances, which is that which
makes a wise builder. For this latter, it being so various, (...), etc. Arist.
Ethic. lib. 6. Cap. 8.
according to those infinite varieties of particular cases and conditions,
which are hardly reducible unto general rules, I cannot here speak, but
refer the Reader to the grave and pious counsels of those Aug. in lib. de
Doctr. Christ and de Catechiz. Rud. Gregor. Mag. de Officio Pastoral part. 3.
Cap. 1. etc.
holy men who have given some directions herein. For the other, two great
works there are which belong to this high calling. Instruction of the Scholar,
and Conviction of the Adversary. Unto the perfection of which two services,
when we duly consider how many different parts of learning are requisite, as
knowledge of the Hieron. Apol. adver. Ruffin. Aug. de Doctr. Christ, lib. 2.
Cap. 16, 17.39.
tongues, for the better understanding of the holy Scriptures by their
original idiome and emphasis; of the arts, to observe the connection, and
argumentation, and method of them; of ancient customs, Histories, and
antiquities of the Babylonians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, without insight
whereinto the full meaning of many passages of holy Scripture cannot be
clearly apprehended; of School learning, for discovering and repelling the
subtilty of the adversaries, a thing required in a Rhetorician by Aristotle and
Quintilian, insomuch Theodoret. Hist. 3. cap 7.
that Julian the Apostate complained of the Christians, that they used the
weapons of the Gentiles against them, and threfore interdicted them the use of
Schools of learning; Aug. de Doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 28. V^d. Greg.
Nazianz. Orat. ^..
Lastly, of Histories and Antiquities of the Church, that we may observe the
succession of the Professors, and Doctrines hereof, the originals and
sproutings of heresy therein, the better to answer the reproaches of our
insolent adversaries, who lay innovation to our charge. I say, when we duly
consider these particulars, we cannot sufficiently admire, nor detest the
sauciness of those bold intruders, who when they have themselves need to be
taught what are the first Principles of the Oracles of God, Docent Scripturas
quas non intelligunt, p^ius imperite^^um magistri, quam Doctorum discipuli,
etc. Hieron. Ephesians. 8 ad Demetriad. Apol. ad Domnion: and To. 3. Epistol. Ep. ad
Paulinum.
become teachers of the ignorant before themselves have been Disciples of the
learned, and, before either maturity of years, or any severe progress of
studies have prepared them, boldly leap, some from their manual trades, many
from their grammar and logic rudiments, into this sacred and dreadful office,
unto which heretofore the most learned and pious men have trembled to approach.
To these men I can give no better advice than that which Tully once gave unto
Aristoxenus a musician, who would needs venture upon Philosophical
difficulties, and out of the principles of his art determine the nature of a
humane soul, Haec magistro relinquat Aristoteli, canere ipse doceat. Let them
spend their time in the work which best befits them, and leave great matters
unto abler men.

Thirdly and lastly, unto this call is requisite the Hi sunt qui se ult^o apud
temerari^s convenas sine divina dispositione praeficiunt, qui se praeposit^s
sive ^lla Ordination is l^ge constituu^t, qui nemine Episcopatum dante Episcopi
sibi nomen assumunt. Cyprian. de unitat. Eccl^siae.
imposition of hands, and the authoritative act of the Church ordaining and
setting apart, and deriving actual power upon such men, of whose fidelity and
ability they have sufficient evidence (for hands are not to be laid suddenly
on any man) to preach the word, and to administer the Sacraments, and to do
all those ministerial acts, upon which the edification of the people of Christ
does depend. I have now done with the first of Christ's regalities in the Text,
which was the Scepter of his Kingdom.

Now to speak a word of the second, which is Solium, the Throne of his
Kingdom. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy strength out of Sion. Which notes
unto us: First, that the Church of the Jews was the chief original,
Metropolitan Church of all others. Therefore our Savior charge his Disciples
to Tarry in the City of Jerusalem, Luke 24.49.
till they should be endued with power from on high. The Apostle says that
they had the advantage or precedence and excellency above other people,
because unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Romans 3.1, 2. Romans 9 4.
To them did pertain the Adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the
giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Of them was Christ
after the flesh. All the Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and writers
of the Holy Scriptures were of them. There is no Church can show such
Privileges, nor produce such authentic records for her precedence as the
Church of the Jews. Therefore they are called by an excellency Gods Ier. 31.9.
firstborn, and Iam. 1.18.
the first fruits of the creatures, they are called The Matthew. 8.12.
Children of the Kingdom, whereas others were at first Ephesians 2.12.
Dogs, and Matthew. 15.26.
strangers. Their Gal. 4 26 6.16. Romans 2 29. Heb. 12 22.
Titles, Sion, Jerusalem, Israel, are used as proper names to express the
whole Church of God by, though amongst the Gentiles. Christ Jesus, though he
came as a Savior unto All, yet he was sent to be a Prophet and a Preacher
only unto them. Therefore the Apostle calls him Romans 15.8.
the Minister of the Circumcision, that is, of the Jews, and he says, Matthew.
15.24.
I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And when he
gave his Apostles their first commission, Matthew. 10 5.6.
he sent them only into the Cities of the Jews; the Rom 11.11.12, 15 30.
Gentiles were incorporated into them, were brought in upon their rejection,
and refusal of the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.
took the Christians of Judea for their pattern in their profession; from Act.
15.2.22.
that Church were Rules and constitutions sent abroad into other Churches, as
binding and necessary things. To Romans 15.27.
that Church the Churches of the Gentiles were debtors, as having been made
partakers of their spiritual things; and though they be now a rejected
people* yet Romans 11.25, 26.
when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, Israel shall be gathered again,
and made a glorious Church. And in the mean time their dispersion tended unto
the conversion of the Gentiles. For though they were enemies to the faith of
Christians, Magnum est quod Deus p^aestitit Ecclesiae suae ubique difsusae, ut
Gens Iudaea, merito debellata and dispersa per ^erra^, ^e a nobis haec
composita pu^arentur codices Prophetarum nostrorum ubique porta^et, and inimica
fidei nostrae test^ fieret veritatis nostrae. Aug. to. 4. de Conse. s. Evang.
lib. 1. c. 26. and epist. 3. ad Volus^anum.
yet they did bear witness unto those Scriptures, out of which the Christians
did prove their faith. And there is no greater evidence in a cause than the
affirmative testimony of that man who is an enemy to the cause. If the Church
of Rome had such evidences as these out of the book of God, to prove their
usurped primacie by, how proud and intolerable would they be in boasting
thereof, and obtruding it unto others, who are now so confident upon far
slenderer grounds?

And from hence we may learn to take heed of the sins of that people, which
were principally the rejecting of the corner stone, and the putting off the
Gospel of Christ away from them, as every obstinate and unbeleeving sinner
does from himself. This is that which has made them of all nations the most
hated, and the most forsaken, and has brought wrath to the uttermost upon
them, because when Christ came unto his own they received him not. Because of
unbelief they were broken off, says the Apostle, and thou stand by faith;
be not high-minded, but fear, for if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he also spare not thee. And we should likewise learn to pray
for the fullness of the Gentiles, and for the restoring of this people unto
their honor and original privileges again; for we are their debtors; we
entered upon the promises which were made to them; and therefore good reason we
have to do for them now, as they did for us before: We have a little sister,
or rather an elder sister, and she has no breasts, the oracles and ordinances
of God are taken from her; What shall we do for our sister in the day when
she shall be spoken for? Cant. 8.8.

Secondly, this notes unto us the calling of the Gentiles into the fellowship
of the same mystery which was first preached unto the Jews, Ezekiel. 16.61. Zech
8.23. Esaias 2.2, 3.
that they might be the daughters of this mother Church, that they may take
hold of the skirt of the Jew, and say, We will go with you, for we have heard
that God is with you. The Church of Jerusalem was set up as a beacon, or an
ensign, or a public sanctuary to which the nations should fly, as doves to
their windows. Of this merciful purpose some evidences and declarations the
Lord gave before in Rahab, Job, Ninive, the Wisemen, and others, who were the
preludes and first fruits of the Gentiles unto God: and did after fully
manifest the same in his unlimited commission to his Apostles, Go preach the
Gospel unto every creature.

And now alas, what were we that God should bring us hitherto? Saint Paul says
that we were filled with all unrighteousness; that we did neither understand
God, nor seek after him. A^l our faculties were full of sin, and the
fullness of all sin was in us; we were ruled by no laws but the course of
the world, the Prince of the air, and the lusts of the flesh, without God in
this world, and without any hope for the world to come. Here vessels of lust
and poison, and fitted to be hereafter vessels of destruction and misery. We
were no nation, a foolish people, a people that sought not, nor inquired after
God; and yet his own people has he set by and called us to the knowledge of
his love and mercy in Christ. And that, not as many other Gentiles are called,
who hear of him indeed, and worship him, but have his doctrine corrupted and
overturned with heresy, and his worship defiled with superstition and
idolatry; but he has for us purged his floor, and given unto us the wheat
without the chafe, he has let the light of his glory to shine purely upon us
only in the face of Jesus Christ, without any humane supplements, or
contributions. How should we praise him for it, and as we have received Christ
purely, so labor to walk worthily in him? How should we run to him that
called us when we knew him not? How should we set forward, and call upon one
another, that we may fly like doves in companies unto the windows of the
Church? How earnestly should we contend for this truth, the custody whereof
he has honored us withal? How should we renew our repentance, and remember
our first works, lest so excellent a privilege be removed from us. There is
no wrath that is wrath to the uttermost, but that which depriveth a people of
the Gospel, and takes away their Candlestick from them.

Thirdly, it notes unto us the difference of the two covenants, the one out of
Sinai, and the other out of Sion. Hebr. 12.18-22. Gal. 4.25, 26
At first the Law proceeded out of Sinai, wherein though the end were merciful,
yet the manner was terrible, and therefore the effect nothing but bondage; but
after it was sent out of Sion with the Spirit of grace, and adoption, observed
with cheerfulness and liberty, as by those that know God will spare them, as
a man spares his child that serves him, for in my bond-slave I look to the
perfection of the work, but in my son to the affection and disposition of the
heart.

Lastly, it notes unto us, that the seat of saving truth, the custody of the
promises, and Gospel of salvation, does still belong unto Sion, to the Church
of God. Out Quomodo potest esse cum Christo qui cum sponsa Christi, atque in
ejus Ecclesia non est? Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 8. and lib. 4 epist. 2. ad Anton. and
lib. de unitat. Eccle. Aug. to. 1. de vera Relig. cap. 5.
of the Church there is no Gospel, and therefore out of the Church there is no
salvation. The 1 Cor. 7.14.
Apostle says of children which are borne out of the Church, that they are
unclean: unto the Church (above all congregations of men) belongs this
excellent privilege to be the Treasurer of the riches of Christ, and Phil 2 16.
to hold forth the Word of life unto men. In which sense the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that it is the pillar and the ground of truth; not that which gives being to
the Church, for the Law must not fail nor perish; nor that which gives
authority, imposes a sense, canonizeth and makes authentical, is a judge or
absolute determiner of the truth; for in that sense the (...). Chrysostom. hom.
11. in Tim.
Church is held up by the Word, and not that by it, for Ephesians. 2.20.
the Church is built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, namely
upon that fundamental doctrine which they have laid: But Romans 3.1. Romans 9.4.
the Church is the depositary of the truth, that orb out of which this
glorious light shines forth, unto it appertains the Covenants and the giving
of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Her office and her honor
it is to be the Revel. 1.12.
Candlestick which holds up the Word of truth, to set to her seal unto the
evidence and excellency thereof, Reynol. Confer. with Heart. c. 8. divis. 6.
by her ministry, authority, consent, and countenance to conciliate respect
thereunto in the minds of aliens, and to confirm it in the minds of
believers, Eccles. 12.11.
to fasten the nails and points thereof, like masters of the assemblies under
one principal Shepherd, which is Christ, in the hearts of men; not to
dishonor it by their usurped authority above it (for by that means all
controversies of religions, are turned not into contentions of doctrine, that
that may be rested in, which does appear to have in it most intrinsecall
majesty, spiritualnesse, and evidence; but into factions and emulations of
men, that that sect may be rested in, who can with most impudence and
ostentation arrogate an usurped authority to themselves) but by their willing
submission thereunto to credit it in the affections of men, and to establish
others in the love and obedience thereunto; for the authority of the Church is
not Cameron. de Eccles. page 44.
Autoritas jurisdictionis, an authority of jurisdiction above the Scriptures:
but only Autoritas muneris, an authority of dispensation and of trust, to
proclaim, exhibit, present the truth of God unto the people, August. in
Prooem. lib. de Doctrine. Christ.
to point to the star, which is directed unto by the finger, but is seen by
the evidence of its own light. Doct. Whit^ in his Way to the Church, number. 15.
To hold forth, as a Figi enim sole bant leges, aut quandoque inaes incidi, and
in locis celeberrimis, ut a qu^libet l^gerentur, proponi. vid. Brisson. ae
formul. l. 2. page 137. and lib. 3. page 323. --
pasquill or pillar that Law, and Proclamation of Christ, the contents whereof
we discover out of it self. In one word, that place shows the duty of the
Church to preserve knowledge, and to show forth the truth of sacred Scriptures
out of themselves; but not any infallibility in it self, or authority over
others, to bind their consciences to assent unto such expositions of
Scripture, as derive not their evidence from the harmony and analogy of the
Scriptures themselves, but only from Ipse dixit, because the Church has spoken
it.

To conclude this point, we are to note for the clear understanding of the
office of the Church concerning the holy Scriptures: First, that some things
therein are 2 Pet. 3.16.
Hard to be understood, as Saint Peter speaks, either by reason of their
allegorical and figurative expressions, as the visions of Ezekiel, Daniel,
Zechary, etc. or by reason of the obscure and strange connection of one part
with another, or of the dependence thereof upon foreign learning, or the like;
but then we must note that the knowledge of such things as these, are not of
absolute necessity unto salvation, for though the perverting of hard places be
damnable (as Saint Peter tells us) yet that ignorance of them which grows
out of their own obscurity, and not out of our neglect, is not damnable.
Secondly, some things have evidence enough in the terms that express them,
but yet are Hard to be believed, by reason of the supernatural quality of
them. As when we say that Christ was the Son of a Virgin, or that he died and
rose again, there is no difficulty in the sense of these things, it is easily
understood what he that affirms them does mean by them. All the difficulty
is to bring the mind to give assent unto them. Thirdly, some things though
easy in their sense to be understood, and it may be easy likewise in their
nature to be believed, are yet Hard to be obeyed and practiced, as repentance,
and forsaking of sin, etc. Now according unto these differences we may
conceive of the office and power which the Church has in matters of holy
Scripture.

First, for hard places in regard of the sense and meaning of the place, it is
the duty of the Church to open them to Gods people with modesty, and
moderation; and Necesse est eos qui Scripturas edissirendo pertracta^t, eti^msi
rectae atque unius fidei fuerint, varias pare^e in mullorum locorum obscuritate
sententias: quam vis nequaquam ipsa vaerietas ab ejusdem fidei unitate
discordet; sicut etiam unus tractator secundum eandem fidem aliter atque aliter
eundem locum potest exponere, quia hoc ejus obscuritas patitur. Aug. cp. 19.
therein God allows the learned a Christian liberty, with submission of
their opinions always to the spirits of the Prophets, so long as they do
therein nothing contrary to the Analogy of faith, to the general peace, and
unity of the Church, to the rules of charity, piety, loyalty* and sobriety;
to abound in their own sense, and to declare, for the further edifying of the
Church, what they conceive to be in such difficult places principally intended.
And further than this no Church nor person can go; for if unto any man or
chair there were annexed an infallible spirit, enabling him to give such a
clear and indubitate exposition of all holy Scriptures, as should leave no
inevidence in the Text, nor hesitancie in the minds of men; how comes it to
pass that hitherto so many difficulties remain, wherein even our Adversaries
amongst themselves do give several conjectures and explications, and how can
that man, to whom so excellent a gift of infallibility is bestowed, clear
himself of envy, and abuse of the grace of God, who makes not use thereof to
expound the Scriptures, and to compose those differences thereabouts, which do
so much perplex the world?

Secondly, for those places which in their meaning are easy to be understood,
but in their excellent and high nature hard to be believed (as all Articles of
faith, and things of absolute necessity are in their terms Theodoret. de
curand. Graec. affect. lib. 8. Cypr. sermon. de Baptis. Christi. Aug. ^pist 3 ad
Volus. et to. 3 de doctrine. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
perspicuous, but in their heavenly nature unevident unto humane reason) the
office of the Church is not to bind men's consciences to believe these truths
upon her authority, for we have not dominion over the faith of men, neither
are we lords in Christ's flock; and how shall any scrupulous mind, which is
desirous to boult things to the bran, be secure of the power which the Church
in this case arrogates, or have any certainty that this society of men must be
believed in their religion, who will allow the same honor to no society of men
but themselves? But in this case the office of the Church is, both to labor by all good means to evidence the credibility of the things which are to be
believed, to discover unto men those essential and intimate beauties of the
Gospel, which to spiritual minds and hearts raised to such a proportionable
pitch of capacity as are suitable to the excellency of their natures, are apt
to evidence and notify themselves, and also to labor to take men off from
dependence on their own reason or corrupted judgment, to work in their heart
an experience of the Spirit of grace, and an obedience to those holy truths
which they already assent unto; Dr. Field of the Church, l. 4. c. 8.
with which preparations and persuasions, the heart being possessed, will in
due time come to observe more clearly, by that spiritual eye, the evidence of
those things which were at first so difficult; so then the Act of the Church is
in matters of faith an act of introduction and guidance, Singulis credentibus
suus gustus est judicii a spiritu, ut hominibus a natura suus. Iun. contr.
Bellar. controv. 1. lib. 3. cap. 3. number. 13.
but that which begets the infallible and unquestionable assent of faith is
that spiritual taste, relish, and experience of the heavenly sweetness of
divine doctrine, which, by the ministry of the Church, accompanied with the
special concurrence of almighty God therewithal, is wrought in the heart; for
it is only the Spirit of God which writes the Law in men's hearts, which
searches the things of God, and which makes us to know them.

Thirdly, for those places which are difficult, rather to be obeyed than to be
understood: The work of the Church is to enforce upon the conscience the
necessity of them, to persuade, rebuke, exhort, encourage with all authority.

Which should teach us all to love the Church of Christ, and to pray for the
peace and prosperity of the walls of Sion, for the purity, spiritualnesse,
power and countenance of the Word therein, which is able to hold up its own
honor in the minds of men, if it be but faithfully published; we should
therefore study to maintain, to credit, to promote the Gospel, to encourage
truth, discountenance error, to stand in the gap against all the stratagems
and advantages of the enemies thereof, and to hold the candlestick fast amongst
us, to buy the truth, and sell it not, betray it not, forsake it not, temper it
not, misguize it not. This is to be a pillar, and to put the shoulder under the
Gospel of Christ. And surely though the Papists boast of the word and name of
the Church (as none more apt to justify and brag of their sobriety than those
whom the wine has overtaken) yet the plain truth is, they have far less of
the nature thereof, than any other Churches, because far less of the pure
service and ministration thereof, for in stead of holding forth the Word of
life, they pull it down, denying unto the people of Christ the use of his
Gospel, dimidiating the use of his Sacrament, breeding them up in an ignorant
worship, to beg they know not what, in all points disgracing the Word of
truth, and robbing it of its certainty, sufficiency, perspicuitie,
authority, purity, energie in the minds of men. And this is certain, the more
any set themselves against the light and general knowledge of the Word of
truth, the less of the nature of the Church they have in them, whatever
ostentations they may make of the name thereof.

The last thing observed in this second verse amongst the regalities of Christ,
was Imperium, his rule and government in his Church by his holy Word, maugre
all the attempts and machinations of the enemies thereof against it: Rule thou
in the midst of thine enemies, that is, Thou shall rule safely, securely,
undisturbedly, without danger, fear, or hazard, from the enemies round about;
their counsels shall be infatuated, their purposes shall vanish, their decrees
shall not stand, their Ne quicquam proficit exquisitior quaeque crudelitas
vestra, illecebra est magis sectae, plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis.
Semen est sanguis Christianorum -- Inde est quod sententiis vestris gratias
agimus, ut est aemulatio divinae rei and humanae, Tertul. Apolog. cap. ult.
persecutions shall but sow the blood of Christ, and the ashes of Christians
the thicker, they shall see it, and gnash with their teeth, and gnaw their
tongues, and be horribly amazed at the emulation and triumph of a Christians
sufferings over the malice and wrath of men.

The kingdom of Christ is twofold; His kingdom of glory, of which there
shall be no end, when he shall rule over his enemies, and tread them under his
feet: and his kingdom of grace, whereby he rules amongst his enemies, by the
scepter of his Word. And this is the kingdom here spoken of; noting unto us,
that Christ will have a Church and people gathered unto him by the preaching of
his Gospel on the earth, maugre all the malice, power, or policy of all his
enemies. Never was Satan so loose, never heresy and darkness so thick, never
persecution so prevalent, never the tail of the Dragon so long, as to sweep
away all the Stars of heaven, or to devour the remnant of the woman's seed.
The gates of hell, all the policy, power and machinations of the kingdom of
darkness, shall never root out the Vine which the Father has planted, nor
prevail against the body of Christ. His Gospel must be preached till the
worlds end, and till then he will be with it to give it success. Though the
Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers gather together against the Lord
and his Christ, yet they imagine but a vain thing, and he that sits in
heaven shall laugh them to scorn.

The grounds of the certainetie and perpetuity of Christ's Evangelicall
Kingdom is not the nature of the Church in it self considered, either in the
whole or parts; for Adam and Evah were a Church at first, a people that were
under the law of obedience, and worship of God, and yet they fell away from
that excellent condition. And the Prophet tells us, Esaias 1.9.
that except the Lord had left a very small remnant, the Church had been all
as Sodom, and like to Gomorrah. But the grounds hereof are; First, The Decree,
ordination, and appointment of God, Psalm. 2.7. Acts 10.42. Hebr. 3.2. and we
know what ever men project, the counsel of the Lord must stand. Secondly, Gods
Gift unto Christ, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, etc. Ps. 2.8. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, Ioh. 17.6.
My Father which gave them me is greater than all, and none is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand, Ioh. 10.29. Thirdly, Gods Oath, which is the Seal
of his irreversible decree, and Covenant with Christ. Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David; His seed shall endure for ever, and
his Throne as the Sun before me, Psalm. 89.35, 36. Fourthly, Christ's own
Purchase and price which he paid for it. The Apostle says, Christ died not in
vain, and the virtue of his blood lasts to the end of the world; for as his
blood was shed from the beginning of the world in regard of Gods Decree, so
does it continue to the end, in regard of its own merit and efficacy; so long
as he sits at the right hand of God, which must be till the time of the
restitution of all things, Act. 3.21.
the merit of his blood shall work amongst men. Fifthly, Christ's own Power,
to keep inviolable the propriety he has gotten, My sheep hear my voice,
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand, Ioh. 10.27, 28. Sixthly, the Fathers
Command unto his Son, This is the Fathers will, that of all which he has given
me I should lose nothing, etc. Ioh. 6.39. Seventhly, Christ's Love and Care. The
Church is his Spouse, under his Coverture and protection, and therefore as he
has power and office, so he has delight to preserve it still. His Love is
better able to help, than the malice of the enemy is to hurt. Eighthly,
Christ's Intercession, which is not for the world, but for those whom God has
given him out of the world, and those he demands of his Father (who hears
him always) in the verture of that Covenant which between them was ratified,
on Gods part by a Promise and Oath, and on Christ's part by a Merit and
Purchase. Now Christ's Intercession shall last till his returning to judge the
world, and therefore still he must have a Church, for whom to intercede.
Lastly, Christ's own Promise, to be with the preaching of his Gospel; that is,
to give it assistance and success, for the gathering together and perfecting
of the Saints unto the End of the world, Matthew. 28.20.

Here then may be answered two great Questions: First, whether the Church may
deficere, fail upon the earth or no? To which I answer, That the Church may
be taken either mystically, spiritually, and universally. And in that sense it
can never fail, but there must be upon the earth a true Church of Christ, not
only certitudine eventus, by the certainety of the event, which is on all
sides agreed; but certitudine causa too, by a certainty growing out of those
irresistible causes upon which the being of the mystical body of Christ on the
earth depends. Or it may be considered particularly in the several parts and
places of the world where the Gospel is planted; and hierarchically and
politically, denoting a company of men, professing the faith of Christ, and
reduced into a quiet, peaceable, composed and conspicuous government; and so
we affirm that there is no Church in the world so safe, but that it may
deficere, fail, and be extinguished out of its place. The Church of the Jews
did, and after them any may. Else the Apostles argument even to the Roman
Church it self (which was then a famous Church throughout the world, Romans 1.8.
and of that passage in the Apostle, Baron. An. 58. 47, 48, 49, 50.
Baronius makes a long boast) were very weak, when a majori ad minus he thus
argues, Be not high-minded but fear, for if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Romans 11.21, 22.
Thus we find the ten tribes in their apostacy, till they became Lo-ammi, to
be no more a people; Hos. 1.9.
and their brethren after fall in their condition, Wrath, says the Apostle, is
come to the uttermost upon them. 1 These. 2.16.
And he tells us that the man of sin, the Son of perdition, should be
revealed by Apostacy, 2 These. 2.3, 7. 1 Timothy 4.1. Cameron. de Eccles. p.
265-268.
to note unto us that Antichrist was to be generated out of the corruption or
falling away of some eminent Church, and that, by a mysterious and insensible
declination.

A second question which may be made is this, that since the Church does not
totally fail from off the earth, whether that which remains thereof be
always visible? To which we answer, That if we take the Church for the
spiritual and mystical body of Christ: Ex illis omnibus qui intrinse^e and in
occulto intus sunt constat ille Ho^tus conclusus, sons signatus, etc. Aug. de
Baptism. cont. Donat. li. 5. cap. 27. Alii ita sunt in dom^ Dei, ut ipsi etiam
sint eadem Domus Dei -- Alii ita ut non pertineant ad compagem Domus, etc. De
Bapt. l. 7. c. 51.
which is indeed the House of God, so it is in a sort still invisible, because
the qualities and principles which constitute a man in the body of Christ, as
Faith, and the Spirit of Grace, are invisible things. Seen indeed they may be
by an eye of Charity, in their fruits, but not by an eye of certainety, in
their own infallible being. Secondly, if we take the Church for a company of
men professing the true Doctrine of Christ, we answer, that take the men in
themselves so truly professing, and impossible it is but their faith should
show it self in the fruits thereof, for the kingdom of Christ is in the heart
like leaven which will manifest it self in the whole lump, and so we can in
all even the worst ages of the Church, show some who have witnessed the truth
against that deluge of ignorance, error, and idolatry, which had invaded the
world, like gray hairs here and there mingled on a black head; as if you
single out fire from the ashes, it will be seen by its own evidence, though
it may be so raked up that it is not observed. But then if we speak of these
men in aggregato, as concurring to make up a distinct external body, or Church,
so we say that the professors of the truth may be so few, and they persecuted,
traduced, suppressed, cried down, driven into the wilderness, without any
apparent, separated conspicuousnesse, and government of its own (as in the
time of Constantius the emperor the public professors of the Divinity of
Christ's person, against the damnable heresy of the Arrians were used) as that
in this sense we may justly deny the Church to have been always visible,
that is, The few true professors of Christ in power and purity to have had a
free, open, uncontroled, distinct ecclesiastical body of their own,
notoriously and in conspectu hominum different from that tyrannical and
pompous hierarchy under which they suffered: for though Christ rule, yet it is
in the midst of his enemies, and the enemies may be so many, and Christ's
subjects in whom he rules so few, that the corn may be invisible for the
abundance of weeds amongst which it grows, though in it self very apt to be
seen.

And this gives a full answer to that Question, where Our Church was before
the late Reformation began by Luther: for that Reformation did not new-make the
Church, but purge it. And that it stood in need of purging, the Papists
themselves were feign to confess, and declare to the world in their Council
of Trent. Only herein is the difference, The Council pretended a Reformation
in points of Discipline and manners, and we made a Reformation in points of
Doctrine too. When Christ purged the Temple of buyers and sellers, it was the
same Temple after, which before. When a man separateth the wheat from the
chafe, it is the same corn which before. In these corrupter ages then the
pure Professor of Christ, who denied not his faith did dwell where Satan had
his seat. Vt sub Antichristi sacerdotibus Christi populus non excideret. Hilar.
The members of Christ were amongst the Rulers of Antichrist. We are not
another Church newly started up, but the same which before from the Apostles
times held the common and necessary grounds of Faith and Salvation, which
grounds being in latter ages perverted and over-turned by Antichristianisme,
have been by valiant Champions for the faith of Christ therefrom vindicated,
who have only pruned the Lords Vine, and picked out the stones, and driven out
the bores out of his Vineyard, but have not made either one or other new.

Now this point that Christ rules in the midst of his enemies is ground of
great confidence in his Church, in as much as she subsisteth not upon any
corruptible strength of her own, but upon the Promise, decree, oath, power and
love of God, things invincible by all the Powers of darkness. Let the enemies
rage never so much, they cannot dis-throne Christ, nor extinguish his Gospel,
for it is an everlasting Gospel. It is but as the coming forth of a Shepherd
against a Lion, as the Prophet compares it. Revel. 14.16. Esai. 31.4. Iud. v.
24.
For either Christ is unable to protect his people, and that is against Saint
Jude, He is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultlesse,
etc. or else he is unwilling, and that is against Saint Paul, This is the will
of God, 1 These. 4.3.
even your sanctification; Or else both his Power and his will are suspended
upon expectation of humane concurrence, or nullified and disappointed by us,
and that is against the influence of his Grace, which gives us both the will
and the deed, Phil. 2.13.
against the mercy of his gracious promise: I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, Heb 8.12. Hos. 14.4. Hos. 11.9. Mal 3.6. Esai. 54.9, 10.
and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. I will heal
their backslidings, I will save them freely: against the immutabilitie of his
Covenant and holy nature, I am God and not man, I change not, therefore the
sons of Jacob are not destroyed.

Now besides this general observation, the words afford some particular notes
which I will but briefly touch. As first, That Christ's kingdom in this world
is Regnum Crucis, a Kingdom beset with enemies, of all other the most hated
and opposed. They that submit unto it must resolve to be herein conformable to
their head; a Cross was his Throne, and Thorns were his Crown, and every one
which will live godly must suffer persecution, and through many afflictions
enter into his Masters Kingdom. Quod erat Christus, erimus Christiani. No
marvel if the world hate the Church of Christ, for it hated him first. In his
word he is resisted, disobeyed, belied, and, if it were possible, silenced and
corrupted; in his officers mocked and misused, in his subjects persecuted and
reviled, in his Spirit thrust away and grieved; in his worship neglected and
polluted; in all his ways slandered and blasphemed.

The Reasons of which strange entertainment of the Kingdom of Christ are,
first, because it is a New Kingdom, which enters into the world by way of
challenge and dispossession of former lords, and therefore no wonder if it find
opposition. Secondly, it is an invisible, unconspicuous, unattended, desolate,
and in appearance ignoble kingdom. It began in the form of a servant, in the
ignominy of a Cross, Ioh. 7.48.
none of the Princes of this world, 1 Cor. 1.21* 22.
none of the learned of this world to countenance or help set it up, but
amongst them all, esteemed as an offensive and foolish thing. Thirdly, it is an
universal kingdom, Nec parem patitur nec superiorem, Christ will admit of no
Consorts or Corrivals in his Government. Body, and Soul, and Spirit, 1 Cor.
6.20. 1 These. 5.23. Laurent. de La Ba^r. in Tertull. Apolog. cap. 5.
he will have wholly and throughout unto himself. And this amongst others is
given for the reason, why when Tiberius proposed Christ unto the Roman Senate
with the privilege of his own suffrage, to be worshipped, they rejected him,
because he would be a God alone. If he would exempt some of the earthly
members from his subjection, let lust have the eye, or folly the ear, or
violence the hand, or covetousness the heart, or any other evil affection
share with him, he would be the easier tolerated; but when he will be absolute,
and nothing must remain in our hearts but as his vassal* to be spoiled,
subdued, condemned, and crucified by him, if the whole state of sin must be
ruined, and the body destroyed, no wonder if the world cannot away with him.
Fourthly, which is the Sum of all, It is a heavenly Kingdom, a spiritual
Kingdom, My Kingdom is not of this world, and therefore no marvel if the
devils of hell, and the lusts of the flesh do set themselves against him.

Note secondly, even there where Christ's Throne and Kingdom is set up he has
enemies. Revel. 2.13.2.9.
Satan has his seat even where Christ dwells. Men may say they are Jews,
and are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan, and men may say they are
Christians, and are not, but of the kingdom of Satan too. A Wenne in the body
seems to belong unto the integrity of the whole, when indeed it is an enemy
and thief therein. Ivy about a tree seems to embrace it with much
affection, when indeed it does but kill and choke it. Men may take upon them
the profession of Christians, and like a Wenne be skinned over with the same
outside which the true members have, may pretend much submission, worship, and
ceremony unto him, and yet (such is the hellish hypocrisy of the heart) the
same men may happily inwardly swell and rancle against the power of his truth and
Spirit. Esai. 29.13.
This people, says the Lord, draw near me with their mouth, and honor me
with their lips, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear
toward me is taught by the precepts of men. Gal. 2.4. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Timothy 4.1,
2. Col. 2.23 2 Timothy 3.5, 6. Occultae ob^epti^nes, Aug. To. 4 de fid. and op. c.
5. (...), Isi^. Pelat. li. 1. Epist. 102. Sub i^so Christiani nominis titulo
fallit [inimicus] incautos, etc. Cyp. ^eunit. Eccl. Vsitatissi^a haec
H^reticorum fraus de personarum revere^tia and praetextu pietatis sibi fidem
praestruere. vid. Aug. To. 1. De morib. Eccle. l. 1. c. 1. and Epist. 120 c.
37. De peccat. merit. and Remiss. lib. 2. c^p. 16. and l. 3 c. 1. and 3.
In the Apostles times there were false brethren, and false teachers, who crept
in, to spy out and betray the liberty of the Church, and privily to bring in
damnable heresies, and to speak lies in hypocrisy, that is, under the pretext
of devotion, and carnal humility, to corrupt the Doctrine of Christ, and
under a form of Godliness to deny the Power thereof. Therefore Rev. 17.1.4.
Antichrist is called a Whore, because he should seduce the Christian world
with much expression of love, and creep peaceably and by flatteries into the
kingdom of Christ: of these several enemies of Christ, under the profession
of his name and worship, some are Christians but not in purity, as heretics;
some not in unity, as schismatikes; some not in sincerity, as hypocrites; some
not so much as in external conformity, as evil workers: The heretic
corrupts Christ, the schismatike divides him, the hypocrite mocketh him, the
profane person dishonoreth him, and all deny him.

Let us then learn to look unto our hearts, for we may Psa. 78.36, 37.
slatter Christ, when we do not love him; we Nihil laborant nisi non invenire
quod quaeru^^. Aug. de Genesis con. Manich. l. 2 c. 2.
may inquire and seek early after him, and yet have no desire to find him;
we may come unto his school as untoward children, not for love of his
Doctrine, but for fear of his rod; we may call him husband, and yet be wedded
to our own lusts; we may be baptized in his name, so was Act 8.13.
Simon Magus; we may preach him, so did the Mat. 7.22. Phil. 1.16.
false brethren; we may flock after him, so Ioh. 6.26.
did the multitude who followed him not for his words or miracles, but for the
loaves; we may bow unto him, Mat. 27.29.
so did his crucifiers; we may call upon his name, Mat. 7.21.
so did the hypocrites that said, Lord, Lord, and yet did not enter into the
kingdom of heaven; we may confess and believe him, Luke 8.28. Iam. 2.19.
so do the very devils in hell; we may give him our lips, our eyes, our
tongues, our knees, our hands, and yet still our kingdom, our throne, our
hearts may be Satan's. And all this is to make him but a mock-king as the Jews
did, when indeed we crucify him.

Note thirdly, Christ's Word and Spirit are stronger than all adverse
opposition. This is his Glory that his kingdom comes in unto him by way of
Conquest, as Canaan unto Israel. Therefore at the very first erecting of his
kingdom, when, in all presumption, it might most easily have been crushed, he
suffered his enemies to vent their utmost malice, and to glut themselves with
the blood of his people, that so it might appear, that though they did fight
against him, they Esai. 8.7-10. Dan. 2.44. Dan. 7.25, 26. Zech 12.3, 4. Esai.
31.8.
could not prevail against him, but that his counsel should still stand and
flourish, and should consume, and break in pieces all the kingdoms which set
themselves against it: that they all should be afraid of the Ensign of the
Gospel, and should fly from it.

This jealousy of God for his Church may be seen, in frustrating the
attempts, and pulling off the wheels on which the projects which are cast
against his Church do move, as he dealt with Pharaoh. He can dissolve the
confederacies, shatter the counsels, cast a spirit of treachery,
unfaithfulness, and mutinous affections into the hearts of his enemies, as he
did into the Midianites, and into the children of Ammon, Judge 17.22. 2 Chr.
20.22, 23. Esai. 19.9.29* 14. Mic. 4.11, 12. Esai. 37.33, 34. Psalm. 33.10, 11.
Moab and Edom, when they gathered together against his people. He can
infatuate their counsels, and make them the contrivers and artificers of their
own ruin, as we see in the consultation of Rehoboam with his young men, and
of Jeroboam in his idolatrous policy, and of Haman in his gallows. He can
defeat their expectations, and disannull their decrees, and make his own
Counsel alone to stand.

But when all this is done, this is only to rule in spite of his enemies. But
besides this, his Kingdom fetches his enemies under, and in some sort rules
over their consciences, and strikes them to the ground; makes the devils in
hell, the stoutest of all sinners to tremble, breaks the rocks asunder,
affrighteth, judges, seals, hardens, Ier. 23 29. 2 Cor. 10.6.
thresheth, revengeth the pride of men, and makes them beforehand to taste
the bitterness of that damnation, which waketh over them, and comes swiftly
against them.

Let us take heed then of being Christ's enemies, in opposing the power and
progress of his word, the evidence and purity of his Spirit in the lives of
men. It is but to make a combination to pull the Sun out of heaven; or for a
wave to contend with a rock; for as the ruins of a house are broken on the
things upon which they fall: so are the enemies of Christ, which gather
together against his Church, Luk 20.18.
and fall upon the rock, at length ruined by their own malice. Sampsons foxes
were themselves burnt amongst the corn which they fired. The land brought
forth corn the next year again (and it may be more plentifully by reason of
that fire) but the foxes never came up any more. Even so can the Lord deal
with those enemies which waste and depopulate his Church, make them the authors
of their own utter confusion, and bring forth his Church with shouting, and
with doubled graces.

Who then is the man that desires tranquillity of life, and security against
all evil? Let him become a subject in this conquering kingdom, and cast
himself under the banner and protection of Christ, and he cannot miscarrie. He
that walks uprightly, walks surely. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower,
the righteous flies unto it and is safe. The Lord is a Sun and a shield, a
Fountain of all good. Grace and Glory will he give, and no good thing will
he withold from them that walk uprightly: and a protection against all
evil; I will not be afraid of ten thousand of men, says the Prophet David,
that compass me about. When there is no light, nor issue, nor in nature
possibility of escape, he can open a door of deliverance, to relieve his
Church. As a man in the kings highway is under the kings protection: so in
Christ's way we are under his protection. Let us then never repine at the
miscarriages of the world, nor murmr against the wise proceedings of God in
the several dispensation towa^ds his Church on earth: when he punishes, he
does it in measure, less than our sins deserved; and when we search and try
our ways, and return unto him, he knows how to work his own glory in our
deliverance. Those stones which are appointed for a glorious building are first
under the saw, and the hammer, to be hewed and squared; and those Christians in
whom the Lord will take most delight, he usually thereunto fitteth by trials
and extremities. He that is brought to tremble in himself, may with most
confidence expect to rejoice in God. Hab. 3.16.


Note fourthly, this is the honor of Christ's kingdom to be a peaceable,
quiet, and secure kingdom, not only after the victory, but in the midst of
enemies. This man, says the Prophet of Christ, Mic. 5.5.
shall be the peace, when the Assyrian, the enemy, is in the land. We have
peace in him, when we have tribulation in the world. Christ says of himself,
I came not to send peace but a sword; and yet the Apostle says, Ioh. 16.33.
That he came, and preached peace to those which were afar off, Mat. 10.34.
Ephesians. 2.17.
and to them which were near. How shall these things be reconciled? Surely as
a man may say of a Rock, Nothing more quiet, because it is never stirred, and
yet nothing more unquiet, because it is ever assaulted: so we may say of the
Church, Nothing more peaceable, because it is established upon a Rock, and yet
nothing more unpeaceable, because that rock is in the midst of seas, winds,
enemies, persecutions. But yet still the Prophets Conclusion is certain, The
work of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness, Esai. 32.17.
quietness and assurance for ever.

VERSE 3. Thy people shall be willing in the Day of thy Power, in the Beauties
of Holiness from the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.


THe Prophet before showed the Reign of Christ over his enemies; he now
speaks of his Reign over his people, and describes what manner of subjects
or soldiers Christ should have. I will not trouble you with variety of
expositions (occasioned by the many Metaphors, and different translations) but
give in a few words those which I conceive to be most literal and pertinent to
the place.

Thy people] that is, those whom thou do receive from thy Father, and, by
setting up the standard and Ensign of thy Gospel, gather to thy self. Shall
be willing] the word is willingnesses, that is, a people of great Willingness
and Devotion, or (as the original word is elsewhere used, Psalm. 119.108.)
shall be free will offerings unto thee. The Abstract being put for the
Concrete, and the plural for the singular, Ephesians. 4.8. Ephesians. 5.8.
notes how exceeding forward and free they should be; as the Lord to signify
that his people were most rebellious, says, that they were Rebellion it self,
Ezekiel. 2.8. So then the meaning is, Thy people shall, with most ready and
forward cheerfulness, devote, consecrate, and render up themselves to thy
government as a reasonable sacrifice, shall be of a most liberal, free,
noble, and unconstrained spirit in thy service, they shall be Voluntaries in
the wars of thy Kingdom. In the Day of Thy Power, or Of thine Armies] by
these words we may understand two things, both of them aiming at the same
general sense: First, so as that [ Armies] shall be the same with [ Thy
people] before; In the Day when thou shall assemble thy Soldiers together,
when thou shall set up thine Ensigns for them to seek unto, that is, when
thou shall cause the preaching of thy Gospel to sound like a Trumpet, that men
may prepare themselves in armies to fight thy battles, then shall all thy
people with great devotion and willingness gather themselves together under
thy Colors, and freely devote themselves to thy military service. Secondly,
so, as that by Power or Armies may be meant the Means whereby this free and
willing Devotion in Christ's people is wrought: that is, when thou shall send
forth the Rod of thy strength, when thou shall command thy Apostles and
Ministers to go forth and fight against the kingdoms of Sin and Satan, when
thou shall in the dispensation of thine Ordinances reveal thy Power and
spiritual strength unto their Consciences, then shall they most willingly
relinquish their former service, and wholly devote themselves unto thee, to
fight under thy banners, and to take thy part against all thine enemies.

In the Beauties of Holinesse] This likewise we may severally understand.
Either, in thy Holy Church. Which may well so be called with allusion to the
Temple at Jerusalem, which is called The Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 29.2. and a
Holy and Beautiful house, Esai. 64.11. and a glorious high throne, Ier. 17.12.
And hither did the tribes resort in troops, as it were in armies, Psalm. 84.7.
to present their free will offerings, and celebrate the other services of the
Lord. Or else we may understand it Causally, thus; In the Day of thy Power,
that is, when thou shall reveal thy strength and Spirit, and in the Beauties
of Holiness, that is, when thou shall reveal how exceeding beautiful, and
full of loveliness thy Holy ways and services are, then shall thy people be
persuaded with all free and willing devotion of heart to undertake them. Or
lastly, thus; as the Priests who offered sacrifices to the Lord were clothed
with Holy and Beautiful garments; Exodus 28.2.40. or as those who in admiration
of some noble Prince voluntarily follow the service of his wars, do set
themselves forth in the most complete furniture and richest attire as is fit to
give notice of the nobleness of their minds: (for Judge. 5.30. Curtius, lib.
3. and 5. vid. Brisson. de Reg. Persarum, lib. 3. page 323. -- and Tho.
Demsteri. ad Rosin. Antiq. paralipom, lib. 10. cap. 1. Cant. 6.4.10.
beautiful armor was want to be esteemed the honor of an army.) So they who
willingly devote themselves unto Christ, to be Soldiers and Sacrifices unto
him, are not only armed with strength, but adorned with such inward graces, as
make them Beautiful as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem, fair as the Moon, cle^re
as the Sun, and terrible as an army with banners. All which three
Explications meet in one general, which is principally intended, that
Holiness has all beauties in it, and is that only which makes a man lovely
in the Eyes of Christ.

From the womb of the morning: thou have the dew of thy youth.] There is a
middle point after those words, [ The Womb of the Morning,] which may seem to
disjoine the clauses, and make those words refer wholly to the preceding. In
which relation, there might be a double sense conceived in them. Either thus,
In the Beauties of Holiness, or in Holiness very beautiful more than the
Aurora or womb of the morning, when she is ready to bring forth the Sun.
And then it is a notable metaphor to express the glorious beauty of Gods
ways. Or thus, thy people shall be a willing people from the very womb of
the morning; that is, from the very first forming of Christ in them, and
shining forth upon them, they shall rise out of their former nakedness and
security, and shall adorn themselves with the beautiful graces of Christ's
Spirit, as with clothing of wrought gold, and raiment of needle-worke, and
shall with gladness and rejoicing, with much devotion and willingness of
heart be brought unto the King, and present themselves before him as
Voluntaries in his service. Psalm. 45.13, 14, 15.
But because the learned conceive that the middle point is only a distinction
for convenient reading, not a disjunction of the sense, I shall therefore rest
in a more received exposition. Thy Children shall be borne in great abundance
unto thee, by the seed of thy word, in the womb of the Church, as soon as the
morning, or sun of righteousness shall shine forth upon it. As the dew is
borne out of the cool morning air as out of a womb, distilling down in
innumerable drops upon the earth; so thine elect shall be borne unto thee, by
the preaching of thy word and first approach of thy heavenly light, in
innumerable armies. And this explication is very suitable to the harmony of
Holy Scripture, which uses the same metaphors to the same purpose in other
places. Mic. 5.7. Revel. 22.16. Luke 2.78. Mal. 4.2. Romans 13.12. 1 John 2.8.
The Remnant of Jacob, says the Prophet, shall be in the midst of many
people as a dew from the Lord. And Christ is called the Bright-morning-starre,
and the Dayspring, and the Sun of Righteousness, and time of the Gospel is
called the time of Day, or the approach of Day. So that, from the womb of the
morning, is from the heavenly light of the Gospel, which is the wing or beam
whereby the Sun of Righteousness reveals himself, and breaks out upon
the world, as the rising Sun, which rejoices like a Giant to run his race,
shall the succession increase, and armies of the Church of God be continually
supplied.

The words thus unfolded do contain in them a lively Character of the
subjects in Christ's spiritual Kingdom. Described first by their Relation to
him, and his propriety to them, Thy People. Secondly, by their present
condition, intimated in the word, Willing, or Voluntaries, and (if we take [
Thy People] and [ Armies] for Synonymous terms. The one notifying the order
and quality of the other) expressed in the Text, and that is, to be military
men. Thirdly, by their through and universal resignation, subjection, and
devotednesse unto him. For when he conquereth by his word, his conquest is
wrought upon the wills and affections of men. Victorque volentes Per populos
dat jura. Thy people shall be willing. The ground of which willingness is
further added, (for so chiefly I understand those words) The Day of thy Power.
So that the willingness of Christ's subjects is effected by the power of his
grace and Spirit in the revelation of the Gospel. Fourthly, By their honorable
attire, and military robes, in which they appear before him, and attend upon
him, In Beauties of Holiness, or in the various and manifold graces of Christ
as in a garment of diverse colors. Fifthly and lastly, by their age,
multitudes, and manner of their birth; They are the Dew of the morning, as many
as the small drops of dew, and they are borne to him out of the womb of the
morning, as dew is generated, not on the earth, but in the air, by a Heavenly
calling, and by the shining of the morning-starre, and dayspring upon their
consciences. Ye are all the Children of light, says the Apostle, and the
Children of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.

I said before, that I approve not the mincing and crumbling of Holy
Scriptures. Yet in these parts of them, which are written for models and
summaries of Christian Doctrine, I suppose there may be weight in every word,
as in a rich Jewel there is worth in every sparkle. Here then first we may
take notice of Christ's Propriety to his people. [ Thy people] All the Elect and
Believers do Matthew. 1.21. Ioh. 10.3. Cant. 2.16.7.10.
belong unto Christ. They are His People. They are his Own sheep. There is a
mutual and reciprocal propriety between him and them. I am my beloveds, and
my beloved is mine. His desire is toward me. His, I say, not as he is God
only, by a right of inseparable dominion as we are his creatures. For all
things were Col. 1.16, 17. Romans 9.5.
created by him and for him. And he is over all, God blessed for ever. Nor his
only as he is the Heb. 1.2, 3.2.7, 8.
firstborn and the heir of all things. In which respect he is Lord of the
Angels, and God has set him over all the works of his hands. But as he is the
mediator and head in his Church. In which respect the faithful are his by a
more peculiar propriety. Esai. 63.19.
We are thine, thou never barest rule over them, they were not called by thy
name. The Devils are his Vassals. The wicked of the world his prisoners. The
faithful only are his subjects and followers. His Jewels, his Friends, his
Brethren, his Sons, his Members, his Spouse. His, by all the relations of
intimatenesse that can be named.

Now this Propriety Christ has unto us upon several grounds. First, by
Constitution and Donation from his Father. Act. 2.36. Ephesians. 1.22. Psalm. 2.8.
Esai. 8.18. Ioh. 17.6.
God has made him Lord and Christ. He has put all things under his feet,
and has given him to be Head over all things to the Church. Ask of me and I
will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for thy possession. Behold, I and the Children whom thou have given
me. Thine they were, and thou gave them to me. For as in regard of Gods
Justice we were bought by Christ in our redemption, so in regard of his love
we were given unto Christ in our election, that he might redeem us.

Secondly, by a right of purchase, treaty, and covenant between Christ and his
Father. For we, having sold away our selves, and being now in the enemies
possession, could not be restored unto our primitive estate without some
intervening price to redeem us. Therefore says the Apostle, he was made
under the Law, Gal. 4.5. 1 Cor. 6.20. Tit. 2.14. Heb. 7 22. Romans 3.25.
(...), that he might Buy out those that were under the Law. And again, ye
are Bought with a price. He was our surety, and stood in our stead, and was
set forth to declare the righteousness of God. God dealt in grace with us, but
in justice with him.

Thirdly, by a right of conquest and deliverance. He has plucked us out of
our enemies hands, he has dispossessed and spoiled those that ruled over us
before, he has delivered us from the power of Satan, and translated us into
his own Kingdom; we are his free men, Luke 11.22. Esai. 26.13, 14, 15.
Ingratus Libertus qui Patrono non praestat obsequium. Josh. 9.26, 27.
he only has made us free from the Law of sin and death, and has rescued
us as spoils out of the hands of our enemies, and therefore we are become his
servants, and owe obedience unto him as our Patron and deliverer. As the
Gibeonites when they were delivered from the sword of the children of Israel,
were thereupon made hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the congregation:
So we being rescued out of the hands of those tyrannous Lords which ruled over
us, do now owe service and subjection unto him that has so mercifully
delivered us. Romans 6.18.7.6.
Being made free from sin (says the Apostle) ye become the Servants of
Righteousness. And, we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should serve in newness of Spirit. And again, 2 Cor. 5.15.
He died for all that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again.

Fourthly, by covenant and stipulation. I entered into covenant with thee, and
thou becamest mine. Therefore in our Baptism we are said to be Baptized into
Christ, and to put on Christ, Ezekiel. 16.8. Romans 6.3, 5. Gal. 3.27. Act. 19.5.
and to be Baptized into his name, that is, wholly to consecrate and devote our
selves to him as the servants of his family. Therefore they which were Baptized
in the ancient Socrat. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 17. Laurent. de la Bar. in Tertull.
lib. de Coron. milit. cap 1. Ambros. Tom. 4. lib. de iis qui mysterijs
initiantur, cap. 7.
Church were wont to put on white raiment, as it were the Liverie and Badge of
Christ, a Testimony of that purity and service which therein they vowed unto
him. And therefore it is that we still retain the ancient form of vow,
promise, or profession in Baptism, which Tertull. de Corona milit. cap. 3. and
de spectaculis, cap 4. Ambros. To. 4. de Sacram. lib. 1. c. 2. Basil. Mag. To.
2. de Spir. Sancto. cap. 11. Nid. Brisson. Comment. in lib. Dominico, etc. page
137.
was to renounce the Devil, and all his works, the world, with the pomp,
luxury and pleasures thereof. And this is done in a most solemn and deliberate
manner by way of answer to the question and demand of Christ. For which
purpose S. Peter calls Baptism 1 Pet. 3.21.
(...). The Answer, or the interrogative trial of a good conscience toward
God. He that conformeth himself to the fashions, and sets his heart upon
the favors, preferment, empty applause, and admiration of the world, that
lives Ephesians. 2.2.
(...), according to the rules and courses and sinful maxims of worldly men,
in such indifferency, compliancie and connivence as may flatter others and
delude himself; he that is freely and customarily overruled by the
temptations of Satan, that yields to loosnesse of heart, to vanity of
thoughts, lusts of eye, pride of life, luxury, intemperance, impurity of mind
or body, or any other earthly and inordinate affection, is little better in the
sight of God than a perjured, and a runnagate person, flinging off from that
service unto which he had bound himself by a solemn vow, and robbing Christ
of that interest in him which by a mutual stipulation was agreed upon.

Lastly, by the virtue of our communion with him, and participation of his
grace and fullness. All that we are in regard of Spirit and life is from him,
2 Cor. 12.11.
We are nothing of our selves. And we Ioh. 15.5.
can do nothing of our selves. All that we are is from the grace of Christ. 1
Cor. 15.10.
By the grace of God I am what I am. And all that we do is from the grace of
Christ, Phil. 4.13.
I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me. As when we
do evil, Romans 7 20.
it is not we our selves, but sin that dwells in us: So when we do good,
it is Gal. 2.20.
not we, but Christ that lives in us. So that in all respects we are not our
own, but his that died for us.

Now this being a point of so great consequence, needful it is that we labor
therein to try and secure our selves that we belong unto Christ. Esai 29.13.
For which purpose we must note that a man may belong unto Christ two manner
of ways: First, by a mere External profession. So all in the visible Church
that call themselves Christians, are his, and his word and oracles theirs. In
which respect they have many privileges, (as the Apostle shows of the
Jews.) Yet notwithstanding such men continuing unreformed in their inner man,
are nearer unto cursing than others, and subject unto a sorer condemnation, for
despising Christ in his word, and Spirit, with whom in their Baptism they made
so solemn a covenant. For God will not suffer his Gospel to be cast away,
Esai. 55.10, 11.
but will cause it to prosper unto some end or other, either to save those that
believe; or to cumulate the damnation of those that disobey it. He will be
more careful to cleanse his garner, and to purge his floor, Luke 3.17.
than of other empty and barren places. A weed in the garden is in more danger
of rooting out than in the open field. Such belong unto Christ, no otherwise
than Ivy to the tree unto which it externally adheres. Secondly, a man may
belong unto Christ by Implantation into his Body: Which is done by faith. But
here we are to note that as some branches in a tree have a more faint and
unprofitable fellowship with the root than others; as having no further
strength than to furnish themselves with leaves, but not with fruit: so,
according unto the several virtues or kinds of faith, may the degrees of men's
in grafture into Christ be judged of. Iam. 2 26.
There is a dead, unoperative faith, which like Adam after his fall has the
nakedness thereof covered only with leaves, with mere formal and
hypocritical conformities. And there is an unfeigned, lively, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and effectual faith; which is availeable to those purposes for which faith
was appointed, namely to justify the person, to purify the heart, to quench
temptations, to carry a man with wisdom and an unblameable conversation
through this present world, to work by love, to grow and make a man abound in
the service of the Lord. And this distinction our Savior gives us, That there
are some branches in him which bear not fruit, and those he takes away: Ioh.
15.2.
And others which bear fruit, and those he purges that they may bring forth
more. Those only are the branches, which he desires to own.

And thus to belong unto Christ is that only which makes us (...) and (...).
A purchased, a peculiar people unto him. And there are several ways of
evidencing it. I will only name two or three, and most in the Text. First, we
must know that Christ is a Morning-starre, a Sun of Righteousness, and so
ever comes to the soul with selfe-evidencing properties. Unto him belongs
that royal prerogative, to write Test Meipso in the hearts of men, to be
himself the witness to his own Acts, purchases, and covenants. Therefore his
Spirit came in tongues of fire, and in a mighty wind, all which have several
ways of manifesting themselves, and stand not in need of any borrowed or
foreign confirmations. If Christ then be in the heart he will discover
himself. His Spirit is the Original of Grace and strength, as concupiscence
is of sin. It is a seed in the heart which will spring up and show it self.
And therefore as lust does take the first advantage of the faint and imperfect
stirrings of the reasonable soul in little infants, to evidence it self in
pride, folly, stubbornness, and other childish sins: So the Spirit of grace
in the heart cannot lie dead, but will work, and move, and as a Spirit of
burning by the light, heat, purging, comforting, inflaming, combating virtue
which is in it, make the soul which was barren, and settled on the lees, and
unacquainted with any such motions before* stand amazed at its own alteration,
and say with Rebekah, If it be so, why am I thus? Externals may be imitated
by art; but no man can paint the soul or the life, or the sense and motion of
creature. Now Christ and his Spirit are the internal forms, and active
principles in a Christian man, Christ lives in us, when Christ who is our Life
shall appear, etc. Therefore impossible it is that any hypocrite should
counterfeite, and by consequence obscure those intimate and vital workings of
his grace in the soul, whereby he evidenceth himself thereunto. It is true,
a man that fears the Lord may walk in darkness, and be in such discomforts
as he shall see no light; and yet even in that condition Christ does not want
properties to evidence himself, in tenderness of conscience, fear of sin,
striving of Spirit with God, closeness of heart and constant recourse to him
in his word, and the like; only the soul is shut up and overclowded that it
cannot discern him. Ephesians. 1.14. 1 Ioh. 4.3.
The Spirit of Christ is a Seal, a witness, an earnest, an hansell, a first
fruit of that fullness which is promised hereafter. It is Christ's own Spirit,
and therefore fashioneth the hearts of those in whom it is unto his heavenly
image, to long for more comprehension of him, for more conformity unto him, for
more intimacie and communion with him, for more grace, wisdom, and strength
from him; it turns the bent and course of the soul from that earthly and
sensual end unto which it wrought before, as a good branch having been
ingrafted into a wild stock converteth the sap of a Crab into pleasant fruit.

Again, if a man be one of Christ's people, then there has a day of power
passed over him, the sword of the Spirit has entered into him, he has been
conquered by the rod of Christ's strength, he has felt John's axe laid to the
root of his conscience, and has been persuaded by the terror of the Lord;
for the coming of Christ is with shaking: the conscience has felt a mighty
operation in the Word, though to other men it has passed over like empty
breath; for the Word works effectually in those that believe, and brings
about the purposes for which it was sent. To those that are called it is the
power of God, 1 Cor. 1.22.

Again, where Christ comes, he comes with beauty and holiness, Ezekiel. 16.9.14.
those who lay in their blood and pollutions before bare and naked, are made
exceeding beautiful, and renowned for their beauty, perfect through the
comelines which he puts upon them. Esaias 61.3.
He comes unto the soul with beauty and precious oil, and garments of praise,
that is, with comfort, joy, peace, healing, to present the Church a Holy Church
without spot or wrinckle to his Father.

Lastly, where Christ comes, he comes with a womb of the morning, John
7.38.15.2.
with much light to acquaint the soul with his truth and promises; and with
much fruitfulness, making the heart, which was barren before, to flow with
rivers of living water, Cant. 4.2.
to bring forth fruit more and more, and to abound in the works of the Lord.
Esaias 32.15.
These are the particular evidences of our belonging to Christ in the Text, and
by these we must examine our selves. Romans 7.4.
Do I find in my soul the new name of the Lord Jesus written, that I am not
only in title, but in truth a Christian? Do I find the secret nature and
figure of Christ fashioned in me, swaying mine heart to the love and obedience
of his holy ways? Do I hear the voice, and feel the hand and judicature of
his blessed Spirit within me, leading me in a new course, ordering mine inner
man, sentencing and crucifying mine earthly members? Am I a serious and earnest
enemy to my original lusts, and closest corruptions? Do I feel the workings
and kindlings of them in mine heart with much pain and mourning, with much
humiliation for them, and deprecation against them? Is Christ my center? Do I
find in mine heart a willingness to be with him, as well here in his word,
ways, promises, directions, comforts, yea, in his reproaches and persecutions,
as hereafter in his glory? Is it the greatest business of my life to make my
self more like him, to walk as he also walked, to be as he was in this world,
to purify my self even as he is pure? Has the terror of his wrath persuaded
me, and shaken my conscience out of its carnal security, and made me look
about for a refuge from the wrath to come, and esteem more beautiful than the
morning brightness the feet of those who bring glad tidings of deliverance and
peace? Has his Gospel an effectual seminall virtue within me to new form my
nature and life daily unto his heavenly Image? Is it an ingrafted word which
mingleth with my conscience, and hides it self in my heart, actuating,
determining, moderating, and overruling it to its own way? Am I cleansed from
my filthiness, careful to keep my self chaste, comely, beautiful, a fit
spouse for the fairest of ten thousand? Do I rejoice in his light, walking as
a child of light, living as an heir of light, going on like the Sun unto
the perfect day laboring to abound always in the work of the Lord? Then I may
have good assurance that I belong unto Christ. And if so, that will be a
seminary of much comfort to my soul.

For first, if we are Christ's, then he cares for us, for propriety is the
ground of care. He that is an hireling, Ioh 10.12, 13, 14.
says our Savior, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees
the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, etc. Because he is an hireling he
cares not for the sheep. But I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and
am known of mine, Ezekiel. 34.11-15.
because they are mine, therefore I am careful of them. He watches over us,
he searches and seeks us out in our stragglings, and feeds us. This is the
principal argument we have to believe, that God will look upon us for good,
notwithstanding our manifold provocations, because he is pleased to own us,
and to take us as his own peculiar people. Though the Church be full of
ruins, Heb. 3.5, 6.
yet because it is his own house, he will repair it; Ezekiel. 16.8, 9.
though it be black as well as comely, yet because it is his own Spouse, he
will pity and cherish it; Ezekiel. 15.5.
though it bring forth wild grapes, and be indeed meet for no work, yet
because it is his own vine, planted by his own right hand, Psalm. 80.15.
and made strong for himself, he will therefore be careful to fence and prune
it. This is the only argument we have to prevail with God in prayer, that in
Christ we call him Father, we present our selves before him, Esaias 63.8-19.
as his own, we make mention of no other Lord or name over us, and therefore
he cannot deny us the things which are good for us. Esaias 26.13.


Secondly, if we are Christ's, then he will certainly purge us, and make the
members suitable to the head. I swear unto thee, and entered into covenant with
thee, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16.8, 9.
and thou becamest mine, and immediately it follows, then washed I thee with
water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee. John 15.2.
Every branch in ^e that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth
more fruit. Tit. 2.14.
He purifieth to himself a peculiar people: If we be his peculiar people, and
set apart for himself (as the Prophet David speaks) he will undoubtedly
purify us; Psalm. 4 3.
that we may be honorable vessels, sanctified and meet for the M^sters use,
and prepared unto every good work. He will furnish us with all such supplies
of the spirit of grace, 2 Timothy 2.21.
as the condition of that place in his body requires, in the which he has set
us. Grace and glory will he give, and no good thing will he withhold from those
who walk uprightly, our propriety to Christ gives us right unto all good
things: All is yours, and you are Christ's.

Thirdly, if we are Christ's, then he will spare us. This was the argument which
the Priest was to use between the Porch and the Altar, Spare thy people, O
Lord, Joel 2.17, 18.
and give not thine heritage to reproach. Then will the Lord be jealous for his
Land, and pity his people. Exodus 32.12. Numb. 14.13. Esaias 64.9. Malac. 3.17.
They shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my jewels; and I
will spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. Of my
servant, to whom I give wages for the merit of his work, not out of love or
grace, I expect a service proportionable to the pay he receives: But in my
child I reward not the dignity of the work, but only the willingness, the
loving and obedient disposition of the heart; and therefore I pass over those
failings and weaknesses which discover themselves for want of skill or
strength, and not of love, praising the endeavors, and pardoning the
miscarriages. Thus does the Lord deal with his children.

Fourthly, if we be Christ's he will pray for us, I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou have given me, John 17.9, 10.
for they are thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, etc. so that
we shall be sure to have help in all times of need, John 11.42.
because we know that tho Father hears his Son always; and those things
which in much fear, weakness, and ignorance we ask for our selves, if it be
according to Gods will, and by the dictate and mouth of the Spirit in our
heart, Christ himself in his intercession demands for us the same things.
And this is the ground of that confidence which we have in him, 1 John 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us, and we have
the petitions that we desire of him: For as the world hates us, because it
hates him first; so the Father loves and hears us, because he loves and
hears him first.

Fifthly, if we be Christ's, then he will teach us, and commune with us, and
reveal himself unto us, and lead us with his voice. He calls his own
sheep by name, and leads them, John 10.3, 4.
and puts them forth, and goes before them. Because Israel was his own
people, therefore he showed them his words. Psalm. 147.19. John 8.17.
The Law was theirs, and the Oracles theirs, when he enters into covenant
with a people, that they become his, then he writes his Law in their hearts,
and teaches them. This is the Prophet David's argument, Psalm. 119.125.
I am thy servant, give me understanding: Because I am thine in a special
relation, therefore acquaint me with thee in an especial manner. The earth is
full of thy mercy, Verse. 64.
there is much of thy goodness revealed to all the nations of the world, even
to those that are not called by thy name: but as for me whom thou have made
thine own by a nearer relation, let me have experience of a greater mercy,
Teach me thy Statutes.

Ier. 30.10, 11.
Sixthly, if we be his, he will chastise us in mercy, and not in fury, though he
leave us not altogether unpunished, yet he will punish us less than our
iniquities deserve; he will not deal with us as with others: Though I make a
full end of all nations whither I have driven thee, Ezra 9.13.
yet I will not make a full end of thee, Qui trucidat non considerat
quemadmodum laniat, qui curat, consider at quemadmodum secat. Aug.
but I will correct thee in measure. I will correct thee to cure, but not to
ruin thee.

The second thing considered in the words, was the Present condition of the
people of Christ, which was to be military men, to join with the armies of
Christ against all his enemies. As he was, so must we be in this world; no
sooner was Christ consecrated by his solemn Baptism unto the work of a
Mediator, but presently he was assaulted by the Tempter: And no sooner does
any man give up his name to Christ, and break loose from that hellish power
under which he was held, but presently Pharaoh and his hoasts, Satan and his
confederates pursue him with deadly fury, and power out floods of malice and
rage against him. Hell and death are at truce with wicked men, Esaias 28.15.
there is a covenant and agreement betwixt them, Satan holds his possession
in peace: Luke 11.21.
but when a stronger than he comes upon, and overcommeth him, there is from
that time implacable venom^ and hostility against such a soul; the malice,
power, policy, stratagems, and machianations of Satan; the lusts and vanities,
the pleasures, honors, profits, persecutions, frowns, flatteries, snares of
the wicked world: the affections, desires, inclinations, deceits of our own
fleshly hearts, will ever plie the soul of a Christian, and force it to
perpetual combats.

There is in Satan an everlasting enmity against the glory, mercy, and truth
of God, against the power and mystery of the Gospel of Christ. This malice of
his exercises it self against all those that have given themselves to Christ,
whose Kingdom he mightily labors to demolish: by his power persecuting it,
by his craftiness and wily insinuations undermining it; by his vast knowledge
and experience in palliating, altering, mixing, proportioning, and measuring
his temptations and spiritual wickedness in such manner, as that he may
subvert the Church of Christ, either in the purity thereof, by corrupting the
doctrine of Christ with heresy, and his worship with idolatry and
superstition; or in the unity thereof, by pestering it with schism and
distraction; or in the liberty thereof, by bondage of conscience, or in the
progress and enlargement thereof, endeavoring to blast and make fruitless the
ministry of the Gospel. And this malice of Satan is wonderfully set on and
encouraged both by the corruption of our nature, those armies of lusts and
affections which swarm within us, entertaining, joining force, and
cooperating with all his suggestions; disheartning, reclaiming, and pulling
back the soul when it offers to make any opposition; and also by the men, and
materials of this evil world. By the examples, the threats, the interests, the
power, the intimacie, the wit, the tongues, the hands, the exprobrations, the
persecutions, the insinuations and seductions of wicked men. By the profits,
the pleasures, the preferments, the acceptance, credit and applause of the
world.

By all which means Satan most importunately pursues one of these two ends,
either to subvert the godly by drawing them away from Christ to apostacy,
formalitie, hypocrisy, spiritual pride, and the like, or else to Discomfort
them with diffidence, doubts, sight of sin, opposition of the times, vexation
of spirit, and the like afflictions. And these oppositions of Satan meet with a
Christian in every respect or consideration, under which he may be conceived:
consider him in his spiritual estate, in his several parts, in his temporal
relations, in his Actions or employments; and in all these Satan is busy to
overturne the Kingdom of Christ in him. In his spiritual estate, if he be a
weak Christian, he assaulteth him with perpetual doubts and fears touching
his election, conversion, adoption, perseverance, christian liberty, strength
against corruptions, companies, temptations, persecutions, etc. if he be a
strong Christian, he labors to draw him unto selfe-confidence, spiritual
pride, contempt of the weak, neglect of further proficiencie, and the like.
There is no natural part or faculty which is not aimed at likewise by the
malice of Satan, for Christ when he comes, takes possession of the whole man,
and therefore Satan sets himself against the whole man. Corporeal and
sensitive faculties tempted either to sinful representations, letting in and
transmitting the provisions of lust unto the heart, by gazing and glutting
themselves on the objects of the world: or to sinful executions, finishing and
letting out those lusts which have been conceived in the heart. The fantasy
tempted by Satanicall injections and immutations to be the forge of loose,
vain, unprofitable, and unclean thoughts. The understanding to earthly
wisdom, vanity, infidelity, prejudices, misperswasions, fleshly reasonings,
vain speculations and curiosities, etc. The will to stiffenesse, resistance,
dislike of holy things, and pursuit of the world. The conscience to deadness,
immobilitie, and a stupid benummednesse, to slavish terrors and evidences of
hell, to superstitious bondage, to carnal security, to desperate conclusions.
The affections to independence, distraction, excess, precipitancie, etc. In
temporal conditions, there is no estate of health, wealth, peace, honor,
estimation, or the contraries unto these: no relation of husband, father,
magistrate, subject, etc. unto which Satan has not such suitable suggestions,
as by the advantage of fleshly corruptions may take from them occasion to draw
a man from God. Lastly, in regard of our actions and employments, whether they
be Divine, such as respect God, as acts of piety, in reading, hearing,
meditating, and studying his Word, in calling upon his name, and the like, or
such as respect our selves, as acts of temperance and sobriety, personal
examinations, and more particular acquaintance with our own hearts: or such as
respect others, as acts of righteousness, charity, and edification. Or whether
they be actions natural, such as are requisite to the preservation of our
being, as sleep and diet: or actions civil, in our callings or recreations,
in all these Satan labors either to pervert us in the performance of them,
or to divert us from it. There is then no condition, faculty, relation, or
action of a Christian man, the which is not always under the eye and envy of a
most raging, wise, and industrious enemy. And therefore, great reason there
is, that Christians should be Military men, well instructed in the whole armor
of God, that they may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, and to
quench all his fiery darts. It is our calling to wrestle against principalities
and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places, to resist the devil,
to strive against sin, to mortify earthly members, to destroy the body of
sin, to deny our selves, to contradict the reasonings of the flesh, to
check and control the stirrings of concupiscence, to resist and subdue the
desires of our evil hearts, to withstand and answer the assaults of Satan, to
outface the scorns, and despise the flatteries of the present world, in all
things to endure hardness as the soldiers of Jesus Christ. Our cause is
righteous, our captain is wise and puissant, our service honorable, our
victory certain, our reward massy and eternal, so that in all respects great
encouragements we have to be voluntaries in such war, the issue whereof is
our enemies perdition, our Masters honor, and our own Salvation.

The third thing observed was the through and universal Resignation and
devotednesse of Christ's people unto him. Thy people shall be willing, or a
people of great devotion in the day of thy Power. From whence I shall gather
two observations: First, They that belong unto Christ as his people are most
thoroughly and willingly subject unto his government, do consecrate, resign,
and yield up their whole souls and bodies to serve in his wars against all
his enemies. For the distinct understanding of which point we are to observe
first, that by nature we are utterly unwilling to be subject unto Christ. Romans
8.7, 8, 10.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be. For if Christ be over us, the body of sin must dye;
it once crucified him, and he will be revenged upon it. By nature we are
willingly subject unto no Law, but the Law of our members, Mal. 3.17. 1 Samuel
15.23.
nor to no will, but the will of the flesh; full of contumacie, rebellion, and
stoutnesse of spirit against the truth and beauty of the word or ways of God.
The Love of corrupted nature is wholly Eccles. 8.11. Prove. 14.14.
set upon our own ways, as an Ier. 2.24.8.6. Hos. 4.16.
untamed heifer, or a wild ass; men Ier. 2.20.
wander, and Ier. 31.22.
go about, and Esai. 57.10.
weary themselves in their full compass and swinge of lust, and will not be
turned. And therefore it is that they bid God Job 21.14.
depart from them, and desire not the knowledge of his ways, that they leave
the paths of uprightness, that having Deuteronomy. 32.5.
crooked hearts of their own, they labor likewise to pervert and Gal. 1.7. 2
Pet. 3.16.
make crooked the Gospel of Christ, that they may from thence steal
countenance to their sins, contrary to that holy affection of Psalm. 5.8.
David, Make my way strait before me, that they Mal. 1.13.
snuff and rage, and Nehem. 9.29.
pull away the shoulder, and Act. 7.51.
fall backward, and Act. 7.39.
thrust away God from them. And hence it is that men are so apt to cavil, and
foolishly to charge the ways of God; first, as grievous ways; too full of
austerity, narrowness and restraint. Matthew. 25.24
I knew that thou were an austere man; and this is an Ioh. 6.60.
hard saying, who can bear it? Amos 7.10.
The land is not able to bear all his words. Prove. 22.13.
There is a Lion in the way, a certain damage and unavoidable mischief will
follow me if I keep in it. Thus as Number. 13.31.14.1, 4. Nehe. 9.16, 17.
Israel when they heard of Giants and sons of Anak, had no heart to Canaan,
but cried, and whined, and rebelled, and mutined, and in their heart turned
back into Egypt, that is, had more will to their own bondage, than to Gods
Promise: so when a natural man hears of walking in a narrow way with much
exactness and circumspection, that come what bait of preferment, pleasure,
profit or advantage will, yet he must not turn to the right hand or to the
left, nor commit the least evil for the greatest good: that as the people in
the wilderness were to go only where the cloud and pillar of Gods presence
led them, though he carried them through giants, terrors, and temptations: so
a Christian must resolve to follow the Lamb whither soever he goes; He Ier.
11.10.
then turns back to his iniquities, and refuses to hear the words of the
Lord. Secondly, as unprofitable ways: Psalm. 4.6.
for who will show us any good, is the only language of carnal men: Job 21.17.
What can the Almighty do for us, say the wicked in Job? Mal. 3.14, 15.
It is in vain to serve God, what profit have we that we have kept his
ordinances, etc? If we must take our conscience along in all the businesses of
our life, there will be no living in the world; notwithstanding Mic. 2.7. 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Samuel 2.30.
the Lord says, that his words do good to those that walk uprightly, that
godliness has the Promises even of this life; that God will honor those that
honor him. Thirdly, as Ezekiel. 18.25.
unequal, and unreasonable ways, as a 1 Pet. 4.4. Esai. 8.18. Zech. 3.8. 1
Cor. 1.21.
strange, a mad, and a foolish strictness, rather the meteor of a speculative
brain, than a thing of any real existence, rather votum than veritas, a wish
or figment, than a solid truth. And from such prejudices as these men grow to
wrestle with the Spirit of Christ, to withstand his motions, to quench his
suggestions, and to dispute against him. Hos. 4.4.
This people are as they that strive with the priest, such a bitter and
unreconcileable enmity there is between the two seeds.

Secondly, we may observe, that notwithstanding this natural averseness, yet
many by the Power of the Word are wrought violently and compulsorily to tender
some unwilling services to Christ, by the spirit of bondage, by the fear of
wrath, by the evidences of the curse due to sin, and by the wakefulnesse of
the conscience. Ier. 2.27. Hos. 5.5, 6. 2 King. 17.25, 26.
They have turned their back unto me, and not their face, says the Lord; that
notes the disposition of their will. But in the time of their trouble, they
will say, Arise and save us, that notes their compulsorie and unnatural
devotion. They shall go with their flocks and their herds, that is, with
their pretended sacrifices, and external ceremonies to seek the Lord; but
they shall not find him; he has withdrawn himself. As when the Lord sent
Lions amongst the Samaritanes, then they sent to enquire after the manner of
his worship, fearing him, but yet still serving their own Gods. But this
compulsory obedience does not proceed from Qui gehennas metuit, non peccare
metuit, sed ardere, ille aute^ peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sicut
gehennas odit. Aug. Epi. 144. In ipsa intus voluntate peccat, qui non
voluntate, sid ^imore non peccat, Idem con. 2. Ep^. Pelag. li. 1. cap. 9. and
lib. 2. cap. 9. Non sicut feram and timeo and odi, ita etiam patrem vereor quem
timeo and amo. Cle. Alex. strom.li. 2.
a fear of sin but a fear of hell. And that plainly appears Aug de Nature.
and Great. cap. 57. cont. 2. ep Pelag. l. 3. c. 4. and To 4 li. de Spi. and lit.
cap. ult.
in the readiness of such men to apprehend all advantages for enlarging
themselves, and in making pretenses to flinch away and steal from the Word of
Grace, in consulting with carnal reason to silence the doubts, to untie the
knots, and to break the bonds of the conscience asunder, and to turn into
every diverticle which a corrupted heart can shape, in taking every occasion
and pretext to put God off, and delay the payment of their service unto him.
Thus Felix Act. 24.25.
when he was frighted with the discourse of Saint Paul put it off with pretense
of some further convenient season; and the Hag. 1.2.
unwilling Jews in the time of reedifying the temple at Jerusalem, This people
say the time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built; in
slighting the warnings and distinguishing the words of Scripture out of their
spiritual and genuine purity, and so Ier 5.12, 13.6.10.
belying the Lord, and saying, It is not he. The word of the Lord, says the
Prophet, is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it, that is, they
esteem me when I preach thy words unto them rather as a slanderer than as a
Prophet: Would thou then know the nature of thy devotion? Abstract all
conceits of danger, all workings of the spirit of bondage, the fear of wrath,
the preoccupations of hell, the estuations and sweatings of a troubled
conscience, and if all these being secluded, thou Nec si per hypo the sin d Deo
po testale^ acceperu ^acundi ^a quae sunt prohi^ita^^tra ullan. ^aena^: -- sed
(...) persuasum habae (...)* fore, ut Deum lat^ant quae gerit, in anim^m u^quam
inda ^ut aliqu^d (...) prae^er (...) A^ x. ^^om. l. 4.
can still afford to dedicate thy self to Christ, and be greedily ambitious
of his image, that is an evident assurance of an upright heart.

Thirdly, we may observe, that by the Power of the Word there may yet be
further wrought in natural men a certain Velleit^e, a languide and incomplete
will, Vi^. Aquin* (...) 3. qu 21. art. 4. ^. Semis* (...) atque (...) and (...)
volu^tatem, etc ^ug confess* l 8 c 8.
bounded with secret reservations, exceptions, and conditions of its own,
which makes it upon every new occasion mutable and inconstant. When Ier. 42.3,
5, 6.2.^ 43.2.
the hypocritical Jews came with such a solemn protestation unto the Prophet
Jeremy, The Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not
according to all things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee unto us,
etc. I suppose they then meant as they spoke, and yet this appears in the end
to have been but a velleitie and incomplete resolution, a zealous pang of that
secret hypocrisy which in the end discovered it self, and brake forth into
manifest contradiction: when ^ King. 8.13.
Hazael answered the Prophet, Is thy servant a dog that he should do thus and
thus? he then meant no otherwise than he spoke, upon the first representation
of those bloody facts, he abhorred them as belluine and prodigious villainies;
and yet this was but a velleitie and fit of good nature for the time which did
easily wear out with the alteration of occasions. When Judas asked Christ,
Mat. 26.5.
Master is it I that shall betray thee? (though a man can conceive no
hypocrisy too black to come out of the hell of Judas his heart) yet possible,
and peradventure probable it may be, that hearing at that time and believing
that woeful judgment pronounced by Christ against his betrayer, It had been
good for that man if he had never been borne, he might then upon the pang and
surprizall of so fearful a doom secretly and suddenly relent, and resolve to
forsake his purpose of treason; which yet when that storm was over, and his
covetous heart was tempted with a bribe, did fearfully return and gather
strength again. When the people returned and inquired early, and remembered God
their Maker, they were in good earnest for the time, and yet that was a
velleity, and ungrounded devotion, their heart was not right toward him,
neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. When 1 Samuel 24.1^, 19.
Saul out of the force of natural ingenuity, did upon the evidence of David's
integrity, who slew him not when the Lord had delivered him into his hands,
relent for the time, and weep, and acknowledge his righteousness above his
own, he spoke all this in earnest as he thought; and yet we find that he
afterward returned to pursue him again, and was once more by the experience
of David's innocence reduced unto the same acknowledgement. The people in one
place would have made Christ a King, so much did they seem to honor him, and
yet at another time when their over-pliable and unresolved affections were
wrought upon by the subtle Pharisees, they cried against him, as against a
slave, Crucify him, crucify him; so may it be in the general services of
God, men may have wishings and wouldings, and good liking of the truth, and
some faint and floating resolutions to pursue it* which yet having no firm
root, nor proceeding from the whole bent of the heart, from a through
mortification of sin and evidence of Grace, but from such weak and wavering
principles, as may be perturbed by every new temptation, like letters written
in sand, they vanish away like a morning dew, and leave the heart as hard and
scorched as it was before. The young man whom for his ingenuity and
forwardness Christ loved came in a sad and serious manner to learn of Christ
the way to heaven: and yet we find there were secret reservations which he
had not discerned in himself, upon discovery whereof by Christ he was
discouraged and made repent of his resolution, Mark^ 10.21, 22. The Apostle
speaks of a Repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. which has firm,
solid, and permanent reasons to support it, therein secretly intimating that
there is likewise a Repentance, which rising out of an incomplete will, and
admitting certain secret and undiscerned reservations, does upon the
appearance of them, flag and fall away, and leave the unfaithful heart to
repent of its repentance. Saint James tells us that a double-minded man is
unstable in all his ways, Iam. 1.8. never uniforme nor constant to any rules.
Now this division of the mind stands thus; The heart on the one side is taken
up with the pleasures of sin for the present; and on the other with the
desires of salvation for the future; and now according as the workings and
representations of the one or other are at the time more fresh and predominant,
in like manner is sin for that time either cherished or suppressed. Many men
at a good Sermon, when the matter is fresh and newly presented, while they are
looking on their face in the glass; or in any extremity of sickness, when
the provisions of lust do not relish for the present, when they have none but
thoughts of salvation to depend upon, are very resolute to make promises,
vows, and professions of better living; but when the pleasures of sin grow
strong to present themselves again, they return like a man recovered of an
ague with more stomach and greediness to their lusts again. As water which
has been stopped for a while rusheth with the more violence, when its passages
are opened. A double heart is like the boles of a Scale, according as more
weight is put into one or other, so are they indifferently overruled unto
either motion, up or down. When I see a vapor ascend out of the earth into
the air, why should I not think that it will never leave rising till it get
up to heaven? and yet because the motion is not natural, but caused either by
expulsion from a heat within, or by attraction from a heat without, when the
cause of that ascent is abated, and the matter gathers together into a thicker
consistence, it grows heavy and falls down again. Even such is the affection
of those faint and unresolved desires of men who like Agrippa are but
halfe-perswaded to believe in Christ.

But now lastly we must observe, that in the day of Christ's power, when he by
his word and Spirit works effectually in the hearts of men, they are then
made free will offerings, Totally willing to obey and serve him in all
conditions. The heart of every one stirs him up, and his Spirit makes him
willing for the work and service of the Lord, Exodus 35.21. They yield
themselves unto the Lord, and their members as weapons of righteousness unto
him, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Romans 6.19. They offer and present themselves to God as a
living Sacrifice; and therefore they are called (...), an oblation sanctified
by the Holy Ghost, Romans 12.1. Romans 15.16. Therefore they are said to come unto
Christ, by the virtue of his Fathers teaching, Ioh. 6.45. To run unto him,
Esai. 55.5. To gather themselves together under him as a common head, and to
flow or flock together with much mutual encouragement unto the mountain of
the Lord, Hos. 1.11. Esai. 2.2, 3. To wait upon him in his Law, Esai. 42.4. To
enter into a sure covenant, and to write and seal it, Nehem. 9.38. In one
word, To serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles.
28.9. when the heart is perfect, undivided, and goes all together, the mind
will be willing to serve the Lord.

This willingness of Christ's people shows it self in two things: First, in
begetting most cordial and constant Enmity against all the enemies of Christ,
never holding any league or intelligence with them, but being always ready to
answer the Lord as David did Saul, Thy servant will go and fight with this
Philistime. He that is a voluntary in Christ's armies is not disheartened with
the potencie, policy, malice, subtlety, or prevailing faction of any of his
adversaries. He is contented to deny himself, to renounce the friendship of
the world, to bid defiance to the allurements of Satan, to smile upon the face
of danger, to hate father, and mother, and land, and life, to be cruel to
himself, and regardlesse of others for his masters service. Through honor and
dishonor, through evil report and good report, through a Sea and a
wilderness, through the hottest services, and strongest oppositions will he
follow the Lamb whither soever he goes: though he receive the word in much
affliction, yet he will receive it with joy too. Secondly, in begetting most
loving, constant, and dear affections to the mercy, grace, glory, and ways of
God, an universal conformity unto Christ our head, who was contented to take
upon him the form of a servant, to have his ear bored, and his will subjected
unto the will of his Father. I delight to do thy will o my God, yea, thy Law
is within my heart, Psalm. 40.8. And as he was, so are all his in this world,
of the same mind, judgment, Spirit, conversation, and therefore of the same
will too.

Now this dear and melting affection of the heart toward Christ and his ways,
whereby the soul longs after him, and hastes unto him, is wrought by
several principles: First, by the Conviction of our natural Estate, and a
through humiliation for the same. Pride is ever the principle of disobedience.
They were the proud men who said unto Jeremy, thou speak falsely, the Lord
has not sent thee, Ier. 43.2. And they were the proud men who hardened their
necks, and withdrew the shoulder, and would not hear, and refused to obey,
Nehem. 9.16, 17, 29. A man must be first brought to deny himself before he
will be willing to follow Christ, and to lug a cross after him. A man must
first humble himself before he will walk with God, Mic. 6.8. The poor only
receive the Gospel. The hungry only find sweetness in bitter things.
Extremities will make any man not only willing but thankful to take any
course wherein he may recover himself and subsist again; when the soul
finds it self in darkness, and has no light, and begins to consider whither
darkness leads it; that it is even now in the mouth of Hell, under the paw of
the roaring lion, under the guilt of sin, the curse of the Law, and the
hatred and wrath of God, it cannot choose but most willingly pursue any
probability, and with most enlarged affections meet any tender of deliverance:
Suppose we that a Prince should cause some bloody malefactor to be brought
forth, should set before his eyes all the racks and tortures which the wit of
man can invent to punish prodigions offenders withal, and should cause him to
taste some of those extremities: and then in the midst of his howling and
anguish, should not only reach out a hand of mercy to deliver him, but should
further promise him upon his submission to advance him like Joseph from the
iron which enters into his soul, unto public honor and service in the state,
would not the heart of such a man be melted into thankfulness, and with all
submission resign it self unto the mercy and service of so gracious a Prince?
Now the Lord does not only deal thus with sinners; does not only cause them
by the report of his word, and by the experience of their own guilty hearts, to
feel the weight, fruitlesnesse, and shame of sin, and the first fruits of
that eternal vengeance which is thereunto due: not only set forth Christ
before them as a rock of redemption, reaching out a hand to save, and offering
great and precious promises of an exceeding, eternal, abundant weight of
glory: but besides all this does inwardly touch the heart by the finger of his
Spirit, framing it to a spiritual and divine conformity unto Christ. How can
the soul of such a man in these present extremities of horror, which yet are
but the pledges of infinite more which must ensue; and in the evidence of so
wonderful and sweet promises, the seals of the eternal favor and fellowship
of God, choose but with much importunity of affection to lay hold on so great a
hope which is set before it, and with all readiness and ambition of so high a
service, yield up it self into the hands of so gracious a Lord, to be by him
ordered and overruled unto any obedience?

Secondly, this willingness of Christ's People is wrought by a spiritual
illumination of mind. And therefore the Conversion of sinners is called a
Conviction, because it is ever wrought in us Secundum modum judicii as we are
reasonable and intelligent creatures. I take it (under favor and submission to
better judgments) for a firm truth; that if the mind of a man were once
thoroughly and in a spiritual manner (as it becomes such objects as are
altogether spiritual) possessed of the adequate goodness and truth which is
in grace and glory, the heart could not utterly reject them; for humane liberty
is not a brutish, but a reasonable thing, it consists not in contumacie or
headstrongness, but in such a manner of working, as is apt to be regulated,
varied, or suspended by the dictates of right reason. The only cause why men
are not willing to submit unto Christ is because they are not thoroughly and in
a manner suitable to the spiritual excellency of the things, illightned in
their mind. The Apostle often makes mention of Col. 4.17. Act. 14 26. 2 Timothy
4.5. Romans 15.19.
fulfilling and making full proof of our ministry, and of preaching the
Gospel fully, namely with the evidence of the Spirit and of power, and with
such a manifestation of the truth as does commend it self unto the conscience
of a man. The 2 Cor. 1.18.
Word of God, says the Apostle, is not yea and nay, that is, a thing which may
be admitted or denied at pleasure, but such a word as has no inevidence in it
self, nor leaves any uncertainty or hesitancie in a mind sitted to receive
it. And as we may thus distinguish of preaching, that there is an imperfect
and a full preaching: so may we distinguish of understanding the things
preached, in some it is full, and in others but superficial; for there is a
Twofold illumination of the mind, the one Theoreticall and merely Notionall
consisting in knowledge; the other Practical, Experimental, and spiritual;
consisting in the irradiation of the soul by the light of Gods countenance, in
such an apprehension of the truth as makes the heart to burn thereby, Luke
24.32. 1 Cor. 8.2.
when we know things as we ought to know them, that is, when the manner and
life of our knowledge is answerable to the nature and excellency of the things
known, when the eye is spiritually opened to believe, and seriously conclude
that the things spoken are of most precious and everlasting consequence to the
soul, as things that concern our peace with God. This is the Learning of
Christ, the teaching of the Father, the knowing of things which pass
knowledge, the setting to the seal of our own hearts that God is true, the
evidence of spiritual things not to the brain but to the conscience. In one
word this is that which the Apostle calls, a spiritual Demonstration. And
surely in this case the heart is never overruled contrary to the full,
spiritual, and infallible evidence of divine truths unto a practical
judgment. Therefore the Apostle says that Eve being Deceived was in the
transgression, 1 Timothy 2.14.
and there is frequent mention made of the deceitfulness of sin, to note
that sin got into the world, by error and seduction. For certainly the will
is (...), a Rational Appetite, and therefore (as I conceive) does not stir
from such a good as is fully and spiritually represented thereunto, as the most
universal, adequate, and unquestionable object of the desires and capacities
of a humane soul; for the freedom, and willing consent of the heart is not
lawless, or without rules to moderate it, but it is therefore said to be free
because whether out of a true judgment it move one way, or out of a false,
another, yet in both it moves naturally, secundum modum sibi competentem, in a
manner suitable to its own condition.

If it be objected that the heart being unregenerate is utterly averse unto
any good, and therefore is not likely to be made willing by the illumination
of the mind. To this I answer, that it is true, the will must not only be
moved, but also renewed and changed, Oportet non tantum moveri, sed e^iam novam
^ieri. Prosper.
before it can yield to Christ. But withal, that God does never so fully and
spiritually convince the judgment, in that manner, of which I have spoken,
without a special work of grace thereupon, opening the eye, and removing all
natural ignorance, prejudice, hesitancie, inadvertency, misperswasion, or any
other distemper of the mind which might hinder the evidence of spiritual
truth. By which means he also frames and fashioneth the will to accept,
embrace, and love those good things, of which the mind is thus prepossessed.

Thirdly, this willingness of Christ's people is wrought by the Communion and
adspiration of the spirit of Grace, which is a free spirit, a spirit of love,
and a spirit of liberty, a spirit which is in every faculty of man as the soul
and principle of its Christianity or heavenly being and working. Psalm. 51.12. 2 Timothy 1.7. 2 Cor. 3.17.
And therefore it makes every faculty secundum modum sibi proprium to work
unto spiritual ends and objects. As the soul in the eye causes that to see,
and in the ear to hear, and in the tongue to speak: so the spirit of Grace
in the mind causes it rightly to understand, and in the will causes it
freely to desire heavenly things; and in every faculty causes it to move
toward Christ in such a way and manner of working as is suitable to its nature.

Fourthly, this willingness of Christ's people arises from the apprehension of
Gods dear love, bowels of mercy and riches of most unsearchable grace,
revealed in the face of Jesus Christ to every broken and penitent spirit. Love
is naturally, when it is once apprehended, an Attractive of love. And therefore
it is that the Apostle says, Faith works by love, that is, By faith first
the heart is persuaded and affected with Gods Love unto us in Christ. I live by
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.
Ephesians. 3.17, 18. Being thus persuaded of his love to us, the heart is framed to
love him again: for who can be persuaded of so great a benefit as the
remission of sins, and not be most deeply inflamed with the love of him by
whom they are remitted? 1 Ioh. 4.19. Luke 7.47. and lastly, by this reciprocal
love of the heart to Christ, faith becomes effectual to work obedience and
conformity to his will. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, he that loves God
would with all joyfulnesse fulfill every jot of Gods Law if it were possible;
This is the love of God, says the Apostle, that we keep his Commandments,
and his Commandments are not grievous. True love overcomes all difficulties,
is not apt to pretend occasions for neglecting any service of God, nor to
conceive any prejudices against it, but puts an edge and alacrity upon the
spirit of a man, he can no more be said to love Christ, who does not willingly
undergo his yoke, than that woman to love her husband who is ever grieved at
his presence, and delights more in the society of strangers.

Fifthly, this willingness of Christ's people arises from the beauty and
pretiousnesse of those ample Promises, which by the love of Christ are made
unto us. It is said of Moses that he did choose (and that is the greatest act of
willingness) rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season: and the ground of this willingness was,
he had a respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. so Christ
endured the Cross, and despised the shame, that is, the shame (which would
much have staggered and disheartened an unresolved man) was no prejudice or
discouragement unto him, to abate any of his most willing obedience, and the
motive was, for the joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2. And Saint Paul
professes of himself that he pressed forward, he was not only willing, but
importunate and contentious to put forth all his spirits, and like riders in a
race to rouse up himself in a holy fervor and emulation, and all this was for
the Price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, which was, as it were,
before his face in the Promises thereof. Phil. 3.14. so the Apostle assures
us, That a Christians Hope to be like unto Christ hereafter, will cause him to
purify himself even as he is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.3. when a man shall sit down
and recount with David, what God has done for him already. Who am I, O Lord
God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And what God
has further promised to do for him more. Thou have also spoken of thy
servants house for a great while to come. Of a child of wrath thou have called
me to an inheritance of the Saints in light, and into the fellowship of more
glory than can be shadowed forth by all the lights of heaven, though every Star
were turned into a Sun; I say, when the soul shall thus recount the
goodness of God, how can it but be wonderfully enlarged with thoughts of
thankfulness, and grieved at the slow and narrow abilities of the other parts
to answer the urgent and wide desires of a willing soul?

Sixthly, this willingness of Christ's people arises from the experience of
that peace, comfort* life, liberty, triumph and security which accompanies
the Spirit and the service of Christ. Nothing makes a man more fearful of
wars than the dangers and hazards which are incident thereunto. But if a man
can serve under such a Prince, whose employments are not only honorable, but
safe; if he, who is able and faithful to make good his words, promise us that
none either of the stratagems or forces of the enemy shall do us hurt, but
that they shall fly before us, while we resist them: who would not be a
Voluntary in such services as are not liable to the casualties and vicissitudes
which usually attend other wars, wherein he might fight with safety, and
come off with honor? David had experience of Gods power in delivering him from
the Lion and the Bear, and was well assured that that God who was careful of
sheep, would be more pitiful to his people Israel, and that made him with much
willingness ready to encounter Goliath, whose assurance was only in himself
and not in God. When a man shall consider what God might have done with him, he
might have sent him from the womb to hell, deprived him of the means of
grace, left him to the rebellion and hardness of his evil heart, and to the
rage of Satan, burnt his bones, and dried up his bowels with the view of that
wrath which is due to sin, and what he has done with him; he has called him
to the knowledge of his will, refreshed him with the light of his countenance,
heard his prayers, given an issue to his temptations, and a reviving out of
bondage, fastened him as a nail in his holy place, given him his favor which
is better than light, and spoken of his servant for a long time to come; O how
readily will the spirit of such a man conclude, Lord, according to thine own
heart have thou done all this unto me, and I have found so much sweetness in
thy service above all mine own thoughts or expectations, that now, O Lord, my
heart is prepared, my heart is prepared, I will sing and rejoice in thy service.

Lastly, this willingness of Christ's people arises from that excellent beauty
and attractive virtue which is in holiness. Thy Law is pure, therefore thy
servant loves it. And therefore we find Christ and his Church do kindle the
coals of love, and stir up those flames of mutual dearness toward one
another, do cherish those longing, languishing, and ravished affections, and
susspirings of hearts, by the frequenting contemplations of each others
beauty. Behold, thou art fair my love, behold, thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes. Behold, thou art fair my beloved, yea pleasant, etc. Cant. 1.15,
16. These are the principles of that great devotion and willingness which is
in the people of Christ unto his service.

And hereby we may make trial of the truth of that profession, subjection, and
obedience which we all pretend unto the Gospel of Christ. Act. 11.23.
It is then only sound when it proceeds from a willing and devoted heart, from
purpose, fervor and earnestness of Spirit; Romans 12.11.
for as God in mercy accounts the will for the deed; Gal. 4.18.
because where there is a willing mind there will certainly be all answerable
endeavors to execute that will, and reduce it into act, so he esteems the deed
nothing without the Qui perspicit apud te paratam fuisse virtutem, reddet pro
virtute mercedem. Nunquid Cain cum Deo munus offerret jam peremerat fratrem?
and tamen parricidium mente conceptum Deus providus ante damnavit, ut illic
cogitatio prava, and perniciosa conceptio Deo providente prospecta est: ita and
in Dei servis, apud quos confessio cogitatur, and martyrium mente concipitur,
animus ad bonum deditus, Deo judice coronatur. Aliud est martyrio animum
deesse, aliud animo desuisse martyrium -- nec enim sanguin^m vestrum quaerit
Deus, sed fidem. Cypr. de mortal. Neque enim in sacrificiis quae Abel and Cain
primi obtulerunt, munera eorum Deus, sed corda intuebatur, utile placeret in
munere qui placebat in cord. Idem de Orat. Domini.
will: Cain and Abel did both sacrifice, it was the heart which made the
difference between them: let the outward conversation be what it will, yet if
a man regard iniquity in his heart, God will not hear him. Gravius est
diligere peccatum quam facere: It is a worse token (says Gregory) of an evil
man to love sin, than to commit it, for it may be committed out of temptation
and infirmity, and so may be either in part the sin of another that tempts
us, or at least not the sin of our whole selves, but of those remainders of
corruption which dwell within us. But our love is all our own, Satan can but
offer a temptation, the heart it self must love it: and love is strong as
death, it works by the strength of the whole man, and therefore ever such as
the will is (which is the seat of love) such is the service too. And the reason
is: First, because the will is the first mover, and the master-wheele in
spiritual works, that which regulateth all the rest, and keeps them right
and constant* that which holds together all the faculties of the soul and
body in the execution of Gods will. In which sense, amongst others I
understand that of the Apostle, That love is the bond of perfection, because
when love resideth in the heart, it will put together every faculty to do
that work of God perfectly which it goes about. And therefore by a like
expression it is called The fulfilling of the Law, because love aims still at
the highest, and at the best in that thing which it loves, it is ever an enemy
to defects. He that loves learning will never stop, and say I have enough, in
this likewise love is as death. And he that loves grace, will be still
Ambitious to abound in the work of the Lord, and to press forward unto
perfection, to make up that which is wanting to his faith, to be sanctified
throughout, to bring forth more fruit, to walk in all pleasing, to be holy,
and unblameable, and unreproveable, without spot or wrinkle. It is an absurd
thing in religion to dote upon mediocrities of grace; in eo non potest esse
nimium, quod esse maximum debet; He that with all the exactness and rigor of
his heart, can never gather together all grace, can surely never have too much.
In false religions no man so much magnified as he that is strictest: that
Papist which is most cruel to his flesh, most assiduous at his beads, most
canonical in his hours, most macerated with superstitious penance, most
frequently prostrated before his idols, is of all other most admired for the
greatest Saint. O why should not an holy strictness be as much honored as a
superstitious? why should not exactness, purity, and a contending unto
perfection, be as much pursued in a true as in a false religion? Why should not
every man strive to be filled with grace, since he can never have enough till
he have it all, till he is brimme-full? He that truly loves wealth, would be
the richest; and he that loves honor, would be the highest of any other:
certainly grace is in it self more lovely than any of these things. Why then
should not every man strive to be most unlike the evil world, and to be more
excellent than his neighbor, to be holy as God is holy, to be as Christ
himself was in this world, to grow up in unity of faith, and in the knowledge
of him, unto a perfect man? Certainly, if a man once set his will and his
heart upon grace, he will never rest in mediocrities; he will labor to abound
more and more, he will never think himself to have apprehended, but forgetting
the things which are behind, he will reach forth to those things which are
before him, for all the desires of the heart are strong, and will overruled any
other natural desire. The grief of David's heart made him forget to eat his
bread. The desire of Christ's heart to convert the Samaritan woman, made him
careless of his own hunger. It is my meat to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work. A true heart will go on to finish the work which
it has begun. The wicked s^eepe not, says Solomon, except they have done
mischief; And the enemies of Saint Paul provided to to stop the clamors and
demands of an empty stomach with a solemn vow that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had slain Paul. Lust never gives over till it finish sin, and
therefore the Love of Christ should never give over till it finish Grace.

Judge. 5.2, 9.
Secondly, because God is more honored in the obedience of the will than of the
outward man. Humane restraints may rule this, but nothing but Grace can rule
the other; for herein we acknowledge God to be the searcher of hearts, the
discerner of secret thoughts, the Judge and Lord over our consciences.
Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle) do it heartily as to the Lord, and not
to men. Noting unto us that a man does never respect the Lord in any service
which comes not willingly, and from the inner man. Now he works in vain,
and loses all that he has wrought, who does not work for him who is master
of the business he goes about, and who only does reward it. Therefore says
the Apostle, Do it heartily as to the Lord, knowing that of the Lord you shall
receive the Reward of the inheritance, for you serve the Lord Christ. He only
is the play master of such kind of work, and therefore do it only as to him,
so that he may approve and reward it.

Before I leave this point touching the willingness of Christ's people, here is
a great case, and of frequent occurrence to be resolved, Whether those who are
truly of Christ's people may not have fears, torments, uncomfortablenesse,
weariness, unwillingnesse in the ways of God? Saint John in general states
the case, There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear:
Because fear has torment, 1 Ioh. 4.18. so that it seems where there is
torment, and weariness, there is no love: for the clearing of this case, I
shall set down some few positions.

First, in general, where there is true obedience there is ever a willing and
a free spirit, in this degree at the least, a most deep desire of the heart,
and serious endeavor of the spirit of a man to walk in all well-pleasing
toward God: a longing for such fullness of Grace, and enlargement of soul as
may make a man fit to run the way of Gods Commandments.

Secondly, where there is this will, yet there may upon other reasons be such a
fear as has pain and torment in it, and that in two respects: First, there
may be a fear of Gods wrath, the soul of a righteous man may be surpised
with some glimpses and apprehensions of his most heavy displeasure, he may
conceive himself set up as Gods mark to shoot at, Job 7.20. that the poisoned
arrows and terrors of the wrath of God do stick fast upon him, Job 6.4. that
his transgressions are sealed up and reserved against him, Job 14.17. The hot
displeasure of the Lord may even vex his bones, and make his soul sore within
him, Psalm. 6.1, 2, 3. He may conceive himself forgotten and cast out by God,
surprised with fearfulness, trembling, and the horror of death, Psalm. 13.1.
Psalm. 55.4, 5. Christ may withdraw himself and be gone, in regard of any
comfortable and sensible fruition of his fellowship, and in that case the soul
may fail and seek him but not find him, and call upon him but receive no
answer, Cant. 5.6. A man may fear the Lord, and yet be in darkness, and
have no light, Esai. 50.10. Secondly, there may be a great fear even of
performing spiritual duties. A broken and dejected man may tremble in Gods
service, and upon a deep apprehension of his own unworthiness, and erroneous
applying of that sad expostulation of God with wicked men, What have thou to
do to t^ke my Covenant in thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. And, what has my beloved
to do in mine house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many? Ier. 11.15.
he may be startled, and not dare adventure upon such holy and sacred things
without much reluctancie, and shame of spirit. O my God, says Ezra, I am
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee my God: for our iniquities are
increased over our heads, Ezra 9.6. Thus it is said of the poor woman who upon
the touch of Christ's garment had been healed of her bloody issue, That she
came fearing and trembling, and fell down before Christ, and told him the
truth, Mark. 5.33. But yet great difference there is between this fear of the
Saints, and of the wicked. The fear of the wicked arises out of the evidences
of the guilt of sin, but the fear of the Saints from a tender apprehension
of the majesty of God, and his most pure eyes which cannot endure to behold
uncleanness (which made Moses himself to tremble, Act. 7.32.) and out of a
deep sense of their own unworthiness to meddle with holy things. And such a
fear as this may bring much uncomfortablenesse and distraction of spirit; but,
never at all any dislike or hatred of God, or any stomacke-full disobedience
against him: for as the fear of the soul deterres, so the necessity of the
precept drives him to an endeavor of obedience and well-pleasing; slavish
fear forces a man to do the duty some way or other, without any eye or
respect unto the manner of doing it. But this other which is indeed a filial,
but yet withal an uncomfortable fear, rather disswades from the duty it
self, the heart being so vile; and unfit to perform so precious a duty in so
holy a manner as becomes it.

Thirdly, as the Saints may have fear and uncomfortablenesse (which are
contrary to a free spirit) so they may have a weariness and some kind of
unwillingnesse in Gods service. Their spirits like the hands of Moses in the
mount may faint and hang down, may be damped with carnal affections, or
tired with the difficulty of the work, or plucked back by the importunity of
temptations, so that though they begin in the spirit, yet they may be
bewitched and transported from a through-obedience to the truth, Gal. 3.1, 3. A
deadness, heaviness, insensibilitie, unactivenesse, confusednesse of heart,
unpreparednesse of affections, insinuation of worldly lusts and earthly cares
may distract the hearts, and abate the cheerfulness of the best of us. And
hence come those frequent exhortations to stir up our selves, to prepare our
hearts to seek the Lord, to whet the Law upon our children, to exhort one
another lest the deceitfulness of sin harden us, to be strong in the Grace
of Christ, not to faint or be weary of well-doing, and the like. All which, and
sundry like, intimate a sluggishnesse of disposition, and natural bearing
back of the will from Gods service.

Fourthly, the Proportion of this discomfort and weariness arises from these
grounds: First, from the strength of these corruptions which remain within us:
for ever so much fleshlinesse as the heart retains, so much bias a man has to
turn him from God and his ways, so much clog and encumbrance in holy duties.
And this remainder of flesh is in the will as well as in any other faculty to
indispose it unto spiritual actions, as it is in our members that we cannot
do the things which we would, Gal. 5.17. so in proportion it is in our wills,
that we cannot with all our strength desire the things which we should, and
therefore David praises God for this especial Grace, Who am I, and what is my
people that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chro. 29.14.

Secondly, from the dullness or sleepiness of Grace in the heart, which
without daily reviving, husbanding, and handling will be apt to contract a
rust, and to be over-growne with that bitter root of corruption within. As a
bowl will not move without many rubs and stops in a place overgrowne with
grass, so the will cannot move with readiness toward God, when the Graces
which should actuate it are grown dull and heavy. A rustie key will not
easily open the lock unto which it was first fitted; nor a neglected Grace
easily open or enlarge the heart.

Thirdly, from the violent importunity and immodesty of some strong temptation,
and unexpellible suggestions, which frequently presenting themselves to the
spirit do there beget jealousies to disquiet the peace of the heart: for
Satan's first end is to rob us of grace, for which purpose he hearteneth our
lusts against us: but his second is to rob us of Comfort, and to toss us up
and down between our own fears and suspicions: for unwearied and violent
contradictions are apt to beget weariness in the best. Consider him that
endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, says the Apostle, lest
ye be wearied and faint in your minds, Heb. 12.3.

Fourthly, from the present weight of some heavy fresh sin, which will
utterly indispose the heart unto any good. As we see how long security did
surprise David after his murder and adultery. Thus as Jonah after his flight
from God, fell asleep in the ship: so stupiditie and unaptnesse to work is
ever the child of any notable and revolting sin: When the conscience lies
bleeding under any fresh sin it has first a hard task to go through in a
more bitter renewing the tears of repentance. And hard works have for the most
part some fears and reluctancies in the performing of them. Secondly, it has
not such boldness and assurance to be welcome to God. It comes with shame,
horror, blushing and want of peace, and so cannot but find the greater
conflict in it self. Thirdly, sin diswonts a man from God, carries him to
thickets and bushes. The soul loves not to be deprehended by God in the
company of Satan or any sinful lust. That child cannot but feel some
strugglings of shame and unwillingnesse to come unto his father, who is sure
when he comes to be upbraided with the companions which he more delights in.

Fifthly, from the proportions of the desertions of the spirit: for the Spirit
of God blows where and how he lists; and it is he that works our wills
unto obedience. If he be grieved and made retire, (for he is of a delicate and
jealous disposition) if he turn his wind from our sails, alas, how slow and
sluggish will our motion be? How poor our progress? Upon these and several
other the like grounds, may the best of us be possessed with fears,
discomforts, and unwillingnesse in Gods service. But yet

Fifthly, none of all this takes off the will a Toto, though it do a Tanto,
but that the faithful in their greatest heaviness and unfitness of spirit,
have yet a stronger by as toward God than any wicked man when he is at best,
for it is true of them in their lowest condition, that they Desire to fear
Gods name, Nehem. 1.11. That the desire of their soul is toward the
remembrance of him, Esaias 26.8. that they are seriously displeased with the
distempers and uncomfortablenesse of their spirit, Psalm. 42.5. that they long
to be enlarged, that they may run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.32.
That they set their affection unto God and his service, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. That
they prepare their heart to seek the Lord God, 2 Chronicles. 30.19. That they
strive, groan, wrestle, and are unquiet in their dumpes and dullness, earnestly
contending for joy and freedom of Spirit, Psalm. 51.8.11.12. In one word, that
they dare not omit those duties, which yet they have no readiness and
disposednesse of heart to perform; but when they cannot do them in alacrity,
yet they do them in obedience, and serve the Lord when he hides his face from
them. I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy
holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. He that fears the Lord will obey his voice, though he
walk in darkness, and have no light, Esaias 50.10. So then the faithful have
still thus much ground of comfort, that God has their wills always devoted and
resigned unto him, though thus much likewise they have to humble them too, the
daily experience of a backsliding and tired spirit in his service; and should
therefore be exhorted to stir up the spirit of grace in themselves, to keep
fresh and frequent their communion with Christ. The more acquaintance and
experience the heart has of him, the more abundantly it will delight in him,
and make haste unto him, that it may with Saint Paul apprehend him in fruition,
by whom it is already apprehended, and carried up unto heavenly places in
assurance and representation. As long as we are here there will be something
lacking to our faith, some mixture of unbeleefe and distrust with it, 1 Thessalonians.
3.10. Mark 9.24. corruptions, temptations, afflictions, trials, will be apt to
beget some fears, discomforts, weariness, and indisposednesse toward Gods
service. The sense whereof should make us long after our home, with the Apostle
groan, and wait for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, for the
manifestation of the sons of God, (for though we are now sons, yet it does
not appear what we shall be, 1 Ioh. 3.2.) should make us pray for the
accomplishment of his promises, for the hastening of his Kingdom, where we
shall be changed into an universal spiritualnesse, or purity of nature, where
those relickes of corruption, those strugglings of the law of the members
against the law of the mind shall be ended, those languishings, decays, ebbes
and blemishes of grace shall be removed, where all deficiencies of grace shall
be made up, and that measure and first fruits of the Spirit which we here
receive, shall be crowned with fullness, and everlasting perfection. Here we
are like the stones and other materials of Salomons Temple, but in the act of
fitting and preparation, no marvel if we be here crooked, knottie, uneven, and
therefore subject to the hammer, under blows and buffets. But when we shall be
carried to the heavenly building which is above, and there laid in, there shall
be nothing but smoothness and glory upon us, no noise of hammers, or axes, no
dispensation of Word or Sacraments, no application of censures and severity;
but every man shall be filled with the fullness of God, Faith turned into
sight, Hope turned into fruition, and Love everlastingly ravished with the
presence of God, with the face of Jesus Christ, with the fullness of the holy
Spirit, and with the communion and society of all the Saints. And so much for
the first observation out of the third particular, concerning the willingness
of Christ's people.

There was further therein observed the Principle of this Willingness, [In the
day of thy power, or, of thine armies] that is, when thou shall send abroad
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Doctors and Teachers for
evidencing the Word and Spirit unto the consciences of men. Whence we may
secondly observe, that the [ Heart of Christ's people is made willing to obey
him by an act of Power,] or by the strength of the Word and Spirit. It is not
barely enticed, but it is conquered by the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
And yet this is not a compulsory conquest (which is utterly contrary to the
nature of a reasonable will, which would cease to be it self, if it could be
compelled) but it is an effectual conquest. The will (as all other faculties)
is dead naturally in trespasses and sins: And a dead man is not raised to life
again by any enticements, nor yet compelled unto a condition of such exact
complacencie and suteablenesse to nature by any act of violence. So then a man
is made willingly subject unto Christ, neither by mere moral persuasions, nor
by any violent impulsions; but by a power, in it self supernatural,
spiritual, or Divine, and in its manner of working sweetly tempered to the
disposition of the will, which is never by grace destroyed, but perfected.
Therefore the Apostle says, that it is God who works in us to will and to
do, Phil. 2.13. first, he frames our will according to his own (as David was
said to be a man after Gods own heart,) and secondly, by that will, and the
imperate acts thereof, thus sanctified and still assisted by the Spirit of
grace, he sets the other powers of nature on work in further obedience unto
his will. And therefore the Prophet David praised God that had enabled him and
his people to offer willingly unto the service of Gods house, and prays him
that he would ever keep that willing disposition in the imaginations and
thoughts of the hearts of his people, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.18. Therefore, the Apostle
says, that Our faith stands not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God, 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore likewise it is called, The faith of the operation of
God who raised Christ from the dead, Col. 2.12.

For the more distinct opening and evidencing this point, how Christ's people
are made Willing by his power, I will only lay together some brief positions
which I conceive to be thereunto pertinent, and proceed to that which is more
plain and profitable. First, let us consider the nature of the will, which is,
to be a Free agent or mover, to have ex se, and within it self an
indifferency and undeterminatnesse unto several things; so that when it moves
or not moves, when it moves one way or other, in none of these it suffers
violence, but works according to the condition of its own nature.

Secondly, we may note that this indifferency is twofold, either habitual,
belonging to the constitution of the will, which is nothing else, but an
original aptitude, or intrinsecall non-repugnancie in the will, to move unto
contrary extremes, to work, or to suspend its own working; or else actual,
which is in the exercise of the former, as objects present themselves, and this
is twofold, either a freedom to good, or evil, or a freedom to will, or not
to will.

Thirdly, notwithstanding the will be in this manner free, yet it may have its
freedom in both regards so determined, as that in such or such a condition, it
cannot do what it should, or forbear what it should, or cannot do what it
should not, nor forbear what it should not. Man fallen, without the grace of
God, is free only unto evil, and Christ in the time of his obedience was free
wholly unto good. Man free to evil, but yet so, as that he only does it
voluntarily, he cannot voluntarily leave it undone. Christ free only to good,
yet so, as that he does it most freely, but could not freely omit the doing of
it.

Fourthly, the will works not in this condition of things unto moral objects
without some other concurrent principles which sway and determine it several
ways; so that the will is principium quod, the faculty which moves, and the
other principium quo, the quality or virtue by which it moves. And these
qualities are in natural men the flesh or the original concupiscence of our
nature, which makes the motions of the will to be (...), the will of the
flesh; and in the regenerate, the Grace and Spirit of Christ, so far forth as
they are regenerate.

Fifthly, as the will is ever carried either by the flesh or the spirit to its
objects, so neither to the one or the other, without the preceding conduct and
direction of the practical judgment, whether by grace illightned to judge
aright, or by corrupt affections bribed and blinded to misguide the will; for
the will being a rational appetite, never moves bu^ per modum judicii, upon
apprehension of some goodness and convenience in the thing whereunto it moves.

Sixthly, the judgment is never thoroughly illightned to understand spiritual
things in that immediate and ample beauty and goodness which is in them, but
only by the Spirit of Christ, which makes a man to have the selfsame mind,
judgment, opinion, and apprehension of heavenly things which he had; so that
Christ and a Christian do (...), think the same thing, as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 2.5. By the which Spirit of grace, working first upon the
judgment to rectify that, and to convince it of the evidence and necessity
of that most universal and adequate good which it presents, the whole nature
is proportionably renewed, and Christ formed as well in the will and affections,
as in the understanding: as the body in the womb is not shaped by peecemeale,
one part after another, but all together by proportionable degrees and
progresses of perfection: So that at the same time when the Spirit of grace by
an act of heavenly illumination is present with the judgment of reason to
evidence, not the truth only, but the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
thereunto, it is likewise present by an act of heavenly persuasion, and most
intimate allurement unto the will and affections, sweetly accommodating its
working unto the exigence and condition of the faculties, that they likewise
may with such liberty and complacencie as becomes both their own nature, and
the quality of the obedience required, apply themselves to the desire and
prosecution of those excellent things which are with so spiritual an evidence
set forth unto them in the ministry of the Word. As by the same soul the eye
sees, and the ear hears, and the hand works: so when Christ by his Spirit
is formed in us, (for the Spirit of Christ is the Actus primus, or soul of a
Christian man, that which animateth him unto an heavenly being and working,
Romans 8.9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 6.17.) every power of the soul and body is in some
proportionable measure enabled to work suo modo, in such manner as is
convenient and proper to the quality of its nature, to the right apprehension
and voluntary prosecution of spiritual things. The same Spirit which by the
word of grace does fully convince the judgment, and let the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God shine upon the mind; does by the same word of
grace proportionably excite, and assist the will to affect it, that as the
understanding is elevated to the spiritual perception, so the will likewise is
enabled to the spiritual love of heavenly things.

By all which we may observe that this working of the Spirit of grace, whereby
we become voluntaries in Christ's service, and whereby he works in us both to
will and to do those things which of ourselves we were not obedient unto,
neither indeed could be, is both a sweet and powerful work, as in the raising
of a man from the dead (to which in the Scriptures the renewing of a sinner is
frequently compared) there is a work of great power, which yet, being
admirably suitable to the integrity of the creature, must needs bring an exact
complacencie and delight with it: we may frequently in holy Scriptures observe,
that of the same effect several things may be affirmed by reason of its
connection unto several causes, and of the several causalities or manners of
concurrence with which those several causes have contributed any influence
unto it. As the obedience of Christ was of all other the most free and
voluntary service of his Father, if we consider it with respect unto his most
holy, and therefore most undistracted, and unhindered will: (for if it were not
voluntary, it were no obedience) and yet notwithstanding it was most certain
and infallible, if we consider it with respect to the sanctity of his nature,
to the unmeasurablenesse of his unction, to the plenitude of his unseducible
and unerring Spirit, to the mystery of his hypostaticall union, and the
communication of properties between his natures, whereby whatever action was
done by him, might justly be called the action of God, in which regard it was
impossible for him to sin. In like manner, the passive obedience of Christ
was most free and voluntary, as it respected his own will, for he troubled
himself, he humbled and emptied himself, he laid down his own life, he
became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; and yet, thus it was
written, and thus it behoved or was necessary for Christ to suffer, if we
respect the predeterminate counsel and purpose of God, who had so ordained,
Act. 4.28. God would not suffer a bone of Christ's to be broken, and yet he did
not disable the soldiers from doing it, for they had still as much strength
and liberty to have broken his, as the others who were crucified with him, but
that which in regard of the truth and prediction of holy Scriptures was most
certainly to be fulfilled, in regard of the second causes by whom it was
fulfilled, was most free and voluntary. We find what a chain of mere
casualties and contingencies (if we look only upon second causes) did
concur, in the offense of V^s^ti, in the promotion of Esther, in the treason
of the two Chamberlaines, in the wakefulnesse of the King, in the opening of
the Chronicles, in the acceptance of Esthers request, and in the favor of the
King unto her, and all this ordered by the immutable and efficacious providence
of God (which moderates and guides causes and effects of all sorts to his own
fore-appointed ends) for the deliverance of his people from that intended
slaughter determined against them, the execution whereof would evidently have
voided that great promise of their returning out of captivity after seventie
years: with relation unto which promise their deliverance at this time was in
regard of Gods truth and purpose necessary, though in regard of second causes
brought about by a cumulation of contingencies. In like manner, when the hearts
of men do voluntarily dedicate and submit themselves to the kingdom of Christ,
if we look upon it with relation unto the Spirit of grace, which is the
principium quo, the formal virtue whereby it is wrought; so it is an effect of
power, and as it were, an act of conquest; and yet look upon it with relation
unto the heart it self, which is Principium quod, the material efficient
cause thereof, and so it is a most free, sweet, connaturall action, exactly
tempered to the exigencie of the second cause, and proceeding therefrom with
most exact delight, answerably to the measure of the grace of illumination, or
spiritual evidence in the mind, whereby our natural blindness, prejudices,
and misperswasions may be removed: and to the measure of the grace of
excitation, assistance, and cooperation in the heart, whereby the natural
frowardness and reluctance thereof may be subdued.

In one word, there are but three things requisite to make up a free and
voluntary action. First, it must be cum judicio rationis, with a preceding
judgment. Secondly, it must be cum indifferentia, there must be an internal
indeterminatenesse and equal disposition of it self unto several extremes.
Thirdly, it must be cum dominio actus, the will must have the power of her own
work. And all these three do sweetly consist with the point of the Text, That
the heart is made willing to obey Christ by an act of power.

For first, this power we speak of is only the power of the Word and Spirit,
both which do always work in the ordinary course of Gods proceeding by them
with men, secundum judicium, by a way of judgment and conviction, by a way of
teaching and demonstration, which is suitable to a rational faculty.

Secondly, which way soever the will is by the Spirit of grace directed and
persuaded to move, it still retains an habitual or internal habitude unto
the extremes, so that if it should have moved toward them, that motion would
have been as natural and suitable to its condition, as this which it
follows; for the determination of the act is no extinguishment of the
liberty thereunto.

Thirdly, when the Spirit by the power of the word of grace does work the will
in us, yet still the will has the dominion of its own act, that is, it is not
servilely, or compulsorily thereunto overswayed, but worket^, ex motu proprio,
by a selfe-motion, unto which it is quickened and actuated by the sweetness of
divine grace, as the seed of that action, according to that excellent known
speech of Saint Augustine, Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed Deus facit ut
velimus. Thus we see how the subjection of Christ's people unto his kingdom is
a voluntary act in regard of man's will, and an act of power in regard of Gods
Spirit, inwardly ^llightning the mind with the spiritual evidence, not only
of the truth, but the excellency and superlative goodness of the Gospel of
Christ; and inwardly touching the heart, and framing it to a lovely conformity
and obedience thereunto.

The ground of this point why there is an act of power required to conquer the
wills of sinners unto Christ, is that notable enmity, stoutnesse, reluctancie,
rebellion, weariness, averseness; in one word, fleshlinesse which possesses
the wills of men by nature: such forwardness unto evil, so much frowardness
against good, such a spring and byas from private ends, and worldly objects,
such fears without, such fightings within, such allurements on the right hand,
such frowns and affrightments on the left; such depths of Satan, such hellish
and unsearchable plots of principalities and powers, to keep fast and
faithful to themselves this chief mistress of the soul of man; such sly and
soaking, such furious and fiery temptations, to flatter or to fright it away
from Christ; such strong prejudices, such deep reasonings, such high
im^ginations, such scornful and mean conceits of the purity and power of the
ways of Christ, such deceitfulness of heart, such misperswasions and
presumptious of our present peace, or at least of the easiness of our future
reformation, such strong surmises of carnal hopes which will be prevented, or
worldly dangers incurred, or private ends disappointed; such lusts to be
denied, such members to be hewed off, such friends to be forsaken, such
passions to be subdued, such certain persecutions from the world, such
endless solicitations of Satan, such irreconcilable contentions with the
flesh; in the midst of all these pull-backes, how can we think the will should
escape and break through, if God did not send his Spirit, as once the Angel
unto Lot, Genesis 19.16. to lay hands upon it while it lingers and hankers after
its wonted course, to use a merciful conquest over it, and, as the Scriptures
express it, Rom, 8* 14. John* 6.44. Hos. 11.3. Esaias 40.11. Deuteronomy. 1.31. Deuteronomy.
32.11. Jude verse. 23.
to lead it, to draw it, to take it by the arm, to carry it in his bosom, to
bear it as an Eagle her young ones on her wings, nay, by the terrors of the
Lord, and the power of his Word and wrath, to pull and snatch it as a brand out
of the fire? Certainly, there is so much extreme perverseness, so much
hellishnesse, and devilish antipathy to God and his service in the heart by
nature, that if it were left to its own stubbornenesse to kick, and rebel,
and fall back and harden it self, and were not set upon by the grace of
Christ, no man living would turn unto him, or make use of his blood; by the
same reason that any one man perishes, every man would too, because in all
there is as fundamental and original enmity to the ways of grace, as there
is in any.

The consideration whereof may justly humble us in our reflection upon our
selves, whom neither the promises of heaven can allure, nor the blood and
passions of Christ persuade, nor the flames of hell affright from our sins,
till the Lord by the sweet and gracious power of his holy ^^irit subdue and
conquer the soul unto himself. If a man should rise from the dead, and truly
relate unto the conscience the woeful and everlasting horrors of hell, if a
man's natural capacity were made as wide to apprehend the wrath, fury, and
vengeance of a provoked God, the foulness, guilt, and venom of a soul
fuller of sins than the heavens of stars, as the most intelligent devils of
hell do conceive them. If an Archangell or Seraphim should be sent from heaven
to reveal unto the soul of a natural man the infinite glory of Gods
presence, the full pleasures of his right hand, the admirable beauty of his
ways, the intimate conformity and resemblance between his divine nature in
himself, and the Image of his holiness in the creature, the unsearchable and
bottomless love of Christ in his Incarnation and sufferings, the endless
incomprehensible virtue and pretiousnesse of his blood and prayers; yet so
desperately evil is the heart of man, that if after all this God should not
afford the blessed operation and concurrence of his own gracious Spirit, the
revelation of his own arm and power upon the soul, to set on those
isntrumental causes, it would be invincible by any evidence, which all the
cries and flames of hell, which all the armies and hosts of heaven were able to
beget. There is no might or power able to snatch a man out of the hands of his
sin, but only Gods Spirit. Notable are the expressions which the holy Ghost
every where uses, to set forth this wretched condition of the heart by nature:
Genesis 49.6. Ier. 6.17. Ier. 44.16. Luke 19.27. Ephesians. 2.3.
wilfulness and selfe-willednesse, We will not hearken, we will not have this
man to reign over us; (...), many wills in one. 1 Samuel 15.23.
Rebellion and stubbornenesse, Malac. 3.13.
stoutnesse of heart, Rom 9.19.10.21.
contestation with God, and gainsaying his Word; Ezekiel. 2.3, 4.
Impudence, stiffenesse, and hard-heartednesse, Hos. 5.2. 2 Cor. 10.5.
mischievous profoundnes and deep reasonings against the Law of God; Ier.
7.27. Ier. 8.5, 6. Ier. 18.18.
pertinacie, resolvednesse, and abiding in mischief; they hold fast deceit;
obstinacy and Ier. 19.15. Zech. 7.11.
selfe-obduration, They have hardened their necks that they might not hear;
Ier. 6.10. Romans 3.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Esaias ^.3.
Impotencie, immoveablenesse, and undocilenesse, their heart is uncircumcised;
they cannot hear, there is none that understands or seeks after God: Ier.
17.15. 2 Chronicles 30.10. 2 Pet. 3.4.
scorn and slighting of the messages of the Lord, where is his Word? Where is
the promise of his coming? Esaias 53.1. Ier. 5.12.
Incredulity, and belying the Lord in his Word, saying it is not he: Who has
believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Genesis 6.3.
Luke 7.30. Esaias 63.10. Act. 7.51.
Wrestling, resisting, and fighting with the Word, rejecting the counsel of
God, vexing and striving with his holy Spirit, ye have always resisted the
holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3 2, 3, 4. Romans 1.^9 31.
Rage and fierceness of disordred affections, despising of goodness,
traiterous, heady, and high-minded thoughts. Ier. 2.24.8.6. Hos. 8.9.
Brutishnes of immoderate lust, the untamed madness of an enraged beast
without any restraint of reason, or moderation. In one word, a Ier. 17 9.
Habac. 2.5.
hell, and gulf of unsearchable mischief, which is never satisfied. It is
impossible that any reasonable man, duly considering all these difficulties,
should conceive such an heart as this to be overcome with mere moral
persuasions, or by any thing less than the mighty power of Gods own grace.
To him therefore we should willingly acknowledge all our conversion and
salvation; So extremely impotent are we, O Lord, unto any good, so utterly
unprofitable, and unmeet for our Masters use, and yet so strongly hurried by
the impulsion of our own lust toward hell, that no precipice, nor danger, no
hope nor reward, no man or Angel is able to stop us, without thine own
immediate power, and therefore Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name only be attributed the glory of our conversion.

Again, by this consideration we should be provoked to stir up and call
together all our strength in the Lords service, to recover our misspent time, to
use the more contention and violence for the kingdom of heaven, when we
consider how abundant we have been in the works of sin, in the pursuing of
vast desires which had neither end nor hope in them. O how happy a thing would
it be, if men could serve God with the same proportion of vigor and
willingness of mind, as they served Satan and themselves before? I was never
tired in that way, I went on indefatigably toward hell, like a swift
Dromedary, or an untamed heifer, I pursued those evil desires which had vanity
for their object, and misery for their end, no fruit but shame, and no wages
but death. But in the service of Christ I have a price before me, an abiding
City, an enduring substance, an immarcescible crown to fix the highest of my
thoughts upon: I have the promises of Christ to strengthen me, his Angels to
guard, his Spirit to lead, his Word to illighten me. In one word, I have a
soul to save, and a God to honor. And why should not I apply my power, to
serve him, who did reach forth his own power to convert me? A long way I have
to go, and I must do it in a spanne of time; so many temptations to overcome,
so many corruptions to shake off, so many promises to believe, so many precepts
to obey, so many mysteries to study, so many works to finish, and so little
time for all: my weaknesses on one side, my businesses on another, mine enemies
and my sins round about me take away so much, that I have scarce any left to
give to God. And yet, alas, if I could serve God on earth, as he is served in
heaven, if I had the strength of Angels, and glorified Saints, to do his will,
it would come infinitely short of that good will of God in my redemption, or of
his power in my conversion. If God should have said to all the Angels in
heaven, there is such a poor wretch posting with full strength toward hell,
go stand in his way and drive him back again, all those glorious armies would
have been too few to block up the passage^ between sin and he^, without the
concurrence of Gods own Spirit and power, they could have returned none other
answer but this, we have done all we can to persuade and turn him, but he will
not be turned. If then the Lord did put to his own power to save me, great
reason there is that I should set my weak and impotent faculties to honor
him, especially since he has been pleased both to mingle with his service
great joy, liberty, and tranquillity here, and also to set before it a full, a
sure, and a great reward, for my further animation and encouragement thereunto.

The fourth thing observed in this Verse was the attire wherein Christ's people
should attend upon his service, In the Beauties of Holinesse] These words
refer to those before, and that either to the word [ People] or to the word [
willing.] If to [ People] then they are a further description of Christ's
Subjects or Soldiers, they shall be all like servants in Princes Courts,
beautifully arraied, like the Priests of the Law that had garments of beauty
and glory, and so Schindler expounds it, In societate sacerdotum. If to the
word [ willing] then it notes the ground and inducement of their great devotion
and subjection unto Christ's kingdom, that as the people came up in troops to
the Lords house, which was the Beauty of his Holiness, or as men do flock
together to the sight of some honorable and stately solemnity: so Christ's
people should by the beauty of his banners be allured to gather unto him, and
fly in multitudes as Doves unto their windows. Which way ever we understand
the words we may from them observe, First, That Holiness is a glorious and a
beautiful thing. The holy oil with which all the vessels of the Sanctuary
were to be consecrated, was a type of that Spirit which sanctifies us and
makes us Kings and Priests unto God, Exodus 30.23.
and it was to be compounded of the purest and most delicate ingredients which
the art of the Apothecary could put together. Therefore our Savior still
calls his Spouse the fairest of wom^n, to note, that no other beauty in the
world is to be compared with Holiness. Cant. ^.12.
Therefore our Faith, and Holiness is called a Wedding Garment, Mat 22.12.
at which solemnity men use above all other to adorn themselves with their
costliest and most beautiful attire: Therefore we are said to Romans 13.14. Col.
3.12.
Put on the Lord Jesus, and to Put on bowels of mercy, and humbleness of
mind, and meekness, etc. and therefore likewise the Church is compared to a
Psalm. 45.13, 14. Esai. 61.10. Ier. 2.32. Ezekiel. 16.8, 14.
Bride decked in her choicest ornaments and jewels, broidred work, silk, fine
linen, bracelets, chains, jewels, crowns, gold, silver, perfect comeliness,
garments of salvation, and of praise, robes of righteousness, etc. And Christ
the husband of this Spouse, the Cant. 5.10, 16.
chiefest and most amiable of ten thousand, even altogether lovely. The Hag.
2.7.
Desire of all Nations, and the allurement of all hearts that can look upon
him. And Psalm. 84.1.87.3. Revel. 21.18, 23.
Jerusalem the palace of this glorious couple described by the most precious
and desirable things which can be thought on. Iaspar the wall, gold the
pavement, pearl the gates, precious stones the foundation, and the Lord the
light thereof. Of our selves by reason of sin we are full of 2 Cor. 7.1.
filthiness and deformity in flesh and spirit, Zech. 3.3, 4. Esai. 1.5, 6.
clothed with filthy garments, and overspread from the head to the foot with
blaines and putrefactions. It is only the holy Word of God which Ioh. 15
3.17.17.
makes us clean from our filthiness and from all our pollutions. By the
washing of water through the Word Christ sanctifies us, that he may present
unto himself (...) a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle that it might be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.27. And therefore the Apostle Saint Peter
exhorts Christian women to adorn the inner man of the heart with the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit which is in the sight of God (whose pure
eye they ought rather to please than the wanton eye of man) of great price, 1
Pet. 3.3, 4. And the truth hereof may be proved even from the practice of
hypocrites themselves: for no man will counterfeite villainies, and make a show
of the vices, which indeed he has not, except he be desperately thereunto
swayed by an humor of pleasing his wicked companions. And therefore Saint
Austin complains of it as of a prodigious corruption of his nature, that he
did sometimes belie himself to his wicked associates, and boasted of the
wickedness which he durst not practice. No woman will paint her self with
dung, or spread ink upon her face. It must be beautiful in it self which any
man will ordinarily counterfeit: so that Holiness has the prerogative of an
enemies suffrage, which is one of the strongest evidences, to testify the
beauty and excellency thereof.

This point will more distinctly appear if we consider either the Author,
Nature, properties, or Operations of this Holiness. First, the Author is God
himself by his spirit. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly, 1 These.
5.23. Heb. 13.20, 21.
says the Apostle, and the God of peace make you perfect in every good work
to do his will. Therefore the spirit is called a spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.4.
by the power whereof Christ rising from the dead was declared to be the Son
of God, to note the answerablenesse between raising from the dead or giving
life where there was none before, and the sanctification of a sinner. Therefore
the Apostle calls it the renewing of the Holy Ghost, and the forming of
Christ in us, the quickening, and creating us to good works. Tit. 3.5. Gal.
4.19. Ephesians. 2.5, 10.
By all which we may note that what Beauty the Creation brought upon that
empty and unshaped Chaos when it was distributed into this orderly frame which
we now admire; or what beauty the reunion of a living soul unto a dead and
ghastly body does restore unto it; the same beauty does Holiness bring unto
the soul of a man which was filthy before. But yet further we must note that
God did not make man as other ordinary Creatures, for some low and inferior
use, (and yet Solomon says, that they were made all beautiful in their time)
but there was a pause, a consultation, a more than common wisdom, power, and
mercy revealed in the workmanship of man: for God made man for his own more
peculiar delight, company and communion, one whom he would enter into a more
intimate league and covenant withal. Psalm. 4.3. Esai. 43.21.
The Lord has set apart the man that is godly for himself. This people have I
formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise, I will magnify the
beauty of my glorious virtues in those whom I have sanctified for my self.
Thus we find what perfect comeliness the Lord bestowed upon his people, when
he entered into Covenant with them, and made them his own, one which was
always to lean on his bosom, and to stand in his own presence, Ezekiel. 16.8,
14. The Church is the Lords 1 Timothy 3.15.
own House, a 2 Cor. 6.16.
Temple in the which he will dwell and walk; it is his Ier. 3.17.
Throne, in which he sits as our Prince and Lawgiver. And in this regard it
must needs be extraordinary beautiful; for the Esai. 60.13.
Lord will beautify the place of his Sanctuary, and will make the place of his
feet glorious. Now then, if by Holiness we are made 1 Cor. 3.9.
Gods building, and that not as the rest of the world is for his Creatures to
inhabit, but as a Temple for himself to dwell in, as a Cant. 7.5.
gallerie for himself to walk and refresh himself in, certainly Holiness
which is the Ornament and ingraving of this temple must needs be a glorious
thing, for there is much glory and wisdom in all Gods works.

Secondly, if we consider the Nature of Holiness, it must needs be very
Beautiful. In general, it consists in a Relation of conformity, as all
Goodness, save that of God does: for no Creature is so absolute as to have its
being from it self, and therefore its Goodness cannot consist in any thing
which has its original in it self. It is the Rule and End which denominateth
the Goodness of any created thing, that therefore which ought not to work for
its own end, ought not to work by its own Rule, for he who is Lord of an
end, must needs be Lord of the means and directions which lead unto that end.
And this is indeed the ground of all sin, when men make themselves their own
will, wit, reason, or resolutions, to be the spring and fountain of all their
actions. Therefore sin is called our own ways, and the lusts of our own
hearts and our own counsels, because it is absolutely from our selves, and
has no constituted rule to moderate or direct it. Impossible it is for any
Creature, as it comes out of Gods hands, to be without a Law, or to be an
original law unto it self: for as he who has none over him cannot possibly
be subject unto any Law, in as much as a Law is but the declaration of a
Superiors will what he requires to be done, and what he threatens on default
thereof to inflict: so he that is under the wisdom and ends of another, must
needs likewise be subject to the Laws which his will prescribes for advancing
and compassing his own ends, who if he be in his own nature and ends most
holy, must needs be holy in the Laws which he enacts. By all which we may
observe that Holiness consists in conformity, so that according to the
excellency of the pattern whereunto it referres, so is the measure of its
beauty to be conjectured. And the pattern of our Holiness is God himself,
Be you holy, as your father which is in heaven is Holy; Other Creatures have
some prints and paths of God in them, and so are all beautiful in their time:
but man had the image of God created in him, his will was set up in our heart
as a Law of nature, most pure, right, holy, good, wise and perfect, and that
Law did bear the same relation to man's life, as his soul does unto his
members, to animate, form, and organize every motion of the heart, every word
of the mouth, every action of the soul and body according unto the will of
God. When after this man threw away this Image, and God was pleased in mercy
again to renew Holiness in him, he did it again by another pattern, or
rather the same exhibited in another manner. He made him then conformable to the
Image of his Son, the heavenly Adam, Romans 8.29. 1 Cor. 15 49.
who is himself the Image of the invisible God, the express Character of his
Fathers brightness, a Sun of righteousness, a morning star, the light of
the world, the fairest of ten thousand: so that compare Holiness with the
first original draught thereof in Paradise, the nature of Adam as it came new
out of Gods fashioning, or that with the Law of God written in his heart, or
that with the Holiness of God, of which it was a ray shining into the soul,
or that Image of God with it self in Christ the second Adam, and every way
Holiness in its nature consists in a Conformity and Commensuration to the most
beautiful things.

Thirdly, if we consider some of the chief Properties of Holiness, we shall
find it in that regard likewise very Beautiful. First, Rectitude and
Uprightness, sincerity and simplicity of heart, God made man upright, but
they have found out Eccles. 7.29. Ier. 31.22. Esai. 57.10.
many inventions, that is, have sought up and down through many turnings and
by-ways to satisfy crooked affections. It was Psalm. 5.8.
David's Prayer, Make thy way strait before my face, and it is the Apostles
instruction, Heb. 12.13.
Make strait paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way. True Holiness is a plain, and an even thing, without falsehood, guile,
perverseness of Spirit, deceitfulness of heart, or starting aside. It has
one end, one rule, one way, one heart, whereas hypocrites are in the Scripture
called Iam. 1.8.
Double minded men, because they pretend to God, and follow the world. And
Deuteronomy. 32.5.
crooked men, like the Esai. 30.12, 13.
swelling of a wall, whose parts are not perpendicular, nor level to their
foundation. Now rectitude, sincerity, and singleness of heart is ever both in
the eyes of God and man a beautiful thing.

Secondly, Harmony and Uniformity within it self. The Philosopher says of a
Just man that he is like a Dye, which is every way even and like it self,
turn it how you will, it falls upon an equal bottom. And so Holilinesse
keeps the heart like its self in all conditions; as a watch though all
together it may be tossed up and down with the agitation of him that carries
it about him; yet that motion does no way perturbe the frame, or disorder the
workings of the spring and wheels within: so though the man may be many ways
tempted, and disquieted, yet the frame of his heart, the order of his
affections, the government of the spirit within him is not thereby stopped,
but holds on in the same tenor. We know in the body if any part do exceed
the due proportion, it destroies the beauty and acceptablenesse of the rest.
Symmetrie and fitness of the parts unto one another is that which commends a
body. Now Holiness consists in this proportion, there is in it an (...) an
exactness of obedience, an equal respect unto all Gods Commandments, an
hatred of every false way, an universal work upon the whole spirit, soul,
and body, a supply made unto every joint, a measure dispensed unto every part,
not a grace due unto Christian integrity which is not in some proportion
fashioned in a man. Christ has no Monsters begotten by his spiritual seed:
for Monsters are ever caused either by an excess, or by a defect of seed; in
the one case nature being overcharged is forced to labor that which remains,
and will not be laid aside, into some superfluous members; and in the other for
want of materials to leave her work unfinished, and destitute of some
necessary parts. But now first we are to note that a man can have no
superfluity of Grace, we can never have too much of that, the fullness whereof
we should labor to get, and for the other danger, we know Christ has a
Residue of spirit to supply any defect, and to make up whatsoever is away for
the fashioning of Christ in us: so then Holiness fashioneth the whole man. He
that leaves any one faculty of his soul neglected, or any one part of the
Service or Law of God disobeyed (I speak of a total, and constant neglect) is
undoubtedly an Hypocrite and disobeyes all, Iam. 2.10, 11. As David with a
little stone slew Goliath because his forehead was open; so can our enemy
easily deal with us if he observe any faculty naked and neglected. The actual
and total breach of any one Commandment, ( Total, I mean, when the whole
heart does it, though happily it execute not all the obliquitie which the
compass of the sin admits) is an implicit, habitual, interpretative, and
conditional breach of all; His soul stands alike disaffected to the
holiness of every Commandment, and he would undoubtedly adventure on the
breach of this, if such exigences and conditions as misguided him in the other
should thereunto as strongly induce him. He that has done any one of these
abominations, has done all these abominations in Gods account. Ezekiel. 18.10,
13. There being then in a Christian man a suitable life and vigor of holiness
in every part, and a mutual conspiring of them all in the same ways and ends,
there must needs likewise be therein an excellent beauty.

Thirdly, growth and further Progress in these Proportions: for it is not
only uprightness and Symmetrie of parts, which causes perfect beauty and
comeliness, but stature likewise. Now Holiness is a thriving and growing
thing. The Spirit is seed, and the Word is rain, and the Father is an
Husbandman, and therefore the life of Christ is an abounding life, Ioh. 10.10.
The rivers of the Spirit of Grace spring up unto Eternity, Ioh. 7.36. As Christ
has no Monsters, so neither has he any Dwarfes in his mystical body; but
all his grow up unto the pitch of perfection which it becomes them to have in
him, even unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4.12, 13. The meaning of the Apostle is that Christ is not always an infant in
us as when he is first formed, but that he does Grandescere in Sanctis, as
Musculus well expresses it, that he grows up still unto the stature of a
man: for wheresoever there is faith and holiness there is ever ingenerated an
appetite for augmentation; Faith is of a growing and Charity of an abounding
Nature, 2 These. 1.3. By the Word of truth, as by incorruptible seed we were
begotten, Iam. 1.18, 21. 1 Pet. 1.23. 2.2. Luke 17 5. Psalm. 68.28.
and by the same Word as by the sap and milk are we nourished, and grow up
thereby. This affection holiness ever works, as it did in the Disciples,
Lord, increase our faith, and in David, Strengthen, O God, that which thou have
wrought for us.

Fourthly, besides the Rectitude, Harmony, and Maturitie which is in
Holiness, there is another property, which makes the Beauty thereof
surpass all other Beauty, and that is Indeficiencie. The measure of Christ
must be the Rule of our growth, but Christ never was overtaken by old age or
times of declining, He never saw corruption: so we must proceed from strength
to strength, like the Sun to the perfect day, but there is no sinking or
setting of Holiness in the heart. They that are planted in Gods House do
still bring forth fruit in their Old age, Psalm. 92.14.
and are even then fat and flourishing. As our outward man decaieth, so our
inward man grows day by day. Our Holiness is a branch of the life of Christ
in us, which does never of it self run into death, and therefore is not apta
nata of it self to decay: for that is nothing but an earnest, inchoation, and
assurance of death. That which waxes old, says the Apostle, is ready to
vanish away, Heb. 8.13.

Fourthly and lastly, if we consider the Operations of Holiness, that likewise
will evidence the Beauty thereof, for it has none but gracious and honorable
effects. It fills the Soul with Joy, Comfort, and Peace. All Joy,
unspeakeable, and glorious joy, peace, quietness, assurance, songs, and
everlasting joy. Romans 15.13. 1 Pet. 1.8. Esai. 32.17. Esai. 35.5, 10.
It makes the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame leap, the dumb sing, the
wilderness and parched ground to become springs of water. It entertaineth the
soul with feasts of fatted things, Esaias 25.6. Cant. 2.4, 5. Psalm. 45.15. Cant.
1.4. Cant. 7 5. John 14.21-23. Hebr. 12.14. Psalm. 45.11. Cant 4.9.
and of refined wines, and carries it into the banqueting house unto apples
and flagons. It gives the soul a dear communion with God in Christ, a sight
of him, an access unto him, a boldness in his presence, an admission into
most holy delights, and intimate conferences with him in his bedchamber, and
in his galleries of love. In one word, it gathers the admiration of men, it
secures the protection of Angels, and which is argument of more beauty than
all the creatures in the world have besides, it attracteth the eye and heart,
the longings and ravishments, the tender compassions and everlasting delights
of the Lord Jesus.

I have insisted on those properties of holiness, which denote inward beauty,
because all the graces of the Spirit do beautify inherently. But the word
properly signifying Decus or Ornatum, outward adorning by a metaphor of rich
apparel, expressing the internal excellency of the soul, notes unto us two
things more.

First, that the people of Christ are not only sanctified within, but have
interest in that unspotted holiness of Christ, wherewith they are clothed as
with an ornament. So the Priests Psalm 132 9.
of God are said to be clothed with righteousness, and we are said to Gal.
3.27.
put on Christ: And the righteousness of Christ is frequently compared to
Revel. 3.18.4.4.6.11.7.9.
long white robes, fit to Psalm. 32.1.
cover our sins, to hide our nakedness, and to protect our persons from the
wrath of God: so that to the eye of his justice we appear, as it were parts of
Christ; as when Jacob wore Esau's garment, he was as Esau to his father, and in
that relation obtained the blessing. God carries himself toward us in
Christ, as if we our selves had fulfilled all righteousness, as if there were
no ground of contestation with us, or exception against us. And this is indeed
the beauty of holiness: The model, prototype, and original of all beauty.

Secondly, from the metaphorical allusion (as it is usually understood) it
notes unto us likewise, that all the people of Christ are Priests unto God, to
1 Pet. 2.5. Esaias 56.7. Revel 1.6.
offer up sacrifices acceptable unto him by Jesus Christ. They have all the
privileges, and the duties of Priests. To approach unto God, Hebr. 10.19.
we have liberty to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus; to consult
and have communion with him, to be his Remembrancer; for as his Spirit is his
Remembrancer unto us, Ioh. 14.26.
he shall bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you; so is he Esaias 43.25. Esaias 62.6, 7.
our Remembrancer unto God, to put him in mind of his mercy and promises, to
make mention of him, and to give him no rest. To know, and propagate his truth;
this Mal. 2.7.
was the office of the Priest, to be the keeper of the knowledge, and to teach
it unto others: and this knowledge in the Gospel does Esaias 11.9.
overflow the earth, and make every Col 3.16. Hebr. 3.13. Jude verse. 20.
man, in a spiritual sense, a Priest, an instructor, and edifier of his
brother. To offer to him such sacrifices as he now delights in: the Psalm.
107 22.
sacrifices of thanksgiving, the Psalm. 51 17.
sacrifices of a broken and contrite spirit, the Heb 13.15, 16. Phil. 4.18.
sacrifices of praise, confession, good works, and mutual communicating unto
one another: in one word, the Romans 12.1. Romans 15.16. Esaias 66.20. James 1.18.
sacrificing of a man's whole self, to be consecrated as a kind of first fruit
unto God, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. There is no man actually
belonging unto the Kingdom of Christ, who has not all these holy affections
wrought in him, and makes conscience of them, as of his calling, and the
duties of his life.

We see then that Holiness is the badge of Christ's subjects; they are called
Esaias 63.18.
The people of his Holiness: Ier. 2.3. James 1.18.
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase
consecrated unto him and his service as a kind of first fruits. The livery of
Christ's servants is a parcel of the same holy Spirit with which his own
humane nature was clothed. Exodus 40.9.
All the vessels and ministerial instruments of the Tabernacle were anointed
with the holy oil; and the Psalm. 93.5.
house of the Lord was an house of holiness, to signify that every Christian
should be by the Spirit of God sanctified, because he is 2 Cor. 6.16.
a Temple, and every member, because it is Romans 6.13.
a vessel and instrument for the Masters use. The Spirit of holiness is that
which distinguishes, and as it were, marketh the sheep of Christ from the
wicked of the world: ye are Ephesians. 1.13.
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise: 1 Cor. 2.12.
ye have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God.
Holiness Tit. 2.14.
sets us apart for Gods service, for his Hebr. 12.14.
presence and fruition; Ezekiel. 9.4.
protecteth and priviledgeth us from the wrath to come, in the day when he
shall separate between the precious and the vile, and make up his jewels:
without this no man can either serve, or see, or escape God, either do his
will, enjoy his favor, or decline his fury. All our services without this are
but Malac. 2.3.
Dung, and who would thank that man for his service, who with wonderful
officiousness should bring nothing but heaps of dung into his house? If a man
could power out of his veins rivers of blood, and offer up every day as many
prayers as thoughts unto God, if his eyes were melted into tears, and his
knees hardened into horn with devotion; yet all this, if it be not the fruit of
holiness, but of will worship, or superstition, or opinion of merit and
righteousness, it is but as dung in Gods sight. Wherefore lie thou upon thy
face, there is an accursed thing in the camp? Whatever sin thy conscience
tells thee lies next thy heart, and warmes it, so that thou art unwilling to
part from it, take heed of bringing it into Gods presence, or provoking him
with thy services, for he will throw them back like dung into thy face. What
has my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with
many? Ier. 11.15. Psalm. 50.16, 17. Esaias 1.11-14.
What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction? Who has required this at your hands to tread in my Courts? Bring
no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me, etc. Till a man
put away the evil of his doings, and cleanse himself, all his worship of God
is but mocking of him, and profaning his ordinances. In vain did the
Mariners pray while Jonah was in the ship; in vain did Joshua intercede while
the accursed thing was in the camp. A man shall lose all which he has wrought
in Gods worship, and have neither thanks nor reward for it, so long as he
harbors any unclean affection in his heart, and will not yield to part from
it. Any sin which wastes the conscience (as every great and presumptuous
sin does in whomsoever it is) unqualifieth that person for the kingdom of
heaven. Grace makes a believer sure of salvation, but it does not make him
wretchlesse or secure in living; though there be not an extinguishment, yet
there is a suspension of his right upon any black and notorious fall, that man
must not dare to lay claim to heaven, that has dared in a presumptuous manner
to provoke the Lord. Our holiness is not the cause of our salvation, but yet
it is the way thereunto; he which by any wasting and presumptuous sin puts
himself out of that way, must by repentance turn into it again, before he
can hope to find out heaven; for without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
He that is an hundred miles from his own house, notwithstanding his propriety
thereunto, shall yet never actually enter therein, till he have traveled over
the right way which leads unto it. There is an Order, a primo ad ultimum in the
salvation of men, many intermediate passages between their vocation and their
glory: Justification, repentance, sanctification, as a scale or ladder betwixt
earth and heaven, he that falls from his holiness and purity of conscience,
though he be not quite down the ladder, and has the whole work to begin
again, as much as ever, yet doubtless he shall never get to the top till he
recover the step from which he fell.

And if in this case it be true that the righteous shall scarcely be saved; O
then where shall that man appear whom God at the last shall find without this
garment and seal upon him. When there was a tempest, he who slept, and least
thought of it, was thrown into the sea; and when the day of wrath shall come,
those that have neglected their estate most, shall doubtless be in the
greatest danger. And therefore we should labor to go to Gods throne with our
garments and our mark upon us; for all other endowments, our learning, our
honors, our parts, our preferments, our earthly hopes and dependencies will
none follow us, but we shall live to see either them or the comforts of them
depart. Achitophel had wisdom like an oracle of God, but he lived to see it
bid him quite farewell, for he died like a very fool or child, who when he
may not have his own will, will be revenged upon himself. Haman had more
honor than the ambition of a subject usually aspires unto, and yet he lived to
see it bid him farewell, and died the basest death which himself could devise
for his most hated and despised enemy. Iehoiakim, a King, lived to see his
Crown take its leave, and was buried with the burial of an Ass, and dragged
like carrion out of the gates of the City. There will be nothing at last left
for any man to cast his trust upon but God, or Angels, or our fellows; and if
then God be against us, though all which remains were on our side, alas what is
an handful of stubble to a world full of fire? but yet there will not be that
advantage, but the combat must be single between God and a sinner. The good
Angels rejoice to do Gods will, and the wicked will rejoice to do man any
mischief; these will be only ready to accuse, and those to gather the wicked
together unto the wrath of him that sits on the Throne. O what would a man
give then for that holiness which he now despises? what covenants would such
a man be content to subscribe unto, if God would then show him mercy when the
court of mercy is shut up? would thou return to the earth, and live there a
thousand years under contempt and persecution for my service? O yes, not under
thy service only, but under the rocks and mountains of the earth, so I may
be hid from the face of the Lamb. Will thou be content to go to hell and
serve me there a thousand years in the midst of hellish torments, and the
reviling of damned creatures? O yes, even in hell infinitely better would it be
to be thy servant than thine enemy. Will thou revenge every oath with an year
of prayers, every bribe or corruption with a treasury of alms, every vanity
with an age of preciseness? Yes Lord, the severest of thy commands to escape
but the smallest of thy judgments. O let us be wise for our selves, there
shall be no such easy conditions then proposed when it will be impossible to
observe them, and there are now far easier proposed, when we are invited to
observe them.

Lastly, from hence we learn that none will be Willing to come unto Christ
till they see Beauty in his service, which with a carnal eye they cannot do,
for naturally the heart is possessed with much prejudice against it, that the
way of religion in that exactness which the Word requires, is but the
phantasme of more sublimated speculations, a mere notionall and airy thing,
which has no being at all, but in the wishes of a few men, who fancy unto
themselves the shape of a Church, as Zenophon did of a Prince, or Plato of a
Commonwealth. And therefore though with their tongues they do not, yet in
their hearts men are apt to lay aside that rigor and exactness which the
Scripture requires, namely, to pull out our right eyes, to cut off our right
hands, to hate father and mother, and wife, and lands, and our own life; to
deny our selves, to cross our own desires, to mortify our earthly members, to
follow the Lamb through evil report and good report, through afflictions and
persecutions, and manifold temptations whither soever he goes, to war with
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses, to acquaint our selves
with the whole counsel of God, and the like: and in stead thereof to resolve
upon certain more tolerable maxims of their own to go to heaven by,
certain mediocrities between piety and profaneness, wherein men hope to
hold God fast enough, and yet not to lose either the world, or their sinful
lusts. This is a certain and confessed truth, that the spirit which is in us
by nature, is contrary to the spirit of purity and power which is in the world:
and therefore the universal and willing submission of the heart unto this,
must needs find both many antipathies within, and many discouragements and
contempts without. Esaias 8.14.18.
Christ was set up for a sign of contradiction to be spoken against, and that
in the houses of Israel and of Judah, and as it was then, so is it now, even in
Abraham's family, in the household and visible Church of Christ, Zech. 3.8.
They that are of the flesh persecute those that are after the spirit; Luke
2.34.
Christ had never greater enemies than those which professed his name. This is
one of the sorest engines Satan has against his kingdom, Quantus in
Christiano populo honor Christi, ubi religio ignobilem facit? -- per hoc omnes
quodammodo matiesse coguntur ne viles habeantur. Salvian.
to make it appear in the eyes of men, as a despicable, contemptuous, and
unbeautifull thing. And therefore no man comes under Christ's government till
that prejudice by manifest evidence of the Spirit be removed. And for this
reason the ways of Christ are set forth as beautiful, even under crosses and
afflictions. I am black with persecution, with the beating of the Sun upon
me, but yet I am comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. When the watchmen smote
the Church, Cant. 1.5-8.
and wounded her, and took away her veil, yet still she acknowledged Christ,
for whose sake she suffered these persecutions, to be the white and ruddy,
Cant. 5.7-10.
the fairest of ten thousand: and the same opinion has Christ of his Church,
though she be afflicted and tossed with tempest, yet he esteems of her as of
a beautiful structure. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for
delights? Esaias 54.11, 12. Cant. 4.1-7.
And this is that we should all endeavor, to show forth in a shining and
unblameable conversation, the Beauty of the Gospel, that the enemy may have
no occasion from any indiscretions, affectatitions, unnecessary, reservednesse,
and deformities, ungrounded scrupulosities, over-worldly affections, or any
other miscarriages of those who profess not the name only, but the power of
religion, to blaspheme or fling off from a way, against which they have such
prejudices offered them; for all that which the faithful have common with the
world, shall yet be sure to be charged upon their profession by wicked men, who
have not either reason or charity enough to distinguish between Gods rule, and
man's error. Submit your selves, says the Apostle, to every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, etc. for so is the will of God, that with well-doing you
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: for this is certain, the
ignorance of foolish men will not so much lay the blows upon your persons, as
upon that truth and religion which you profess, when you needlessely withstand
any such ordinances as you might without sin obey.

The last thing observed in this verse was the Multitudes of Christ's subjects,
and the manner of their birth; From the womb of the morning, thou have the dew
of thy youth. Thy children are borne in as great abundance unto thee, as the
dew which falls from the morning womb.

From whence we may note; First, that Christ in the day of his power, in the
morning of his Church, had multitudes of children borne unto him. This promise
the Lord made to Abraham, and it is not to be limited to his children after the
flesh, but to his children of promise, Genesis 22.17. Genesis 28.14.
that his seed should be as the Stars, and as the Dust for multitude. And the
Prophet applies that Promise to Israel by promise, when those after the flesh
should be dissipated and become no people, yet says the Prophet, the number of
the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea which cannot be measured
nor numbered, Numb. 23.10.
etc. meaning the Israel of God amongst the Gentiles. Thus the faithful are
said to flock like Doves unto their windows, Hos. 1.10.
and to swell into a sea of great waters, an hundred and four and forty
thousand, Esaias 11.9. Revel. 7 4-9.
with an innumerable company more, all sealed and standing before the Lamb.

Now this was in die copiarum, in the time when Christ first sent abroad his
armies and the rod of his strength into the world. Act. 14.16.
Before this God suffered men to walk in their own ways, yea, in his own
lifetime he forbade his Disciples to enter into the Cities of the Samaritans,
Act. 17.30.
or the Gentiles. And he promised them that they should do greater works than
he himself had done, because he went unto his Father: Ioh. 14.12.
for when he ascended up on high, he then led captivity captive, that
ignorance and thraldom under which the world was held he triumphed over, and
gave gifts of his Spirit unto men of all sorts in abundance; Visions to the
young, Dreams to the aged, and his gracious Spirit unto all. We never read
of so many converted by Christ's personal preaching (which was indeed but the
beginning of his preaching, for it is the Lord which speaks from heaven
still) as by the ministry of his Apostles; he thereby providing to magnify
the excellency of his spiritual presence, against all the carnal
superstitions of those men who seek for an invisible corporal presence of
Christ on the earth, charmed down out of heaven under the lying shapes of
separated accidents. And who cannot be content with that All-sufficient
Remembrancer, which himself has promised to his Church, Ioh. 14.26. except
they may have others, and those such as the holy Scriptures every where
disgraceth as teachers of lies and vanity, the Crucifixes and images of their
own erecting; therein infinitely derogating from that all-sufficient provision
which the Lord in his word and Sacraments (the only living and full images of
Christ crucified, Gal. 3.1.) has proposed unto men as alone able to make them
wise unto salvation, being opened and represented unto the consciences of men,
not by humane inventions, but by those holy ordinances and offices which
himself has appointed in his Church, the preaching of his word, and
administration of his Sacraments. And surely they who by Moses and the
Prophets, by that Ministry which Christ after his ascension did establish in
his Church, does not repent, would be no whit the nearer, no more than Judas
or the Pharisees were, if they should see or hear Christ in the flesh.
Therefore it is observed after Christ's ascension that the word of God grew
mightily and prevailed; Act. 19.20. Act. 3.47. 2 Cor. 2.14. Esai. 54.1. Act.
4.32. Act. 5.14. Zech 8 20.23. Matthew. 11.12. 1 Samuel 15.27.
and that there were men daily added unto the Church. That the Savor of the
Gospel was made manifest in every place. That the Children of the desolate
were more than of the married wife. Therefore the believers after Christ's
ascension are called (...). The multitude of them that believed, and multitudes
of men and women were added to the Lord. Ten to one of that there was before;
Ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, of the skirt of
him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you; that is, shall take the
Kingdom of heaven by violence, as Saul laid hold on the skirt of Samuels
Ma^tle, that he might not go from him.

The Reason hereof is to magnify the exaltation and spiritual presence and
power of Christ in the Church; while he was upon the earth he confined his
ordinary residence and personal preaching unto one people, because his bodily
presence was narrow, and could not be communicated to the whole world. For he
took our nature with those conditions and limitations which belong thereunto.
But his Spirit and power is over the whole Church, by them he walks in the
midst of the Candlesticks. Christ's bodily presence and preaching the Jews
withstood, and crucified the Lord of glory. But now to show the greatness of
his power by the Gospel, he goes himself away, and leaves but a few poor
and persecuted men behind him, assisted with the virtue of his Spirit, and by
them wrought works which all the world could not withstand. He could have
published the Gospel as he did the Law by the ministry of Angels; he could
have anointed his Apostles with regal oil, and made them not Preachers only
but Princes, and Defenders of his faith in the world. But he rather chose to
have them to the end of the world poor and despised men, whom the world
(without any show of just reason which can be by them alleged) should
overlooke, and account of as low and mean conditioned men, that his Spirit
might in their ministry be the more glorified. God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
and weak things of the world to confound things that are mighty, and base
things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, ye and
things that are not, to bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should
glory in his presence. 1 Cor. 2.3, 4, 5.
But that his own Spirit might have all the honor; therefore I was with you in
weakness, says the Apostle, and in fear, and in much trembling, etc. That
your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. 2
Cor. 4.7. Zech. 4.6.
And again, We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God and not of us* not by might, nor by power, but by my
Spirit, says the Lord. Thus we find that when the Church was most persecuted
it did then most grow, and in the worst times it brought forth the greatest
fruit, to note the power of Christ's Kingdom above all the attempts of men. 1
Cor. 16.9.
A great door, and effectual is opened unto me, says the Apostle, and there
are many adversaries; intimating that the Gospel of Christ had great success
when it was most resisted. All persecutors (as S. Cyprian observes) are like
Herod, they take their times, Infantiam Christi studiose persequuntur, and
antequam formetur Christus in nobis, in ipso piae conversationis initio ut
extinguatur Spiritus, and suffocetur vita justitiae, penitus elaborant,
Cyprian. Sermon. de stella and Magis. Aug. Epist. 42.
and seek to slay Christ and overthrow his Kingdom in its infancy, and
therefore at that time does he most of all magnify the power and protection
of his Spirit over the same. Never were there so many men converted as in those
infant-times of the Church when the dragon stood before the woman ready to
devour her Child, as soon as it should be borne. The great Potentates of
the world, which did persecute the name of Christ, were themselves at last
thereunto subjected, Non a repugnantibus sed a morientibus Christianis, not by
fighting but by dying Christians. As a tree shaken sheds the more fruit, and a
perfume burnt diffuseth the sweetest Savor; so persecuted Christianity does the
more flourish by the power of that Holy Spirit, whose foolishness is wiser,
and whose weakness is stronger than all the oppositions and contradictions of
men.

But if there be such multitudes belonging unto Christ's Kingdom, is not
universality, (...): Nazian. Orat. 25.
and a visible pomp a true note to discern the Church of Christ by? To this I
answer, that a true characteristicall note or difference ought to be
convertible with that of which it is made a note, and only suitable thereunto;
for that which is common unto many, can be no evident note of this or that
particular. Now universality is common to Antichristian, idolatrous, and
malignant Churches. The Arrian heresy invaded the world, and by the Imperial
countenance spread it self into all Churches. The whore was to sit upon many
waters, which were peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; Revel.
17.15.18.3.
the Kings of the earth were to be made drunk with the wine of her
fornications, and all nations to drink thereof. Therefore touching these
multitudes in the Church, we are thus to state the point; Consider the Church
in it self, and so it is a very vast body, but yet consider it comparatively
with the other more prevailing and malignant part of the world, and so it is
but a little flock, as many grains and measures of corn may lie hid under a
greater heap of chafe. Secondly, the Church now is many, comparatively with
the old church of the Jews, more are the Children of the desolate than of the
married wife, Esai. 54.1. But not comparatively with the adversaries of the
Church in general. We see of thirty parts of the world, Brierwood of
Religion.
nineteen are either idolatrous or Mahumetan, and the other eleven serving
Christ in so different a manner as if there were many Christ's or many Gospels,
or many ways to the same end. Thirdly, though Christ always have a numerous
offspring, yet in several ages there is observable a different purity and
conspicuousnesse according to the different administrations and breathings of
the Spirit upon his garden. In some ages the Doctrine more incorrupt, the
profession and acceptance more universal than in others. In the Apostles
times there were many borne unto Christ, by reason of the more abundant measure
of Spirit which was shed abroad upon them, Manifesta se tum Dei virtus contra
odia humana porrexit: cum tanto magis Christus praedicaretur, quanto magis
praedicari inhiberetur. Hilar. contra Auxent.
Tit. 3.6. In the times of the Primitive persecutions there were many likewise
born, because God would glorify the foundations of his Church, and the power
of his Spirit above the pride of men. In the first countenancing of it by
Imperial Laws and favors, it was very general and conspicuous, because
professed by the obedience, and introduced by the power of those great emperors
whom the world followed. But after that long peace and great dignities had
corrupted the minds of the chief in the Church, and made them look more
after the pomp than the purity thereof, the mystery of iniquity, like a weed,
grew apace, and overspread the Corn, first abusing, and after that subjecting
the power of princes, and bewitching the Kings of the earth with its
fornications.

Hence likewise we may learn to acknowledge Gods mercy in the worst times; in
those ages wherein the Church was most oppressed, yet many have yielded
themselves unto Christ. The woman was with Child, and was delivered even when
the Dragon did persecute her, Revel. 12.1.4. Hieronymus Conir. Luciferianos.
Vincentius Lyrinensis in Commonitorio.
and even then God found out in the wilderness a place of refuge, defense, and
feeding for his Church. As in those cruel times of Arrianisme when heresy had
invaded the world, and in those blind and miserable ages wherein Satan was
loosed, God still stirred up some notable instruments by whom he did defend
his truth, and amongst whom he did preserve his Church, though they were
driven into solitary places, and forced to avoid the assemblies of Heretical
and Antichristian Teachers.

We learn likewise not to censure persons, places or times; God had seven
thousand in Israel, when Elias thought none but himself had been left, all are
not alike venturous or confident of their strength. Nicodemus came to Christ by
night, and yet even then Christ did not reject him. Therefore we must not
presently censure our neighbors as cold or dead, if they discover not
immediately the same measure of courage and public stoutnesse in the profession
of Christ with our selves; some men are by nature more retired, silent,
unsociable, unactive men: some by the engagement of their places, persons, and
callings wherein they are of more public and necessary use in the Church, are
put upon more abundant caution and circumspection in the moderate carriage of
themselves than other men. Paul was of himself very zealous and earnest in
that great confusion, when Gaius and Aristarchus were haled into the theater,
to have gone in unto the people in that their outrage and distemper: but the
wisdom of the Disciples, and some of his chief friends is herin commended,
that they sent unto him desiring him that he would not adventure into the
theater, and that they suffered him not, Act. 19.30, 31. It is a grave
observation which Gregory Nazianzen makes of that great champian, and
universal agent for composing the differences, Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 20.
and distractions of the Church, S. Basil, that pro temporis ratione and
Haereticorum principatu, by reason of the prevalencie of adversaries and
condition of the times, he did in the controversies concerning the Deity of
the Holy Ghost abstain from some words which others of an inferior rank did
with liberty and boldness use; and that this he did in much wisdom, and
upon necessary reasons; because it was not fit for so eminent a person, and one
who had such general influence by the quality of his place and greatness of
his parts in the welfare of the Church, by the envy of words or phrases to
exasperate a countenanced enemy, and to draw upon himself, and in him upon
the Church of God, any inevitable and unnecessary danger. And surely if the
wisdom and moderation of that holy man were with the same pious affection
generally observed, that men, when they do earnestly contend for the truth
once delivered, (which is the duty of every Christian) did not in heat of
argument load the truth they maintain, with such hard and severe, though it
may be true expressions, as beget more obstinacy in the adversary, and it
may be suspicion in the weak or unresolved looker on, differences amongst men
might be more soberly composed, and the truth with more assurance entertained.

Again, we have from hence an encouragement to go on in the ways of Christ,
because we go in great and in good Company: many we have to suffer with us,
many we have to comfort and to encourage us. As the people of Israel when they
went solemnly up to meet the Lord in Sion went on from troop to troop, the
further they went, Psalm. 84.7.
the more company they were mixed withal, going to the same purpose: so when
the Saints go toward heaven to meet the Lord there, they do not only go
unto an innumerable Company of Angels, and just men, Heb. 12.21, 23. 1 Kings.
19.14.
but they meet with troops in their way* to encourage one another. All the
discouragement that Elias had was, that he was alone; but we have no such plea
for our unwillingnesse to profess the truth and power of Religion now. We are
not like a lamb in a wide place, without comfort or company; but we are sure
to have an excellent guard and convoy unto Christ's Kingdom. And this use the
Apostle makes of the multitudes of believers, that we should by so great a
Cloud of witnesses, be the more encouraged in our patient running of that race
which is set before us, Heb. 12.1.

Lastly, It should teach us to love the multitudes, the assemblies and the
Communion of the Saints, to speak often to one another, to encourage and
strengthen one another, not to forsake the assembling of our selves together as
the manner of some is; to concur in mutual desires, to conspire in the same
holy thoughts and affections; to be of one heart, of one soul, of one
judgment, to walk by one and the same rule, to besiege heaven with armies of
united Prayers; to be mutually serviceable to the City of God, and to one
another as fellow members. Therefore has the Lord given unto men several
gifts, and to no one man all, that thereby we might be enabled to and induced
to work together unto one end, and by Love to unite our several graces for
the edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 13.

Now for the manner of producing or procuring these multitudes, it is set forth
unto us in two Metaphors. A womb, and Dew of the morning. Now the birth of Dew
is first generatio caelestis. That which is exhaled is an earthly vapor, but
the heavenly operation changes it into Dew; no art of man is able to do it.
It is also undiscerned and secret, when it is fallen you may see it, but how it
is made you cannot see. Lastly, it is a sudden Birth, in a night, or morning it
is both begotten, conceived, and brought forth. Here then we have four notes.

First, that all Christ's subjects are withal his Children. They are borne unto
him. Ioh. 3.3. Esai. 8.18. Heb. 2.12, 13. Gal. 4.26. Esai. 51.18. 1 Cor. 4.15.
Philem. v. 10. Gal. 4.19. 1 Pet. 1.23.
Christianity is a Birth, except a man be borne again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. There is a Father. Christ our Father by generation; Behold, I
and the Children whom thou have given me; as we are his brethren by adoption.
He is not ashamed to call us brethren. There is a Mother, Jerusalem which is
above is the Mother of us all. And there are subordinate instruments, both of
one and other, the holy Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, who
therefore are sometimes called Fathers begetting us, in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel; and sometimes Mothers bearing, and bringing
forth; of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be formed in you. There
is a holy seed out of which these Children of Christ are formed; namely the
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. For the heart of a man newborn unto Christ comes from the word as a paper from the press, or as a
garment from a perfume, transformed into that quality of spiritualnesse and
holiness which is in the word. There is a Vis (...), or formative virtue,
which is the energie and concurrence of the Spirit of grace with the word, 1
Pet. 1.22. Ioh. 3.5.
for the truth is not obeyed but by the Spirit, except a man be borne of water
and the Spirit, water as the seed, and the Spirit as the formative virtue
quickening and actuating that seed, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
There are Throws and pains both in the Mother and in the Child; much trouble
and care in the ministry of the word, (...) with whom I travel in pain
again. I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. Gal. 4.19.
Act. 20.31.
As a woman with Child, by reason of the fear and danger of miscarriages,
does abridge her self of many liberties, in meats, physic, violent exercise,
and the like; so those who travel in birth with the Children of Christ are put
to deny themselves many things, and to suffer many things for the success of
their service. 1 Cor. 8.13. 2 Timothy 1.11, 12. 2 Timothy 2.10.
I will eat no flesh while the world stands rather than make my brother to
offend. I am appointed a Preacher, and an Apostle, a teacher of the Gentiles;
for the which cause I also suffer these things. I endure all things for the
elects sake that they may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus. And
there is pain in the Child too; a sinner does not leave the warmth and
pleasure of his former condition without pain; Christ comes not without
shaking unto the soul. There is a New being or nature; a corruption of our old
man, and a formation of the new. Old things are done away, Tit 3.5. 2 Cor.
5.17. Ephesians. 4.22, 23. Romans 12.2. 1 Ioh. 3.3* 4.17.
behold all things are become new; the same holy nature, the same mind,
judgment, will, affections, motions, desires, dispositions, spirit wrought in
us which was in him. He that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is
pure; as he is so are we in this world; patient as he is patient, Heb. 12.2.
Holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. Humble as he is humble, Ioh. 13.14.
Compassionate as he is compassionate, Col.. 3.13. Loving as he is loving;
Ephesians. 5.2. in all things laboring to show Christ fashioned in our nature and
in our affections. There is a new conversation answerable to our new nature;
that as God is good in himself, and does good in his works, Psalm. 119.68. so
we both are as Christ was, 1 Ioh. 4.17. and walk as he walks, 1 Ioh. 2.6.
There is new food, and appetites thereunto suitable. A desire of the sincere,
immediate, 1 Pet. 2.2.
untempered, uncorrupted milk of the word as it comes with all the spirits and
life in it, that we may grow thereby. New Privileges and Relations; the
Sons of God, the brethren of Christ, the citizens of heaven, the household of
the Saints. New Communion and society; the fellowship of the Father and the
Son by the Spirit; fellowship with the Holy Angels, we have their love, their
ministry, their protection; followship with the spirits of just men made
perfect, by the seeds and beginnings of the same perfection, by the
participation of the same Spirit of holiness, by expectance of the same glory
and final redemption.

Ephesians. 5.8. Romans 13.12.
In the mean time then we should walk as Children of the light, or as it is
here, as Children of the morning. The Day is given us to work in, and
therefore in the morning, as soon as we have our Day before us, we should
endeavor to walk honestly. Night-workes are commonly works of uncleanesse,
violence, dishonor, and therefore want a cover of darkness to hide them.
Thieves use to come in the night, 1 These. 5.2. The eye of the adulterer waits
for the twylight, saying, no eye shall see me, and disguiseth himself, Job
24.15. In the twylight, in the evening, in the black and dark night, he goes
to the house of the strange woman, Prove. 7.9. The oppressor diggeth through
houses in the dark. For the morning is, to them as the shadow of death, Job
24.16, 17. They that are drunken are drunken in the night, 1 These. 5.7. Sins
are of the nature of some sullen weeds, which will grow no where but in the
side of wells, and of dark places. But works of Christianity are neither
unclean, nor dishonorable; they are beautiful and royal works, they are
exemplary, and therefore public works, they are themselves light (let your
light shine before men) and therefore they ought to be done in the light.

Mark. 10.15. Phil. 2.15. 1 Cor. 14.20. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.
If we be Children we should express the affections of Children. The
innocence, humility, and Dove-like simplicity of little Children; as the
Sons of God blameless, pure, and without rebuke. Children in malice, though
men in understanding. The Appetite of little Children, As newborn babes
desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby. In all
impatiencie the breast will pacify a little infant, in all other delights the
breast will entice it and draw it away: ever so should the word and worship of
God work upon us in all our distempers, and in all our deviations; Christ was
hungry and faint with fasting; it was about the sixth hour, and he had sent
his Disciples to buy meat, and yet having an occasion to do his Father
service, he forgot his food, and refused to eat, Ioh. 4.6.8.34. The Love of
Children he that is begotten loves him that did beget him. 1 Ioh. 5.1. with a
Love of Thankfulness. We love him because He loved us, 1 Ioh. 4.19. I love the
Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplication, Psalm. 116.1. With a
love of obedience; faith works by love, Gal. 5, 6. Love is the fulfilling of
the Law, Romans 13.10. If a man love me he will keep my words, Ioh. 14.23. with
a love of reverence, and awful fear. A Son honors his Father, Mal. 1.6.
If you call on the Father, etc. Pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. The faith of Children. For whom should the Child rely on
for maintenance and supportance but the Father; Take no thought, saying, what
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed;
For your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things? Matthew.
6.31, 32. The hope, assurance, and expectation of Children; For as Children
depend on their parents for present supply, so for portions and provisions for
the future; fathers lay up for their Children, and so does God for his. There
is an inheritance reserved for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Lastly, the Prayers and requests
of Children. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.

Note 2. The Birth of a Christian is a divine and heavenly work^. God is both
Father and Mother of the Dew, by his power and wisdom, a Father; by his
providence and indulgence, a mother. Progenitor, genitrixque, therefore he is
called in Clem. Alex. Metripater, to note that those causalities which are in the
second agents divided, are eminently and perfectly in him united, as all things
are to be resolved into a first unity. Has the Rain a Father, or who has
begotten the Drops of Dew? says Job. Out of whose womb came the Ice? and the
hoary frost of heaven who has gendred it? None but God is the parent of the
Dew, it does not stay for nor expect any humane concurrence, or causality,
Mich. 5.7. Esai. 55.10. such is the call and conversion of a man to Christ, A
heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. the operation of God in us, Col. 2.12. A birth not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, no^ of the will of man, but of God,
Ioh. 1.1^. 1 Ioh. 3.9. Paul may pla^t, and Apollo may water, but it is God that
must bless both; nay it is God who by them, as his instruments, does both; of
his own will begat he us, Iam. 1.18. The Mi^isters are a Savor of Christ, 2
Cor. 2.15. It is not the garment but the perfume in it which diffuseth a sweet
sent: It is not the Labor of the Minister, but Christ whom he preaches, that
works upon the soul. I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I,
but the Grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10.

It is not good therefore to have the faith of God in respect of persons; the
seed of this spiritual generation cannot otherwise be given us than in
earthen vessels, by men of like passions and infirmities with others. Therefore
when pure and good seed is here and there sowed, to attribute any thing to
persons, is to derogate from God; where gifts are fewer, parts meaner,
probabilities less, God may and often does give an increase above hope, as to
Daniels Pulse, that the excellency of the power may be of him, and not of man.
Though it be a lame or a leprous hand which sows the seed, yet the success
is no way altered: good seed depends not in its growth on the hand that sowes
it, but on the earth that covers, and on the heavens that cherish it: So the
word borrows not its efficacy from any humane virtue, but from the heart
which ponders, and the Spirit which sanctifies it.

When then thou come unto the word, come with affections suitable unto it.
All earth will not bear all seed; some wheat, and some but pulse; there is
first required a fitness, before there will be a fruitfulness. Christ had
many things to teach which his Disciples at the time could not carry away, Ioh.
16.12, 13. Heb. 5.14.
because the Comforter was not then sent, who was to lead them into all truth;
they who by use have their senses exercised, are fit for strong meat. The
truth of the Gospel is an heavenly truth, and therefore it requires a heavenly
disposition of heart to prosper it. It is wisdom to those that are perfect, 1
Cor. 2.6.
though to others foolishness and offense. The only reason why the word of
truth does not thrive is, because the heart is not fitted nor prepared unto it.
The seed of it self is equal unto all grounds, but it prospers only in the
honest and good heart; the rain in it self alike unto all, but of no virtue
to the rocks, as to other ground, by reason of their inward hardness, and
incapacity. The Pharisees had covetous hearts, and they mocked Christ; the
Philosophers had proud hearts, and they scorned Paul. The Jews had carnal
hearts, and they were offended at the Gospel; the people in the wilderness
had unbeleeving hearts, and the word preached did not profit them. But now a
heavenly heart comes with the affections of a Scholar to be taught by God;
with the affections of a servant, to be commanded by God, with the affections
of a Son, to be educated by God; with the affections of a sinner, to be
cured by God. It considers that it is the Lord from heaven, who speaks in the
Ministry of the word to him who is but dust and ashes; and therefore he puts
his hand on his mouth, dares not reply against God, nor wrestle with the
evidence of his holy Spirit, but falls upon his face, and gives glory unto
God; believes when God promises, trembles when God threatens, obeyes when God
commands, learnes when God teaches, brings always meekness and humility
of Spirit, ready to open unto the word that it may incorporate.

Lastly, from hence we must learn to look unto God in all his ordinances, to
expect his arm and Spirit to be there in revealed, to call on, and depend on
him for the blessing of it. If a man could when he enters into Gods house but
power out his heart in these two things; A Promise and a Prayer. Lord, I am now
entering into thy presence, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Amos 7.16. Esai. 55.10.
to hear thee speak from heaven unto me, to receive thy rain and spiritual
Dew which never returns in vain, but ripeneth a harvest either of corn or
weeds, of grace or judgment. My heart is prepared o Lord, my heart is
prepared, to learn and to love any of thy words. Thy Law is my Counselor, I
will be ruled by it; it is my Physician, I will be patient under it; it is my
Schoolmaster, I will be obedient unto it. But who am I that I should promise
any service unto thee? and who is thy Minister that he should do any good
unto me without thy grace and heavenly call? be thou therefore pleased to
reveal thine own Spirit unto me, and to work in me that which thou
requirest of me; I say, if a man could come with such sweet preparations of
heart unto the word, and could thus open his soul when this spiritual Manna
falls down from heaven, he should find the truth of that which the Apostle
speaks, Ye are not straightened in us, or in our ministry, we come unto you
with abundance of grace, but ye are straightened only in your own bowels, in
the hardness, unbelief, incapacity, and negligence of your own hearts, which
receives that in drops, which falls down in showers.

Note 3. As it is a divine, so it is a secret and undiscerned Birth. As the
wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but caust
not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes: So, says our Savior, is every
one, that is borne of God, Ioh. 3 8. The voluntary breathings and accesses of
the Spirit of God unto the soul, whereby he Judge. 14.6. Judge. 6.34.
comes mightily, and as it were cloatheth a man with power and courage, are of
a very secret nature, and notwithstanding the power thereof be so great, yet
there is nothing in appearance but Matthew. 10.20. 2 Pet. 1.21.
a voice, (of all other one of the most empty and vanishing things.) As Dew
falls in small and insensible drops, and as a Child is borne by slow and
undiscerned progresses (as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 139.14. Job 10.10, 11.
Fearfully and wonderfully am I made,) Such is the birth of a Christian unto
Christ, by a secret, hidden, and inward call, Vocatione Alta, as S. Austen
calls it, by a deep and intimate energie of the Spirit of grace is Christ
formed, and the soul organized unto a spiritual being. A man hears a voice,
but it is Esai. 30.21. Act. 9.8.
behind him, he sees no man; he feels a blow in that voice, which others
take no notice of, though externally they hear it too. Therefore it is
observable that the men which were with Paul at his miraculous conversion are
in one place said to hear a voice, Act. 9.7. and in another place, not to have
heard the voice of him that spoke unto Paul, Act. 22.9. Glass. Philolog. Sacr.
lib. 2. page 232.
They heard only a voice, and so were but astonished, but Paul heard it
distinctly as the voice of Christ, and so was converted.

Note 4. As it is a Divine and secret, so is it likewise a sudden birth. In
natural generations the more vast the creature, the more slow the production,
an Elephant ten years in the womb. In humane actions magnarum rerum tarda
molimina, great works move like great engines slowly and by leisure to their
maturity: but in spiritual generations, Children are borne unto Christ like
Dew, which is exhaled, conceived, formed, produced, and all in one night. Paul
to day a Woolfe, to morrow a Sheep, to day a Persecutor, to morrow a Disciple,
and not long after an Apostle of Christ. The Nobleman of Samaria could see no
possibility of turning a famine into a plenty within one night: neither can
the heart of a man who rightly understands the closeness, and intimate
radication of sin and guilt in the soul, conceive it possible to remove
either in a sudden change; yet such is the birth of men unto Christ, Before
she traveled she brought forth: 2 Kings 7.1, 2. Tarnou, Exercit. Biblic
Edit. 2. page 84, 85.
before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child. The earth brings
forth in one day, and a nation is borne at once; It is spoken of Jerusalem the
mother of us all, Esai. 66.7, 8.

VERSE 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not Repent, Thou art a Priest for ever
after the Order of Melchisedeck.


FRom the Regal Office of Christ, and the Administration thereof by the
Scepter of his Word and Spirit to the conquering of a willing people unto
himself; the Prophet now passes to his sacerdotall office; the vigor and
merit whereof is by the two former applied unto the Church. Therefore we may
observe that though the tribes were interdicted confusion with one another in
their marriages, Number. 36.7. Poterant Levitae ex Regia familia ducere, quippe
quae etiam peculiari Privilegio hinc est exempta, etc. Tarnou. Exertit. Biblic.
page 21. Edit. 2.
Yet the Regal and Leviticall Tribes might interchange, and mingle bloods; to
intimate (as I conceive) that the Messiah, with relation unto whose lineage
that confusion was avoided, was to be both a King and a Priest. Thus we find
Iehoiada, the Priest married Iehoshabeath the Daughter of King Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 22.11. And Aaron of the Tribe of Levi took Elish^ba the Daughter of
Amminadab, Communicabant inter se reg^atribus ac Sacerdotalis propterea quod
Christus Dominus secundum Humanitatem Rex futurus erat, and Sacerdes.
Theodoret. Quaest. in Number. qu. 52.
who was of the tribe of Judah, Exodus 6.23. Numb. 1.7. In which respect I
suppose Mary and Elizabeth the Wife of Zatharie the Priest, are called Cousins,
Luke 1.36. In the Law indeed these two Offices were distinct. Our Lord, says
the Apostle, sprang out of the Tribe of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke
nothing concerning Priesthood, Heb. 7.14. And therefore when King Vzziah
incroached on the Priests Office, he was smitten with a Leprosy, 2 Chronicles.
26.18, 21. But amongst the Gentiles ( Sacerdos Ecclesiae habentis praeputium.
Hieron. To. 3. lib. quaest. Heb. in Genes. Verisimile est illum esse ex illis
Gentibus quae Palaestinamincolebant. Theodoret. Quaest. 63. in Genes.
amongst whom Melchizedek is thought to have been a Priest,) it Vid. Casaub.
in Sueton. August. Cap. 31. Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phaeliq Sacerdos.
Virgil. Aenead. l. 3.
was usual for the same person to have been both King and Priest.

The words contain the Doctrine of Christ's Priesthood. The Quality of it,
Eternal. The Order, not of Aaron, but of Melchizedek. The foundation of both,
Gods immutable decree and counsel; he cannot repent of it, because he has
confirmed it by an Oath. I shall handle the words in the Order as they lie.

The Lord has sworne] Here two things are to be enquired: First, how God is
said to swear? Secondly, why he swears in this particular case of Christ's
Priesthood? The former of these the Apostle resolves in one word, (...), Heb.
6.17. He interposed in or by an oath, namely himself, for that is to be
supplied out of the thirteenth verse, where it is said that be swear by
himself. So elsewhere it is said that he swear by the excellency of Jacob,
that is, by himself, Amos 8.7.6.8. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord,
that in blessing I will bless thee, Genesis 22.16. The meaning is, that God
should deny himself, (which he cannot do, 2 Timothy 2.13.) and should cease to
be God, if the word which he has sworn should not come to pass. So that
usual form, as I live, is to be understood, let me not be esteemed a living
God, if my word come not to pass; so elsewhere the Lord interposeth his
holiness, I have sworn by my Holiness that I will not lie unto David, Psalm.
89.35. As impossible for him to break his word as to be unholy.

For the second question, (...). Basil. Mag. in Psalm. 14. To. 1.
why God swears in this particular? I answer: First, and principally, to show
(...), The immutable and irreversible certainty of what he speaks, Heb. 6.17.
I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth, and it shall not
return, etc. Esai. 45.23. Thus we find God confirming the unmoveablenesse of
his covenant by an Oath, Esai. 54.9, 10. Psalm. 89.34, 35. When the Lord does
only say a thing (though his word be as certain in it self as his oath, for
it is as impossible for him to lie as to forswear himself) yet there is an
implicit kind of reservation for the altering, revoking, or reversing that
word by some subsequent declaration. As in the covenant and Priesthood of Aaron
though God made it for a perpetual ordinance, yet there was after a change of
it, for the weakness and unprofitablenesse thereof. So when the Lord sent
Jonah to preach destruction unto Ninive within forty days, though the
Denuntiation came not to pass, yet was it not any false message, because it
was made reversible upon an implicit condition, which condition the Lord is
pleased sometimes in mercy to conceal, that men may be the sooner frighted
out of their security, upon the apprehension of so approaching a danger. At what
time, says the Lord, I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy: If that Nation
against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the
evil that I thought to do unto them, Ier. 18.7, 8. But when the Lord swears
any absolute Act, or promise of his own (for the Revocation whereof there can
no other ground de novo arise, than was extant at the time of making it, and
yet was no bar nor hinderance unto it, namely the sin of man) he then by
that oath seals and assures the immutability thereof, to those that rely upon
it.

Secondly, it is to commend the excellency and preeminencie of that above
other things, which has this great seal of Heaven, the Oath of God to
confirm and establish it. Inasmuch, says the Apostle, as not without an oath
he was made Priest, by so much was he made a surety of a better Testament;
Heb. 6.20, 22. and this is a consequent of the former; for by how much the more
abiding, by so much the more glorious is the Ministry of the Gospel. If that
which is done away were glorious, much more that which remains is glorious, 2
Cor. 3.11. The more solemn and sacred the institution was, the more excellent
is the Priesthood. Now this Oath was that Seal of God, by which he designed
and set apart his Son for that great Office, in a more solemn manner of
ordination than was to others usual. Him has God the Father sealed; John
6.27. It was but He has said, unto others, ye are Gods, but it is, He has
sanctified, to his Son. Quod Deus tantopere commendat, quod etiam humano more
sub dejeratione testatur, summa utique gravitate and aggredi and custodire
debemus, ut in asseveratione Divinae gratiae permanentes, in fructu quoque ejus
and emolumento proinde perseverare possimus. Tertul. de poenitent. cap. 4.
John 10.34* 36.

Thirdly, It is to commend Gods great compassion and good will, for the
establishing of the hearts of men in comfort and assurance. He therefore
confirmed his promise by an oath, That by two immutable things wherein it is
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold on the hope which is set before us. Heb. 6.17, 18. an oath
even amongst men is the end of all controversy, the determination and
composing of all differences; how much more when he sets his Seal upon his
mercy and covenant should the hearts of men be secure, and lay fast hold
thereon without doubt or scruple? Therefore we find the Saints in the
Scripture make mention of the Oath of God, for establishing their hearts
against fears or dangers. Thou will perform the truth to Iaakob, and the
mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.
Micah. 7.20. Thy bow was made quite naked, Quid est Dei very veracisque
Iuratio, nisi promissi confirma^tio, ut infidelium quaedam Increpatio? Aug. de
Civi. dei. lib. 16. cap. 32.
according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy Word. Hab. 3.9. that is, Thou
did make it appear to thine enemies that thou did fight for thy People,
and remember thy Word or Covenant of mercy which thou did swear unto Abraham
the Father of the faithful, and so oftentimes new ratify unto his seed, the
Tribes which proceeded from him. And this is the ground of all the Churches
comfort and stabilitie: for alas, we every day deserve to have God abrogate
his Covenant of mercy with us, but he is mindful of the Oath which he has
sworn. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.9.5. There was wickedness enough in the world to have
drawn down another flood after that of Noah, the same reason that caused it,
did remain after it was removed. Genes. 6.12, 13.8.21. But Gods Oath bound him
to his mercy, Esaias, 54.9. The meaning then of this first Clause is this. The
Lord to show the immutability of his Counsel, the unchangeablenesse of Christ's
Priesthood, the excellency of it above the Priesthood of Aaron, the strong
consolation which the Saints may there hence receive, has sealed it by an
Oath: so that he is a Priest by a decree which cannot be revoked.

It notes unto us the Solemn call of Christ unto the office of Priesthood, as
before of King. verse 1. He did not usurp this honor to himself as Nadab and
Abihu did, when of their own heads they offered strange fire unto the Lord,
nor incroach upon us as Vzziah; but he was ordained and begotten, and called
of God thereunto, after the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 5.5.10. He was
sanctified and sent, and had a commandment, and a work set him to do. John
10.18.36.37. In which respect he was called a Servant, or a chosen officer
formed for a special employment. Esaias 42.1.49.5.53.11. Phil. 2.7. here then is
the consent of the whole Trinity unto Christ's Priesthood. First, the Fathers
consent in his Act of ordination: for him has God the Father sealed, John
6.27. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Heb. 5.5, 6. Secondly,
The Sons by voluntary susception and vadimonie for mankind: for he was the
Surety of the Covenant, Heb. 8.22. The Apostle joyneth these two together,
Heb. 10.9, 10. Lo, I come to do thy Will O God; there was Gods Will and
Christ's submission thereunto, in which regard he is said to sanctify himself,
John 17.19. There was a Covenant between God and Christ, Christ was to
undertake an office of service and obedience for men, to offer himself a
sacrifice for sin, to be made of a woman under the Law, etc. Esaias
53.8.10.11.12. Psalm. 2.7, 8. Phil. 2 7, 9. John 17.2.4, 5. Heb. 2.8, 9. Heb.
12.2.
And for this God was to prolong his days, to give him a seed, and a
Generation which could not be numbered, a Kingdom which cannot be bounded, a
portion with the great, and a spoil with the strong; a Name above every name,
to set a joy and a glory before him, after he should have finish^d his work,
etc. Thirdly, here is the consent of the Holy Ghost which did hereunto anoint
him, which came along with him, which formed him in the womb of the Virgin,
and descended upon him in his solemn susception of this office in John's
Baptism, by which Spirit he was consecrated, warranted and enabled unto this
great function, Esaias 61.1.42.1. Matthew. 3.16, 17. Heb. 1.9.

If then God call Christ unto his Priesthood by a solemn Oath, and make him
surety of a better covenant, we ought to take the more especial notice
thereof: for when God swears he must be heard. The more excellent any thing
is, the more earnest he should be given unto it: for how shall we escape,
says the Apostle, if we neglect (...) so great Salvation, so sure a covenant,
Heb. 2.1, 3.

This is the only rock on which we may cast anchor in any trouble, doubt, or
fear of Spirit. It is not our own will or strength that holds us up from
ruin, but only Gods Oath, by which Christ is made a Priest, Able to save to
the uttermost all that come unto God by him. Saint Paul and his company were in
a great tempest, all hope that they should be saved was taken away, Act. 27.20.
yet he exhorts them to be of good cheer, because there should not be the
loss of any man's life amongst them; and the ground hereof was Gods promise,
which he believed, verse 24, 25. The case is the same with us, we are compassed
about with infirmities; with enemies too hard, and with sins too heavy for
us; with fears and doubting, that we shall lose all again; how can we in
such tempests of Spirit be cheered, but only by casting anchor upon Gods
covenant which is established by an oath? by learning to hope above hope, Romans
4. 18. to be strong in him when we are weak in our selves? to be faithful in
him when we are fearful in our selves? to be steadfast in him when we stagger
in our selves? in the midst of Satan's buffets and our own corruptions to find
a sufficiency in his Grace, able to answer and to ward off all? 2 Cor. 12.10.
To catch hold of his covenant and to fly to the hope that is set before us, as
to the only refuge and sanctuary of a pursued soul, when we are not able to
stand by our selves? Esaias 56.6. Heb. 6.18. It is hard very thing when a man
has a distinct view of his filthiness and guilt, by reason of time, not to
give over himself and his salvation as desparate things. It is nothing but
ignorance and insensibilitie which makes men presume of the pardon of sin. In
this case then we must consider Gods Oath and Covenant with his people. First,
not to reject them for their sins. Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah
of his God, though their land was filled with sin against the holy One of
Israel, Ier. 51.5. My People are bent unto backsliding, etc. and yet I will not
execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim,
For I am God, and not Man, etc. Hos. 11.7, 9.

Secondly, not always to suffer them to lie under sin, but in due time to
heal their backeslidings, Hos. 14.4. he will not only remove our
transgressions from himself, but he will remove them from us too, and that so
far, as that it shall be as possible for the East and West to meet together,
as for a man and his sin, Psalm. 103.12. Though we have made him to serve with
our sins, and wearied him with our iniquities, yet He will not remember
against us our sins past, Esaias 43.25. neither will he see against us the
sins which remain, Numb. 23.11. These he will forgive, and these he will
subdue, and all this because of his Truth unto Jacob and his mercy unto
Abraham, which he swear unto our fathers from the days of old, Micah. 7.18,
19.20. He has given us ground for both our feet to stand upon, and hold fast
for both our hands to cleave unto: A Promise, and an Oath, that by two
immutable things, we might have strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. So the Apostle
says, that all the promises of God in Christ are yea and amen: yea, to note
their Truth; and amen, to note their certainty and stability, being confirmed
by the Oath of Christ. For so that word may be conceived, either Quodamodo si
dicifas est juratio ejus est Amen, Amen, dico vobis, Aug. Tract. 41. in Johan.
as an Oath, or at least Confirmationis verbum. Ambrosan Psalm. 40. (...).
Basil. Mag in Psalm. 14. vid. Nicol. Fuleri. Miscellan. lib. 1. cap. 2.
as a very strong and confident affirmation which is equivalent unto an oath, 2
Cor. 1.20. except happily we will understand (...) and (...) to be the same
thing expressed in several tongues; as Abba Pater, in other places thereby
noting not only the stabilitie but the universalitie of Gods promises.

Many things there are in this call of Christ unto his Office to confirm this
consolation, and upon which the troubled soul may cast Anchor

First, from the Father he has received a command and call unto thy service,
and so as a Servant he has fidelity; for God choseth none but faithful
servants. He was an Apostle and high Priest sent to preach the Will, and to
pacify the wrath of God, and he was faithful to him that appointed him, as
Moses was, Heb. 3.11.2. And if he be faithful we may trust him, for he will
do the work which is given him to do. Faithful is he that calls you who
also will do it, 1 These. 5.24.

Secondly, from himself there is a voluntary submission, whereby he gives
himself for his Church, and lays down his own life, Ephesians. 5.25. Tit. 2.14.
Ioh. 10.11. for being of himself equal with the Father, he could not be by
him commanded, ordained, or overruled to any service, without a voluntary
concurring to the same decree; emptying himself, and taking on him the form
of a servant, making himself less than his Father, and in some sort for a
while lower than the Angels, John 14.28. August de Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 7. and
9.
that so he might be commanded. So that besides his fidelity to rest on as a
servant, here is his especial mercy as a concurring agent in the decree,
whereby he was ordained unto this office: He is not only a Faithful, but a
merciful high Priest, to make reconciliation for the sins of men, Heb. 2.17.
But a man may both by his Fidelity as a servant, and by his Mercy, as having
the same tender compassion with him that sent him, be willing to help another
out of misery, and yet may not be able to effect his own desires for want of
Power. And therefore,

Thirdly, by the Unction of the holy Spirit, who proceeds from the Father and
himself; he is said to be sanctified by the Father, John 10.36. and to
sanctify himself, John 17.19. To have received power and authority from his
Father, Matthew. 28.18. John 5.27. John 17.2. and to have power likewise within
himself, John 10.18. That spirit, which for the discharge of this office he
brought with him in fullness, and unto all purposes of that service into the
world, is a Spirit of Power, 2 Timothy 1.7. whereby he is enabled perfectly to
save all comers, Heb. 7.25. so that unto his Fidelity and Mercy, here is added
Ability likewise.

Fourthly, as he received an office and a service, so he received a Promise
from his father likewise which did much encourage him in this service. And this
promise is twofold. First, the promise of a great seed which by the execution
of his office he should gather unto himself, and of a great conquest over all
his enemies. God conferred this ho^our upon him to be the King of a mighty
People, whom he should save and sanctify to himself: They were given unto
him, Psalm. 2.8. John 17.6. so that unto his Fidelity, Mercy and Power; here
is further added a Propriety to the thing which he saves: and who would not
use all fidelity in his own business, all mercy toward his own seed, all
the power he has to deliver his own House from the fire? and Christ was
faithful, as a Son over his own house, whose house are we: Heb. 3.6.
Secondly, there was the promise of a great Glory and Crown which the nature he
had assumed should in his Person receive after the fulfilling of his Service.
After he had been a little while lower than the Angels, he was to be crowned
with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2.7. and therefore we may be sure that he has
fulfilled all righteousness, and done for his Church all which he was to do
upon the Earth; because he is gone, and we see him no more: for his
sufferings were to go before, and his glory to follow: 1 Pet. 1.11. This is
the Apostles argument why we are not in our sins, but delivered from them,
because Christ is risen, 1 Cor. 15.17. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ
that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us? Romans 8.34. And it is his argument
again, why we ought to hold fast our profession, and to come boldly to the
Throne of Grace for help in time of need, because we have a great high Priest
that is passed into the Heavens, Heb. 4.14, 15, 16.

Fifthly, as he had a Promise from the Father to encourage him, so he had a
Nature from us to incline him unto the execution of his Office. He was made of
a woman, made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, tempted and
afflicted as we are: and so there are two things which the heart of a believer
may rest upon in him in any discomforts. First, his Sympathy, for besides his
Essential mercy as he is God, there was in him a mercy which he learned by
being like unto us. In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful high Priest, Heb. 2.17.
Such was his compassion toward the hunger of the multitude, Matthew. 15.32.
because he himself knew what hunger was, Matthew. 4.2. and such was his
compassion toward the sorrows of Mary and Martha, John 11.33, 35. because he
himself was acquainted with grief, Esaias, 53.3. and such was his compassion
toward Peter in that state of desertion wherein he lay, Luke 22.61. because he
himself knew what it was to be forsaken, Matthew. 27.46. And this is the
Apostles assurance that we shall obtain mercy and grace to help in time of
need; because he had a feeling of our infirmities, and was tempted, as we
are, Heb. 4.15, 16. Secondly, His consanguinitie, He is not ashamed to call us
brethren: He is our Goel, our Kinsman, and therefore our Redeemer: Heb. 11.
Ruth. 3.9.4.4.

And will not repent.] Many things God has said, which he has revoked, as
the destruction of Ninive; the death of Ezekiah, and the like; which implying a
tacit condition, fit in the particular cases to be concealed upon the
varieties of that, God might be said either to persevere, or to repent; Ier.
18.7, 8.26.13, 19. God is ever most unchangeable in all his ways, counsels and
purposes, they stand for ever. Nothing can fall out to make God more wise, more
merciful, more provident, more powerful than he was before, and therefore
nothing can make him truly to change his will, or to repent of his former
actions or resolutions. There is with him no variableness nor shadow of
changing: He is not a man that he should repent. I the Lord change not: Iam.
1.17. 1 Samuel 15.29. Mal. 3.6. Only in mercy unto Humanae capacitati aptiora
quam Divinae sublimitati, etc. Vid. Aug. To. 4. ad Simplicia. lib. 2. qu. 2.
vid. de Civi. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 11. lib. 15. cap. 25. Tertul. Con. Maro. l. 2.
cap. 16.
our weakness God condescends unto the manner of humane expressions, retaining
still the steadfastness of his own working, which receives no variation nor
difference from the contingencies of second causes. He speaks according to
our capacity, but he works according to his own counsel, so that God is
then said to repent, when that which he once willed to be, he after by the
counsel of the same will, causes not to be; therein not changing his own
counsel, but only willing the change of the things, Vbi legitur quod
poeniteat cum, mutatio rerum significatur immutabili manente praescientia
divina. Aug. de Civi. Dei, lib. 17. cap. 7 and lib. 22. cap. 1, 2. Just.
Martyr, Quest. and Resp. ad Orthodox. qu. 36.
that the same thing for this period of time shall be, and then shall cease. As
when a rope is fixed to either side of a River, by the same without any manner
change or alteration in it, I draw the boat wherein I am, backward or forward:
so the same will and counsel of God stands constant and unmoved in the
several mutations of those things which are wrought or removed by it.

Now then, when not only the counsel of God is immutable in it self, but
also he has ordained some Law, Covenant or Office, which he will have for
ever to endure, without either natural expiration, or external abolishment,
then is God said not to repent. To apply this to the present business; the
Apostle speaking of a new covenant which is established upon this new
Priesthood of Christ (for the Priesthoods and the Laws go both together, the
one being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the other; Heb.
7.12.) makes the introducing of this new Covenant, which is founded upon the
Oath of God, to make the preceding covenant old and transitory: In that he
says, A new Covenant, he has made the first old: Now that which decays and
waxes old, is ready to vanish away, Heb. 8.13. And he says peremptorily that
it was therefore disannul'd, because of the weakness and unprofitablenesse
thereof: Heb. 7.18. and this he affirms even of the moral Law; that law, the
righteousness whereof was to be fulfilled in us by the Spirit of Christ,
(namely in sincerity and in love, which is the bond of perfection, and the
fulfilling of the Law) Romans 8.3, 4. For the full understanding then and
applying the words to the priesthood of Christ, and the Law of Grace, or the
second covenant thereupon grounded, it will be needful to resolve these two
questions. First, whether God has repented him of the Law, which was the rule
and measure of the Covenant of works? Secondly, upon what reasons or grounds
the immutabilitie of the second Covenant or Law of grace stands?

For the first of these, the Psalmist tells us, that the Commandments of God
are sure, and that they stand fast for ever and ever, Psalm. 111.7, 8. and we
may note that the same form of speech which the Lord uses to show the
stability of the new covenant; The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee, Esaias,
54.10. the same kind of form does our Savior use to express the stability
of the Law; It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass, than for one tittle of
the Law to fail; Luke 16.17. Now the Law has a twofold Obligation; the one
principal which is to Obedience, whereunto is annexed a promise of
righteousness or justification: the other secondary and conditional, which is
unto malediction, upon supposall of disobedience. For, cursed is every one
which continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to
do them, Gal. 3.10. Now if no tittle of the Law must fail, then neither of
these two must fail, but be both fulfilled, and then it should seem that the
first Covenant is not removed notwithstanding the weakness thereof.

For resolving hereof, we must note that in point of validity or invalidity,
Vid. Gretii desens fidei Cathol. de satisfactione Christi, cap. 3.
there can but five things be said of the Law: for first, either it must be
obeyed, and that it is not, for all have sinned and come short of the Glory of
God, Romans 3.23. Or secondly, it must be executed upon men, and the curse or
penalty thereof inflicted; and that it is not neither, for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. Or thirdly, it must be
abrogated, or extinguished; and that it is not neither, for Heaven and Earth
must sooner pass away. If there were no Law, there would be no sin, for
sin is the transgression of the Law; and if there were no Law, there would be
no judgment; for the world must be judged by the Law. Or fourthly, it must be
moderated and favorably interpreted by rules of equity, to abate the rigor and
severity thereof; and that cannot be neither, for it is inflexible, no jot nor
tittle of it must be abated. Or lastly, the Law it self remaining, the
Obligation thereof notwithstanding, must toward such or such persons be so
far forth dispensed withal, as that a surety shall be admitted (upon a
concurrence of all their wills who are therein interested; God willing to
allow, Christ willing to perform, and Man willing to enjoy:) both to do all
the duties, and to suffer all the curses of the Law, in the behalf of that
Person, who in rigor should himself have done and suffered all. So then
neither the Law nor any jot or tittle thereof is abrogated, in regard of the
Obligations therein contained, but they are all reconciled in Christ with the
second covenant. Yet notwithstanding, to the purpose of a covenant or rule of
righteousness between us and God, so he has repented of it, and removed that
office or relation from it, that righteousness should come to us thereby, by
reason of the weakness and unprofitablenesse which is in it to that purpose by
the sin of Man: yet thus much the Law has to do with justification, that
the fulfilling of the whole law is thereunto ever some way or other
presupposed. Only in the first covenant, we were to do in our own persons;
in the second, Christ is appointed and allowed to do it for us. He fulfilled
all the Obligations of the Law; the duties thereof by active obedience in his
life, and the curses thereof by passive obedience in his death. Now then we by
faith becoming one with Christ, the grace of God does number us up in the same
mass and sum with him, and so imputes and accounts that ours which was
done by him. There is no righteousness but does originally refer and bear
proportion to the Law of God, and yet we are not justified by the Law, but by
Grace; because it is the favor of God, contrary to the rigor and exaction of
the Law, which allows the righteousness of the Law by one fulfilled, to be
unto another accounted. A man is denominated righteous, as a wall may be
esteemed red or green. Now that comes to pass two manner of ways, either by
the color inhering and belonging unto the wall it self, or by the same color
in some diaphanous transparent body; as glass, which by the beam of the Sun
shining on the wall, does externally affect the same as if it were its own,
and covers that true inherent color which it has of it self. In like manner
by the strict covenant of the Law we ought to be righteous from a
righteousness inherent in, and performed by our selves; but in the new
covenant of grace we are righteous by the righteousness of Christ, which shines
upon us, and presents us in his color unto the sight of his Father. Here in
both covenants the righteousness from whence the denomination grows is the
same (namely the satisfying of the demands of the whole Law) but the manner of
our right and propriety thereunto is much varied. In the one we have right unto
it by Law, because we have done it our selves: In the other we have right unto
it only by Grace and favor; because another man's doing of it is bestowed upon
us, and accounted ours. And this is that gracious covenant of which the Lord
here says, I have sworn and will not repent.

For resolving of the second question, upon what reasons the immutability of
the covenant of Grace stands, we must note that as things are of several
sorts, so accordingly they may be mutable or immutable several ways. Some
things are absolutely immutable out of the nature of the thing it self; and
that is, when the abrogation, or alteration of the thing would unavoydably
infer some prodigious consequences and notorious pravity with it, as certain
dishonor to God, and confusion upon other things. As if we should conceive a
man free from worshipping, reverencing, acknowledging, loving or trusting in
God; herein the creature would be unsubordinated to the Creator, which would
infer desperate pravitie and disorder, and God should be robbed of his
essential honor which he can no more part from, than cease to be God. But now
it is repugnant to the nature of an entire covenant, to be in this manner
immutable. For in a covenant there is a mutual stipulation and consent
between God and Man; and after performance of Man's duty, God makes promise of
bestowing a reward. Now there can be no binding necessity in God to confer,
nor absolute power in Man to challenge any good from God, who does freely and
by no necessity, good unto his Creatures. Secondly, some things are merely
juris positivi, not of any intrinsicall necessity, resulting out of the
condition of their nature, such as are free either to be or not to be of
themselves, or when they are free to continue or to cease; not in themselves
determined unto any condition of being unvariably belonging unto their nature.
And such are all covenants; for God might have dealt with Men, as with lapsed
Angels, never have entered anew into covenant with them: he might have
reserved unto himself a power of reconciliation and calling in his patent, and
shutting up his office of mercy again. How then comes it that this covenant is
immutable, and Christ's Priesthood of everlasting and unchangeable vigor to all
ages and generations of men? That there shall never be erected in the Church
any other form of Gods worship, or any other instruments of Man's salvation,
than those which we now enjoy? The Apostle groundeth it upon two reasons, Heb.
6.17, 18. The Promise and the Oath of God. First, The Promise puts a right
in the creature which he had not before, and that Promise determines the Will
of God to the being; and leave not that indifferent to the being or not being
of the Covenant. For it is the foundation of a just claim which we by faith
may make upon the Fidelity, Justice and Power of God, to make it Good. He is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins; 1 John 1.9. The righteous God
shall give unto me a Crown of righteousness: 2 Timothy 4.8. righteousness and
justice as well as mercy is the ground of forgiveness of sins and salvation,
not in relation or respect to merit in us, but to promise in God. Only mercy
it was which moved him to promise, and having promised only truth and fidelity
and righteousness binds him to perform. As impossible it is for God to
break any promise, and to lie unto David, as it is to be an unholy God, or to
deny himself; Psalm. 89.35. 2 Timothy 2.13. 1 These. 5.24. Secondly, the Oath of
God, for that pawnes his own Being, Life, Power, Truth, Holiness, to make
good that which he has so ratified; and upon these two does the immutability
of the second Covenant, and of Christ's Priesthood depend.

Here then we see upon what ground all our comfort and assurance subsisteth;
not upon any strength, power, liberty, or inherent grace already received,
which we of our selves are every day apt to waste and be cheated of by Satan
and the world, but upon Gods unchangeable mercy and covenant. This was all
David's salvation and desire, all that his heart rested upon, that though his
house were not so with God, that is, did fail much of that beauty and purity
which therein God required, and therefore did deserve to be cast off, yet God
had made with him an everlasting covenant ordered in all things and sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. When the conscience is afflicted with the sense of sin, with the
fear of its own slipperinesse and unstedfastnesse in Gods covenant, this is
all it has to support it, That God is one, Galath. 3.19. That Christ is the
same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. that he is where he ever
was, ready to meet those that return, Esaias 64.5. Luke 15.20. If I should do
to men, as I have done to God, they would despise, forsake, revenge themselves
on me, I should never receive grace nor favor again. But God is not as man,
Hos. 11.9. the whole cause of his compassion is in and from himself, and
therefore he does not take the advantage of our failings and exasperations, to
alter the course of his dealing toward us, Psalm. 103.8-14. Though we fail
every day, yet his compassions fail not, and therefore from his immutable
mercy it is that we are not comsumed, Lam. 3.22. Mal. 3.6. His blessing of an
adopted people is an irreversible thing, because he is God and not man, and
therefore cannot repent, nor call in the promise which he has made, for which
purpose he does not behold iniquity i^ Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel,
Numb. 23.19, 20, 21. If the Sun should be always immoveably fixed in one
place, as it was a little while in Joshua's time at the destruction of the
Kings, Josh. 10.12, 13. though I might shut out the light of the Sun from me,
yet as soon as I remove the curten, the Sun is still where it was, ready to
be found, and to shine upon me. The case were lamentable with us, if so often
as man provokes Gods justice, he should presently revoke his mercy; if the
issue of our salvation should depend upon the frailty and mutability of our
own nature, and our life should be in our own keeping. If the pure Angels of
heaven fell from their created condition, to be most black and hideous
adversaries of the God that made them; if Adam stood not firm with all that
stock of strength and integrity of will which he had in Paradise: how can I
who have so many lusts within, so many enemies without, such armies of fears
and temptations round about me, be able to resist, and stand? Grace inherent
is as mutable in me, as it was in Adam, Satan as malicious and impetuous
against me, as against Adam: Propensions to sin and falling away, strong in
me, which were none in Adam; snares as many weaknesses more; enemies as many
temptations more: from the grace which is deposited in mine own keeping, I
cannot but depart daily, if the Lord should leave me in the hand of mine own
counsel: even as water, though it could be made as hot as fire, yet being left
unto it self, will quickly reduce and work it self to its own original
coldness again. We have grace abiding in our hearts, as we have light in our
houses, always by emanation, effusion and supportance from the Sun of
righteousness which shines upon us. Therefore this is all the comfort which a
man has remaining, that though I am wanting to my self, and do often turn
from God, yet he is not wanting to me, nor returns from me, for the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29. The heart of the best man is
like the wheels in Ezekiels vision, Ezekiel. 1.16. As mutable, and moveable
several ways as wheels, as perplexed, hindered, and distracted in it self,
as cross wheels in one another, grace swaying one way, and flesh another, who
can expect stabilitie in such a thing? Surely of it self it has none, but the
constancy and uniformitie of motion in the wheels was this, that they were
joined to the living creatures, who in their motion returned not when they
went, verse. 17-21. such is the stability of the faithful in the covenant, they
have it not from themselves, for they are all like wheels, but from him unto
whom by the same Spirit of life they are united, who cannot repent, nor return
from the covenant of mercy which he has made.

Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech] We now come to
speak of the Priesthood of Christ it self, which is thus sealed and made
immutable by the oath of God. Every high Priest, says the Apostle, is ordained
for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for sins, Heb. 5.1. These sacrifices are of two sorts, some
Eucharisticall, as testifications of homage, subjection, duty and service, as
the dedication of the first fruits, the offerings of Abel and Cain, the meat
and drink offerings, etc. some Ilasticall or expiatory, for the washing away
of sins, for making compensation to the justice of God, which had been in
sin violated, and to propitiate him again. So that in this regard a Priest
was to be a middle person, by Gods appointment to stand, and to minister
between him and men in their behalf, to be impartial and faithful toward
the justice and truth of God, and not to be overruled by his love to men to
injure him, and to be compassionate and merciful toward the errors of men,
and not to be overruled by his zeal to Gods justice, to give over the care or
service of them. And such an High Priest was Christ, zealous of his Fathers
righteousness and glory, for he was set forth to declare the righteousness
of God, Romans 3.25. and he did glorify him on earth by finishing the things
which he had given him to do, Ioh. 17.4. Compassionate toward the errors and
miseries of his Church, for he was appointed to expiate, and to remove them
out of the way, Col. 2.14.

Touching this Priesthood, we will thus proceed: First, to enquire into the
Necessity we have of such a Priest. Secondly, what kind of Qualifications are
requisite in him, who must be unto us such a Priest. Thirdly, wherein the Acts
or Offices of such a Priesthood do principally consist. Fourthly, what is the
Virtue, fruits, ends, events of such a Priesthood. Fifthly, what are the
Duties which the execution of that office does enforce upon us, or what uses
we should make of it. In these five particulars, I conceive, will the
substance of most things which pertain unto the Priesthood of Christ be
absolved.

For the first of these we must premise this general rule, there can be no
necessity of a Priest (in that sense which is most proper and here intended)
but between a guilty creature, and a righteous God, for if man were innocent
in his relations toward God, he would stand in no need of an Expiation, and
if God were unrighteous in the passages of man's sin, there would not be due
unto him any just debt of satisfaction. This being premised I shall through
many steps and gradations bring you to this necessity of Christ's Priesthood
which we inquire into.

First, every creature is unavoidably subject to the Creator, for he made all
things for himself, and all is to return that glory to him for which he made
them, Pro. 16.4. Romans 9.21. And this subjection of the creature to the Creator,
does suppose a debt of service to the will of the Creator. Impossible it is,
and utterly repugnant to the quality of a creature not to be subject to some
Law, and indebted in some obedience or other to him that made it. Omne esse is
propter operari, it is a certain rule in creatures, that God gives every
creature a Being to this end, that it might put forth that being in some such
operations as he has fitted it for, and prescribed it to observe. The most
excellent of all creatures, that excel in strength, are Ministers to do his
pleasure and to hear his voice, Psalm. 103.20, 21. and all the rest have their
several laws, and rules of working by his wisdom set them, in the which they
wait upon him, and according unto which they move like Ezekiels wheels, by the
conduct of an invisible Spirit, and by the command of a voice that is above
them, as if they understood the Law of their Creator, and knew the precepts
which they do obey, Ezekiel. 1.25, 26. Psalm. 104.19. No creature is for its self
only, or its own end, for that which has not its being of its self, cannot
be an end unto it self, in as much as the end of every thing which is made is
antecedent to the being of it in the mind and intention of him that made it.
The end of things is, as a mark, fixed and unmovable in the purpose of the
supreme cause, the creatures as the arrow, ordered by a most wife, and
efficacious providence, some through natural and necessary, others voluntary
and contingent motions unto one and the same general end, the glory and
service of the Creator.

Secondly, no creature is in its being, or in any those operations and services
which to God it owes, intrinsecally, and of it self immutable. It is Gods own
peculiar honor to be without variableness or shadow of changing, Iam. 1.17.
Mal. 3.6. There was a time when the Sun stood still, and moved backward, and
was filled with darkness, as with an internal cloud; when the Lions have
forgotten to devour, and the fire to consume, and the Whales to concoct, God
can as he will alter the courses of nature, let go the reins, and dispense
with the rules which himself had secretly imposed upon the creatures to
observe, which shows that they are not in themselves immutable. That
constancy which in their motions they observe, is from the regular government
of that most wise providence which carries them to their end without any
turning, Ezekiel. 1.17. but when his glory requires, and his will commands it, the
mountains tremble, the sea cleaves asunder, the rivers run back, the earth
opens, the Laws of nature stand still for a while without any execution, as if
they were suspended or repealed by him that made them: and therefore in that
place things are said to move by a voice which is above them, namely, by the
command of the supreme cause, Ezekiel. 1.24, 25.

Thirdly, man being in his nature, and formal constitution a reasonable
creature, was appointed by God to serve him after a reasonable manner, out of
judgment, discretion, and election to make choice of his way above all others,
as being most excellent, and beautiful in it self, and most convenient and
advantageous unto man; therefore our service is called a reasonable service,
Romans 12.1. and David is said to have chosen the way of truth, and the precepts
of the Lord, Psalm. 119.30. and Moses to have chosen the afflictions of Gods
people, and the reproaches of Christ, before the pleasures of sin, or the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.25, 26. And hence it is that Holiness in the
phrase of Scripture is called Judgment, he shall convince the world of
judgment, Ioh. 16.11. and he shall bring forth judgment unto victory, Matthew.
12.20. Noting that the Spirit of holiness rules and works in the children
of obedience by a way of reason and conviction, therefore he is called a
Spirit of Judgment, Esaias 4.4. And for this cause God did not set any
overruling law, or determinating virtue over the operations of man, as of
other creatures, that so he might truly work out of the conduct of judgment,
and election of will.

Fourthly, there is no deviation from a reasonable service, or true active
obedience, (properly so called) for the obedience of brutes and inanimate
creatures (is rather passive than active) which has not some intrinsecall
pravity in it, and by consequence some fundamental demerit, or obligation unto
punishment; for Guilt is the proper passion of sin, resultant out of it, and
therefore inseparable from it. It cannot be that a creature should of it self,
and out of the corruption of its own reason and judgment, choose to
relinquish the service of him to whom it is naturally and unavoidably subject,
and by that means become altogether unprofitable, abominable, and unfit for
the Masters use, and for those holy ends to which it was originally ordered,
but it must withal incur the displeasure, and thereupon provoke the revenge
of that righteous Creator, who out of great reasons had put it under such a
service.

Fifthly, By all this which has hitherto been spoken it appears, that God is
not unjust, but most holy and righteous: First, in making a Law for man to
observe, when he forbade the eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, to show that man had nothing by personal, immediate, and
underived right, but all by donation, and indulgence. Any Law God might justly
make, the obedience whereof he gave the creature an original power to
perform, by reason of the natural and necessary subjection of the creature
unto him. Secondly, in annexing a curse and penalty to the violation of that
Law, which for the declaration of his glorious justice he might most
righteously do, because of the inevitable demerit, or liablenesse unto censure
from the disobedience of that Law resulting. Thirdly, in making man in such a
mutable condition, as in the which he might stand or fall by his own election,
because he would be obeyed by judgment and free choice, Basil. tom. 1. Homil.
Quod Deus non est Author mali. Justin. Mart. Apolog. 1. (...) -- (...). Vid.
Tert. advers. Marc. l. 2. c. 6, 7. -- 9. Prove. 1.29. Eccles. 7.29. Esaias 66.3, 4.
not by fatal necessity, or absolute determination.

Sixthly, here then comes in the fall of man, being a wilful or chosen
transgression of a Law, under the precepts whereof he was most justly created,
and unto the malediction whereof he was as necessarily and righteously subject
if he transgressed: for as by being Gods creature, he was subject to his will,
so by being his prisoner, he was as justly subject unto his wrath, and that so
much the more, by how much the precept was more just, the obedience more easy,
the transgression more unreasonable, and the punishment more certain.

Now by this fall of man there came great mischief into the world, and
intolerable injury was done by the Creature to him that made him: First, his
dominion and authority in his holy command was violated. Secondly, his
justice, truth, and power in his most righteous threatenings were despised.
Thirdly, his most pure and perfect Image, wherein man was created in
righteousness and true holiness, was utterly defaced. Fourthly, his glory,
which by an active service the creature should have brought unto him, was lost
and despoiled. So that now things will not return to their primitive order and
perfection again, till these two things be first effected: First, a
Satisfaction of Gods justice: And secondly, a Reparation of man's nature: which
two must needs be effected by such a middle and common person, as has both
zeal toward God, that he may be satisfied, and compassion toward man, that he
may be repaired; such a person, as having man's guilt and punishment on him
translated, may satisfy the justice of God, and, as having a fullness of Gods
Spirit and holiness in him, may sanctify and repair the nature of man. And
this person is the Priest here spoken of by David.

Here the learned frame a kind of conflict in Gods holy Attributes, and by a
liberty which the Holy Ghost from the language of holy Scripture allows
them, they speak of God after the manner of men, as if he were reduced unto
some straits and difficulties by the cross demands of his several attributes:
Justice called upon him for the condemnation of a sinful, and therefore
worthily accursed creature, which demand was seconded by his truth, to make
good that threatening, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death. Mercy on the other side pleaded for favor and compassion toward man,
woefully seduced and overthrown by Satan; and peace for reconcilement and
pacification between an offended Judge, and an undone creature. Hereupon the
infinite wisdom and counsel of the blessed Trinity found out a way, which
the Angels of heaven gaze on with admiration and astonishment, how to reconcile
these different pleas of his attributes together. A Priest then is resolved
upon, one of the same blessed Trinity, who by his Fathers ordination, his own
voluntary susception, and the holy Spirits sanctification, should be fitted for
the business. He was to be both a Surety, and a Head over sinful men, to
suffer their punishments, and to sanctify their natures, in the relation of a
surety to pay man's debt unto God; and in the relation of an Head to restore
Gods Image unto man: and thus in him mercy and truth have met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10.

So then the necessity which man fallen has of this Priest here spoken of, is
grounded upon the sweet harmony, and mutual kisses of Gods Mercy, Truth,
Righteousness, and Peace; which will more distinctly appear by considering
three things: First, God did purpose not utterly to destroy his creature, and
that principally for these two reasons, as we may observe out of the
Scriptures: First, his own free and everlasting love, and that infinite
delight which he has in mercy, which disposes him abundantly to pardon, and
to exercise loving kindness in the earth, Mic. 7.18. Exodus 34.6, 7. Psalm.
103.8. Esaias 55.7. Ier. 9.24. Secondly, his delight to be actively glorified by
his creatures voluntary service and subjection: Herein is my Father glorified,
that you bear much fruit, John 15.8. I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that he turn from his way and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. He delights
most in unbloudy conquests, when by his patience, goodness, and forbearance he
subdueth the hearts, affections, and consciences of men unto himself, so
leading them unto repentance, and bringing down their thoughts unto the
obedience of Christ: he loves to see things in their primitive rectitude and
beauty, and therefore esteems himself more glorified in the services, than
in the sufferings of men. He loves to have a Church and generation of men,
which shall serve him in the midst of all his enemies. The Lord loves the
gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.2. namely,
because he was there more solemnly worshipped and served. And therefore he
resolved not to destroy all men, lest there should be no Religion upon the
earth. When the Angels fell, they fell not all, many were still left to
glorify him actively in their service of him, but when Adam fell, all mankind
fell in him, so that there was no tree of this Paradise left to bring forth any
fruit unto God (and this is most certain, God had rather have his trees for
fruit, than for fuel,) and for this reason he was pleased to restore mankind
again. These are the causes why the Lord would not utterly destroy man, but
these alone show not the necessity of a Priest to come between God and man.

Secondly, God did purpose not to suffer sin to pass utterly unrevenged, and
that for these reasons: First, because of his great Hatred thereunto. He is of
purer eyes than to behold evil, he cannot look on iniquity, Hab. 1.13. it
provokes a nauseousnesse and abhorrencie in him, Psalm. 5.6. Zech. 8.17. Revel.
3.16. Amos 5.21, 22. Esaias 1.13, 14. Secondly, because of his Truth, and the Law
which he had established against sin, (...). El^a^. de Za^eu Vi. Grot. de
satisfactione Christi, cap. 5.
which he will in no wise abolish, one jot or tittle shall in no wise pass
from the Law till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18. for it is altogether undecent,
especially to the wisdom and righteousness of God, that that which provokes
the execution, should procure the abrogation of his Law, that that should
supplant and undermine the Law, for the alone preventing whereof, the Law was
before established. Thirdly, because of his terror and fearful Majesty, for
God will have men always to tremble before him, and by his terror to be
persuaded from sinning, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. God will for this cause have men
always to fear before him, because he reserveth to himself entire the
punishment of sin; Fear him who is able to destroy both body and soul in
hell, I say unto you fear him, says our Savior, Matthew 10.28. Luke 12.4. for
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, and therefore
we ought to serve him with reverence and godly fear, because he is a consuming
fire, Hebr. 10.30.12.28, 29.

Thirdly, add unto all this the everlasting Impotency which is in man either
to satisfy God, or to repair himself. Gods justice is Infinite which is
wronged, and his glory infinite, of which man had attempted to spoil and rob
him, and man is both finite in himself and very impotent by reason of sin (for
to be a sinner, and without strength are terms equivalent in the Apostle, Romans
5.6.8.) Now then between finite and infinite there can be no proportion, and
therefore from the one to the other there can be no satisfaction: man is
utterly unable to do any of Gods will, because he is altogether carnal, Romans
8.7. 1 Cor. 2.14. and he is utterly unable either to suffer or to break through
the wrath of God, because he has not strength enough to endure it, nor
obedience to submit unto it. Now then join all these things together, and we
shall see the absolute necessity we had of a Priest. God will not execute the
severity of his Law, for thereby the creature should everlastingly lose the
fruition of him, and he should likewise lose the service and voluntary
subjection of his creature. And yet he will not abolish his Law neither, lest
thereby his justice should be the more securely abused, his hatred against
sin the less declared, his truth in all his threatenings questioned, and his
dreadful Majesty by men neglected, as the wooden king by the frogs in the
fable, he will not punish those persons whom he loves, because he is pitiful
to them: he will not pass over the sins which he hates, because he is
jealous toward himself. Man and sin are as inseparably joined together since
the fall, as fire and heat; yet God will have mercy on the man, and he will take
vengeance of the sin. Some course then or other must there be found out, to
translate this man's sins on another person who may be able to bear them, and
to interest this man's person in another righteousness, which may be able to
cover him. Some way must be found out, that things may be all one in regard of
man, as if the Law had been utterly abrogated, and that they may be all one in
regard of God too, as if the creature had been utterly condemned. And all this
is done in our High Priest. On him was executed the curse of the Law, by him
was fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, for him was remitted the sin of
man, and through him were all things made new again. The world was in Christ
as in its surety, making satisfaction to the justice of God; and God was in
Christ as in his Ambassador, reconciling the world unto himself again. By
all which we see the necessity which man lapsed had of a Priest to restore
him.

Hence then we may learn, first, how much we ought to hate sin, which arms
the Law, Justice, and power of God against us. As hateful as it is unto God,
so hateful it is in it self, for he judges uprightly, he sees things just
as they are, without passion, prejudice, or partiality: and as hateful as it
is in it self, so hateful should it be unto us, as the only ground of our
misery, of the creatures vanity, and of Gods dishonor. We see it is so
hateful unto God, that he will most certainly be avenged of it. If he spare
me, yet he will not spare my sin, though his own beloved Son must be punished
for it. O then why should that be light to me, which was as heavy as a
millstone to the soul of Christ? Why should that be my pleasure, which was his
passion? Why should that be in a throne with me, which was upon a cross with
him? Why should I allow that to be really in me, which the Lord so severely
punished, when the guilt thereof was but imputed to his Son? Many sins
there are which others in their practice, as well as Papists in their doctrine
and profession esteem for light and venial sins. And venial indeed they
are, per exoratorem Patris Christum, as Tertullian states the question, by
Christ who is a prevailing Advocate with the Father. But however let not us
dare esteem that a light thing for which Christ died. And woe had it been for
men, if Christ had not in his body on the tree carried as well the guilt of our
idle words, our vain thoughts, our loose and impertinent actions, as of our
oaths, execrations and blasphemies. If great sins were as the spear and
nails, certainly small sins were the thorns which pierced his head. And
therefore we should learn with David to hate every evil way, because God
hates it, and suffers it not to pass unpunished, to revenge the quarrel of
Christ against those lusts of ours which nailed him to his cross, and to
crucify them for him again, for, for that end was Christ crucified, that our
old man might be crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin, Romans 6.6.

Again, we see by this necessity of a Priest, how deeply we stand engaged
to our merciful God, who has vouchsafed to help us in our greatest
necessity. How we ought to love him, who has first of all loved us. How we
ought in our bodies and in our spirits to glorify him, who has so dearly
bought us. How we should like Voluntaries fight for him who overcame for us.
How thankful we should be to him, who was so compassionate unto us. How we
should admire and adore the unsearchable riches of his wisdom and goodness,
who when we were desperately and incurably gone, had found out a way of escape
and deliverance for us. God stood not in need of us or any service of ours, he
could have glorified himself in our just destruction. Who then can enough
express either the mercy of God, or the duty of man, when he considers that
God should call together all the depths of his own wisdom and counsel, to
save a company of desperate fugitives, who had joined in combinations with his
greatest enemies to resist and dishonor him? It would have posed all the
wisdom of the world, (though misery be commonly very witty to shape and
fashion to it self images of deliverance) to have found out a way to heaven
between the wrath of God, and the sin of man. It would have posed all the
heavenly intelligences, and the united consultations of the blessed Angels, to
have reconciled Gods mercy in the salvation of man, and his justice in the
condemnation of sin, to have powered out hell upon the sin, and yet to have
bestowed heaven upon the sinner. If God should have instructed us thus far,
you are miserable creatures, but I am a merciful God; the demands of my
justice I must not deny, neither will I deny the entreaties of my mercy: find
me out a sacrifice answerable to my justice, and it shall be accepted for you
all: O where could man have found out a creature of capacity enough to hold,
or of strength enough to bear the sins of the world, or the wrath of God?
Where could he have found out in heaven or earth, amongst men or Angels a
Priest that durst accompany such a sacrifice into the presence of so consuming
a fire? Or where could he have found out an Altar whereon to offer, and whereby
to sanctify so great a sacrifice? No, no, the misery of man was too deep, and
inextricable for all the created counsel in the world to invent a deliverance.
Now then if God himself did study to save me, how great reason is there that
I should study to serve him? How ought all my wisdom, and counsel, and
thoughts, and desires be directed to this one resolution, to live acceptably
and thankfully unto him, who when he might have produced glory to himself out
of my confusion, chose rather to humble, and as it were for a while to
unglorifie himself for my salvation? Certainly that man did never rightly
understand the horror of sin, the infinite hatred of God against it, the
heaviness of his wrath, the malediction of the Law, the mystery and vast
dimensions of Gods love in Christ, the preciousnesse of his sacrifice, the end,
purpose, or merit of his death, any of those unsearchable riches of God
manifested in the flesh, who will not crucify a vanity, a lust, a pleasure,
an earthly member unto him again; who finds more content and satisfaction in
his own ways of sin and death, more wisdom in the temptations and deceits
of Satan and his own fleshly mind, than in those deep mysteries of grace,
and contrivances of mercy, which the Angels desire to pry into.

Therefore in the last place we should labor to feel this necessity we have
of such a Priest. This is the only reason why so few make use of so precious a
fountain, because they trust in their own muddie and broken cisternes at
home, and are never sensibly and thoroughly touched with the sense of their own
wants; for it is not the saying and confessing, ore tenus, that I have nothing,
nor the knowing in speculation only that I have nothing, but the feeling and
sm^rting by reason of my want, which will drive me to seek for relief abroad.
If a man did seriously consider and lay together such thoughts as these; I am
very busy for the affairs and passages of this present life, which will
quickly vanish and pass away like a Weavers shuttle, or a tale that is told.
I have another and an abiding life to live after this is over. All that I toil
for here is but for the back, the belly, the bag, and the posterity. And am
I not nearer to my self, than I am to my money? Am I not nearer to my soul,
than I am to my carcass, or to my seed? Must I not have a being in that, when
neither I nor my posterity have either back to be clothed, or belly to be
fed, or name to be supported? O why am I not as sadly employed, why spend I not
some at least as serious and inquisitive thoughts about this, as about the
other? Do I not know that I must one day stand before him who is a consuming
fire, that I must one day be weighed in the balance, and woe be unto me if I
am found too light? Appear before him I dare not of my self alone, without a
Priest to mediate for me, to cover and protect me from his fury, and to
reconcile me unto him again. My person wants a Priest, it is clogged with
infinite Guilt, which without him cannot be covered. My nature wants a Priest,
it is overspred with a deep and universal corruption, which without him
cannot be cured. My sins want a Priest, they are in number and in quality
above measure sinful, which without him cannot be pardoned. My services want
a Priest, they are blemished and poisoned with many failings and corruptions,
without him they cannot be accepted: I say, if men did seriously lay together
such thoughts as these, it could not be that rational and sad men, men of
deep thoughts in other matters, who love to boult out things to the bran, and
to be very solicitous for evidence and certainty in them, should suffer such a
business as this, their interest in that Priest who must alone clothe their
persons with his righteousness, and cleanse their nature with his Spirit, and
wash away their sins with his blood, and sanctify their prayers, and alms,
and all religious devotions with his incense, and intercession, or else all of
them must pass through the trial of such a fire as will consume them all, to
be slubber'd over with loose and slender thoughts, and to be rested in, and
resolved upon rather by the lying presumptions of a deceitful heart, than by
the evidences and testimony of Gods holy Spirit. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

The second thing proposed to be considered in the Priesthood of Christ, was
the qualification of that person who was to be a fit High Priest for us. Legal
sacrifices would not serve the turn to purge away sin, because of their
baseness. They were not expiations of sin, Heb. 9.9.12. but were only
remembrances and commemorations of sin, Heb. 10.3. necessary it was that
heavenly things themselves should be purified with better sacrifices, Heb.
9.23. for they of themselves, without that typical relation which they had
unto Christ, Gal. 3.23. and that Isntrumental virtue which in that relation
they had from him, Heb. 9.13. were utterly weak and unprofitable, Heb. 7.18.
as the shadow has neither being in it self, nor can give refreshment unto
another, but dependently on the body to which it belongs. And this appears,
first, by their reiteration, where the conscience is once purged, and there is
remission of sin, there is no more offering, Heb. 10.2-18. for the repeating of
the sacrifice shows that the person for whose sake it is repeated, is in statu
quo prius, in the same condition now as he was in at the time of the former
oblation. Secondly, by their Variety, there were both Gifts and sacrifices for
sins, Heb. 5.1.8.3. bulls, and goats, and calves, and lambs, Heb. 9.9.12.13.
and that shows that no one thing was fit to typifie the full expiation wrought
by Christ, whereas he offered but One Sacrifice, and by that perfected for ever
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.12.14. And if legal sacrifices would not
serve the turn, then neither would legal Priests be fit for so great a work;
for all the good which the Priest does is in the virtue of the sacrifice which
he brings: and this likewise the Apostle proves by many arguments: First,
because of their sinfulnes, for they themselves wanted an expiation, and
therefore could not be mediators for the sins of others, Heb. 5.3.7.27.
Secondly, because of the carnalnesse of their institution. They were made after
the Law of a carnal commandment, that is, of a temporary, perishable, and
merely external ordinance, Heb. 7.16. which prescribed only the examples and
shadows of heavenly things. Thirdly, because of their mortality, they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death, whereas our Priest must live to make
intercession. Fourthly, because of their ministry* and the revolution of their
services, which never came to a period or perfection in which the Priest might
give over, and Sit down. They Stood daily ministering, and oftentimes offering
(their service did daily return upon them again) whereas Christ, after he had
offered One sacrifice for sin for ever, sat down on the right hand of God,
Heb. 10.11, 12.

To show you then the qualifications of this Priest. A Priest in general is
ordained for men in things pertaining to God, to offer sacrifice for the
obtaining of righteousness and remission of sins.

First then, Christ being a Priest, must of necessity be a Mediator and a
Surety between parties, that he might have one unto whom, and others for whom
and in whose behalf to offer a sacrifice. Every Priest must be a mediator to
stand between God and the people, and to intercept and bear the iniquity even
of their holy things. Exodus 28.38.
And unto this mediation there must concur the consent of the parties between
whom it is negotiated; for a mediator is not a mediator of one. Now God gives
his consent by laying on him our iniquities, and making his soul an offering
for sin, and thereby declaring himself to be One with us. And man gives his
consent, Esaias 53.6 -- 10. Gal. 3.20.
when by faith he receives Christ, and so becomes not only the friend, but
the Son of God, Ioh. 1.12.

Secondly, but every Mediator is not presently a Priest, for there is a
mediation only by way of entreaty, prayer, and request, wherein men do
obtain but not deserve or purchase remission for others; such mediators were
Ioab, and the Widow of Tekoah in the behalf of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. and there
are mediators by way of satisfaction, as Sureties are between the creditor and
the debtor; and such a mediator was Christ, not only a Mediator, but also a
surety of a better covenant, Heb. 8.6. Heb. 7.22. he was not to procure
remission of our sins by way of favor and request; but he was set forth to
declare the Righteousness of God, Romans 3.25. and such a mediator between God
and us must needs be a Priest too; for the debt which we owed unto God was
blood. Without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. ^.22.

Thirdly, being such a Priest he must have a Sacrifice answerable to the debt
which was owed to his Father. The debt we owed was the forfeiture and
subjection of our Souls and Bodies to the wrath of God, and the curse of the
Law. God is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, Matthew. 10.28. It is
not to be understood only of his Absolute power but of that power which as
our Judge he has over us per modum Iustitiae, as we are his Prisoners, and so
obnoxious to the Curses of his Law. Therefore our Priest also was to have a
Soul and a Body, to pay as a surety for our Souls and Bodies. Thou shall make
his Soul an offering for sin, Esai. 53.10. My soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto Death, Matthew. 26.38. And again, A Body have thou prepared me; we
are sanctified through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all,
Heb. 10.5.10. His own self bare our sins in his own Body on the tree, 1
Pet. 2.24. So he was to be Man that he might have a fit and answerable
Sacrifice to offer, (...), Thou have fitted or prepared a Body for me, that my
Sacrifice might be proportionable to that in the place whereof it stood. And
thereby as he is fit for passion, so also for Compassion, he was to be our
Kinsman, and of our blood, that he might be a merciful and faithful high
Priest, Heb. 2.11.14.17. Deuteronomy. 18.15. And fit for derivation of his
Righteousness, and transfusion of his Spirit upon us; for he that Sanctifies
and they that are Sanctified are both of one. And as it must be thus fitted to
the sinner that it may be a proper and suitable Sacrifice for his sin: So
must it be perfect likewise. First, Without blemish or sin. Such an High
Priest became us who is Holy, Harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
Heb. 7.26. That so he might offer himself without spot unto God, and have no
need of a Sacrifice for himself, Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. Secondly, without any
manner of Defect, which should stand in need of supplement and contribution
from some thing else, that of it self alone it might be sufficient, and
available to bring perfection and salvation unto men, and to leave no more
conscience of sin behind it, Heb. 7.19.10.14.

Fourthly, as there was to be such a Sacrifice, perfect in it self, and fit
for the use and occasion for which it was appointed, so there must be an Altar
upon which to offer it unto the Father; for it is the Altar which Sanctifies
the offering; that is, which in regard of God gives it acceptance, and which
in regard of Man gives it virtue, merit and value answerable to his occasions.
This Sacrifice was to be sufficient for the satisfaction of God, and for the
justification and reparation of Man, and both these by means of the Altar on
which it was offered, which was the Divine Nature. Through the Eternal Spirit
he offered himself without spot unto God, and so by his blood purges our
consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14. For Christ as God sanctified himself
as man, that so we through the virtue and merit of his Sacrifice might be
sanctified likewise, John 17.19. He was to be God as well as man, Medium
participationis; before he could be Medium reconciliationis; that so he might
be himself supported to undergo and break through the weight of sin and
the Law, and having so done might have compass enough in his Sacrifice to
satisfy the Justice of God, and to swallow up the sins of the world.

Fifthly, in as much as the Virtue of the Deity was to be attributed truly to
the Sacrifice (else it could have no value nor virtue in it) and that Sacrifice
was to be his Own Life, Soul and Body, who is the Priest to offer it, because
he was not barely a Priest but a Surety, and so his person stood in stead of
ours, to pay our debt, which was a debt of blood, and therefore he was to
offer himself, Heb. 9.26. 1 Pet. 2.24. And in as much as his person must needs
be equivalent in dignity and representation to the persons of all those for
whom he mediated, and who were for his sake only delivered from suffering:
for these causes necessary it was that God and man should make but one Christ,
in the unity of the same infinite person, whose natures they both were, that
which suffered, and that which sanctified. The humane nature was not to be
left to subsist in and for it self, but was to have dependence, and
supportance in the person of the Son, and a kind of Inexistence in him, as
the graft of an apple may have in the stock of a plumb. From whence arises;
first, the Communication of properties between the natures; when by reason of
the unity of the person, we attribute that to one nature which is common to
the other, not by confusion or transfusion, but by Communion in one end and in
one person; as when the Scriptures attribute Humane properties to the Divine
Nature. The Lord of Life was slain, Act. 3.15. God purchased the Church with
his own blood, Act. 20.28. They crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Or
Divine to the Humane Nature. As the Son of Man came down from heaven, Ioh.
3.13. and the Son of Man shall ascend where he was before, Ioh. 6.62. Or
when both natures work with their several concurrence unto the same work, as
to walk on the waters, to rise out of the grave, etc. By which Communication
of properties virtue is derived from the Altar to the Sacrifice in as much as
it was the Lord of Glory which was crucified. So that his passions were in
regard of the person which bare them, (...), both Humane and Divine, because
the person was (...), God and Man. Secondly, from the unity of the person
supporting the Humane Nature with the Divine, arises the Appliablenesse of one
sacrifice unto all men. Because the Person of the Son is infinitely more than
equivalent to the persons of all men, as one Diamond to many thousand pebbles;
and because the obedience of this sacrifice was the obedience of God, and
therefore cannot but have more virtue and well-pleasingnesse in it, than there
can be demerit or malignity in the sin of man.

Now this Person in whose unity the two Natures are conjoined, is the second
person in the Holy Trinity. He was the person against whom the first sin was
principally committed, for it was an affectation of wisdom and to be like
unto God; (as the falling-sinne now is the sin against the third person) and
therefore the mercy is the more glorious that he did undertake the expiation.
By him the world was made, Col. 1.16, 17. Ioh. 1.3. and therefore being spoiled
he was pleased to new make it again, and to bring many Sons unto glory,
Heb. 2.10. He was the express image of his Father, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.15. And
therefore by him are we renewed after Gods image again, Col. 3.10. He was the
Son of God by Nature, and therefore the mercy was again the more glorified
in his making us Sons by Adoption, and so joint heirs with himself who was
the heir of all things.

So then such an high Priest it became us to have, as should be first an
equal middle person between God and Man. In regard of God toward man an
officer appointed to declare his Righteousness, and in regard of man toward
God a surety ready to purchase their pardon and deliverance. Secondly, such an
one as should be one with us in the fellowship of our nature, passions,
infirmities and temptations, that so he might the more readily suffer for us,
who in so many things suffered with us; and one with God the Father in his
Divine Nature, that so by the virtue of his sufferings and resurrection he
might be able both to satisfy his Justice, to justify our persons, to
sanctify our Nature, to perfume and purify our services, to raise up our dead
bodies, and to present us to his Father a glorious Church without spot or
wrinkle. And both these in the Unity of one Person, that so by that means the
Divine Nature might communicate virtue, merit, and acceptablenesse to the
sufferings of the humane; and that the dignity of that person might
countervaile the persons of all other men. And this person that person of the
three, by whom the glory of the mercy should be the more wonderfully
magnified. In one word two things are requisite to our High Priest. A Grace of
Union to make the person God and man in one Christ: and a Grace of Unction, to
fit him with such fullness of the Spirit, as may enable him to the performance
of so great a work, Esai. 11.2.

By all which we should learn: First, to adore this great mystery of God
manifested in the flesh, and justified in the Spirit, the unsearchablenesse of
that love, which appointed God to be man, the Creator of the world to be
despised as a worm, for the salvation of such rebels, as might justly have
been left under chains of darkness, and reserved to the same inevitable
destruction with the Devils which fell before them. Secondly, to have always
before our eyes the great hatefulness of sin, which no sacrifice could have
expiated but the blood of God himself; and the great severity and
inexorablenesse of Gods Justice against it, which no satisfaction could
pacify, no obedience compensate, but the suffering and exinanition of
himself. O what a condition shall that man be in, who must stand or rather
everlastingly sink and be crushed unto the weight of that wrath against
sin, which amazed and made heavy unto death the soul of Christ himself?
which made him who had the strength of the Deity to support him, the fullness
of the Spirit to sanctify, and prepare him, the message of an Angel to
comfort him, the relation of a beloved Son to refresh him, the voice of his
Father from heaven testifying unto him that he was heard in what he feared,
the assurance of an ensuing glory and victory to encourage him (none of which
shall be allowed the wicked in hell, who shall not only be the vessels of his
vengeance, but which will be as grievous as that, the everlasting objects of
his hatred and detestation) which made I say even the Son of God himself,
notwithstanding all these abatements, to pray with strong Cries, and bloody
drops, and woeful conflicts of soul against the Cup of his Fathers wrath, and
to shrink and decline that very work for which only he came into the world?
Thirdly, to praise God for that great honor which he has conferred upon our
nature in the flesh of his Son, which in him is anointed with more grace and
glory, and filled with more vast and unmatchable perfections than all the
Angels in heaven are together capable of; for though for a little while he was
made lower than the Angels for the purpose of his suffering, yet he is now sat
down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Angels, and Authorities, and
Powers being made subject unto him, Heb. 2.6-9. 1 Pet. 3.22. Heb. 1.4-13. And
for the infinite mercy which he has showed to our souls, bodies, and persons
in the sacrifice of his Son; in our reconciliation and favor with him, in
the justification of our persons from the guilt of sin, in the sanctification
of our nature from the corruption of sin, in the inheritance reserved in
heaven for us, in the Communion and fellowship we have with Christ in his
merits, power, Privileges, and heavenly likeness. Now, says the Apostle, we
are Sons, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that
when he shall appear, we shall be ^ike him; for we shall see him, as he
is, 1 Ioh. 3.2.

From these things which have been spoken of the Personal Qualifications of
our High Priest, it will be easy to find out the third particular inquired
into, touching the Acts or Offices of Christ's Priesthood; or rather touching
the parts of the same Action, for it is all but one. Two Acts there are wherein
the execution of this office does consist. The first, an Act of Oblation of
himself once for all, as an adequate sacrifice, and full compensation for the
sins of the whole world, Heb. 9.14.26. Our Debt unto God was Twofold. As we
were his Creatures, so we owed unto him a Debt of Active Obedience in doing
the Duties of the whole Law, and as we are his prisoners, so we owed unto him
a Debt of passive obedience in suffering willingly and thoroughly the Curses of
the Law. And under this Law Christ was made, to redeem us by his fulfilling
all that righteousness who were under the precepts and penalties of the Law
our selves. Aug. Enchirid. cap. 41. and Danaei Comment. de Mendacio, cap. 15.
and Epist. 120. Greg. Nazian. Orat. 2 de filio. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 5.
Therefore the Apostle says, he was sin for us; that is, a Sacrifice for
sin, to meet and intercept that wrath which was breaking out upon us, 2 Cor.
5.21. Herein was the great mercy of God seen to us that he would not punish
Sinners, though he would not spare Sin. If he should have resolved to have
judged Sinners, we must have perished in our own persons, but being pleased
to deal with sin only in abstracto, and to spare the sinner, he was
contented to accept of a Sacrifice, which (under the Relation and Title of a
Sacrifice) stood in his sight like the body of sin alone by it self; in
which respect he is likewise said to be made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. Now
that which together with these things gives the complete and ultimate
formality of a Sacrifice unto the death of Christ, was his own Hostia si ad
aras reluctata fuisset, invito Deo offerri putaba^t. Macro^. Saturn. l 3. c. 5.
Imo ^on nisi volentem and ^elut anuentem mactabant. Plutarc. Sympos. lib. 8.
cap. 8. (...).
willingness thereunto in that he offered himself. And therefore he is
called the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, because he
was dumb, and opened not his mouth, but was obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. Christ's death in regard of God the Father was a
necessary death; for he had before determined that it should be done, Act.
4.28. Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, Luke 24.46. The
Son of Man must be lifted up, Ioh. 3.14. And therefore he is said to be a
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, in regard of Gods Decree and
preordination. But this gave it not the formality of a Sacrifice; for God the
Father was not the Priest, and it is the Action of the Priest which gives the
being of a Sacrifice to that which is offered. Again, Christ's death in regard
of men was violent. They slew him with wicked hands, and killed the Prince of
life, Act. 2.^3.3.15. And in this sense it was no Sacrifice neither, for they
were ^ot Priests but butchers of Christ. Thirdly, his death in regard of
himself was Quia voluit, quando voluit, quomodo voluit. Aug. de trin. l. 4.
cap. 13. Passiones animi and corporis dispensationis voluntate sive ulla
necessitate suscepit. lib. 83. Quaest. cap. 80. Spiritum cum verbo sponte
dimisit praevento carnisic^^ officio. Ter^. Apol. cap. 21.
voluntary. I lay down my life, no man takes it from me, but I lay it down
of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again,
Ioh. 10.17, 18. And this oblation, and willing obedience, or rendering himself
to God is that which gives being to a Sacrifice. He was delivered by God, Act.
2.23. He was delivered by Judas and the Jews, Matthew. 27.2. Act. 3.13. and he
was yielded and given up by himself, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 5.25. De Traditione
Christi facta ae Patre and a Fi^io, a Judah and Iudaeis, vide (ex Augustino)
Lumbard. 3. Sent. Did. 20. C. D.
In regard of God it was Justice and mercy, Ioh. 3.16, 17. Romans 3.25. In regard
of man it was murder, and cruelty, Act. 7.52. In regard of Christ it was
obedience and humility, Phil. 2.8. And that voluntary act of his was that which
made it a Sacrifice. He gave himself for us, an offering and a Sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. Non conditionis necessitate sed
miserationis voluntate. Aug. in Psalm. 78. vid. Parker. de Descensu, lib. 3.
Number. 116.
His death did not grow out of the condition of his nature, neither was it
inflicted on him by reason of an excess of strength in those that executed it,
(for he was the Lord of glory) but only out of mercy toward men, out of
obedience toward God, and out of power in himself. For omnis Christi
infirmitas fuit ex potestate. By his power he assumed those infirmities which
the oeconomic and dispensation of his Priesthood on the earth required; and by
the same power he laid them aside again, when that service was ended. And
this I say was that which made it a Sacrifice. As martyrdom, when men lay down
their lives for the profession of the truth, and the service of the Church, is
called a Sacrifice, Phil. 2.17.

If it be here objected that Christ's death was against his own will, for he
exceedingly feared it, Heb. 5.7. and prayed earnestly against it, as a thing
contrary to his will, Matthew. 26.39. To this I answer, that all this does not
hinder but commend his willingness and obedience. Consider him in private as a
Man, of the same natural affections, desires, and abhor^encies with other men,
and consider the cup as it was calix amaritu^^^^s, a very bitter cup, and so
he most justly feared and declined it, as knowing that it would be a most
woeful and a heavy combat which he was entering upon: but consider him in his
public Relation, as a mediator, a surety, a merciful and faithful high
Priest, and so he most willingly and obediently submitted unto it. And this
willingness ratione officii was much the greater, because ratione naturae, his
will could not but shrink from it. It is easy to be willing in such a
service as is suitable to our natural condition and affections, but when
nature shall necessarily shrink, sweat, startle, and stand amazed at a
service, then not to repent, nor decline, nor fling off the burden, but with
submission of heart to lie down under it, this is of all other the Sea Hooker
lib. 5. Number. 48. Field of the Church. lib. 5. cap. 18. Between these diverse
desires, no Repugnancie but a Subordination. Filius Dei qui dixit and facta
sunt, Mandavit and creata sunt omnia: secundum hoc quod Fil^us ^ominis temperat
sententiam, etc. Hiero. Ep. 70.2. lib. 2. advers. Pelagium.
greatest obedience. It was the voice of nature, and the presentation of the
just, and implanted desires of the flesh, to say Transeat, let it pass from
me. It was the retractation of mercy and duty to say, Glorify thy self.
Whatever my nature desires, whatever my will declines, whatever becomes of
me, yet still glorify thy self and save thy Church. If it cannot otherwise
be, than by my drinking this bitter Cup, Thy will be done.

The second Act in the work of Christ's Priesthood is the act of Application,
or virtuall continuation of this Sacrifice to the end of the world; and that is
in the Intercession of Christ; unto which there is prerequired a power and
prevalency over all his enemies, to break through the guilt of sin, the
Curse of the Law, and the chains of death, with which it was impossible that
he should be held. The vision which Moses had of the burning bush, was an
excellent resemblance of the Sacrifice of Christ. The Bush noted the Sacrifice*
the fire, the suffering; the continuance and prevailing of the bush against the
fire, the victory of Christ and breaking through all those sufferings, which
would utterly have devoured any other man. And this power of Christ was showed
in his Resurrection, wherein he was declared to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1.4. and in his ascension when he led all his Enemies captive,
Ephesians. 4.8. and in his sitting at the right hand of God, far above all
principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. All which did make way to the
presenting of his Sacrifice before the mercy-seate, which is the consummation
thereof, and without which he had not been a Priest. We have such an high
Priest, says the Apostle, as is set down on the right hand of the Majesty in
the heavens, for if he were on earth he should not be a Priest, seeing that
there are Priests which offer gifts according to the Law, Heb. 8.1.4. It was
the same continued action, whereby the Priest did offer without the Holy place,
and did then bring the blood into the holiest of all, Heb. 13.11. For the
reason why it was shed was to present it to the mercy-seate, and to show it
unto the Lord there. So Christ's act or office was not ended, nor fit to
denominate him a complete Priest, till he did enter with blood, and present
his offering in the holiest of all not made with hands, Heb. 9.24. And
therefore he had not been a Priest if he should have continued on the earth,
for there was another Priesthood there, which was not to give place but upon
the accomplishment of his; for the whole figure was to pass away when the
whole truth was come. Now Christ's Oblation was the (...), the Truth prefigured
in the Priests Sacrificing of the Beast, and his entrance into heaven was the
Truth prefigured in the Priests carrying of the blood into the holiest of all.
And therefore both these were to be accomplished, before the Leviticall
Priesthood did give place.

Here then it will be needful for the more full unfolding of the Priesthood
of Christ to open the Doctrine of his Intercession at the right hand of his
Father. The Apostle calls it the Appearing of Christ for us, Heb. 9.24. which
is verbum forense, an expression borrowed from the custom of humane courts;
for as in them when the plaintiff or defendant is called, their A^turnie
appears in their name and behalf; so when we are summoned by the justice of
God to defend our selves against those exceptions and complaints, which it
prefers against us, we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ
the righteous, who stands out, and appears for us, 1 Ioh. 2.2. As the high
Priest went into the sanctuary with the names of the twelve Tribes upon his
breast: so Christ entered into the holiest of all with our persons, and in our
behalf, in which respect the Apostle says that he was Apprehended of Christ,
Phil. 3.12. and that we do sit together in heavenly places with him, Ephesians. 2.6.
Merit, and Efficacy are the two things which set forth the virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice by which he has reconciled us to his Father. The Merit of Christ,
being a Redundant merit, and having in it a plentiful redemption, and a
sufficient salvation, has in it two things: First, there is (...), an
expiation, or satisfaction by way of price. Secondly, there is (...), an
Inheritance by way of purchase, and acquisition, Ephesians. 1.14. He was made of a
woman, made under the Law, for two ends, (...), and (...); that he might
redeem us from the curse under which we lay, and that he might purchase for
us the inheritance which we had forfeited before; for so by adoption in that
place I understand in a complexed and general sense every good thing which
belongs unto us in the right of our sonship with Christ, and that is the
Inheritance of glory, Romans 8.17.23. Now all this effected by the obedience of
Christ's death; for in that was the act of impetration or procurement,
consisting in the treaty between God and Christ. But there is yet further
required an execution, a real effectualnesse, and actual application of these
to us. As it must be in regard of God a satisfaction and a purchase, so it
must be likewise in regard of us an actual redemption and inheritance. And
this is done by the intercession of Christ, which is the commemoration, or
rather continuation of his Sacrifice. He offered it but once, and yet he is a
Priest for ever, because the Sacrifice once offered does for ever remain
before the mercy-seate. Thus as in many of the Legal Oblations there was first
mactatio, and then Ostensio: First, the beast was slain on the Altar, and then
the blood was together with incense brought before the mercy-seate, Levit.
16.11-15. So Christ was first slasn^, and then by his own blood he entered
into the holy place, Heb. 9.12.10.12. That was done on the earth without the
gate, this in heaven, Heb. 13.11, 12. That the Sacrifice or obtaining of
redemption, this the Application, or conferring of redemption. The Sacrifice
consisted in the Death of Christ alone, the application thereof is grounded
upon Christ's death as its merit, but effected by the Life of Christ as its
immediate cause. His death did obtain, his life did confer redemption upon
us. And therefore in the Scriptures our justification and salvation are
attributed to the Life of Christ. He was delivered for our offenses, and Rose
again for our justification, Romans 4.25. If Christ be not raised your faith is
vain, you are yet in your sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. He shall convince the world
of righteousness, because I go to my Father, Ioh. 16.10. Because I live you
shall live also, Ioh. 14.19. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him, Romans 6.8. Being made perfect, or consecrated for
ever, he became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him,
Heb. 5.8.7.28. He is able perfectly to save, because he ever lives, Heb.
7.25. We were reconciled in his death; but had he there rested, we could never
have been acquitted nor entered in, for he was to be our forerunner. And
therefore the Apostle adds a (...), a much more to the Life of Christ. Much
more being reconciled shall we be saved by his life, Romans 5.10. Not in point
of merit, but only of efficacy for us; as in buying Land, the laying down of
the price gives a man a meritorious interest, but the delivering of the deeds,
the resigning of the property, the yielding up of the possession gives a man
an actual interest in that which he has purchased: so the death of Christ
deserves, but the intercession and life of Christ applies salvation unto us.
It was not barely Christ's dying, but his Dying victoriously, so that it was
impossible for death to hold him, Act. 2.24. which was the ground of our
salvation. He could not justify us, till he was declared to be justified
himself; therefore the Apostle says, that he was Justified by the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. Namely by that Spirit, which quickened him, Romans 1.4.8.11. 1 Pet.
3.18. When Christ offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, he was numbered
amongst transgressors, Mark. 15.28. He bare our sins along with him on the
tree, and so died under the wrongs of men, and under the wrath of God, in both
respects as a guilty person; but when he was quickened by the Spirit of
holiness, he then threw off the sins of the world from his shoulder, and
made it appear that he was a righteous person, and that his righteousness
was the righteousness of the world. So then our faith and hope was begun in
Christ's death, but was finished in his life, he was the Author of it, by
enduring the cross, and he was the finisher of it, by sitting down on the
right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.2. The Apostle sums up all together.
It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died,
yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us, Romans 8.33, 34.

Now then to show more distinctly the nature and excellency of Christ's
Intercession: It consists in these particulars: First, his appearance, or the
presenting of his person in our nature and in his own, as a public person, a
mediator, a sponsor and a pledge for us; as Judah was both a mediator to
request, and a surety to engage himself to bear the blame for ever with his
Father for his brother Benjamin, Genesis 43.8, 9. And Paul for Onesimus, a
Mediator, I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus, Phil. v. 9, 10. And a sponsor,
If he has wronged thee, or owes the ought, put that on mine account, I will
repay it, v. 18, 19. So Christ is both a mediator and surety for us, Heb.
7.22.8.6.

Secondly, the presenting of his merits as a public satisfaction for the debt
of sin, and as a public price for the purchase of Glory; for the Justice of
God was not to be entreated or pacified without a satisfaction; and therefore
where Christ is called an Advocate, he is called a Propitiation too, 1 Ioh.
2.2. Because he does not intercede for us, but in the right and virtue of the
price which he paid. For the Lord spared not his Son, but delivered him up
for us all, Romans 8.32. He dealt in the full rigor of his Justice with him.

Thirdly, in the name of his person, and for the vigor and virtue of his
merits, there is a presenting of his Desires, his will, his request, and
interpellation for us, and so applying both unto us. Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, etc. Ioh. 17.24.

Fourthly, to all this does answer the consent of the Father, in whose bosom
he is, who hears him always, Ioh. 11.42. And in whom he is well pleased,
Math. 17.5. Who called him to this office of being as it were Master of
Requests in the behalf of his Church, and promised to hear him in his
petitions, Aelian. var. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 19. Aelian. lib. 13. cap. 24. (...).
-- Justin. Martyr. Quaest. and Respons. ad Orthodox.
Ask of me, and I will give thee, etc. Psalm. 2.8. Thus as once when Aeschylus,
the Tragedian was accused in Ar^opago for impiety, his brother Amynias stood
out as his Advocate, using no other plea but this, he opened his garments and
showed them cubitum sine manu, how he had lost his hand in the service of the
state, and so vindicated his brother: or as Zaleucus, when he put out one of
his own eyes for his Son who had been deprehended in adultery, delivered
him from half the punishment which himself had decreed against that sin:
or, to come nearer, as when the hand steals, if the back be scourged, the
tongue may, in matters that are not capital, intercede for a dismission: so
Christ when he suffered for us (which he might more justly do than any one
man can for another, because he was by divine preordination, and command, and
by his own power, more Lord of his own life, than any other man is of his,
Ioh. 10.18. 1 Cor. 6.19.) may justly in the virtue of those his sufferings
intercede in our behalf for all that, which those his sufferings did deserve,
either for the expiation of sin, or for the purchase of salvation. In which
sense the Apostle says, that the blood of Christ is a speaking or interceding
Blood, Heb. 12.24.

By all which we may observe the impiety of the Popish Doctrine, which
distinguishes between Mediators of Redemption, and Mediatores of Intercession,
affirming that though the Saints are not redeemers of the world, yet they are
(as the courtiers of heaven) Mediators of Intercession for us, and so may be
sought unto by us. To which I answer, that we must distinguish of interceding,
or praying for another. There is one private, and another public, (which some
learned men have observed in Christ's own Prayers:) or praying out of Charity,
Cameron. de Eccl. page 122.
and out of Justice or Office: or thirdly, praying out of Humility, with fear
and trembling, or out of Authority, which is not properly Prayer, (for Prayer
in its strictest sense is a proposing of requests for things unmerited, which
we expect ex vi promissi out of Gods gracious promise, and not ex vi pretii,
out of any price or purchase;) but the presenting of the will and good pleasure
of Christ to his Father, that he may thereunto put his seal and consent, the
desiring of a thing so, as that he has withal a right jointly of bestowing
it, who does desire it. That the Saints in heaven, and the blessed Angels do
pray for the State of the Church militant, as well as rejoice at their
conversion, in as much as charity remains after this life, seems to be
granted by Cyprian, Cyprian. Epist. 1. Hieron. lib. adversus Vigilantium.
and Hierom, neither know I any danger in so affirming if rightly understood.
But if so, they do it only ex charitate ut fratres, not ex officio ut
mediatores. Out of a habit of charity to the general condition of the Church
(for it reaches not to particular men) not out of an office of mediation, as
if they were set up for public persons, appointed not only to pray for the
Church in general, but to present the prayers of particular men to God in
their behalf. To be such a mediator belongs only to Christ, because True
intercession (as it is a public, and authoritative act) is founded upon the
satisfactory merits of the person interceding. He cannot be a right Advocate,
who is not a propitiation too. And therefore the Papists are feign to venture
so far as to affirm that the intercession of the Saints with God for us is
grounded upon the virtue of their own merits. Oramus Sanctos ut intercedant
pro nobis; id est, ut merita eorum nobis suffragentur. P. Lumb. lib. 4.
distinct. 45.
We pray the Saints to intercede for us, that is, that we may enjoy the
suffrage of their merits. But this is a very wicked Doctrine. First, because it
shareth the Glory of Christ, and communicates it to others. Secondly, because
it communicates Gods worship to others. Thirdly, because under pretense of
modesty and humility; it brings in a cursed boldness to deny the faith, and
drives children from their Father unto servants, expressly therein gainsaying
the Apostle, who bids us make our requests known to God, Phil. 4.6. And
assures us that by Christ we have boldness so to do, Heb. 10.19. and free
access allowed us by the Spirit, See Dr. Vshers Answer to the Jesuits
challenge, Chap. of Prayer to Saints, Page 411. and the quotations out of Hales,
and Biel there.
Ephesians. 2.18. whereas one chief reason of turning to the Saints and Angels is
because sinful men must not dare to present themselves or their services unto
God in their own persons, but by the help of those Saints that are in more
favor with God, and with whom they may be bolder.

Now from this Doctrine of Christ's intercession many and great are the benefits
which come unto the Church of God. As first, our fellowship with the Father and
his Son; I pray for these, that as thou Father art in me and I in thee, they
also may be one in us, Ioh. 17.21. Secondly, the gift of the Holy Ghost, I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 14.16, 17. all the
comforts, and workings of the Spirit in our hearts, which we enjoy are fruits
of the intercession of Christ. Thirdly, protection against all our spiritual
enemies. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8.34. I pray that thou would keep them from the
evil, Ioh. 17.15. But are not the faithful subject to evils, corruptions, and
temptations still? how then is that part of the intercession of Christ made
good unto us? for understanding hereof we must know that the intercession of
Christ is available to a faithful man presently; but yet in a manner suitable
and convenient to the present estate and condition of the Church, so that there
may be left room for another life, and therefore we must not conceive all
presently done. As the Sun shines on the Moon by leasurely degrees, till
she come to her full light; or as if the King grant a pardon to be drawn;
though the grant be of the whole thing at once, yet it cannot be written and
sealed but word after word, and line after line, and action after action: so
the grant of our holiness is made unto Christ at first, but in the execution
thereof, there is line upon line precept upon precept, here a little, and there
a little; such an order by Christ observed in the distribution of his Spirit
and grace, as is most suitable to a life of faith, and to the hope we have of
a better Kingdom. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, says
Christ unto Peter, yet we see it did shake and totter, non rogavit ut ne
deficeret, sed ut ne prorsus deficeret, the Prayer was not that there might be
no failing at all, but that it might not utterly, and totally fail.

Fourthly, the assurance of our sitting in heavenly places. His sitting in
heavenly places has raised us up together and made sit with him, Ephesians. 2.6.
First, because he sits there in our flesh. Secondly, because he sits
there in our behalf. Thirdly, because he sits there as our Center, Col.
3.1, 2. And so is near unto us, natura, officio and spiritu, by the unity of
the same nature with us; by the quality of his office or Sponsorship for us;
and by the Communion and fellowship of his Spirit.

Fifthly, Strength against our sins: for from his Priesthood in heaven, which
is his Intercession; the Apostle inferres the writing of the Law in our hearts,
Hebr. 8.4.6.9, 10.

Sixthly, the sanctification of our services: of which the Leviticall Priests
were a type, who were to bear the iniquity of the holy things of the children
of Israel, that they might be accepted, Exodus 28.38. He is the Angel of the
Covenant, who has a golden Censer, to offer up the prayers of the Saints,
Revel. 8.3. There is a threefold evil in man; First, an Evil of state or
condition under the guilt of sin. Secondly, an Evil of nature, under the
corruption of sin, and under the indisposition and ineptitude of all our
faculties unto good. Thirdly, an Evil in all our services, by the adherencie
of sin, for that which touches an unclean thing, is made unclean, and the
best wine mixed with water, will lose much of its strength and native spirits.
Now Christ by his righteousness and merits justifies our persons from the
guilt of sin; and by his grace and Spirit does in measure purify our
faculties, and cure them of that corruption of sin which cleaves unto them. And
lastly, by his incense and intercession does cleanse our services, from the
noisomeness and adherencie of sin, so that in them the Lord smells a sweet
savor; and so the Apostle calls the contributions of the Saints toward his
necessities, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, and well
pleasing unto God, Phil. 4.18. Genesis 8.21. And this is a benefit which runs
through the whole life of a Christian; all the ordinary works of our calling
(being parts of our service unto God, for in them we work as servants to the
same Master) are unto us sanctified, and to the Father made acceptable by the
intercession of his Son, who has made us Priests, to offer all our
sacrifices with acceptance upon this Altar, Revel. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Esaias ^56.7.

Seventhly, the Inward interpellation of the soul it self for it self, which
is, as it were, the echo of Christ's intercession in our hearts: The Spirit
makes intercession for us with groans which cannot be uttered, Romans 8.26. The
same Spirit groaneth in us, and more fully and distinctly by Christ prays for
us. These things I speak in the world, says our Savior, that they might have
my joy fulfilled in themselves, Ioh. 17.13. that is, as I conceive, I have made
this prayer in the world, and left a record and pattern of it in the Church,
that they feeling the same heavenly desires kindled in their own hearts, may
be comforted in the workings of that Spirit of prayer in them, which
testifies to their souls the quality of that intercession which I shall make
for them in heaven.

Eighthly, Patience and unweariednesse in Gods service: Let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is sat down at the right hand of the Throne
of God, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.

Lastly, Confidence in our approches to the throne of Grace: Seeing then that
we have a great high Priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of
God, let us hold fast our profession, and come boldly unto the throne of Grace,
Heb. 4.14. -- 16. And again, This man after he had offered one Sacrifice for
sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God, from henceforth
expecting till his enemies be made his footstool: from whence the Apostle
infers, Having therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of
Jesus; and having an high Priest over the house of God, Let us draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of faith, etc. Heb. 10.12 -- 23.

And all these things are certain to us in the virtue of this Intercession of
Christ: First, because the Father hears him, and answers him, Ioh.
11.42.12.28. and appointed him to this office, Heb. 5.4, 5. Secondly, because
the Father loves us; I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you,
for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, etc. Ioh. 16.26,
27. Thirdly, because as Christ has a Prayer to intercede for us, so has he
also a Power to confer that upon us for which he intercedeth. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, Ioh. 14.16. If I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto
you, Ioh. 16.7. That which Christ by his prayer obtained for us, by his power
he conferreth upon us; and therefore in the Psalm he is said to Receive gifts
for men, noting the fruit of his intercession, Psalm. 68.18. and in the Apostle,
to give gifts unto men, noting the power and fullness of his person, Ephesians.
4.8. Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this which you now see and hear, Act. 2.33. Thus great, and thus
certain are the benefits which come unto the Church from the Intercession of
Christ.

The fourth thing inquired into about the Priesthood of Christ, was, what is
the Virtue, and fruits thereof, and they may be all comprised in two general
words: there is Solutio de^its* the payment of our debt, and Redundantia
meriti, an overplus, and redundancie of merit. Satisfaction, whereby we are
redeemed from under the Law; and an Acquisition, or purchase of an inheritance
and privileges for us. The obedience of Christ has a double relation in it,
there is, first, Ratio legalis justitiae, the relation of a legal
righteousness; as it bears exact and complete conformity to the Law, will,
and decree of his Father. Secondly, there is ratio superlegalis meriti, the
relation of a merit over and beyond the Law; for though it were nostrum
debitum, that which we did necessarily owe, yet it was su^m indebitum, that
which of himself he was not bound unto, but by voluntary susception, and
covenant with his Father, for it was the blood and obedience of God himself.

Here then first is to be considered his payment of that debt which we did owe
unto God, in which respect he is said to Bear our sins. To bear sin, is
to have the burden of the guilt of sin and malediction of the Law to lie upon a
man; so it is said, he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment, Gal.
5.10. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son; the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon him, Ezekiel. 18.20. So wrath is said to Abide on a man, Ioh. 3.36. and sin
is said to be retained, or held in its place, Ioh. 20.23. So Christ is said to
bear our sins in his body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Esaias 53.4.6. and by so
bearing them, he took them off from us, canceled the obligations of the Law
against us, and did all whatsoever was requisite to satisfy an offended
Justice, for he fulfilled the Law, which was our debt of service. It becomes
us to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. and he endured the Cross, and
curse, the bloody agony, and ignominy of that death which was the debt of
suffering, Heb. 12.2. and the covenant between him and his Father was, that
all that, should be done by him as our Head and surety, and so he was to taste
death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Romans 5.8. Notani qui de l^gum relaxatione
scripserunt, eas esse optimas relaxationes, quibus annexa est commutatio sive
compensatio, Grot* de satisfact. Christi, cap. 5.
So there is a Commutation allowed, that he should be in our stead, as it were,
(...), his soul a sacrifice, and his life a price, and his death a conquest of
ours, and therefore is called (...), 1 Timothy 2.6. A price or ransom for all
those in whose place he was made sin, and a curse, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.
Though he had not any Demerit or proper guilt of sin upon him, which is a
Deserving of punishment (for that ever grows out of sin either personally
inherent, or at least naturally imputed, by reason that he to whom it is
accounted, was seminally and naturally contained in the loins of him from whom
it is on him derived) yet he had the guilt of sin so far as it notes an
obligation and subjection unto punishment, as he was our surety, and so in
sensu forensi, in the sight of Gods court of justice, one with us, who had
deserved punishment, imputed unto him.

The fruit which redounds to us hereby, is the expiation or remission of our
sins by the imputing of his righteousness unto us. This is my blood of the
new Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his glory, Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 8.12. And this must
needs be a wonderful mercy, to have so many thousand talents forgiven us, such
an infinite weight taken off from our consciences, the penalty and curse of so
many sins removed from us: our natural condition is to be an heir of
everlasting vengeance, the object of Gods hatred and fiery indignation, exiles
from the presence of his glory, vessels fit and full of misery, written within
and without with curses, to be miserable, to be all over miserable, to be
without strength in our selves, to be without pity from other, to be without
hope from God, to be without end of cursednesse; this is the condition of a
sinner, and from all this does the mercy of God deliver us.

The manner whereby the satisfaction of Christ becomes profitable unto us, unto
the remission of sin and righteousness, is by Imputation, Romans 4.3.5.8.5.19.
No man is able to stand before Gods justice, for he is a consuming fire, Heb.
12.29. No flesh can be righteous if he enter into judgment. He is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. for his eyes are not eyes of flesh,
Job 10.4. Now all the world is guilty before God, and comes short of his
glory, (...), it lies in mischief, 1 Ioh. 5.19. and therefore must be
justified by a foreign righteousness, and that equal to the justice offended,
which is the righteousness of God unto us graciously imputed. We are
justified freely by his grace, through the ^edemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3.19 -- 24.

To open this point of Justification by imputed righteousness: We must note
that two things are pre-required to denominate a man a righteous man. First,
there must be extant a righteousness which is apt and able to justify.
Secondly, there must be a right and propriety to it, whereby it comes to pass
that it does actually justify. We must then first inquire what the
righteousness is whereby a man may be justified. Righteousness consists in
a relation of rectitude and conformity. God made man upright, but they have
sought out many inventions, and turned into many crooked diverticles of their
own, Eccles. 7.29. Deuteronomy. 32.5. A wicked man loves crooked ways, to wander up
and down in his own course, Ier. 31.22. Hos. 4.16. whereas a righteous man
loves strait ways, Heb. 12.13. Psalm. 5.8. because righteousness consists
in rectitude: and this presupposes some Rule, unto which this conformity must
refer. The primitive and original prototype, or Rule of holiness, is the
righteousness of God himself, so farre-forth as his Image is communicable to
the creature, or at least so far forth as it was at the first implanted in
man: Be ye perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect, Matthew. 5.48.
It is not meant of his infinite perfection, (for it was the sin of Adam to aim
at being as God, in absoluteness and independent excellency) but of that
perfection of his, which is in the Word, set forth unto us for an Image and
pattern whereunto to conform our selves. Therefore the secondary rule of
righteousness, or rather the same rule unto us revealed, is the Law of God
written in his Word, in the which Gods holiness, so far as it is our
example, exhibiteth it self to the soul, as the Sun does communicate its
light through the beam which conveyes it. Now in the Law there are two things;
one principal, Obedience; the other secondary, Malediction, upon supposition
of disobedience: Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. So then, upon
supposition of the sin of man, two things are required unto Justification,
the expiation of sin, by suffering the curse, and the fulfilling of
righteousness de novo, again. Man created might have been justified by
obedience only, but man lapsed cannot otherwise appear righteous in Gods
sight, but by a double obedience, the one passive, for the satisfaction of his
vindicative justice, as we are his prisoners; the other active, in proportion
to his remunerative justice, as we are his creatures.

But besides this that there must be a r^ghteousnesse extant, there is required
in the person to be justified or denominated thereby a propriety thereunto,
that it may be His righteousness, Ier. 33.16. Now there may be a twofold
propriety to righteousness, according to a twofold manner of unity. (Vnitas
enim praestantis est fundamentum proprietatis ad officium praestitum) First,
there is a personal and individual unity, whereby a man is unus in se, one in
and by himself, and so has propriety to a duty performed, because it is
performed in his own person, and by himself alone. Secondly, there is a
common unity, whereby a man is unus cum alio, one with another, or whereby many
are unum in aliquo primo, one in and with some other thing which is the
fountain and original of them all. And this is the ground of Righteousness
imputed; for in the Law a man is justified by performing entire obedience in
his own person, for the Law requires righteousness to be performed by a
created and implanted strength, and does not put, suppose, or indulge any
common principle thereof out of a man's self: Therefore legal righteousness
is most properly called Our own righteousness, and is set in opposition to
the righteousness of God, or that which is by grace imputed, Romans 10.3. Phil.
3.8, 9. We see then that in this matter of imputation either of sin or
righteousness, for the clearing of God from any injustice or partiality in his
proceedings, there must ever be some unity or other between the parties, he
whose fact is imputed, and the other to whom it is imputed: It would be
prodigious and against reason to conceive that the fall of Angels should be
imputed unto men, because men had no unity in condition either of nature, or
covenant with the Angels, as we have in both with Adam.

This common unity is twofold, either natural, as between us and Adam, in
whom we were seminally contained, and originally represented; for otherwise
than in and with Adam there could at the beginning be no covenant made with
mankind, which should ex aequo reach unto all particular persons in all ages
and places of the world: Or Voluntary, as between a man and his surety, who,
in conspectu fori, are but as one person. And this must be mutual, the one
party undertaking to do for the other, and the other yielding and consenting
thereunto; as between us and Christ, for Christ voluntarily undertook for us,
and we by the Spirit of Christ are persuaded and made willing to consent, and
by faith to cast our sins upon Christ, and to lay hold on him. And besides the
will of the parties who are, the one by default, the other by compassion and
suretiship engaged in the debt; there is required the will and consent of the
Judge, to whom the debt is due, and to whom it belongs in the right of his
jurisdiction, to appoint such a form of proceeding for the recovery of his
right, as may stand best with the honor of his person, and the satisfaction of
his justice, who if he would, might in rigor have refused any surety, and have
exacted the whole debt of those very persons by whose only default it grew.
And thus it comes to pass that by grace we have fellowship with the second
Adam, as by nature with the first, 1 Cor. 15.45 -- 48. So then between Christ
and us there must be an unity, or else there can be no imputation. And
therefore it is that we are said to be justified by faith, and that faith is
imputed for righteousness, Romans 4.5. not the (...) credere, the act of
believing, as if that were, in se, accounted righteousness, as it is a work
proceeding from us by grace; because it is Vinculum and instrumentum unionis,
the bond of union between us and Christ, and by that means makes way to the
imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us. Therefore we are said to be
buried, and crucified in and with Christ, by the virtue of faith concorporating
Christ and a Christian together, and communicating the fellowship of his
sufferings and resurrection, Romans 6.6. Gal. 6.14. Ephesians. 3.17. Phil. 3.10. If I
be lifted up, says our Savior, I will draw all men after me; crucem
conscendit, and me illuc adduxit, when Christ hanged on the cross, we in a
sort were there too. As in Adam we were all in Paradise, by a natural and
seminall virtue; so in Christ by a spiritual virtue, whereby in due time faith
was to be begotten in us, and so we to have an actual being of grace from him,
as after our real existence we have an actual being of nature from Adam. Thus
we see that Christ did for us fulfill all righteousness, by his passive
meriting and making satisfaction unto the remission of sins. By his active,
covering our inabilities, and doing that in perfection for us, which we could
not do for our selves. First, he suffered our punishment, he was wounded for
our transgression, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Esaias 53.5. If it be
here objected, that an innocent person ought not to suffer for a nocent, for
guilt is inseparable from sin; The son shall not bear the iniquity of his
father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son, the soul
that sins the same shall die, Ezekiel. 18.20. For the clearing of this
objection, we must note that there is a twofold manner of guilt (as I before
touched) either such as grows out of sin inherent, which is the deserving of
punishment, as it is in us: or such as grows out of sin imputed, and that
not by reason of union natural, as the guilt of Adams sin is imputed unto us
(which manner of imputation is likewise funda^entum demeriti, and causes us to
deserve punishment) but voluntary by way of vadimony and susception. And so
guilt is only a free and willing obnoxiousnesse unto that punishment which
another has deserved. Amongst sinful men it is true that the son shall not
bear the punishment of the fathers sin: first, because he is altogether
personally distinct. Secondly, because he is not appointed so to do, as Christ
was, Ioh. 10.18. Thirdly, because he is not able to bear them, so as to take
them off from his father as Christ did ours: He was himself able to stand
under our punishment without sinking, and was able by suffering them, to take
them off from us, because his person was answerable in dignity, and therefore
(by the grace of God, and the act of his Divine jurisdiction in ordering the
way to his own satisfaction) equivalent in justice unto all ours. Fourthly,
because he has already too many of his own to bear. But yet, if the will of
the son go along with the father in^sinning, it is not strange, nor unusual
for him to suffer for his fathers and his own sin together, as for the
continuation of the same offense; because, though he do not will the
punishment, (as Christ did ours) yet imitating and continuing the sin, there is
Volitum in causa, for the punishment too.

Now for an answer and resolution of the question, Vid. Grot. de satisfactione
Christi, cap. 4, 5.
whether an innocent person may suffer for a nocent, we must note first that
God out of his Dominion over all things, may cast pains upon an innocent
person, as it is manifest he did upon Christ: And what ground of complaint
could any creature have against God, if he should have created it in fire, and
made the place of its habitation the instrument of its pain? Do not we our
selves without cruelty upon many occasions put creatures that have not offended
us unto pain?

Secondly, it is not universally against equity for one to suffer the
punishment of another sin: we see the infants of Sodom, Tertul con^r.
Marcio^ l^b. 2. cap. 15.
Babylon, Egypt, of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were involved in the punishment
of those sins of which themselves were not guilty: The Lord reserveth to
himself the punishment of the fathers on the children, he punished the sins
of three hundred and ninety years all together, Lumbard l^b. 2 distinct 33.
Ezekiel. 4.2.5. Cham committed the sin, and yet Canaan was cursed for it. Genesis
9.22.25. The sin was Gehezies alone, and yet the leprosy cleaved not to him
only but to his posterity. Aquin. 22 ae. qua^^. 108. art. 4.
2 King. 5.27. The sin of crucifying Christ was the Jews in that age alone,
Coquaeus in Aug. Civ* Dei, lib. 1^. cap 1. number. 1.
and yet wrath is come upon them to the uttermost even unto this day. Matthew.
27.25. 1 These. 2.16. Achan trespassed alone, but he perished not alone but his
sons, Danaeus in Aug. Enchirid. c. 46.
and his daughters, and all that he had with him. Josh. 7.24. 1 King. 21.21.
Judge. 9.56. 1 King. 2.33. Ierem. 22.30.

Thirdly, the equity hereof in the case of Christ does herein plainly appear,
when all parties are glorified, and all parties are willing and well pleased,
there is no injury done unto any: and in this, the case is so; first, All
parties are glorified, the Father is glorified in the obedience of his Son. I
have both glorified my name, and I will glorify it again, Ioh. 12.27, 28. I
have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do, Ioh. 17.4. The Son is glorified, Thou made him a little lower than the
Angels, and crownedst him with glory and honor, Heb. 2.7. Ioh. 17.5. and the
sinner is glorified, I will that where I am they may be also, that they may
behold my glory, etc. Ioh. 17.24. secondly, All parties are willing; first, the
Father is willing, for by his Ordination he appointed Christ to it, Act. 4.27,
28. by his love and tender Compassion he bestowed Christ upon us, Ioh. 3.16. by
his Divine Acceptance he rested well pleased in it, Matthew. 17.5. in one word
by his wonderful Wisdom he fitted it to the manifestation of his glory and
mercy, to the reconciliation of him and his creature, and to the exaltation of
his Son: secondly, the Son is willing, he cheerfully submitted unto it,
Heb. 10.9. and freely loved us and gave himself unto us, Gal. 2.20. thirdly,
the sinner is willing, and accepts and relieth upon it, as we have seen at
large before in the third verse, so that there can be no injury done to any
party, where all are willing, and where all are glorified.

Fourthly, that an innocent person may thus in Justice and equity suffer for a
nocent, there is required (besides these acts of ordination in the supreme, of
submission in the surety, and of consent in the delinquent) first, an intimate
and near conjunction in him that suffers with those that should have
suffered. Several unions and conjunctions there are, as Politic between the
members and subjects in a state, and Navicula in qua erat Judas turhabatur,
unde and Petrus, qui erat fi^mus meritis suis, turbabatur ali^nis Ambros. in
Luc. 5. (...). Hesiod. D^lirant r^ges, plectuntur Achivi.
thus is a commonwealth universally sinful, a few righteous men may as parts
of that sinful society be justly subject to those temporary evils which the
sins of the society have contracted, and the people may justly suffer for the
sins of the Princes, 2 Samuel 24.17. and he for theirs, 1 Samuel 12.25.
secondly, Natural, as between parents and children, so the Lord visited the
sins of Dathan upon his little ones, Numb. 16.27.33. thirdly, Mystical as
between man and wife, so the Lord punished the sins of Amaziah the priest of
Bethel by giving over his wife unto whoredom, Amos 7.17. and we see in many
cases the husband is liable to be charged and censured for the exorbitancies of
his wife; fourthly, Stipulatory and by consent, as in the case of fidejussores
or obsides, who are punished for the sins of others whom they represent, and
in whose place they stand as a caution and muniment against injuries which
might be feared, as we see in the parable of the prisoner committed to the
custody of another person, 1 King. 20.39-42. fifthly, Possessory as between a
man and his goods, and so we find that a man was to offer no beast for a
sin offering but that which was his own, Levit. 5.6, 7. Now in all these
respects there was in some manner conjunction between us and Christ, He
conversed amongst men, and was a member of that Tribe and society amongst whom
he lived, and therefore was together with them under that Roman yoke which was
then upon the people, and in that relation paid tribute unto Caesar: he had
the nature and seed of man and so was subject to all humane and natural
infirmities without sin: He was mystically married unto his Church, and
therefore was answerable for the debts and misdemeanors of the Church. He
entered into covenant, and became surety for man, and therefore was liable to
man's engagements. Lastly, he became the possession, in some sort, of his
Church: whence it is that we are said to receive him, and to have him, 1 Ioh.
5.12. not by way of Dominion (for so we are his, 1 Cor. 6.19.) but by way of
communion and propriety; and therefore though we cannot offer him up unto God
in sacrifice for our sins, yet we may in our faith and prayers show him unto
his Father, and hold him up as our own armor and fence against the wrath of
God, Romans 13.14.

Secondly, there is required in the innocent person suffering, that he have a
free and full dominion over that from which he parts, in his suffering for
another. As in suretiship, a man has free dominion over his money, and
therefore in that respect he may engage himself to pay another man's debt; but
he has not a free dominion over himself or his own life, and therefore he
may not part with a member of his own in commutation for another, (as
Zaleucus did for his son) nor be (...), to lay down his own life for the
delivering of another from death, except in such cases as the Word of God
limiteth and allows. But Christ was Lord of his own life, and had therefore
power to lay it down and to take it up. And this power he had (though he were
in all points subject to the Law as we are) not solely by virtue of the
hypostaticall union, which did not for the time exempt him from any of the
obligations of the Law, but by virtue of a particular command, constitution,
and designation to that service of laying down his life. This commandment
have I received of my Father, Ioh. 10.18.

Lastly, it is required that this Power be ample enough to break through the
sufferings he undertaketh, and to reassume his life, and former condition
again. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up. So then
the sum of all is this; by the most just, wise, and merciful will of God, by
his own most obedient and voluntary susception, Christ Jesus, being one with
us in a manifold and most secret union, and having full power to lay down, and
to take up his life again by special command and allowance of his Father
given him, did most justly, without injury to himself, or dishonor to, or
injustice in his Father, suffer the punishment of their sins, with whom he
had so near an union, and who could not themselves have suffered them with
obedience in their own persons, or with so much glory to Gods justice, mercy
and wisdom.

If it be here again objected, that sin in the Scripture is said to be
pardoned, which seems contrary to this payment and satisfaction. To answer
this, we must note, first, that in the rigor of the Law, N^xa seq^itur caput,
the delinquent himself is in person to suffer the penalty denounced, for the
Law is, In the day that Thou eatest thou shall dye; and the soul that sins
it shall die. Every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.5. So that the
Law, as it stands in its own rigor, does not admit of any commutation, or
substitution of one for another. Secondly, therefore, that another person
suffering may procure a discharge to the person guilty, and be valide to free
him, the will, consent and mercy of him to whom the infliction of the
punishment belongs must concur, and his overruling power must dispense,
though not with the substance of the Laws demands, yet with the manner of
execution, and with that rigor, which binds wrath peremptorily upon the head
only of him that has deserved it. So then we see both these things do
sweetly concur; first, a precedent satisfaction by paying the debt; and yet
secondly, a true pardon and remission thereof to that party which should have
paid it, and out of mercy toward him, a dispencing with the rigor of that Law,
which in strictness would not admit any other to pay it for him.

Thus we see how Christ has suffered our punishment. Secondly, he did all
obedience, and fulfilled all actions of righteousness for us; for such an high
Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
Heb. 7.26. He came not into the world but for us, and therefore he neither
suffered, nor did any thing but for us. As the color of the glass is by the
favor of the Sunne-beame shining through it made the color of the wall, not
inherent in it, but relucent upon it, by an extrinsecall affection: so the
righteousness of Christ by the favor of God is so imputed unto us, as that we
are quoad gratiosum Dei conspectum, righteous too. In which sense I understand
those words, He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen
perverseness in Israel, Number. 23.21. Though it is indeed in him, yet the Lord
looks on him as clothed with the righteousness of Christ, and so is said
not to see it, as the eye sees the color of the glass in the wall, and
therefore cannot behold that other inherent color of its own, which yet it
knows to be in it.

Now of this Doctrine of Justification by Christ's righteousness imputed we
may make a double use. First, it may teach us that great duty of
self-denial; we see no righteousness will justify us but Christ's, and his
will not consist but with the denial of our own. And surely whatever the
professions of men in word may be, there is not any one duty in all Christian
Religion of more difficulty than this, to trust Christ only with our
salvation. To do holy duties of hearing, reading, praying, meditating,
almesgiving, or any other actions of charity or devotion, and yet still to
abhor our selves and our works, to esteem our selves after we have done
all, unprofitable servants, and worthy of many st^ipes: to do good things, and
not to rest in them; to own the shame and dung of our solemn services: when
we have done all the good works we can, to say with Nehemiah, Remember me, o
my God, concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy, Nehem. 13.22. and with David, To thee o Lord, belongs mercy, for
thou renderest to every man according to his work, Psalm. 62.12. It is thy
mercy to reward us according to the uprightness of our works, who might in
judgment confound us for the imperfection of our works. To give God the
praise of our working, and to take to ourselves the shame of polluting his
works in us. There is no Doctrine so diametrally contrary to the merits of
Christ, and the redemption of the world thereby, as justification by works. No
Papist in the world is or can be more contentious for good works than we
both in our Doctrine and in our prayers, and in our exhortations to the people.
We say no faith justifies us before God but a working faith, no man is
righteous in the sight of men, nor to be so esteemed, but by works of
holiness; without holiness no man shall see God, he that is Christ's is
zealous of good works, purifieth himself even as he is pure, and walks as
he did in this world. Here only is the difference; we do them, because they
are our Duty, and testifications of our love and thankfulness to Christ, and
of the workings of his Spirit in our hearts; but we dare not trust in them, as
that by which we hope to stand or fall before the tribunal of Gods Justice,
because they are at best mingled with our corruptions, and therefore do
themselves stand in need of a high Priest to take off their iniquity. We know
enough in Christ to depend on, we never can find enough in our selves. And
this confidence we have, if God would ever have had us justified by works,
he would have given us grace enough to fulfill the whole Law, and not have
left a Prayer upon public record for us every day to repeat, and to regulate
all our own Prayers by, forgive us our trespasses. For how dares that man say,
I shall be justified by my works, who must every day say, Lord forgive me my
sins, and be merciful unto me a sinner. Nay though we could fulfill the
whole Law perfectly, yet from the guilt of sins formerly contracted we could
no other way be justified, than by laying hold by faith on the satisfaction
and sufferings of Christ.

Secondly, it may teach us confidence against all sins, corruptions, and
temptations. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, etc. Satan
is the blackest enemy, and sin is the worst thing he can allege against
me, or my soul is or can be subject unto; for Hell is not so evil as sin.
In as much as Hell is of Gods making, but sin only of mine. Hell is made
against me, but sin is committed against God. Now I know Christ came to
destroy the works, and to answer the arguments and reasonings of the Devil.
Thou can not stand before God, says Satan, for thou art a grievous sinner,
and he is a devouring fire. But faith can answer, Christ is able both to cover
and to cure my sin, to make it vanish as a miste, and to put it as far out
of mine own sight, as the East is from the West. But thou have nothing to do
with Christ, thy sins are so many and so foul; surely the blood of Christ is
more acceptable to my soul, and much more honorable and precious in it self,
when it covers a multitude of sins. Paul was a persecutor, a Blasphemer,
and injurious, the greatest of all sinners, and yet he obtained mercy, that
he might be for a pattern of all long-suffering to those that should after
believe in Christ. If I had as much sin upon my soul as thou have, yet faith
could unlade them all upon Christ, and Christ could swallow them all up in his
mercy. But thou have still nothing to do with him, because thou continuest in
thy sin. But does he not call me, invite me, beseech me, command me to
come unto him? If then I have a heart to answer his call, he has a hand to
draw me to himself, though all the gates of Hell, and powers of darkness, or
sins of the world stood between. But thou obeyest not this call. True indeed
and pitiful it is, that I am dull of hearing, and slow of following the voice
of Christ, I want much faith: but yet Lord thou do not use, to quench the
smoking flax, or to break the bruized reed; I believe, and thou art able to
help mine unbeleefe. I am resolved to venture my soul upon thy mercy, to
throw away all mine own loading, and to cleave only to this planck of
salvation. But faith purifieth the heart, whereas thou art unclean still. True
indeed, and miserable man I am therefore, that the motions of sin do work
in my members. But yet Lord I hate every false heart; I delight in thy Law with
mine innerman, I do that which I would not, but I consent to thy Law that it
is good, I desire to know thy will, to fear thy name, and to follow thee
whithersoever thou leadest me. But these are but empty velleities, the
wishings and wouldings of an evil heart. Lord to me belongs the shame of my
failings, but to thee belongs the glory of thy mercy and forgiveness. Too
true it is that I do not all I should: but do I allow my self in any thing
that I should not? do I make use of mine infirmities to justify my self by
them, or shelter my self under them, or dispense with my self in them? though
I do not the things I should, yet I love them, and delight in them, my heart,
and Spirit, and all the desires of my soul are toward them; I hate, abhor,
and fight with my self for not doing them. I am ashamed of mine infirmities,
as the blemishes of my profession, I am weary of them, and groan under them as
the burdens of my soul: I have no lust, but I am willing to know it, and when
I know, to crucify it. I hear of no further measure of grace, but I admire
it, and hunger after it, and press on to it. I can take Christ and affliction,
Christ and persecution together. I can take Christ without the world, I can
take Christ without my self. I have no unjust gain, but I am ready to restore
it. No time have I lost by earthly business from Gods service, but I am ready
to redeem it. I have followed no sinful pleasure, but I am ready to abandon
it, no evil company but I mightily abhor it. I never swear an oath, but I
can remember it with a bleeding conscience; I never neglected a duty but I can
recount it with revenge and indignation. I do not in any man see the Image of
Christ, but I love him the more dearly for it, and abhor my self for being
so much unlike it. I know, Satan, I shall speed never the worse with God,
because I have thee for mine enemy. I know I shall speed much the better,
because I have my self for mine enemy. Certainly he that can take Christ
offered, that can in all points admit him, as well to purify as to justify,
as well to rule as save, as well his grace as his mercy, need not fear all
the powers of darkness, nor all the armies of the foulest sins which Satan
can charge his conscience withal.

The second great virtue and fruit of the Priesthood of Christ was ex
redundantia meriti, from the redundancy and overflowing of his merit. First,
he does merit to have a Church; for the very being of the Church is the effect
of that great price which he paid; therefore the Church is called a purchased
people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, Psalm. 2.8. when he made his soul an offering for sin, he did
by that means see his seed, and divide a portion with the great, Esai. 53.10,
11, 12. The delivering and selecting of the Saints out of this present evil
world was the end of Christ's Sacrifice, Gal. 1.4. Secondly, he did merit all
such good things for the Church, as the great love of himself and his Father
toward the Church did resolve to confer upon it. They may I conceive be
reduced to two heads: First, Immunitie from evil, whatsoever is left to be
removed after the payment of our debt, or taking off from us the guilt, and
obligation unto punishment. Such are the Dominion of Sin. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, Romans 6.14. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and of Death, Romans 8.2. He that
commits sin is the servant of sin; but if the Son shall make you free,
you shall be free indeed, Ioh. 8.34-36. He that is borne of God does not
commit sin, 1 Ioh. 3.9. That is, he is not an artificer of sin, one that
makes it his trade and profession, and therefore brings it to any
perfection. He has received a Spirit of Judgment, that chaineth up his
lusts, and a Spirit of burning, which works out his dross, Esai. 4.4. Mal.
3.2, 3. Matthew. 3.2. Such is, The Vanity of our Mind, whereby we are naturally
unable to think, or to cherish a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 4.17. The
Ignorance, and hardness of our hearts, unable to perceive, or delight in any
spiritual thing, Ephesians. 4.18. Ioh. 1.5. Luke 24, 25.45. The Spirit of
disobedience and habitual strangeness and averseness from God, Ephesians. 4.18.
Job 20.14. Such are also all those slavish, affrightfull, and contumacious
effects of the Law in terrifying the conscience, irritating the concupiscence,
and compelling the froward heart to an unwilling and unwelcome conformity. The
Law is now made our counselor, a delight to the inner man, that which was a
lion before, has now food and sweetness in it.

Secondly, Many Privileges and dignities in the virtue of that principal and
general one, which is our unity unto Christ; from whence by the fellowship of
his holy and quickening Spirit, we have an unction which teaches us his ways,
and his voice, which sanctifies our nature, by the participation of the divine
nature, that is, by the renewing of Gods most holy and righteous Image in us.
Which sanctifies our Persons, that they may be spiritual Kings and Priests.
Kings, to order our own thoughts, affections, desires, studies toward him, to
fight with principalities, powers, corruptions, and spiritual enemies.
Priests, to offer up our bodies, souls, prayers, thanksgivings, alms,
spiritual services upon that Altar, which is before his mercy-seate, and to
slay and mortify our lusts and earthly members; which sanctifies all our
actions, that they may be services to him and his Church, acceptable to him,
and profitable to others. Secondly, from this unity with him grows our
adoption, which is another fruit of his Sacrifice. He was made of a woman,
made under the Law, that we might receive The Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.5. By
which we have free access to call upon God in the virtue of his Sacrifice,
sure supplies in all our wants, because our heavenly Father knows all our
needs, a most certain inheritance, and salvation in hope; for we are already
saved by hope, Romans 8.24. and Christ is to us the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.
Lastly, there is from hence our exaltation, in our final victory and
resurrection, by the fellowship and virtue of his victory over death, as the
first fruits of ours, 1 Cor. 15.20.49. Phil. 3.21. And in our complete
salvation, being carried in our souls and bodies to be presented to himself
without spot and blameless, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. and to be brought unto God, 1 Pet.
3.18. Now to take all in one view, what a sum of mercy is here together.
Remission of all sins, discharge of all debts, deliverance from all curses;
joy, peace, triumph, security, exaltation above all evils, enemies, or fears;
a peculiar, purchased, royal seed, (the gift of God the Father to his Son)
deliverance from the dominion and service of all sin, vanity, ignorance,
hardness, disobedience, bondage, coaction, terror; sanctification of our
persons, natures, lives, actions; adoption, hope, victory, resurrection,
salvation, glory. O what a price was that which procured it? O what manner of
persons ought we to be for whom it was procured?

The fifth thing to be spoken of about the Priesthood of Christ I shall
dispatch in one word, which is the Duty we owe upon all this. First, then we
should not receive so great a grace in vain, but by faith lay hold upon it,
and make use of it. Let us fear, says the Apostle, lest a promise being left
us, of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it; for
unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them: but the word preached
did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb.
4.1, 2. God in Christ is but reconcilable unto us, One with us in his good
will, and in his proclamation of peace. When two parties are at variance, there
is no actual peace without the mutual consent of both again; till we by
faith give our consent, and actually turn unto God, and seek his favor, and
lay hold on the mercy which is set before us; though God be one, in that he
sends a mediator, and makes tender of reconcilement with us, yet this grace
of his is to us in vain, because we continue his enemies still. The Sun is
set in the heavens for a public light, yet it benefiteth none but those who
open their eyes, to admit and make use of its light. A court of justice or
equity is a public sanctuary, yet it actually relieveth none but those that
seek unto it. Christ is a public and universal salvation, set up for all
comers, and appliable to all particulars, Ioh. 3.16. He is not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. He
tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. But all this is not beneficial unto
life, but only to those that receive him. Only those that receive him are by
these mercies of his made the Sons of God, Ioh. 1.12. without faith they
abide his enemies still. God in Christ publishes himself a God of peace and
unity toward us, Gal. 3.20. And sets forth Christ as an all-sufficient
treasure of mercy to all that in the sense of their own misery will fly unto
him, Revel. 22.17. But till men believe, and are thus willing to yield their
own consents, and to meet his reconciliation toward them, with theirs
toward him, his wrath abides upon them still; for by believing only he will
have his sons death actually effectual, though it were sufficient before. O
therefore let us not venture to bear the wrath of God, the curse of sin, the
weight of the Law, upon our own shoulders, when we have so present a remedy,
and so willing a friend at hand to ease us.

Secondly, we should labor to feel the virtue of the Priesthood and Sacrifice
of Christ working in us, purging our consciences from dead works, renewing our
nature, cleansing us from the power and pollution of sin; for when by the
hand of faith, and the sweet operation of the Spirit we are therewithal
sprinkled, we shall then make it all our study to hate, and to forbear sin,
which squeezed out so precious blood, and wrung such bitter cries from so
merciful a high Priest; to live no longer to our selves, that is, secundum
hominem, as men, 1 Cor. 3.3. Hos. 6.7. After our own lusts and ways: but (as
men that are not their own, but his that bought them,) to live in his service,
and to his glory, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20, 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Pet. 4.2. All that we can
do is too little to answer so great love. Love to empty himself, to humble
himself, to be God in the flesh, to be God on a Cross, to take off from us
the hatred, fury and vengeance of his Father, to restore us to our primitive
purity and condition again. Why should it be esteemed a needless thing to be
most rigorously conscionable, and exactly circumspect, in such a service as
unto which we are engaged with so infinite, and unsearchable bounty? He paid
our debt to the uttermost farthing, drunk every drop of our bitter Cup, and
saved us (...), thoroughly: why should not we labor to perform his service,
and to fulfill every one of his most sweet commands to the uttermost too?

Thirdly, we should learn to walk before him with all reverence and fear,
as men that have received a Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. And
with frequent consideration of the high Priest of our profession, that we may
not in presumption of his mercy, harden our hearts, or depart from God, Heb.
3.1.8. But in due remembrance of the end of his Sacrifice, which was to
purchase to himself a peculiar people, be zealous of all good works, Tit.
2.14.

Fourthly, we should learn confidence and boldness toward him, who is a
great, a faithful, and a merciful high Priest; this use the Apostle makes of
it. Seeing we have a great high Priest-let us hold fast our profession-and come
with boldness unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. And again, Having
therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Iesus-and having
an high Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in
full assurance of faith, etc. Heb. 10.19-22.

Fifthly, we learn perseverance and steadfastness in our profession, because
he is able to carry u^ through and save us to the uttermost. This is that which
indeed makes us partakers of Christ. We are made partakers of him, if we hold
the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end, Heb. 3.14. The considering
of him, of his perseverance in finishing his own work, and our faith, and his
power and ability to save us to the uttermost, will keep us from fainting in
our service and the profession we have taken, Heb. 12.2, 3.10.23.

Sixthly, we have hereby access to present our prayers, and all our spiritual
Sacrifices upon this Altar, sprinkled with the blood of that great Sacrifice,
and liberty to come unto God by him who lives to make intercession for us,
Heb. 7.25. In him we have access with confidence by faith, Ephesians. 3.12.
Therefore the Lord is said to have his eyes open to our Prayers, to hearken
unto them, 1 Kings. 8.52. Because he first looks upon our Persons in Christ,
before he receives or admits any of our services.

Lastly, we ought frequently to celebrate the memory, and to commemorate the
Benefits of this Sacrifice wherein God has been so much glorified, and we so
wonderfully saved. Therefore the Lord has of purpose instituted a sacred
ordinance in his Church, in the room of the Paschall Lamb, that as that was a
prefiguration of Christ's death expected, so this should to all ages of the
Church be a resemblance and commemoration of the same exhibited. So often as
ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lords death till
he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. For in the ordinances he is crucified before our eyes,
Gal. 3.1. Therefore the Apostle more than once inferres from the consideration
of this Sacrifice and office of Christ, our duty of not forsaking the
assemblies of the Saints, and of exhorting and provoking one another, Heb.
3.13.10.24, 25.

Now I proceed to the last thing mentioned in the words concerning the
Priesthood of Christ, and that is about the Order of it. Thou art a Priest
[for ever after the Order of Melchisedek.] Secundum verbum, or secundum morem
and rationem: the Apostle reads it (...), according to the Order of
Melchisedeks Priesthood. Of this Melchisedek, we find mention made but in two
places only of the whole Old Testament, and in both very briefly; the first in
the History of Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, when
Melchisedek, being the Priest of the most high God, brought forth bread and
wine, and blessed him, Genesis 14.18, 19, 20. and the other in this place. And for
this cause the things concerning him, and his Order are (...), hard to be
understood, Heb. 5.11. It was so then, and so it would be still, if S. Paul
had not cleared the difficulties, and showed wherein the Type and the Antitype
did fully answer; which he has largely done in Heb. 7.

For understanding and clearing the particulars which are herein considerable,
Vid. Cameron Quaest. in Hebr.
here are some questions which offer themselves. First, who Melchisedek was?
Secondly, what is meant by (...), his Order? Thirdly, why Christ was to be a
Priest after his Order, and not after Aarons? Fourthly, why he brought forth
bread and wine? Fifthly, what kind of blessing it was with which he blessed
Abraham? Sixthly, in what manner he received Tithes? Lastly, in what sense he
was without Father, and without Mother, without beginning of days, or end of
life?

First, for Melchisedek, who he was, much has been said by many men, and with
much confidence. Apud Hieron. Epist. To. 3. Epist. 136. and Epiphan. lib. 2.
Haeres. 55.
Some heretics of old affirmed that he was the Holy Ghost. Origin. apud
Hieronym.
Others that he was an Angel. Haebraei apud Epiphane. and Hieron.
Others that he was Sem the Son of Noah. Tertull. contr. Iudaeos. Justin.
Epiphan. Par^us in Genesis
Others that he was a Canaanite, extraordinarily raised up by God to be a
Priest of the Gentiles. Quiaam apud Epiphan. and nuper Petrus Cu^. eus. de
Repub. Hebraeor. cap. 3. vid. Coquae in Aug. de civ. Dei lib. 16. cap. 22.
Others that he was Christ himself, manifest by a special dispensation and
privilege unto Abraham in the flesh, who is said to have seen his day, and
rejoiced, Ioh. 8.56. Difference also there is about Salem, the place of which
he was King. Some take it for Jerusalem, as Antiq. Iud. l. ^. 1. cap 11.
Josephus, and most of the ancients. Others for a city in the half tribe of
Manasse, within the River Jordan, where Hierom reports that some ^uines of the
palace of Melchisedek were in his days conceived to remain. Tedious I might
be in insisting on this point who Melchisedek was. But when I find the Holy
Ghost purposely concealing his name, genealogy, beginning, ending, and
descent, and that to special purpose; I cannot but wonder that men should
toil themselves in the dark to find out that of which they have not the
least ground of solid conjecture, and the inevidence whereof is expressly
recorded, to make Melchisedek thereby the fitter type of Christ's everlasting
Priesthood.

Secondly, what is meant by (...) It is as much as the state, condition, or
prescribed Rule of Melchisedek; and that was (...), After the power of an
endless life, Heb. 7.16. Not by a corporeal unction, legal ceremony, or the
intervening act of a humane ordination: but by a heavenly institution, and
immediate unction of the Spirit of Life, by that extraordinary manner whereby
he was to be both King and Priest unto God, as Melchisedek was.

Thirdly, Why was he not a Priest after the order of Aaron? The Apostle gives
us an answer, Because the Law made nothing perfect, but was weak and
unprofitable, and therefore was to be abolished, and to give place to another
Priesthood. Men were not to rest in it, but by it to be led to him who was to
abolish it, Heb. 7.11, 12. as the morning-starre leads to the sun, and at
the rising thereof vanishes. The ministry and promises of Christ were better
than those of the Law; and therefore his Priesthood, which was the office of
dispencing them, was to be more excellent likewise, Heb. 8 6. For when the Law
and covenant were to be abolished, the Priesthood in which they were
established, was to die likewise.

Fourthly, Why Melchisedek brought forth bread and wine? The Papists, that they
may have something to build the idolatry of their mass upon, make Melchisedek
to Sacrifice bread and wine, as a Type of the Eucharist. I will not fall into
so tedious a controversy, as no way tending to edification, and infinite
litigations there have been between the parts already about it. In one word;
We grant that the Ancients do frequently make it a Type of the Eucharist but
only by way of allusion, Glass. Philolog. Sacra* page 423.
not of literal prediction, or strict prefiguration; as that, out of Egypt
have I called my Son, and in Rama was there a voice heard, which were
literally and historically true in another sense, are yet by way of allusion
applied by the Evangelist unto the History of Christ, Matthew. 2.15.18. But we
may note; first, it is not Sacrificavit, but Protulit, he brought it forth, he
did not offer it up. Loco supra citato.
Secondly, he brought it forth to Abraham as a Prince to entertain him after
his conquest, as Josephus, and from him Cajetan understand it; not as a Priest
to God. Thirdly, he, if he did offer, he offered bread and wine truly, these
men, only the lying shapes thereof, and not bread and wine it self which they
say are transubstantiated into another thing. Fourthly, the Priesthood of
Melchisedek as Type, and of Christ as the substance, was (...), a Priesthood
which could not pass unto any other either as successor or vicar to one or the
other, and it was only by divine and immediate unction; but the Papists make
themselves Priests by humane and ecclesiastical ordination to offer that which
they say Melchisedek offered; and by that means most insolently make
themselves either successors, or vicars, or sharers, and copartners and
workers together with him and his Antitype, Christ Jesus, in the offices of
such a Priesthood as was totally uncommunicable, and intransient, Heb. 7.24.
and so most sacril^giously rob him of that honor which he has assumed to
himself as his peculiar office.

Fifthly, what kind of blessing it was wherewith Melchisedek blessed Abraham?
To this I answer, that there is a twofold Benediction. The one Charitativa, o^t
of love, and so any man may bless another by way of euprecation or well
wishing: The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we bless you in the name of
the Lord, Psalm. 129.8. the other Autoritativa, as a King, a Priest, an
extraordinary superior and public person, by a way of office, and to the
purpose of effecting, and real conveying the blessing it self desired:
without all contradiction, says the Apostle, the less is blessed of the
greater, Hebr. 7.7. and such was this of Melchisedek. Benedictio obsignans, a
seal, assurance, and effectual confirmation of the promise before made, Genesis
12.2, 3.

Sixthly, in what manner he received Tithes? I answer with Calvin, Quod debebat
Abraham Deo, solvit in manum Melchisedec. Decimarum ergo solutione, se minorem
professus est, Calv. in Heb. 7.5.8.9.
that he had Ius decimarum, and received them as testifications of homage,
duty, and obedience from Abraham; for the Apostle uses it as argument to prove
his greatness above Abraham, which could be no argument in the case of pure
gift. Since gifts, qu^tenus gifts, though they prove not a general
inferioritie in him that receives them, yet they prove that in that case there
is something which may be imputed, and which deserves acknowledgement. But in
this particular all the acknowledgements are from Abraham to Melchisedek.
Besides, nothing was here by Abraham or Melchisedek done after an arbitrary
manner, but Extraordinario spiritus afflatu and ex officio, on both sides, as
learned Cameron has observed.

Lastly, in what sense he was (...) and (...), etc. without father, mother, or
genealogy? I answer with Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom.
that it is not meant literally and strictly; but only the Scripture takes
notice of him as an extraordinary man, without signifying his line, beginning,
end, or race, (as Tiberius said of Rufus, that he was Homo ex se natus) that so
he might be the fitter to typifie Christ's person and excellency in whom those
things were really true, which are only quoad nos, spoken of the type, of
whose beginning, end, or parentage, we neither have, nor can have any
knowledge. These things thus premised, it will be easy for you to preoccupate
those observations, which grow between the Type and the Antitype, which
therefore I will but cursorily propose.

Note, first, that Christ's Priesthood is such as did induce a kingdom with it,
for Melchisedek was King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God.] This,
Saint Hierom, and from him Ambrose, report to have been meant by the order of
Melchisedek, namely, Regale Sacerdotium, that Christ was to be a Royal Priest.
By way of merit purchasing a kingdom of his Father, and by way of conquest
recovering it to himself out of the hands of his enemies; this mystery was
obscurely intimated, in the marriages allowed between the regal and
sacerdotall tribes of Judah and Levi, which confusion was in the other Tribes
interdicted, as I have before observed.

Note, secondly, that Christ by offering up himself a Sacrifice unto God, is
become unto his people a King of Righteousness, or the Lord our
righteousness: in which sense he is called The Prince of life, Act. 3.15. that
is, he has all power given him as a Prince, to quicken, and to justify whom
he will, Ioh. 5.20, 21. And this comes from his Sacrifice and perfect
obedience to us imputed, and by us with faith employed and apprehended; for
having fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, and justified himself by
rising from the dead, he became, being thus made perfect, the Author of
righteousness and salvation to us, Heb. 5.9. We had in us a whole kingdom of
sin, and therefore requisite there was in him that should justify us a
kingdom of Grace, and righteousness, That as sin reigned unto death, even
so might Grace through righteousness reign unto eternal life by Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 5.21. and therefore we are said to be justified by the
righteousness of God, Romans 3.21, 22. that is, such a righteousness as is ours
by gift and grace, not by nature, Romans 10.3. and such a righteousness as God
himse^fe did perform, though in the humane nature, in our behalf, Act. 20.28.
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.

And this is the ground of all our comfort, the best direction in all our
miseries and extremities whither to fly. A King is the greatest officer
amongst men, and his honor and state is for the supply, defense, and honor of
his people: He is Custos Tabularum, the Father, and the Keeper of the Laws. If
I want any of that justice and equity, of which his sacred Bosom is the
public treasure, I may freely beg it of him, because he is an Officer to
dispense righteousness unto his subjects; so also is Christ unto his Church. I
find my self in a miserable condition, condemned by the conscience of sin,
by the testimony of the Word, by the accusations of Satan, full of discomforts;
God is a God of justice, and all fire, my self a creature of sin, and all
stubble; Satan the accuser of the brethren, who labors to blow up the wrath of
God against me. In this case what shall I do? Surely God has set his King on
Sion; and he is a King that has life and righteousness to give to me; that
has grace enough to quench all sin, and the envenomed darts of Satan, in whom
there is erected a court of peace and mercy, whereunto to appeal from the
severity of God, from the importunity of the Devil, and from the accusations
and testimonies of our own hearts. And indeed he had need be a King of
righteousness that shall justify men, for our justification is in the
remission of our sins; and to pardon sins, and dispense with Laws is a regal
dignity; and God takes it as his own high and peculiar prerogative, I, even
I am he who blotteth out thine iniquity for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins, Esaias 43.25. No man, or Angel, or created power, no merit,
no obedience, no rivers of oil, nor mountains of cattle, no prayers, tears,
or torments, can wipe out the stains, or remove the guilt of any sin, I
only, even I and none else can do it. None but a Divine and Royal Power can
subdue sin, Mica 7.18.

And this is a ground of a second comfort, that being a King of righteousness
he is rich in it, and has treasures to bestow; that as we have a kingdom, a
treasure, and abundance of sin; so we have a King that has always a residue
of spirit and grace, that has a most redundant righteousness from faith to
faith, Romans 1.17. A man's faith can never over-grow the righteousness of our
King. If we had all the faith that ever was in the world put into one man, all
that could not over-claspe the righteousness of Christ, or be too big for
it. As if a man had a thousand eyes, and they should one after another look on
the Sun, yet still the light would be revealed from eye to eye; or as if a
man should go up by ten thousand steps to the top of the highest mountain,
yet he could never over-looke all the earth, or fix his eye beyond all visible
objects, but should still have more earth and heaven discovered unto him from
step to step: so there is an immensitie in the righteousness and mercy of God,
which cannot be exhausted by any sins, or overlooked, and comprehended by any
faith of men. As God dot^ (...) and more reveal himself, and the
righteousness of Christ unto the soul, so man makes further progresses from
faith to faith. And therefore we should learn everlasting thankfulness unto
this our King, that is pleased to be unto us a Melchisedek, a Priest to
satisfy his Fathers justice, and a Prince to bestow his own.

Note thirdly, Melchisedek was King of Salem, that is, of Peace. Here are two
things to be noted, the Place, a City of the Canaanites, and the signification
thereof, which is Peace: First then we must observe, that Christ is a King of
Canaanites, of Gentiles, of those that lived in abominable lusts: Such were
some of you, but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.11. Be a man never so sinful or
unclean, he has not enough to pose or nonplus the mercy and righteousness of
Christ; he can bring reconciliation and peace amongst Jebusites themselves;
though our father were an Amorite, our mother an Hittite, though we were
Gentiles, estranged from God in our thoughts, lives, hopes, ends: though we had
justified Sodom and Samaria by our abominations, yet he can make us nigh by
his blood, he can make our crimsin sins as white as snow, he can for all that
establish an everlasting covenant unto us, Ephesians. 2.11 -- 14. Esaias 1.18. Ezekiel.
16.60 -- 63. I was a blasphemer, a persecutour, very injurious to the Spirit of
Grace in his Saints, I wasted, I worried, I haled into prison, I breathed out
threatenings, I was mad, and made havocke of the Church, I was within one step
of the unpardonable sin, nothing but ignorance between that and my soul;
Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them who should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting, says Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13 -- 16.

Let us make Saint Paul's use of it: First, To love and to believe in Christ, to
accept as a most faithful and worthy saying, that Christ came to save sinners;
indefinitely, without restriction, without limitation; and me, though the
chiefest of all others. Though I had more sins than earth or hell can lay
upon me, yet if I feel them as heavy weights, and if I am willing to forsake
them all, let me not dishonor the power and unsearchable riches of Christ's
blood, even for such a sinner there is mercy. Secondly, To break forth into
Saint Paul's acknowledgement, Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible,
and only wise God, to him that is a King of righteousness, and therefore has
abundance for me, that is eternal, and yet was borne in time for me;
immortal, yet died for me; invisible, yet was manifested in the flesh for me,
the only wise God, and who made use of that wisdom, to reconcile himself to
me, and by the foolishness of preaching does save the world; be honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Secondly, from the signification of the word, we may note, Where Christ is a
King of righteousness, he is a King of Peace too. So the Prophet calls him,
the Prince of Peace, Esaias 6.9. a Creator and dispencer of peace. It is his own
by propriety and purchase, and he leaves it unto us: Peace I leave with you,
my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you, Ioh. 14.27.
The world is either fallax or inops, either it deceives, or it is deficient;
but Peace is mine, and I can give it. Therefore as the Prophet Jeremy calls
him by the name of Righteousness, Ier. 33.16. So the Prophet Micah calls him
by the name of Peace, This man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come
into our Land, Mic. 5.5. To which Saint Paul alleging, calls him (...), our
peace, Ephesians. 2.14. By him we have peace with God, being reconciled, and recti
in curia again, being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. so that the heart can challenge all the world to
lay any thing to its charge. By him we have peace with our own consciences,
for being sprinkled with his blood, they are cleansed from dead works, and so
we have the witness in our selves, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 9.14. 1 Ioh.
5.10. Romans 8.16. By him we have peace with men. No more malice, envy, or
hatred of one another, after once the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, Tit. 3.3, 4. All partition walls are taken down, and they
which were two before, are both made one in him, Ephesians. 2.14. and then there is
toward the brethren a love of communion, toward the weak a love of pity,
toward the poor a love of bounty, either (...) or (...), 2 Pet. 1.7. either
brotherly love, or general love, toward those without mercy, charity,
compassion, forgivenes, toward al good works. By him we have peace with the
creatures, we use them with comfort, with liberty, with delight, with piety,
with charity, with mercy, as glasses in the which we see, and as steps by the
which we draw nearer to God. No rust in our gold or silver, no moth, nor pride
in our garment, no lewdnes in our liberty, no hand against the wall, no flying
roll against the stone or beam of the house, no gravel in our bread, no gall
in our drink, no snare on our table, no fears in our bed, no destruction in
our prosperity; in all estates we can rejoice, we can do and suffer all
through Christ that strengthens us. We are under the custody of peace; it
keeps our hearts and minds from fears of enemies, and makes us serve the
Lord with confidence, boldness and security, Phil. 4.7. The works of
righteousness are in peace, and the effect of righteousness is quietness and
assurance for ever. Esaias 32.17.


Note fourthly, from both these, that is, from a peace grounded in
righteousness, needs must Blessedness result, for it is the blessedness of a
creature to be reunited, and one with his Maker, to have all controversies
ended, all distances swallowed up, all partitions taken down, and therefore
the Apostle uses Righteousness and Blessedness as terms promiscuous. Romans 4.5
-- 9.
All men seek for blessedness, it is the sum and collection of all desires, a
man loves nothing but in order and subordination unto that. And by nature we
are all children of wrath, and held under by the curse, so many sins as we
have committed, so many deaths and curses have we heaped upon our souls, so
many walls of separation have we set up between us and God, who is the fountain
of blessedness. Till all they be covered, removed, forgiven and forgotten, the
creature cannot be blessed. Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered, Romans 4.7. All the benedictions which we have from
the most high God come unto us from the intercession and mediation of Christ.
His sacrifice and prayers give us interest in the all-sufficiencie of him that
is above all, and so are a security unto us against all adverse power or fear,
for what or whom need that man fear, that is one with the most high God? If
God be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8.31. When God blesses, his
blessing is ever with effect and success, it cannot be reversed, it cannot be
disappointed: Has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and
shall he not make it good? Behold, says Balaam, I have received commandment
to bless, and he has blessed, and cannot reverse it, Numb. 23.19, 20.

Note fifthly, from Melchisedeks meeting Abraham returning from the slaughter
of the Kings, we may observe the great forwardness that is in Christ to meet
and to bless his people, when they have been in his service. Thou meetest him
that rejoices and works righteousness, Esaias 64.5. I said I will confess my
sins, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32.5. No sooner did
David resolve in his heart to return to God, but presently the Lord prevented
him with his mercy, and anticipated his servants confession with pardon and
forgiveness; Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness, Psalm. 21.3.
As the father of the Prodigal, when he was yet a great way off, far from that
perfection which might in strictness be required, yet, because he had set his
face homeward, and was now resolved to sue for pardon and re-admittance; when
he saw him, he had compassion, and ran (the fathers mercy was swi^ter than
the sons repentance) and fell on his neck and kissed him, Luke 15.20. We do
not find the Lord so hasty in his punishments, He is slow to anger, and does
not stir up all his wrath together. He is patient, and long-suffering, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance; he
comes, and he comes again, and the third year he forbeares, before he cuts
down a barren tree: But when he comes with a blessing, he does not delay,
but prevents his people with goodness and mercy. O how forward ought we to be
to serve him, who is so ready to meet us in his way, and to bless us?

Note sixthly, from the refection and preparations which Melchisedek made for
Abraham and for his men, we may observe, That Christ as King and Priest is a
comforter and refresher of his people in all their spiritual weariness, and
after all their services. This was the end of his unction to heal, and to
comfort his people. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and a recovering of
sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruized, and to preach
the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4.18, 19. To provide a feast of fatted
things, of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the
lees well refined, Esaias 25.6. To mi^ke out unto his people consolations and
abundance of glory, Esaias 66.11. To speak words in season to those that are
weary, and to make broken and dry bones to rejoice, and to flourish like an
herb, Esaias 50.4. Psalm. 51.8. Esaias 66.14.

And this is a strong argument to hold up the patience, faith, and hope of men
in his service, and in all spiritual assaults; we have a Melchisedek which
after our combat is ended, and our victory obtained will give us refreshments
at the last, and will meet us with his mercies. If we faint not, but wait a
while, we shall see the salvation of the Lord, that in the end he is very
pitiful and of tender mercy, Exodus 14.13. Iam. 5.11. He is near at hand, his
coming draws nigh: He is near that justifies me, who will contend with
m^e? Let us stand together. Who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.
The readiness of the Lord to help is a ground of challenge and defiance to al
enemies, Phil. 4.5. Iam. 5.8. Esai. 50.8, 9. Job went forth mourning, and had a
great war to fight; but the Lord blessed his latter end more than his
beginning, and after his battle was ended met him like Melchizedek with
redoubled mercies. David, Hezekiah, Heman the Ezrahite, and many of the Saints
after their example, have had sore and dismal conflicts, but at length their
comforts have been proportionable to their wrestlings, they never wanted a
Melchizedek after their combats to refresh them. Rejoice not against me, O
mine enemy, when I fall I shall rise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall
be a light unto me: I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me, he
will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness, Mic.
7.8, 9. He has strength, courage, refection, spirit, to put into those that
fight his battles, though they be but as Abraham, a family of three hundred
men, against four kings, yet he can cut Rahab, and wound the dragon, and make
a way in the sea for the ransomed to pass over, and cause his redeemed to
return with singing, and with joy and gladness upon their heads, I, even I am
he that comfort you, who art thou that should be afraid of a man that
shall dye, and of the son of man that shall be as grass? Esai. 51.12.

Note, seventhly, from Melchisedeks receiving of tithes from Abraham (which the
Apostle takes special notice of four or five times together in one Chapt.
Heb. 7.2, 4, 6, 8, 9.) we may observe, That Christ is a receiver of homage and
tribute from his people; There was never any type of Christ as a Priest, but he
received tithes, and that not in the right of any thing in himself, but
merely in the virtue of his typical office, so that originally they did
manifestly pertain to that principal Priest, whom these represented, whose
personal Dicit Apostolu^, Ad tempus deci ^as Levitis solut as faisse, quia non
semper viverent; Meichised^c vero, quia immortalis sit, retinere usque in finem
quod a Deos^mel illi datum est, Calv. in Heb. 7.8.
priesthood is standing, unalterable, and eternal, and therefore the rights
thereunto belonging are such too.

If it objected, why then did not Christ in his life receive tithes? I answer,
first, because though he were the substance, yet the standing typical
priesthood was not abolished till after his ministry on earth was finished,
for his priesthood was not consummate till his sitting at the right hand of
God: secondly, because he took upon him a voluntary poverty for especial
reasons belonging to the state of his humiliation, and to the dispensation of
man's Redemption, 2 Corinthians. 8.9. You will say, now Christ's priesthood is
consummate, and he himself is in heaven, whither no tithes can be sent;
therefore none are due, because he has no typical priests in earth to
represent him. I answer, though he be in heaven in his body, yet he is on
earth in his ministry, and in the dispensation of the virtue of his sacrifice;
and the Ministers of the Gospel are in his stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. and ought to
be received as Christ himself, Gal. 4.14. so then men are not by this excused
from rendering Gods dues unto him; first, because there is in respect of him,
whose sacrifice we commemorate and show forth to the people, due a
Testification of homage unto him; secondly, because in respect of us there is
due a Reward of our labor, for the labourer is worthy of his hire: to lay all
together in one view, in as much as all the types of Christ, as a Priest, have
received tithes as due, and in as much as that right was not grounded upon any
thing in or from themselves, but upon their typical office, and so did
originally pertain to the Principal Priest, whom they typified; and in as
much as his person and office is eternal, and therefore such are all the
annexa, and dues thereof; and in as much as he has no where dispensed with, or
denied, or refused, or revoked this right which from him as the principal all
his types ever enjoyed: and lastly, in as much as he has left to the
Ministers of his Word, the dispensation of his sacrifice, and made them his
Ambassadors, and in his stead to the Church, to set forth him crucified in his
ordinances: for my part I do not see why unto them in the name and right of
their Master, those rights should not be due, which were manifestly his in his
types, and of which himself has no where in his Word declared any revocation.

But not to enter upon any disputes or unwelcome controversies, thus much I
cannot by the way but observe, that these who labor in the word and doctrine,
and therein are Ambassadors for Christ, and stand in his stead to reveal the
mysteries, and dispense the treasures of his blood in the Church, ought to have
by way of homage to Christ, and by way of recompense and retribution to
themselves a liberal maintenance, befit^^^g the honor and dignity of that
person whom they represent, and of that service wherein they minister: the
Apostle says, that they are worthy of double honor, an honor of reverence,
and an honor of maintenance, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Lam. 4.16. Phil. 2.29. 2 Cor.
1.14. Hos. 4.4. Live. Al^x. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and doubtless the very heathen shall rise up in judgment against many who
profess the truth in both these respects: for the heathen themselves did show
so much honor to their devilish priests, that I remember one of the Roman
Consuls seeing a priest, and some Vestall virgins going on foot, and he riding
on his chariot, descended, and would not go into it again, till those
diabolical Votaries were first placed, nay their very kings and emperors in
Greece, Egypt, Rome, etc. Clem. Alex. stro. l. 7. Diodor. Sic^l lib. 2.
thought it one of their greatest honors to be withal the Priests for the
people* amongst the Christians when the Synod of Nice was assembled by
Constantines command, and some accusations, or (as the Historian calls them)
calumniations were presented to the emperor against some Bishops and
Ministers, he looked not on the particulars, Theodoret. Hist. li. 1. c. 11
Socrat. li. 1. c. 8.
but sealed them up with his own signet, and having first reconciled the
parties, commanded the libels to be burnt, adding withal that if he should
himself see a bishop in adultery, he would cover his nakedness, with his
own royal robe, because, says he, the sins of such men ought not to be
divulged, lest their example do as much hurt to the souls of others, as their
fact to their own: Vita Episcoporum sibi, fama aliis necessaria. Aug.
for as a good life is necessary for themselves, so is their good fame
necessary for others. The meaning of that noble Prince was not that such men's
sins should go unexamined or exempted from punishment, but to show both in how
high honor they who are worthy in that function ought to be had for their
works sake, 1 These. 5.12, 13. and how wary men should be in giving liberty to
their tongues or distempered passions to censure, misreport, or scandalize the
persons and parts of such men, against whom Timothy was not to receive an
accusation without two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. And to give notice of
those ill consequences which would ensue upon the public observation of the
sins of those men, who in their doctrine preach the truth, and build up the
Church: for doubtless of other men who preach lies in hypocrisy, there cannot
too much of their secret villainies, and personal uncleanness be detected,
that so the lewdness of their lives may stop the progress and growth of their
evil doctrine.

But to return to the point that I am upon, liberal maintenance is due to
those that labor in the word and doctrine out of justice, and not out of
mercy, for their works sake. I will not press the examples of heathen
themselves in this duty for the shame of Christians. Plin li. 12. c. 14. Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 3. ca. 22.
We find that the priests of Egypt had portions out of the kings own
treasuries, and that their lands were still reserved unto them, Genesis 47.22. And
we find besides these lands, that they had the third part of all yearly
tributes and levies, Diodo. Sicul. l. 2.
as Diodorus Siculus tells us. But we will first look upon the example of Gods
own Priests and Levites under the Law. Secondly, upon the precepts and
commands of the Gospel. God is not less mindful of Ministers under the
Gospel, than of those under the Law. Now then, if you will not believe that a
liberal maintenance is now by God allotted unto us, look what he did allot to
them; first, look upon the proportion of their persons, and then upon the
proportion of their maintenance: for their persons it would not be hard to
prove that the Tribe of Levi, Vid. Seldens Review of his History, Cap. 2.
though the thirteenth part of the people in regard of their civil division,
were not yet the fortieth part of the people. Look into the numbering of them,
and compare Number. 1.46. with Numb. 3.39. The other Tribes were numbered from
twenty years old and upward, all that were able to bear arms, which was to
the age of fifty years, as Josephus reports; for at that age they were
supposed to be unserviceable for war; and yet thus their number amounted to
six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty men able to go to
war. The Levites on the other side were numbered from one month old and
upward, and yet the whole sum amounted but to twenty two thousand. Now
conjecture the number of those in the other Tribes who were under twenty
years of age, and who were too old for warlike service to be but half as many
as the rest, yet the whole number of the Tribes reckoned from their infancy
upward will amount at the least to nine hundred two thousand men. Of which
number, the number of the Levites is just the one and fortieth part. After we
find that they increased to a mighty number more, 1 Chronicles. 33.3. but the
whole people increased accordingly, for the tribe of Judah which was before but
seventie four thousand, was then five hundred thousand, and in Iehoshaphats
time eleven hundred thousand at least, 2 Samuel 24* 2 Chronicles. 7. well then, the
Levites were but the fortieth part of the people (not so much) so that that
Tribe was but almost a quarter as numerous as the rest. Now look in the next
place to the Proportion of their maintenance. One would think that the
fortieth part of the people could require but the fortieth part of the
maintenance in proportion. But first they had the Tenth of all the increase of
seed, and fruit, and great and small cattle, Levit. 27.30. Secondly, they had
forty eight cities with suburbs for gardens and for cattle, Numb. 35.2. Which
cities were next to the best, and in many tribes the best of all; in Judah,
Hebron, in Benjamin, Gibeon, both Royal Cities; so that those Cities with
about a mile suburb to every one of them can come to little less than the
wealth of one tribe alone, in that little country, which from Dan to Beersheba
was but about a hundred and sixty miles long. Thirdly, they had all the first
fruits of clean and unclean beasts, Numb. 18.13. Of the fruits of the earth
and the fleece of the sheep, Deuteronomy. 18.4. Nehem. 10.35. of men to be redeemed,
Number. 18.15. Fourthly, the meat Offerings, the sin offerings, the trespass
offerings, the heave offerings, and the wave offerings, were all theirs, Numb.
18.9, 10, 11. Fifthly, they had all vows, and voluntary oblations, and
consecrations, and every hallowed thing, Numb. 18.8, 9. Sixthly, excepting the
Holocaust they had either the shoulder, or the breast, or the skin, or
something of every Sacrifice which was offered, Numb. 18.18. Lev. 7. Deuteronomy.
18.3. Seventhly, the males were to appear three times a year before the Lord,
and they were not to come empty handed, Exodus 23.15.17. Lastly, unto them did
belong many recompenses of injury, which was the restitution of the
principal, and a fifth part, Number. 5.7, 8. Now put the Tithes, the Cities, and
these other constant revenews together, and the Priests and Levites, who were
but about a quarter as many as one tribe, had yet about three times the
revenews of one tribe.

But to leave this Argument. Let us consider what the Apostle says; let him
that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches, (...), in all his
goods, as Beza well expounds it, Gal. 6.6. The elders that labor in the word
and Doctrine are worthy of double honor, for the Scripture says, Thou shall
not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn, and the Labourer is worthy of
his reward, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Who goes a warfare at any time of his own
charges? Who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who
feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock. Say I these things as
a man (that is, am I partial? do I speak merely out of affection, and humane
favor to mine own cause, or calling?) or, says not the Law the same also? For
it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn. Does God take care for Oxen? or says he it
altogether for our sakes? That is, does God provide Laws for rewarding and
encouraging the labor of brute beasts, and does he leave the maintenance and
honor of his own immediate officers to the arbitrary and pinching allowances
of covetous and cruel men? For our sakes no doubt this is written, That he
that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope should
be partaker of his hope. That is, that the encouragement of the Ministers in
their service might depend upon such a hope as is grounded on Gods Law and
provision, and that they might not be left to the wills and allowances of
those men against whose sins they were sent. And this the Apostle proves by
an argument drawn from a most unanswerable equity. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
If you do rightly judge of those heavenly treasures which we bring in
abundance unto you, impossible it is that you should judge our pains and
service toward your immortal and precious souls sufficiently rewarded with a
narrow and hungry proportion of earthly and perishable things. Do ye not know
that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple?
And they which wait at the Altar are partakers with the Altar (to note that
they receive their maintenance from the hand of God himself, whose only the
things of the Altar are, and not from men:) Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they which preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.7-13.
And what is it To live? First, They must love as men, they must have for
necessity and for delight. Secondly, they must live as believers. He that
provideth not for his own is worse than an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. They must
therefore have by the Gospel sufficient to lay up for those, whom the Law of
common humanity, much more of faith, commands them to provide for. Thirdly,
they must live as Ministers. They must have wherewith to maintain the Duties
of their cal^ing, a good example of piety, and charity, and hospitality, that
they may confirm by practice, what in Doctrine they teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. And the
instruments of their calling, which in a profession of so vast and unlimited a
compass of learning, (for there is no part of learning in the whole circle
thereof which is not helpful and may not contribute to the understanding of
Holy Scriptures, and to some part or other of a Divines employment;) cannot but
be very chargeable. And alas, how many men preach the Gospel, and yet can
scarce find the first and meanest of all these supplies? This is the great
ingratitude of the world, and withal the malice and policy of Satan, by the
poverty and contempt of the Ministers, to bring the Gospel it self into
contempt, and to deter able men from adventuring on so unrewarded a calling,
as Calvin justly complains. All that can with color or countenance be
pretended by those who are guilty of this neglect is Poverty and disability to
maintain the Gospel. And it were well if there were not places to be found
wherein Dogs and Horses, hawks and hounds grow fat with Gods portion, and the
mercenary Preacher, when he grows lean with want, is accused of too much
study. But suppose that poverty be truly alleged: Hic est astus Satanae
aliment is fraudare pios Minis^res ut Ecclesia talibus destituatur, etc.
Calvin. in Gal. 6.6. Satan hac art tentat Doctrine privare Ecclesiam, dum
inopiae and samis me^u plurimos absterret ne id oneris suscipiant, Idem in 1 Timothy 5.17. vid. Muscul. in Gal. 6.6. and in 1 Timothy 3.2. Bishop Jewels Sermons
on Hag. 1.2.3.4. page 181.182. on Psalm. 69.9. page 191-194. Perkins in his
Sermon of the Duties and Dignities of the Ministry. H^okers Eccl. policy, lib.
5. Number. 79. Hildersh^m on Ioh. 4. page 300.301.319.323. Balto^ in his Epistle
dedicatory to his discourse of true happiness Gr^g. Thol. s. de Repub. lib.
13. cap. 17.
Do we think poverty a just pretext for the neglect of a moral duty? may a
man spend the Lords day on his shop-board because he is poor and wants means?
And if I may not rob God of his time upon pretense of poverty, neither then is
the same any argument to rob him of his portion. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, namely with pretense of poverty and necessity, as Calvin expounds that
place, Gal. 6.7. S. Paul bears witness unto some men, that they did good
beyond their power, that they were richly liberal though they were deeply
poor, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3. And yet those were but contributions out of mercy, whereas
double honor is due to the Ministers of the Gospel by a Law of Justice. It is
a wrong and foolish Apology to pretend the punishment for the continuance of
the fault. The poverty of many men is doubtless a just recompense for their
neglect of the honor of the Gospel. (For God has ever severely punished the
contempt and dishonor done to his messengers, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.12. 2 Chronicles.
24.21-25. 2 Chronicles. 26.19, 20. 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17.) Whereas on the other side,
do thou deal faithfully with God, fulfill to thy power his appointment and
decree, that they which preach the Gospel may live by the Gospel, and then
hearken unto God. Honor the Lord with thy substance and the first fruits of all
thine increase; so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy presses
burst out with new wine, Prove. 3.9, 10. Consider now from this day and upward,
from the day that the foundation of the Lords Temple was laid consider it. Is
the seed yet in the barn? From this day I will bless you, Hag. 2.18, 19. Ye
are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. Bring
ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house,
and prove me herewith says the Lord of Hoasts (if you will not do it out of
duty, yet do it out of experiment) If I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and power you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to
receive it, Mal. 3.9-12. There was never any man lost by paying God his Dues,
there was never any man thrived by grudging, or pittancing the Almighty. I will
conclude this point with the Apostle. It is his Doctrine; faithful Ministers
are worthy of double honor. And it is his Exhortation; Render to all their
Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom, fear to whom fear,
Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13.3.

Greg. Naz. Orat. 36. de Filio.
Note lastly, The Priesthood of Christ is an everlasting Priesthood. He also
was without Father, and without Mother, without beginning of days, or end of
life. As man without a Father, Heb. 13.8. Esai. 9.6. Revel. 14.6.
as God without a Mother, The same yesterday and to day, and for ever. His name
was, Everlasting Father. His Gospel an Everlasting Gospel, He was a lamb
slain from the beginning of the world. The virtue of his blood goes backward
as high as Adam. He was foreordain'd before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet.
1.19.
2 Timothy 1.9. The redemption of those that transgressed under the first
Testament, the remission of sins that were past, were procured by this
Sacrifice, Heb. 9.15. Romans 3.25. It goes downward to the end of the world, he
must reign till all be put under his feet, and he must raise up all by the
power and virtue of his victory over death, Ioh. 5.26-29. And lastly, it goes
onward, to all immortality; for though the Acts and administration of his
Priesthood shall cease when he shall have delivered the Kingdom to his
Father, and have brought the whole Church into Gods presence; yet the virtue
and fruits of those Acts shall be absolutely eternal, for so long as the
Saints shall be in heaven, so long they shall enjoy the benefit of that
Sacrifice, which did purchase not a lease, or expiring term, but (...), an
endless life, an everlasting glory, an inheritance, incorruptible and that
fades not away, reserved in the heaven for them.

VERSE 5. The Lord at thy Right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath.

VERSE 6. He shall judge amongst the Heathen, he shall fill the places with
dead Bodies: He shall wound the heads over many Countries.


IN the former part of the Psalm we have had the description of Christ's
offices of King and Priest, together with the effect thereof in gathering a
willing people unto himself. Now here the Prophet shows another effect of
the powerful administration of these offices, containing his victories over
all his enemies, allegorically expressed in a Hypotiposis, or lively allusion
unto the manner of humane victories; wherein first I shall in a few words
labor to clear the sense, and then the observations which are natural will
the more evidently arise.

The Lord at thy right hand] To lay aside their exposition who understand these
words of God the Father; the words are an Apostrophe of the Prophet to those at
whose right hand the Lord Jesus is. Some make it an Apostrophe to God the
Father, a triumphall and thankful prediction of that power and Judgment which
he has given to this his Benjamin, the Son at his right hand. Because that
thereby the phrase retains the same signification and sense which it had in
the first verse. As if David had said, O God, the Father of all power and
majesty, worthy art thou of all praise, thanksgiving and honor who have given
such power to thy Son in the behalf of thy Church, as to smite through
Kings, and judge heathen, and pull down the chief of his enemies, and to
subdue all things to himself; and these read it thus, O Lord, he that is at
thy right hand shall strike through Kings, etc. Others make it to be an
Apostrophe to the Church, and so to be a phrase not expressing Christ's
exaltation, as verse 1. But his care and protection over his Church, his
readiness, to assist and defend his own people against all the injuries and
assaults of adverse power. Solomon says, A wise man's heart is at his right
hand, but a fools heart is at his left, Eccl. 10.2. That is, his heart is
ready and prepared to execute any wife counsels or godly resolutions; as the
Prophet David says, My heart is prepared o God, my heart is prepared, I will
sing and give thanks. But a fools heart when he should do any thing is like
his left hand, to seek of skill, unactive and unprepared; when he walks by
the way his heart fails him, verse. 3. And this readiness and present help
of God to defend and guide his Church is expressed frequently by his being at
the right hand thereof. Because the Lord is at my right hand I shall not be
moved, Psalm. 16.8. He shall stand at the right hand of the poor to save him,
Psalm. 109.31. I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee,
fear not I will help thee, Esai. 31.13. As if David had said, Be not
dismayed nor cast down o ye subjects of this King, as if being exalted to
Gods right hand, he had given over the care and protection of his people; for
as he is at the right hand of his Father in glory and majesty; so is he at
your right hand too, standing to execute judgment on your enemies, and to
reveal the power of his arm toward you in your protection.

Now the reasons of this phrase and expression as I conceive are these two.
First, to note that Christ's power, providence, and protection do not exclude,
but only strengthen, assist, and prosper the ordinary and just endeavors of
the Church for themselves. The Lord is not at our left hand to succor us in our
idleness and negligence, but at our working hand to give success to our
honest endeavors. The sword of the Lord does not fight without the sword of
Gedeon, Judge. 7.18. In the miracles of Christ when he fed and feasted men, he
never created wine or bread of nothing, but blessed, and so changed, or
multiplied that which was by humane industry prepared before. Our Savior had
fish and bread of his own, and yet he would have his Disciples put in their
net and catch, and bring of their own, to note unto us, that Gods power and
providence, must not exclude but encourage man's industry, Ioh. 21.9, 10. He
protecteth us in viis nostris, non in praecipitiis, in our ways, not in our
precipices or presumptions, Psalm. 91.11. So long then as the Church is valiant
and constant in withstanding the enemies of her peace and prosperity, God is
undoubtedly with her to bless that courage, and to strengthen that right hand;
so long as Moses held up his hand, God fought for Israel. There was Ioshuas
sword, and Moses his hand or prayer, and upon those Gods blessing, Exodus 17.12,
13. And they were all to concur. If the sword should cease, the Prayer would
do no good; for God will not be tempted: If the Prayer faint, the sword is in
vain, for God will not be neglected. As in a curious Clock stopp any wheel
and you hinder the whole motion. If God promise to be present, Joshua must
promise to be courageous, Josh. 1.5.6.9. Secondly, to note unto us the care
and military wisdom of Christ our Captain to meet with and to prevent our
enemies, and to intercept their blows against us; for we may observe in the
Scripture that Satan plieth the right hand of the Church, labors to weaken
and assault us where there is most danger toward him. Let Satan stand at his
right hand, Psalm. 109.6. That is, either give him over to the rage of Satan,
that he may be hurried to execute his will, or set Satan to hinder him in his
mischievous intents. Thus Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua the high
Priest to resist him, Zech. 3.1. Noting the assiduous and indefatigable
endeavors of Satan to resist, disappoint, and overthrow the works of the
worthies in Gods Church ( I would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and
again, but Satan hindered us, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18.) And to divert the strength of
men upon his service. And therefore to rebuke him, and to show to the Church
that our strength is from him, and due unto him he also stands there to outvie
the temptations and impulsions of Satan.

These are the two expositions which are given of these words, The Lord at thy
right hand. Now though of all places of Scripture there is indeed but one
literal sense; yet when two are given, which both tend unto the same general
scope, and are suitable not only to the analogy of faith, but to the meaning
mainely aimed at by the Holy Ghost in the place, and when there is no apparent
evidence in the face of the Text, for preferring one before the other: I think
it is not unfit to embrace both; and so something I shall touch upon both
senses.

Shall strike through, or wound, or make gore bloody, Kings in the day of his
wrath.] The word is, Has stricken through Kings. It is a Prophecy of things
future, spoken as of things to be done. To strike through, notes a complete
victory and full confusion of the enemy, an in curable wound, that they may
stagger, and fall, and rise up no more, and that affliction may not arise a
second time, Nahum 1.9. 1 Samuel 26.8. The only difficulty is what is meant by
Kings; for which we must note that the Kingdom of Christ is spiritual, and
his war spiritual, and therefore his enemies for the most part spiritual.
Therefore I take it we are hereby to understand the most potent enemies of
Christ; whether spiritual, we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places,
Ephesians. 6.12. 2 Cor. 10.4. Or Carnal, as heathen and wicked men, Psalm. 2.8, 9.
The fat and the strong enemies of the Church, Ezekiel. 34.16. Our spiritual
enemies in Scripture are called Kings. Satan the Prince of this world, the God
of this world, Ioh. 16.11. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. Revel. 9.11. Rev. 17.12.14.
Psalm. 2 9. Act. 26.27. 1 Cor. 2.8.
the Prince of the power of the air. The King of the locusts, etc. Sin and
original concupiscence is a King. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies.
And the Earthly enemies of Christ are called Kings. The ten Horns, that is,
ten Kings make war with the Lamb. The Kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were gathered together against the Lord and his Christ; and Death which
is the last enemy is a King. The King of Terrors, that reigns over men. And
over all these Kings do the victories of Christ reach. Some by Kings
understand the Roman emperors (who are called Kings, 1 Pet. 2.13.17.) And
their overthrow for persecuting the Church. But since all sorts of Christ's
enemies are called Kings in Scripture, and all of them do push at his Kingdom
in the Church, I see no ground why we may not by Kings understand them all,
with their subjects, armies, and associates. As in great victories the Lords
and principal men are said to be overcome, when the servants and soldiers are
routed and slain.

In the Day of his wrath.] That is, when time has ripened the insolency and
malice of the enemy, when his fury is fully stirred up and provoked, when the
just and full time of his glory is come; That it may appear that they are
overcome not by time, or chance, or humane power, or secular concurrence, but
only by the power of his wrath he will do it. Christ is never destitute of
power, but in wisdom he has ordered the times of his Church, when to have
his Church suffer and bear witness to him, and when to triumph in his
deliverances. So the meaning of this clause is this, when the day of recompense
is come, when the sins and provocations of his enemy is ripe, when the
utmost period of his patience is expired, (...), in the fixed and unmovable
day which he has set, be the probabilities never so poor, and preparations
never so small, the expectations never so low, the means in humane view never
so impossible, yet then by his wrath he will utterly and incurably wound his
enemies both spiritual and temporal, that they shall not rise a second time.

He shall judge amongst the Heathen.] The word judgment notes both
Government, and Punishment. The Lord shall judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, Deuteronomy.
32.36. There to judge, notes government. The Lord stands up to plead and to
judge his people, Esai. 3.13. That nation whom they serve will I judge, Genesis
15.14. There to judge notes punishment. Here it is taken for executing
condemnation upon the contumacious adversaries of the Gospel of Christ amongst
the Gentiles, as in the great victory of Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 39. Some by
Gentiles understand all Enemies both spiritual, Glassius in Isai. 63.6.
and earthly.

He shall fill the places with dead Bodies.] That notes both the swiftness of
the victory, and the greatness of the victory. That it shall be so general,
and so speedy that the enemy shall have either none left, or they that are
left shall not be able, nor have leisure to bury their dead Bodies, Ezekiel.
39.11.

He shall wound the head over diverse Countries. Hab. 3.13. Psalm. 68.21.
] That is, either the principal of his enemies every where; or Satan who is
the God of the World, that rules as Head over the Children of disobedience in
all places. Or Antichrist the Head of nations, the chief of Gods enemies,
Revel. 13.7, 8.14.8.17.15.18.

The Lord at thy right hand.] According to the twofold Apostrophe before
mentioned, here are two observations which I will but touch. First, that God
the Father is worthy to have all the power, Majesty, and judgment which he
has given to his Son our Mediator, for our protection, salvation and
defense, most thankfully and triumphantly acknowledged to him. We find our
Savior himself praising God in this behalf, that he had delivered all things
into his hand, even power to make Babes believe on him, Matthew. 11.25.27. And
this S. Paul is frequent in, namely in praising and glorifying God for Christ.
O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me, etc. I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 7.25. 1 Timothy 1.16, 17. All the promises of God are in him
yea, and in him Amen, to the Glory of God by us, 2 Cor. 1.19, 20. He gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world according to the will of God and our Father, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen, Gal. 1.4, 5. Every tongue must confess that Jesus Christ is
Lord to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.11.

And reason there is that it should thus be acknowledged to the Father,
because he has all his Kingdom and power in the Church from the Father. All
power is given unto me. He has given him a name above every name; and this
the Son has revealed to us, that so he might manifest the name, that is,
get glory to his Father thereby, Ioh. 17.6, 7. For in Christ it was God that
reconciled the world to himself. Secondly, he has it all given unto him in
our nature, in our behalf, and as our head, so that we in the gifts of God to
him were only respected, and therefore we have reason to praise God for them.
It was not indeed given to him strictly (for it was not to him Beneficium but
Onus, an office, but not a benefit) but to him for us, or to us in and by him.
In all the victories, deliverances, refreshments, experiences of Gods power and
goodness we must ever remember to praise God in and through his Son, to
acknowledge the power of his right hand, which is not now against his Church,
but against the enemies of his Church. For therefore the deliverance of his
Church is ascribed to Gods Right hand, because he has there one to plead, to
entreat, to move his right hand in our behalf. Therefore in all our
distresses, in all conflicts and temptations, we must by faith look up unto
Gods right hand, put him in remembrance of that faithfulness, righteousness,
atonement, and intercession which is there made in our behalf. There we shall
have matter enough to fill our mouths and hearts with praises, and triumph, and
rejoicing in him. It is Christ who is at the right hand of God; who shall
separate us from the Love of Christ, Romans 8.34, 35. Here are two arguments of
the Churches safety and triumph. The Love of Christ, and the Honor of Christ.
He loves all his to the end. But what good can love do without power?
Therefore he that loves us is exalted by God, and has all power given him
for this purpose that his love may do us good. In the conflicts of my
corruptions (which are an adversary too wise, too subtle, too numberless for
me to vanquish,) I may yet when I am driven to Paul's extremity, rest in his
thanksgiving, and looking up to Jesus, who will be the finisher of every good
work which he begins, and seeing him at Gods right hand, may triumph in the
power and office which God has given to his Son there, which is, to subdue
our iniquities, and to sanctify us by his Truth, and by that residue of Spirit
which he keeps for the Church, Ioh. 17.17, 19. for that Prayer is a Model,
as it were, and counterpane of Christ's Intercession: for, says he, I come to
thee, and speak these things in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled
in them, ver. 13. that is, that they having a specimen and form of that
Intercession which with thee I shall make for them, left upon public record
for them to look on, and there finding, that their sanctification is the
business of my sitting at thy right hand, may in the midst of the discomforts
and conflicts of their corruption have a full joy and triumph in the honor
which thou have given me. I am beset with the temptations of mine enemies, and
persecutions for the Name of Christ; In this case I may give God praise for the
power which he has given to his Son, I may from mine enemies appeal unto
Gods right hand, I may like Stephen when the stones and buffets are about my
soul look up by faith, and see there my Captain standing up in my defense,
Act. 7.55. I may acknowledge unto God the power given unto his Son, that
though nothing of all this fall upon me without his provision and permission,
yet sure I am that he has power and mercy in his right hand, that though mine
enemies were as strong as a combination and army of kings, yet the Lord at his
right hand has from him in my behalf received power enough, to strike through
kings when the day of his wrath is come.

Note, secondly, Christ is at the right hand of his people, present with them,
and prepared to defend them from all their enemies, present by his Spirit to
strengthen, comfort, and uphold them, enabling them to glory and rejoice in all
their sufferings, as knowing that they are but for a moment, and that which is
needful to purge their faith, and to make them bear their shame, 1 Pet. 1.6,
7. Iam. 1.2, 3. Esai. 27.8, 9. and to glorify the consequent power of Christ,
which shall be revealed to their joy, 1 Pet. 4.13. when he will recompense
double to us in mercy, and to our enemies in severity, Esai. 54.7, 8.61.7.
present by his mighty power, and by his Angels, to rescue, deliver and protect
them, to be as a wall of fire, as a shield, a buckler, a rock, a Captain to
his people, Zech. 2.5.

And this is the ground of all the Churches comfort that more is with them than
against them: the enemies have combinations and confederacies of men, but the
Church has Immanuel, God with them, Esai. 8.9, 10. none can pull Christ from
the right hand of God, or from the right hand of his people: that is, none can
take away either his power or his love from his people. The Church and truth
can never be crushed and overthrown, no more than a rock with the raging of
the waves: they are Heavenly things, and therefore nothing of earth or hell can
reach to corrupt them. It was but a vain attempt of the Giants to build a
tower to heaven: The world was made that there might be therein a Church to
worship and contemplate that God which made it; therefore in the creation God
never rested till he came to a Church, to note that that was the end thereof;
and therefore it is easier to pull down the world, and to shake in pieces the
frame of nature, than to ruin the Church. The Church has Christ for her
husband, he to whom all knees must bend, he whom every tongue must confess,
he who will subdue all things to himself, so she has Love, Power and
Jealousy, all three very strong things on her side. And therefore the only
way to be safe, is to keep Christ at our right hand, to hold fast his truth,
worship, and obedience; for so long as we have Immanuel, all adverse power is
but flesh, and all flesh is but grass, withered in a moment when God will blow
upon it.

Note thirdly, Christ in his appointed time will utterly overthrow the greatest
enemies of his Kingdom, and deliver his Church from under the sorest
oppressions. There is not any one argument in the holy Scriptures more
frequently repeated, than this of Christ's victories; prefigured they were in
the deliverances of Israel out of Egypt, 1 Cor. 10.2, 4. In the deliverance of
the Arc out of the waters, 1 Pet. 3.21, 22. in the deliverance of the Jews
from Babylon, Revel. 14.8. Esai. 11.10-12.15. To note that in the sorest
extremities and greatest improbabilities God will show himself jealous for his
people. This victory is expressed by treading of a wine press, Esai. 63.1, 6.
when there are none to help, when the Church is brought to sorest extremities,
though multitudes meet against her as many as the grapes in a vintage, they
shall all be but as Clusters of grapes, he shall squeeze out their blood like
wine, and make his Church to thresh them, Lam. 1.15. Revel. 14.20. Joel 3.12.
Mic. 4.13. By the dissipation of smoke out of a Chimnie, they shall be as the
smoke out of the Chimnie, Hos. 13.3. As Athanasius used to say of Julian the
Apostate, that he was but Nubecula quae cito transiret, a little cloud, which
would quickly be blown away: smoke when it breaks out of a Chimnie with a
horrible blackness threatens to blot out the Sun, and to invade and choke
up all the air, but a little blast of wind scatters it, and anon nothing
thereof appears. By fire consuming thorns and briars, Esai. 10.17. While they
be folded together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, that
is, while they have plotted their counsels, and confederacies so curiously that
no man dares so much as touch them, and while they are drunken with the pride
and confidence of their own strength, they shall then be devoured as stubble
that is fully dry, Nahum 1.10. Esai. 27.4.31.9.

Therefore the Scripture calls Christ a Man of war, Exodus 15.3. Because he is
furnished with all Arts of victory, Power invincible, as a Lion amongst
shepherds, so is he amongst his enemies, Esai. 31.4. wisdom unsearchable
which must stand, v. 1, 2. If he purpose, none can disappoint him, Esai.
14.27. Authority by the least intimation to gather together all the forces of
the world against the enemies of his Church. If he but hiss unto them, they
presently come in troops, Esai. 5.26.7.18. He can command help for his people,
Psalm. 44.4. Psalm. 71.3. Ier. 47.7. and, if that should fail, he can create
help for his people, as he did for Israel, when he wrought miracles to
deliver them, Psalm. 106.22.

We may more profitably consider the truth and comfort of this point, by
discovering it in the several enemies of Christ and his people. First, the
great enemy of the seed of the woman is the Serpent, that great red Dragon,
whose names are all names of enmity. The Accuser, the Tempter, the Destroyer,
the Devourer, the Envious man, furnished with much strength, and mighty
succor, legions of principalities and powers attending on him; and with much
wisdom, which the Scripture calls (...), the wiles, and trains, and
craftines of Satan. And his Arts of destroying men are two. To tempt and to
accuse. His Temptations are twofold: either unto Sin, or unto discomfort:
either to make us offend God, or to make us disquiet our selves: either to
wound us or to vex us. And in all these his Arts Christ our Captain will tread
him under our feet, and will give his Church the victory at the last, either by
Arming us with sufficiency of grace and faith in his Victories, putting us by
his Spirit in mind of his Temptations, which taught him compassion toward us
who are so much weaker, and encouraging our hearts to cry out unto him who is
our merciful and compassionate high priest, like a ravished woman in our
extremities, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. stirring up our faith to lay hold on
him when we are in darkness; and our spirit of Adoption to cry unto him when
we are in danger; and our spirit of wisdom to solve the objections to
discern the devices of Satan, and to prepare and arm our hearts accordingly
to wrestle with him. Or else by rebuking of him, pulling in his chain, and
chasing him away, and, as our second, undertaking the combat in person for us,
when he is ready to prevail, Zech. 3.1, 2. Thus he overcommeth him as a
Tempter, and ever gives some either comfortable or profitable issue out of
them.

He likewise overcommeth him as an Accuser. Satan accuses the Saints either by
way of complaint and na^ration of the things which they have done, Revel.
12.10. which the Apostle calls (...), his laying of crimes to the charge of
men, Romans 8.33. and thus Christ overcommeth him by his Intercession, and in the
hearts of his Saints by making them judge and accuse themselves, that they may
be able to clear themselves too, 1 Cor. 11.31. 2 Corin. 7.11. Or he accuses
by way of suspicion or preconjecture, as he did Job, Job 1.9, 10, 11. and
herein likewise Christ overcommeth him in his servants, by permitting him to
tempt and vex them, that they may come the purer out of the fire, and by
putting a holy suspicion and jealousy into them over their own hearts, which
may still be a means to prevent them against evils that are likely to assault
them, to teach them in every condition, as well possible as present, how to
walk acceptably before God, Phil. 4.11, 13.

Another great enemy of the Kingdom of Christ is, the lust of our own evil
nature. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. Phil. 3.8. Enmity in grieving,
vexing, and quenching the holy Spirit in us, and lusting enviously against his
grace, Iam. 4.4, 5. And here also Christ overcommeth, by the prevailing power
of his Spirit, giving us more Grace, demolishing the kingdom of sin, and
judging the prince of this world which before did rule in the children of
disobedience. And this he does by the judgment Seat, and Scepter of his Spirit
in the heart: for the judgment of the Spirit is too hard for the principality
of Satan, Ioh. 16.11. The Spirit of Christ is a victorious Spirit. He brings
forth his judgment unto victory, Matthew. 12.20. Esai. 4.4. He works out by
degrees the dross and impurity of our nature, and services. First, by faith
fixing upon better promises and hopes than lust can make, 1 Ioh. 5.4. Heb.
11.24, 26. Secondly, by watchfulness, eying corruptions, and so stirring up
those arguments and principles which are strongest against them, Job 31.1.
Psalm. 39.1. Thirdly, by leading us to more acquaintance with God in knowledge,
love and communion, Job 22.21. 1 Ioh. 1.3. and so fetching more wisdom and
strength from him: for this is the way that we get all our strength, even by
learning of him, Phil. 4.12. Fourthly, by inclining the heart to hate, and to
complain of corruptions, to bemone it self, as Paul and Ephraim did, Romans
7.23. Mark. 9.24. Ier. 31.18, 19. Fifthly, by bringing the heart into the
light, there to approve and judge its actions, Ioh. 3.20. by setting it always
in Gods eye, that it may not sin against him, Psalm. 16.8. Sixthly, by
convincing the heart of the beauty and excellency of Grace, of the unlikenesse
of sin to God, and so making the soul more full of desires for the one, and
against the other, Esai. 26.8. Ezekiel. 36.31. and thus kindling lust against
lust, Gal. 5.17. Seventhly, by being always a present Monitour and Watchman in
the soul, to supply it with spiritual weapons and reasonings against the
temptations of lust, Esai. 30.31. Ioh. 14.26. Lastly, in one word, by daily
supplies from the residue of Spirit which is in our head, whereby according to
the proportion and exigence of the members, he flows into them, Mal. 2.15.
Phil. 1.19. This is that seed, that leaven, that vital instinct, which is ever
in the heart, setting it self against the workings and life of lust, and by
little and little wasting it away as fire does water.

The grand instrument of Satan and lust (who are the two leaders in this war
against Christ) is the wicked world. The power, malice, wisdom, learning, or
any other either natural or acquired abilities of evil men: for even in an
earthly respect by the word kings, we are not only to understand those
Monarchs, and princes of the earth who set themselves against Christ; but all
such as excel in any such worldly abilities as may further that opposition. It
notes the strength, policy, pride and greatness of mind, or scorn of
subjection, which is in the heart against Christ. So that king here stands in
opposition to subject, they who reject Christ's yoke, and break his bonds
asunder, and will not have him to reign over them, those are the kings in the
Text. And these also will he smite through and confound by the Power of his
Word, and the strength of his arm. The Lord gave the Word, great was the
company of those that published it. Kings of armies did fly apace, and she that
tarried at home divided the spoil, Psalm. 68.11, 12. Tophet is ordained of old,
for the king it is prepared, Esai. 30.33. Come, and gather your selves together
unto the Supper of the great God. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the
flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and
of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both
small and great, etc. Revel. 19.17, 18. As for those mine enemies which would
not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me,
Luke 19.27. Be wise now, ye kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth. Psalm.
2.10, 11, 12
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling; kiss the Son lest he
be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.
Thus the Lord overthrows his Churches enemies, and protecteth it against al
their greatest preparations, and most formidable power.

And this he does several ways; sometimes, by diverting their forces from his
Church into some other necessary channel, or ambitious design of their own.
Thus Rabshakah and his host were called from Judah, 2 King. 19.7, 8. so the
Lord promised his people that when they went up to appear before him thrice a
year he would divert the desires of their enemies from their land, Exodus
34.24. Thus Julian the Apostate, having but two maine plots to honor (as he
supposed) his government and his idols withal, the subduing of the Persian,
and the rooting out of the Galileans, as he called them; was prevented from
this by being first overthrown in the other; for the prosperous success of
which expedition he vowed unto his idoll-gods a sacrifice of all the Christians
in the Empire, Greg. Naz. Orat. 4. in Julian. 2.
as Gregory Nazianzen relates. Sometimes by infatuating, and implanting a
spirit of giddiness and distraction in the enemies of his Church, making them
destitute both of counsel and courage. When God would punish Babylon (which
was a type of the enemies of Christ's Kingdom) he made their hearts melt, that
they should be amazed at one another, and their faces should be like flames,
Esaias 13.7, 8. that is, not only pale like a flame, but rather, as I conceive,
full of variety of fearful impressions, and distracted passions: nothing so
tremulous, so various, so easily bended every way with the smallest blast as a
flame: so their fear should make their blood and spirits in their faces to
tremble, quiver, and vary, to come and go like a thin flame in them; so God
threatens to mingle a perverse spirit, to make the spirit of Egypt fail in
them, and their wisdom to perish, Esal. 19.1, 2, 3, 14, 17. and thus likewise
the Lord dealt with Julian in that Persian expedition, he put a spirit of folly
in him to burn his ships, Theodoret. Hist. li 3 cap. 20. Naz. Orat 4 Caesar
Co^m. lib. 1.
and so to put a necessity of courage in his people, as the old Gauls did
against Caesar, and then to leave them all destitute of necessary relief.
Sometimes by ordering casualties and particular emergencies for the deliverance
of his Church, a thing wonderfully seen in the histories of Joseph and Ester.
Thus as a man by a chain made up of s^verall links, some of gold, others of
silver, other of brass, iron, or tin, may be drawn out of a pit: so the
Lord by the concurrence of several unsubordinate things, which have no manner
of dependence, or natural coincidencie amongst themselves, has oftentimes
wrought the deliverance of his Church, that it might appear to be the work
of his own hand. Sometimes by ordering and arming natural causes to defend
his Church, and to amaze the enemy. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. lib. 5. c. 6.
Thus the stars in their courses are said to fight against Sisera, Judge.
5.20. A mighty wind from heaven beating on their faces discomfited them, as
Josephus reports. So the Christian armies under Theodosius against Eugenius the
Tyrant were defended by winds from heaven, Aug. de Ci^. De^^. 5. ca. 26.
which snatched a way their weapons out of their hands. To make good that
Promise, No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. So the Lord slew
the enemies of Joshua with hail. Ios. 11.11. And thus the Moabites were
overthrown by occasion of the Sun shining upon the water, 2 King. 3.22, 23.
Sometimes by implanting fantasies and frightfull apprehensions into the minds
of the enemy, as into the Midianites, Judge. 7.13, 14. The Assyrians, Eusebius.
lib. 3. c. 8.
2 King. 7.6. thus the Lord caused a voice to be heard in the Temple before the
destruction of Jerusalem, warning the faithful to go out of the City.
Sometimes by stirring up and prospering weak and contemptible means to show
his Glory thereby. Brisson. de Reg. Pers. l. 2.
The Medes and Persians were an effeminate and luxurious people, Cyrus a mean
prince, for he was not at this time the emperor of the Medes or Persians, but
only son in law to Darius or Cyaxares, and yet these are made instruments to
overthrow that most valiant people, the Babylonians, Esai. 45.1.13.3.17. As
Jeremy was drawn out of the dungeon by old rotten rags, Ier. 38.11.
which were thrown aside as good for nothing, So the Lord can deliver his
Church by such instruments as the enemies thereof before would have looked upon
with scome, as upon cast and despicable creatures; for God, as he uses to
infatuate those whom he will destroy: so he does guide with a spirit of
wonderful wisdom those whom he raised to defend his kingdom. The
Babylonians were feasting, and counted their City impregnable, Herodot. lib.
1. Zenoph^n de expedit. Cyri, lib* 7.
being fortified with walls and the great river, and God gave wisdom beyond
the very conjectures of men, to attempt a business which might seem
un^easable in nature, to dry up Euphrates, and divide it into several small
branches, and so he made a way to bring his army into the City while they
were feasting, the gates thereof being in great confidence and security left
open, Esaias 44.27, 28.45.1. Ier. 51.36. Sometimes by turning the hearts of
others to compassionate the Church, to hate the enemies, and not to help them,
but to rejoice when he is sinking, Esaias 14.6.10.16. Nahum 3.7. Sometimes by the
immediate stroke of God upon their bodies or consciences. Thus God gave the
Church rest by smiting Herod, Act. 12.23, 24. Thus Maximinus being smitten with
an horrible and stinking disease in his bowels, Eusebius. de vita Constantin. lib.
1. cap. 50. Theodoret. lib. 3. cap. 20. vid. Tertul contr Scapulam, cap 3. and
Laurent. de la. Bar. Eusebius. hist. lib. 8. cap. 26. and Z^^aras.
confessed that it was Christ which overcame him; and Julian being smitten with
an unknown blow from heaven, as is supposed, confessed that Christ was too
hard for him; and another Julian, uncle to the Apostate, for pissing on the
Lords Table, had his bowels rotted, and his excrements issued out, non per
secessum, sed per vulnera, as the same Historian reports. Sometimes by tiring
them quite out, and making them for very vexation and succeslesnesse give over
their vain attempts, or else disheartning them that they may not begin them.
So Dioclesian retired to a private life, because he could not root out the
Christians. And Julian was afraid to persecute the Christians, as his
predecessors had done, lest they should thereby increase; Nazian. Orat. 3. in
Julian. 1.
he forbore it out of envy, and not out of mercy, as Nazian. observes.
Sometimes by turning their own devices upon their heads, ruining them with
their own counsels, and it may be dispatching them with their own hands. Thus
the Lord set every man's sword against his fellow in the huge host of the
Midianites, Judge. 7.22. So Pilate and Nero, the one the murderer of Christ,
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 5. Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 7.
the other the dedicatour of all the consequent great persecutions, both died
by their own hands, as being most wicked and most cruel, and therefore
fittest to revenge the cause of Christ and his people upon themselves. Thus God
did not only curse the counsel, but revenge the treason of Achitophel by an
act of the most desperate folly and inhumanity which could be committed.
Sometimes by hardening them unto a most desperate prosecution of their own
ruin, as in the case of Pharaoh, suffering them to lift at the stone so long,
till it loosen, and fall upon them, Zech. 12.3. Matthew. 21.44. Sometimes by
ingratiating the Church with them to their own destruction, as he did Israel
with the Egyptians, Exodus 12.35, 36. By these and a world the like means does
the Lord overthrow the enemies of his kingdom.

Now all this is In the day of his wrath, or in his own due time: where we may
note by the way, that Christ has wrath in him as well as mercy. Though he be
by wicked and secure men misconceived, as if he were only compassionate: yet
laesa patientia fit furor, he will more sorely judge them hereafter, whom he
does not persuade nor allure here. So merciful he is, that he is called a
Lamb for meekness, and yet so terrible, that he is called a Lion for fury. It
is true, fury is not in him, namely, to those that apprehend his strength and
make their peace with him, Esaias 27.4.6. But yet to those that will not kiss,
that is, not love, worship, nor obey him, he can with a little wrath show
himself very terrible, Psalm. 2.12. He comes first with peace, Luke 10.5. but
it is Pax concessa, not pax emendicata, a peace mercifully offered, not a peace
growing out of any necessity or exigencies on his part, and so wrought by way
of composition for his own advantages. The peace of a Conqueror, Zech. 9.10.
A peace which puts conditions to those to whom it is granted, that they
shall be tributaries and servants unto him, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11, 12. Therefore the
Apostle says, that he came to preach or to proclaim peace, Ephesians. 2.17. but
if we reject it, he then follows the directions of Joshua, These mine enemies
which would not have me to reign over them, bring them hither and slay them
before me, Luke 19.27.

But the maine thing here to be noted is, that Christ has a Day, a (...), a
prefixed, and constituted time wherein he will be avenged on the greatest of
his enemies. When he forbeares, and suffers them to prevail, yet still he
holds the line in his own hand, the hook of his decree is in their
nostrils, and he can take them short when he will. It is never want of power,
wisdom, or love to his Church, that their quarrel is not presently revenged;
but all these are fitted to his greater glory. The Lord seems to neglect, to
break up the hedge, to sleep while his Church is sinking (as Christ to his
Disciples seemed careless, Mark. 4.38, 39.) so frequently in Scripture the
Saints expostulate with God in an humble and mourning debate, Why sleep
thou, O Lord? Arise, cast us not off for ever, Psalm. 44.23. Ier. 14.8, 9. But
God has his quare against us too for this infirmity and haste of ours: Why
say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my
judgment is passed over from my God? That is, he has not taken notice of my
calamity. Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting God,
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary?
There is no searching of his understanding, Esaias 40.27, 28. He is wonderful in
counsel and excellent in working; and therefore he does not slumber nor
sleep: but only in wisdom orders times and seasons, that there may in the
end be the greater glory unto him, and, in the things done, the more beauty.
Every thing, says Solomon, is beautiful in its time; if you gather it before,
it loses both its beauty and virtue. It would be a madness for a man to mow
down his corn when it is in the green blade. He waits, says the Apostle,
for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience, Iam. 5.7. Now the
Prophet assures us, that Light, that is, comfort, refreshment, peace,
deliverance, is sown for the righteous, Psalm. 97.11. It was sown for the
people of God when they were in captivity, though to themselves they seemed as
dead men in their graves, yet indeed they were dead but as seed in the
furrows, which revived again, Psalm. 126.5, 6. and therefore the Lord likewise
(like Saint James his husbandman) is said to wait, that he may be gracious to
his people, Esaias 30.18. Though a man suffer never so much injury, and be most
violently kept out of his own right, yet he must wait till time and mature
proceedings have brought on his matters to a trial; therefore the Lord calls
it The year of recompenses for the controversies of Sion, Esaias 34.8. It is not
for private men to order the periods, or stints, or revolutions of times
wherein businesses are to be tried; but public authority constitutes that,
and every man must wait for the appointed time: so the Church must not set God
the times when it would be heard or eased; but must trust his wisdom and
power, Ier. 49.19. for there is a set time wherein he will have mercy upon
Sion, Psalm. 102.13.

Now this Time is ruled and bounded by these considerations: First, when the
sin of the enemy is grown ripe, and his heart proud and insolent against
God and his people; when he trampleth upon the poor, when he sacrifices to
his own net, when he adoreth his own counsels, when he deifieth his own
condition, and thinks that none can pull him down; then is it a time for God
to show himself, and to stir up his glory. It is time (says David) for thee,
O Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law, Psalm. 119.126. So outrageous
they are, that their fury runs over from thy servants to thine ordinances,
to blot out the very records of heaven, the name and fear of God out of the
earth. And this reason and period of time we find frequently in the
Scriptures given: In the fourth generation they shall come hither again, for
the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full, Genesis 15.16. It is not grown to
that ripeness and compass, as I in my wise, secret, and patient providence
will permit. O thou that dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures
(says the Lord to Babylon) thine end is come, and the measure of thy
covetousness, Ier. 51.13. when men have filled up the measure of their sin,
then is their end come; be their wealth, or safety, or their natural, or
acquired munition never so great: Put you in the sickle, says the Prophet, for
the harvest is ripe, come get you down for the press is full, the fats
overflow, for the wickedness is great, Joel 3.13. When wickedness is so
great, that it fills all the vessels, then is the Lord ready to put in his
sickle, and to cut it down.

It is further demanded when sin is full? To this I answer, that there are
three things principally which set forth the fullness of sin, Universality,
Impudence and Obstinacy: First, when a whole Land is filled with it, that there
are none to intercede or to stand in the gap, when from Streets to Palaces,
from Houses to Courts, from Schools to Churches, from every corner sin
breaks forth, so that blood touches blood. The Land is full of adulterers,
says the Prophet, because of swearers the Land mourns -- for both Priest and
Prophet are profane, yea in my house have I found their wickedness, says the
Lord, Ier. 23.10, 11. when in every place, and at every view there are new, and
more abominations, Ezekiel. 8.17. Esaias 48.4. Ier. 3.3.
Ier. 5.1-6. Secondly, when sin is impudent, whorish and outrageous; when
there is no fear, modesty or restraint, but it breaks all bonds, and like a
raging sea overrunneth the banks. They declare their sin as Sodom, Delicti
durior frons est, ab ipso and in ipso delicto, impudentiam docta. Tertul. de
vel. virg. c. l.

Romans 1.24-26. Esaias 69.27.


says the Prophet, and hide it not: woe unto their souls, Esaias 3.9. it is so
full that it breaks out into their countenance, hypocrisy it self is too
narrow to cover it. This is that which the Apostle calls An excess of riot,
and the Prophet, a rushing like an horse into the battle. Now when God thus
gives a man over, sin will not be long a filling up; when lusts break forth,
and throng together, when from concupiscence sin goes on to conception and
delight, to formation and contrivance, to birth and execution, to education,
and custom, to maintenances and defense, to glory and boasting, to
insensibilitie, Dum servitur libidini sacta est consuetudo, dum consuetudini
necessitas, Aug. Confess. lib. 8. c. 5. vid. Benard. de Gradibus superblae.
hardness, and a reprobate sense, then there is such a fullness in sin as is
near unto cursing, the very next step is hell. Lastly, when sin holds out in
stubbornenesse, and is incorrigible, when the remedy is refused, the pardon
rejected, the peace not accepted; Then is sin come to its fullness. The sin
of the Amorites was never quite full, but when they rejected that peace, mercy,
and subjection to Gods people, which was offered them first. But when men sin
against those means of grace which are sent unto them, and leave no remedy to
themselves; no marvel if the Lord give them over, and let in the enemy upon
them, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Therefore we must take heed of finishing sin, for it is
not sin, but the consummation and finishing of sin which condemns a man.

Now when thus the sin of the enemy is grown so ripe, that it breaks
forth into pride and insultation against Gods people, then is the Lords time to
show himself: I will restore health unto thee, says the Lord to his Church,
and I will heal thee of thy wounds, because they called thee an outcast,
saying* This is Sion whom no man seeks after, Ier. 30.17. see Ier. 50.11.
Ezekiel. 25.3.28.6 -- 9. Obad. v. 3, 4. when the high ways were waste, and the
wayfaring man ceased, and the enemy regarded no man -- Now, says the Lord,
will I arise, now will I be exalted, etc. Esaias 33.8 -- 11. when the enemies
help forward the affliction of Gods people, and by their pride and insultation
do double the misery which is upon them, then will the Lord return to them in
mercies, and be sore displeased with his enemies, Zech. 1.15, 16. Esaias
40.2.47.5, 6.

Secondly, when Gods people are thoroughly humbled and purged, for God uses
wicked men but as his staff or weapon, as his fire or fan to correct and purge
them, Esaias 10.12. He intends not in his punishments such severity against
them, as against their enemies: if the rod be for the child, the fire is for
the rod, Esaias 27.7, 8.9. When men are so smitten, that they can return to him
that smites them, and not revolt more and more, for God will not throw any
more darts at those who are sunk and dead already: when they are stirred in
their hearts jointly to seek the Lord, and to meet him in the way of his
judgments, and to compassionate and favor the dust of Sion, then is the day
of his wrath; for when Gods time to deliver a people is come, he will more
abundantly stir up the hearts of his people to pray for it, Psalm. 102.16.17.
Dan. 9.2.3. whereas, when he will destroy a people, he will not suffer his
Saints to pray, Ier. 14.11.

Thirdly, when all humane hopes and expectations are gone, when a people is so
pilled and broken, that they have no courage, means, succors or probabilities
left, then is Gods time to deliver his Church, and to punish his enemies: The
Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his Servants, when he
sees that their power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36. Psalm. 68.20, 109^31. In one word
when the preparations and premises as it were unto Gods glory are best ordered,
and put together, then is the day of his wrath come.

The Church then need not to be cast down with the insultation of her
enemies, Deuteronomy. 20.3, 4. Esai. 51.12, 13. Deuteronomy. 31* 6, 7, 8.
since Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; such as he was
ever to his Church, such he is still. If he have delivered his Church from
the pride of her enemies heretofore, his power, truth, watchfulness,
compassion is the same still; and by faith in them we may rebuke Satan, we
may chide away the weakness and fear of our own hearts, we may rejoice
against those that insult over us, when they rage most we may hope their time
is short, and that it is but the biting of a wounded beast. Therefore we find
the Saints in Scripture arm themselves against present dangers, with the
consideration of what God has done for his Church in times past, Psalm. 68.7,
8.74.13-18. Esai. 51.9, 10, 11. Habak. 3. And in the confidence of the same
truth and power break forth into a holy scorn of their enemies, Mich. 7.8, 9,
10. Esai. 50.8, 9. In the sorest extremities we may fix our faith on God, and
he delights to be depended upon alone, when all outward helps and
probabilities fail, see Esai. 41.17, 18. Hab. 3.17, 18. A million of men came
against Asa, Ier. 31.8.
one of the hugest hoasts of men that were ever read of, yet by relying on God
they were all delivered into his hand; and the reason is added, because God
has eyes, and strength, or as he is described, Revel. 5, 6. Seven horns and
seven eyes, much wisdom, and much power to show himself valiant in the
behalf of those that walk uprightly, 2 Chronicles. 16.8, 9.

We should learn likewise to rejoice and triumph with all thankfulness of
heart when Christ subdueth the enemies of his Kingdom, and gives deliverance
and refreshment to his people. When he makes his hand known to his servants,
and his fury to his enemies, then should all they that love Jerusalem rejoice,
Esai. 66.10. Thus the Church after they were delivered from the malice of Haman
instituted days of joy and feasting, Ester 9.22. It is a sign of an evil
heart against the peace and prosperity of the Church of Christ, to envy, or
slight, or think basely of the instruments and ways whereby Christ delivers
it; as we see in Tobiah and Sanballat, Nehem. 4.2, 3.

Lastly, we should learn wisdom to lay hold on the times and seasons of
Gods peace, because he has a day of wrath too; to apprehend the offers and
opportunities of grace. Christ had been at the Churches door, and had knocked
for admittance; but neglecting that season, he was gone, and much she
suffered before she could find him again, Cant. 5.2-7. When the Lord
speaks unto us in his ordinances, and by the secret motions and persuasions
of his holy Spirit, we should not defer, nor put him off, as Felix did Paul
to some other time, but pursue the occasion, and set our selves to do every
duty in Gods time. There is a time for every work, and it is beautiful only
in its time; and therefore fit it is, that we should observe wisely the signs
and nature of the times, Matthew. 16.2. And accordingly proportion our devotions
for the Church and our selves. It is the worst loss of time, to let slip the
seasons of grace, and spiritual wisdom, till it may be Gods time of mercy
is passed over. If thou had known in this thy day the thing that concern
thy Peace. But now thy day is over, and my day of wrath is come, they are now
hidden from thine eyes.

He shall judge amongst the Heathen.] By heathen we are to understand the same
with Enemies, verse. 1. and People, Esai. 63.6. Meaning all the armies and
swarms of Christ's enemies either spiritual or secular. The word Gentiles was
a word of great contempt and detestation amongst God people, Cameron de
Ecclesia, page 33.34. Wee^^s Christian Synag. page 137.
as the word Jew is now amongst us; a proverbiall word to cast reproach and
shame upon men. Therefore the Apostle says of the Ephesians, that in times
passed they had been Gentiles in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.11. As if by being
Christians they had ceased to be Gentiles, or rather that word had ceased to
be a term of reproach. So that Gentile was a word of scorn, as Samaritan,
Ioh. 8.48. or Canaanite, Ezekiel. 16.3. or Publican, Matthew. 18.17. Luke 18.11. And
therefore we find those two still joined together Publicans and sinners; and
so the Apostle joyneth these two words Gentiles and sinners, Gal. 2.15. So then
the word Heathen is added by David to the enemies of Christ, to render them the
more odious, and to express their more abject and hateful condition; and
therefore when God would cast notable reproach upon his people he calls them
Sodomites, and Gentiles, Esai. 1.10. Ezekiel. 2.3. So then the meaning is, his
most abject and hateful enemies, that are unto him as Jews and Samaritans,
he shall judge, that is, he shall condemn and punish them.

Whence we may note, That Christ's victory over his enemies shall be by way
of pleading and disceptation. His military is likewise a judiciary proceeding
grounded upon righteous and established Laws. Therefore the day of Gods wrath
is called a time of vengeance, and recompense for the Controversies of Sion,
Esai. 34.8. To show that the Lord does not take vengeance but by way of debate.
And therefore when he punishes, he is said to plead with men. The Priest
said not where is the Lord, and they that handle the Law knew me not, etc.
Wherefore I will yet plead with you, says the Lord, and with your Childrens
Children will I plead, Ier. 2.8, 9. So to plead and to take vengeance go
together, Ier. 51.36. And the Lord is said to reprove with equity; and to
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; that is, to convince, and argue
before he does punish, Esai. 11.4. as we see in the case of Sodom, Genesis
18.21-33. Herein the Lord shows that all our misery begins at our selves.
That if we perish, it is because we would not take his counsel, nor be guided
by his will; That he did not sell us to any of his creditors, but that for our
iniquities we sold our selves, Esai. 50.1. In humane wars, though never so
regularly and righteously ordered, yet many particular men may perish without
any personal guilt of their own. Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. But in
these wars of Christ, there shall not a man perish, till he be first
convinced by a judiciary proceeding, of his own demerit. Every mouth must be
stopped, and all the world by the evidence and acknowledgement of their own
conscience become guilty before God, before his wrath shall seize upon them.
The Lord sent Noah to preach, before he sent a flood to destroy the old world.
He argued with Adam before he thrust him out of Paradise. The voice goes ever
before the rod, Mich. 6.9. This course our Savior observed toward him who had
not the wedding garment. First, convinced him till he was speechless, and
then cast him into utter darkness, Matthew. 22.12, 13. And this course the Lord
took with his people when he punished them, Esai. 5.3, 4. Amos 2.11.3.7. For
he will have the consciences of men to subscribe, and acknowledge the
justness of his proceedings, and to condemn themselves by their own
witness; when he enters into judgment he does it by line and plummet,
Esai. 28.17. In proportion to the means of grace neglected, to the patience
and forbearance abused, to the times of grace overslipped, to the purity of the
Law violated and profaned. We must take heed therefore of continuing Gentiles,
of being aliens from that commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenant of promise, of living without God in the world. No man can with hope
or comfort say, Enter not into judgment, but he who is the Lords servant, and
of his household; we must be all ingrafted into the natural Olive, and become
the seed of Abraham, and Jews by covenant, before Christ will be our peace or
reconcile us unto his Father, Romans 2.29.11.17-24. Gal. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.11-14.

He shall fill the places with dead Bodies.] This notes the greatness of the
victory, that none should be left to bury their dead. There shall be an
universal destruction of wicked men together in the day of Gods wrath, they
shall be bound up in bundles, and heaped for damnation, Matthew. 13.30. Psalm.
37.38. Esai. 1.28.66.17. And it notes the shame and dishonor of the enemy,
they shall lie like dung upon the face of the earth, and shall be beholding to
their victors for a base and dishonorable burial, as we see in the great
battle with Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 39.11-16.

He shall wound the Head over many Countries.] Either literally, Antichrist,
Rev. 17.2.18. Who takes upon him to be oecumenicall Bishop, and Monarch, and
to dispose of crowns, and dispense Kingdoms at his pleasure. Or spiritually,
Satan, who is the Prince of this World, whose head Christ was to crush, and
tread under our seete, Genesis 3.15. Romans 16.20. Or figuratively, the Head, that
is, the counsel and power of many nations, which shall at last appear to have
been but a vain thing, Psalm. 2.2. 1 Cor. 1.19. What sense soever we follow,
the maine thing to be observed is that which we handled before; that Christ
will in due time utterly destroy the greatest, the highest, the wisest of his
enemies. And therefore this may suffice upon this verse.

VERSE 7. He shall drink of the Brook in the way: therefore shall he lift
up the Head.


SOme understand these words in the sense of the two former, for a figurative
expression of the victories of Christ; and they in a twofold manner. Some by
brook understand the blood of the adversary with which the way should be
filled as with a stream: and by drinking hereof, the satiating, refreshing,
and delighting himself in the confusion of his enemies; for the Lord is eased
when his enemies are subdued, Esai. 1.24. Others, that he should pursue his
victory with such heat and importunity, that he should not allow himself
any times of usual repast, but should content himself with such obvious
refreshment as should offer it self in the way: and should immediately lift up
his head again, to pursue the enemy at the heel; and in this sense, there is
no more new matter here intimated than that which has been before handled.

Others understand the means whereby Christ should thus lift up his head and
exalt himself above all the enemies of his Kingdom, namely by his Passion,
and sufferings; by death destroying death and him that had the power of death,
which is the Devil. I will not undertake to define which sense is most
agreeable to the place; it being so difficult. But upon occasion of this latter
(which I think is more generally embraced) I shall speak something of the
means and ground of Christ's victories over his enemies, and of his government
in his Church, namely his sufferings and resurrection.

He shall drink of the brook in the way] By Brook then or Torrent we may
understand the wrath of God, and the rage of men. The afflictions and
sufferings which befell Christ. And this is a very frequent Metaphore in holy
Scriptures to understand afflictions by water, Psalm. 18.4, 5.42.7.69.1.124.4,
5. So the wrath of the Lord is called a stream, and a lake, Esaias 30.33. Revel.
19.20. In regard of the rage and irresistibleness thereof, Sternit agros,
sternit sata laeta, boumque labores, and in regard of the turbidnesse and
foulness thereof, for Gods wrath is full of dregs, Esaias 51.17. Psalm. 75.8. It
is said in the History of Christ's passion, when he was going to wrestle with
that woeful agony in the garden, that he passed over the brook Cedron. Ioh.
18.1. And we may observe in the History of the Kings, that when the good Kings
Hezekiah, and Asa, and Josiah, purged the City and the Temple of idolatry,
they burnt the cursed things at the brook Kidron, and cast them thereinto, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. 2 Chronicles. 29.16.30.14. 2 King. 23.6. To note unto us that that
brook was the sink, as it were, of the Temple, that into which all the
purgamenta, and uncleanness of Gods house, all the cursed things were to be
cast; with relation whereunto it is not improbable that the Prophet David by a
prophetical spirit might notify the sufferings of Christ, by drinking of that
cursed brook over which he was to pass, to signify that on him all the
faithful might lay and power ut their sins, who is therefore said to be made
sin and a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. As the people when they laid
their hands on the head of the sacrifice, did thereby, as it were, unload all
their sins upon it.

Now as waters signify Afflictions; so there are two words with relation
thereunto, which signify suffering of afflictions, and they are both applied
unto Christ, Matthew. 20.22. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink of, or be baptized with that Baptism that I am baptized with? He that
drinks has the water in him; he that is dipped or plunged, has the water
about him: So it notes the universalitie of the wrath which Christ suffered, it
was within him, My soul is heavy unto death; and it was all about him,
betrayed by Judas, accused by Jews, forsaken by Disciples, mocked by Herod,
condemned by Pilate, buffeted by the servants, nailed by the soldiers, reviled
by the thieves and standers by, and which was all in all, forsaken by his
Father. So then by drinking of the brook is meant suffering of the curses, and
it is frequently so used, Ier. 25.27.49.12. Ezekiel. 23.32.34. Hab. 2.16. Revel.
14.9.10.

By [ The way] we must understand either the life of Christ on earth, his
passage between his assumed voluntary humility and his exaltation again; or
The way between mankind and heaven, which by that should of wrath and torrent
of curses, which were (...), Col. 2.14. was made utterly unpassable, till
Christ by his sufferings made a path through it, for the ransomed of the Lord to
pass over.

Therefore shall be lift up the head.] It notes in the Scripture phrase
victory, electation, and breaking through those evils which did urge and press
a man before, Psalm. 27.6. and also boldness* confidence, and security to the
whole body, Qui se humiliaverat, ipse exaltis. Hieron.
Luke 21.28. And further, it is not, He shall be lifted up, but, He shall do
it himself, He has the power of life, and the fountain of life in himself,
Ioh. 5.26. 10.18. So that following this sense of the words, the meaning is, He
shall suffer, and remove all those curses which were in the way between
mankind and heaven, and then he shall lift up his head in the Resurrection,
and break through all those sufferings into glory again; which sense is most
punctually and expressly unfolded in those parallel places, Luke 24.26.46. Phil.
2.8, 9. 1 Pet. 1.11.

He shall drink of the brook in the way] From hence we may note, First, that
between mankind and heaven there is a torrent of wrath and curses, which does
everlastingly separate between us and glory; (...), a great and fixed gulf,
which all the world can neither wade through, nor remove. The Law at first was
an easy and smooth way to righteousness, and from thence to salvation, but
now every step thereof sinkes as low as hell. It is written within and without
with curses, which way soever a man stirs, he finds nothing but death before
him: one man's way by the civility of his education, the ingenuitie of his
disposition, the engagement of other ends or relations, may seem more smooth
and plausible than another, but by nature they all run into hell, as all
rivers, though never so different in other circumstances, run into the sea.
It is as impossible for a natural man of himself to escape damnation, as it
is to make himself no child of the old Adam, or not to have been begotten by
fleshly parents. The Gulf of sin in our nature cannot be cleansed, and
therefore the Guilt thereof cannot be removed. The Image we have lost is by us
unrepairable; the Law we have violated, inoxorable; the Justice we have
injured, unsatisfiable; the concupiscence of our nature insatiable, sin an
aversion from an infinite good, and a conversion to the creature infinitely;
and therefore the Guilt thereof infinite and unremoveable too.

We should learn often to meditate on this point, to find our selves reduced
unto these straits and impossibilities, that we cannot see which way to turn,
or to help our selves, for that is the only way to draw us unto Christ. Every
man naturally loves to be in the first place beholding to himself; in any
extremity, if his own wits, purse, projects, or endeavors will help him out,
he looks no further; but when all his own succors have forsaken him, then
he seeks abroad. It is much more true in the matter of salvation; no man ever
did begin at Christ, but went unto him upon mere necessity, when he had
experience of the emptiness of all his other succors and dependencies, we all
by nature are offended at him, and will not have him to reign over us, till
thereunto we be forced by the evidence of that infinite and unpreventable
misery, under which without him we must sink for ever. This is of all other
the most urging argument unto men at first to consider, that there is a torrent
of curses, a sea of death, a reign of condemnation, a hell of sin within,
and a hell of torments without between them and their salvation; and there is
no drop of that sea, no scruple of that curse, no title of that Law, which must
not all be either fulfilled or endured. Suppose that God should summon thy
guilty soul to a sudden appearance before his tribunal of Justice; and should
there begin to deal with thee even at thy mothers womb: Alas, thou would
be utterly gone there; even there a seed of evil doers, the spawne of viperous
and serpentine parents, a cursed child, a child of wrath, an exact image of
the old Adam, and of the blood of Satan. But then here is after this produced a
catalogue, and history of sins of forty, fifty, or three score years long.
And in them every inordinate motion of the will, every sudden stirring, and
secret working of inward lust, every idle word, every unclean aspect, every
impertinencie and irregularity of life, scored up against thy poor soul, and
each of them to be produced at the last, and either answered or revenged. O
where shall the ungodly and sinners appear if they have not right in Christ?
And how should men labor to be secured in that right? Who would suffer so many
millions of obligations and indictments to lie between him and God,
uncancelled, and not labor to have them taken out of the way? Now the only
way to be brought hereunto is, to deny our selves and all we do; to do no
good thing for this end that we may rest in it, or rely upon it when we have
done, but after all to judge our selves unprofitable servants: when we have
prayed, to see hell between heaven and our prayers; when we have preached, to
see hell between heaven and our sermons; when we have done any work of
devotion, to see hell between heaven and all our services, if God should mark
what is amiss in them, and should enter into judgment with us: In one word,
to see hell between heaven and any thing in the world else, save only
between Christ and heaven. Till in this manner men be qualified for mercy,
they will have no heart to desire it, and God has no purpose to confer it.
Christ must be esteemed worthy of all acceptance, before God bestows him: and
the way so to esteem of him is, to feel our selves the greatest of all
sinners. And when the soul is thus once humbled with the taste and remembrance
of that worme-wood and gall which is in sin, there is then an immediate
passage unto hope and mercy, Lament. 3.19 -- 22. and that hope is this.

That Christ has drunken up, and dried that torrent of curses which was
between us and heaven, and has made a passage through them all by himself
unto his Fathers Kingdom. He was made sin and a curse for us, that so he
might swallow up sin and death, and might be the destruction of hell, Hos.
13.14. I will here but touch upon two things. First, What Christ suffered.
Secondly, why he suffered: for understanding of the first we must note, first,
that Christ Humane nature was by the hypostaticall Union exalted unto many
dignities, which to all the Creatures in the world besides are utterly
incommunicable; as the communication of properties, the adoration of Angels,
the primogenitu^e of the Creatures, the cooperation with the Deity in many
mighty works, the satisfaction of an infinite Justice by a finite passion,
etc. Exalted likewise it was by his spiritual unction above all his fellows,
with that unmeasurable fullness of grace, as wonderfully surpasses the united
and cumulated perfections of all the Angels in heaven. Secondly, we must note
likewise, that all these things Christ received for the work of man's
Redemption, and therefore he had them in such a manner as was most suitable and
convenient for the execution of that work. Now Christ was to fulfill that
work by a way of suffering and obedience, by death to destroy him that had the
power of death, as David by Goliahs sword slew him that was master of the
sword. As there fell a mighty tempestuous wind upon the red sea, whereby the
passage was opened for Israel to go out of Egypt into Canaan; so Christ was to
be torn and divided by his sufferings, that so there might be a passage for us
to God, through that sea of wrath which was between our Egypt and our Canaan,
our sin and our Salvation. Here then are two general Rules to be observed
concerning the sufferings of Christ. First, that the Oeconomie or dispensation
of his Mediatorship is the measure of all that he suffered. So much as that
required, he did suffer, and more he did not: for though he suffered as man,
yet he suffered not because he was a man, but because he was a Mediator.
Secondly, in as much as a Mediator between God and sinners was to be holy and
separate from sinners (for if he should have been a sinner, he had been one
of the parties, and not a Mediator) therefore none of those sufferings which
are repugnant to his holiness, and, by consequence, unserviceable to the
administration of his office, could belong unto him. Such things then as did no
way prejudice the plenitude of his grace, the union of his natures, the quality
of his mediation, such things as were suitable to his person, and requisite for
our pardon, such as were possible for him, and such as were necessary for us,
those things he suffered as the punishments of our sins.

Now punishments are of several sorts; some are sins, some only from sins.
Some things in several respects are both sins and punishments. Deus
naturarum bonarum Creator optimus, malarum voluntatum justissimus ordinator.
Aug. de Civit. Dei, li. 11. c. 17. l. 14. ca. 26. and to.7. cont. Julian.
Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. De Great* and Lib. Arbitr. c. 23. de Praedest. storum. cap.
10.
In relation to the Law, as Deviations, so they are sin: in relation to the
order and disposition of Gods providence, so they are punishments. As hardness
of heart, and a reprobate sense. Other punishments are from sin, and in this
regard sin is two ways considerable, either as inherent, or as imputed: from
sin as inherent, or from the consciousnesse of sin in a man's self, does
arise remorse, or torment and the worm of conscience. Again, sin as imputed
may be considered two ways; either it is imputed upon a ground in nature,
because the persons to whom it is imputed are naturally one with him that
originally committed it, and so it does seminally descend, and is derived upon
them. Thus Adams sin of eating the forbidden fruit is imputed unto us, and
the punishment thereof on us derived, namely the privation of Gods Image, and
the corruption of our nature. Or else it is imputed upon a ground of voluntary
contract, vadimonie, or susception, so that the guilt thereupon growing is not
a derived, but an assumed guilt, which did not bring with it any desert, or
worthiness to suffer, but only an obligation and obnoxiousnesse thereunto. As
if a sober and honest person be surety for a prodigal and luxurious man, who
spending his estate upon courses of intemperance and excess, has disabled
himself to pay any of his debts; the one does for his vicious disability
deserve imprisonment, unto which the other is as liable as he, though without
any such personal desert. Now then the punishments which Christ suffered are
only such as agree unto sin thus imputed, (...) Greg. Nazian. Orat. 36
as all our sins were unto Christ. Again, in punishments we are to
distinguish between punishments inflicted from without, and punishments
ingenerated, and immediately resulting from the condition of the person that
suffers. Or between the Passions and Actions of the men that are punished.
Punishments inflicted are those pains and dolorous impressions which God
either by his own immediate hand, or by the ministry of such instruments as
he is pleased to use, does lay upon the soul or body of a man. Punishments
ingenerated are those which grow out of the weakness and wickedness of the
person lying under the sore and invincible pressure of those pains which are
thus inflicted. As Blasphemy, despair, and the worm of conscience. In one
word, some evils of punishment are Infirmitates quaedam vitiosae, quaedam
miserae. Aug.
vicious, either formally in themselves or fundamentally, and by way of
connotation in regard of the originals thereof in the person suffering them.
Others are only dolorous and miserable, which press nature, but do no way
defile it, nor refer to any either pollution or impotency in the person
suffering them, and of this sort only were the punishments of Christ.

Now these punishments which Christ thus suffered are either inchoate or
consummate; inchoate, as all those penal defects of our nature which neither
were sins, nor grounded upon the inherence of sins (for he took not our
personal, but only our natural defects.) And these were either corporeal,
as hunger, thirst, weariness, and the like; or spiritual, as fear, grief,
sorrow, temptations, etc. consummate, were those which he suffered at last. And
these likewise were either corporeal, as shame, mockings, buffets, trials,
scourgings, condemnation, an ignominious and a cursed death. Or spiritual, and
those were principally two. First, a punishment of Dereliction. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. There was some kind of separation
between God and Christ during the time of his sufferings for sin in that
cursed manner. For understanding whereof we must note that he had a fourfold
Union unto God? First, In his humane Nature, which was so fast united in his
person to the divine, that death it self did not separate it either from the
person or from the deity. It was the Lord that lay in the grave. Secondly, In
Love, and so there was never any separation neither, but when he hanged on the
Cross, he was still the beloved Son of his Father, in whom he was well
pleased. Thirdly, In the Communion of his Spirit and Holiness; and in that
regard likewise there was no disunion, for he was offered up as a lamb
without spot or blemish. Lastly, In the fruition of the light of his
countenance, and of his glory and favor, and in this respect there was for the
time of his sufferings a dereliction, subtractione visionis, non dissolutione
unionis, by the withdrawing of his countenance, not by the dissolving of his
union. He looked upon Christ as a God armed against the sins of the world
which were then upon him. Secondly, There was a punishment of malediction. He
did undergo the curse of the Law, he did graple with the wrath of God, and
with the powers of darkness, he felt the scourges due unto our sins in his
humane nature, which squeezed and wrung from him those strong cries, those
deep and woeful complaints, that bloody and bitter sweat, which drew
compassion from the very rocks. And surely it is no derogation to the dignity
of Christ's person, but on the other side a great magnifying of the Justice of
God against sin, of the power of Christ against the Law, and of the mercy of
them both toward sinners, to affirm, that the sufferings of Christ, whatever
they were in specie* in the kind of them, were yet in pondere, in their weight
and pressure, equally grievous with those which we should have suffered; for
being in all things save sin like unto us, and most of all in his liablenesse
to the curse of the Law (so far as it did not necessarily denotate either
sin inherent, or weakness to break through in the person suffering) why he
should not be obnoxious to as great extremities of pain, I see no reason; for
no degree of mere anguish and dolor can be unbefitting the person of him who
was to be known by that Title, A man of sorrows. And surely far more
indignity it was to him to suffer a violent death of body from the hands of
base men, than to suffer with patience, obedience, and victory far sorer
stripes from the hand of God his Father, who was pleased upon him to lay the
iniquity of us all.

For the second thing proposed, Why Christ suffered these things; The Scripture
gives principally these five reasons: First, to execute the decrees of his
Father, Act. 4.27, 28. Secondly, to fulfill the prophesies, prefigurations, and
predictions of Holy Scriptures, Luke 24.46. Thirdly, to magnify his mercy, and
free love to sinners, and most impotent enemies, Romans 5.8. Fourthly, to declare
the Righteousness and truth of God against sin, who would not be reconciled
with sinners but upon a legal expiation, Romans 3.25. For although we may not
limit the unsearchable wisdom and ways of God, Aug. de Trin. lib. 13. cap.
10. and de Agone Christiano, To. 3. cap. 11.
as if he could no other way have saved man; yet we are bound to adore this
means, as being by him selected out of that infinite treasure of his own
counsel, as most convenient to set forth his wonderful hate of sin, his
inexorable Justice and severity against it, his unsearchable riches of love and
mercy toward sinners, and in all things to make way to the manifestation of
his glory. Lastly, To show forth his own power which had strength to stand
under all this punishment of sin, and at last to shake it off and to declare
himself to be the Son of God by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4.
For though Christ did exceedingly fear, and for that seem to decline and pray
against these his passions: yet none of that was out of jealousy, or suspicion
that he should not break through them. But he feared them as being pains
unavoidable, which he was most certainly to suffer; and as pains very heavy
and grievous, which he should not overcome without much bitterness, and very
woeful conflict. Now for a word of the last Clause.

Therefore shall he lift up the Head.] We may hence observe, that Christ has
conquered all his sufferings by his own power. As in his passion when he
suffered he Bowed down his head beforehand, and gave up the ghost with a
loud voice, to note that his sufferings were voluntary, Ioh. 19.30. So in his
resurrection he is said to lift up his head himself, to note that he had
life in himself, that he was the Prince of Life, that it was impossible for
him to be held under by death (as we were by the Law, Romans 7.6.) And that his
exaltation was voluntary likewise and from his own power, for he was not to
have any assistant in the work of our redemption, but to do all alone, Ioh.
2.19.5.26.10.17. Act. 3.15.

If it be objected that Christ was raised from the dead by the Glory of his
Father, and that he raised him up, Romans 6.4. Act. 13.33. To this I answer that
this was not by way of supplement and succor to make up any defect of power in
Christ; but only by way of consent to Christ's own power and action, that so
men might jointly honor the Son and the Father, Ioh. 5.19-26. Or by the
Glory of the Father we may understand that glorious power which the Father
gave unto his Son in the flesh, to have life in himself, Ioh. 5.26. annexing
thereunto a command to exercise the same Power, Ioh. 10.18. Or he is said to
be raised by himself and his Father both, because that Holy Spirit which
immediately quickened him ( Romans 1.4. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 3.18.) was both his and
his Fathers. It was not any personal thing wherein the Son differed from the
Father which raised Jesus from the dead, but that Spirit which was common to
them both.

To conclude then with the consideration of those great benefits, and that
excellent use which this resurrection of Christ does serve for unto us. First,
it assures us of the accomplishment of his works of mediation on earth, and
that he is now in the execution of those other offices which remain to be
fulfilled by him in heaven for the application of his Sacrifice unto us; for
having in the resurrection justified himself he thereby rose for our
justification likewise, Romans 4.25. For if the debt had not been taken quite off
by the surety, it would have lien upon the principal still. And therefore the
Apostle proves the resurrection by this that Gods mercies are sure, Act.
13.34. Whereas if Christ were not risen from the dead we should be yet in our
sins, and so by consequence, the mercies of David should have failed us, 1
Cor. 15.17, 18. And for this reason it is (as I conceive) that the Lord sent an
Angel to remove the stone from the mouth of the sepulcher; not to supply any
want of power in him, who could himself have roled away the stone with one of
his fingers; but as a Judge when the Law is satisfied sends an officer to
open the prison-doores to him who has made that satisfaction; so the Father to
testify that his Justice was fully satisfied with the price which his Son
had paid, sent an officer of heaven to open the doors of the grave, and as it
were to hold away the hangings while his Lord came forth of his bedchamber.

Secondly, it assures us of our resurrection; for as the head must rise before
the members, so the members are sure to follow the Head. The wicked shall rise
by his Judiciary power, but not by the virtue and fellowship of his
Resurrection; as the faithful, who are therefore called Children of the
Resurrection, Luke 20.36. 1 Cor. 15.20-23. Thirdly, it does by a secret and
spiritual virtue renew and sanctify our Nature, Romans 6.4. For the acts of
Christ's mediation in his sufferings and victories are spiritually appliable and
effectual in us unto answerable effects. His death to the mortification of
sin, Heb. 9.14. 1 Ioh. 1.7. And his resurrection, to the quickening of us in
holiness, Ephesians. 2.5. Col. 2.12. Fourthly, it comfort us in all other
calamities of life which may befall us; he that raised up himself from the
dead, has compassion and power to deliver us from all evil and to keep us
from falling. This is the sum of Jobs argument, God will raise me up at the
last day, therefore undoubtedly he is able (if it stand with my good and his
own glory) to lift me up from this dunghill again, Job 19.27. And this is
Gods argument to comfort his people in patient waiting upon him in their
afflictions, because their dead bodies shall live, and they that dwell in the
dust shall awake and sing, Esai. 26.19. Lastly, it serves to draw our thoughts
and affections from earth unto heaven; Because things of a nature should move
unto one another. Now says the Apostle, Our conversation is in heaven, from
whence we look for a Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change
our vile Body, and make it like unto his glorious Body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. To him with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, be all honor, glory,
Majesty and thanksgiving for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 16. line 2. for rejoices, read rejoycest. p. 31. l. 30. for That, r.
The. p. 43. l. 7. for that, r. the. p. 49. l. 6. dele Our. p. 52. l. 23. for
world, r. word. p. 64. l. 25. for to give, r. not to give. p. 65. l. 2. dele
At. p. 82. l. 35. for wrested, r. rested. p. 148. l. 3. for deliberation, r.
deliberating. p. 154. l. 21. for stones, r. stones. p. ^59. l. 22. for acquit,
r. acquaint. p. 191. l. 11. for exhaleth, r. extracteth. p. 195. l. 21. dele
only. p. 197. l. 18. for Heralds, r. Harbingers. p. 221. lines 21.25. for
matter, r. master. p. 225. l. 28. for And, r. An. p. 261. l. 15. for world, r.
word. p. 327. l. 24. for frequenting, r. frequent. p. 387. l. 28. for us, r.
it. p. 388. l. 29. for he, r. heed. p. 399. l. 1. for reconciliation, r.
revocation. l. 12. r. leaves it not. p. 444. l. 2. for because, r. but because.

A Table of such places of Scripture as are by the way briefly opened or
paraphrased in this Exposition, and the former three Treatises.
T notes the Treatise, and P the Psalm.
Genesis 3.15. T. 439 Genesis 6.5* 6. T. 274 Genesis 8.21. T. 274 Exodus 15.3. P. 493
Numb. 14.17. T. 274 Numb. 20.12. P. 190 Numb. 23.21. P. 450 Deuteronomy 4.19. T. 284
Deuteronomy. 6.5. T. 202 2 Samuel 3.25. P. 400 1 King. 21.20. T. 278.279 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
P. 163 Job 21.16. T. 51 Psalm. 2.9, 10. P. 12* 13. Psalm. 37.16. T. 77.369 Psalm.
37.25. T. 26 Psalm. 62.10. T. 98 Psalm. 78.37. T. 110 Psalm. 87.4. P. 372 Psalm. 89
27. P. 17 Psalm. 89.35. P. 80 Psalm. 109.6. P. 486 Psalm. 119.18, 19. T. 435 Psa.
119.64-125. P. 308 Psalm. 126.1. P. 209 Psalm. 132.8. P. 163 Psalm. 144.11. P. 23
Eccles. 1.15. T. 68 Eccles. 5.10 -- 17. T. 72. Eccle. 6.1-3.7-10. T. 73.
Eccles. 7.29. P. 354 Eccles. 10.2. P. 484 Esaias 13.7* 8. P. 498 Esaias 28.16. T.
484 Esaias 33.22. P 94 Esaias 53.10. P. 31 Esaias 57.20. P. 138 Ier. 1.11, 12. T. 49
Ier. 2.13. T. 16 Ier. 3.19. P. 233 Ier. 8.8. P. 215 Lam. 3.39* 40. T. 176 Ezekiel.
3.3. P. 162 Ezekiel. 18.20. P. 444 445 Ezekiel. 33.31.32. P. 68 Hos. 5.11. P. 59 Hos.
5.12. T. 42 Hos. 7.14. T. 311 Hos. 7.16. T. 302 Hos. 8.7. T. 302 Hos. 8.14. T.
426 Hos. 9.8. P. 251 Hos. 9.11. T. 43 Hos. 10.11. T. 422 Joel 3.17. T. 50 Amos
8.2. T. 49 Mic. 7.19, 20. P. 122 Nahum 1.10. P. 493 Habak. 3.9. P. 387 Zeph.
1.8. P. 149 Hag. 2.7. T. 389 Hag. 2.14. T. 307 Zech. 5.6-11. T. 49 Mal. 4.2. P.
51 Matthew. 4.4. P. 6 Matthew. 6.24. P. 21 Matthew. 9.15-17. P. 43 Matthew. 11.11. P.
178 Matthew. 13.22. T. 59 Matthew. 15.28. T. 489 Matthew. 23.29. P. 56 Matthew. 26.5.
P. 316 Matthew. 26.39. P. 426 Matthew. 10.21. T. 413 Luke 1.36. P. 384 Luke
2.40-52. T. 423 Luke 22.32. T. 351 Luke 24.46. P. 30 John 1.16. T. 400 John
1.17. P. 183 John 1.18. P. 169 John 3.18. T. 131 John 4.22. P. 136 John 6.44.
P. 12 John 7.38. P. 40, 178 John 7.39. P. 37 John 8.56. T. 57 John 10.4. P. 257
John 11.48-50. T. 219 John 13.27. T. 267 John 14.20-23. T. 487 John 15.1-5. T.
464 John 16.7. P. 236 John 16.10. P. 30 John 16.21. P. 50 John 17.4. T. 420
John 17.13. P. 437, 491 John 17.15. P. 434, 435 Act. 9.7. P. 381 Act. 28 28. P.
136 Romans 5.10. P. 430 Romans 5.13. T. 370 To. 5.14. T. 136, 137, 370 Romans 6.3. T.
144 Romans 6.11. T. 144.275 Romans 7.8. T. 131 Romans 7.12. T. 133 Romans 7.14, 15. T.
278 Romans 8.29, 30. T. 447 Romans 8.32. T. 485 Romans 13.9. T. 414 Romans 13.10. P.
328 1 Cor. 2.14. T. 118 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. T. 27 1 Cor. 7.29. T. 54 1 Cor. 8.2.
P. 322 1 Cor. 11.1. T. 411 -- 413 1 Cor. 12.3. P. 170 1 Cor. 13.13. T. 494 1
Cor. 14.24, 25. T. 162 1 Cor. 15.24-28. P. 78 1 Cor. 15.56. T. 130 2 Cor. 1.18.
P. 322 2 Cor. 1.20. T. 345-350. P. 390 2 Cor. 2.16. T. 390 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. P.
191 2 Cor. 3.12. P. 202 2 Cor. 3.18. T. 416. P. 180-191 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. P. 206 2
Cor. 4.6. P. 136-181 2 Cor. 5.14. T. 488 2 Cor. 5.21. P. 424 2 Cor. 8.9. T. 413
Gal. 3.10. T. 226 Gal. 3.19. T. 137 Gal. 4.5. P. 429 Gal. 5.6. T. 485, 486 Gal.
5.15-22. T. 374-383 Gal. 6.16. P. 216 Ephesians. 2.6. P. 435 Ephesians. 3.9, 10. P. 167
Ephesians. 4.17, 18. T. 182 Ephesians. 4.26. T. 174 Ephesians. 4.30. T. 434 Ephesians. 6.24. P.
74 Phil. 2.8, 9. P. 29 Phil. 3.8. T. 474 Col. 1.18. P. 18 Col. 1.24. T. 421
Col. 2.15. P. 118 Col. 3.3. T. 432 1 Timothy 1.13. T. 295 1 Timothy 1.15. P. 6 1 Timothy
3.16. P. 273-430 1 Timothy 4.4. T. 24 1 Timothy 4.8. T. 492 1 Timothy 6.18. T. 489 Heb.
1.9. T. 422 Heb. 2.3. P. 136 Heb. 6.17. P. 384*385 Heb. 7.19. P. 19 Heb. 8.4.
P. 427 Heb. 9.24. P. 428 Heb. 10.11, 12. P. 23 Heb. 11.1. T. 57 Heb. 11.40. P.
19 Heb. 12.2, 3. T. 356 Iam. 1.8. P. 317. Iam. 1.14, 15. T. 155-286 Iam.
1.19-21. P. 174 Iam. 2.10, 11. P. 356 Iam. 4.5, 6. P. 184 1 Pet. 1.16. T. 413 1
Pet. 2.6. T. 484 1 Pet. 2.24. P. 438 439 2 Pet. 1.3. T. 485 2 Pet. 1.4. T. 344
2 Pet. 1.9. T. 56 2 Pet. 3.16. T. 126 1 Ioh. 3.2. T. 433 1 Ioh. 3.3. T. 341 1
Ioh. 3.9. T. 288. P. 52. 1 Ioh. 4.20. P. 73 1 Ioh. 5.8. T. 280.
FINIS.

