The remedy against the troubles of temptacyons.





^Here after follows four proufytable things to have in mind which has be
taken out of ye third chapter of a devout treatise and a form of lyuinge
that the dyscrete and virtuous Richard hampole wrote to a devout and an holy
person for great love.

THe first mesure of thy life which is so short that uneaths it is any thing
/ for we live here but in a point that is the leest thing yt may be. And for
to say sothe our life is less than a point if we should lyken it to the life
everlasting. An other thing is the vncertaynte of our ending for we wot not
when we shall dye nor how we shall dye nor whether we shall goo when we be
deed. And the will of god is that it be to us uncertain / for he wylleth that
we be always ready to dye / the third is yt we shall answer before the right
wise Judge of all the time yt we have been here how we have lived what our
occupacyon has be / and what good we might have done when we have been idle.
Therefore ye prophet said / he has called the time against me that is for every
day he has lent us here to spend in good use as in penance and in gods
service. And if we waste it in erthly love and vanytees full grievously must we
be demed and punysshed. Therefore it is one of the most sorrows yt may be to us
but if we enforce us to the contrary / and set our heart to the love of god.
And do good to all that we may in ye short while that our time lasts For
each time yt we think not of god we may count it as lost. The fourth is that
we think how much the Joy is that they shall have which contynueth in the
love of god to their ending / for they shall be brethren and fellows with
au^gelles seeing the king of Joy in his beauty and shynynge majesty the
which shall be to them above all the delytes that any creature may think.
Than to remember the great and intolerable sorrow pain and turmentes which
they shall have that loves not god above all thing as we may se in this world
many of that dysposycyon which set all their pleasure in lust and liking of
this life / as in pride / couetyse / and other sins / they shall brenne in the
fire of hell with the devil whom they served as long as god is in heaven
with his servants that lasts ever.

Here follows and enseweth a sovereign notable sentence to comfort a person
that is in temptacyon.

OUr merciful lord god christ Ihesu chastyseth his children and suffers them
to be tempted for many proufytable causes to their souls health / and therefore
should no man nor woman be heavy or sorry for any temptacyon. For as saint James
the appostle techeth us we should have very great Joy when we be tempted with
diverse temptacyons / for as the gold is pured and purged by the fire / and a
knight in battle is proved good: right so is a man by temptacyon proved for
good / but if he suffer himself to be overcome / that is to say but he
consent thereto by delyberacyon. For sothely when a man is sharply tempted he
may than have hope of grace virtue / and it is necessary for a man much to be
troubled with temptacyons / for every virtue is proved by his contrary. Our
enemy the fend is besy day and night to tarry and travail good men and women
with diverse temptacyons in doubts of the faith and dredes of salvation and
other many moo in diverse manners and specially now in these days he is full
besy to deceive many souls / and therefore wisely rule you to withstand his
vyolent sterynges of temptacyon / and for all that take ye no dredes of his
assawtes / ne have ye any doubt of his erroures ne dyspytes nor of his false
leasynges or fantasyes or any manner of travail of that foul fend whether ye
here him se him or think of him take no head thereof / for all be matters of
great mede and no sin in no wise be they never so troublous or full of
anguysshes whiles it comes of the malice of the fend or of evil dysposycyon
of man's nature or compleccyon. And therefore all such travail men ought not
to charge but suffer mekely and abide pacyently till god do remedy thereto. And
for as much as they be matters of great mede none ought to strive there against
/ nor marvel of them ne seek the cause nor think by what skyll he is so
trauaylled / for the more that a man labors in sechynge and thinking of
such anguysshes the more depely he falls in to errors / and therefore in as
much as man's thought is often vain and diverse and none end has: it ought
not to be forced or be taken head of / ne a man should not anger himself
therewith ne blame ne impute it to his own defaute that he is so troubled / for
such trauaylles ben paynefull but not sinful in so much as they be gretely
against his will. Saint Augustyne says that every sin lies in wylfull will.
And what that is against man's will is no sin. And the holy doctor ysodore
de summo bono says that the fend tempts a man no more than god gives him
leave / therefore let us have always a good will to will well and do well / and
god will keep us and give us the vyctory / and so the fend shall be confounded
/ faith and hope is ground of all perfeccyon and rote of all virtue / and
therefore our old enemy the fend is full besy with all his sleyghtes to draw
the soul down therfro. And it happeth sometime that the fend tempts and
trauaylleth a right wise soul so sharply that it is ouerlayde with care and
driven to dyspayre / and yet all that time though the soul perceive it not it
dwells still in the dread and love of god / and all that travail is to their
great mede before god / for our lord of his endless mercy arrecteth not to ye
soul that sin which himself suffers the fend to work in the soul
without the consent or will of the said self soul. But when we wylfully do
against the will of god with delyberacyon than we committee sin actually But
when we be drawn with wicked vyolence or vile thoughts and turmented with
dyspayre against our will thorugh the fendes vyolent temptynge we suffer pain
but we do no sin / and yet the sely souls knowledge is hid by that turment.

The second chapter.
Ut yet right often the temptynge of the fend that makes the soul to err in
faith and foul fantasye and in dyspayre: seems to the self soul great sin
/ but it is not so. For all holy doctors says that faith and hope be virtues
of man's will / wherefore who so would right wysly believe in this life: he is in
right believe before god / and like wise who so would here trustly hope he is in
trusty hope before god / though he be never so much troubled with ferefull
thoughts. The appostle saint Poule says that in a man's believe is wylfull
believe of right wysnes. Of the which words says the gloss that all only in
man's will which may not be constrained lies both mede and gylte / that is
to say: a man before god has never mede ne gylte for no deed but only of the
deeds that be done wylfully / but sometime man's thought and woman's be so
troubled and ouerlayde that they know not their own will / and yet though it
so be they ought not to care. For good deeds shows always good will / and
evil deeds evil will wherefore a man that does in deed the service of god
that man has a good will to god / though his trauaylous heart deem the
contrary. Also there should no creature deem his even christian for any
doubtful fantasyes / but if they have a very open knowledge of that thing
which they should deem him for. Than it is evil and unreasonable for any
creature to deem his own soul in that plyght that he should be parted from
god for any doubtful fantasye.

The third chapter.
ANd than if it so be ye have consented and fallen to sin by any temptacions
/ than be sorry and cry god mercy thereof. And yet be ye not dyscomforted but
think well on the great mercy of god how he for gave David his great sins.
Peter and Magdalene and not only them / but also all those that have been or
now be or shall be contryte for their sins / and meke them lowly and cry our
lord mercy. And therefore sister flee to him that all mercy is in / and ask
mercy and ye shall have it with forgyuenes of all your sins and meke you
lowly / and take the sacraments of holy church / and than ye ought to believe
faithfully that your sins be forgyuen / and that ye be received in to the
grace of god. For god says himself by his prophet Ezechie: that when a
sinful man soroweth for his sins he will never have mind thereof / and if a
man perceive in his heart no very sorrow / and though he think when he byddeth
his bedes or cries to god for mercy that he does all against heart: yet
therefore should he not deem himself graceles / for who so would have very
sorrow for his sins or would cry god mercy for them or in his heart would cry
for mercy: he cries god mercy truly / for as I have said before / god takes
head to man's will and not to his trauayllous fantasyes / it is good that a
man take no head of such fantasyes or sterynges that comes in such manner.
For god hydeth from them the knowleges of such fantasyes for many causes unto
the proufyte of their souls / wherefore such passions be not sinful / but
rather matter of grace and of great merit. And so good sister think ye always
/ and if it be so that temptacyon cease not but were always more and more be
not afraid but say sometime among in the worship of god and in the spyte of
the fend your creed and knowledge your believe and hope and think on the words
of saint Poule that says. Knowledge of mouth is done to the help of souls /
and they shall not be deceived by the fendes whiles that with a good auysement
both in word and will withstandeth him strongly. For there was never man
deceived of the fend but by consent of his own will / and that with such a
will as the heart consented with the same / for other fantastycall troublous
wylles puts not away man from god.

The fourth chapter.
ANd therefore should no man care nor be heavy that he is so troubled more than
an other. Sister always when I speak of a man in this writing take it both
for man and woman / for so it is meant in all such wrytynges / for all is
mankind / and ferther more as touching your troubles think in all your
dyseases what troubles gods servants has suffered and what pains and
turmentes they have had here in this world in many sundry manners and ye shall
find cause to suffer. Leo the pope says / it happeth sometime that good and
right wise souls be styred sharply by the fend / and sometime by their own
compleccyon to angers troubles dredes and such other taryenges that it seems
to them their life a turment in so much that sometime for very dread the begin
to dyspayre both in life of body and soul / thinking they be forsaken of god
/ which does it but to assaye and prove his chosen children and friends by
such temptacyons. For as I before have said at the beginning of this writing
in like manner as fire purges gold and as a knight is proved good and hardy
by battle: right so temptacyons and troubles purges a right wise soul / this
is proved well by Toby / for the angel Raphaell said this to him. Toby for as
much as thou art ryghtfull to god it is needful that temptacyon should preue
thy will / and well it is known that sykenes falls to a man after the
dysposycyon of his compleccyon. So like wise temptacyon as Leo the pope says.
The fend our ghostly enemy aspyeth in every man what wise he is dysposed by
his compleccyon / and by that disposicyon he tempts him. For there as he
fyndeth a man full of malencoly he tempts him most with ghoostly temptacyons
of Ire. But they that will attend to withstand it for the love of god they
must shape them to pacyence and say with Job. Sythen we have received of god
so great benefaytes why should we not receive and suffer dyseases. And think
on the great anguysshes sorrows and dyseases that our lord Ihesu christ
suffered himself here in earth. And also suffered his blyssed mother to have the
same. And think that to suffer disease pacyently is the way to heaven ward.
And that ye may not in this frail world be so free as an angel that is
confermed by grace / but while your body and soul be together in this life they
must receive troubles as well as eases. And think not that god has forsaken
you: but mekely abide the comfort of him and without doubt when it needs ye
shall not fail thereof. But some men when they have dread of salvation or be
tempted to dyspayre by vysyons or ghostly sterynges of their own frayltye /
they wene anon that they have sinned in the sin of the holy ghoost / and
than the fend puts in them that they may never be saved nor forgyuen of
their trespaces. Thus speaks the fend wtin them. So ferynge sin good
creatures that they wene to goo out of their minds / But they that been thus
tempted answer the fend thus again that he is false and a liar as his nature
is to be. For the sin of the holy ghoost as clerks says is infynyte without
repentance. And that is when a man wylfully by delyberacyon will never repent
nor ask god mercy ne forgyuenes of his sins / nor will be turned / but
wylfully departs him from the goodness of god / and in his wretchedness abides
wylfully with full consent of will / he that does thus synneth in the holy
ghoost which may not be forgyuen here nor else where / for he will not trust
in the goodness of the holy ghoost nor ask forgyuenes of his sins. And
therefore he that will no mercy ask no mercy shall have / for his sins be
infynyte without repentance. But though a man or a woman have or feel all
these vycyous sterynges and as many moo as any heart can think against their
own free will and when reason comes to them they be sorry thereof and flee
always hastily to the mercy of god: it is to them but a preuynge or a clensynge
of their sins though they be never so often in the night and the day now up
now down as wrestelers be / and though ye have any time fall in any sin
ghoostly or flesshely and layne therein wylfully by delyberacyon and full
content of heart: ye than ought to be sorry and ask god forgyuenes with as
great contrycyon as god will give you grace / and than think fully the goodness
of the holy ghoost surmounteth all sins that ever was done or ever shall be
done / though a man had sinned in them all / as well in deed as thought he
being truly contryte and confessed mekynge himself lowly to almighty god and
to his sacraments of holy church / doubt ye not he so asking mercy shall
have full forgyuenes of all his sins / for the mercy of god is so great that
it passes all his works. And therefore though ye sometime here by speaking or
else of writing or redynge in books sharp words and hard sentences: yet
comfort your self and think well that all such hard words be said and
written to chastyse the sinners and to withdraw them from evil / and also to
pourge and pure gods special lovers as the metal is in the fire before
rehearsed / and in them god will make his house. And wete it well many words
that seem full hard be meant full tenderly when they be well understand / and
though some words be meant right hardely as the plain text shows / yet
should ye not take them to you ward / but comfort your self and think that
all those hard sentences shall be fulfilled in Jews and sarasyns / for the
christian people that will be contryte and trust in gods mercy or have a will so
for to do: they shall escape all perils / so yt they shall not perysshe / but
be saved / where as the Jews and sarasyns in their perils shall utterly
perysshe to pardycyon / for they have not the strength of Baptym ne the
precious oyntement of crystes passion / that should give to their souls life
and health. Of this they have example and a great figure in holy write that
where as Moses led the children of Israel over the reed see which were
gods people. Moses went before them and smote the water with his rod and
therewith the water parted and the children of Israel went over in suertye.
And they of egypt that followed perysshed and were drowned. By Moses I
understand our lord Ihesu christ / and by the yerde or rod that departed ye
water I understand his holy passion / and by the children of Israel that were
not perysshed all christian people / for right so our lord Ihesu christ came from
his faders bosom to the sea of trybulacyons and temptacyons to be our guide
and leder / he gooth before us with his precious passion and smyteth away the
perils of our troublous temptacyons / so that we shall not perysshe / but it
shall bring us to suertye of everlasting life / and therefore give we to him
thankynges louynges and infynyte praysynges as the children of Israel did /
for though a christian man were never so sinful thinking himself yt he stood
in the sentences of the hardest words that be written: yet should he trust
faithfully in the mercy of god / for and he will forsake his sins and turn
him to good and virtuous life: he shall have grace and forgyuenes / and the
hard sharp words of dampnacyon should turn him to mercy and salvation. For
thus says our lord god in holy write by his prophet Ieremye / though I make
great thretes I shall repent me of my words if my people will repent them of
their sins. O behold the great goodness of our lord / and how pity always
constrayneth him to mercy worship and thanks be ever to his goodness / he is so
benygne and merciful to them that be repentaunt that he freely will change his
sentences from sharp vengeance to forgyuenes / and of the pains that they be
worthy to suffer / give them alygeaunce or lyghter pain to suffer. He says
also by the prophet I say I shall forgive the sins of every man that with
very true contrycyon will draw him to good and virtuous life. And this great
mercy showed our lord openly upon the Cite of Niniue / and also by king
Ezechie / therefore let no man dyspayre but always trust fully to gods
mercy that so well can redress our myscheues and turn all our woo to well /
and our sorrow to Joy. O thou glorious myghtyfull god that thus meruayllously
werketh in thy creatures it is to se that thy mercy is large and broad which
makes the to change thy sentence that before was both thy will and word /
blessed be thou good lord in all thy virtues for thou can / may / and will
turn and change all our infyrmytees to our most proufyte if we will not
flee from the / but turn to thy goodness and ask mercy. But for all this thy
great goodness / god forbede that any man should be the more bolder to sin or
wylfully and wyttyngly by delyberacyon should presume to fall to sin upon
trust of thy mercy. And therefore our lord is so merciful I surely trust that
every true courteys soul will be the more loathe to offend his goodness / and as
for you that be tempted against your will / and will not for all the world
dysplease god wylfully: but that ye be thus begyled and encombred by the fend
with many paynefull thoughts / be ye not afraid of the fend nor of his
ferefull assawtes / for he is full sore dyscomforted when that he sees a man
or a woman which he so tempts is not aferde of him. Sometime the fend
comes and tempts a soul fyersly like a dragon / and sometime he assaylleth
him like a rampynge lion / but and if a creature strengthynge himself saddely
in the passion of almighty god / and arm him with that holy passion / a
thousand such fendes how someuer that they come shall have no more power
over him then has as many flies or gnattes. And therefore strength you all in
god and be not abashed. So to strength and arm you in him though ye be
sinful / for he says himself in the gospel he came for sinners. And in an
other place of the gospel he says that he came for mercy and not for no
vengeance / and to be our shield and strength and so let us humbly with a
meke heart take him And if ye feel any dredes by ymagynacyon or temptacyon or
for words that ye have herd or read in books by the which ye doubt of
salvation / than think on the words that christ himself taught to a man that
doubted / saying and asking of our lord who should be saved / for he
thought it was to hard to himself for to esche we all the points that led
man to pardycyon. And our lord badde him for to say Credo in deum patrem
omnipotentem creatorem celi et terre. Et in iesum christu^ filium cius. Believe
said our lord Ihesu that god the fader is almighty and that no thing to him
is impossyble but that he may forgive all sins and redress all wrongs and
bring the souls to his bliss and think ferthermore that his might and power
may do all that his wisdom can / and his goodness will / and therefore trust
fully that by his goodness he will save you and bring you to everlasting Joy
when he sees best time / for he has bought you full dear with his precious
blood and paynefull death. And I dare sauely say that there is none so sinful
a caytyf which is crystened or would be crystened this day on the earth all
though he were in the sight of god dampnable and in the sight of all creatures
also: ye and yet were Iuged to be dampened by all scripture and he would for
sake his sin and be contryte and ask god forgyuenes he should have mercy and
forgyuenes of him / and if it were so that he stood in that case or had a good
mind to stand so in the time of death he should be saved / the might and mercy
of god is so great that it surmounteth all his laws Iugementes and scryptures
And so our lord Ihesus shows us by an example in the gospel of a woman that
was found in aduoutry and by Moses law which was ordained by god yt she
should be stoned to the death. But the might and the wisdom of that blessed
lord god was so gretely showed to the pharyzens which accused her that they
so largely perceived their sins that they might not for shame deem her but
stale away out of the temple. And our lord Ihesu would not deem her but of
his gracyous mercy forgave her all her sins And therefore be a man or woman
never so sinful and that they feel never so many bodily and ghostly sins
always rysynge and sterynge within them / they should never the rather dyspayre
of the mercy of god / ne be dyscomforted. For there as much sin is / there
is showed much mercy and grace / and the goodness of god is known by the
forgyuenes of the sin when a body turns him there from and is very contryte
/ but god forbede as I said before that any creature be the more recheles or
bold to sin wylfully / for in so much the mercy of god is so large we ought
to be the more besy and dylygent to love and praise him. Almighty god werketh
like a leche / for a leche suffers sometime the deed flesh to grow on him
that he has in cure / but afterward he takes away the same and makes the
quycke flesh to grow / and so he heleth the pacyent. Right so does our
lord Ihesu christ maker of heaven and earth suffers sometime a man or a woman to
fall in deedly sin: but afterward of his great mercy and pity he puts to
his hand of grace / for they that were deedly wounded thorough sin he heleth
them and wassheth away their sins with the water of his well of mercy / and
makes in them quycke virtues to grow whereby he gives to them everlasting
life. Our lord god is also like a gardyner for a gardyner suffers sometime
wicked wedes to grow in his gardyn / and when the earth thorugh moisture of
rain wexeth tender he takes and pulls away the wedes both rote and rynde.
So in like wise does our lord Ihesu christ he suffers sometime in his gardyn
which is man's soul wicked deeds of sin to grow / but when the heart of
man wexeth tender by mekenes and moisture of contrycyon he than takes away all
the sins both rote and rynde and planteth and sets in his gardyn herbs
and fruytes of good virtues / and watreth them with the dew of his blessed
goodness / whereby the soul of man shall come to everlasting Joy and rest.
Now than sythen our lord god is so good so pyteous and so merciful to
sinners that wylfully offends him by co^myttynge of horrible sins / much
more he is merciful and has pity and compassyon of a soul / that thorughe
trouble and temptacyons falls to sin / for almighty god suffers often
times the soul of man for to be tempted and vexed in withstanding temptacyons
/ whereof it deserves the more merit. And therefore be ye not doubtefull nor
heavy for it shall neuertourne you to peril ne danger but to great proufyte.
For thereby ye shall win the crown of glory and the palm of vyctorye which
shall be given to you for withstanding of such temptacyons / and to the fend
it shall turn to shame and confusyon / and though it seems to you sometime
that ye feel dyscorde between god and you be not therefore recreaunt ne
dyscomforted. For almighty god says by his prophet I say A little while I
have forsaken and hid my face from the: but I shall call the to me again by
my mafolde mercyes which ever shall endure.

The fyfte chapter.
ANd therefore grutche not against the will of god ne marvel not of these
temptacyons / for the more that a man or a woman be tempted in this manner or in
any other against their will and they withstand it that is to say not
wyllyngly consenting thereto but mekely suffers the same: the more they shall
encreace in virtues to the proufyte of their souls in the sight of god though
it be hid from them / for perauenture when ye be sharply tempted ye think
ye be to dull and neglygent in ghoostly excercyse thorughe wyckednes of your
spyryte that is sore trauayled and vexed / whereby ye think that ye have a will
consented to such temptacyons as ye be tempted with / but it is not so / for
ye shall understand that every man and woman has two wylles a good will and
an evil / the evil will comes of sensualyte the which is ever inclynynge
downwarde to sin / and the good will comes of grace which always styreth
the soul up ward to all goodness / and therefore when reason comes to you ye
have always a good will to do well / and as myscontent with all evil thoughts
and sterynges that ye feel and puts your will only to the will of god /
though ye through such wicked thoughts and sterynges by vyolence and sharpnes
be enclyned to sensualyte yet ye do it not ne consent thereto but it is the
sensualyte that does it in you / and your good will abides in you still
unbroken though the clouds of evil thoughts stops your sight from the
feeling of your good will as ye may se by ensample of the moon / for the moon
shyneth always in her dew place as well when we se her as when we se her not.
But oftentimes the clouds shadoweth and puts from us the sight thereof /
and so in like wise it fares by your good will which stands always unbroken
in you by the grace of almighty god though ye feel it not through trauayllous
thoughts which takes away the syghte of your knowledge. Therefore ye good
children that sharply be vexed with such temptacyons and tribulacions
comfort your self in your benygne and merciful fader that says to you by
his prophet in holy write / my children though ye go in ye fire dread ye not /
for ye flambe thereof shall not trouble you. As who says ye that be christian
people wyllyngly to do well though ye goo in to the fire of trybulacyons and
temptacyons dread you not for it shall turn you to no peril / but thorugh my
goodness and the merytes of my passion it shall turn you to great proufyte and
comfort of your soul / the manner of all these temptaco^ns and ye remedies of
ye same shows our savior Ihu^ christ to his apostle saint Peter as it
appears in ye gospel where he says thus / Peter sathanas asks and desires
to syfte the as men syfte whete / whereby it appears well yt the fend has no
might ne power to atte^pte ye servants of almighty god but by his suffrau^ce
/ and that was euydently known by the temptacyons of Job whom the fend
besyfted and tempted / for ye more yt whete is syfted and cast from side to
side the more clean it is. Right so the more yt a man or a woman be tempted
with the fend against their will / the more clean they be before god / wherefore
it appears plainly yt almighty god suffers not his servants to be tempted
but for their great well and profit if they purpose them self myghtely to
withstand the fendes temptacyon / which no man may withstand without the
help of god. Therefore of his help he makes us sure like as he said to peter
/ these words I have prayed for the that thy faith fail the not / and
therefore that man which pacyently is ready to suffer all troubles and dyseases
for the love of his maker almighty Ihesu not taking head of all the fendes
mocyons and temptacyons: that man through the might and grace of christ bears
down and ouercometh the fend / whereby he may be called a vaynquyssher or
ouercomer. And to such men may be said thus / thou that art thus turned to
almighty god by the virtue of pacyence / but if thou help to counseyle and
conferme thy brethren. And teache them to suffer as the grace of god has
taught the: or else thou art unkind. For Salamon says that one brother well
counseylled and confermed by an other is a mighty Cite against the fend / and
therefore they that be sharply trauaylled and tempted when they have had the
good counseyle of their brother: they ought to take comfort to them saying
with David which says. O my soul why art thou so unsteadfast thus to assail
and trouble me trust only to almighty god that is full of benygnyte and mercy
whom I only confess and knowledge to serve be I never so sore trauaylled ne
troubled. And to such men thus vexed with thoughts mocyons and sterynges is
behouefull to take the counseyle and techynge of the wise and dyscrete persons
fleing utterly their own wild fantasyes which often times gretely troubles
them. And in eschewynge of such temptacyons and troubles they must give them
self to good and virtuous occupacyons / as to redynge and saying the service
of almighty god / and doing other virtuous deeds / and ever among prayenge to
almighty god they may have strength in their souls to resyste such mocyons
and temptacyons. And though they find in them self no manner of swetenes ne
savor in gods service: yet they ought not to be heavy therefore if their will
and mind be to fulfill the same. For as holy write says every good will is
accepted for the deed. Saint Barnarde says that sometime god withdraws
devotion from prayer to make the prayer more medefull / for he will be served
sometime in bytternes and sometime in swetenes which both two we must mekely
receive. And therefore Arystotle says that with the more dyffyculte and
travail virtuous ben gotten: the more they proufyte and increase in the soul.
It was no maystry for saint Peter when he saw almighty god on the hill of
bliss to say / lord it is good for us to dwell here / But afterward when he
saw him among his enemies cruelly turmented a woman's word fered and put him
in such dread that he forsook and denied his master. But when thorugh the
might of the holy ghoost he was reconsyled and confermed again: than was there
no turment in earth that king or prince put unto him could fere him. Right so
if a man be in perfyte rest and quyetnes of heart / it is no maystry for him to
serve god. But it is a maystry to him that is in travail and out of quyetnes
of heart to serve him / therefore that creature that is tempted or vexed in the
service of almighty god and is in will to withstand the said temptacyons till
he after be strengthed and comforted by the holy ghost the fend shall never
have power to fere ne put him in dread / for though it be long or he feel
comfort yet let not him dread / for our merciful savior knows what time
comfort is most needful to him than he fails not to give it him. For
sometime the feeling of swetnes is withdrawn from man or else he should wexe
proud and presumtuous or neglygent and recheles in virtuous living / and
therefore it is withdrawn for the best to the health of his soul / wherefore
hardness and sharpenes sent to a creature is full proufytable to the soul: as
saint Austyn says in techynge us of the manner of almighty god that when a man
is feeble and newly turned to him he gives him peace and swetnes to the intent
to stablysshe him in his law and love / But when he is stablysshed and sadly
grounded in his love: than suffers he him to be vexed and trauaylled for two
reasons / one is to prove him and to crown him the hyer in the bliss of
heaven. An other is to pourge him of his sins in this world that in no wise
he be from him in the everlasting world.

The syxte chapter.
ANd for as much as many men can not nor will not in time of temptacion se or
perceive it but have a dredefulnes and a sorynes in themself by sterynge of
their compleccyon therefore to all such men three things be needful and
necessary. The first is that they be not much alone. The second is that they
think ne study to depely in any one thing / but fully order them by some
dyscrete person as before I said / and though it come in their mind that they
should be in Ieopardye or peril utterly to be lost: they should take no head
of such sterynges or thoughts / for it never may turn them to danger of
their souls. Almighty god says in the gospel / if the intent of a man's
purpose be good the deed is good. The third remedy is this / that for as
much as the fend labors to make a man dredefull and sorye / a man again
ought to the honor of god and confusyon of the fend to strength himself and
be merry though it be against his heart / and dread no thing the fendes malice.
For the less gladness that he feleth in himself the more merit he shall have
when he so enforces himself to be merry to the honor of god / and in spyte of
his ghoostly enemy the devil. For as holy write says the holy appostles went
away merry and glad when the Iues enemies of god had shamefully beten them.
Also a man ought to be glad for three causes when the fend tempts and
turmenteth him. The first is that he is troubled by the enemy of god. The
second is by such temptacyons and turmentes the fend shows plainly that he
is his enemy and every man ought to be glad that gods enemy is his enemy.
And the third is that by such turmentes a man is not only released of the
pains in purgatory but also it makes him to wyn^e everlasting bliss. Our
lord Ihesu says in the gospel / blessed be they that suffers persecucyon
for right wysnes for they shall have the kingdom of heaven.

The seventh chapter.
ALso it is to understand that our old enemy the fend is often times about
to begyle man's soul in diverse and many manners / sometime he styreth man under
color of goodness to deceive him when he is well dysposed and specially in three
things which I will speak of. One is that though a creature be it man or
woman be never so well ne so often shryuen / yet the fend makes them believe
they are not well shryuen / and that he does to bring the soul in heaviness /
and so anoyeth and troubles the poor soul that he makes him to forgete what
he would say / and thereby makes him out of rest till he be newly shryuen
again. But this does he not for that he would that any were often and well
shryuen: but fully to let and trouble him / and to make him believe that he
were blinded by sin and out of grace / wherefore he might not make himself
clean. The second while and color that the fend makes to withdraw goodness
is that when a man or a woman by devout sterynges of thoughts have felynges of
contemplacyon and medytacyon as perauenture some solytarye persons has: and
he makes them to think that to hold and keep that medytacyons is to their
most proufyte to thentent they should leave their dyuyne service that they be
bound to / and brings them in such a combraunce that they wot not which
way is best to them to take / and all this he does utterly to deceive them
and cause them to be unquiet to do any of them both. The third craft or
wyle that he tempts with is when a man or a woman gives them to honest
dysporte to strength them self against his false wyles to the comfort of their
own soul / than will the fend cause them to have a conscience thereof / and
puts in to their minds that all such dysportes is but sin and vanyte.
And many times brings in to their minds again the sins that they before
had done and were confessed of. And all that does he to bring them in to
heaviness and dyscomforte to thentent he might bring them to dyspayre.
Nevertheless there be good remedies in these temptacyons for as unto the last
where the fend puts them in a fere when they dyspose them to honest
dysporte. And also when they be never so clean shryuen always puts them in a
doubt that they have not shryuen them well: or else that there is yet some
sin in them that they perceive not: but for all these fantasyes they ought
to take no fere nor thought: but verayly think that it is by suggestyon of
their ghostly enemy that would let them from rest and peace of their souls /
and though it be so sometime that by the mean of such fantasyes and troubles
they forgete some thing of their charge which they ought for to have said:
let him than be confessed if he may and if he may not conuenyently and
lightly have his confessor: than let him have a full will and purpose to be
confessed as soon as he can possible. And in the mean time cry god mercy /
and with a contryte heart ask forgyuenes for his sins / and than trust fully
it is forgyuen him / for a man is not so ready to ask forgyuenes and mercy:
but our merciful lord of his great goodness is much more ready to forgive
them. And as to the second temptacyon whereby the fend would let a man from
his dyuyne service that he is bound unto utterly temptynge him to leave it:
than ought he to be the more dylygent devoutly and reverently with good
aduysement to say it / and if it be so he say alone his service he may when
good thoughts come or that it will please god with swetenes or some hye
vysytacyon of the holy ghoost to vysyte and touch him / than shall it be but
well done for to stynte of his service / and attend to that medytacyon for a
time and after to say forth / so that his service that he is bound unto be
not left vnsayd or undone / and in thus doing it shall be but little lettynge
to his service / and he shall find great comfort and ease therein For though
it let him for the time: it shall well further him to the quyckenes of his
soul an other time. The third temptacyon is this when a man in due time
gives himself to honest company and dysporte for the strength and comfort of
his soul / and the fend puts in his mind his sins to fore done. And
that he synneth in vain spending the time: for all such temptaco^ns give ye
no charge for it is the ghostly enemy that so tempts and troubles you. For
nevertheless ye may be sure that all thing which is truly grounded in god
pleases his goodness and no thing offends him / wherefore all gods
servants must ground them fastely in god / and do by the counsel of holy
church / and if they so do they shall never be deceived / and therefore a man
that has been sore troubled well done it is to take him to dysporte in dyspyte
of the fend / and put away all other fantasyes / and at time conuenyent to
ask god mercy of his offenses and to pray unto him for grace.

The eight chapter.
ALso the fend is full besy to meue men and women to tender conscience / and
to bring them in such erroures and makes them wene sometime when they do
evil they do no sin. And sometime that is well done they think it sin and
makes a venyall sin as grievous as a deedly. And sometime also the fend
encombreth them so gretely that what soever they do or love undone they be so
sore bytten in conscience that they can no while together have any rest in them
self. And all this the cruel enemy does by the mean of putting them in a
false dread and blind conscience that he brings them to / but the remedy of
these and all other temptacyons is to be governed by their confessor or some
other dyscrete person / and fully put them to their rule as before is said and
no thing follow their own blind conscience For if they follow their own
conscience it were a great pride / in that he would hold his own wit better
than the true counseyle of holy church. For a man that so will do must needs
fall in great errors and in to the fendes hands. And if such an error of
conscience made to you by your ghostly enemy make you think that other men
feel not that ye feel. And for that cause they can not give you good counseyle
or remedy. And therefore ye needs must follow your own fantasyes: yet for all
this charge not your heart therewith / but put away all such errors of
conscience as fast as they come to mind / and let them not tarry ne sink in
your soul. And if any person will say that they may not ne can not put them
away they say not truly / for who so is in very will to do away any such
false suggestyon tofore god it is put away though they have in them never so
false demynges / and therefore have ye never so many of them against the will of
his conscience: he needs not to dread them For out of doubt almighty god will
comfort him or he dye / and the longer time that he suffers such vexacyon
and trouble the more is he thankful in the sight of god.

The nynth chapter.
ALso though the fend put in you any thought of dyspayre or make you to think
that in the hour of death ye shall have such evil thoughts and grievous
sterynges / and that ye than shall be but lost: yet for all that believe him no
thing / but answer that ye have fully put your trust in god / and therefore
for all his temptacions by the great power of almighty god and merytes of his
passion think verayly it shall be to you no peril of soul / but turn to
the shame and confusyon of your ghostly enemy / and if any creature man or
woman speak to you sharp or dyscomfortable words take it mekely and pacyently
and think that perauenture it is done by the temptacyon of the fend to
trouble and let you / or that it is a chastysynge of god for some word or
deed that ye have done contrary to his will / for our lord god does like a
kind mother / for a loving mother that is wise and well taught her self she
would that her children were virtuously and well nortured / and if she may
know any of them with a defaute she will give them a knock on the heed /
and if the defaute be more she will give him a buffet on the cheke / and if he
do a great fault she will sharply lasshe him with a rod / and thus does
god that is our loving fader from whom all virtue and goodness comes he will
that his special chosen children be virtuously and well taught in their souls
/ and if they do a defaute he will knock them on their hedes with some words
of dyscomforte and dyspleasure / and if they do a greter fault he will give
them a buffet with great sharpenes in sundry manners after the diverse condycyon
of the defautes / and if they do a much greter trespass than he chastyseth
them much more sharply. And all this our blessed lord does for the special
love he has unto us / for as he says himself / them that he loves / them he
chastyseth. Now truly and we took good head of these words we would be gladder
of his chastysynge than of all this worlds cherysshynge / and if we so did /
all disease and trouble should turn us to comfort and Joy / but it is full
hard thus to do in the time of sharp heaviness when a soul stands naked
from all ghoostly and bodily comfort to take and find Joy in disease / al be
it they that be in such inward dures they must seek in all ways how they may
comfort themself in god / and think and trust fully that god sent never
such chastysynge but that he would in long time or in short send comfort
whereby they should be brought out of these heaviness. For the prophet says many
be the trybulacyons of right wysmen / and all such god shall deliver / and
though ye feel somtymes sterynges of desires of such unkindly evil thoughts
comfort you ever in the goodness of god / and in the paynefull passion that his
manhood suffers for you / for the fend tempts many of the servants of god
to dysperacyon and dread of salvation / as well worldely men as other ghoostly
lyuers / putting in worldely men's minds the greuousnesse of their sins /
and to the ghoostly lyuers he puts dread and strayte conscience in many more
sundry wyses than I can tell / and full gracyously god has comforted them
and brought them out of their errors / and now I am styred and moved for to
tell you of one of them which was a squire that hight John^ holmes A
narracyon. This squire that I have named had been a great sinful man / and so
at the last thorugh the beholdynge of his great sins. And by the temptacyon
of the fend he fell in to dyspayre so depely and grievously that he had nygh
lost his mind. And thus he was troubled forty days that he might neither
sleep ne ete but wasted away and was in the point to destroy himself / but
that blessed gracyous lord that is so full of mercy and pity would not have
him lost. And upon a day as he walked in a wood alone an angel came to him
in form of a man and saluted the squire full goodly / and talked with him in
full curteys manner / saying unto him man thou semest to have great heaviness and
sorrow / tell me I pray the / the cause of thy disease. Nay said the squire it
is not to be told to the. yes hardely said the angel / thou wotest not how
well I may help and remove thy disease. For a man being in dyscomforte should
always dyscouer his heaviness to some creature that might ease him / for thorugh
good counseyle he might recover comfort and hele / or in some wise have
remedy. The squire answered the angel again and said that he wyste well he
neither could ne might help him. And therefore he would not tell it to him.
This sady squire wenynge always that this angel had been an erthly man / and
dredde that if he had told it unto him he should have said some word that
should utterly have grieved him more. And when the angel saw he would by no
way tell it unto him / he said unto the squire in this wise. Now sithe thou
will not tell me thy grieve I shall tell it the. Thou art said the angel in
dyspayre of thy salvation but trust me faithfully thou shalt be saved / for
the mercy of god is so great that it passes all his works / and surmounteth
all sins. It is sothe said the squire I wot well that god is merciful but he
is also ryghtfull and his ryghtwysnes must needs punysshe sin. And therefore I
dread his ryghtfull Iugementes. The angel spoke unto him again and told him
many great examples how gracyous and merciful our lord god is to sinners. But
the squire of whom we spoke was so depely fallen in dyspayre that he could
take no comfort of any thing that he could say. Than the angel spoke
again to him in this manner. O said he that thou art hard of believe / but
will thou have an open showing that thou shalt be saved. Than said he to ye
squire I have here three dyce that I will throw / and thou shalt throw them
also / and who that has most of the dyce sykerly shall be saved. A said the
squire how might I in this throwynge of the dyce be certain of my salvation /
and held it but a Iape / that not withstanding the angel threw the dyce
and he had on every of the dyce upward the nombre of six. And he than bad the
squire throw the dyce. O than said the squire certainly that dare I not do /
for I wot well though I cast / more than thou have cast should I not cast ne
have / and if I had less than should I fall in ferther dyscomforte / but so
specially the angel desired and spoke that at the last the squire threw the
dyce / and in throwynge by the gracyous might and power of god every dyce
divided in two / and on every dyce was the nombre of six / and so he had the
double that the angel had / and as he was meruaylynge thereupon the angel
vanysshed out of his sight / wherefore he thought verily than it was an angel
sent from god to bring him out of his sorrow / and than he took much
comfort and Joy in the great mercy and goodness of god in such manner that all
his dredes and sorrows were clean departed / and he became a virtuous man and
the very servant of god / and lived blessydly. And when he should depart from
this world he devised there should be a stone laid upon him / with these
words written about it that follows Here lies John^ holmes that of the mercy
of god may say alargys. I knew a worshypfull person that was in the same
abbey here in england where as he lies that read the same words before said
written on his tomb. Now than sythen our merciful lord god sent thus his
gracyous comfort to this man that was a worldly sinful man and received him
to grace and brought him out of dyspayre. There should no man be dyscomforted
nor dyspayre of any temptacyons / for hardely god will comfort him when he
sees his time / and though he send not a man comfort shortly it shall be
to his more mede / and therefore think always when ye think of any temptacyons
bodily or ghostly that ye stand in the blessings of all holy church / for
holy write says blessed be they that suffers temptacyons. For when they be
well proved they shall have the crown of life the which almighty god has
promised to them that love him.

The tenth chapter.
O ye children of holy church that has forsaken the world for the health of
your souls and pryncypally to please god: comfort you in him whom ye have
chosen to love and serve / for he will be to you full free and large as ye may
se by example of Peter in the gospel where as he asked our lord Ihesu christ
what reward he should have that had forsaken all thing to follow him. And our
lord answered him and said that he should Judge with him the twelve trybes of
kynredes of Israel at the day of dome / and ferthermore our lord said also
unto him that not only one or two or some / but he said all tho that forsake
for his love kynne / friends / possessions / or any erthly goods: they shall
have in this life an hundred fold more / and after bless withouten end.
Therefore sister cast away all such false dredes that would trouble and let
you from love and hope of our merciful lord god for no thing pleases so
much the fend as to se the souls withdraw from the love of god. And
therefore he besyeth himself full sore day and night to let and trouble love
and peace in man's soul / and on the other side no thing confounds nor
dyscomforteth him so much as when he sees a man set all his desire to have
the love of god. Alas though ye feel not that fervent love of god shall ye by
your Imagynacyon fall in dyscomforte and heaviness of heart / and think your
self lost? nay / nay / put away all such dyscomfortable heaviness and think
well it comes of your enemy the fend / and ever have a good will to love and
please god / and prynte well these words in your heart that a good will is
except as for a deed in the sight of god / and comfort you always in the name
of Ihesu / for Ihesu is as much to say as a savior / and therefore think
well ever thereupon / and bear it in your mind with his passion / and also his
other great virtues / for no thing shall so soon put away all dredefull
temptacyons and fantasyes as the remembrance of this name Ihesu / his bitter
passion and glorious virtues. These three be shield and spear / armure / and
strength to drive down the fendes power be he never so fyersly set to tempte
man or woman / and specially to think on his great virtues how god the fader
in himself has all dyuyne nature and in whom is all might and power and to
whom is all thing possible and no thing impossyble to him. And god the son
is all wisdom that all thing may make and govern / and god the holy ghoost
is all love and bounte that in a moment of time all sins may forgive. I say
not to you three gods but three persons and one god / in whom is all bliss
and glory / he is so fair and bright shynynge that all the aungelles marvel
of his beauty / his glorious blessydfull beauty and presence fedeth and
fulfylleth all the court of heaven with such myrthe and melody that is
everlasting. In him is all benygnyte keeping us from vengeance and in him is
all grace and gentylnes / curtesy / fredome / and largenes / pity / mercy / and
forgyuenes / Joy / swetenes / and endless health / our socour he is in all
trybulacyons when we call upon him / our comfort / our strength / our help /
and our souls health. I wys sister this is our spouse / whom ye desire to love
and please / the gretenes of his virtues / ne the multitude of his Joys which
spredeth to all them that be in the court of heaven: no heart can think nor
tongue tell / for the blessydnes of his presence can can neither be said nor
written. Joy ye ther^ore in our lord christ Ihesu christ / for he has bought
you full dear to bring you to that bliss / and therefore say to him. O holy
god in whom is all goodness whose pity and mercy made the to descend from the
high trone down in to this wretched world the valay of woo and weeping / and
here to take our nature / and in that nature thou suffrest pain and passion
with cruel sharp death to bring our souls to thy kingdom. Therefore
merciful lord forgive me all my sins that I have done / thought / and said.
Glorious trinite send me clennes of heart / purete of soul / restore me with
thy holy virtues / strength me with thy might / that I always may withstand the
fend and all evil temptacyons. O good lord comfort me with thy holy ghoost
and fulfill me with perfyte grace and charity: that I may from hens forth live
virtuously. And love the with all my heart / with all my might and with all my
soul / so that I never offend the but ever to follow thy pleasures in will /
word / thought and deed / now grant me this good lord that art infynyte /
which eternally shall endure. And now good sister if ye do thus I hope it
shall do you great ease. And though ye find no manner of comfort swetnes nor
devotion when ye would / be not therefore dyscomforted / but suffer it mekely /
for right many there be that strive with themself as though they would have
sweet devotion by maystry. And I say you for troth so will it not be had /
but by mekenes much sooner it may be gotten. And that is as thus that a man
hold and think himself unworthy to have any swetnes or comfort and offer
himself lowly to the will of god and put his will fully to the will and mercy
of that blessed lord / for a man should not desire to have that swetnes and
devotion for his own comfort and pleasaunce: but purely and only entendynge
to please god and to follow his will / and than it suffyseth unto us whether we
have it or no / some also weneth that and they have not such swetnes and
devotion that they be out of grace / but certainly some there be that in them
self feleth no swetnes nor devotion that be in more grace then the other that
feleth it / for they have many comfortes / and better it were mekenes without
feeling than feeling without mekenes. Therefore sister suffer mekely and
pacyently what ever falls unto you / and ever have a good will to do that may
be most pleasynge to god / and when any dyscomforte comes by temptacyon or
ymagynacyon of your enemy have the words in your mind that often is said in
this writing before which is that a good will shall be excepted for a deed /
for and ye desire to be virtuous and to love and please god it is excepted as
for deed before our lord god / if you so follow it with your might and power /
as when reason comes to you with a desyrefull will to live and do well / and
if ye any time feel comfort and swetnes and after feel these temptacyons as ye
did before / yet be ye not dyscomforted therefore ne think thereupon. Say not
alas it is comen again it will never away from me. And by the mean of your
own ymagynacyon fall again in dyscomforte / do not so / but comfort you in
god / and be glad that the fend has envy unto you / for while the life is
in the body he will always trouble and tarry the servants of god / he is so
fully set against them with all malice to disease and dyscomforte them in all
the diverse manners that he can or may. Saint Augustyne says ye in many manner
ways temptacyons be had by the which the serpent adder enemy to all
mankind tourmenteth man's soul. And saint Gregorye says that there is no
thing in the world which we ought to be so syker of god as when we gave
these tourmentes and troubles. And if a man say that bodily turmentes be
medeful and not ghoostly turmentes he says not right / for doubtless the
ghoostly tourmentes be more grievous and paynefull that come against man's will
than be bodyly tourmentes / and so much more be they needful / and therefore
many men do dishonor to god that says with full aduysement that the fend in
this world may more turment than god may give merit / wherefore truly there is
no thing more medefull charytable nor more godly than for to strength and
comfort the soul that the fend so troubles / for who so comfort them
that be dyssolate and in sorrow the lord of comfort Ihesu christ our lord
and god will comfort them without end in the bliss of heaven / the which
lord thorugh the might and merit of his paynefull passion and precious blood
has put down ye power of ye fondes / and has granted to christian souls the
vyctory over them to the worstyp of all the hole trynyte / fader / sone / and
holy ghoost that lives and reyneth withouten end. Amen.

Here ends ye remedy against the troubles of temptacyons.
Here begins a devout medytacyo^ in saying devoutly ye psalter of our lady
with diverse ensamples.


THe glorious master John^ of the mou^te in his moryall tells / which also
I found in ye book of friar Thomas of the temple. In the time ye most blessed
Domynyck the noble fader and leder most famous of ye order of prechers /
preched throughout the world in many regyons and exhorted incessau^tly ye
people to the laud: and praise of ye blessed marye vyrgyn undefiled / and to
her angelyke co^fraternyte. It fortuned him to preche at Rome in the audyence
of the great prelates of the world and showed by fygures and examples this
blessed vyrgyn to be saluted most specially by her psalter. All they
meruaylled of thaffluence of his words. They were astonyed at the great
wonders. To whom he said. O faithful and true lords and other true lovers of
the faith: here this synguler wholesome saying to you all / that ye may verily
know those things which I have spoken to be true. Take the psalter of this
blessed vyrgyne / and in saying it: call deuoutely unto your remembrance the
passion of christ. Thus I show unto you that ye shall have in experyence the
spyryte of god both in saying and in forgyuynge. Truly so great a flambe
may not stand in any place without making hot. Neither so great light
without gyuynge light / nor so godly a medycyne without the virtue of making
hole. What should I say more / all the people gave audyence and in manner
astonyed: they meruaylled of his godly words / many persons not only of the
common people / but also of great prelates of the church as reverend
cardynalles and many honorable bysshoppes took upon them to say this psalter
of our lady / to thentent they might get some grace of almighty god. A
meruayllous thing. The cite being in trouble / diverse multyplycacyon of
prayers was among the people in every state or degree. For truly thou might se
both morning / evening / and at myddaye men and women every where berynge
the psalter of our lady. Cardynalles which be named the pyllers of the world
and bysshoppes shamed not to bear in their hands and at their gyrdelles these
so great tokens of the godhede and of our faith verily to be byleued. Truly
by the miracles of our lady showed by saint Domynyck they doubted not but in
excercysynge of this psalter gods help to be ready at all times. What more.
All that did assaye this psalter perceived some knowledge of the pity of god.
And among all I shall show this wonder or miracle only following. At Rome
was a certain mysdysposed woman of her body most famous above all other like
dysposed / in beauty / eloquence / apparayle / and worldly gladness / which
fortuned gracyously to have the psalter of our lady by thaduyse of holy saint
Domynyk / which she hid under her kyrtell and said it many times on the
day. But alas she nevertheless used the unlawful flesshely pleasure and
uncleanness of her body above all other / more men resorted to her than to any
other woman of such vain dysposycyon. This woman named fair Katheryne for
the incomperable beauty of her body continued in her mysselyuynge / and ones on
the day at the leest she did vysyte the church saying the psalter of our
lady / and thus was her medytacyon and thought The first fyfty she said for the
infancye of christ in the which he bare all his passion to come / and if it
were not at that time in execucyon / nevertheless it was in his intent and
mind. The second fyfty she said for crystes passion exhybyte and done royally
like as he suffered in his manhood. The third fyfty she said for the passion of
christ as it was in his godhede / not because the godhede as the godhede might
suffer / but because this infynyte godhede loved so much the nature of man /
that if it had been mortal it should have suffered death. Therefore because the
eternal wisdom of god in himself might not dye for us / he took upon him our
manhood / which his will was should suffer passion and dye for all mankind.
And as this fair Katheryne thus continued in prayenge / it happened on a
season as she went about Rome wandrynge after her old manner / a meruayllous
fair man met her and said. Heyle Katheryne / why stondest thou here / have
thou no dwelling place. To whom she answered saying. Sir I have a dwelling
place and every thing in it ordered to the best and goodlyest manner. To whom
he said. This night will I soupe with the. She answered I grant with all mine
heart / and what soever thou will have I shall gladly prepare. Thus going
hand in hand they came unto her house where as were many wenches of like
dysposycyon. Souper was prepared and this unknown geste sat with fair
Katheryne / the one drank to the other. But every thing that this strange
geste touched were it drink or other thing like / anon turned in to blody
color with a meruayllous excellent smell and sweet savor. She meruaylynge said
to him Sir what art thou / either it is not well with me else thou art very
meruaylous / for every thing that thou touchest is anon made of blody color.
And he answered saying / know thou not that a christian man neither eteth nor
drynketh but that is dyed or colored with the blood of christ. Thus this woman
was meruayllously abashed of this stranger / so much that she fered for to
touch him. Notwithstondynge she said. Sir I well perceive by your countenance
that ye be a man of great reverence. I beseech you who be ye / and from whens
come ye. To whom he said when we be together in thy chaumbre / I shall show
the all thyn askynges. And thus left in doubt of the matter? she made ready the
chaumbre. This woman Katheryne went first to bed / and desired the stranger
to come to bed to her. A wonderful thing and such one as in manner never was
herd of any creature. Suddenly this stranger changed himself in to the
shappe of a little child / bare upon his heed a crown of thorn / upon his
sholder a cross / and tokens of his passion with innumerable wounds up on all
his body / and said unto Katheryne. O Katheryne now leave thy folysshenes.
Behold / now thou see the passion of Christ verily as it was in his infancye
for the which thou said the first fyfty of thy psalter I show unto the / that
from the first hour of my concepcyon unto my death I bare contynually this
pain in mine heart / which for thy sake was so great that if every little
piece or stone of gravel in ye see were a child and every one of them had as
much pain as ever suffered all the men in the world at their death: yet all
they together suffer not so great pain as I suffered for the. This woman was
sore abashed seeing and herynge this wonder. And anon again he was turned
in to the lykenes of a man even after the same form which he had the time of
his passion royal. And said Daughter behold now thou see how great pains
I suffered for the / which does excede all the pains of hell / for my power
of suffrynge is of god and not of man. And my passion was so great that if it
had been divided among all creatures of the world / they should all have dyed
or ben dystroyed. After this seeing he changed himself in to the clerenes of
the son / notwithstanding the tokens of his passion remaining also
gloryously he apered / in all his wounds were seen al and infynyte creatures
of the world for compassyon of the same and he said unto her.



Behold / take heed / now thou see what I suffered i^ my godhede for thyn
health / sith all things be in me and I in every thing / in all these I se the
/ I love the / and in them all I am ready to suffer eternally the pain for thy
souls health which thou see for my love is infynyte (after saint Dyonyse)
and all things in me be infynyte as the same Dyonyse shows. Therefore know
the mekenes of god / and call to mind the threfolde passion of christ / for
the which thou said thryse fyfty Aues / and fyftene Pater nosters. And here
after amend thy self / that as thou were before the example of all malice and
unclean living / so now from this time forward live in such manner that thou
may be to all other a myrrour of purete and clennes. I do not appear to the for
thy merytes but only for an example of penance / and because thy brethren and
systers of mine undefiled moders fraternity have prayed for the / that by thy
conuersacyon many should be converted and be the children of god / like as
before innumerable were made the children of the devil by thy wyckednes. what
more. This vysyon vanysshed away. It was also unfeigned / for the woman
afterward felt in her hands and fete the sorrow of crystes passion / and in
other parts of her body. Therefore she rose from sin and took her to penance
/ and on the morrow after made her confession to saint Domynyk / to whom he
enjoined in penance to say the psalter of the blessed vyrgyn Marye as she was
wont to do and to be one of her fraternity / which she had not before in
deed / but only in purpose and intent / as it is before said / where it is to
be noted how much this said fraternity is worth to them which have it in deed
/ sith it was so great valor to this woman having it but in purpose / whiles
that she prayed deuoutely unto this vyrgyn Marye / the same blessed lady
appeared to her with saint Katheryne saying to her. Daughter behold / take heed / thou have sinned much: therefore thou must suffer great penance for
this cause / take in penance every day three dyscyplynes or three correccyons /
whereof every one shall be of.lv. strokes which make a penyte^cyall psalter.
She said also / it shall not always need to have a rod / but prycke the with
thy nails / or pynche thy flesh in every place. Thou may at all times do
this penance against every wicked temptacyon and for to obtain all goodness /
and this is a royal preuy penance and natural. It may be called the queen of
all penaunces. This woman herd all these words and fulfilled them in deed.
And as she was thus daily penytent: upon a time saint Domynyk auau^ced by the
power of god saw in the night a wonderful thing to all the world. He
perceived that from the house of this same Katheryne issued out.lv. flodes from
the members of a little child / which flodes descended to hell in whose
coming the souls there to be purged were gretely comforted. O how great and
Joyful noyses made they than: how many blessings gave they unto this said
Katheryne: verily the earth sounded again to their voices for Joy. There were
souls delivered / comforted / made hole and excluded from their pains by the
medytacyon that Katheryne had of crystes passion in his chyldehode. She was
always about to apply it to the comfort of all true christian souls departed
out of this world. O meruaylous thing. After this saint Domynyk saw a man
enter in to Katheryns chaumbre / and from.v. fountaynes of his body yssewed
out.lv. wounds which nourysshed and watered all the church mylytante / and
also this present world / trees and plants did burgyn / birds and fysshes
were quyckened / true christian people were bathed in those flodes. O how great
swetenes was there and how great worldly gladness. All creatures blessed this
woman Katheryne and prayed for her to almighty god maker of all things. And
these two meruaylles were showed for the first fyfty and the second. And where
as this penytent Katheryne began the third fyfty of her psalter. Saint Domynyk
saw a meruaylous great gyaunt clerer than the light / of whom yssewed out
five fountaynes / of the five fountaynes sprange fyfty flodes which neither
descended to therth / nor to hell / but meruayllously ascended together unto
heaven. And by them all heavenly paradyse was watered. Their swetenes was so great
that the aungelles and holy saints did drink of them / gyuynge great
thanks to almighty god. when saint Domynyck saw all these meruaylles as
Thomas of the temple writes: he meruaylled greatly why they should be showed
and done in the house of so great a sinner. To whom marye the vyrgyn appeared
and said. O my friend Domynyk why do thou marvel in such causes? Know
thou not I am a friend to all sinners and that the mekenes of god is in me? It
was my will to show these vysyons to the of this my daughter that thou should
preche them to the world / for this intent that no christian person be their
sins never so great should dyspayre in any condycyon / but always trust in
god and his mercy / and namely they that will flee under my proteccyon with
this woman Katheryne the holy vyrgyn and martyr saint Katheryne socoured her
very much which always she loved and served with some prayer from her young
aege / for the congruence of the name. More over the blessed mother of god said.
O Domynyk thou haste seen these meruaylles. Here now and preche that I so holy
and meke shall say. Show that I have purchased of my sone to all such as
says my psalter and are of my fraternity / they shall have the same excellence
which the said Katheryne has / and though they can not se it in this world
like wise as men can not se god / his aungelles / the deuylles neither their
merytes and virtues in this life. Also they can not se the virtue of a precious
stone nor of the sterres: therefore the knowledge of heavenly things must be
much ferther from them. Notwith sto^dynge they shall behold this excellence
after their death. Therefore Domynyk be of good comfort / preche my psalter and
my fraternity / for unto all such as has them I have purchased not only to
se this excellence but also to have it eternally in possessyon. what should I
say more. Saint Domynyck gave thanks to almighty god for his great mercy. And
this Katheryne made herself a recluse / she dystrybuted her goods to the
poor people / which afterward was of so great holiness that many very holy
persons came unto her because of her godly reuelacyons. To whom appeared our
lord Ihesu.C. days and fyfty before her departing out of this life showing
the time of her death / which afterward departed out of this life very holy.
Three holy vyrgyns one named Iohanne / an other Martha / the third Lucya saw
her soul depart from the body bryghter than the son / between the arms of
her spouse christ. Her sepulture is in the church of saint John^ lateranence.
All christian people by this take heed of how great virtue the psalter of our
lady is with the remembrance of crystes passion / it is always in strength
both in life and at the hour of death. Therefore let us praise and laud our
lord Ihesu and Marye his mother in their psalter / to thentent we may deserve
to have the Joys of heaven / here by grace / and after this life by glory.

^Here ends a devout medytacyon in saying devoutly the psalter of our lady
with diverse ensamples.
Enprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the son. By wynkynde
word. Anno domini. M. CCCCC.viii. the fourth day of February.




