A REMONSTRANCE: OR PLAIN DETECTION OF SOME OF THE FAVLTS AND HIDEOVS SORES OF
SVCH SILLY SYLLOGISMES AND IMPERTINENT ALLEGATIONS, AS OVT OF sundry factious
Pamphlets and Rhapsodies, are cobled up together in a Book, Entitled, A
DEMONSTRATION OF DISCIPLINE: Wherein also, The true state of the Controversy
of most of the points in variance, is (by the way) declared.

2. Timoth. 3. ver. 5, 6, and 7. They have a show of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof: turn away therefore from such, for of this sort are
they which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins,
and led with diverse lusts, which are ever learning, and are never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth.

Augustinus in Psalm. 34. Quare in Praecisione vultis magnificare nomen Domini?
quare duos populos ex vno vultis facere?

Cyprianus lib. 4. epist. 9. ad Florentium Pupianum. Pupianus solus integer,
inuiolatus, sanctus, pudicus, qui nobis miscere se noluit: in Paradiso and in
regno coelorum solus habitabit.

Imprinted at London by GEORGE BISHOP and RAFE NEWBERIE.

An. Domini 1590.

TO THE FACTIOVS AND TVRBVLENT T.C.VV.T. I.P. AND TO THE REST OF THAT
ANarchicall disordered Alphabet, which trouble the quiet and peace of the
Church of England.
MAnifold and foole-hardie have your oppositions and practices been against the
setlement of that discipline of the Church of England, which beyond all just
contradiction, we rightly maintain, as lineally deduced from the Apostles and
primitive times downward unto us, and to be reduced from our times upward unto
them: As namely by your opposite Admonitions to the Parliament, by
Pamphlet-writing of Replies, by Counterpoyson, by Abstract, by Dialoguizing, by
Martinizing, or printing of infamous libels, by penning, or Penrying of
malepart, and treasonable letters, by coursing and discoursing over the holy
discipline of the Church: And now at last, by show and demonstration, or by
making colorable show and false demonstration to conclude your discipline in
Syllogism, That is, to seclude your selves from all pretense of the thing you
would have for ever after before you are awares, and that in Mood and Figure.
The subtiller sort of Heretics have done no more, then you have done to vex
the Church. Tertullian. de Praescript. aduers. H^^^.
Apelles the disciple of Marcion had certain private, but extraordinary
Lectures, or Readings, or prophesies of his own, which they called
Phaneroseis, declarations or demonstrations of a certain maid, named
Philumena, whom he followed as a Prophetess. Habet praeterea suos libros quos
inscripsit Syllogismorum, Besides this, he has his books, to which he gives
this title of Syllogismes, wherein he undertakes to prove, That whatsoever
Moses has written is not true, but false. Semblably this scholar of T. C.
besides all their prophesyings, conferences, private sermonings, parlour
exercising, libellings, has brought unto light this book of demonstratiue
Syllogismes, an incredible and singular good method, and most serviceable to
their own times: which method if either your Ecclesiastical discipliners, A.
B. C. D. or T.C. or any other of your Alphabet, had heretofore embraced and
bound them selves fast unto, we should not have needed to pursue after your
extrauagant and straggling conceits, lying so scattered in your worthy
commentaries, whereby you do nothing else then blurre paper, as always saying
one and the same thing: nor your selves should be so far off from joining a
right issue to determine and try the cause. For by this demonstratiue dealing,
all waste words had been pared away as excrementious and superfluous to the
body and state of the question, and your undutiful demeanors against the
proceedings and superiority of Church-gouernors altogether spared. Which
stratageme, as in the sight of God and his Angels detestable and damnable, it
has rather with silence then with censure been answered, and your wits
exceedingly misliked therefore: so this sophisme or manner of paralogisme, if
it were somewhat more mannerly, as dealing with material points, and letting
alone personal, might deserve less reprehension or mislike, whereunto I have
framed this brief answer with Remonstrance, showing the absurdity of your
reasons, fallacy of your syllogismes, indemonstrable demonstrations, compiled
by other in their books, combined up in this book of yours, worthied by you
of this title, to be named a Demonstration, and to be surnamed a Demonstration
of the holy discipline of the Church, not the discipline of the holy Church,
because the Church is not so holy, but must be hallowed by the discipline.
Whiles I am thus conversant in answering, I list not make of ten apparent
digression from the propositions which I answer, by instance to the contrary,
distinction, or denial, and by returning or retorting all upon your selves as
I might, neither make a roadeouer to invade other men's persons with selaunder,
as the Demonstrator does particularly, by producing at his pleasure every one
into the Theater of envious diffamation: but I rather leave a blanke or cyphre
in Algorisme, or an Abecedarie name. And do farther pray, that all
protestations of your zeal and godliness laid aside, this Academicall law of
disputing schoolelike, being once enacted by your selves, may not be repealed:
That whether your Demonstrator has more to say, he may still syllogize, or if
he have ought to gainsay, it may please him to distinguish, flatly deny, or
give an instance to an affirmative point. But if he have no more to say,
wherewith to fortify his part, nor is able in this form to dispose of his
sayings; Let the wiser sort of your sectaries suspend their judgment, from
either crediting or admiring those pitiful demonstrations. All that I have
said, is no more in substance, then that which has been aforesaid. The
solutions of your arguments are included in the answers to the Admonition, in
the defense of that answer, in the answer to the Abstract, in the defense of
the discipline of the Church of England, and such other learned works,
excepting some forced allegations annexed to the Demonstration, and the coined
syllogismes. All which, by this method of Remonstrance is reanswered, for it is
but one answer. Omne verum, vero consentaneum, Every truth is but agreeeble to
a truth. Veritas est simplex, mendacium est multiplex, there is but one
truth. And although you multiply and urge your falsehood, or divide or
subdiuide or part into infinite fractions, yet it is but one and the same
objection, one Proteus putting on diverse mishapes, the argument sometime
clowded under an equinoction, or colored with ambiguitie of terms, or veiled
with inconsequencie or disorderly disposition of mood and figure, or
transposition of parts of the figure, or borrowing Ignorationem elenchi,
Ignorance or uncunning, whether the proposition hold, Ad idem, secundum idem,
etc. respectively to this, and not to that, or by begging Petitionem principij,
to conclude one and the same by the self same: Or to be beholding to the
fallacte a non causa, by arguing from insufficient cause untrue effect, and
such other sophistications to plaster up your assertions with untruth:
videlicet, as these and such like: As when you argue from your Puritan Idaea
of government, out of the 14. Romans

All lawful things are of faith: all lawful things of faith are warranted by
the word, Ergo, all lawful things are warranted by the word, and
consequently every lawful action in government of the Church: Where the
conclusion is universal in the third figure, and Medius terminus, videlicet,
(lawful things) is in the conclusion contrary to all rule of reasoning, and
yet the Demonstrator misseth of S. Paul's words which are, Quicquid non ex fide
peccatum est. All that is not of faith is sin. Or where as you argue
Hypotheticallie out of the 4. Ephesians. If all needful gifts be appropriate to
other ministeries, then is the Archbishops ministry unlawful, but they are,
Ergo, the Archbishops unlawful.

And T. C. before you argues Categorically after this sort:

Those functions only are sufficient for the Church which have gifts needful:
but all those Ephesians. 4. and Cor. 1.12. have gifts needful, Ergo, they are
only sufficient.

Which is as good a conclusion as if one of you did argue thus:

Those things only are sufficient to salvation which are contained in the
Scripture.

But all those things in the Aue Marie are contained in the Scriptures, Ergo,
those things only in the Aue Marie are sufficient to salvation. Or as
cunningly after this sort.

Those only are men which are endued with reason.

But all the Costerdmongers in London are endued with reason, Ergo, the
Costerdmongers in London are the only men.

Or where you go about to prove that none is ordinable to the ministry,
unless he have a benefice.

As was the 12. place for Mathias, so is a certain place for every church
officer.

But Mathias was not ordained till Judas had made it void by hanging himself:
Ergo, none is to be ordained before the place be void.

Add unto this, by such manner of Resignation as hanging of himself: Or when
another Apostleship falls void: Or when every 12. place is void: Or when
Mathias comes again to be chosen into Judas place.

The Argument leapeth from one predicament to another, from the predicament
Agere to Vbi: They ordained him to an office, Ergo, to a place, and a certain
place, as if the Apostles were not to preach (...), in all the world.

Or when you will euince indefatigable residence of the Minister on the place
out of the 1. Samuel 9.

Elie the priest sat upon a stool by one of the posts of the Temple, Ergo, a
Minister must be resident, and belike must also as he did sit down upon a
stool. Or this: A Shepeheard must feed: a Minister is a Shepeheard, Ergo, he
must corporally and continually reside, without natural or legal dispensation
for his absence.

As if you had said a Minister to be a Shepeheard, otherwise then
Metaphoricallie: for a king also is a shepeheard, but in a Metaphor, who may
law fully depute others to govern and to feed.

Or against non Residence out of the 1. These. 1.17. v. Satan hindered me:
Satan is the cause of non Residence, Ergo, unlawful: where the Demonstrator
makes S. Paul to write good divinity. Satan hindered me, that is, after the
Demonstrators skill, Satan caused me to do an ungodly and unlawful thing,
whereas S. Paul his meaning is, Satan raised persecution against me.

Or as fitly and perfectly after this sort for your popular elections and
choice of ministers from the 8. Number. 9. v.

The children of Israel put their hands upon the heads of the Levites.

The Levites put their hands upon the heads of bullocks: Ergo, the people must
lay their hands on the heads of the Ministers.

Then add unto this: The Ministers must lay their hands on the heads of
bullocks. T. C. taught you to reason thus from the ceremony to the Gospel: Et
vitulo tu dignus, and hic.

Or when it pleases you to establish the presbytery, you interpret roundly,
Dic ecclesiae, tell the Church, that is, the Eldership or Aldermanship of the
Church: yea and go farther for the authority of this venerable Eldership, out
of the 49. Esaias, Kings and Queens shall worship thee with their face toward
the earth, and shall lick up the dust of thy feet, etc. Ergo, great homage
and honor shall be done to the Eldership.

Or in that place where you overthrow all standing superiority of Ministers
over Ministers, you demonstrate after this fashion.

A bishop is called Episcopus.

An ordinary Minister is called Episcopus: Ergo, all one.

Or a Bishop and an ordinary Minister must have one quality: Ergo, a parish
Bishop and a diocoesan Bishop are all one thing. Or, all Bishops are equal in
commission of the Ministry: Ergo, equal in whatsoever commission of
authority. Or, In the beginning for a while a Bishop and a priest or Minister
were all one: Ergo, they must continue all one.

For in the Apostles time was the change, and that same, I am of Paul, I am of
Cephas, was the occasion of the change: and finally the decree of all the world
(at least as S. Hierome thinks) was the approbation of the change. This were
strange reasoning: In the beginning Kings and priests were all one, ergo, they
must continne all one. In the beginning such was the simplicity, etc. Great
lords sons, as Jacob, etc. kept their fathers sheep: ergo, noble men's
children mus^ keep their fathers sheep. In the beginning they baptized in
Rivers, ergo, men must carry their children down to be christened in Rivers.
Or in another, where you demonstrate against the superiority of Archbishops.

If the Pope be odious, the Archbishop is odious also, as who would say: If the
unmeasurable and illimitable power be unlawful, Ergo, a modest and limited
superiority by law is unlawful also. Finiti ad Infinitum nulla est proportio.
Or,

The Archbishops office and name is unknown to us Puritanes, Ergo, unknown
and unheard of in the Church.

You shall well know that both the name and equity of the name and thing is
known and allowed of in Gods Church. Or, where it pleases you to say.

Calvin says there were governors of order, not of superiority: Ergo, this
is true: as if it were truly said, all government of superiority is government
of disorder, and that these were opposite. Or in the demonstration: To prove
Doctor and Pastor to be distinguished, you dispute cunningly thus.

Male and female are distinct in sex or kind, Gal. 3. Ergo Doctor and Pastor
must be distinct: why not then in sex or kind? with many other like
Paralogismes, as in your several Chapters shall be unfolded, the whole
Demonstration being nothing else but a bundle of absurdities. Howbeit, the book
thereof is a thing so preciously esteemed by the author himself, so magnified
by his folowers, as worthy to be set upon the highest pinnacle of this Church
new reformed: for which cause he gives himself such applause for writing of
it, and glorifieth himself as if he were riding upon the Cherubins with
Luciferian pride, or as if he were to draw down as the Dragons tail all the
stars in the firmament, consent of scriptures, Councils, Fathers old and new,
only to give light to the cause in handling.

And concerning other men's books that have oppugned the cause, he speaks
scornefully and disdainfully, as of the lord Archbishop and Deane of Sarum
their books, whose learned travails, neither T. C. W. T. I. V. nor any
ecclesiastical discipliner of them all, are able to confute, unless to rail
in all their writings, and snatch at one word in 40. leaves, be to answer a
book: whose virtue notwithstanding shall shine, when your canckred malice
shall be dead. Touching that most reverend Prelate, you and your accomplices may
in this licentious and outrageous world speak pleasurablie: Never yet good man
spoke but honor of him, whom her Majesty has graciously vouchsafed under her
to exercise Christian jurisdiction and authority: whose Primacie is humility,
who is for his virtue no less honored then loved, whose learning angreth you,
unto whom if you will make answer, you must study for more learning. I am
verily persuaded, that as God in all ages raised excellent men, instruments of
his glory to confute and banish out of the Church heresy, as Athanasius
against the Arrians, Augustine against the Donatists, Augustine and Hierome
against the Pelagians in former times: In our latter times bishop Jewel
against the false Catholics and Semipelagians: so God has stirred up this
learned man against the false brethren and Aerians of our time, to hammer and
beat down the schism and singularity of Puritanes. And therefore I do
humbly thank God, that it has pleased his glorious majesty in heaven, and
her excellent majesty here on earth, to reserve him to these times. I speak
it in the fear of God, had not her Majesty's principal spirit of wisdom
illumined with Gods truth, together with the Heroical prudent spirits of
certain honorable personages and industrious learned men, affecting a
provident care of the posterity of the Church, patronized this
Church Discipline, your private spirits of newfangled discipline happily had
more prevailed against these godly and religious proceedings in the Church,
nay, to the utter remoouing of the Gospel by such confusion and Anarchie.
Imagine that the external face of that Church where you might see so many
thousand Superintendents, so many Elderships advanced in or above the Church,
to make orders and to censure at pleasure, where the people give voices, the
Laity lay on hands, the majesty of the Prince excluded from all swaie in the
presbytery: all antiquity forlorn, all Councils utterly repealed, doctrine
divided from exhortation, Laie-men Deacons of the Church, parish bishops,
parrot preachers, the Universities disgraced of the privilege of granting
degrees, Cathedral Churches by greedy wolves spoiled, all courts of Justice
overthrown or impaired by the Consistoriall court of Elders, and as it were
all the trees of the garden of Eden plucked up, to implant Sambucus the fair
goodly Elders or Elder tree. Or else what may be the fantasy or imaginary
form of this reformation in matters of Ecclesiastical government? They
themselves skill not: or when you have supplanted or ouerturned, or turned out
those Ecclesiastical Senators and governors which we have, whence shall the
supply be of able governors? from beyond the seas? that is impossibility.
From your selves? that is matter of difficulty. From us again? that were
egregious and ridiculous folly. Might it not fare with us as it sometimes did
with the Commons of the City of Capua? the Commons bare a deadly hate to the
magistrates and governors of the City. Upon a time the council of the City
being in consultation of their affairs, one Pacunius (as Liuie writes) Homo
vsus malis artibus, he was not the best man, makes an insurrection with the
Commons, and suddenly shuts all the Magistrates into one place, and with
sufficient garrison keeps the place, and held them all as prisoners within,
gives farther this counsel to the Commons to draw them forth one by one, and
to put every one to death, and to put others in their places, to create new and
better governors of the City. This advise pleased them well. He commands
in order the first to be drawn forth to execution, as a man worthy of
death: every base and tumultuarie varlet cries out, he is worthy of an
hundred deaths, let him be shortened by the shoulders. The noble Senator
whiles he is to lay down his neck upon the block, Pacuuius (as chief
speaker) pawseth on the matter: Sirs, before we put this man to death, it were
good we did nominate another to occupy his place: this noble City may not
stand without a Senate. That counsel also seems pleasing unto them, they
straight proceed on to the nomination and election of a Senator, One man
names one, that man names another, each man as he best fansieth, makes a
several nomination: no sooner any man is named, but a 1000. exceptions are
taken to the party, the person named is thought unworthy either for baseness
of his parentage, or vileness of his trade, or meandness of his fortunes, or
lack of this, or lack of that: the sedition thereupon is dissolved of it
self, the election of a new set of officers is interrupted, every one plainly
sees his own folly and temeritie. Semblably if like power were given, as in
the Preface of your Demonstration you pray for, (which God forbid) to shut up
into a corner our Reverend Fathers and Ecclesiastical magistracy, and you
ready upon the change to transform our Bishops into your Surueillants, or
ouerwatchers, our Conuocations and Chapters, into your marvelous Classical
conferences and Synodes, all the whole Hierarchy of the Church into your
Tetrarchie of Doctor, Pastor, Elder and Deacon (for if you did affect (...) to
have no superiority, then were you far worse then the Capuans) If I say your
mortal or immortal hatred against the state ecclesiastical carried you to
extinguish this order established in the Church already: blessed God, how
would you proceed to the choice of a new Senate Ecclesiastical and their
inuestiture? whiles a man might hear you say of the new Doctor or Pastor,
Elder or Deacon, This man has zeal but no learning, that man learning but no
zeal, the other neither zeal nor learning, such a man is factious and full of
deadly poison, he a base crafts-man or artisan, another is auaricious, and
would carry away our bag, T. C. will ouertoppe all, or loves the preheminences
as Diotrephes, each man taking exception unto other. Do ye not foresee, or
rather do you not see as in a glass, the image or bodily shape of the
imagined state which you so impetuously strive for, and we strive against, and
strive will in a good cause unto the death? Or what need we strive? the strife
will be with and within your selves, when you shall see the monstruousnesse of
your misbegotten, conceived foul Embryon, deformed and mishaped birth, borne
into the world of Christianity, which you are so enamoured upon, and so fond
over, that every one must kiss and embrace it in his arms, and blush not to
make show and demonstration of triumph of the birth and nativity of the same.
How soever your fancy deludeth you with joy, this monster may not be suffered
to live upon the face of the earth. 1. Cor. 15.35.
S. Paul sometime said (...): I have fought with beasts under the shape of men
at Ephesus, that is, with beastly and monstrous men and their opinions. So I
now say or will assaie to encounter the Demonstrator and his demonstrations, to
quell this monster amongst men. Of the same mind are many more of our excellent
and learned men. Men are now awakened and will no longer endure these
insignious abuses offered to the Church, to the Universities, to the Colleges
of learned men. No, no T.C. and you the whole busy sect of Puritans, do not
think any longer to pester the Church of England. You lack the most of you
(for any thing I see) sound Logike, and other learnings divine and humane.
Perchance you, or some of the most ignominious amongst you, may devise an
infamous Libell or letter against D. Bridges, or D. Bancroft for his Sermon
preached at Paul's cross (a Sermon worthy to be read and printed in the heart
of the hearer in deed) or against the writer of this Remonstrance to solace
your selves withal for the mean time, as all heretics and schismatikes are
wont to countenance their cause. I do assure my self that none of you dare
to undertake a public disputation in the schools (if those in authority
shall think it fit) or to go forward with this scholasticall exercise of
Syllogising. To second your irrefragable, undoubted, and thrice learned
demonstrations, the next news I look to hear from you, will be no refutation
of this my book, but a little book or Libel full fraught with calumnious
slander: nevertheless, per bonam famam and per infamiam, by good report and
bad report we must proceed on to the justification of a good cause. And if like
dastards and recreants you will not deal with handie-strokes of Syllogism:
let it be an evident sign that you are ready to run away, and for ever
after relinquish your so disputable and demonstrable a cause. *

Chap. I. A REMONSTRANCE TO THE SVPPOSED DEMONSTRATION OF PRETENDED DISCIPLINE.
The maine Conclusion or Assertion of the first Chapter.
THE word of God describes perfectly unto us that form of governing the
Church which is lawful, Demonstration.
and the officers which are to execute the same, from the which no Christian
Church ought to swerve.

This is the maine conclusion of these monstrous Demonstrations, Remonstrance.
not to be worthied the name of Demonstrations, forasmuch as I have learned,
Medium est causa maioris extremi in omni demonstratione, Arist. poster. li. 1.
which never falls out in any of these Demonstrations: neither are the parts
or propositions correspondent to a Demonstration, whereof none can be admitted
but such which are Termini pares and reciprocabiles. Nor so much as principles
or grounds immediate of themselves needing proof of no other infallibly true,
or first true before all other, or forth with known, and to be acknowledged
true: or finally, Causae conclusionis: But which rather, be probable
Syllogismes, and those but very few, or indeed Paralogismes, mere Sophismes
to make a brawle against received truth.

In this conclusion, if by governing, were understood the direction in faith
and manners of every true member of the Church, it were simply to be granted.
But these men (as by their whole discourses appears) understand thereby the
government for the external policy and orders of the whole Church in
general, also of every greater part thereof (as the Church of an whole nation
or province) and of every several congregation.

If therefore by these words (describes perfectly) he and they mean that all
the whole frame and form of this government, and the officers to execute the
same, with their names, adjuncts, offices, and several authorities
particularly and specifically are either expressed, or by the word of God
immediately and necessarily may be concluded: both we deny it, and themselves
now at length (though with much a do) confess it not to be true.

Yet T. C. the Bel-weather of this band (out of whose forge the
Demonstrationer has taken up almost all his stuff on trust) in his books did
at first so understand it. For because Christ his faithfulness in Gods house is
likened to that of Moses, who described every pin almost of the Tabernacle,
therefore he concludes, that not the least particular point tending to
external Church government, is omitted vndescribed in Gods word: As if either
he had some Scripture that others have not seen, or he only were clear
sighted. And to this very purpose serve all the arguments of this first
Chapter: Insomuch as Barrowe (who professes that he holds nothing, which he
has not gathered out of those, and like men's books) still thinks, that none
external orders or laws at al are lawful now to be set down for the Church,
because Christ has set down sufficient in particular.

But the other sort somewhat wiser, being taught by their schoole-mistresse
experience, that upon trial made every expedient particular in external
government could not be so proved, have by their Champion Martine the Malepart,
In his second book.
restrained this whole controversy to a narrower issue, saying, that the
Officers and their offices are so described, and both these forsooth at least,
are essential.

And the whole fraternity (as I hear) either in person, or representatiuely,
being out of all coasts of this land synodically assembled, have now
impounded The holy discipline (which they hold to be described in the word,
to be essential, eternal, and immutable) unto the fourth part of one sheet
of paper: but their Synodicall discipline (which already upon the first licking
is seven times as great as the other,) they think in some respects to be
necessary and eternal, in other respects to be mutable: but how much of it
looks the one way, and how much the other way, they have not yet reueiled.
Therefore thus I reason by retortion upon their own positions.

Ba- Al form of governing the church, which is lawful, with the officers to
execute it, is perfectly described in ye word of God.

to- Your Synodicall form of governing, and the officers to execute it (by
your own position) is not perfectly described in the word of God, ergo,

co. It is not a lawful form of governing the Church, etc.

The 1. Demonstration.

These things I write unto thee, etc. 1. Timot. 3.14.15. v. Demonstration.
Out of this place I reason thus:

That end which S. Paul respected in writing unto Timothy, the holy Ghost
directs all Ministers unto for ever, for it must be kept. 1. Timoth. 6. cap.
14.

But he wrote to direct him in the establishing and building of the Church:
ergo, all Ministers are directed by the word for ever: and consequently
neither to add, nor take from.

Because the Demonstrator will be at an end before he begins, Remonstrance.
he frames his argument a fine, or, a destinatis, from the end.

To the Mayor.

Out of this place you can not argue thus: That which S. Paul respects, the
holy Ghost directs, etc. Nay the contrary is more reasonable: That which the
holy Ghost respects, S. Paul does point unto, and appoint all Ministers to be
respective thereunto: S. Paul's intendement runs not before the holy Ghost,
S. Paul thinks he has the holy Ghost.

To the Minor.

But Saint Paul wrote for the establishing and building of the Church: This is
(...), the Cart before the horse. It is preposterous to establish a Church
first, and to build a Church after: The meaning of the place is, how he
should (...). converse in the house of God, which is the Church, 4. cap. 12. v.
(...), be a pattern to the faithful, in speech, in conversation, in love, and
therefore bids him keep (...), the undefiled commandment, or the general
commandment, one commandment for all: ergo, S. Paul there directs all
Ministers how they should publicly and privately converse.

This your collection is unnatural to the text. As for the whole syllogism,
and prosyllogisme, if it were a perfect reason, it makes nothing against us:
or it is Demonstratio in circulo, a circular demonstration: Al Ministers must
be directed in particular, because Timothy a particular Minister was directed
in a generality: vel e contra: Topic. 4.
The fallacion is apparent: qui dicit genus non dicit speciem, nec qui dicit
speciem, dicit indiuiduum: Paul gave there general direction, ergo all
particular direction whatsoever.

The conclusion follows not of those premises, because it is defective in
minori extremo, for it ought thus to be concluded.

Da- What end Paul respected, etc. to that the holy Ghost directs all
Ministers for ever:

ti- The end that Paul respected, was to direct Timothy to build and
establish the Church, ergo

si. The holy Ghost directs all Ministers for ever to build and establish
the Church. But this conclusion is false (because all are not to plant
Churches, for some build on others foundation) and not the minor, in that Paul
taught Timothy at least, to establish the Church, therefore the mayor must be
untrue. It had been more probable if it had been thus said, Directs all such
ministers as Timothy was, who indeed was B. of Ephesus, as all old writers,
beside the subscription of the epistle do testify. Therefore thus I retort
with the like argument.

Da- What end Paul writing to Timothy respected, Retortion.
to that the holy Ghost directs all such Ministers as he was for ever:

ri- Paul writing to him a Bishop, respected as an end the teaching of his
duty in ordinations of Ministers, and in his jurisdiction over others (as may
appear by the precepts of laying on of hands, of examination, approbation,
reiection, censures, receiving accusations, and for avoiding of partiality and
prejudice) these two, (with the censures annexed) being the preheminences that
BB. claim in their several charges, ergo,

j. The holy Ghost directs all such Ministers for ever as he was ( viz. BB.)
unto ordinations of Ministers and jurisdiction.

The 2. Demonstration.

Every house must be governed by the orders of the wise governor only: But
the Church is an house, Demonstration.
and God an householder, ergo.

This is no demonstration, Remonstrance.
dare I or you say, but a syllogism in Darij, and the conclusion to be granted
for all orders which God has indeed set down.

To the Mayor.

Every house must so be governed, etc. id est, for matters of importance, and
to do nothing contrary to his orders: for in that government of an
householder, some matters of less weight are left to the good discretion of
those of the family, neither is it otherwise possible to be. It suffices if
every house be ordered by the principal orders of the lord, or father of the
family, or by the steward, who is lex loquens. Joseph was a wise steward over
all Pharaoh his house, and so are we stewards. Ephesians. 4. and yet a very wise
and learned Minister, may miss in direction of some particular matter that may
come in experience in the Church.

To the Minor.

The Church is an house, and God an householder, that is, the Church like an
house, God likened to an householder: ergo. In this connection of the Mayor to
the Minor, are four termini: the conclusion is naught, and the argument
follows not of inevitable necessity, from oeconomiques unto politiques, or
least of all from politiques to the Hierarchy of the Church. Retortion.
Rather e contra. Gods house must be governed by the orders of himself, and by
the faithful servants and stewards of his mysteries, who have interpretation of
the Lord his word and will: ergo, every man's house may be ordered by the
Master of the household, or steward in his place, who has skill of the L. his
pleasure, and his Masters will.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which teaches every good way, Demonstration.
teaches also how the Church must be governed: but the word of God teaches
every good way: ergo, it teaches how the Church must be governed.

To the Mayor.

This argument is drawn a Transcendente: Good is Transcendent, Remonstrance.
which is the Mayor. It derogateth nothing from the Majesty and sufficiency
of the word to teach in a generality and infallible certainty of the
substance, although not in every individual circumstance: no art, no science,
no faculty, consists of singulars, or provides for every casualtie, much
less for every ceremonial ordinance. Suffices unto us that the Scripture is
(...), inspired from God, and is profitable to doctrine, etc. That the man of
God may be made perfect, and every Christian man may be lead into the right way
of salvation, without wandering ignorance, or wanton curiosity.

To the Minor.

The Minor makes for this exposition. 2. Pro. 9. Tunc intelliges iustitiam,
and ius, and quicquid rectumest, and omnem orbitam bonam: thou shall then
understand equity and righteousness, and all right, and every good way, which
is requisite to the spiritual worship of God: for else should all good
sciences and arts, and all good medicines which God has created, be also
learned out of the scriptures. Therefore this arrowe shot out of their own
bow into the air upright, as a childs arrowe falls into their own eyes.

Ba- The word of God teaches every good way:

to- But it teaches not the Synodicall discipline, Retortion.
and the mutabilitie thereof, according to the variety of several
circumstances, for so themselves in their new platted discipline, are forced
to distinguish and confess. ergo,

co. Their Synodicall discipline, etc. is no good way.

The 4. Demonstration.

The Demonstrator says: Demonstration.
we cannot glorify God but by obedience to his word: But in all we do we
must glorify God. ergo, In all that we do, we must be obedient to his word,
and consequently in governing of his Church.

The Syllogism and prosyllogisme prove nothing to the purpose, Remonstrance.
and reprove not any thing of ours.

It is an obedience to the word such government as ours, whether ordained by
it, or subordinate unto it, always to be conformable to the government of his
word: of this sort is every title and jot of our Liturgy and Communion
book, our ceremonies, our provincial constitutions, or any law in force,
which binds us to the subscription or observation of the book. Have home
again this slender Syllogism to your self.

You cannot disglorifie God, Retortion.
but by disobedience to his word: but your recusance of her Majesty's lawful
proceedings under God, is as the sin of witchcraft, and is disglorifying of
God: ergo, in not doing or undoing her Majesty's proceeding, is disobedience to
the word.

The 5. Demonstration.

If meat and drink cannot be sanctified but by the word and prayer,
Demonstration.
much less any thing is holy in action of governing the Church, that is
besides the word: but the first is true, ergo, the second.

This Syllogism is connexiue, Remonstrance.
il fauouredly knit together: the sequel of the Antecedent must be
distinguished. If you mean besides the word, contrary or repugnant to the
word: no man will deny the consequence of the first: and then all this threede
is evil spunne, it makes nothing to the purpose: But if by Besides the word,
you understand all comprehended under the general precepts thereof, you must
begin to knit a new demonstration: else your whole discipline frame falls on
your head. I therefore retort your argument thus:

If every creature under heaven (...), Retortion.
be good, and not to be rejected, because it is sanctified by prayer, and the
word, then much more (...), every human creature or ordinance which comes
down from heaven, which is often sanctified by prayer and the word: but the
former is true, ergo the later. And by consequence, every deal of our Church
discipline and policy is of God, unto which you must submit, or else be
rebels against God: for you cannot prove it repugnant to Gods word.

The 6. Demonstration.

All lawful things are of faith. Romans 14.23. v. Demonstration.


All lawful things of faith are warranted by the word, ergo,

All lawful things are warranted by the word: and consequently, every lawful
action in the government of the Church.

The state of the question that you make, is: Remonstrance.
Whether every lawful action be warranted by the word: the right state of the
question is, whether every sere and singular action for Church external
policy, must be in so many letters expressed, or immediately to be gathered
of the word. You may not pass away thus in clouds of generality.

To the Mayor.

viz. All lawful things are of faith. Falsification of the text by the
Demonstrator.
Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum. You corrupt the text: the text is: All
that is not of faith is sin, not all lawful things are of faith, for all
good arts and sciences be lawful, but not of faith: for Heathens invented and
practiced most of them. The Mayor neither is true in the allegation, nor in the
conversion of the terms true, which in a demonstration is requisite: for all
faithful things are lawful, not all lawful things are faithful. This poison
is not worth a counter, you must run a begging for a better Demonstration to
the Counterpoysoner, whence this was borrowed.

To the Mayor, Minor, and Conclusion.

The whole Syllogism is faulty.

All lawful things are of faith.

All lawful things of faith are warranted in the word, ergo

All lawful things are warranted in the word.

Transposition of terms makes no Syllogism in direct concluding moodes.

Now for the consequencie.

It is ab angulo ad baculum, from the corner to the staff.

All lawful things of faith are warrantable by the word, ergo

All lawful things are warrantable by the word.

The Demonstrator never learned this Logike.

Ab oratione secundum quid sumpta cum determinatione ad orationem sumptam
simpliciter sine determinatione non valet argume^tum.

The reason is all alike.

All fastes or days of abstinence commanded by the Church, are good: ergo all
fastes (yea upon the Lords day) are also good, whether commanded or not
commanded.

The 7. Demonstration.

Either God has left a prescript form of government now, or else he is less
careful under the New Testament then under the Old: Demonstration.
But he is as careful now, ergo.

This disjunctive desperately sets all out of tune. Remonstrance.


Either God has made a prescript form of government, or he is a careless
God: These men care not what they say: it makes against themselves, whatsoever
they say.

The assumption is presumption, by a trick of Logike, to accuse God of
carelesnes.

To the Antecedent.

The Antecedent is most false, when both parts are false.

Either he has prescribed (as they would have described) or the divine
Majesty is a careless God. O careless divinity.

When both parts of a Dilemma or disjunctive are false, a bare negative might
serve: but neither has God given a prescript form of accidental or external
government (as themselves with shame enough at last confess) neither is he at
any time a careless God.

Every point of discipline is not disclosed in the law: every particular case
incident is not reckoned there: the lips of the Priest must preserve
knowledge, the breast of the High Priest keep Vrim and Thumim, light and
perfection of holiness and knowledge. When a hard case rises, resort must be
to the high priest or Judge in the land. Romans 8.
As for so much as is prescribed in the new law, or law of spirit of life, no
prescription ought to be made against it: where the word leaves of for
diversity of government, it leaves all the rest to a Christian liberty, to
the Christian magistracy, to the holy ministry to keep us within awe.

But see now this argument reboundeth from the wall of your discipline upon
your faces. Retortion of the argument


Either God has given a Christian liberty, and for the right use there of the
gifts of government (...), 1. Cor. 12. by the perpetual pledge and operation
of his spirit, or else he tieth us to the ceremonial obseruances and policy
of the law to be schooled under them. God is not tied unto us.

But God has not by any prescript form tied us to that part of the law,
neither does he suffer us to be lawless. Ergo, he has given us the use of
Christian liberty, and the gifts of his spirit to his Church to be disciplined
thereby in matters not contained in Scripture, else it were no gift to govern,
if all were specificallie set down.

Diversities of graces, one spirit, diversities of ministrations, one lord,
diversity of operations, one God.

The difference is in the manner of dispensatio^, not in the things dispensed,
and yet one and the same Christ, in no manner of prescript governance to be
accused of caring more, or of caring less for the government of his Church
under the Gospel, or under the law.

The 8. Demonstration. Demonstration.


He that was as faithful as Moses, left as clear instruction for the
government of the Church: but Christ was as faithful, ergo. Heb. 3.2.


To the Mayor.

He that was as faithful as Moses, Remonstrance.
left as clear instruction for doctrine of faith and manners: nay he left
clearer.

To the Prosyllogisme,

But Moses gave direction for every particular: ergo, Absurdity of the
Demonstrator.
according to this your sense add unto this: but Moses from the Cherubin to
the lowest pin in the tabernacle: ergo, Christ from the Communion table to
the sweeping of the Church: Moses left an heap of ceremonies, Ergo, Christ
must bring in another heap of ceremonies: Moses made Judicials, Ergo, Christ
new Judicials: Moses ten commandments of old: Ergo, Christ ten commandments
of new. Aaron had an Ephod, or superhumerall, and girdle: ergo, every thing
must be proportioned in Christ, of whom Moses was a figure, or in Christians
and their government, of whom Moses was neither type nor figure: The better is
not the shadow of the worse, but the worse of the better.

The 9. Demonstration.

If the word of God has described sufficient ministeries and ministers for the
building and ordering of the Church, Demonstra. Romans 12.5, 6, 7. 1. Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians 4.11.
then is our assertion true: But it has set down sufficient for doctrine,
exhortation, ouerseeing, distribution, etc. ergo,

This reasoning infers Fallaciam consequentis, Remonstrance.
fallacy of the consequent, viz. a non distributis ad distributa.

To the Antecedent.

Albeit the word has set down sufficient ministers and ministration, yet is
your assertion short of the truth.

The Assumption bewraieth your falls dealing in the Antecedent. Although the
word sets down different sorts and diversities of functions and duties,
yet our Axiom and rule is,

Every particular gift and quality makes not a new settled office in the
Church of God. Except you will have a several officer also to show mercic,
Romans 12. that so your selves need to show none till you have that office.

E diuersitate accidentiu^ non sequitur diuersitas subiectorum, but e contrar.
subiectum est principium emanationis accidentium.

If the word etc. then is your assertion true (say you) Omne verum vero
consentaneum, every truth is agrecable to a truth: but this is manifestly
false, and utterly untrue that the word has set down the liuclie image or
imaginary face of your Church Discipline, the counterfeit whereof you have, or
pretend to have. This together with the former, is untruth, disagreeing in it
self, and iarring with the truth. Let your own reason march upon you thus:

Either in those places you have found, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
or in no place else can be found the four states of Doctors and pastors,
governors, and Deacons in use perpetual: but not in those places, which is the
issue that we join: and therefore to seek in so many books that which you
deem to be already found, is a fond matter, and already frustrate: or to
seek that never can be found, is an infinite matter, and better unsought then
found. Quicquid sine fine fit, aut infinitum est, aut frustra fit: unless you
do as Inachus the good man that sought his daughter transformed into a Cow.

sed quam non inuenit vsquam
Esse putat nusquam, atque animo peiora veretur.
The 10. Demonstration.

That government which the Apostles taught and planted, Demonstration.
is expressed in the word: But the Apostles taught and planted pastors and
teachers for instruction, Elders for ouerseeing, Deacons for distributing:
Ergo, a certain form is expressed in the word.

To the Mayor.

Indefinita locutio restringenda est. Remonstrance.
First, the Mayor is ambiguous: that which the Apostles, etc. It is not
expressed so precisely what all the Apostles taught and planted in the Church,
but the sum and substance of it. Secondarily, the Mayor is not conuersiue or
reciprocal in every part, and therefore no demonstratiue proposition: viz. to
say that which the Apostles taught, is expressed in the word, and that which is
expressed in the word, the Apostles taught.

To the Minor.

Answer is: neither by writing nor by practice did they ever establish an
uniformity of external Church discipline, and that perpetually to hold. An
instance is of your Lay and unpreaching elderships, being temporary and
living not of the Church, having imposition of hands, and interest of
ordinatio^ and censures, contrary to all Scripture and practice of antiquity:
Or Deaconship of women, never to be continued for Apostolical constitution,
as your selves for the most part confess.

Note, the appearance of this manner of reasoning, Retortion.
retireth upon your selves. That which the Apostles taught and planted, all, or
that our Savior taught himself, is impossible to be expressed in the word:
for the whole world cannot contain the books: but the Apostles and our Savior
converted many millions, taught many doctrines in particularitie of conference:
the Apostles planted many churches in the dispersion: ergo, it is a matter of
impossibility to expres it so largely in the word. Or, that which is necessary
to salvation is expressed in the word, That which is unnecessary, is silenced
in the word. Puritans Idaea or fantasy, is not necessary to salvation, for
many millions of souls of Martyrs and others, have been saved without it.
Ergo, it is not specifically expressed in the word.

The 11. Demonstration.

All lawful action and office in the building of the Church, Demonstration.
is from heaven: but every thing (in the ordinary building of the Church) from
heaven, is reueiled in the word. Ergo, every lawful office and action is
revealed in the word.

An eleven men must lift a straw in this 11. Demonstration: Remonstrance.
needs you must confess a flat Paralogisme in this. This is faulty both in
form and matter, or profess your self absurd.

The medius terminus is disposed secundum habitudinem nullius figurae, in no
order either of mood or figure. By transposition of the parts which may never
be allowed in a Demonstration: or this fair Demonstrator means to conclude
by an affirmative in the second figure.

To the Minor.

Whereas the Minor says, every thing from heaven with a decent Parenthesis, to
salve an inconvenience (in the ordinary building) is reueiled (as you
understand reueiled) in the word, It is utterly untrue, whether you understand
matter of external orders and circumstance, or for the proportionating of
external decency of every part and parcel: it is a matter of infinity to
find all determined particularly by the word. But to beat their own weapon
about their own pate, I make this Dilemma.

Every office and action in our Church government, Retortion.
is either from heaven or from earth: if from earth, then all of that mind
were earthly minded men from the primitive Church downward unto us, and from
us upward unto them, whereby fall into your condemnation all they whom you
deem to have abused the same, or not used the same, since it is clear by
Ecclesiastical history, they for the most part used the same Church
discipline which we do. If from heaven, how dare you withstand the same? It
is hard to kick against the prick: your contradiction cannot long stand
against it, least you perish in the same.

The 12. Demonstration.

If God continued in regard of the substance, Demonstration.
the Church administration as well as the things to be administered, then is the
form of discipline described in the word: but the former is true: for
priests, Pastors: for teaching Levites or Doctors of the law, Teachers: for
rulers of the Synagogue, Elders: for Leuiticall lookers to the treasury,
Deacons: for Sanedrim, the Eldership. Ergo,

This Demonstration is Demonstratio a causa remota: Remonstrance.
a demonstrate seldom used: the resolution or Analysis is this:

If God from all succeeding ages continued as well the form as the matter, in
respect of the substance, then etc.

To the Antecedent.

This phrase of speech (in respect of the substance) emplyeth a contradiction
to the sequel of the Antecedent: for it comes to this sum. If God has
continued the whole discipline in respect of the essential parts of
discipline, then is the frame of accidental points of discipline and
external policy of the Church continued therewith: which Antecedent with the
consequence is stark naught. As if a man did reason thus, he might reason
also as well: Absurdity.
If God has continued (in regard of the substance) the propagation of Adams
posterity by enduing man with an human body, and infusing into man a
reasonable soul, then has he endued all men alike with semblable endowment of
body and soul: As if God did garnish every man alike with reason and
religion in the intellectual soul, or complexionate alike the natural body
which is united to the soul. Nothing so like as man unto God: for he made man
to the likeness of himself: nothing so dislike as man unto man: man in honor
understood not, but became like to the brute beast, Psalm. 49.
and yet in regard of the substance, God continues the unchangeable tenor of
the race of man.

To the Assumption.

The assumption beggarly beggeth that which is in question, drawing a
proportion of that which is not.

Non entis nullae qualitates.

Where can you ever prove the correspondence, or one word of Scripture for the
maintenance of this, videlicet, That Pastor answers unto priest, since with
you pastoral charge is exhortation? Or Doctor of the law, or teaching Leuite
for one of your Doctors, which is a bare teacher using explication, and
refusing application, or a simple catechiste, whereas Saint Paul doctor gentium
was a full minister? Or for Leuiticall lookers to the treasury, Deacons,
because they look to finger treasure? you will make it a corporal office, but
we withal, some ministry about the word, (...), as amongst the Apostles
after the expiration of that service at Jerusalem, the primitive Deacons did?
Or for Jewish (...) rulers of the Synagogue, Elders to come in place, since that
was a canker of corruption that crept in amongst them?

Or for Sanedrim, Eldership, since no man can exactly number the time when it
first came in? Since it was a deprauation of a better thing, but dealing with
all civil causes: since that was no holy nor sacred pres byterie, which we do
hold all our Synodes and solemn Conuocations to be.

The Idaea of this discipline is a hot Meteor invisible, not hanging in any
region of the air: The difference of this Sanedrim from the old is, (...):
the imagination upon this, is: Diametri ad latus, incommensurable proportion:
the Identitie is a contrariety in sight: the use of this discipline is a
nullitie in deed.

But thus we retort the argument upon them.

If God continued in regard of the substance, Retortion.
the church administration under the Gospel, which was under the law, then
are there degrees of superiority and authority in persons ecclesiastical one
over another: for the priests were above the Levites, and the high priests
above all the priests of that nation, in so much as he that willfullie
disobeied his judgment, was to die the death.

But our Demonstrationer and his customer of whom he borowes it, say (upon
their credites) the former is true: ergo,

Superiority in the state ecclesiastical, is continued by God under the
Gospel, and therefore not to be discontinued as Antichristian.

The 13. Demonstration.

Every wise king that is careful for his subjects, Demonstration.
sets down laws: but Christ is a wise king: ergo, a certain form of
government.

The second demonstration was of an householder, Remonstrance.
this is the 13. of a king: this is to parabolize, not to demonstrate.

You cannot hence draw a consequence, but inconsequentlie conclude, because
Christ is a king, Ergo, he is bound to set down express laws for every
individual point of government that may happen: for no wise king does so,
especially where the whole policy which is by him continued, is set down
before, as you bear us in hand in your 12. Demonstration, that the whole
substance of the policy under the law, is continued under the Gospel. True
it is for the inward and spiritual worship, all is described in the word, and
prescribed unto us. As for every external matter of dependaunce, it ought
rightly to be deduced from the word, and reduced to the touchstone of the word
again, regard being had to the several circumstances of time, persons, etc.
Me thinks if you would have framed an argument, the consequence should be
thus. Every wise king is careful, etc. Ergo, he barreth all wranglers to make
false constructions and collections of his laws: But Christ is an everlasting
king, and has an everlasting truth concluded in the tables of his laws:
Ergo, none of his subjects may call that law which is not law, nor of the
volume and body of his law: or call that sole and an eternal truth, which
is a sole and eternal lie, as your formal government, partie-coloured coat
of Laity and Clergy, linsey wolsey discipline, or uncertain form of
government.

The 14. Demonstration.

That which the Ministers must teach the people to observe, Demonstration.
is set down in the word.

But they are to teach obedience to the particular form of government: Math.
28.20.
Ergo, the particular form is set down.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is vndemonstrable, not reciprocal, most false. Remonstrance.
The Ministers need not teach all that is set down:

Which is the conuersiue of the Mayor. An instance is, Instantia soluit
argumentum.

Many things in Moses law, as to abstain from blood, are not of necessity to
be taught to be observed, which nevertheless are distinctly set down.

The error hereof rests in the ambiguitie of this word, set down, whether
particularly or generally set down be understood.

Ministers are to teach obedience to the particular form of government, and
laws civil of any lawful common wealth: Ergo, all civil laws are
particularly set down in the Scripture.

To the Minor.

The Minor proceeds of Supposall.

Ex suppositione sequitur quidlibet.

Supposing that government of necessity to bind us, they must necessarily
teach it us:

Supposing that our Savior Jesus when he said 28. Math. 20. ver. Absurdity of
the Demonstrator.
Go (...), Teach and make disciples, baptizing and teaching them to observe
all, (...), that I have commanded you, etc. did command their discipline: It
will easily follow, as if he did preposterously command a faithful
conversation before conversion to the faith: or as if (...) alludeth only unto
discipline, and not respectiuelie looks to the whole sum of Christianity
which the Apostles were to teach: so they may dally for their discipline with
any place. You know the old proverb, Abegger is never out of his way. Eckius
to prove transubstantiation, alleges: Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis
hodie: These men to turn doctrine into discipline, all into government, every
way is an high way: every conjecture is an invincible demonstration to show
and present us with the face or mask of disguised discipline.

The 15. Demonstration.

Every government consists in the matter and manner. Demonstration.


But in the word is described the particularitie of both, as in the 9.
Demonstration. Ergo, the word has prescribed a prescript government.

Here is a conclusion in 2. figura affirmative, Remonstrance.
and by a leap from described to prescribed, quatuor termini.

To the Mayor.

Things coincident are considerable together.

All government consists not in the matter and manner only, but in the
efficient and final causes also, As God the author and beginning in Christ,
and the glory of God, which is the scope or latter end.

To the Minor.

The Minor is very false: but to retort it.

If both matter and manner be described, then what need your variable
Synodicall discipline, or any more orders at all, as the Barrowists contend, and
you would seem to oppugn?

The 16. Demonstration.

Cyprian says, Demonstration.
Sermon de baptismo Christi. From Scripture, rules of all doctrine have
sprung, and hither does return whatsoever the Ecclesiastical discipline does
contain.

The words of Cyprian are. Remonstrance. De bapt. Christi, and manifest.
Trinit.
Legate hoc verbum, and in hoc mandato meditetur Christiana religio, and
inueniet omnium doctrinarum regulas ex hac Scriptura emanasse, and hinc nasci,
and huc reuerti quicquid Ecclesiastica continet disciplina, and in omnibus
irritum esse and friuolum, quicquid dilectio non confirmat.

Cyprian speaks of love and charity, he treats not there of an
Ecclesiastical policy, but thereby means only the doctrine of the Church,
which is recapitulated in love: which chapter being very brief of one word, I
would our Discipliners had once read over.

Cyprian right well did skill of Christian discipline, viz. a rule of doctrine,
which is another manner thing then this fansied discipline of Church-frame,
which you pretend to have: being a salt discipline, not the salt of
discipline, which Cyprian would have.

Te docente ad siccandas corruptionum mearum putredines prodesse cauterium,
Sermon de bapt. Christi.
and mundare cicatrices veteres salem disciplinae tuae Euangelio tuo medente
infusum.

God being the Doctor or heavenly doctrine, is of as great avail, as a burning
iron to sear up the rottennes of putrified flesh: the salt of discipline
sprinkled upon us out of the divine Gospel, does mundifie old sores, and
purge and heal them clean. In both which places you see, that which he first
called doctrine, he after (...) calls discipline.

Therefore this salt of discipline, might very well serve to mundifie and
heal the wound of charity, which you have made: Luculentam plagam declarat
cicatrix: 2. Philip.
the scarre whereof in the forehead of our Church does manifestly appear.

But I perceive the Demonstrator for all his brag, is but a sorry reader of
Cyprian, or had his allegation gathered to his hand, and never had the leisure
to read over Cyprian.

The 17. Demonstration.

We may not give our selves the liberty to bring in any thing that other men
bring of their will: Demonstration.
we have the Apostles for authors, who themselves brought nothing of their own
will: But the discipline which they received of Christ, Tertul. de praescript.
adu. haere.
they delivered faithfully to the people.

I take your meaning, Remonstrance.
and not your words.

Your quotation is of Cyprian, but your meaning of Tertullian, who has such
like words: Nobis ex arbitrio nostro indulgere nihil licet, speaking against
the doctrine of men and devils: vt aeones and formas nescio quas, and
trinitatem hominis apud Valentinum: as the Commentator upon Tertullian, does
observe.

Tertullian directs those words against Marcion, and Apelles, and others.

Tertullian says, we may not give our selves liberty, neither abridge others
of their Christian liberty. Tertullian is not contrary to Tertullian: else
where he requires consanguinitatem doctrinae, consanguinitie of doctrine, from
Christ and his Apostles downward: so that it is plain to him that weieth the
place, he meant of doctrine. If he had meant it of the policy and outward
government of the Church, it makes not against ours, which for the substance
of it we are ready to auerre to be grounded of the word, and taught by the
Apostles, and retained ever since in the Church, theirs being never heard of,
till about 50. years ago it was set up in one town, being a popular state.

The 18. Demonstration.

It is adulterous, Demonstration.
it is sacrilegious, whatsoever is ordained by humane fury, that the divine
disposition should be violated.

Cyprian speaks of Heretics, Remonstrance.
and of Schismatikes, who departed from the Church, as our Puritanes do from
the unity of the godly proceedings, established in the Church: against
Foelicianus, and the five Priests. Nunc apparet Foeliciani factio vnde est,
quibus viribus, quibus radicibus staret: hij fomenta quibusdam confessoribus
and hortamenta tribuebant, ne concordarent cum Episcopo suo, nec Ecclesiasticam
disciplinam cum fide and quiet iuxta praecepta Domini continerent, vt relictis
Domini sacerdotibus contra Euangelicam disciplinam, noua traditio sacrilegae
institutionis exurgat.

Note whether these words of Cyprian concern not our times.

Now it is clear whence T. C. his faction arises, how it took rooting,
how it is hardened. He and his crew have withdrawn certain, who of good
zeal profess the name of Christ, from the love and obedience of their
Superior or Pastor, or Bishop, and have dangerously drawn them into contempt
of Ecclesiastical discipline to break from the faith and allegiance of the
Lords precepts, that by forsaking of the Lord his Priests, contrary to the
Evangelical discipline, they might begin a new platform of sacrilegious
institution of their own discipline. Observe last of all that Ecclesiastical
discipline, Evangelical discipline, which S. Cyprian sounds far otherwise
then the new Tetrarchie of Doctors, Pastors, Elders, and Deacons discipline:
for it is taken for the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

Yet here of by the way we gather, that such as break forth from the Bishops
government and censures (as our schismatikes do with greatest contempt that
may be) do offend against the commandments and the doctrine or discipline of
the Gospel: and therefore a superiority of Bishops is a divine institution,
by Cyprians judgment, who lived not very long after the Apostles times.

I might answer, Allegare non est probare. Allegation is no demonstration,
least of all of humane authority. And all this may be granted, and nothing
gained to the cause. Dominus Demonstrator does pass away in clouds of
generality, and concludes not the question. So that in steed of 18.
demonstrations, there are 18. monsters, some without head, some without tail,
some without middle, others without arm, all without harm, not able to
affright the veriest fool that is, with so much as a false fear of loosing
the impregnable fort of the truth of our cause. *

CAPVT SECVNDVM.
IN the second chapter follow certain Maxims of their own, or certain
Oracles of one T. C. tanquam ex tripode: which if you will not take upon T.C.
his credit, you may take it upon the credit of 20. letters, or take unto you
the whole Alphabet, to make demonstrations thereby.

The 1. Proposition.

No calling is lawful, but which is directly warranted out of the word, to
him that executes it. Demonstration.


The 2. Proposition.

The name and office of an Archbishop is contrary to the word of God.

The 3. Proposition.

No man may be ordained to an office, until a place be void as he is fit for.

Every one of these propositions has a special aim to the usual intended
marks of a cauilling Sophister. Remonstrance.


The 1. is.

(...) or mere trifling, Aristot de reprehens, Soph.
as Aristotle says, (...).

Like as a Cuckoo to sing always one song: as in the former Chapter the
Demonstrator trifleth up and down.

The 2. is.

(...), a false or stark staring lie, (...), to make a demonstration of a lie.

The 3. is.

(...), a mere Paradoxe, which never any but of this new fantasy said before.

The saying is, A three twisted cord will not easily break asunder: but this
thrice twisted cable knappeth asunder.

If the Demonstrator will only propound, we may lawfully return these
propositions home again.

1.

No calling is lawful, but directly warranted to him that executes it.

All lay Presbyteri, or unpreaching eldership, with the authority they
attribute unto it, is unwarranted directly by Gods word to them that do
execute it: Ergo

No such calling is lawful.

2.

No name of Superiority for order and (...) in the Church, is contrary to the
word: The name and office of Archbishop, Archdeacon, Deanes, are such names
and offices of Superiority: Ergo No names and offices of Archbishop and
Archdeacon, etc. are contrary to the word.

3.

Paul, Barnabas, Epaphroditus, Andronicus, Iunius and others, were not forth
with limited to a certain place: But Paul, Barnabas, Philip, etc. were
ordained Ministers. Ergo,

Certain were ordained Ministers not limited to a place.

The 1. Demonstration, which is a reason of this 1. redoubted Proposition.

If John were constrained to prove his ministry out of the word when the
Priests accused him, Demonstration.
Then there is no lawful calling but warranted in the word: but he proved
his calling: Ergo no calling lawful, but which is warranted in the word.

To the Antecedent.

This fallacy is, (...) of the consequent: Remonstrance.
The sequel of the Antecedent is to be denied, which is in plainer terms
this, vz. There is no calling in the new, but is first warranted by some
prophecy of the old Testament.

To the Assumption.

But he proved his ministry.

Whether he proved or did not prove: whether he were accused or not accused,
the ministry of John was a lawful ministry, their impeachment there of was
not to hinder the execution of his ministry: The warrant rather is the
immediate commission from heaven, and the prophecy that went of him to
exercise his ministry. How follows the Argument, a facto adius? Or from
their constraint, to the warrantize of his calling? If any proof should be
drawn for or against, it can be other in consequence then this.

One extraordinary Minister did upon occasion of those that cauilled at him
prove his extraordinary calling out of the word of God: Then every ordinary
Minister may against wranglers prove his ordinary ministry out of the word
to be the ordinance of God, Even so do we.

Or this.

Johannes confessus est and non negauit: John 1.20.
John did confess and denied not, confessed who he was and denied not who he
was: Even so in humility we ought to do, and semblably do.

Unless it please you to argue after this sort out of the text: These things
were done in Bethany or Bethabara beyond Jordan, or John proved his ministry
in Bethany or Bethabara beyond Jordan: Ergo your ministry must be proved in
Bethany beyond Jordan: O then your reason has a further fetch beyond or on the
other side of Jericho or Jordan.

Or else better after this sort.

John exercised his ministry and proved it too, without warrantie of an
outward calling of any that sat in Moses chair: for the people held him for
a Prophet. Ergo you have an exercise of your ministry without an outward
calling, and may run before you are sent, and the people hold your prophecy
and baptism to be true: But this will savor strongly of Anabaptisme I trow.

The 2. Demonstration.

The callings under the Gospel must have as good warrant as the callings under
the Law: Demonstration.
But all callings under the Law (except miraculous) had direct warrant. Ergo.

Ridetur chorda qui semper oberrat eadem: Remonstrance.
A bad harper harpeth always on one string.

My answer is as unto the 7. and 8. Demonstrations. 1. Cap.

Or I answer with concession because it is nothing to the question, and
therefore your fight is with no body, but with the foolish fear of your own
shadow.

Or I answer by distinction thus.

Direct warrantie is either immediate from the voice of God, or which is
mediate by direct consequencie gathered out of the word of God: Such is any
calling in the Church of England, by what name soever it be named, deducible
from the word of God.

The 3. Demonstration.

If Corah, Dathan and Abyram were punished having no warrant of that they took
in hand, Demonstration.
then is every calling generally warranted out of the word and particularly
laid upon the parties.

But the first is true, Ergo the second. Nomb. 16.


This is well concluded: Your consequence of the Mayor no way follows,
Remonstrance.
except the want of warrantize had been the only cause of their punishment.

You confess a truth before you are aware in the Minor, your own feters
shall serve for your own feet.

If Corah, Dathan and Abyram were swallowed up alive for insurrection against
Moses and Aaron the high Priest, Retortion.
for ambitious seeking to be all high Priests, not contented with the
ministry of the Tabernacle as inferior Levites, and for scismatical
assertion, Is not the whole Congregation holy? Hij omnes sunt sancti: are not
all these holy, that is sanctified to the Lord, Number. 16.3.
both intruding into the office, and obtruding to the people the office of the
high Priest at that time: Must not the scismatikes of our time, whose
contradiction is the same, perish also in the same contradiction? Pares culpa,
pares paena: like fault, like punishment without the mercy of God. But the
Antecedent is true, Ergo, the consequent is together true: For these do the
very same against those who are set over them in the Lord.

Plus satis arrogatis vobis: Inter eos est Iehoua: quare ergo effertis vos
super Congregationem Iehouae?

You take too much upon you, amongst them is the Lord: Is not all the
Congregation holy? Why do you advance your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord? Are not all holy? all Ministers alike? and ministeries? Is not the
laytie a holy presbytery to the Lord? Are not the Congregation interessed in
the government of the Church?

Nemo de vobis vnus excellat:
Omnem exuperantiam virtutis oderunt. Tusc. quest. lib. 5.

Every of us is as good as other. These be as the voices of old scismatikes
were.

The 4. Demonstration.

That which gives comfort in trouble, must have a warrant out of Gods word:
Demonstration.
But every lawful calling does so. Ergo.

The Argument lies at Cowards ward. Remonstrance.


We deny not but that all lawful callings have warrant of Gods word, but not
particularly or totidem verbis: For where finds he a Master of an Hospital,
a Printer, a Cartwright, a Salte-peter man, a shirte-maker, a gunne-maker, an
Attorney in all Scripture?

Ante diem clauso componet vesper Olimpo. From morning unto night: Stans pede
in vno, you may demonstrate thus.

The 5. Demonstration.

That which helps forward in godliness, Demonstration.
must have a warrant out of Gods word: But every lawful calling helps
forward in godliness. Ergo.

These and such other like Arguments, Remonstrance.
are like to the Islands in Archipelago, (...), lying in the middle way to be
surprised of any man: or as the province of Iewry and Syria: where of Tullie
says, Iudaei et Syri ad seruitutem nati, De prouin. consul.
bound to serve all turns, and pay tribute unto all who will make them
tributarie.

Wastewordes of the Demonstrator.

They confess all this to be true, Demonstration.
but deny the Archbishop and LL. B B. etc. to be distinct Ministers: which we
hold to be distinguished, and by six Demonstrations do prove it, first thus.

The 1. Demonstration.

Those things which have diverse efficient causes, Demonstration.
are diverse: Our L L. B B. and the Ministers of the word have diverse
efficient causes, the one the ordinance of God, the other of humane policy.
Ergo.

We hold their ministry of the word to be as others, Remonstrance.
and there in equal, but for order and policy of the Church, a Superiority
in government, censures, and ordinations, in which respect they are B B. So
much Beza and Calvin also confess in effect, speaking of Patriarchs,
Archbyshops and Bishops in the Primative Church.

To the Mayor.

This must be true in natural, or in artificial and civil things, or true in
neither: For some things have diverse efficients, and are the same things:
other are diverse things, and have the same efficient. Ergo. It is true in
neither.

The brain of an Anabaptist and the brain of an ass have one efficient, and
yet are diverse things.

Sol et homo generant hominem: Sol et asinus generant asinum. unless you make
an Anabaptist the foale of an ass.

The soul of Nouatus and the soul of T.C. have but one creator, and yet are
indiuiduated and diverse things: unless you hold (...) transmigration into
T.C. of Nouatus soul.

Again, if we might believe your selves, Moses made the Sanedrim of old, or
authorized it: Christ in your eldership made or authorized the Sanedrim of the
new according to your selves: These are diverse efficients, yet but one thing.

The egg of this byrds laying, and of another byrds hatching, has diverse
efficients, but yet is one chicke.

Diversities of efficient church wrights and reformers of the state, belike
must needs breed diversity of reformation of the state, and diverse
communion books, as fell out within two years experience thrice diuersely:
your Presbyteries, your Classies, and your Synodes, severally may make or
ordeine ministers, and these be diverse assemblies: ergo, their ministeries be
diverse, that so diversely be ordained and called of them.

The Minor cannot pass, it is passing naught: viz. our BB. and the ministers
have diverse efficients, as themselves do confess. Who ever of us did
confess the BB. to be a mere humane constitution? Therefore let this lie. As
for the word and title of Lord (in which limitation, they think a great
advantage lurketh) it is but per accidens, as they have Baronries. If it were
otherwise, why not titles of honor due to them, if honor be due? The
efficient of BB. in respect they are ministers, is God: as BB. properly, is
also God: Omnis potestas a Deo. For admit all their authority or names were
not specifically expressed, shall not their power therefore be of God? else
where be the four Syndicts of Geneuaes authority? For there is no such office
named particularly in scripture. See the 304. page of the defense of the
answer to the admonition, whose plain distinction is: That great is the
odds, to be ordained of Christ for external policy of the Church, and to be
constituted for mere human policy. Vide Sarau. lib. 1. de diuersis grad.
minist.

This conclusion therefore drives the dust and wind of their folly into their
own eyes.

God and christian policy ordeyneth all ministers,

Ergo, all ministers have the same efficient.

Or, God and christian policy ordeyneth all ministers.

God and christian policy are not diverse efficients, (as this diverse man
does dream) but subordinate: for all christian policy is the good gift of
God, and therefore no efficient absolute of it self, but effected by God.

The 2. Demonstration.

A diverse form makes diverse things: Demonstration.
ministers of the word and the LL. BB. have diverse forms, as their
ordinacion, since one L.B. may ordeine a minister, but there must be three to
ordeine one of them: Ergo,

To the Mayor.

Whether you mean accidental form or substanciall, Remonstrance.
it is not ever true, viz. diverse forms make diverse things: you know the old
said saw, Ouorum inter se similitudo. Nothing so like as an egg to an egg:
Nothing so like as Hypocrates two twins: which (in specie) were not different
things, yet the one was not the other.

Again, diverse forms are in any thing: as Trigonus in Tetragono, the one
included in the other: or where the one is ordained for the complement and
perfection of the other: 2. physic.
Homo prius viuit vitam plantae, deinde bruti, postremo hominis.

To the Minor.

The ministers and the LL. BB. have one essential form in their ordinacion to
the ministry, as in giving them the ministerial charge of the word and the
administration of the sacraments, which is his commission for the ministry.
The form is all one: the consecration of a B. which is a commission for
superior authority in ordinacions and jurisdictions, with the censures, or
whatsoever else is annexed thereunto, is never a deal the more for the
presence of three, any new or strange ordiancion of a ministry. For accidens
non mutat speciem subiecti: yet is it such, as if we read all the old fathers,
counsels, and other antiquity, (who were like to know best in what sort the
apostles planted and established churches) ye shall never find above one B.
required at the ordination of any presbyter a priest or minister: but 2. BB. at
least, and the Metropolitan at the consecration of a B. according to which
number, our book of ordination in that behalf was framed, and it may be
gathered from the like ordination of Paul and Barnabas in the thirteenth of the
Acts: the one of which was an apostle, the other vir apostolicus before: from
which example, I reason thus:

Either this new ordination of Paul by the prophets and doctors of Antioch gave
him a new and diverse ministry from his former, so that he continued not an
Apostle still: or else by this accession no such alteration is made.

But he continued an apostle still, ergo, by this accession of ordination or
function no such diversity was made. And consequently, an accession of
function or authority unto our BB. by their consecration, makes them not
cease to be ministers of the word still, which is contradictorie to their
mayor, and therefore that untrue. But to pommell them about the pates with
their own swords, thus again I may reason.

A diverse form makes diverse things:

Ministers and Elders in a church not yet established, must be chosen and
ordained by the whole church: but in a church established, by the presbitery
alone, (as their own platformers describe) which two be diverse forms and
diverse members of ordeiners: ergo, they who be chosen and ordained after the
first manner, have a diverse ministry and eldershippe from such as be of the
latter making: and consequently, the first being of another kind, cannot
choose or ordeine any of the second sort, and so shall their new discipline be
nipped in the head, and stand after possibility of issue extinct. Or thus:

A diverse form makes diverse things.

All our new discipliners (saving the church of Scotland which thinks it a
needelesse abrogated ceremony) in ordination of elders do necessarily require
and use imposition of hands: ergo the ministers of Scotland have a several
function and ministry from all reformed churches besides.

Or reason for your selves, and reason thus:

Mixed forms put together make either no thing (quia species cum specie non
copulatur etc.) or a mingle mangle, Retortion of their argument.
erratum naturae a monstrous thing.

The new manner and guise of ordination by combining laity and clergy, is
not actus purus, but a compound and mixed form: ergo, such ordination by the
imposing of hands of laity and clergy, makes their ministry either a
nullitie, or a monstrous thing.

The 3. Demonstration.

Members of one division are distinct one from another. Demonstration.


The L.BB. and ordinary ministers are members of one division: for the
ministers are divided into the Rulers and ruled: Ergo,

To the Mayor.

The axiom is, Remonstrance.
Membra vnius diuisionis contra distinguuntur de se inuicem non predicantur,
are not verifiable one of another. As a man is not an horse, prudence is not
fortitude, fortitude is not prudence: howbeit, they are concident in vno
subiecto, as temperance and prudence in one Scipio. Secondarily, conueniunt in
aliquo superiori, meet and concur in one general or universal, a man and
beast in one living creature. This is T.C. oversight. See the defense of the
answer to the admonition: 203. pa.

To the Minor.

The Minor we distinguish.

The Ministers are not oppositiuely distinguished, but relatiuely. Or, the
division is of the common of more, into the common of the less. They are not
of diverse predicaments.

The argument to be framed is thus.

Every B. is not an inferior minister: ergo, every inferior minister is not a
B. in or out of his parish: viz. a parish B. which these men crave.

The fallacy is (...). Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
It is absurd to argue thus: The BB. and other inferior ministers are
according to superiority and inferiority of order distinct: ergo, altogether
and in every respect distinct. Or, (...) (the word that imports ministers
as well as deacons) or ministers are divided into BB. and priests: ergo BB. are
not priests. Or thus: Their officers ecclesiastical are divided into pastores,
doctores, presbyteros, et diaconos: ergo, Pastores non sunt presbyteri, et per
consequens non sunt de presbyterio: Pastors are none Elders, and therefore are
not of the Eldership.

The 4. Demonstration.

The thing that have diverse effects, are diverse in themselves one from
another: Demonstration.
The LL.BB. and other ministers have diverse effects. The one effects
government, the other subjection. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

What a confident Demonstration call you this? An 100. Remonstrance.
Instances to one thing.

Eaedem causae sunt interimentes quae efficientes. Contrary effects issue out
of one cause or thing. God makes the wound, and heals, Job 4. Vna eaedemque
manus vulnus opemque tulit. The sun melts wax, and indurateth clay, which
are contrary effects and diverse things.

To the Minor.

The Argument is builded upon the sand of ignoration Elenchi: The answer is,
The LL.BB. and ministers do neither affect nor effect, secundum idem, ad idem,
simpliciter, and eodem tempore diverse things. The one in his Parish, the other
in his Diocese, both are rulers as far as Law gives leave, the one has
more command, the other less. Magis and minus non variat speciem: More or
less government make no opposition of government. Obediant (says Ignatius)
Laici Diaconis, Diaconi Presbyteris, Ignat. Epi. 7. ad Smirn.
Presbyteri Eppiscopo, Episcopus Christo, sicut ipse patri. The subjection of
the one is the fair degree of government for the other: The Lord Mayor and the
Aldermen of several Wards, the one effects rule, the other obedience, both
respect order: These are adverse in a regard, not contrary things.

Me thinks some amongst you should reason for you thus:

They who affect tyranny over al, Retortion.
and they who effect obedience unto none, are diverse in them selves, and
contrary unto all: But the Seigniorie or Presbytery, affects an ambition and
rule over all persons, and over all matters, as in the learned discourse their
words do assertiuely importe: Ergo, the Seigniorie is contrary unto all, and
concording with none: and therefore, as they of the Concision then amongst the
old Jews, so they of the Precision, (who in this are as bad as Jews) are at
variance with all, and agreement with none: But as Ismaels hand against every
man, so every man's hand against Ismael.

The 5. Demonstration.

They who are employed about diverse things, are diverse one from another:
Demonstration.
The LL.BB. and ordinary Ministers are so. Ergo, For the one has the view of
many Congregations, the other the direction of one particular.

To the Mayor.

Adignorationem elenchi reduci possunt omnes elenchi, Remonstrance.
and paralogisimi, says Aristotle: This fallacious stone is dug out of the
former quarrie.

Those which are employed about diverse things, are diverse for time of
employment, not diverse in office and nature.

One mortal King has two Ambassadors in diverse regions, their Commission is
alike, both Ambassadors. Or, one immortal King has two Apostles, one for the
circumcision or dispersion of the Jews, another for the gathering and
conversion of the Gentiles: And yet but one Apostleship, 2. Cor. 5.
and Embassage for faith in Christ. Legatione pro Christo fungimur.

To the Minor.

The Minor is not precisely true: the Bishops have no such care of all, that
therefore they do no good to any particular Church, since their sea must be
there: But as S. Paul having care of all, and for all Congregations, be doing
good in one, As the soul and life is distributed into all and every part.
Anima est in toto, and totum in qualibet part.

The ordinary Minister has direction of one Congregation, says the
Demonstrator, Ergo the same Minister has government of one or of few, so many
as are within the charge of that Congregation.

This is a contradiction since many and few are always in relation.
Contradiction to your selves.
Oportet mendacem esse memorem: A liar must be mindeful of the beginning of his
tale: This manner of Demonstration is called (...).

But you say: Retortion.
They which are employed about diverse things, are diverse.

The Martinists rail, and the Puritanes would pull down Cathedral Churches,
certain of them would take ye pains to pull down al Churches: These are
employments about diverse things, and yet you and the Martinists are loath to be
accounted scarce diverse kind of men.

The 6. Demonstration.

That which is perpetual, Demonstration.
and that which may be taken away by men, are distinct things: The office of
the Minister is perpetual, and the BB. may be taken away, as themselves
confess, Ergo they are distinct the one from the other.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is false, if you mean distinct, re and subiecto as ye scholemen
say: as for distinct ratione, in consideration, we will easily grant.

The prince of Philosophers says, Corruptibile and incorruptibile differunt
plusquam genere. But what your meaning is of distinct, I can not attain:
whether that which is always and every way distinct, or no way distinct, or how
many ways: Distinguish it, that we may have issue of the question. The body
and soul, the one is corruptible, the other incorruptible, distinctly
considerable, are vnum subiecto, one thing: Anima in coniuncto.

To the Minor.

You take this pro confesso: But you often mistake, as a child would do a
counter for gold, or as fools often do, chalk for cheese. He that reports
a slanderous tale, if he cannot produce his Author, must father it himself.
We always allow of the perpetuity of the office, and that it may not be done
away, though there be no doubt, but some accidents thereof may lawfully (yet
perhaps none conveniently) be changed.

If the governing Ministers be perpetual, the government and ministrations are
perpetual also. He that ministers, in the ministry, He that governs, in
his government. Romans 12.


I propounde this Dilemma: Retortion.
Either all Ministers are perpetual, or all temporal, or some temporal and
some perpetual. All Ministers temporal, you will not say for shame, as you
make your Elders for a year or two, and so temporary if not temporal: To
auerre all perpetual, is to gainesay your selves. If you say and unsay, some
of these Ephesians. 4. are perpetual, and others are not: Show by plain
Demonstration which are, and which are not, or by the clear light of any
collection out of any other place produce your Tetrarchy, as it were the half
face of Venus painted by Apelles, or as it were another with two faces, your
Doctor and Pastor, your Elder and Deacon, the one before, the other behind: or
else with shame and confusion cover your face.

The 2. Proposition.

1. The name and office of the Archbishop is contrary to the word.
Demonstration.
2. The name of the Archbishop is unlawful to give to any man in the Church of
God.
The 1. Demonstration.

No man may have that name given to him which is proper to our Savior Jesus
Christ: Heb. 12.2. and 13. chap. 20.1. pet. 5.4. Acts. 3.15. and 5.31.
But the name of Archbishop is proper to him. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

By proper you mean appropriate unto the essence of God and Christ,
Remonstrance.
and that is an ineffable name, which is Iehoua: Name of essence as the
Hebrews do expound, who can tell his name, or who can tell his sons name?
The name of his office the Angel could foretell: They shall call his name Jesus.
Generationem eius quis enarrabit? Absurdity.
This is a proper manner of reasoning: No man can design or assign the name
essential unto Christ. Ergo, None can give to any man the name of the offices
and honors in a secondarie respect.

To the Minor.

You say the name of Archbishop is proper unto Christ by the places quoted in
the magent: Well do you quote a margent, you cannot quote a text: never a
place of those terms him Archbishop: Ergo, we intrude not upon the name of
Christ: Since Archbishop is none (in the letter of the new Testanment) of the
names belonging unto Christ. But either we intrude upon the iniquity or
equity of this name, you will not say with irreverence, there is iniquity in
the name wherewith Christ is named: admitting therefore no iniquity in the
name, and for disputes sake that it is Christ his name: as well as Archduke and
author of our faith: Heb. 12.2. and 13.20. Act. 3.15. and 5.31.
(...), Great shepherd of the sheep ye have killed, (...), Prince of life.
(...), A Prince and Savior: or high Shepherd and chief ruler. (...), to rule
as well as to feed, yet you can not term it intrusion to resort unto the
name, or to resume the equity of the name.

Our rule which you never can refute, is this.

Those names which are attributed unto Christ, may in subalternall respects
without rapine or ambition be attributed unto man, as Rabbi, Master, Doctor,
high Priest, high Shepherd, Archbishop also if it were found attributed unto
Christ. Magistrates be called Gods.

Your fallacious Rule and maxim is without reason, without religion, without
rule.

Wheresoever you find (...) preposed before a name, your outcry is: It is
unlawful for any man to inuest him with the name or tilte in a secondary
respect, and that after Christ.

This is a most falacious and erroneous rule: for the name agreeeth secundum
prius et posterius, analogically: viz. Christ is a chief builder, and lays
himself as a foundation or corner stone: yet Saint Paul (...), a wise chief
or master builder lays a foundation: Christ chief leader Archduke of our
faith: others also spiritual fathers, and begetters principal guides of
faith, 1. Cor. 3.
(...). Christ is high priest: yet this title in Christ's time was attributed to
some of the priests. Christ is head of the nations. psalm. 2. yet Paul calls a
man (...), Christ is chief in all congregations, Psalm. 2.
yet were some men (...), and though Christ be prince of angels, yet is the
trumpe of Archangel mentioned before judgment, and ten Iuny cannot persuade
me, that the Archangel in Jude that durst not give ill language but said, the
Lord rebuke thee, was Christ: vide 2. Pet. 2. ca. v. 11. Christ a chief
minister and washed his Apostles feet, in humility is called 8. Heb. v. 2.
(...): minister of holy things, and of the true tabernacle, also (...) high or
chief priest or chiefest minister, for he came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister. Yet nevertheless he has a name above all names: 20. Matthew. 28. v
underneath him are many ministers, 1. Cor. 3.5. v. what is Paul, what is
Apollos; but the ministers by whom you have believed? and yet none of you dare
say, but they were chief ministers, or had care of many congregations, as our
Archbishops, or chief BB. have, or as our chiefeministers or archdeacons have.
Christ is the chief shepherd or chief ruler of his sheep: other inferior
pastors are superintendents over the flock, but all after him: Christ chief
or great master or doctor: Saint Paul, doctor gentium, doctor of the gentiles:
he that is first and foremost in order and superiority amongst men: he that
seeks the primacie, qui primatum quaerit minister sit 20. Matthew. 26. v. 20.
Mat. 26. v.
qui Episcopatum desideder at praeclarum opus desiderat: He that occupies the
primacie must hold on his ministry: he that desires a Bishopric desires
but a work, yea a commendable and godly labor and work. And to cut you of
from all color, will you say, that the princes of the earth may not without
blasphemy be called monarchs because the etymology seems to exclude all
others even God himself from any rule, seeing it specifieth sole rulers? But
if (...), and (...), were granted to be all one (which is untrue) because the
one signifies feeding and ruling, the other but inspection: yet is Christ
called (...) with the article: td est, that chief Shepherd universal, and
without limitation of place or time, whereas Archbishops are chief BB. with
limitation to a certain province and limits, and not simply, but in respect of
the BB. within that circuit, for reteyning of order in Synodes, and for
redress upon appellations happening in that province.

For shame T C. and you the counterpoysoner help the Demonstrator to a
cunninger Sophisme then this.

The 2. Demonstration.

If the name of the Pope be odious because of that Antichrist who is entitled
therewith, Demonstration.
then also the name of Archbishop when it is ascribed to a mortal man,
forasmuch as it is a title of a special member of Antichrist: But the first is
true, Ergo, the later is true: The first is true by their own confession 300.
page of the defense of the answer to the admonition.

To the Antecedent.

We deny the antecedent and the sequel of the same. Remonstrance.


This is (...) to trifle and sing always one song. Say you, if the Pope being
Antichrist, (...) that great Antichrist. This is an identicall affirmation,
Antichrist is Antichrist. What meaning carries this?

But let us take the meaning, and not the disorder of the words.

If the name of the Pope be odious because of Antichrist of whose mystical
iniquity he is the head, then also the name of the Archbishops being a title
of a special member of Antichrist, must be odious therewith: This is your
argument, if a man will unfold it: But this is most odiously argued against the
most reverend and christian name of Archbishops. The name and office of
Archbishops was in sundry places of the world before BB. of Rome were
Antichrists: ergo, Archbishops no members of Antichrist (...). Why not all
deacons odious because of popish deacons? Of this foolish figment of your
fantastical brain, or false supposall, it follows by semblable
consequencie, that if the Archbishops be odious because of the pope, the
Bishops are odious because of the Archbishops, the priests are odious because
of the Bishops, the deacons are odious because of the priests and so for one
disorderly step or gradation from the Archbishops upward, all orderly
hierachie from the Archbishops downward to the deacons, from the deacons
upward to the Archbishops, shall be drawn into obloquious hatred: as some of
your Brownists condemn all church policy and refer to Antichrist, and so
likewise all our universities are calumniously traduced by you to be the dishes
of Antichrist wherein he is served, being colleges of the prophets and
serviceable nurces to the church.

What manner of reasoning call you this?

If the name of infinite and illimitable jurisdiction be odious, Foul
absuditie of the Demonstrator.
Ergo, the name of that which is bounded within limits must be odious
likewise: Or if the name of universal and transcendent power that climeth over
all, be hateful: Ergo, the name of a modest and measurable power and
superiority is full of hatred also?

This is an absurdity in sight of every man.

Finiti ad infinitum nullae est proportio. Between a thing finite and infinite
there is no proportion.

The repercussiue rather makes against you thus.

If the name of so vaste and infinite authority be intolerable in the church,
Retortion.
and antichristian: the name of a determined and precincted authority is
tolerable and christian: (...).

If this follows upon that, the opposite follows of contrary or opposite:
contrariae sunt contrariorum consequentiae: Ar. Repraeh. Soph.
contrary follows upon contraryes.

To the assumption.

But the name of the Pope is odious (say you,) because of that Antichrist: Not
because he used the name, but because he abused the name, the name is odious
at this day.

If you make this a maxim, as T.C. and all his fellows do: viz. whatsoever
is used by the Pope and church of Rome, must be deadly hated for his and their
sakes: you make a wodden ado then. Though Nero and Caligula abuse the name of
God, or will be called Gods being by nature no gods, shall not we therefore
invoke and call upon the name of God, the euerlyuing God? Albeit Tarquinius
made the name of a King odious, in that he governed all domesticis consiliis,
as Liuie reports, and by other misdemeanour of himself: does it therefore
follow, we must detest the name of a King? Although the false prophets
prophesied lies in the name of the living God, shall we shake of other good
prophets for their names sake? though the persons degenerate, the name may
continue unless it be a name of blasphemy, wherewith no name is named in our
church policy.

How say you to this?

If one Pope be odious because of that one Antichrist, Retortion of the
argument upon the Demonstrator.
then many popes be odious because of many Antichrists. No Archbishop has so
popelike authority as you claim: no man may propound but your selves, and so
you have a negative voice: you would examine and censure kings: you claim to
make laws and orders for the church, without the Princes authority, and your
sentences stand not suspended upon an appellation: no Archbishop in her
majesty's dominions has any such authority: S. John says there are many
antichrists: Tertull de prescript. aduer. haeret.
Qui pseudoprophetaenisi falsi praedicatores? qui pseudo apostoli nisi falsi
euang elizatores? qui antichristi interim and semper nisi Christi rebels? Who
are false prophets, but false preachers? who are false apostles but false
gospellers? who are Antichrist between this and the worlds end, but such who
are contumacious and rebellious against Christ? who if that you appose your
selves against the christian magistracy and holy ministry of Christ, profane
ye priesthood by erecting a laical presbytery: 2. These. 2.
advance your selves (...) in the temple against all that is called God, (...),
against the reverend Archbishops and BB. who bear this jurisdiction for and in
the name of Christ and God.

The demo^strator as it were weary of demonstration leaves his forest bill
or long staff, and takes a shorter pair of codgels into his hand, goes to
ob. and So. Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit? what piety in an
adversary is this to muster our argument and authorities for us? there can be
little disadvantage in this, for he disputes pro et contra: First out of the
defense of the answer to the admonition. 318. page

The 1. objection of the Demonstrator.

Clemens allows these names as Polidore lib. 4. cap. 12. reports.
Demonstration.


The Answer of the demonstrator.

Polidore is but a reporter, and Clemens is a counterfeite and worthy of no
credit.

He that used the argument page 318. Remonstrance with reply.
used it as a probable testimony for the antiquity of the name, not as
infallible ground or certainty to prove the name and thing: for that the said
author or Defendor proves, together with the equity of the name and thing,
out of the word of God sufficiently: but you sir deal very handsomely, like a
mad dog which biteth any alive or dead. Mortui non mordent, the dead bite not
him, for any thing your profoundnes knows, Polydore Virgil might have seen
Compendiarium Christianae religionis, of Clemens his book, who compiled his
own book out of such notices which he compiled and robbed from our Library
books in England, and therefore it is a probability he had seen the right
and orthodoxe Clemens, not the counterfeit Clemens, whose epistles and
bastardie no man defends. But every Clement with you is a counterfeit
Clement. Your clemency and courtesy in arguing thus to and fro is but a
counterfeit clemency.

The 2. Objection.

Erasmus says, Titus was an Archbishop.

Answer.

He spoke as the times wherein he lived: Demonstration.
but that proves not that he held him one in deed, no more then our naming
the Archbishop of Canturburie proves that we like his authority.

This man the Demonstrator, holds as good opinion of Erasmus, Remonstrance
with reply.
as Bellarmin the Jesuit, who terms him semichristianu^: as if Erasmus
speaks that which he does not believe, or loquitur secundum vulgus, non ex
animi sententia. T C. the master and Demonstratour the man at variance.
But what says T.C. to this? forsooth this: Erasmus says, S. Paul did inform
Timothy of the office of a Bishop, and Titus and Timothy had an office, ergo,
Titus was no Archbishop, according to T.C. because he was a Bishop: and the man
reasons thus in old earnest.

As for you, and the whole unlettered sort of Puritanes, and T. C. your
leader, name the Archbishop when and where, and how often you please, neither
shall you be compeers with Erasmus, neither will any wise man hold his
authority to be more or less for you. Finally for T.C. who is opinatiue that
Titus was neither Archbishop nor Bishop, (which the scholiast in Greek does
easily yield unto) but rather an Evangelist, he is a mad man, and will
infinitely deny and revenge him in the end. Plus potest vnus asinus negare,
quam mill Augustini possunt probare. An ass may deny more, the^ a thousand
Austines shall be able to prove. Yet the subscription, the consent of the
Fathers, his constitution of Bishops in that large Island of Candie, joined
with the epistle, will prove more then T.C. conjecture. And how follows this,
he was a Preacher of the Gospel or Evangelist, ergo none Archbishop? was not
Idmes an Apostle, and Bishop of Jerusalem?

The 3. Objection.

Anacletus says, Demonstration.
James was first Archbishop of Jerusalem.

Answer.

He is forged, as our answer to the Papists have showed: But Eusebius li. 2.
cap. 25. calls him Bishop, and Simeon after him, li. 3. cap. 22. and so
Irenaeus li, 4. ca. 63. Apostles ordained Bishops every where, making no
mention of Archbishops.

This is the readiest answer that comes out of your forge. Remonstrance with
reply.
Bishop Jewel in his question between us and you, vouchsafes to allege
Anacletus, whom you so peremptorily reject. Anacletus (says he) that was next
after Peter, if there be any weight in his word, names Archbishop Anacletus as
nearer unto those times, in his epistle, 1. Tom. Council. says, James called
Iustus, was Archbishop of Jerusalem. Now say you, Eusebius calls him but
Bishop of Jerusalem, (by the way T.C. gives or lends you a false quotation
22. cap. for 11. cap.) ergo, no Archbishop. It would scare a man to reason with
you: you do it so clearly, as if a chief among Bishops, or Archbishop, were
not a Bishop. Howbeit neither Eusebius, nor Irenaeus speaks exclusiuely: for
every Archbishop is a Bishop, not every Bishop an Archbishop, e conuerso. Hic
semper erras. To reason from auctorities negatiuely, is an affirmative
impudency. As rightly might you reason, and do wrong to divine authority,
Moses made Captains of 100. and 1000. ergo, Moses made not any superior
Magistrate, as the 72. Or Christ sent 72. Disciples, ergo, he sent none of the
12. Apostles, or any other officers.

The 4. Objection.

The Council of Nice, Demonstration.
canon. 6. mentions a Metropolitan Bishop.

Answer.

That proves nothing, it is as much as Bishop of the chief City.

You cut off the definition of the Archbishop at the waste: Remonstrance with
reply.
for the Council not only mentions a Metropolitan, who is idem re, which
the Archbishop is, but defines him also: Cui conuenit definitio, conueniet
definitum: and e contra. Antiqua consuetudo seruetur per Aegyptum, Libyam,
Pentapolim, vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem. 6. ca.
Let the old custom be kept throughout Egypt, Libya, Pentapolis, that the
bishop of Alexandria have his iutisdictio^ or authority over them. It was then
no novelty, but an ancient and primitive custom. What is the Archbishop or
Metropolitan bishop? one who has power, one who must be primus inter eos,
first or chief, 6. can.
or primate amongst them, 33. ca. Apostol. quodammodo pro capite 35. ca.
Apost. 33. can. Apostol. 35. can. Apostol.
as it were their head, head of the rest: (...), one that has care of the
whole province. conc. Antio. ca. 9. ca. 9. conc. Antio.
What is a Metropolitan bishop, but an Archbishop? None was to be ordained a
B. without the consent of the Metropolitan bishop.

This is a great reproof to him that is not past blushing, when he shall
allege that which conuinceth him self, as this does you. A little bringing
about will make you confess in plainenes, which you confess in
circumloquution. It is but nicetie thus to deal with the famous Council of
Nice.

The 2. part of the Proposition.

That the office of Archbishop is contrary to the word of God. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

Every ministry lawful, is of God.

The office of Archbishop is not described in the word, nor of God, but of
humane policy: ergo, unlawful.

To the Mayor.

This is one of your Demonstrations a causaremota, Remonstrance.
when you fetch your medius terminus so far of, as from God, and never quote
a place: but I grant your Mayor, if you can prove the Minor.

To the Minor.

The office of the Archbishop is from God, Cyp. li. 1.11.50. secundum Dei
dignationem sacerdotium Dei ad ministramus. Contradiction to themselves.
and described in Gods word: that it is not of mere humane policy, you are
answered before, but of God, though mediatiuely by divine permission,
permissione diuina, as themselves in humility do confess. Observe this by
the way, as a contradiction you make unto your selves. Where you now say, the
office is not described in the word, a little before you say, the Archbishop
does usurp Christ his proper name, which is (...), Archbishop, or high or
chief pastor. Now to every name longs a charge and office, and to the name
pastor and bishop, longs an office, and so per consequens to the Archbishop,
as sometime to Titus and Timothy, an higher charge and pastoral office.

The 2. Demonstration.

That ministry whose original is unknown, has no warrant in Gods word,
Demonstration.
and is unlawful: the Archbishop is so. page 351. of the Defense of the answer
to the Admonition. ergo,

To the Mayor.

The Mayor I deny, Remonstrance.
and distinguish upon this word unknown: unknown is an ambiguous word.

There is an original of the name, and of the nature of the name. There is
ignotum nobis, and ignotum natura, unknown to us, and unknown in nature:
which unknown do you mean, make it once known. Lucan.
I may say unto you, as the Poet Lucan said: ignotum vobis Arabes venistis in
orbem: you are children of a strange world, that coming into the world of
Christianity, make the Archbishops ministry an unknown thing.

To the Minor.

If you mean unknown the nature and equity of the thing, this is utterly
false: the superiority of ye Archbishops is most clearly known, Council,
Antioch.
both in and before the first Council of Nice, and in the Ecclesiastical
history, and lineally descended from the Apostles themselves. It skilleth not
for the original of the name, since (...) may bear equiualencie with the name,
since in the practice of the Apostles a blind man may see, also amongst the
Primative Christians, a superior authority supported by the name. But if your
meaning be, it is unknown to you contemners and breakers down of the hedge
and wall of all jurisdiction, it makes no matter what is known or unknown
unto you, who have forgotten all together, and know not your selves.

See now whether this Syllogism can be retorted upon your selves? Retortion
of the argument.


That public function whose original is utterly strange and unknown in
nature and in name, has no warrant in the word, nor is authorized in the
Church.

Your confused popular unpreaching, temporary, mechanical Presbyteri, or
Alderma^ship, is utterly unknown, but within these few years of late, neither
is it known to any but your selves, if perhaps you know it your selves: ergo,
it is neither warranted by God, nor ought to be auctorised by the Church.

The 3. Demonstration.

The office which is needless in the Church is unlawful. Demonstration.


The Archbishops office is needless, because the ministry is perfect without
it, Ephesians. 4.11. Ergo. Ephesians. 4.11.


To the Mayor.

This demonstration is rather folly then fallacy: Remonstrance.
the Medium or proof there is needless. In deed less need of this then of
that before. Bare need makes you demonstrate after this sort, your argument
is but mistaken. It is not a non necessario, sed ab independente. My answer
therefore is.

Not every thing seeming needless in humane prejudice, is forth with
unlawful in Gods divine judgment.

To the Minor.

This is a most lewd affirmation in the Minor, that the Archbishops office is
needless, because the ministry is perfect without it. The Demonstrator is as
bold as any man, and as blind as whosoever: but boldness and blindness are
the two helps. As for the reason that ye ministry is perfect without it, it
is an imperfect reason: For as justly may he say the office of a Christian King
is needless in the church, because ye ministry is perfect without it. This
is a doubtful clause to leave the ministry in speculation, not in action: or
to consider of the being of the ministry, not of the well being of the same.
Let this one word serve for your answer, if you will be answered. The
perfectness of the ministry does not ouerturne the needfulnesse of
government or direction by the Archbishop, I dare avouch he knows not
wherein an Archbishops office here consists.

That which is needless, is unlawful, etc. Retortion of the argument.


The office of Church-Aldermen over all men, and all manners, is needelesse in
our Church, where a Christian magistracy is established already, and because
no place of Scripture affirms for it, Ergo, it is unlawful in the Church,
and none but T.C. idest, thanklesse curiosity would bring it in place. Or this.

That which is needless, is unlawful.

All courts of Record, as Chancerie and Common pleass, etc. shall be found
needless if the Consistory of Presbyters and Elders were set up, which is
only needful, or else full of need, in the Church or congregation of the
faithful brethren, because they may determine all matters wherein any breach
of charity may be, as the Admonitioner says: Ergo, all Courts of Record, as
Chancerie, Common pleas, etc. by their reason will be found all unlawful.

Thus then we reason out of their own grounds.

What office soever is needless, idest, is not necessarily required in the
Church, the same is unlawful.

The Christian princes supreme government in causes ecclesiastical (if we
believe these men) is needless: for the learned discourser (who says the
Church was most flourishing when there was no Christian magistrate) and T.C.
says no less, who finds no difference between an heathen and a Christian
king touching the matter of intermedling in church government, iumping therein
with Harding and other papists: Ergo, (by this assertion) the princes supreme
government is unlawful: which unsound and rebellious conclusion very
necessarily follows, not only of this assertion, but of infinite other their
speeches. Or thus.

The office which is needless, is unlawful.

The having of an Eldership in every congregation, is needles, for one
Eldership in the town serves for the whole country belonging to Geneua, where
nevertheless they have diverse Churches and their several ministers. And so in
Scotland where there be but few Elderships in comparison of the several
congregations, yet these Churches were reformed will you say. Likewise the
having of a Doctor in every congregation, and Deacons to be of the Eldership,
is an office needless, for they have them not so in France or Scotland, though
most of our platformers require both: Ergo, the having of an Eldership, or of
Doctor, or Deacons to be of the Eldership in every congregation are offices
unlawful. By which examples also appears the falsehood of the Minor: because
the ministry is perfect without those in such places, and yet the
Demonstrationer will not affirm the Eldership, Doctor and Deacon to be
needless.

The 4. Demonstration.

If all gifts for perfecting of the Church needful be appropriated unto other
ministers, Demonstration.
then is his ministry unlawful: But all are appropriated to those four,
Ephesians 4. Pastor, Doctor, Elder and Deacon, whereof he is none. Ergo.

This Hypotheticall Syllogism is as bad a Paralogisme as T.C. his simple
Syllogism refuted at large in the defense of the answer to the Admonition,
Remonstrance.
page 316. I may well call it T.C. his whirlepoole, because he drowneth
himself and his scholars in it. Thus:

Those functions only are sufficient for the Church, which have all gifts
needful, etc.

But all those functions reckoned of Paul, Ephe. 4. and 1. Cor. 12 have the
gifts needful: ergo, those functions only are sufficient for the Church.

As if a man did argue thus.

Those things only are sufficient to salvation which are contained in the
Scripture. Absurdity of T.C. and of the Demonstrator.
But all things in the Aue Maria are contained in the Scripture: ergo, those
things in the Aue Maria are only sufficient to salvation.

Or as cunningly after this sort.

Those only are men which are endued with reason. But all the Costerdmongers of
London are endued with reason: ergo, the Costerdmongers of London are the only
men.

Where the Mayor is particular, the argumentation of sole particulars, and has
no force of reason, the Medium or argument has this word Only in the Mayor
cum subiecto, and is left out in the Minor. Besides all this, it concludes
affirmative in the second figure, against the law of due conclusion: finally,
it lacks both mood and figure, and lacks no fault.

To the sequel of the Antecedent.

The sequel is untrue: for dealing with the Church stock themselves say, it
was appropriate Act. 6. to 7. Deacons, yet Act. 11. the collection was sent,
(...), for the administration, not to such as we call commonly and peculiarly
Deacons, but (...), to the priests or ministers, yet this not unlawful in them.

To the Assumption.

Both sides, back and belly, turn which side you will hereof, is a
shameless untruth: for God has not appropriated the gifts to those 4. nor to
any other, 4. or 5. titles and names of offices in Church: but he does tie and
untie, confer and bestow the gift on such an office, which is fit for the
commodity of the Church, in what measure he pleases.

Elders and Deacons are not once mentioned in that text: therefore thus I
reason. If all gifts needful for perfecting of the Church be appropriated
unto the Ministers mentioned, Ephesians. 4. then the ministry of Elders and
Deacons is unlawful, much less is it needful for perfecting of the Church.

But by the Demonstrator (and his customers, of whom he boroweth) all needful
gifts are appropriate to Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets (now wholly ceased as
they say) and to Pastors and Doctors which only remain. Ergo, Elders and
Deacons are both needless and unlawful: neither will their old silly shift
shroud them: viz. that Ministers of the word are there only meant. First,
because no such distinction is there made, or to be collected: Vbi lex non
distinguit, nec nos debemus, and they should least of all so gather, who reason
in all matters negatiuely out of Scriptures: for either it must teach this
distinction, or else it is no good way that is taught. Secondly, for that
Elders and Deacons either are contained under some of these, or else they have
no gifts or blessings from Christ annexed to their callings: for that those are
the gifts which Christ ascending gave to his Church. Thirdly, because those
officers mentioned, Ephesians. 4. are given as sufficient of Christ, not only for
the work of the Ministry, (...), but for the gathering together of the
Saints, and building of the body of the Church: two special effects (if we
should believe them) of their presbyteries, then what gifts will remain, and
to what end, which may be bestowed on their Elders and Deacons? all that Christ
gave (as themselves speak) being appropriate and taken up before, by others? Or
thus. If all such gifts for the work of the ministry, etc. be appropriate
to Pastors and Doctors which still remain, then are the gifts peculiar to
Apostles, Evangelists and Prophets either ceased with them, because several
functions (they say) have always several and peculiar gifts, and e conuerso:
so that Pastors and Doctors shall not have any gifts which any of the other
three had: or if this be absurd, because Christ has given them all to his
Church (as is there testified) until we all meet together in the unity of
faith, and knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man, and unto the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ (which shall not be till the
consummation of all things) therefore (setting aside some extraordinary points
that were personal to some few in those times) all these functions and offices
are ordinary, and remain still in the Church, whatsoever some writers say to
the contrary: albeit through the great diversity of the measure of gifts, it
be difficult to set down certainly in all times what offices do answer unto
which of every of them. But for so much as the consent of all ancient writers
making bishops both a divine institution (saving only Hierome in two places,
being thereby also contrary to himself elsewhere) and successors of the
Apostles, for the planting of sundry Churches at first, or establishing and
governing Churches already planted: concurreth with the uniform practice of
all the Churches in the world, from the Apostles time downward, and is not
contraried by the word: therefore I mustneedes (with that incomparable man
Zanchus) judge their institution and office to be of the holy Ghost, Zanchus
in confess.
as succeeding therein the Apostles. As for an Archbishop, he is a bishop of
his several dioecesse, yet chief amongst many of a province, for better
direction of matters of order, and for justice upon appellations, which being
but an accident, makes no several kind of office: therefore that addition to
the Minor is untrue, whereof he is none, because in all those offices the
greater includes the less, and a bishop is both a successor of the Apostles,
and also a pastor or minister: he is (...), as S. Peter, although in order
chief Apostle, yet a fellow elder in the lord. For teaching and feeding (to
use Saint Hieromes words) Vt vnus idemque sit paster ouium magister hominum:
Ephesians. 4.
one and the same man may be a pastor amongst his sheep, and a Doctor
amongst men.

Note the feature of this deformed argument.

If God has given all sense and intelligence to T.C. and the Demonstrator
which are but two men: Absurdities of the Demonstrator, which he is lead unto
by ignorance of All collectiue, and All distributive.
All the world besides are senseless and witless men.

If the lord has put the spirit of wisdom and cunning into Bezaleel and
Aholiab: By this collection of the Demonstrator, all the rest after are
unskillful and uncunning men.

If God gave (...), omnem fidem, to his 12. Apostles, whereof Paul was none,
being borne out of due time: Ergo, Paul the Apostle had no faith.

The 5. Demonstration.

That office is unlawful which none may lawfully bestow. Demonstration.


But none may lawfully bestow the office of the Archbishop, because none can
give new gifts to adorn it withal, Ergo, unlawful.

To the Mayor.

By this rule you may take exception to Moses, Remonstrance.
and to S. John Baptist, who took not their office from man, but from God.
Your Mayor had been true, if the ground of it were Nemo sibi arroget honorem,
unless he be called by God, or by the ordinance of man underneath God.

To the Minor.

This is not only unreasonable, but treasonable, because the Queens majesty
does and ought to give and bestow the office of the Archbishop, unto which
office no extraordinary, but ordinary gifts are belonging. None can bestow
(says the Demonstrator) the office of an Archbishop, because he can give no
new gifts to garnish it withal: Ergo, according unto him, some may bestow the
office of an Archbishop, who is able to give new gifts to adorn it withal.
But I would gladly for my instruction learn, how they prove the contradictorie
Proposition unto this, viz. None can bestow an office of government in charge,
unless he give new gifts to beautify it withal, or, that office which holy
Synod and Parliament does allow, none can bestow. As if the substance could
not be without changeable Accidents and alterable qualities belonging unto it:
Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
as if no man can bestow a new mantell, unless he give new buttons together
with the mantell: or none can bestow a clokebag on the maker of these worthy
Demonstrations, unless he give new strings to tie both ends withal. Thus I
retort it upon them.

That office which none may lawfully bestow, is unlawful.

The office of their Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, none can lawfully
bestow, because (as they reason) None can give new gifts to adorn them
withal, more then they had before their ordinations: Ergo, (by this their own
position) all those are unlawful. If they answer, God has bestowed gifts on
these offices already, we reply that so he has given to Apostles, and unto
(...) gouernements in the Church, Romans 12. a matter wherein Bishops and
Archbishops are especially bestowed: and yet (as I have showed before) they must
by their own collection pull their Elders and Deacons out of that rank, for
they are not once mentioned where the gifts are said to be given. Ephesians. 4. but
come clean after the dole.

The 6. Demonstration.

If the office of an Archbishop be lawful, Demonstration.
it is either in respect of his excellency above other men, or the place
whereof he is above other places: But neither of these have ever been, or
hereafter can be. ergo,

You might have remembered the old rule, Remonstrance.
that from insufficient enumeration of the parts or of the causes, the argument
does not hold: or this fallacy is of the consequent, as says Aristotle:
(...), when you mistake the cause. The lawfulness of his office is in regard
of his superiority grounded on the word of God, and in respect of his
authority, wherewith he is put in trust by the prince and Parliament.

But I answer thus.

If the office of the seignorie be lawful, it is either in respect of the
excellency of the men, or of the most illustrious and celebrated place: not
the first, for an Artisan elder is as good and substantial an elder, as any
Earl or honorable man, and by their own platform he must sit cheek by
ioll, by the noblest Earl or counselor of the land. Neither the second, for no
place is better or worse unto them, who seek for equality, Non locus virum,
sed vir locum honestat: The place gives not credit to the man, but the man to
the place: ergo, the seignorie is not lawful in respect of the man or place,
and consequently has none authority or government.

The 1. Allegation.

Calvin, lib. 4. Institut. cap. 11. sect. 7. Demonstration.


Beza in the book of diuorcements speaks against jurisdiction of bishops,
and others substitute officers.

If you allege new writers one for one, Remonstrance.
we have an Oliver for a Rowland: if you allege two, we can produce twice so
many. Bullinger and Musculus, Hemingius, Gualter and Zanchus, etc. But our
meaning is not to muster authorities, or recite the names of authors: Pauperis
est numer are pecus: Go rather to the things then names.

Caluins words are against the papists: Iurisdictionem suam spiritualem
iactant Romanenses: He allows in his institutions, Patriarchs, Archbishops
and bishops, in the primitive Church: Show any impiety in the offices of ours
more then in those.

Beza speaks against their dealings in those causes, that know more in such
causes (any one of them) then 20. of his Assistants in Eldership: but if you
allege the only fathers and begetters of presbyteries for them, we will set
Ridley and Jewel for bishops, as learned as these in all respects, and as
godly.

The 2. Allegation.

Peter Martyr upon the 13. to the Romans, Demonstration.
speaks against civil Jurisdiction in Bishops, and by the same reason
condemns it in their substitutes.

Peter Martyr speaks not against any jurisdiction, Remonstrance.
which is a furtherance, but popish jurisdiction which is a hinderance to the
Gospel. But whatsoever Peter Martyr says, we say this to you: Bishops in
respect they are bishops in England, have no civil jurisdiction: for the
distinction of civil and ecclesiastical matters, is more priciselie and upon
greater penalties here retained, then elsewhere in all Christendom. If it be
said some matters they handle be civil, that are called ecclesiastical, we
ask whether oeconomicall matters be not a part of civil, wherein they are as
husbandly, nay niggardly as any: and further demand a rule out of Gods word
(of them that urge this as a sin) whereby to know a specificall difference
between civil and Ecclesiastical causes. They cannot say because some of
those which Ecclesiastical courts here handle, be accounted elsewhere
civil, therefore they may not be here Ecclesiastical: for of the contrary,
some matters here mere civil, are elsewhere holden Ecclesiastical. As for
example in Geneua and Scotland, they inflict censures on those which for civil
enormious crimes the magistrate has punished or pardoned, as felons, manslears,
and such like, and all their presbyteries (even that among the Englishmen at
Middleborough) use to deal with qualifiyng of forfeitures of bonds and
accounts between hard masters and their prentises, and other such Chancerie
matters: much more therefore those may justly be accounted ecclesiastical,
which the law and civil magistrate do put over to ecclesiastical me^, and
better the^ those which being in truth mere civil, are intruded upon the
presbyteries. Causes beneficial, viz. for titles and maintenance of Ministers,
causes matrimonial, diffamatorie, with breach of charity, where none action
lies in civil Courts, punishment of sins not punishable by the civil
Magistrate, and of reparations of churches and churchyards (which are all the
heads of matters that bishops may handle, saving testamentarie,) you will (I
hope) allow to be Ecclesiastical. As for testamentary causes, even at the
common law of this land, they have been always made Ecclesiastical, both
because that law has little direction in those causes (but such as is borrowed
from the civil and Ecclesiastical laws) and for that men's last wills (at least
were wont) do contain sundry demises for Churches, orphans, poor, captives,
and such like good uses, whereof the Church had the fourth part, and wherein
Bishops are intended to be most careful to minister right indifferently to
all, for performance of the deads will.

Any jurisdiction civil, which Bishops, or some Ecclesiastical persons have,
is not claimed by them as due to their functions, but imposed by the Prince, as
upon subjects serviceable for the Realm, and for a credit to their places, as
Counselor, Ambassador, Justice of the Peace, etc. For seeing they are
subjects, freemen, and citizens of the Commonwealth, (besides their ministry
of the Church) I would know whether they owe not this duty, (being imposed on
them,) unto the Commonwealth, and their Prince? But we shall not (I trust)
need to persuade much with these men, for they are not so squemish of civil
honor and function, as they would then seem, whiles their malignant eyes are
only fastened upon Bishops. For where they have sway, neither prince nor
Magistrate shall proclaim feast or fast, treat of league, peace or war with
any Prince, nor make any ordinance, without their advise: The example of the
reverend learned man.
they will have Deputies of the Churches in Parliament, when they have shut out
Bishops, and they thrust their Elders and Ministers upon Kings, to sit with
their other Counselors, as was not long since practiced. Is any matter most
civil (even almost of least moment) determined at Geneua, without Beza?
insomuch as when troubles increase, he omitteth his readings and preachings
sundry times? Is he not of the counsel of 60. in that state? was not Villiers
Secretary of estate to the Prince of Orange? and further (if we may believe
the Chaos, de Politia civilly and ecclesiastica, Lib. 3.
which Law. Cha. was so earnest to have printed at Leyden) ministers and
persons Ecclesiastical (in that they are citizens) may, nay (in respect they
are wise and learned) ought to be of counsel of Princes in affairs civil of
the Commonwealth, and to give especial direction even in setting up and
deposing of Princes, as he says, being a Presbyteriall man: and further, if
there were nothing else, by as good reason may our Bishops meddle in civil
jurisdiction, Retortion.
being Ecclesiastical men, as your profane Lay elders intermeddle with
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, being civil men or Lay men.

Is not this a good and lawful conversion?

Some civil Magistrate lawfully is an Ecclesiastical person and governor,
ergo, some Ecclesiastical person and governor lawfully is a civil
Magistrate: or if some may be so, what prerogative for one is there more then
for some other? But stay a while, the Demonstrator means to skirmish with him
self with ob. and so.

The 1. Objection.

Cyprian says, Demonstration.
lib. 1. epist. 3. ad Cornelium. Neither have heresies and schisms risen of
any other occasions then that the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest
for the time, nor one Judge in steed of Christ thought upon, etc.

Answer.

This place is alleged for the Pope, but it serves for every Bishop.

This place is elsewhere in Cyprian, making for the superiority of Bishops.
Remonstrance with reply. Lib. 4. ep. 9.
But this answer cutteth their own throat. If for every bishop, ergo, it
serves for the superiority of our bishops, which Cyprian in writing (being a
bishop, and superior over others) would neither in him self, nor other
bishops, of whom he also speaks, condemn.

The 2. Objection.

The authority of the Archbishop preserves unity. Demonstration.


Answer.

Cyprian li. 4. ep. 9. says: unity is preserved by the agreement of Bishops,
that is, Ministers.

He speaks of the unity of the Catholic Church. Remonstrance with reply.
Lib. 1. ep. 3.


Bishops with Cyprian are not ordinary Ministers: you may not take these in
signification, (...) all one. But admit it were so, as it is not so in
Cyprian, Does this reason hold being the very like?

Unity is preserved by concord and amity of burgesses, or commons of a
Town, ergo, not by the Magistrate or peaceable Mayor of the Town? no more
does that, It is preserved by bishops, ergo, not by Archbishops.

The 3. Objection.

It compoundeth controversies that would grow to many heads. Demonstration.


Answer.

Cyprian says, lib. 1. ep. 13. the company of Elders is the glue of mutual
concord, Demon. cites 13. ca. 1. li. whereas there are but 12. editi. Basil.
that if any be author of heresy, the other should help.

Cyprian uses in the former allegation, lib. 1. ep. 3. glutine sacerdotum. The
Church is framed and made fast with the glewe of priests. And also li. 3. ep.
13. Corpus sacerdotum concordiae mutuae glutine: the body of the priest. If
the word were Elders, Remonstrance with reply.
the help of Elders, meaning the Priests, lies not as a bar to exclude the
helping hands of bishops, who are in degree higher then the priests, or of the
Archbishop who is highest of them all: for if concord of minds make them to
agree, superiority of order will withold them from disagreeing.

The 4. Objection.

Ierom upon Titus 1. says: that in the beginning a Bishop and a Priest,
Demonstration.
meaning a teaching Elder, were all one: but when one said, I am of Paul, I am
of Apollos, it was decreed, one should bear rule over all the rest.

Answer.

From the beginning it was not so. Tertullian contra.

That is true whatsoever is first, etc. and Hierom ibidem says, that this
authority was by custom, and not by Gods institution. If it had been the best
way to take away divisions, the Apostles in whose time controversies did arise,
would have taken the same order.

This is called preuarication or collusion, Remonstrance with reply. Epist. ad
Euagr.
to oppose your selves a little gentler, and make the objection weaker to
fortify your selves. He that will make a rod for himself, will make it of
feathers. If you would have alleged out of Hierome the Epistle ad Euagr. would
have fitted your turn better, where S. Hierome says: It was not only
decreed, but decreed in all the world, that one of the priests being chosen,
should be set over or above all the rest: this then you confess was so, but
from the beginning it was not so. Our Savior speaks of matter of divorce.
This text is bravely applied: and that of Tertullian, for matter of doctrine to
a manner of discipline, is in the like sort applied.

But to the point of the argument. Because S. Hierom is made to puritanize with
you, and this allegation is the (...), to kill us withal, not to withstand
Hierome, but to understand Hierome, the best expounder of himself: we plainly
grant, that Bishop and Priest were once for a short time all one, donec
Ecclesia reciperet compleme^tum, as Ambrose says, till the church were brought
to a perfection: so once there were no Deacons, which yet derogateth nothing
from them. But yet not so all one, that by the institution of God they were to
continue all one, and might not be changed; or that in the Apostles time, they
were not forthwith changed, since in the Apostles time, I am of Paul, I am of
Cephas, was the occasion of the change, and that for rooting out of schism,
and composing of strifes, as in sending from Antioch to Jerusalem, was the
very chief end and purpose of the change, and finally the decree of all the
world for the ratifying of a standing superiority, was the approbation of the
change, as Hierome thinks, who being but a Priest or Minister himself,
though there he labors to debase the Bishop, as much as he could, yet by the
pregnant light is forced to confess such a decree, (though in truth it be not
likely any such general decree was positiuely made) through all the word,
otherwise then the imitation of such Churches (by a secret and universal
consent) as the Apostles had planted, and such a decree we will grant.

Me thinks I hear one of you reason as strongly, thus.

In the beginning Kings were Priests, Absurdity of the objection.
kingdom and priesthood were joined in one: ergo, Kings and Priests must so
remain and continue all one.

Or, in the beginning, such was their simplicity.

Great Lords sons, Jacob and his children kept their fathers sheep: ergo,
Noble men's children must keep their fathers sheep: for in the beginning young
sheepheards and young princes were but all one. Or thus: In the beginning there
were no (...), Elders: for the first mention of them is but in the 11. of the
Acts, ergo, there never ought any Presbyteri, viz. Ministers, to have been
ordained.

The 5. Objection.

Calvin says, the Apostles had one amongst them to govern the rest.

The Answer.

That was for order to propound matters, to gather voices, as the speaker of
the Parliament, not for Superiority.

This answer would be better justified then with bare words: Remonstrance
with reply.
Do the fathers or Calvin think, James was but chosen chief for one meeting,
as they choose their Presidents? And we do not hold Calvin or any humane
authority affirmative, and therefore we rather defend it was for order and
Superiority, both of dignity and office. Eusebius, whom Calvin cites to this
purpose, makes James the son of Alpheus Bishop of Jerusalem and Bishop of
the Apostles, because the Synod of the twelve Disciples and 72. Evangelists
continued from Christ his ascencion to ye dispersion of the Apostles. It must
needs be amongst the Apostles and other Pastoral Elders, not only a
government for continuance of order, but also preeminence in the action. Act.
15.19. For there the word (...) I judge or determine is used, whereupon after
much disputation all rested, and the matter was concluded: for it is no
prejudice to the equality of the Apostleship or ministry, a modest, orderly,
and temperate authority. This is worth the whole, It was of order (say they)
not of Superiority as the speaker in Parliament: as if all Superiority were
opposite to good order: but as near as they can, they will borrow from the
high Court of Parliament: Belike they mean one day to keep a Court of it.
Retortion.
The Speaker does not gather the voices, neither has voice, but when all the
house is even. The L. Chanceller in the upper house asks, the Clarke
gathers, but the L. Chanceller remains the propounder so long as he is
Chanceller. And this their temporary Presidencie is for order (say they) nay
it is for disorder, ordo est rationis. Aristotle in his physics: To choose one
this day, another to morrow, and the third day choose a neewe, is a tumultuous
order. Note this by the way: Their governor or president of order in every
meeting is to propound matters, to gather voices viua voce, or by scrutinie:
Ergo, some authority is left unto him, for he is to propounde: Ergo, it is in
his choice to gather or scatter, to silence, or propound, Ethicorum. 3.
eadem quae agere possumus and non agere, which is as much in valewe, as a
Warden amongst his scholars with a negative voice, which is a great
preeminence and Superiority.

The 6. Objection.

Paul was Superior to Timothy and Titus. Demonstrator.


The Answer.

Paul and they had diverse offices, Paul an Apostle, and they Evangelists over
others.

Let him show me a reason, Remonstrance with reply.
An Apostle being Superior to an Evangelist, and he to a Pastor, etc. why a
Bishop may not be Superior to a Pastor succeeding the Apostles: for if vos
autem non sic do take away all Superiority, then an Apostle and every Pastor
is every way equal, and a Pastor but equal with their lay Elder and Deacon. As
for Paul Doctor Gentium a Doctor of the Gentiles, he was their Superior, this
is beyond all question: As for Titus and Timothy, if as you say they were
Superiors as Evangelists, Ergo, every way Superior for Ecclesiastical order
over ordinary Ministers.

It is an Absurdity to say, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
he was Superior as an Evangelist, Ergo not Superior as a Bishop, since he
that desires a Byshopricke, praeclarum opus desiderat, desires a good work.
Paul says, that Timothy works the work of the Lord even as he, 1. Cor. 16.
But hence follows not that he was an Apostle even as Paul was, no more then
hereof, that he was an Evangelist. Or as well to make the holy Ghost say,
Episcopatum eius accipiat alter, Let another take the Byshopricke of Judas, but
let no man take the Apostleship of Judas.

The fallacy of this is the caption adidem, Our positive learning is better
then your negative learning: they were Evangelists in some manner signification
as Preachers, but no such Evangelists as a several office, Ephesians. 4. as you
imagine of them: for by their own authority they did not plant Churches but
by commission and teaching of Saint Paul: The one Timothy being (...) Prelate
of the Ephesians, 1. These. 5.12. 1. Tim. 3.14.
Ephesus Metropoliticall city of Asia where after his abode which Saint Paul
requested of him for to stay, no where you can find Saint Paul afterward to
send for him, especially from the date of writing the Epistle: The other Titus
being Archbishop of Crete (whether in that time or after times Crete were (...)
or (...), as Homer (...) Iliad reports, having three or an hundredth cities)
be it for ordeining or governing, the one and the other had Superiority of all
the Pastors there. Justin Martyr one of the next writers to the Apostles
calls Timothy (...) governor, or Prelate of the Church of Ephesus, which he
could not call him if he had bin chosen for one only meeting or action. This
word in Plato 7. Epist. (...) is Prefect of a city, and therefore al his
Superiority was not so much of order as of greatness in authority: and the
Church from time to time has admitted the title of, (...) ordained by
imposition of hands first or chief Bishop, not so much for time as dignity,
for he had to denounce and command, 1. Tim. 1.4. (...), that is, with power
denounce and command, with many other words in that Epistle importing his
Judicial authority and Superior dignity.

The 3. Proposition of the Demonstrator.

None may be ordained to an office in the Church until the place be void.
Demonstrator.


The 1. Demonstration.

As was the twelfth place for Matthias, so is a certain place for every Church
officer.

But Matthias was not ordained to the place til Judas had made it void by
hanging himself. Ergo none is to be ordained before the place be void.

Add unto this conclusion which you ought to do, Remonstrance.
by hanging himself, or by lot: Or when an Apostleship falls, or when every
twelfth place is void by such manner of Resignation, Absurdity of the
Demonstrator.
as hanging himself, or when Matthias comes again to be chosen in Judas
place.

This Argument leapeth from one praedicament to another, from the praedicament
agere, to vbi. He ordained him to an office, Ergo to a place, and a certain
place: as if the Apostles were not to preach (...) in all the world.

The Mayor proposition is false: For Christ appointed the number of twelve such
as had bin conversant with him: so that there might of ye Apostles be no less
or more, albeit he had 72. Disciples besides that had bin instructed by him,
which were Eua^gelists, but there is no set number of ordinary Ministers
prescribed to any nation which it may not come short of nor exceed. In one
Church of Antioche, Ast. 13. was there not sundry both Prophets and Doctors
there named? yet no stinted number, for it is there noted (...), as happily the
Church then stood, and it stood very flourishing without any such Eldership as
is since dreamed of.

The 2. Demonstration.

As it was in the planting of the Church, Demonstration.
so in the building it must be for ever: But they ordained neither Pastor nor
Doctor, Deacon nor Elder, but to a place that had need, Ergo nor we until
there be need.

The Demonstrator concludes in the third figure, Remonstrance.
and never a mood. The Minor is negative, contrary to all law of apt
conclusion.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is too general to be geneerally true: Prophecy, interpretation of
tongues, gifts of healing, miracles were requisite in first planting of the
Church, all which are not required in building of the Church. In Salomons time
Infidels did help to set up the material Church which afterward were debarred
to come in or profane the Church.

To the Minor.

How prove you the negative, vz. They ordained neither Pastor, etc. until
they had need? Why there is always need. Messis multa operarij pauci: a
great harvest, but few laborers. Yet this Donec might be well spared, until
we have need of it: for they never made any when any place was void,
excepting Matthias case which was a singular case. vna hirundo non facit ver:
one swallowe makes no summer, unless you mean of such an auoidance which is
priuatione praeuia, where never any was before, and then it is true, but far
estranged from your meaning. In vacuum venerunt, they made these officers where
never any were before, and quae nullius sunt in bonis cedunt occupanti.

To dismiss you without laughter due unto your folly, Absurdity of the
Demonstrator.
let all the world judge what a consequence this is.

In the beginning and first planting of the Church they baptized in theriuer,
ergo we must christen our children in the river. The Churches were in private
houses, ergo we must practice our religion in our private parlours.

In the first they had community of goods (...) though not (...). ergo, none
may now possess in use ought that he has: but as they brought and laid it
down at the Apostles feet, even so we must lay down our substance at the
doctors and pastors feet.

As it was in the planting, so it must be in the building of the church for
ever: But Apostles the first planters were called by Gods own immediate voice
being men unlettered, to them were 72. evangelists adjoined and after prophets:
ergo, the church must be built by these and such like for ever, and
consequently they are not ceased as elsewhere you affirm.

The 3. Demonstration.

These things that are of one beginning, continuance, and ending, Demonstration.
cannot be one before and after another.

But the minister and the execution of his ministry be relatiues, ergo, a
minister ought not to be ordained, before there be a ministry whereunto he
is allotted.

To the Mayor.

Albeit in this paralogisme are 4. termini, Remonstrance.
because he concludes the ministry of a certain person, instead of the
ministry of a certain place: yet my answer is, Those things etc. cannot be
but one before and after another, that is, idem subiecto, one and the same in
subject, which is a contradiction to it self, that one thing is one and the
same, and yet one and the same is prius and posterius seipso, before and after
it self.

To the Minor.

But they are relatiues says the demonstrator: say I, not proper, but
improper, viz. a minister and his ministry to a determinate place: for a
minister (if you will make a reference) is a minister of a ministry be it
gospel or law, his ministry is not precisely tied to a certain place,
although his care must be to do good at once in one place, his readiness to do
good, and that in every place. God chose his Apostles, whom after his
ascension he sent into all places: They who convert infidels, are not sure of
intertaynement. This argument proceeds not but retroceedeth against
themselves.

Those new fangled runners before they are sent, Retortion.
have no ordination or designement to a certain place, ergo, their ministry
is a nullitie and without lawful calling according to them selves, in
whatsoever place, as if they will they shall hear in particular: for none more
factious then those who have no set places but intrude upon others, and win
credit of zeal by novelties and defacing of the ministers of the place.

The 4. Demonstration.

If none ought to be called a shepherd that has no flock of sheep to
keep, Demonstration.
nor watchman which is not allotted to a place to watch: then none may be
ordained to any office before the place be void: the 1. is true, Ergo, the
second.

I deny the antecedent and sequel of the same: Remonstrance.
for a man may be called a shepherd and have never a flock of sheep of his
own or others to keep: as many poor men who are expert in the knowledge and
are not worth a sheep, or as Jacob he and his fathers were shepherds, and
accounted themselves so in the presence of Pharao, for that was their trade. Or
a man may be called a captain, if he have instruction of military discipline,
though he do not ever lead a band of soldiers: denomination is rather of
the habit then of the act. If a shoemaker have sold all his shoes, or a
grasier all his cattle, belike their trades and names are clean gone. Now
farther to say, that none may be called to the promotion of a shepherd,
unless forthwith some man deliver him a flock of certain sheep, it is a
pretty imagination, as if he could be his craftsmaster before his craftsman.

But to the sequel of the Antecedent, this is (...) to argue he cannot be
made a shepherd before a place be void, Ergo, he cannot be made a minister
before the place be void. This is easily avoided: For no man is so made a
minister for a particular parish or small precinct of place, as that his
ministry were gone, if the parish were dispeopled and the houses burnt up,
but he is made a minister for the church of England whersoeuer his service
shall be required in the province or place. This is an old stoppegamball.

No more coats then backs to wear them.

No more ministers then places to dispose them.

The ministry shall be like to a drawebridge: keep them sure enough that are
within, keep them secure enough from dealing in the ministry, who albeit of
their pure zeal (as many with us which would preach the gospel,) because of
lack of room, shall be feign to stand without.

The first therefore is false, and semblably the second.

How does the old rule hold now?

One shepherd must have one flock by their delineation, or many shepherds
may not have one flock for fear of thronging or intrusion: which otherwhiles
they admit of the puritan transformation: vnum ad vnum est aptissimum, one is
fittest for one: It is in very deed the best referencie: for one thing
secundum idem cannot have sundry relation.

The 5. Demonstration.

To do contrary to the precept and practice of the apostles is unlawful.
Demonstration.
To ordeine an officer without a certain place is contrary: Ergo, unlawful.
Titus. 1.5. acts. 14.23.

To the Mayor.

To do contrary to the precepts and practice of the apostles is not ever
unlawful as Act. 15.29. Remonstrance.
v. is commanded Absteyne from blood and strangled: yet it is now lawful to
eat blood, or strangled: therefore this universal mayor is false.

To the Minor.

To ordeine an officer without a place, or to ordeine many officers in readiness
to do office and service to the whole church, is not contrary to the practice
or commandment of the apostles in any of those places, but rather justifiable
out of the place, Act. 14.23. Paul and Barnabas returned to Lystra, and
Iconium, and Antioche: (...), that is, ordained unto them or for them pastoral
elders in every church, and commended them to the Lord in whom they had
believed. They ordained pastoral elders in every church, or in the church: how
follows it hereof, that they did not or might not ordeine some over and above
for the provision of the whole church? likewise out of the place, Tit. 1.5. v.
It is an impossible collection: Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
for this were handsome reasoning: I have left thee to make pastoral elders
(...) in every city, Ergo, make no elders nor ministers for the country: or I
have left thee to make elders for every city: Ergo, make just no more elders
then there be cities. Sometimes these fellows would gather by the plural
number their lay elders from hence: They hold it policy of their church to
make more Bishops then one, Rotortion.
where the maintenance will stretch for one town or city, and why may not our
universities and cathedral churches being colleges of the prophets, keep
within them as they do, and foster with their maintenance, many ministers and
pastoral elders to furnish town and country?

The 6. allegation of the Demonstrator. Demonst. Conc. Chalced. Can. 6. Artic.
15


It was ordained that neither deacon nor elder nor other should be ordained
(...) that is loosely, but in a church, city, or town.

The words are Neminem absolute, Remonstrance.
id est, sine titulo: the exception is, nisi in ecclesia suae ciuitatis sieve
possessionis, aut in martyrio aut in monasterio: There are exceptions enough to
authorize any ordination in our church, since many are ordained for our
colleges and cathedral churches etc. Great ods between absolute et
dissolute, which is to be let run at random, Demonstration. Conc. Urban.
Test. Gra. c. tuum distinct. 70.
as most of you are persons of no church and vicars of the same.

The 7. allegation of the Demonstrator.

The ordination that is made without a title, let it be void.

This is marvel you will borrow out of Gratian, or out of the Canon law,
Remonstrance.
draw clear demonstration from puddle water, unto which you often compare the
Canon law: I perceive every place you can make must serve your turns, yea
puddle wharfe.

Your answer was before with the exceptions before remembered. Besides, a title
is not always a charge or flock: but an assignation of set maintenance, least
they should beg cum dedecore clericalis ordinis, as the Canons speak.

The 8. allegation of the Demonstrator.

Hieronymus ad Nepotianum complained that ministers were ordained being chosen
by no church, Demonstration.
and so went here and there having no place.

There is no such matter to be found in S. Hierom as is here alleged:
Remonstrance.
but if Hierom had complained, belike he did not complain without a lawful
cause: It is pity and shame they should wander up and down: but this would
have argued, that absolute ordinations were then used: yet we grant the
Canons (saving in some cases) do forbid them as inconvenient, and so this
church practices if the laws be followed: if not, the men are blameable, not
the laws.

The 9. Allegation of the Demonstrator.

That action which is read to be practiced never but by Idolaters, is
unlawful: Demonstrator.
To have wandering officers is so, Judge. 17.8. Ergo unlawful.

This is (...) fight with a shadow, Remonstrance.
or to wander from the purpose: More is in the conclusion of the Syllogism
then in the premises.

The question was of allotting Ministers to a place: the conclusion is of a
wandering apostacy or forsaking his ordination and his place. If there be any
like Micah for entertaining such, or like the wandering Leuite that did go from
Bethlehem Judah, from the better to the worse, and go to dwell (as it is in
that text) where he may find a place: your selves are such hosts and such
guestes, rather then we. For many amongst you are wandering stars and
wayfaring mates, a life chosen by your selves, not imposed.

The Objection of the Demonstrator.

Paul and Barnabas did wander. Ergo. Demonstrator.


Answer.

The Apostles office and the Evangelists was to preach the word and to plant
Churches: But the order that they left is a president for us, that every Church
should have their proper officers, and that there be no other else where to be
found.

Bray a fool in a mortar, he will not leave his folly, Remonstrance with
reply.
no more will this man his babble, nor babbling objections: Paul and Barnabas
did not wander (as in our behalf you would seem to object) but for the
watring and planting of the Churches passed to and fro, as any may do that
have care of many Congregations to visit them, or as Saint Paul who confessed
solus ego, I only have care of all Congregations: this is (...) or incoherent,
or a president never to be found. Every Church must have proper officers, Ergo,
there are no other, nor ought to be else where any other found. Once again,
how prove those men a negative? This is to stop the increase of Gods divine
grace: This is fine in conceit, Your governing Elders must be numerus
infininitus, or indefinitus, Ergo, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
our Pastoral Elders must be numerus finitus, a certain number: Why not sans
number of those who to Godward are professed?

The third Chapter.
The Assertion of the Demonstrator.

EVery Church officer ought to execute his office, Demonstrator.
and be continually resident on his charge.

The Demonstrator is too too peremptory: Remonstrance.
because he comprehends neither natural nor legal, nor other dispensation by
the word continually. But let us hear the Demonstration.

The 1. Demonstration.

A Shepherd has a flock continually to feed it.

The Minister is a Shepherd and his charge a flock, Demonstration.
Ergo he ought continually to feed it, and be resident upon it.

What? continually feed? neither he is able to do it, nor they to hear and
digest it: Quod caret alterna requie, etc. What? never to the term, or
Parliament, though neither their Synod be called, nor they sent for? Never
bring their wives to Sturbridge fair, nor to the Act at Oxforde, nor to lie a
dozen weeks or such a trifle at a friends house? nor to ride half a summer
from country to country to confirm the brotherhood? What, not once in a
fortnight to go down by boat to London to learn news, to confer, and to
buy some discipline papers? These be strong Demonstrations when the first is
grounded on a metaphor.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is false, whether ye understand it properly or in allegorical
meaning of a shepherd, 1. Sam. 17.20, 28. (...), David left his fathers sheep
with a keeper, and ran into the camp: or as he is charged by his brother
Eliab to leave his few sheep in the wilderness, and of a pride and malice of
his heart to come into the battle.

To the Minor.

This is true, but metaphorically true, as Princes are also Shepherds, both in
divine and profane writings (...) Iliad: (...), 1. Reg. 22.17. all Israel
scattered as sheep upon the mountains, that had no Shepherd, that is, no
King: Esai. 44.28. Cyrus my Pastor or Shepherd.

This is drawn into a goodly consequence.

A Shepherd must feed, Ergo, he may depute no man in his absence to feed.

Or, Princes being Shepherds may have their Deputies and Lieutenants: Ergo,
ministering Shepherds may not be allowed in their absence under Shepherds.

They that reason thus, En quo discordia ciues? See how far madness and
malice carries man?

The 2. Demonstration.

Where God has placed a man, there his travail is needful: Demonstration.
But God has placed every Minister over the charge. Ergo.

This fallacy and all the other following to prove this assertion,
Remonstrance.
proceed ex ignoratione elenchi: or as Aristotle speaks, (...).

1 When a man has not a discreet eye to see what is one and the same. 2 What
is diverse from one and the same. 3 What is different at diverse times. 4 What
in diverse respects.
The Mayor is false: that where God has placed a man, there his travail is
only, at all times, in all respects requisite, and in no other places
requisite or needful. A man's travail is there most requisite sometimes,
whither the Spirit of God bids him come, as to S. Paul, (...), Come and
help us in Macedonia. Themselves both upon cause of preaching in other Cures,
and for no causes, are contrary to this position in their practice.

The 3. Demonstration.

Flocks that are in danger must be watched night and day, Luke 2.8.
Demonstration.


Every Congregation is a flock in danger: 1. Pet. 5.8. Matt. 13.23. Ergo the
Minister must watch night and day.

To the Mayor.

So great is the discordance between your Mayor and Minor, Remonstrance.
as the difference is between sheep and men: but I answer thus, If you mean
one man may watch night and day without ceasing or intermission, he must have
Argos eyes.

Centum front oculos, centum ceruice gerebat.

Argus, That whiles some wake others may fall a sleep. As for the watch of the
Shepherds, Luke 2.8. it was in the night: of a conuenience therefore their
fellows did watch in the day. If you will deal so strictly to make no
difference or partition between the night and the day, Saint Luke makes it
for you, that the Shepherds watched in the night.

If you will make ought good out of the place, it is thus: Those Shepherds did
watch their flock only (for any thing there mentioned) in the night season,
Ergo, Ministers must watch their flock only in the night: nay, in and out of
season must Ministers watch their flock, yet no man's labor and watch can be
infinite beyond the measure of humane ability. As for the watchfulnes of the
Minister, it is in forewarning them of danger, albeit he can not always
preserve them from the danger: Howbeit be the danger never so great, Gods power
is made perfect in our infirmity, we shall be able to save some out of the
fire and temptation of the devil.

The 4. Demonstration.

If his duty requires so much travail, Demonstration.
as may continually set him on work, then may he not be non Resident: But the
former is true, Ergo the later.

I deny the Sequel of the Antecedent: Remonstrance.
That therefore at no time, upon no cause, upon no commandment of his
Superior, for no Embassage abroad, for no attendance upon the Prince at home,
for no prosecution of Law to keep his right, for no repulsing of injury to
recover his right, for no service of ye Church, for no pacification of scisme,
nor consultation about matters of the Church, finally for no remedy and
restitution of health, he may have a Coadiutor or Substitute underneath him,
or be non Resident from his Pastoral charge. The Puritanes confess a man may
be absent from his charge, which they can not deny: for both by their running
up and down, that they practice at our Parliaments time, as also by those
necessary assemblies in their new Synodes they allow, Ergo, simply and
absolutely to be non Resident is not unlawful, but when it is without just
cause. I pray you who did dispense with Fenne and Knewstubs for their absence
from their Cures, whom I saw in the low countries? Except half a years
absence or more be residence: You must allow as large measure to others as to
your own pew-fellowes.

The 5. Demonstration.

If the Ministers cannot faithfully apply themselves to the capacity of the
people, Demonstration.
but by knowledge of their disposition: Then is non Residency unlawful: But the
former is true, Ergo, the later.

I deny the sequel of ye Antecedent as before: Remonstrance.
for they may know their disposition, without being chained in perpetual
prison to them: and non residency is not absolutely against the law of God or
directly: for if it were simply impious, then for none occasion, no not for an
hour might a man be away, (no more then he may for an hours space in his
whole life use blasphemy against God,) but by event and by the way of
consequence: quatenus so far forth as they who are the people of God, are
destitute of spiritual food: which I hope in our congregations seldom
falls out by any such event. It is thought now a days, multum scientiae
parum conscientiae, too much knowledge or science, in respect of so little
conscience.

Albeit no man ever as yet defended an absolute estranging of the pastors from
the charge: yet the teacher being occasionly absent, may apply himself
fructfully both elsewhere, and to them also by other directions: even as S.
Paul himself by letters and epistles, when he heard but by hearesay
contentions were risen amongst them, he suppressed the contentions.

The 6. Demonstration.

If the ministers of the gospel be as narrowly tied to their charges as the
priests of the law, then they may not be non resident, Demonstration.
for they were always ready in the temple to answer doubts. 1. Sam. 19. But
etc. Ergo,

Eodem modo opponenti eodem modo respondendum est: Remonstrance.
For him that has but one manner play one manner of defense is good enough:
This argument of Type and proportion is sure to be one: An impudent man will
never be answered. I answer as before: Gods law and nature dispense with non
residence in diverse cases, although the one and the other be narrowly tied to
the ministry, under the gospel and the law.

To the Prosyllogisme.

For they were always ready etc. Here is a good Illatiue 1. Sam. 9. Ely the
priest sat upon a stool by one of the posts of the temple of the Lord: ergo,
what? Ergo, Ely was tied to residencie in the temple, all exigencie of business
whatsoever laid apart, as it were unto a post. Or as well thus: Ely the priest
in the temple sat upon a stool: Ergo, a man may say to one of you for making
this wise argument: Accipe stultum et sede, take a stool, and be resident
continually upon it. Why man, they did not lie in the temple, but had their
several habitations: and they waited in course, as appears in the story of
Zachary in S. Luke.

The 7. Demonstration.

If the minister must be an example, Demonstration.
then he must be present, but the first is true, Ergo, the second.

By these and like arguments, Remonstrance.
the ministers must be pinned upon the peoples sleeue: as for the place
alleged 1. tim. 4.12. Timothy was an example (...) as well absent as
present. It is the image of the virtue, not so much the corporal presence that
serves for imitation. Has not Christ left us an example of himself because
he is not corporally present?

The 8. Demonstration.

He whom the people must know by the voice, Demonstration.
and follow in and out, must be continually resident: But the first is true.
Ioh. 10.4. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

Upon this phrase of speech continual residence, Remonstrance.
I distinguish. There is continual in time, and there is a residence to be
continued for the discharge of the duty of the cure: A man may be a resiant
and do no office and service but bodily reside upon the cure, as many of those
unlettered reformitans, velut incubus and succubus lie upon and under the cure,
as a burden and under a burden.

To the Minor.

As for the place of John, it is meant of Christ who is the high shepherd and
Bishop of the church, unto whose perfection we must draw our selves near.

The 9. Demonstration.

None can be ready to feed his flock that is absent: Demonstration.
Every minister must be ready to feed his flock. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

This silly argument is answered before, being all one with the 1. Remonstrance.
Demonstration of this 3. cap.

His readiness may be per se aut vicaria fide. By himself or his sufficient
deputy.

The Demonstrator is like to Anaxagoras: Anaxagoras vocem suam ignorauit:
forgets his own word and voice. In stead of urging continual residence
here is nothing else but continual Tautologie.

The 10. Demonstration.

He that must take heed to his flock must be resident continually.
Demonstration.


Every minister must to so. Act. 20.28. ergo,

To the Mayor.

The mayor is true leaving out the word continually and with the former
limitations. Remonstrance.


The minor out of the acts 20. must be understood for attendance on the flock
with the due exceptions: if his employment may be there with most conuenience
of doing good, be it over a whole province or in a particular church: for else
how durst S. Paul have at that time sent for them out of their cures, and if
it had been but for an hour?

The 11. Demonstration.

If Satan be the cause of non residence, then it is utterly unlawful:
Demonstration.
But Satan is the cause, 1. These. 2.17, 18. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

Although Satan etc. yet it is not utterly unlawful: Remonstrance.
for albeit Satan may be cause of retchlesnesse and carelessness in some,
Satan is not cause of non residence in all.

This mayor seems to import this.

Whatsoever Satan is the cause of, is utterly unlawful:

To give an instance: Satan was the cause of Christ's setting upon a pinnacle
of the temple: ergo Christ standing upon a pinnacle of the temple is utterly
unlawful by this plausible mayor.

Satan is the cause of persecution and chains: yet to suffer persecution and
chains is not unrighteous and unlawful.

To the Minor.

Satan out of that. 1. these. 1.17.18. v. is the cause of non residencie,
Demonstrator makes S. Paul write false divinity.
says the demonstrator. These ioly gentlemen make. S. Paul write good
divinity. Satan hindered me, that is, caused me to do an ungodly and
unlawful thing, viz. to be a non resident, nay rather understand S. Paul thus:
Satan raised persecution against me: or sometimes Satan causes persecution,
persecution fear, fear feebleness of faith and timorousness of conscience,
that same in weak brethren causes love of the present world, and consequently
a final and utter discontinuance, which you may rather say to be the cause of
dissolute non residence, which God forbid you should rightly deem to have been
in S. Paul.

The 12. Demonstration.

That which abridgeth the love of God to his people, Demonstration.
and comfort to his minister, that is unlawful: but non residence etc. Ergo.

This and the next demostrations are far fetched and worth nothing. Remonstrance.


To the Minor.

Answer is: non residence or absence for a time in some regard for the greater
good of other congregations, does rather procure the favor of God and
consolation of the whole estate of Christ's church: And therefore a false minor.

The 13. Demonstration.

That which hinders love between the minister and the people, Demonstration.
that is unlawful: But non residence etc. Ergo,

What an easy way of demonstration has the demonstrator attained unto?
Remonstrance.


To the Mayor.

The mayor is not precisely true: for to reprove the people of their faults
and to rebuke them sharply makes less love between some people and the
minister, which nevertheless is a thing most lawful: Non residencie amongst
some of your sectaries would be a cause of more love and charity amongst gods
people, some amongst you being firebrands of sedition: and therefore better is
your room then company.

To the Minor.

All absence with deputation of an able minister effects neither so nor so.

The 14. Demonstration.

To be absent from those who have need of us, Demonstration.
is unlawful.

But the congregation has need of us, Ergo, unlawful.

Syllogizari non est exparticulari. Remonstrance.


To be absent from one man or one particular congregation is not unlawful, his
employment being otherwise beneficial. I might reason as well thus: Absurdity
of the demonstrator.


To be absent from those who have need of us is unlawful.

The church of Ephesus had need of Timothy, the church of Galathians and
Corinthians need of Paul: Ergo, Paul's and Timothies absence were both
unlawful. Or after this wise.

To be absent from those that have need of us is unlawful.

The Paynims and heathen in America and terra australi where no church is, have
need of us, Ergo, our absence is utterly unlawful. This fallacion is secundum
quid ad simpliciter.

The 15. Demonstration. Demonstration.


If the priests might not dwell far from the temple, then the ministers may
not be non Resident. But the first is true. 1. Chron. 28. ca. 13. v. ergo, the
second.

I may argue as substantially and as well. Remonstrance.


If the Exchequer men must of conueniencie dwell near to Westminster hall, and
the singing men of Paul's near there abouts: ergo, they must never go out of
the place.

The place which you allege, is. David gave to Solomon a pattern of the courts
of the house of God, and for all the chambers round about, which serve for the
treasures of the house of God, and for the treasures of the dedicate things,
and for the courses of the Priests and Levites. Now the later may expound the
former: ergo, the Priests and Levites waited in their courses. It proves not
an indefatigable or continual howrely attendance. You deal hardly to make
them de genere affixorum, or to nail them to a place.

The 16. Demonstration or Allegation.

Let no Clerk be placed in two charges, for it is filthy merchandise,
Demonstra. Council. Nic. c. 15.
etc. No man can serve two Masters, Let every one tarry in the place where he
is called.

The old proverb is now verefied, (...), Remonstrance.
Like egg like bird, like master like man. T.C. the master misalledged the
Council, and so does V. D. his yeoman. See the 247. page of the Defense of
the answer to the Admonition.

These men to euict their purpose, will not refuse omne genus testium, etiam ab
inferis, viz. the most blasphemous, corrupt and depraved, the 2. Council of
Nice, which to bleare men's eyes withal, they call simply the Council of Nice.
Out of this Council they may prove adoration of relics, invocation of
Saints, worshipping of images with the same worship that the Trinity is
worshipped, if they will take farther serious counsel in the cause. I may say of
them, as Seneca said of a wanton Poet, Non ignorauit sed amauit sua vitia, they
cannot be ignorant, but they love their own faults and errors. Let no man,
etc. in the end of the canon in Regia ciuitate, be placed in more great cities
then one. In other towneships and villages it is lawful, and so Gratian
expounds, Cause. 20. quaest. 1. Clericus, and the Council of Chalcedon, and
the gloss. A man may be entitled to two Churches, if they be poor and with
dispensation, or by way of trust or Commendam. As for allegation, 6. Matthew. No
man can serve two masters, that is, contrary Masters, God and Beliall, God
and Mammon. For the other place, 1. Cor. 7. Let a man tarry in his vocation,
that is, his kind of vocation, not in the local place. These fallacies are
fallacies figurae dictionis. This therefore must be the meaning of the place:
Let no man, etc. without ability to discharge them both, be placed in two
charges, or let no man make a filthy lucre of his charge.

The 17. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstration.


Damasus compares them that set over their charges, to harlots that put out
their children, Council. com. 2.
etc. to nurse, to give themselves to more pleasure.

This man heard T. C. say it was in the second Tome of Councels, Remonstrance.
which is in the first. See what it is to take every thing by hearsay.
Damasus in his epistle, speaks against Chorepiscopi, which occupied ye place
of their bishoprikes, and some part of their office, as consecration of
Priests, Deacons, and Virgins, imposition of hands, dedication of Churches,
who were both insolent themselves, and made others their bishops live in
pleasure and idleness. This concerns nothing honest, learned, and sufficient
Curates.

If you think your own wife, or any other (only for putting out their
children) within the compass of an harlot, you are within the compass of a
jealous headed fool. It were more reasonable to judge her so, if she were with
child before you married her.

The 18. Allegation or Demonstration.

It was ordained that none, Demonstra.
either Bishop or Elders, should go from City to City. Theodor. l. 1. c. 9.


The place is in the Ecclesiastical history of Theodoret, Remonstrance.
albeit you quote it not. Theodoret speaks of Eusebius Nicomediensis, an
Arrian, who leaving Nicomedia, Ad sedem Constantinopolitani Episcopatus per
ambitum arrepsit, idque contra Ecclesiae canonem, qui vetat tum Episcopos, tum
Presbyteros de vnius ciuitatis sede, ad alterius sedem transfer, who
translated himself by suit and ambition from one Church to another, for as it
is in the same Theodoret: Cum ei Beryensis Ecclesiae administratio concredita
esset, inde ad Nicomediae Episcopatum gerendum se transtulit, where he was
Governor of the Church of Beria, he translated him self to Nicomedia, and
from the bishoprike thereof to Constantinople, leaping from Church to Church by
suit after the promotion, and contrary to the Canon of the Church, which
forbids ambition and suit both unto Priests and Bishops, and translation
from one See to another of their own heads, without a cause allowed by their
Superiors, according to the several orders of every Church.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Two parishes may be united: ergo, one may have charge of them, Demonstrator.
when they are two, or divided.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

One shepherd may keep one flock being great, but not two flocks being
little, going in diverse pastures.

That is falsely answered: Remonstrance with reply.
for Jacob in the 30. Genes. kept Labans and his own flock of sheep, and put
them in diverse pastures. As for the objection, when they are divided, his
pains are the greater: he must repair to them but in the union, (whatsoever
is the distance) they must repair to him, except it be otherwise especially
provided.

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Parishes were divided by men, by the Monk Denis Pope of Rome. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

That is untrue: for the Apostles in the Acts divided the Churches into
Congregations.

Nay that is more untrue. This is as the Schoolmen speak, (...), Remonstrance
with reply.
a very barbarism or nugation: for it follows, that they divided Churches
into Churches, for the Church always is a Congregation. You might have quoted,
if you had a quote, where the Apostles by constitution did divide national
Churches into Diocesses, or Diocesses into Parishes. The Council of Nice in
very deed appointed to bishops certain of them their bounds and limits of
jurisdiction, though sundry bishoprikes were appointed before. In which
division, the division of the civil state of Rome into Provinces, Diocesses,
Prefectures, De Rep. Romans
etc. was for the most part followed, as Lazius testifies.

The fourth Chapter.
Assertion of the Demonstrator.

IT belongs to the Church to elect the Officers which Christ would have
placed, Demonstration.
and not to the Patrons, etc. Therefore that which is practiced in the Church
of England, must return to Antichrist.

The practice of this Church is neither of (...), Remonstrance.
false Christ, nor of Antichrist, but drawn from the purest times of the
Primitive Church. For neither in the Apostles times, nor any times after (that
I can read of) is there pregnant proof to be found, that for the choice and
ordination presbyteri alicuius, of any priest or pastoral elder only (for
there were no Lay elders heard of) any more then one bishop was required. In
deed when a bishop was to be chosen, it is often to be found in the Primitive
Church, that the priests or pastoral elders which for most part then lived in
the great cities, where bishops Sees were planted, (though according as the
bishops thought good they were sent out into the territory a dioyning, to
preach, baptize, and minister the supper) being with the people assembled, and
often with the Metropolitan, and some other bishops direction, did nominate
whom they thought good to have chosen for their bishop, whom if the people
liked, they would cry, Dignus est, iustus est, he is well worthy, he is a
just man. If they liked him not who was named, they would with great clamours,
yea often times with outrages of blows and murder, importune them to another
nomination. So that there was no scrutinie of suffrages of the people, as
having interest, but a tumultuarie proceeding, and acclamation or exclamation
of the multitude present at such actions. Therefore the old Canons speaking
hereof, do use for the most part, but the words Testimonij ciuium, and
conscientiae populi, of testimony of Citizens, and knowledge of the people,
with which these elections of bishops only were made: but because they breed
great tumults, sedition, and murders (as the ancient Fathers, and histories of
the Church testify) they were abrogated both by counsel and appointment of
Christian Emperors (upon whom by law the people in all matters had bestowed
their whole right) since which time the priests of several Sees in the name of
the rest (which we call now the Chapters of Cathedral Churches) have had the
election of their bishops, being (if the Emperor or prince thought good)
directed to some one special man by his nomination.

In England according to the ancient common law of the land, the prince
grants leave to the Chapter to elect a bishop to the void See, which license
is called Conge d'eslire, and withal sends letters to them, nominating him
whom her majesty upon grave advise of her honorable counsel, judges fit,
requiring their choice of him. The election being made, she gives her royal
assent unto it, requiring the Archbishop to confirm the election if it be
duly and canonically made, and after with two other bishops, to consecrate the
elect: the day and place for confirmation whereof, is published a competent
time before, that if any think good to propound against the person of the man
or form of election, they may be heard. After this confirmation, follows the
consecration according to the prescription of the book: then is the bishop to
do his homage personally to her majesty for his temporal revenues, and
after to have them restored unto him. Now to the temporalties of a bishoprike,
a Baronrie by law is annexed, whereby he is a lord of the parliament.

Other ministers in the dioecesse are to be examined, approved and ordained by
the bishop, he and such other ministers as be present at the ordination,
laying their hands upon them. And when any is presented to a set place or
benefice by the patron thereof, the bishop is to examine his life and
learning, and to institute him in title thereunto after he have approved of
him. This course of placing in the title of certain roumes or benefices grew
by these degrees and means, which will not be amiss also to point at, because
many that will needs be meddling, either know it not, or are wilfully ignorant.

At first (as was showed before) the bishop and all his clergy lived in a kind
of community in the city, whereof he bare the name of bishop, he and they
going abroad at certain most convenient times to preach and minister the
Sacraments in the territory adioining: at what time all Church revenues of the
whole dioecesse, whether lands, tithes, oblations or legacies, were in common
amongst them, but at the distribution of the bishop. One fourth part whereof
was employed pro mensa episcopali, for the B. hospitality: another to
maintain those of the Clergy: the third, for building and repairing the
churches of the city, and rest of the dioecesse: the fourth, for redemption of
captives, for the poor and for other godly uses.

But when sundry persons, partly upon devotion, and partly the rather induced
to have the nominating of a Minister thereto, had built and endued diverse
Churches in places far distant in the country abroad, so that so many
several parishes could not conveniently nor so often be respected by those who
attended always about the Bishop (saving at certain set times) and that the
former co^munitie began through multitude of the clergy (being for the most
part in one place) and sundry other inconveniences to be ouer-troublesome and
also envious: then in most parts of the christian world, they grew to a
division of all ye church revenues, so that the bishop, the clergy that was to
remain in the cathedral church of the chief city, and the clergy of the
rest of the dioecesse, had every of them their several portions allotted, as
was thought expedient. Out of which, every of them severally besides their
own maintenance, was afterward to defray for the reparation of the fabrikes
that were to be vpholden by them, and to relieve the poor, etc. as their
several abilities should serve. In so much as the bishop, who first was as a
common past our of the whole dioeces, as the common law also at this day does
account him, and had before (toward the uses aforesaid) the common revenues of
the Church in title as a kind of proprietarie himself, did then at the
presentation of the founders or Patrons, to whom the Canons gave that
pre-eminence (in regard of their cost bestowed) call other ministers in partem
sollicitudinis, into a part of the charge, and by institution of them unto
several churches and the revenues thereof, did as it were inuest them to the
title of that part of Glebe, tithes, etc. which was accounted as his own before,
but unto the said uses, which course now has continued many hundred years
down unto these times.

It rests to consider what the Demonstrator can prove therein to be impious,
and to be returned again to Antichrist, as proceeding from him being
Antichristian.

The 1. Demonstration.

The constant practice of the Apostles Church must be followed. 1. Tim. 6.14.
Demonstration.


The constant practice of the Church was to choose her officers: Ergo, It
belongs to the Church to choose her officers. Act. 1.6. Act. 6.5. Act. 14 25.

Here be quatuor termini: for in stead of must be followed, is put belongs to
the Church: which is the conclusion, Remonstrance.
but is in neither of the premises: and besides the Mayor speaks of the
Church, which is the Apostles, and therefore a Paralogisme. Besides it is
untrue, for their constant practice was to abstain from blood and strangled,
to celebrate the supper at night, to prophecy in course so many as thought
good, not to wear any thing at all on their heads at prayer, and to speak
strange languages in the congregation, 1. Cor. 14. which need not be followed
of us.

To the Minor.

I deny the constant practice of the Apostles to have been, or to be proved
out of those places in the Acts. Mathias was immediately chosen by God unto the
Apostleship by casting lots: ergo, by no free election of the people. The word
(...), they did propound or nominate, is not necessarily to be referred to all
then assembled, viz. 120. but rather to the 11. Apostles there particularly
reckoned and named: Otherwise we should say that the apostles wives, and Mary
the mother of Jesus had an interest also in this nomination and propounding,
which our discipliners will not in their own platform admit: but whosoever
propounded those two men, sure it is, they which propounded them, did not elect
them, for they were referred to Gods own election by lot: Show which of them
thou have chosen. If this example must always be followed, then the Church
shall only and always have the nomination of two to be chosen, but shall
have none election, which nevertheless is the thing shot at. The^ also shall
there need no fasting nor any ordination by imposition of hands, for neither of
these was here used. If they say something herein was ordinary, something
extraordinary, why do they then by this place urge a constant practice of the
church? and let them prove also by scripture how much is ordinary, how much
extraordinary not to be pursued by us. But let us see also what constant
practice agreeing with ye other two places, or with your own usage, you can find
in the election of the 7. chosen, (...), yt were to serve table. Acts. 6


They were such as the Lord gave none express commandment to be ordained, but
grew by a collateral occasion, viz. the grudge of the Greeks against the
Hebrews, and the toil which the Apostles through the number of believers were
drawn into ministering alone to all the holy supper at their (...),
Loue-feasts. They were but 7. chosen for the Church at Jerusalem upon that
special occasion, and to serve tables at the Loue-feasts. The course of
circumstances in which feasts is ceased, and therefore this choice is an unfit
rule to exact all elections of church officers unto. Because these seven called
commonly Deacons were chosen, must ministers of the word needs iumpe just with
them? Must all officers needs have all circumstances in their elections alike?
What Logike is this thus to reason a disparatis adidem? The 12. Apostles in
this action called the disciples together, propounded and persuaded the matter,
told them the number and qualities of those men to be chosen, but for avoiding
suspicion of partiality, and appeasing the mutiny, permitted the whole
election to the number of the disciples. And shall we therefore in all elections
give to the wisest and learned BB. and other ministers of the Church, no
further direction, sway or interest, but permit all elections and the manner of
the^ to the rest of the Church? why this our platformers themselves will not
like. For their presbyteries have the entire nomination and election of all,
and the people must allow of their choice, if a cause sufficient be
notalleaged, though all else were against it. Of the sufficiency of which
cause, the eldership themselves be judges, saving that the latest platformes
for choice of a minister, will have some other minister near to lay on hands
with the lay elders, least also they should seem to give that function, which
none of themselves have. In this action (...), and (...), even all the whole
multitude was called and used in election: but women, children, and youths, the
discipliners themselves will exclude from giving voices. When the multitude had
chosen the^, they presented the^to the Apostles: but our elderships will first
have both nominatio^ and election, and the^ they will present the elected to the
people. Here neither the Apostles nor the multitude are said to have fasted,
and therefore not to be presumed where the holy ghost in wisdom has omitted
to mention it, as themselves reason, when it serves their turns. But the
examples Acts 13.14. (not touched by the Demonstrator) do mention fasting, and
the platformers do necessarily require it in all ecclesiastical elections. The
apostles after prayer made, without further inquisition or examination into the
persons do only lay hands upon the^, the ministry of the word and sacraments
being included in their apostleship. But our platformers (I hope) will not
refuse hereupon all examination of those who first are elected by the
multitude, and yet being mere lay elders, will presume to impose hands, not
only upon Deacons, but also upon ministers of the word, function and offices
which themselves have not, and this they do where their discipline is alredie
planted: but where it is to be planted, there (I think) as the people shall
choose, so shall they also ordain and impose hands upon the ministers, then
they upon the elders, and the ministers and elders both upon the Deacons, after
which time the people for ever shall give up this office. Here by the way we
note, that this notable Apostolical Church established at Jerusalem, was
without any lay ministering Eldership, which might impose hands and ordain
Deacons, which they would not so long have lacked, if Christ by dic ecclesiae,
had so long before appointed and commanded it: by which foundation laid, thus I
retort.

The constant practice of the Apostles church must be followed.

In the election of church officers, Act. 6.1. appears no constant practice
of ye Apostles church: ergo, In those elections appears nothing that must be
followed. And again of the contrary thus.

That which differs from the practice of the apostles church, must not be
followed.

The platformers elections (as in sundry points is showed here) differs from
the practice of the Apostles Church Ergo, the platformers elections must not be
followed.

Now for the 14. Act. 25. v. Paul and Barnabas ordained ministers with prayer
and fasting, (...): ergo, they ordained them without election of the people,
because no mention is made of the election or approbation of the people,
antecedent or subsequent.

The place serves to prove, the right of election and ordination whatsoever
was in Paul and Barnabas, and not any wise in the people, as it is an
invincible argument to be gathered out of the words, if the Demonstrator did
understand, or T.C. (for all his bragging) a Greek text aright. When they had
ordained unto them ministers or pastoral elders: for one and the same in one
respect cannot be ordainer, and those for whom they were ordained: the
consequence therefore is, they did not ordain with them, or with the
promiscuous multitude, but for the^: for here be three sundry persons
mentioned, (...) the ordainers Paul and Barnabas: (...), priests or ministers
ordained, and (...), for the Churches of Antioch, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe.

That it must so be understood, appears thus. Those which preached and
taught, v. 20. comforted the minds, and exhorted v. 21. prayed with fastings,
v. 22. (...), it was they which (as I translate it) by imposition of hands
ordained ministers unto those churches, for all those participles have none
other verb to relate unto. But Paul and Barnabas were the persons only that
preached, etc. Ergo, they only were the persons that so ordained ministers. But
against this clear light they seek to shadow themselves by the doubtful and
heathenish interpretation of this word (...), which signifying by etimologie to
stretch out the hand, they say is an allusion to the manner and custom of the
multitude in some popular common wealths of Greece, to signify their assents
by lifting up their hands to matters proposed. To grant the^ that such custom
was somewhere amongst the Grecians (though rarely) observed: is it likely that
this confused course was thence borrowed, and brought into the Church by the
Apostles? Nay rather as upon a custom not unlike used amongst the Romans, all
that do assent by what gesture soever, even at this day may not unaptly be
said in Latin, Pedibus ire in sententiam, so was this word (...), drawn from
that usage to any ordaining or appointing of men to functions, in what manner
soever by one or more, as may appear by infinite places in the purest Greek
writers, profane and divine. One example in S. Luke himself, Acts 10. v. 41.
may suffice, where ye same word is used, viz. (...), witnesses before ordained
for the ordination and choice that God himself made of his apostles. And the
like is said Act. 22. v. 14. of Paul, yt God did ordain him to know his will,
(...), a word derived of the hand. They might hereof then as well gather, and so
might as probably translate those places, as they do this place, that the
Apostles and Paul were chosen not only by God, but by the suffrages of the
people also, and that testified by lifting up of their hands (a thing absurd to
be deemed): and is not this a pretty opinion and sufficiently well grounded, to
trouble the church with, that is built upon nothing saving the doubtful
interpretation of one single word? This is no marvel: for in truth upon the
diverse interpretations of 8. or 10. such words in the testament, is the whole
frame almost of the new platform builded, as were easy to be showed in his
due place. Because they will not believe me perhaps herein, let the^ for the
true understanding hereof, peruse all the old Latin translations to be found,
and the fathers Greek and Latin, that ever either writ of this place, or have
occasion to use the word for ordination of ministers, and they shall find yt it
imports no creation or election by suffrages of the people, but ordination
with laying on of hands: for if it should not here so signify, we should be
driven to confess that Paul and Barnabas laid not their hands of the ministers
whom they ordained. Chrysostom. in Act. 6. homil. 13.
S. Chrysostom an ancient Greek father, and Archb. of Constantinople, thus
writes, No^ dicit quomodo, etc. he tells not how (says he) but simply
says that they were ordained by prayers: for this is (...), that is,
ordination. The hand is laid upon the man, but it is God who works all, and
it is his hand that does touch the head of the ordained, if he be ordained as
he ought. And S. Hierome most plainly: Hierom. in 58. Isaiae.
Three other interpreters (says he) did translate the word (...), a finger
stretched forth, but the most of us do interpret it the ordination of clergy
men, which is performed not alone by the prayer of the voice, but by the laying
on of hands. But if the Demonstrator meant not deceitfully, why did he not (for
proof of the constant practice of the Apostles church herein) produce all
ordinations of ecclesiastical persons to any function in the whole testament?
Forsooth he saw, the further he waded, the less likelihood of his purpose. For
in Act. 13. the 4. prophets and doctors of Antioch, beside Paul, did with prayer,
fasting, and laying on of hands, ordain and separate Paul and Barnabas to that
holy function, which ye spirit there called the^ unto. Here are no traces of
peoples propounding, electing, or of any eldership to concur with these
ecclesiastical ordainers, yet was it then a most famous Church. In 1. Tim. 3.4.
etc. he is taught the qualities of bishops and Deacons, and precepts are given
to him yt he might know how to converse and behave himself in ye church of God,
1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. and Titus was left by Paul in ye Isle of Candie to supply yt
which wanted, and to ordain bishops and ministers in the congregations, as S.
Paul had before prescribed to him. In both which whole epistles, not the least
tidings are to be learned of any popular or Oligarchical intermedling in
elections of people, or of any such elders. The conclusion therefore is, that
there is neither constant nor inconstant rule and practice of perpetual
election by the people from any example of the Acts, or other part of the new
testament.

The 2. Demonstration.

If the people had interest in the liking of their teaching Levites,
Demonstration.
Then much more the people now. But the first, ergo the second Number. 8. v. 9.

I like not this manner of dealing in your own respect, Remonstrance.
to derive your presbytery from Sanedrim, and your election from the
ceremonial law: for all this tends unto Iudaisme, and will overthrow your
whole platform.

To the Antecedent and sequel of the same.

If you conclude for your purpose, you mean by Interest in liking, viz. your
election: for other liking is not worth the liking. Even with us (whom you do
mislike) the people may show their cause of dislike, and the minister be
disauthorized. You would reason a fortiore, but ye reason proceeds ab
infirmitate. Admit (which ought not to be granted) ye people might choose
Levites under the ceremonial law, they cannot choose after ye abrogatio^ of the
same.

The sequel of the Mayor is not good, for whatsoever was then used toward the
Levites, though happily it might now be used, yet does it not follow that of
necessity it must now so be.

To the Assumption.

But they had etc. No forsooth: It was a ceremony of offering and purifying
instituted in that place, not of election of the Levites: for God had chosen
them before, Number. 3. I cannot marvel sufficiently at the strange boldness of
this sort of men. The purpose here is to prove election of church officers by
the whole church: but now he tells us only of a liking the people must have.
He speaks when the Levites are to be elected, Number. 3. and 8.
the place is when they are to be offered, for all the Levites male are elected
and destinated from their birth to the service of the priests in the
tabernacle, in stead and redemption of all the first borne of the people, whom
the Lord had consecrate unto himself, which was the cause why the people laid
their hands on the Levites heads, when they were to be offered, as yielding
them up in their steeds to that service. This offering of them was after 25.
years of their age, and they served till 50. He tells us of teaching
Levites, the place is of all the Levites male, to serve the priests about
dressing the sacrifices in the Tabernacle of the congregation. Shall we say
that all the 20. thousand Levites that were then dedicated to this service, and
all their successors proved learned, and able to teach, and did they in deed
all teach in the Tabernacle? And did every one of all the children of Israel
lay his hand upon every Levites head that was offered, which is the ground work
of the whole peoples interest in election that should hereof be proved? As the
people laid their hands on the Levites, so did the Levites on the heads of the
bullocks, shall this also be retained among Christians? Why they themselves do
not require nor allow the people to lay hands upon the elected, but only the
eldership. And because here the people laid on hands, had they authority to
allow or disallow of them, whom the Lord had chosen before? Moses the civil
Magistrate is commanded to take them indefinitely, therefore al Levites of
those years, and to cause them to be purified: likewise to cause the
congregation of Israel to be assembled, and to bring the Levites before the
Lord: but Aaron and his sons the priests did only offer them, and (as it
were) by sacrifice consecrate them to the service in the Tabernacle. Shall then
our civil Magistrate be permitted so much in Church elections, as here Moses
was? and will they be content that the low degree Ecclesiastical be
consecrated and ordained by the greater (as here) and not the greater by the
less? as they absurdly do ordeine ministers, by the hands of vnministring
Lay elders? When we urged a lawfulnes of superiority and degrees in
Ecclesiastical persons, by the like equity under the law, yea even among
priests themselves, one being above another, then (said they) all was but
ceremonial, and there was an high priest only for a type of Christ, and not
for any direction or government belike. But when we call for proofs of their
presbyteries and perpetuity of them, then did they make Pastors answer to
Priests, Doctors to Levites, Lay elders to I know not what Governors, and
Deacons to Keepers of the treasury, Counterpoison.
so that the Hierarchy in the old, was thus to be columned in the new,
making the Scriptures by such dalliance to serve their turns at all assaies,
as Procustes did his bed for men of all statures, by cutting of some, and
stretching the shortest to the length of it. Veritas est simplex, mendacium
multiplex. They had need of many shifts for a false matter. Therefore all
that you can make out of that place (if the Mayor were necessary) is this.

The children of Israel put their hands upon the Levites, Absurdity of the
demonstrator.
or the heads of the Levites: the Levites put their hands upon the heads of the
bullocks, ergo, the people now must lay their hands on the heads of the
Ministers, and the Ministers must lay their hands on the heads of bullockes.
For this your good reason learned of him, (as I said before) Et vitulo tu
dignus and hic. It is too egregious abuse of Gods people thus to trifle, and
yet to set such a grimme countenance on the matter, as if every word dropped
down an Oracle from them.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which appertains unto all, Demonstration.
must be approved of all the Congregation: but the ministry in the Church
pertains to all, ergo, authority to approve pertains to all.

This is a paralogisme: Remonstrance.
for authority, is in the conclusion, which is not in either the premises,
and therefore 4. termini.

This Mayor is a rule of law.

Quod omnium interest, ab omnibus debet approbari, but so many exceptions as
syllables in the rule. But to the reason of the Maxim or rule.

Not every one whom it concerns to be governed, must have a stroke in the
choice of the governor, whether in election of a Mayor of a city, or chosing
a Burgess, or Knight of the shire, but legales homines, such as are credited
with the matter. This reason is too popular. To have a good Prince is every
man's benefit, yet must not all Princes go by election: and if this be a divine
rule of nature, and so to be understood, why do the most voices carry the
matter, yea the odd voice oftentimes?

This absurdity of demonstrating is not out of kenning, but in every man's
sight, if you would make another syllogism, which is this:

That which pertains unto all, Retortion.
must be approved of all:

The ministry pertains to all men, women, and children of the Congregation,
ergo, the approbation pertains to all men, women, and children of the
Congregation.

And if one do but dissent, the election must be dashed, because all are
interessed, and some one or other may be prejudiced uncalled thereunto, which
is wholly contrary to their practice and platform: and though the ministry
reaches to all, does it therefore follow the election of the Minister does
belong to all? Why not then his vocation, examination, and his ordination by
imposition of hands as well shall belong to all? all which you do alonely
attribute to your Elderships.

The 4. Demonstration.

That which is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, Demonstration.
is the best election, and may not be abridged: But election by common consent
is so, ergo, election by the Church is best, and all other unlawful.

To the Mayor.

Not every thing that effects obedience is forthwith best: Remonstrance.
for flattery steals away eftsoons the peoples hearts, as in Absoloms
ambition, that spoke the people fair, to take the crown from his fathers
head, and put it on his own.

To the Minor.

But election by common consent is neither so nor so, if you mean the common
and baser sort of people taken into elections: nay the contrary is true, for
who has chosen them may depose them: which takes away all godly liberty of
frank rebuking them, from the Minister, and in them all behoouefull awe and
reverence toward their own creature.

But sir, if you can frame such election that all the world can agree upon:
Consensio nationum, lex naturae putanda est. The agreement of all is the law
of nature: otherwise in popular elections you perhaps know what Liuie in his
first Decad, says: vt fere fit mayor pars vincit meliorem, the greater part
overcomes the better: but you run not in your conclusion, because though it
were admitted to be best, yet does it not follow that all other be unlawful
and naught.

The 5. Demonstration.

That election which procures greatest reverence to the teacher, is best:
Demonstration.
But so it is in the peoples consent. ergo,

This argument, and the former 4. Remonstr.
(if the parts were granted true) do but hold with the usual limitations
of caeteris paribus, other things weighed and considered together, that is the
best election that procures obedience, reverence, etc.

To the Mayor.

The virtue of the man, sufficiency of learning and honesty, procures
amongstall good men the best reverence and estimation, not aura popularis, the
fond and wandering opinion of the people. Bellua multorum capitum plebs, the
common people has more heads then Hydra, and will easily contemn him whom
they have advanced.

To the Minor.

We see otherwise by experience, as in our Savior Jesus Christ his case, one
day make him a king, the other day nail him on the cross. This day cry
(...), to morrow cry crucifige.

The 6. Allegation of the Demonstrator, with the testimonies of the ancient
writers, in steed of the sixth Demonstration.

The Minister should be chosen, Demonstration.
the people being present in the eyes of all, by the common judgment, Cypr.
li. 1. ep. 3.
testimony, approbation, and this is the lawful vocation out of the word of
God.

It is the 4. Remonstrance.
epistle of the 1. li. therefore your unskillfulness in quoting, or negligence in
reading, is to be noted here. The words are falsified by you: Quod and ipsum
videmus de diuina authoritate descendere vt sacerdos plebe praesente, Cypr. li.
1. ep. 4. de Mart. and Basilide.
etc. sub assist entis populi conscientia ordinationes sacerdotales fieri
oportere. Where no common judgment, testimony, consent, or approbation is
mentioned, but only the peoples knowledge and presence.

Cyprians words extend to the legal of a Priest and evangelical ordination
of a Bishop, as of Eleazar in Aarons place, 20. Number. and of every Catholic
bishop, and not of every minister (as is showed before) and can never be
misproued. Then which, a more strong example cannot be brought against you:
for if a bishops ordination do answer to the consecration of the high priest
by Gods appointment, and out of the 20. of Numb. to be proved, then is T.C.
shift of the high priests, being a type of Christ, no warrant to exclude the
superior degree of bishops above other ministers, under the Gospel. And as
Moses by Gods direction there, when Aaron was to die, put off his clothes, and
put them on Eleazar his son: so must the civil Magistrate have the chiefest
sway in the calling and inuestiture of Bishops: for, of the people no more is
there said, but that they, vz. Moses, Aaron, and Eleazar went up to the mount
about this business, in the sight of all the Congregation. Yet both the one of a
Bishop, and the other of the Minister with us are solemnized in a Congregation
in the presence of the people: that if any have knowledge of exceptions to be
lawfully made, he may freely allege them: vt detegantur malorum crimina,
bonorum merita praedicentur.

The 7. Allegation.

That is certainly a divine election of a Bishop which is made by the whole
Church. Demonstrator.


Ambrose writes, Ecclesiae Vercellensi, to choose them a Bishop, Remonstrance.
the custom being then of such a choice as before is described: neither does
he speak of all rules of choosing but of the good and commendable choice of
Eusebius the Confessor: Ambrose ep. 82.
Merito creditum quod diuino esset electus iudicio quem omnis Ecclesia elegit:
Socrat. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 25.
As also in Ambrose election, unto which Valentianus the Emperor gave his
royal command, qui iusserat vt alium crearent Episcopum.

The 8. Allegation. Demonstrator.


Let the people have authority to choose their Clerks and Ministers.

There is not any such title to be found in any his Epistles ad Ruffinum: which
here is quoted at large, Remonstrance.
as if he had written but one Epistle to him, the better to cover this
coggerie. Hieron. ad Ruffinum.


The 9. Allegation.

They run to Bishops suffraganes (speaking of Clarks) certain time of the
year, Demonstrator.
and bring money and they are anointed and ordained being chosen of none:
Hierom ad Nepotianum.
And afterward the Bishop in hugger mugger is chosen of the Canons or
Prebendaries only, without knowledge of the people.

The margin hereof is beautified with this elogie: Remonstrance.
This is right our English fashion, as if he had found some great treasure. It
is a lewd fashion for you or any other to misreport S. Hierome, or this whole
Church of England: there is not any such word in that whole Epistle, except
you have some larger copies then we have, of your own framing. It is likely
you took this out of some other book of the brotherhood, being their own
words, but finding this quotation not far off, thought it pertained unto
these words. Those that take up all of trust, are forced often to lie by it.

The 10. Allegation. Demonstrator.


Nazianzen. in the Oration of the death of his father, approves the election
by the people, and confuteth them that would hinder it.

What egregious impudency has the Demonstrator thus to cite Greg. Nazianz.
whose words are these: Remonstrance.
Purissimae populi parti, hoc est and sacris ministris and nostris Nazaraeis,
quibus vel solis vel potissimum illis electiones committi oportebit, sic enim
ecclesiae nunquam male esset. The purest sort of people, that is, holy
Ministers and our Nazarites should be the chief electors of Bishops, so the
Church should never do amiss.

The 11. Allegation.

Augustine when he appointed Eradius to succeed him, Demonstrator.
says it was the approved right and custom, that the whole Church should
either choose or consent to their Bishop.

I take the place you mean to be in the 110. Remonstrance.
epist. August. which appointment or designement of his successor is against
the 4. Conc. Toletan. cap. 18. which you mean to allege in your 18.
Allegation to serve another turn.

How little this makes for your purpose, he that will read that Epistle may
see. First it concerns the election of a Bishop, and not of any inferior
minister, as the Demonstrators general issue imports. Besides, it is not an
ordinary election, when as Augustine both desired that himself might resign,
and appointed his successor in his life time: therefore less marvel if he
would not do it wholly against the peoples wills: yet how slender a consent
was looked for, which the Demonstrator would make a solemn election, these
words of Augustine do show: Least any (says he) should think much or
complain of me, I declare my will which I believe to be the will of God in
all your hearings, August. epi. 110.
and knowledge: I will have Eradius the minister to be my successor: whereupon
the people used this acclamation, Deo gratias, thanked be God.

There is no mention of their right, or of the custom. If you mean not this
place, it might have pleased you to have quoted it. Augustines whole works are
somewhat too large to be perused over to trace you in an untruth. Besides, in
that you say with a disjunctive Either choose or consent, your issue is not
hereby concluded, for the disjunctive is true, if either part be true.

The 12. Allegation. Demonstrator.


Anthimius choosing a Bishop without the consent of the people filled all
Armenia with sedition. Basilius epist. 58.


Basil writes this to Miletius: you do untruly report of Basil: Remonstrance.
Volopietatem tuam scire quod fraeter Anthimius Faustum cum Papa agentem
Episcopum, spretis suffragiis in locum reuerendissimi fratris Cyrilli ordinauit
sic, vt Armeniam seditione repleuerit, where is to be noted ordinauit sic,
Emphatically, So and in such sort, Spretis suffragijs, In contempt of the
people, who might be interessed. Lastly, one absent or from hence abiding, in
another place with the Patriarch.

The 13. Allegation. Demonstrator.


Why did Peter communicate the election with the Disciples? least it should
turn to a brawle. Chrysostom. 1. Act.


Chrysostom is the best interpreter of himself, Remonstrance.
whom you should have faithfully alleged: the words together with the sense
are: Nunc autem tempori iudicandi negotium permisit illis: Vide Chrysostom. supra
6. Act. Eligere viros illis permittum.
It was but a temporary permission or leave: An non licebat ipsi? was it not
lawful for Peter to elect? Yes verily says he, it was lawful, but he does
it not: ne cui videretur gratificari, least he should seem to gratify one
more then another.

The 14. Allegation out of the testimonies of general Counsels.

It is meet you should have power to choose and to give their names that are
worthy to be Clearkes, Demonstrator.
according to the laws and decrees of the Church: If any die, Council Nicen.
test Theodoret.
they who were last chosen are to be promoted to the honor of him that is
dead, if they be worthy of it, and the people choose them.

The Demonstrator leaves Theodoret with a blank for book and Chapter: the
place, Remonstrance.
lib. 9. cap. Eccles. Histor. ex Epistola Concilij Niceni: Ecclesiae
Alexandrinae and Egypt. Pentapol. etc. written against Arrius and against
Miletius, but against Miletius with less severity, that he should loose his
authority and power, but retain his name of dignity and office. The Council
therefore speaks of the Clergy, not of the peoples choosing. Iura Clericorum
qui orthodoxi manserunt, it is the right of the Clearks, who are Orthodoxe, as
Irenaeus notes in the margin, who should choose other clearks. Howbeit, if
needs you will understand the people and Clergy, we will not deny the people
present to have by acclamations testified their approbations of elections made
as is before noted, neither for all that bind christian people to the same order
in election now. By the way I observe you are not the best translatour ad
verbum, of the words of the council mangled by you: Modo idoneus videatur, so
he be fit and populus illum eligat, and the people choose him, Episcopusque
Alexandrinus ei suffragetur, adeoque populi electionem confirmet. There is the
Bishop of Alexandria his necessary and negative voice who was Metropolitan
and one of the four oecumenicall Patriarchs.

The 15. Demonstrator.
Allegation.

Let ye people choose, and the Bishop approve and seal up the election with them.

This proves the elections were not so absolute in the people, Council. Nicen.
Trip. Hist. 2. li.
but might be countermaunded by the Bishop who seems to obtain and hold a
negative voice. Remonstrance.


The 16. Allegation.

In an Epistle to Damasus, Demonstrator.
Ambrose, etc says, We have ordained Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, the
whole city decreeing the same: and Flauianus was appointed Bishop of Antioch,
Council. Constable. test. Trip. Hist. li. 9. cap. 14.
the whole city appointing him.

The place is in Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 9. Praeposuimus in generali concilio
nostro Nectarium cum omnium clericorum and totius ciuitatis approbatione
praesente Imperatore Theodosio. Remonstrance.


We have placed, that is, we Bishops, says Theodoret in the Chapter going
before: the Pastors and Ministers did choose him, the whole city was well
pleased therewith: As for Flauianus, the same answer serves in the same case.

The 17. Demonstrator.
Allegation.

When he has bin examined, let him be ordained Bishop by the common consent of
the Clarks and lay people. Council. Carthag. cap. 1.


We will not strive whether he must be tried, as also both, vel Episcoporum
examine vel populi testimonio, Remonstrance.
or whether ever any Bishop de facto, have bin so ordained, but whether always
of necessity it must be so. 22. cap. 3. Council. Carthag.


The 18. Allegation.

Let him not be counted a Priest whom ye Clergy and people does not choose.

The words are, Demonstrator.
qui nondum ad 30. annos peruenerint: qui nec a clero nec a populo propriae
ciuitatis electi sunt: Neither by Clergy, nor people: Conc. Tolet. distinct.
50.
So that either served.

It is a shame for you to allege that Canon which makes so directly for
Priests, Remonstrance.
Bishops, and Metropolitanes: The witness you bring for you, you may not
reject.

The 19. Allegation. Demonstration.


If any Bishop be chosen but out of the Bishops of the same province and of the
clergy, and citizens, let another be chosen. Con. Gabilon. cap. 10.


We confess such elections of Bishops were in use then, the people having the
least stroke therein: Remonstrance.
but that makes nothing to the state of the question, whether it must needs
be so now in all ministers, because it was then used in Bishops elections. That
which was used then, these men themselves abrogate by taking away all such
Bishops. Note by the way the Demonstrator and T.C. can use the testimonies of
Councels, which otherwise they impugn, yea, use ye testimony of a prouincial
council, yea, such a council which 14. can. gives ordination of clearks unto
Bishops and forbids 4. can. any two Bishops to be in one city ordained or
abiding: the contrary whereof, the puritans draught does importune and crave,
making every pastor a Bishop, by which reckoning there would be 129. Bishops in
London.

The 20. Allegation out of the Emperors laws.

Following the doctrine of the apostles etc. we ordeine that as often as any
place of ministers shall be void in any city, Demonstration.
voices shall be given of the inhabitants of the city, that one of three for
right faith and holiness, Justinian in cod.
be chosen to the Bishoprike.

The words of the constitution are craftily suppressed, Remonstrance.
and yet borrowed of Illiricus, at second and third hand: The demonstrator who
does gather the rapsodies she weth not where in the codi. but in nouellis
co^stitutionibus 123. following etc. We make this pragmaticall law, that as
often as it shall be necessary, the clergy and primates of the city shall
assemble, for which city the Bishop is to be ordained, and swear to choose
etc of three: one fit, above 35. years old.

The words are, vt ex tribus illis personis quae decretis hoc modo eliguntur
melior ordinetur electione et iudicio, eorum qui ordinandi ius habeant: By the
inhabitants, he means clergy and chief of the city: so the inhabitants
must choose three, the Emperor choose one to be ordained. Understand in this
law: he says following, etc. Not for kind or manner of election but for the
men eligible: vt sint integerimi and incorrupti: for no such election for one
to be chosen amongst three, is to be deduced from the apostles of Christ.

The 21, Allegation. Demonstrator.


Being not ignorant of the holy Canons, etc. We assent to the Ecclesiastical
order that the Bishop be chosen by the election of the Clergy and people.
Carol mag. distinct. 63. sacrorum Canon.


He does not say Canons of the Apostles or holy scripture, which argues sundry
kinds and manner of elections in sundry places: but rather he says Secundum
statuta Canonum in propria diocaesi: Remonstrance.
according to the statutes Canonical of every Dioecese: for the Emperors would
not suffer the diminution of any of their privileges.

The 22. Demonstrator.
Allegation.

Ludouicus Caroli filius decreed that he should be Bishop of Rome, whom the
people should consent to choose.

This I take to be Distinct. 63. Remonstrance.


I know no better Illatiue a man may draw from this, then Ergo, it is in the
power of the Emperor who made it, to alter also the decree: to what end else
says he We decree?

The 23. Demonstrator.
Allegation.

Out of Platina in vita Adriani 2. the Romans were commanded by letters to
choose their own Bishop. Platina.


This is an untrue report: He does not command the doing, but commend them for
doing: Remonstrance.
Romanos admodum laudat quod sancte and integre creassent: But howsoever the
Emperor swallowed and digested the injury, the Emperors Ambassadors were
secluded, and the election was tumultuous, as (for the most part) popular
elections are wont to be. And even then the Bishops of Rome began to usurp a
tyranny.

The 24. Allegation.

In the life of Leo the 8. Demonstrator.
Let the people, says Otho the Emperor, choose, I will approve.

This proves the power of the civil magistrate, Platina.
being Christian for election of Ministers: Remonstrance.
and that the consent of the people is not necessarily requisite: for this Otho
put out Bennet whom the people had chosen in steed of John the 13. and placed
Leo again, whom the people had displaced. But one thing must be often
iterated and inculcated upon these learned Demonstrators. The question is not
between us and antiquititie, whether the people had approbation in elections
of Bishops in diverse places of Christendom, and especially in Rome: But the
question is between us and the Churchwrights at this day, whether the whole
manner of all Ecclesiastical men's elections, be constantly, precisely, and
singularly deduced from, and attributed by the scriptures to the whole people
of that Church.

The 25. Allegation of new writers.

Musculus in his common place of the title of magistrates. Demonstration.


Bullinger 1. Timoth. 4.

Calvin. Institut. 4. lib. 3. cap. sect. 15.

Confess. Heluet. cap. 18. are ours and many others in this behalf.

This Qui dicunt, or Jurors cannot agree on their foreman, Remonstrance.
to speak one thing or deliver in one verdict. For if Musculus say, aplebe and
ministris in primis Ecclesys eligebantur antistites, The Prelates were chosen
of the people and ministers: he will add and say the truth and the whole
truth, Talis tum erat ecclesiarum status, such was the state of the Church
policy then: now there is a Christian magistrate, the state is otherwise.

As for Calvin, Huius res certae regula ex Apostolorum institutione peti non
potest.
he holds that there never was instituted by the Apostles, any uniform order
in Church elections. li. 4. Instit. ca. 3. sect. 13. As for the confession, it
makes no necessity of such elections. And for Bullinger contra Anabaptistas,
What does he mean? Remember him I pray you when he writes thus:

The Anabaptists pretend a calling by the people: But our calling is authorized
from the Christian Prince, who is therewith credited by the Christian people.

The 26. Allegation or Demonstration.

If there be none write against it but the Papists: Demonstrator.
and no other arguments but Papisticall, then the election belongs to the
people: the 1. is true. Ergo the second.

This is a long leap from the antecedent to the consequent, Remonstrance.
a personis adres: If none but Papists, or if all Papists band against
election by the people, then is the election by the people true: as well, if all
transubstantiators write against consubstantiators, Ergo, all consubstantiation
is by the reason a likelihoode of truth. If no Papists had written against
popular election, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
popular election is never the truer. If none but the papists did first
extirpat heresies, then were those heresies to have likelihoode of truth.

To the Assumption.

But none etc. Many orthodoxe old and new writers, write against their
popularity of election, and against their positions. As for arguments, they are
plentiful in scriptures, Councels, Fathers, besides the practice welneere of all the world of Christianity.

The 1. objection of the Demonstrator.

They were under the cross and few in number. Ergo, the fitness sooner
known and easier espied. Demonstration.


The Answer of the Demonstrator.

The gospel was dispersed throughout al Asia, Affricke, and Europe, and could
keep less together: Ergo, that makes for us.

Although the gospel was sown in Asia, Remonstrance, with reply.
Affricke, Europe: Nevertheless, it is not so much to have it sown in many
places, as to have it deeply suncken in many persons and generally received:
Ergo, this makes rather against, then for you. And therefore could not be such
uniform assemblies as immediately in Jerusalem upon the assension of our
savior: multitudinis credentium erat cor vnum, via vna.

The 2. objection of the Demonstrator.

There are many hypocrytes: Demonstration.
Ergo, dangerous to grant elections unto them.

The Answer of the Demonstrator.

True: but it is a principle in hypocrisy to be forward in elections and such
actions.

Belike the demonstrator has read over the Aphorisms of hypocrisy:
Remonstrance, with reply.
or an hypocrite himself being a man so forward to set forward these elections
sauouring of popularitie. Me thinks I may mislike the answer: it should be
thus shaped to his own objection: because hypocritical men are many in the
church, Ergo, many such may set forward such elections.

The argument does not hold, a coniugatis: but that hypocritical electors will
make hypocritical elections, and eligible hypocrites: and few others in their
church.

The 3. objection of the Demonstrator.

They had knowledge, our people are ignorant. Demonstration.


The Answer of the Demonstrator.

Our people would have knowledge, if they had teaching: they cannot choose
worse then the Bishops and the patrons.

Our people would etc. This is an apparent digression and no answer to
himself: Remonstrance, with reply.
Our people have not the knowledge together with those gifts the primitive
christians had: howbeit if the patrons might present, and the Bishops freely
without suite in law choose, you should find the commodity of Bishops
election. As for patrons, some I know most honorable, most virtuous, and
religious patrons who will not to gain a world of commodities, defile their
hands with pitch of briberie: as for cormorant patrones (whereof some I know)
no man means to patronize their sacrilegious impiety.

The 4. Objection of the Demonstrator.

The Church was noe then established. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

That is untrue: for the Apostles did better establish without the help of the
Christian Magistrate, then we with the help of them.

Nay it is most infallibly true, that colourably you now object. Remonstrance
with reply.
For the Church was not established concerning civil government and
Magistracy, which did persecute the Church, and killed the children of it in
manner altogether, massacring the Christian professors: howbeit the church was
established concerning faith and spiritual government, not concerning the
visible society and policy of the Church externally, being then under
persecution. And therefore the Illation is false and erroneous, to say the
Apostles did better establish the outward face of Christianity, and practice
of religion, then Christian Kings and Queens in their tender care and
maintenance of the Churches policy. But hereof may be gathered, how gladly
these men would seclude all Christian Princes from rule in matters
Ecclesiastical, as I have before noted.

The 5. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Drunkards and Papists will choose like themselves, the best disposed are
fewest. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

Such are not of the Church, but without. 1. Cor. 5.12. v.

Known drunkards are in the Church, but not of the Church, Remonstrance.
unless they repent. As for the eldership to reform the people, (which you
would have) is for the multitude to reform the multitude. And as for the
schools of the Prophets (if you mean the Universities, which you must send
your Ministers unto) they will send few enough to you, their maintenance being
taken away by those whom you have organized: all might come to barbaritie and
Turcisme.

The 6. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Paul commands Timothy to lay hands on no man rashly. Timoth. 1.5. cap.
22. v. ergo, One did it. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

He teaches what to do for his part, though others would be rash, he
should not join with them.

He teaches him his duty, Remonstrance.
and in him all others that have power to ordeine Ministers, to do nothing with
temeritie. Look upon the place: S. Paul speaks singulariter to Timothy, not
to any Eldership.

This interpretation is but a new trick of one of their Patriarchs, in his
Ecclesiastical discipline never heard of before, and is convinced by the
pregnant circumstances of the place, and the uniform consent of all ancient
writers thereupon. For the epistle is directed to Timothy himself, to the end
to teach him how to demean himself in the Church. Immediately before this
place, he gives precepts how widows should be maintained, and what proportion
of allowance he was to make unto ministers: how Timothy should receive an
accusation against a minister, what course he should use in admonitions and
rebukes, according to the diversity of sins. Then Paul adiureth him most
earnestly, that in the exercise of his office in this behalf, he observe an
equal course of justice, (...), without all preiudicate opinion, or leaning to
one side more then to another, viz. prejudice and partiality, two words
judicial, and two things that are the very banes of all upright administration
of justice. Then follows (after jurisdiction) this precept of ordination,
wherein he ought not to deal rashly, lest otherwise his sins whom he so
ordeineth, be imputed unto him the ordeiner. And after a little, answers an
objection that might be made, how it should be possible for him to know
before hand other men's sins, that in this behalf he might keep him self
blameless. Therefore Paul, to take this away, says: That his meaning is not
of sins that such shall commit afterward, but of such as were committed
before, which could no more be hidden, then a man's good conversation by past
could be: so that by the whole course appears, that the other men's sins,
whereof in ordinations he is willed to beware, lest he communicate with them,
and be made guilty of them, are the sins of him, that is to have imposition
of hands, and not any eldership sins, by reason of their rash ordeining of
others, which these men had rather make Elders very prone unto, and Paul also
less careful of all them then of Timothy alone, then that they should not
here by in some appearance, be showldered into this action. Why man, if we
should not trauerse this gloss with you, it would follow, that elders through
greater number of voices, might ordeine ministers with imposition of hands,
without advise or consent of any minister of the word, nay against the will of
Timothy, (whom you make an Evangelist) and contrary to the last reformed
essential platform, and to your own answer unto the next objection
following. Stick not to your own wits, let the uniform consent of learned
antiquity weigh some thing with you, not only in this interpretation, but
others also, lest this be found to be one of the places in that book of
Discipline Ecclesiastical, which T.C. was forced in his epistle to disauowe,
as not agreeing unto.

The 7. Objection of the Demonstration.

The Council of Laodicea decreed, that people should not elect. Demonstration.


Answer.

That is as Calvin upon 16. Act. not elect alone without direction of a grave
Minister.

T. C. makes this Council a bastard Council, Remonstrance.
by the judgment of the Centuries: but the Demonstrator, as privy to T.C.
better pause, makes no doubt of the Council: the 12. Canon of which Council,
would have bishops preferred to Ecclesiastical dignity, by the judgment of
the Metropolitan, and other bishops.

As for Calvin, it is not material whether he have the word or no: the place
is 14. Act. Quod non sit permittendum turbis, electionem facere eorum qui sunt
ad sacerdotium promouendi. The common people will make turbulent elections. And
is this Caluines answer? was ever before that Council any election permitted to
Lay people, without any Ecclesiastical man, that this should need now to be
decreed?

*

The fifth Chapter.
Assertion of the Demonstrator.

ALL those who are to be admitted to any public office, Demonstration.
must be examined by the Eldership.

The 1. Demonstration.

They who are to ordeine, must have particular knowledge and examination: the
Eldership is to ordeine, ergo, the Eldership must examine.

The Mayor makes for us: Remonstrance.
for your Lay Elders have no knowledge for the most part to examine.

The Minor is obscurum per obscurius, to approve an ambiguitie by a doubtful
thing: for we defend that the eldership you fancy, may not ordeine. If we did
allow them ordination, we would not stick for examination: but they want
calling to ordeine, and skill to examine.

The Syllogism goes against themselves: Retortion. 22. cap. 3. Conc. Carthag.
for what forehead can deny that all bishops have, or ought to have
examination? witness to this all Fathers and Councels.

All that have ever had examination have been bishops:

No Lay elders ever have been bishops, ergo,

No Lay Elders ought to have examination.

The 2. Demonstration.

Matters of greatest importance must be done by able governors. Demonstration.


Approving of Church officers, is a matter of greatest importance, and the
Eldership are most able governors, ergo,

It must be done by the Eldership.

To the Minor.

Preaching of the word, Remonstrance.
and ministration of the sacraments, are matters of greatest importance, not
electing of Church officers: for this is referred to the other, neither can
your Lay Elders be for this point most able, nay they are not able governors
at all, and least of all to have examination of the learning of Ministers.

This syllogism reuerseth against themselves.

Matters of greatest importance must be done by able governors: one President,
Pastor, and Eldership of Laytie, are not best able governors, ergo, one
President, Pastor, and Eldership, cannot do matters of greatest importance: by
consequence neither minister word and sacrament, examine, ordain, nor rule the
Church.

The 3. Demonstration.

The way whereby a man's insufficiency is best espied, Demonstration.
is the best way to examine.

But by the Eldership consisting of diverse, a man's insufficiency is best
espied: for many eyes see more then one eye. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

We will not strive about the Mayor, Remonstrance.
because it serves both our turns: But our answer is, sufficiency or
insufficiency is not best espied by those who of all others are most
insufficient to judge of able ministers.

De vnaquaque re iudicat in ea re peritus artifex, Tullie.


Quam multa vident pictores in vmbris and eminentia quae nos non videmus.

Ratiocinabiturne de coloribus ortus caecus? A bleare eye, 1. Physic.
or a blind man cannot judge of colors: the Painter or Limner can also better
judge then we. Touching the reason, Many eyes see more then one: Many bleare or
blinke eyes see not more, nay not so much as one quicksighted eye. One
Ecclesiastical wise governor or prelate, is like to Linceus eye, sees further
then all they: and sometimes he that has but half an eye, sees farther then
Poliphemus with his great basen eye. Is not one great Clarke better able to
judge of a man's sufficience in learning, then twenty thousand Last of
unlearned tradesmen or artisans?

The 4. Demonstration.

Men least subject to partiality, are to examine: The Eldership are least
ergo, Demonstration.


To the Minor.

That is a fabulous narration of your Eldership, Remonstrance.
who being many and but Mechanical artisans and idiotes in learning, are most
subject to love, hatred, favor, friendship, schism and division, Scinditur
incertum studia in contraria vulgus. Especially every one having a Negative
voice in the elections, as you make by your rule: That which concerns all,
must be approved of all. Such turbulent elections of Bishops were in the
Primitive Church, where as one man being a good man in the place, Iustum and
tenacem propositi virum,
Non ciuium ardor praua iubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranni,
Mentit quatit solida.


The 5. Demonstration.

The Apostles way in examination is to be followed. Demonstration.


For many to examine is the Apostles way: Ergo, to be followed.

To the Mayor.

Here he is come from his eldership unto Many, Remonstrance.
as if wheresoever many are, there were straight their Eldership.

The Apostles way commanded as perpetual, is to be followed, but no such thing
appears to be commanded.

To the Minor.

We must distinguish of this word Many, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
not for Eldership, but for the multitude of disciples, which is absurd now for
the whole multitude to elect, much more to examine, a thing not mentioned in
all scripture, (...), 120. Ergo, 120. must elect, examine and present now: Or
the 12. did call, (...), The whole multitude of disciples, Act. 1.15.
to choose Deacons then: Ergo, the innumerable multitude of all believers, must
examine the Deacons to be chosen now: as though if the Deacons were only
distributers to the poor (as is imagined by you) any learning were requisite,
Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
or all finite or infinite number must be chusers and opposers now. They who
can do no more but render an account or reason of their own faith (if they can
do that) must hear the audite and reckoning of others faith, and try their
skill in high points of divinity, and so the shepeheard not lead the sheep,
but the sheep the shepeheard: for he must teach them the next day that
examined him the day before.

The 6. Demonstration.

They whose testimony the people may best credit, Demonstration.
must examine:

But the Elderships judgment the people may best credit, being a company of
able and sufficient men. Ergo,

All goes to popular democracie. Remonstrance.


To the Minor.

This is idem peridem: The Eldership is nothing else, but a few unlearned
people for the most part, and can no more judge of gifts, (other then
volubilitie of speech) then a blind man of colors.

The 7. Demonstration.

They who can best persuade the people of his sufficiency must examine:
Demonstration.
But the Eldership can best persuade: Ergo,

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is false: Remonstrance.
For a crafty Orator may seduce the people, and best persuade in a bad matter.

To the Minor.

The bishop of the dioecesse and others under them, can best judge of the
quality of learning, themselves being learned: As for the silly Eldership,
they are uncunning to persuade, and more uncunning to examine. Lord, what a
confusion, barbaritie and indignity were this, to have unlearned men examine
ministers? Can they tell who is (...), that neither know tongues, art
liberal, or method, nor can tell a Paralogisme when they hear it?

The sixth Chapter.
Assertion.

1 ALl must be preachers received into the ministry. 2 The Church may not be
governed by Commissaries, Officials, Chancellors.

The 1. Demonstration.

He that may be received into the ministry, Demonstration.
must be able to teach the people all that Christ commanded, Mat. 28.20. Only
he that is able to teach the truth, and convince the adversary, can teach the
people all that Christ commanded: Ergo, none must be received into the
ministry, but such as be able to teach the truth, and convince gainesaiers.

To the Mayor.

That whosoever may be received into the ministry, Remonstrance.
must be able to teach all that Christ has commanded (for so is it here
propounded) universally is not true: for then no man since the Apostles,
might, or can now be received to the ministry. Things that Christ commanded
to the Apostles, were of two sorts: either things for knowledge, or for
conversation, what was to be embraced, and what eschewed. For matter of
knowledge it was so eminent in the Apostles, being led by Gods spirit unto
all truth, as that they could not err in their doctrine delivered to the
Churches, and that the 72. Evangelists or any since, were not endued with like
measure of it. Augustine, Hierome, with all the old fathers and learned
bishops that have written, have both erred (and therefore were not able to
teach all knowledge that Christ had commanded his Apostles to know) and in
sundry points of Scripture confess their ignorance. Beza and Calvin (whose
examples I use because you do most account of them) do differ in sundry
interpretations. By this rule then, the one of them (light on whether it will)
was not able to teach all that Christ commanded and commended to his Apostles,
and consequently no minister, because none omniscient minister.

They doubt of some places, and some Beza himself professes he understands
not, as that in the Corinthians, Propter angelos, and I know other places,
which I persuade my self verily he understood not, at least not aright: and
shall not he be allowed with you an able minister? Then woe be to your selves
of the faction that are of this opinion, for you will (I hope) give place to
Beza for sufficiency in learning. But especially woe to them that
nevertheless think you ministers, and receive (as they think) sacraments at
your hands, yet in truth nothing, if we might believe your own doctrines.

The error hereof rises, because the Demonstrator (following the steps of the
devil when he tempted Christ) alleges this Scripture defectiuelie. Math. 4.
For it is not, teaching them all that I have commanded you: but teaching them
to observe all that I have commanded you. What? that all nations should
observe all that Christ commanded the Apostles, either to know or to put in
practice? no but teach them to observe what Christ commanded the Apostles to
have observed: for the Apostles were to use many things as Apostles, which are
not requisite of every Christian to be observed and kept. And as the Apostles
knew many hid mysteries and depthes of knowledge which is not necessary for
every minister to the being of his ministry in that hie measure to know: and
as it is not necessary to the being of every Christian, to have as many and
as excellent degrees of knowledge, as any bishop or minister of the word (else
were no difference between teacher and scholar:) so I doubt not but that the
Apostles were not endued with knowledge and other gifts all alike: and
therefore that the like inequality may be of ministers amongst themselves,
and amongst common Christians in comparison one of another, without derogating
hereby from them, the essence and being either of an Apostle, minister, or good
christian. The diversity of gifts are in all sorts of men of great
multiplicitie and variety, and every one has not all, but as pleases God to
dispense. There is in Scriptures milk and strong meat, rudiments and
perfection, for a lamb to wade, and an Elephant to swim: and yet (as S.
Augustine says) In these things which are plainly set forth in Scripture, are
all things that contain faith, or conversation and manners of men. Act. 20.
And though S. Paul kept back nothing of the whole will of God, ver. 27. from
the ministers of Ephesus, yet does he expound himself before, verse. 20. 2.
Cor. 12. v. 4.
(...) I kept back nothing that was profitable, but have showed you, etc. For
all was not profitable for them, as namely he in revelation heard words not to
be spoken, which was not (...), lawful for man to utter. Every minister cannot
be of perfectest knowledge and gifts, as in the prick of perfection, for
that which is superlatiue, Arist. in Topic.
agrees only to one.

Are all Apostles? are all prophets? are all doctors? 1. Cor. 12. v. 29 and 30.
do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? etc. Of necessity therefore
the ministers teaching of the people, (whether in matter of belief and
knowledge, or what to follow and eschew) must be according to the proportion of
his own knowledge and gifts, wherewith he is endued. If notwithstanding all
this, joined with the experience of ministers in all times, and that which they
might find in themselves, if they had the spirit of humility, they will urge,
that to be in deed a minister, a man must be perfectly endued with all the
enhablements by Saint Paul described: and condemn me (as the Countrey-poisoner
has done others) for saying that Saint Paul sets down an Idaea, that is a
perfect sampler of an absolute minister for all to aim at, which he
unskillfully and calumniouslie detorteth, as if it were meant to be such a
matter as cannot possibly by any man be attained: then let Saint Hierome, (a
more learned minister then one hundred of the best of these) disputing this
matter professedly, sit judge between us for a final composing of this
controversy touching degrees of learning, and other requisites for the
ministry.

As Orators and Philosophers (says he) when they describe what kind of Orator
or Philosopher they would wish to have, Hier. ad Oceanum epist. 83.
do none injury to Demosthenes or Plato, who happily are not so perfect, but
describe the things without persons: so in the description of a Bishop, and in
the exposition of those things that be written, a glass Sacerdotij of
Priesthood, or of the ministry, is set before us: where you see the example
of Idaea, or samplar confirmed. Touching the other point, Hier. ibidem.
he says in the same Epistle thus. In that Saint Paul requires a Bishop to
be without fault, he comprehends in one word all virtues, and requires
almost a thing contrary to nature, which is more then any of us do say of it.
That this may not seem lightly to have in that place slipped him, or without
deliberate advise: he disputes it at large elsewhere: for speaking of
Ecclesiastical men, Hier. li. 1 adu. Pelag. ca. 8.
he says: Many do treat well upon the Gospels, but in expounding the
Apostle are not like themselves: other that very well understand the new
Testament, yet in the Psalms and old Testament are dumb: this I say, because
every one cannot do all. Ibidem.
And again: God has given diverse precepts and manifold virtues, all which
every of us cannot have at once. So it comes to pass, that which is
excellent or perfect in some, is in others but in part: and yet he that has
not all, is not blameable, neither condemned for that he has not, but
justified or approved for that he has. The example hereof he assigns in
bishops and ministers out of S. Paul, and after thus: Ibidem.
Truly God would have all bishops and ministers, such as the vessel of
election teaches. First, in that he says, a bishop must be irreprehensible,
either none is such, or he is a very rare man: for who is there who has not
as it were some blemish or wart in a body otherwise fair, as Peter himself
had? then, to be husband of one wife, sober, chaste, comely, harborous, admit
you may find them: but that which follows, (...), he that can teach, not
docible (as the Latin reading full simply translateth it) ye shall hardly find
with the other virtues. I am of opinion you shall hardly find such as shall be
accused of none, that shall be of good account, even with those that are
without, so as they that cannot away with his doctrine, shall like his
conversation: but especially ye shall hardly find him that is mighty to
resist the adversaries, and to suppress and convince erronions opinions, so
that either there is none, or he is very rare that has all which a bishop
ought to have: and yet though one or two things in the Catalogue of bishops
virtues be wanting in any, he shall not thereupon want the name of a just or
fit bishop, neither shall he be condemned for that he has not, but shall be
crowned for that he has: for to have all and to want nothing, is his peculiar
virtue who sinned not, and in whose mouth was no guile: which if they be so
hard all at once to be found in Bishops, (who in comparison are but few) how
shall they be found in every minister, in so great a Church and nation, as is
the realm of England?

To the Minor.

Only he, etc. A minister may teach the people in plainness and truth,
though he be no exact preacher or pulpit man: This exclusive, Only he, will
exclude many of our opinatiue men, when they shall encounter with a crafty
Jesuit. I know the most of them are not (...), able to confute false doctrine,
howsoever they be quick enough to reprehend faults, neither are able to
dispute with a Jesuit or other subtle heretic, and yet you shall do them
foul disgrace not to count them pulpit men and ministers.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which is to be done conditionally, may not be done, Demonstration.
the condition not kept: Men are to be received into the ministry
conditionally if they be unreprovable, Titus 1.5, 6. Therefore if they be
not such as is there described, and by consequence able to teach, they are not
to be received.

To the Minor.

This is a fond matter to be received into the ministry conditionally,
Remonstrance.
They must be before hand rather condicioned and qualified with gifts. Our
Savior received Judas into the Apostleship, whose conditions in his divine
foreknowledge, he knew to be bad, and him a devil. The Apostles bestowed or
conferred the Deaconship on Nicolaus, who afterward proved a Sectarie. As for
the place to Tit. 1.5, 6. (...), if a man be without reprehension, Not every
one who is no actual preacher, falls into this condemnation: Est quoddam
prodire tenus sinon datur vltra, says Horace. They may be able to teach
profitably many points, yet not all. You heard S. Hieromes opinion hereof, to
be a thing scarce possible in nature, to be without all blame.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which cannot be done without manifest breach of Gods commandment,
Demonstration.
may not be done at all. To receive an unable man to teach is so: Ergo, 1.
Tim. 3.1. Tit 19. v.

To the Minor.

The whole Syllogism is (...), Remonstrance.
yet true and not in question between us, if he understand, that such (who
have no gift at all to teach, or in no measure can exhort or do good) are not
to be received.

The 4. Demonstration.

They whom God refuses to be made ministers may not be received: Demonstration.
The Lord refuses all that cannot teach, Osea, 4.6. v.

The place of Osea is, Remonstrance.
Because thou have refused knowledge, I will refuse thee: thou shall be no
priest to me: because thou have forgotten the law of God, I will forget thy
children. The Prophet speaks of wilful blindness and disobedience,
knowledge is (...) a thing immanent and not transitiue in that place.

It is certain the Lord refuses all those who are (...), absolutely
unfurnished of their gifts of learning: It is not meant comparatively of those
whom God endueth with mean gifts, who do their best endeavor albeit they
cannot aspire to an high eminency or singularity of learning, for teaching
and preaching substantiallie and orderly, as were to be wished in all.

The 5. Demonstration.

He that may be admitted into the ministry, Demonstration.
must divide the word of God aright, 2. Timothy 2.15. Only he that
conuinceth the adversary, can do so: Ergo,

To the Minor.

The Minor is ambiguous and false, Remonstrance.
Only he, etc. for others also can divide aright and give Gods servants
spiritual food with the competencie of those gifts, although they cannot
(...), stop the adversary and gainesaier in all things. This one quality will
by a maine bar exclude most, or all of our busiest and waiwardest ministers.

The 6. Demonstration.

He that may be admitted into the ministry must have a treasury furnished
with old and new things, and able to bring it forth. Matthew. 13.52. v.
Demonstration.
Only he that is able to teach is such, ergo,

To the Mayor.

Our Savior speaks of a man that is taught, not of the teacher, Remonstrance.
(...): and therefore the Demonstrator is beside his purpose. Here is nothing
less meant then admission to the ministry.

The Minor is as false as the Mayor was: The Demonstrat. does not only, but
also allegorize as before.
for only he that is able to teach, etc. You see, he that is of ability to
learn, and to be taught, is so ready furnished with old and new, etc.

The 7. Demonstration.

He that can epsy the enemy, and forewarne, must be admitted, Ezech. 33.7.
Demonstration.
None can epsy but an able man to teach, ergo,

The Mayor is false being universally taken.

This syllogism would feign be in the third figure, Remonstrance.
but it is in never a mood nor figure, but quem torra, pontus.

To the place of Ezechiel, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel,
thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and admonish them.

Every man endewed with mean gifts in or out of the ministry, may admonish,
though he that is a teacher may better admonish. And one of the meanest can
many times descry and forewarne of the enemies approaching.

The 8. Demonstration.

He that leads his people and himself to Hell, may not be admitted:
Demonstra.
he that is not able to teach, is so, ergo, 15. Matthew. 14.

The Mayor is a great ways about. The Minor is false in it self, Remonstrance.
and in allegation of the text: If the blind lead the blind, Matt. 15.14. v.
both fall into the ditch. It is too too peremptory to make every downfall
into hell.

A man may fall, and rise again: Septies in die cadit iustus. What blind
guide taught you to expound, (...), into hell, in foueam, for the local place
of hell?

He that is not able to teach in any tolerable measure, is a blind guide, but
God forbid he should lead Gods people down to hell of necessity. But if you
mean here, as before, teaching to be preaching, and that every one that is no
preacher leads into hell: The father, master, householder, Catechist, and also
many ministers can teach and instruct their charges in godliness, who
nevertheless are not able to make an exact sermon, and do not therefore lead
the people in the way to hell.

The 9. Demonstration or Allegation. Demonstra. Aug. l. de pastor. Remonstr.


Who preaches not, but holds his peace, murdreth.

It is true in a metaphorical sense, in those who are called, and have the
talent to discharge it as is required.

The 10. Allegation. Demonstra. Greg. 1. li. 33. ep. Remonstra.


He that preaches not, is not sent, and so begets no faith.

Take the word preaching in a larger comprehension, and it is equivalent to
the word teaching: and so it may carry show of a truth: but in that 33.
epistle written to Venantius Chancellor of Italy, there is no such thing.

The 11. Allegation or Demonstration.

In that S. Paul requires a bishop should be wise, Demonstra. Hier. ad Oecum.
Remonstrance.
be barreth those, who under name of simplicity, excuse the folly of
Ministers.

Those who mean and deal plainly, do quote the place of the author, whereby
it may be easiest found: but how shall we by this direction ad Oecumenium find
that epistle which was never written for any copy of S. Hierom, that I can get
or hear of?

The 12. Allegation or Demonstration.

We condemn all unmeet ministers not endewed with gifts to feed a flock.
Demonstra. Confess. Heluet. Remonstrance.


Neither do we absolve them, if they have no gifts at all to do good to
their flock.

You might take the other words with you: the harmless simplicity of some
in the old Church did more good then the delicate finenesse but proud learning
of others: fastuosiorem.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

There must be reading in the Church, Demonstration.
ergo, a reading ministry.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

There must be breaking of bread, and pouring of water, ergo, one whose office
must be to break bread, and power water.

There are six things that God hates: Remonstrance with reply.
take heed you be not within the compass of all, as of some of them. This
objection was made page 252. in the defense of the answer to the admonition.
But I am sure your answer is there: Os quodmentitur, occidit animam. True it
is, you cannot utterly condemn reading: since faith comes by reading the
Scriptures within book, as by rehearsing them without book. As the Law and
Moses were read, so the Gospel in the ears of the hearers.

If you had objected for us thus:

There may be reading ministers, ergo, a reading ministry. For a reading
Minister is one that does a particular duty in the Church, and a reading
ministry is a part of his duty in the Church.

The consequence does hold. Quod valet in vno coniugatorum, valet in reliquis,
si sint and re, and nomine coniugata. As for the inferencie, there must be an
officer for every particular action. It is your own absurdity, not our
collection. As out of the 12. Romans He that distributeth in simplicity, ergo,
there must be an officer of your Deaconship in the Church. May you not as well
gather thus: he that shows mercy in cheerefulnes, ergo, a several officer
of showing mercy in the Church?

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Better to have Readers, then none at all. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

It is not better, for then they would seek preachers. But why are the
preachers turned out?

Where shall they find for every cure, by any narrow seeking? Remonstrance
with reply.


Those that be turned out, are but few, and fewer then deserve it: preaching
as they preach, may not patronize schism, slander, scandale, and
disobedience: not every one that takes upon him to preach, is a preacher, nay
according to the first Demonstration, and others of this chapter, and his
interpretation of it, none be.

The having a Reader, debarreth not from seeking to a Preacher, and therefore
it is better to have readers then none at all. As for parrat Preachers, it is
better to have a discreet Reader, then one of them, who are bold and hambolde
to speak, but speak not to the purpose, or else speak schismatically, and
therefore are turned out.

The 3. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It is impossible to have preachers every where, Demonstration.
ergo, readers.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

This is a disgrace to say it is impossible, and yet to say all is well, and to
violate the Lords decree.

He that is challenged so to say by you, Remonstrance with reply.
says it is not possible (as the state is now) to have such supply in every
free chapel, or place of service of a preacher: there is some difficulty in
compassing of this. But to deprave other men's word, is your special grace: as
for breaking Gods decree, you must better prove it then you have, or else never
say that the part of a ministers duty to read in the Church, to be thus
unlawful. In the fear of God be it spoken, we will thank God for our
freedom both to read Gods word, and preach, and pray for her Majesty's
gracious continuance: for so much quantity of dominion, no such plenteous
preaching is in all the world, as in her Majesty's dominion. God increase the
number of learned and well advised preachers.

The 4. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It were uncharitableness to turn bare Readers out: Demonstration.
for they, their wives and children should beg.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

Better 3. or 4. beg, then damnation of 1000.

Yea it were injustice and impiety to turn them away, Remonstrance with
reply.
because they cannot preach: for they can exhort, and teach, and minister the
sacraments, no such fear of damnation of a 1000. But it is your prejudice and
condemnation to avouch, that by their ministry God cannot save souls. I
doubt not but much better by sundry men's labors, being but simple in
learning, then by the most of that crew their vain verbal babbling, which with
grief of heart I know the most of your humor to use in sermons: for set
aside a few resonant ill applied words culled together, to astonish the
simple a little for that time, what order, what learning, or any thing else,
tending to the building of the inward man in spiritual knowledge, is to be
found in most of their speakings or exercises? So that I see no difference
betwixt such unlearned talkers, and the ignorant ministers (whom with great
disdain they term never better then Dumb dogs) but that these, because
they cannot preach will not, and therefore are less impudent: the other in
truth cannot bark, but yet will be bold to be balling, though it be but
against the Moon, or with running riot. How much different is S. Hieroms
judgment from yours? he says thus: It is a fault in some Bishops, Hierom.
(...) 19. (...).
that choose not into the Clergy those who be the best, but who talk the best,
non meliores sed argutiores, and think simple and harmless men to be
vnliable for the ministry.

The 2. Assertion of the Demonstrator.

That the Church ought not to be governed by Commissaries, Officials,
Demonstration.
and Chancellors.

The 1. Demonstration.

They who are no elders, ought not to have any thing to do in the government
of the Church. 1. Tim. 5.17.

Those Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials are no elders, whether you take
elder for a minister, or assistant, ergo,

To the Mayor.

The Mayor proposition is intricated both with schism, untruth, Remonstrance.
and treason. For the Queens Majesty is no elder, no minister, no priest, and
yet has and ought to have the government of the Church: whereas such elders as
you mean, have nothing at all to do in the Church, either by precept, or
president.

The conversion is false which the Demonstrator would have gathered: Elders
govern well, ergo, they that are no Elders do not govern: others may govern
in the actions of the Church, who are no pastoral elders, which is the answer
to your Minor.

For Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, they are assistant to the pastoral
elders, or do govern in foro litigioso, and yet many of them also pastoral
elders and ministers. It is a loud lie to say, none of them are ministers.
Well, the grief is, that every minister may not govern and rule without
check of all superiors, not only bishops, or their substitutes, but any
other. This is a wise Demonstration, which is a paralogisme, consisting all of
negatiues, and is like to this, viz. No bishoply authority is lawful: none
eldership is a bishoply authority, ergo, none eldership is lawful.

The 2. Demonstration.

They who must govern the Church, Demonstra.
must have a warrant for so doing from Christ: But the Chancellors, etc. have
no warrant from Christ, ergo,

The Mayor is false, if you mean immediately from Christ, Remonstr.
or especially and positiuely warranted, otherwise then as all superior power
is of God. It is sufficient to be warranted from the Christian Magistrate, and
those who occupy the place of the Apostles: else a Mayor, Sheriff, and
Constable, Justice of peace, and master of an Hospital should have an
unlawful authority. For a man may no more deal without lawful warrant in
the Commonwealth, then he may do in the external government of the Church.

To the Minor.

Their warrant is out of the word of God. He that governs in diligence, Romans
12. The bishops and others make them partakers of their authority, by way of
delegation and substitution, which in Church and Commonwealth is both lawful:
for not only by the equity, but by examples of Scriptures, and practice of
the Primitive Church substitution may be approved lawful.

The 3. Demonstration.

They whose names, Demonstration.
offices, and practice, be derived from Antichrist, may not govern the Church
of Christ: for who will suffer his wife to be governed by the master of a
Brothell house? but so are the names, etc. of our Chancellors, because they are
grounded in the filthy dunghill of the Canon law: ergo,

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is of infinite distance from the Minor. Remonstrance.
I answer to the Minor.

The name of Chancellor is not found in all the Canon Law, in that sense it
is used: but in the Civil Law of the Romans is used for any chief assistant
sitting intra eosdem tribunalis cancellos cum Magistratu, as I have learned of
those who be skillful, and is not repugnant unto, but may be said to be derived
out of Gods law, if the deriuation be drawn a cancellis, to keep unbridled
or inordinate men intra cancellos, within their bounds. So the name of
Commissaries, by reason of commission or matter of charge wherewith they are
credited, or Officials, for the offices they bear, are most Christian names:
else why do themselves so often call their Tetrarches Church officers, a name
not found in Scripture, neither discipline in their sense, nor classis, nor
prouincial, or national Synod.

As for the pillar the Minor leans upon, to prove their offices, and practice
to be derived from Antichrist, it is weak and unstable, viz. All founded upon
the Canon law, is grounded upon a dunghill. Some dunghill scholar made this
Minor, to diminish and detract from the authorized Canons of the Church, under
the odious name of the Popes law. For the Canon law which is retained with
us, is nothing but the old Canons of the Primitive Church, and such other
approved Judicials in matters Ecclesiastical, as be neither contrary to the
prerogative royal, nor to the laws and statutes of the Realm, and which had
been used before the making of that act of Parliament, 25. H. 8.
and are therefore since by diverse acts in K. Ed. 6. days, and in her
Majesty's, honored with the name of the kings Ecclesiastical laws, and the
Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, and they are in like sort used in the
Ecclesiastical Consistories of most of the reformed Churches in Germany, as
they are here, who do as little esteem the Pope, as we can do. Neither are
some of those (which were set down by the Popes authority) therefore used of
us, as binding this Realm in respect of the ordeiner, any more then Italy,
France, or Spain, be said to acknowledge the authority of the Roman
emperors over them, for using the civil laws. For we do therefore only
practice them, because they concur with the former statute enacting them, and
being set down by good advise, are found equal and profitable. Those who
disdain them in respect of the author, do show therein as witless
curiosity, as if they would urge us to abandon all printing, because it was
devised first at Harlem by a Papist, or cease to defend our selves with
gunnes, for that a Monk invented them. But if the matter retained displease
them, as not convenient nor according to rules of equity: let all the wisest
of them take all the several cases propounded throughout that law, and give
diverse or clean contrary decisions to that which is there given, and they
shall thereby easily find themselves either ridiculous, absurd, or unjust
lawgiuers. The most of them are such as have happened and may happen in Church
government. If they can find the decision of them in the word of God
directly, we will then abandon all other Canons, and only follow theirs. The
Church may not be without laws in external government, and to refer all to
the governors will, were a step to all tyranny, and insolency.

As for the slander, to call Christian Magistrates, or once to compare them to
masters of the stews, they being the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, is
a more filthy and beastly phrase of speech, Aconitum spunia Cerberi.
then Cerberus the hound of hell could spewe. But we are too well acquainted
with these foul blasphemous mouths, and it is but suitable to the opinion they
carry of the supreme Christian Magistrates, and of their laws Ecclesiastical
or Common.

The 4. Demonstration.

They that being inferiors do tyrannize over their superiors, Demonstration.
ought not to rule the Church: but such as they do tyrannize over the
ministers, to whom they are inferiors by the Canon law, ergo, they ought not
to rule the Church.

This is not the issue in question: Remonstrance.
for we say not that they are to rule the Church, but are ministers of justice,
according to the ordinances of the Church.

The Mayor is not (...), yet true, so long as they do tyrannize over their
superiors, they ought not to rule the Church.

To the Minor therefore: They who execute their office, with correspondence to
their duty, and according to laws, do not tyrannize, neither are they in
place of justice inferior, but are inferior (...), in respect of the dignity
of the office of the ministry. But this office of ministry does not always
worthy the person above every calling, though not so sacred: else should every
ministers person be above any Lord, or the Prince himself that chiefly
deals but in matters of this life. Besides surrogatus sapit naturam
surrogantis. If then the bishop who does appoint them, be above an ordinary
minister, then are they also. In place of justice, a mean Gentleman is
superior to a Duke conuented, and so is a poor Constable in matters of his
office, by reason of them who give the authority, and whose persons they
bear. But thus we turn it home again upon themselves.

They that being inferiors do govern the superiors according to their own
will, Retortion.
without any direction of laws, they do proudly tyrannize, and consequently
neither are to rule the Church, nor in the Church.

But your Lay elders, being of inferior calling (as your selves confess) to
your Pastors and Doctors, and much more to the whole Congregation, do govern
them even to the displacing or censuring them according to their own wills and
discretions without all direction of laws, which is tyranny, and their
platformes do abrogate all laws, but of their own making (which are not yet
framed): and in deed experience teaches, that their Consistories will not
willingly tie themselves to any set laws in their government, which makes
their decrees concerning diverse persons (where the matter nevertheless is the
self same) to be so diverse and contrary: ergo,

Your lay elders do proudly tyrannize, and so neither are to rule the Church,
nor in the Church.

The 5. Demonstration.

They who live by the faults of men, are not fit to rule the Church:
Demonstration.
But all Chancellors, Officials, Commissaries do so: Ergo,

To the Mayor.

It is very false if it be meant per accidens, to live by faults, Remonstrance.
as here it must needs be: for in this sort do all judges, judicial officers
and ministers having fees, live by the wrong that the one party does to the
other. So the clerks of the crown, of jail delivery, and of peace, do live
by the pleas against traitors, murderers, felons, and other malefactors, etc.
and yet lawful in the common weal: why not the like in the Church? Nemo
militat proprijs stipendijs.

To the Minor.

O rash and temerarious judgment: What art thou that iudgest an other man's
servant? you may remember Horace saying, Mendax infamia terret,
Quem nisimendosum and mendacem?


They do not live but by honest fees, though they grew by occasion of faults,
as the least part of them in deed does, if any do, and therefore the Minor
very false and slanderous. The matters whereupon their fees do rise, are
either beneficial, tending to the title and maintenance of the ministry: or
testamentarie tending to the performance of the deads will: or matrimonial: or
for preservation of Churches and Church goods: or lastly, of punishing faults,
which the temporal law does not punish, and those are either diffamation of a
man's neighbors, at the suit of some party, or of other faults, as blasphemy,
sorcerie, adultery, drunkenness, etc. the public corporal punishment
whereof, if it be commuted into pecuniarie, to their own private gain, it is
not by law warranted, but is the personal fault of the man, and deeply
punishable, and therefore this Minor is both without appearance of truth, and
very opprobrious.

The seventh Chapter.
Assertion of the Demonstrator.

OFficers of the Church are to be ordained by imposition of hands of the
Eldership. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

As in the Apostles time they were ordained, so they must be still ordained:
But in the Apostles time they were ordained by laying on of hands, etc. Ergo,
they must continually be so ordained.

To the Mayor.

This word As, Remonstrance.
in the Mayor proposition, imports either the whole action of ordination it
self, with the manner or form, or the ceremony alone used in ordaining: there
is ambiguitie and doubting in this: Tell us first which you understand, and
then we can tell you after, whether every form or accidental ceremony ought
of necessity to be used or refused now, which in the ordaining of
ecclesiastical persons was used then.

To the Minor.

But in the Apostles times, etc. by the Eldership, Act. 6. v. 6. and cap. 13.3.
say you. Nay imposition of hands cannot be attributed to any eldership there,
unless you will force a strange interpretation of the text, viz. Apostleship
to be Eldership, Apostles to be unpreaching elders, and your elderships now to
be as the Apostles were then in the Church: (for the first mention of Elders,
viz. ministers is Act. 11.) And so all things may be one: Omnia sunt vnum:
Turn Laity into Clergy, and Clergy into Laity, ouerturne all. In like wise
no more probability is to be gathered out of the other place, Acts 13.3.
There were in Antioch (...), Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
In the Church as it then stood, certain Prophets and teachers, as Barnabas
and Simeon called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, Manahem and Saul. Now as they
ministered and fasted to the Lord, (...), that is, (...), whiles they preached
(says Chrysostom expounding that place) or whiles they ministered unto or for
the Lord. But how follows it out of this place, that because there were
Prophets and Doctors in the Church there: Ergo, there were unpreaching Elders
also, though not specificallie named to be there? Or, these fasted and prayed,
and laid their hands upon Barnabas and Saul: Ergo, other unpreaching elders
also laid their hands: you may as justly conclude, They were not there: ergo,
they were there: or the elders laid not their hands: ergo, they laid on their
hands. But hereof we thus reason against you.

As in the Apostles times they were ordained, so they must be still ordained.
In the Apostles ordinations is no one word of ordination by such lay elders
that might not minister the word and Sacraments, nor in any other pregnant
place of Scripture, nor ever practiced for fifteen hundred years and an half
in any Christian Church: Ergo, In ordinations your Elders must have nothing to
do: for it were intolerable presumption where the holy Ghost mentions not
nor insinuates any such thing, for man to say they were nevertheless there.
What like Elders to yours were at Mathias election, Acts 1. at the choice of
the seven, Acts 6. where none are named but the Apostles and the rest of the
believers? At the separating of Paul and Barnabas in this place, Acts 13. but
four other Prophets and Doctors? at the ordination of so many ministers for
sundry Churches, Acts 14. other then Paul and Barnabas the ordainers, the
ministers then newly ordained, and the people for whom they were ordained? at
Timothies ordination more then Paul, Per impositionem manuum mearum, as shall
appear? In Crete to assist Titus, ad Tit. 1. except you will say they had
elderships before they had any Elders or yet ministers, or before the Churches
were planted. And again, If ordination must needs (as is here concluded)
continually be made by the eldership, the^ can no church or congregation newly
to be established, elect and ordain their own ministers and Eldership. But in
this case you do attribute this whole action to the people of such
congregation: ergo, by your own rules all ordinations must not be continually
by the Eldership: for if it should, your Church government shall never have any
beginning.

The 2. Demonstration.

Church officers must be ordained by them who can assure them of their
calling: Demonstration.
Only the eldership can assure, 1. Tim. 4.14. Ergo,

I much muse how the author can term his book a Demonstration. Remonstrance.
So many chinkes in one planke argues unseasoned timber. The conclusion has
only the Eldership, which only lies not in the Mayor proposition. The
Demonstration is neither formal nor material.

To the Minor.

Viz. Only the Eldership can assure, 1. Tim. 4.14. that is no way the purpose
of the place: as shall easily appear, Despise not the grace, or neglect not
the grace which is in thee, and was given thee by prophecy, (...), With laying
on hands of the Eldership. Whether you do understand and expound, Neglect not
the grace which is in thee, and was given thee, by prophecy, that is by divine
oracle and imposition of hands, with prayer of other pastoral elders, as by
special occasion of a special grace confirmed unto thee (which Beza himself
does insinuate) and not his creation for the Ministry: Or whether we
understand, Despise not etc. the grace or gift which is in thee now, and was
sometime by prophecy conferred upon thee by a farther confirmation of the
laying on, or imposition of hands, of the function and office of Pastorship and
presbytery which is laid upon thee, as Calvin does allow, rather then to be
by any College and officers of the presbytery. It can never be understood
either in part or in whole, of a Laicall presbytery to assure men of their
ordinary calling in the ministry: for they that cannot confer ye like
grace, how can they by the imitation hereof assure the calling? In those days
by laying on of hands, were often the visible graces of the holy ghost bestowed.

The fallacy is (...), Fallacy.
secundum figuram dictionis: For presbytery there is not the company or
college of ordainers, but the ordination or order given by one alone
principal in his authority: The figure is Metonymia, the sign, the
imposition of hands for the thing signified.

At the least this is a foul absurdity, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
that never any was either in the practice of the Apostles Church, or
succeedingly, or in our church assured of his ministry, but by such a fansied
presbytery.

We therefore thus retort against you.

They who cannot assure or confer like grace as was assured to Timothy, they
have nothing to do to ordain or lay on hands, (by the grounds and
interpretation of your own place) your Eldershippe neither do nor can assure or
confer like grace. Ergo, they have not to do with ordinatio^ or imposition of
hands. And again, If only the eldership can assure men of their calling, as you
assume in your minor, then cannot the classis or synodes ordeine ministers,
being several assemblies, and offices in the Church, neither can the
Demonstrator nor any of the faction, have any assurance of their callings, Or
else the Bishops calling is the calling by an Eldership: Then also the blessing
that you imagine God gives to your labors, is none assurance of your calling.
But you will not condemn your selves for intruders, for running before you
were sent, nor deny the fruits of your pains to give assurance unto you of
your callings, nor allow the Bishop that ordained you to be an eldership: Ergo,
the ordination by an Eldership is not the only way to assure a man of his
calling, which is the contradictorie of your minor. Besides that it is unsound
divinity to say that the outward calling (in what sort soever) is an assurance
of the inward as here is meant.

The 3. Demonstration or Allegation.

Many sentences before alleged out of Councels, laws, histories,
Demonstration.
writers old and new, that speak for election by many, speak for ordination
by many and not by one.

Albeit we did grant for 200, years after Christ, Remonstrance.
the people in diverse places had voices of acclamation, not of suffrages in
election of their Bishops, yet had they not like in election of their pastors
or priests. As for ordeining, they had no part at al either for Bishops or
priests at any time. The election at sometimes permitted before princes were
Christian, and even by Christian princes afterward, could not make them
ordeiners: neither shall you find any act of ordination given to any of the
people. All Councels give ordination of a Bishop to the Metropolitan or to the
Bishops: and therefore to give unto the Church Aldermen, this authority egally
distributed were geason and strange news. Your reason roundly trussed up is
this: Election was by many peoples voices. Ergo, Ordination by many Elders
hands: which is no sequel. And why not by one? since the designement is so by
the holy Ghost, Lay thine hands rashly on none: Timothy was but one, Vnus
instar omnium, One in steed of all as representing all, as having the
preeminence of ordeyning above all.

The 4. Demonstration or Allegation.

Euagrius came to a Bishopric unlawfully, Demonstration. Theodor. lib. 5.
cap. 23.
because one Paulinus ordained him contrary to the Canons, which provide he
must be ordained by all or by three at the least.

Theod. says, Remonstrance.
Plures canones simul violauit, Made him his successor being about to die,
without the comprouinciall Bishops. And so say we, if any will aspire without
the comprouinciall Bishops: but by your leave we do not intend hereby to
account every parish priest, or inferior pastor to be privileged as a Bishop,
which meaning I wot right well you have.

The 5. Demonstration or Allegation.

When a Bishop is to be ordained, Demonstra. Conc. Carthag. 4. ca. 23.
one shall pronounce the blessing, and the rest of the Bishops with elders
present shall lay on their hands.

This is ca. 2. distinct. 23. Remonstrance.
But it is false play to foist in your eldership into the Canon: for it is
reliqui omnes episcopi, which is the use in our consecration of Bishops, where
all the Bishops present, and in our ordination of ministers, where all the
ministers present lay on hands with the Bishop.

The 6. Demonstration or Allegation.

When a Bishop is ordained, Demonstra. Cypri. li. 1. epi 4
the Bishops adjoining did ordeine him.

We grant Cyprian: Remonstrance.
but ordination of a minister and consecration of a bishop, neither with
Cyprian nor the council are alone thing. See Conc. Carth. 4. ca. 3. qualiter
presbyteri ordinentur.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, Demonstration.
and no mention made of Eldership.

The Answer of the Demonstrator.

They are said to ordeine, because they were chief in ordeyning, as Joshua was
said to circumcise which was the Levites office. Ios. 3. ver. 5. cap. and the
Queen said to make a law, and not she alone.

The Argument holds good: Remonstrance, with reply.
P. and B. did ordeine Elders, Ergo, Elders did not ordeine one another. As for
the pieuish interpretation: They did ordeine, that is, chiefly ordeine, as
Joshua, it is expressly in the Text, That the Lord bid Joshua make sharp knives
and circumcise: Ergo, by divine Oeconomie he might do it: or in the 8. ver. is
a clearer construction, when they had made an end of circumcising, the Levites
did circumcise: and Joshua commanded, but nothing is in the Text that after Paul
and Barnabas had ordained, the others made an end of the action, and therefore
were no parties in the beginning, middle or end of the same: for they commended
them to the grace of God: so your similitude or exemplifying in neither of
these does hold. And what reason is this? Joshua is said to do that which he
commands others to do. Ergo, Paul and Barnabas who commanded none others: but
imposed hands themselves (as we both confess) had others to join with them:
and so by this wise construction, these Churches had Elderships (of no man's
calling) before they had Ministers: and if they had not had such, neither Paul
nor Barnabas had been able to have ordained them any ministers, for want of
their assistance.

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Albeit then so, not so now: No more then community in the Apostles time.
Demonstrator.


Answer.

There was no more community then, then now: for they are Anabaptists who so
think: Ergo, the instance makes for us.

The instance makes little for you, Remonstrance, with reply
if you defend community of all: quoad (...), both for propriety and use, or
that a man may now say as then, (...), they had all common, sold their
possessions and goods, divided to all as every man had need. 2. Act. 45.
verse. Neither did any man say (...), ought of his goods to be his proper
own: but all was common. Act. 4.32. This is right Anabaptisticall if you so
say, that either propriety or egaltie of the use, is either common to all, or
chalengeable by any now a days.

The third Objection of the Demonstrator.

Examples are no general rules to be followed.

The Answer of the Demonstrator. Demonstrator.


Examples not contrary to rules or reason of Scriptures are to be followed as
if they were commandments.

Yea but a general doctrine of a particular example or singular may not be
concluded: Remonstrance, with reply.
we may not follow the examples of the Apostles and the time, which were
peculiar unto them and to the time, but such as the Apostles would have us to
embrace and follow. But you have for ordinations by Lay men, neither rule,
reason, example, neither in Scripture nor at any time since, til at Geneua
they begun it, not as an ordinance of Christ (as is now urged) but as a
kind of government in Church causes, fitting that popular state. Gualter
complains that whereas at first they of Geneua writ to them of Zuricke for
advise, but whether they might plant such a government, they did after find
fault with the Tigurines for not establishing the like. What is this but to
make Geneua the protestants Rome, whereunto all others must conform?

The eight Chapter.
The Assertion of the Demonstrator.

THE ordayning of Church officers must be by prayer of the Eldership,
Demonstrator.
and the Congregation. Eccles. Discipl. fol. 50.

The Demonstrator quoteth one of his fellows for this: Remonstrance.
as if it were Saint Paul: God wot it is a silly fellow, The Ecclesiastical
discipliner. But he need not slanderour ordination as done in a corner, (...),
Act. 26.27.
None of this (as Paul said so can we say) has bin done in a corner, they may
come to the celebration of it, if they lift to come. I will trusse vpshorter
these three waste Demonstrations.

1 We must behave our selves as the Apostles and Elders did. Demonstrator.
2 By how much greater the action is, by so much more humble our selves in
prayer. 3 The Eldership and the people have part of the comfort or discomfort.
Ergo, All ought to join together in prayer.

We confess all this, Remonstrance.
but bid them first prove their new formed eldership must always be a party,
not only of the solemnity, but of the necessity of the action.

I observe by the way this: The Apostles and they who did ordeyne, joined
therewith, Act. 13. Act. 14.
fasting and prayer, Act. 13. Act. 14. which our Demonstrator leaves out, who
otherwise are so curiously precise, in bynding us to the example of primitive
imitation. Belike fasting is popish, except they that fast be holden together
with four or five Sermons arowe, that they cannot break their fast though
they would, except they do as some Jurors do, bring some what in their pockets
with them.

The ninth Chapter.
FOr the profit of imposition of hands the Demonstrator uses three
Demonstrations. Demonstration.


1 That which stirs every party to feruencie must be used. 2 That which
helps forward the party ordained in his care. 3 That which works an
acknowledgement of Gods ordinance in the peoples hearts, must be used.
So is the ceremony of laying on hands: Ergo, it must be used.

The Demonstrator is busied about matter of ceremony: Remonstrance.
let him alone in Gods name. But this ceremony that thus is used would have
been better vnderlaide with scripture: especially where such notable effects
(not only as signs) be attributed unto it, and by those that pretend the
least matter, may not be admitted in Church matters, without direct proof out
of Scripture.

This makes nothing for the new conceived Eldership of Lay Presbyters, who are
to be erected forsooth to profane our holy and sacred ordination, and make it
co^municable with the common people. Here I observe, that to this ceremony not
only a signification of a doctrine (as they therefore cauil against the sign
of the cross in Baptism) but even spiritual effects are attributed, vz. to
stir up Feruencie in prayer, a feeling sensible of the charge spiritual laid
upon the ordained, to work a care of walking in a good conscience, and to give
hope of Gods continual assistance in that calling. If we had said half so
much, it had bin making a new Sacrament, popish, and blasphemy at least: But
this Chapter makes not against us, who retain it, but those reformed churches
that have left the imposition of hands in ordinations.

The tenth Chapter.
The Assertion of the Demonstrator.

ONe Bishop at the least must be president over every congregation,
Demonstration.
which Bishops are equal in their several charges, and in the general
government of the Church.

Out of this Assertion of one B. President, are deduced two branches.
Remonstrance.


1 One may have but one benefice. 2 One may not be above another: but all this
serves for their parish Bishops.
The 1. Demonstration.

One may not have more then he is able to discharge: No man in any measure is
able to discharge more then one, Demonstration.
because he cannot preach in season and out of season: Ergo, none may have
more charges then one.

The whole conclusion is of negatiues, if the Demonstrator will speak
congruitie: Remonstrance.
for one may not, is as much as none may have: Besides, the Medium is
praedicatum in maiore subiectum in minore: But we must forgive you this
misdeede, though it be not primum tempus: with you it is a common fault.

To the Minor.

One and the same mortar will dawbe your Mayor and Minor. No man may have more
then he is able to discharge in some measure, per se aut vicaria fide, By
himself or his sufficient deputy: as for deputation, it is lawful both in
civil and Ecclesiastical functions: or make instance to the contrary. As for
the reason he cannot preach (...), nothing is so sure as that he may preach
both by word, example, and hospitality, though he do not always corporally
reside. The rectorie of a small village or towneship is not as the government
of a whole city and territory, which did import Titus and Timothy to do
their duty in season and out of season in straiter measure. Besides the Minor
is false, for in good measure may one man discharge two, not far distant, and
preach as shall be sufficient at both. If you so understand in season and out of
season, as if a man should preach continually, then shall not a man have any
time to pray, which he is also willed to do continually: then shall there be
no cause of being away allowed, no not for an hour, which your selves find to
be absurd, and therefore take as much liberty many of you, as any that has two
cures does at either.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil, Demonstration.
cannot be lawful.

To have more charges then one does so: Ergo, unlawful.

To the Minor.

It is not the diversity of charges, for it is always Regimen animarum,
Remonstrance.
one regiment or cure of souls, nor the having them, but the having no care of
them, which is a spoil left to the enemy. A man may be absent, and yet have
continual care, and leave both direction and instruction for them. I pray you
who drives the devil away from your cures, when you are at Synodes, at your
Classies, at Terms, at Parliamentes, in visiting your friends in half a
dozen shires?

The 3. Demonstration.

That which is from Antichrist, is unlawful. Demonstration.


To have more then one is from Antichrist: Ergo, unlawful.

I may reason also thus, even with as great probability:

To follow the example of S. Paul, is to follow Christ. Remonstrance.
To have more charges to look unto then one, is to follow S. Paul: cura omnium
ecclesiarum incumbit mihi, I bear a care of all Churches: Ergo, to have more
charges then one is to follow Christ. Ergo, it is not simpliciter evil to have
more charges then one. For none can follow two contrary masters, Christ and
Antichrist: neither is it absolutely to have more charges then one, derived
from Antichrist: and therefore your Minor is false.

The 4. Demonstration.

That which declares a minister to be more desirous of the fleece then to
profit the flock, that is unlawful. But more charges then one is so: Ergo.
Demonstration.


This fallacy is non causa pro causa. Remonstrance.
To have more charges then one, proceeds not from (...) couetise of more, but
from (...) sufficiency or competencie of living, and from privilege and
favor of the law. For they that preach the Gospel, must live of the Gospel:
as also the Geneua note upon these words. 1. Timoth. 5.17. Qui been praesunt
presbyteri duplici honor digni sunt, that is, they must have sufficient
maintenance. But that exposition is not the only meaning of the text: for
double honor is something more then sufficient maintenance: the proportion is
double (...). Now double is more then sufficient, and honor presupposes
maintenance: or else it will be very single honor.

The 5. Demonstration.

He may not have more charges, Demonstrator.
unless he be willing to be quartered, that every charge may have a piece.

The Demonstrator is at great cost and charges to bestow this argument:
Remonstrance.
but I take it, that if every quarter of the City had a quarter of him that
made this Demonstration, and many like to this, whatsoever came to the H. man's
part, he could not boast of the least fraction, vna quarta, one fourth part of
an honest man.

The 6. Demonstration or Allegation.

Hooper upon the 8. commandment, reckons them among thieves, and their
actions theeuerie, Demonstration.
by that commandment.

His words are 76. page super 8. com.

Such as live of spirituallty these, Remonstrance.
etc. who do neglect their duty in teaching and office, commit sacrilege: he
speaks against unable men, or those who have more then competency with
vndesert.

The 2. Assertion of the Demonstrator.

One minister may not have sovereign authority and Lordship over his fellow
ministers. Demonstration.


The Demonstrator cannot distinguish between sovereignty, dominion,
Remonstrance.
or entier Lordship, which is one thing, and superiority or authority over
others, which are different things both in Church and Commonwealth.

The 1. Demonstration.

They that have their commission indifferently given them without difference,
are equal, Demonstration.
and not one above another: But such is the commission of all Ministers. 28.
Matthew. 19.20. ergo, equal not one above another.

To the Mayor.

Although par in parem non habet imperium, Remonstrance.
touching the commission, yet in other respects in comparably they may be
superior one unto another, as experience daily teaches. If you were in a
commission of peace, etc. with my Lord Treasurer, would you be his equal
therefore, and as good as he?

To the Minor.

There are two commissions included in 28. Matthew. One, as they were Apostles,
chief builders, and planters of Churches, in which respect they had also
government and authority over them, and such they also gave to bishops of
places, as Timothy and Titus, whom they so ordained: Another, in that they
are also Pastors, and herein every minister is their successor, as bishops only
in the other respect. The one brings equality in the essence, and for the
exercise of the ministry, the other an inequality of authority and rule,
that are exercised in the Church, and must be for government and order. An
instance is the very example of the Apostles, whereof some were chief pillars,
chief Apostles, and James a standing superior amongst the Apostles at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. 2. Cor. 12. Bishops and ministers are for their ministry
equal, but for order and policy of the Church in government unequal: This is
both Caluins and Bezaes answer.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which Christ has directly forbidden, is for ever unlawful.
Demonstration.


But Christ has directly forbidden this dominion of one minister over an
other, Matthew. 20.25. Luc. 22.25. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

This is directly auerred: for that is directly forbidden, Remonstrance.
which by one of the 10. commandments, or by some new commandment, or
special forbode is forbidden, not that always which in the letter of ye word
seems forbidden: Else were it not lawful to swear at al, nor to call any man
your father on earth, nor to preach to the Gentiles. Christ forbids arrogant
dominion or domination, not all authority. Absolute tyrannical dominion is
forbidden among all christians. Aristot. in his politikes makes (...), the
dominion of Barbarians. To your places the answer is: Our Savior destroys
not there either his own primacie, or the superiority of the Apostles over
other callings ecclesiastical inferior, but rather establishes it,
attempering them nevertheless to humility. He that is great, or will be great
amongst you, (...), Let him be your servant: or as Luke 22. (...), he that is
greatest, let him be as punie, (...), the chiefest as he that serves: he does
not deuest himself of lawful superiority, but wills them after his own
example to be invested with humility: for he himself did not degrade himself
from his supremacy, when by washing of their feet he served them.

But because this is a matter that they do no less insist upon and applaud
unto themselves in, then the papists do in their Hoc est corpus meum, I will
crave leave that I may a little dilate hereupon, further then that brevity
requires which I first propounded to my self. In those two places of S. Matthew
and S. Luke, are to be considered both what Christ reproved, and also the
general doctrine which by that occasion he delivered. If both the stories be to
be understood of one action, then must we interpret, that the contention of
all the Apostles ( who of them should be the greatest mentioned by Luke) had
his original occasion of the request of Zebedees children, at which the other
Apostles took indignation, as Matthew testifies: both they and all the
Apostles dreamed of an earthly kingdom of Christ's: and therefore to sit at his
right hand, and at his left, and to be the greatest, was an honor and civil
pre-eminence and authority next unto Christ in such his kingdom that they
shot at. He reproved therefore this erroneous conceit, and for thinking that
civil jurisdiction should appertain to them as they were apostles, and drew
them to another consideration of his heavenly kingdom. If they desired that to
be given them to have the very condition and state of their persons so advanced
with earthly honor and authority civil (in regard of some special affection
which each of the^ severally supposed Christ did bear unto him) in this
respect was it their ambition ye was reproved. But if each of the^ thought such
an honor due to himself by reason of some excellent qualities above others
which he fansied to be in himself, then was their arrogancy and want of
humility withal rebuked. And lastly, (...), the brawle and contention that
all the apostles burst forth into about this matter, was by our Savior taxed
and blamed. Now the BB. in this church of England do not claim any civil
jurisdiction or authority to be incident to their callings, although (if as
citizens of the common weal and subjects) some such be imposed upon them by
the prince, as they may not lawfully refuse, so (we know) they may lawdablie
use it. But if either erroneously any of them should think civil jurisdiction
of or under earthly princes to belong unto them as successors of the apostles,
or if they seek after any authority whatsoever, ambitiously, arrogantly or
contentiously, such should justly incur our Sauiors censure and reproof in
this place. In that by the law and customs of the land, they have the title of
lords, this is not (...), simply in it self, in regard of their bishoprikes,
but by reason of the Baronries which are annexed of old unto those dignities,
and yet it is but a mere title of external honor, as (...) with the Grcians,
and Dominus with the Latins, without any authority or jurisdiction annexed.
For there is never a lord in the land, either of the ecclesiastical or civil
state, that has any jot of authority or jurisdiction in him as he is a
Baron. Nevertheless, the apostles and BB. their successors are not therefore
without all rule and superiority: for they are termed (...), overseers, (...),
gouernements or governors, (...), men set over others, (...), rulers, guides or
directers, (...), feeders and rulers, which they cannot be, except they have
some rule, government, and authority. But this rule and authority is but
ecclesiastical, whereas that which was affected by the apostles, was civil:
which ecclesiastical authority, whether it be wholly or in part condemned by
that general doctrine there delivered by our Savior, does now rest to be
considered. We are therefore in these words Vos aute^ non sic, it shall not be so
amongst you, to note these two things: viz. unto whom such prohibition
reaches, and what rule it is which is there forbidden. First, it was not
spoken to the apostles as they represented the whole Church, as may appear by
the example, ye Christ propounds to the^ of his own abasing of himself.
Neither was it forbidden so to every one of them severally, as if it might
have been permitted to them all together, or to the greater part of them: Quia
nihil est in composito quod non est in simplicibus, vel actu vel saltem
habitudine: If no one of the^ might exercise such rule nor any part of it, the^
cannot they altogether have it: neither yet was the prohibition personal to
them, for then it would follow that albeit no one of them might have authority
over the rest, yet their successors nevertheless (whether more properly taken
as bishops, or generally as all ministers of the word) might have had such
authority as is there forbidden, which were absurd to imagine: so that the
prohibition reaches to the^ all, and to every one of them, and to their
successors also. The whole difficulty therefore now rests in this, what kind
of authority or rule either ecclesiastical or civil it is, which under the
words (...), or (...), and (...), is forbidden. And because there are many
resembla^ces between ecclesiastical and civil authority, and the exact laying
forth of civil authority serves aptly for the understanding of ye other, I
will distribute civil or temperal authority into his parts and differences
according to Arist. and other Politicia^s. Authority civil or temporal (as we
speak) is either oeconomical, such as is exercised within ye limits of one
family: or Political over greater societies. Oeconomicall is either (...), of
the husband over the wife being the most moderate: Or (...) the authority of
the father over the children being more ample: or (...) which is of two sorts:
either of the householder over such of his household as be of condition free
men, and is less mild then the other two, or of the Lord over his bondmen and
villains, which is most severe and absolute of all the others. Political
authority is either supreme, that is, Sovereign, or else subordinate and
delegated. Sovereign or supreme is either Absolute called (...) which is of
two sorts: (...) that is, Seigneuriall, such as the good Emperors of Rome had
and used, who though they had all authority in the^ without restraint, so that
their word was a law, yet did they use it according to the rules of civil
honesty and justice: or (...) tyrannous, where not only their will is a law,
but they also use it contrary to all rules of civil honesty or justice, as
the Empire of the Turks, Russes and other Barbarians: or limited by certain
bounds of laws. That which is Sovereign and yet limited, is also of two
kinds: either wholly limited by laws, as is the authority of ordinary chief
magistrates in all free commonweals, as the dukes of Venice, etc. or
restrained but in part, as for the most part in all monarchies and kingdoms.
For albeit kings and such sovereign Monarchs are so tied to laws, as that
they cannot dispose of their subjects lives, or liuelihood and goods contrary
to them, yet are they at liberty to allow or disallow laws to be made, to
enhance or decrie the price or standerd of their coins, to pardon offenders
condemned by law, and to make war or peace, truce or league. Those which have
subordinate or delegated authority by the supreme magistrate, they may not
claim nor exercise more then is allowed unto the^ either by commission or by
law. Of all these authorities there is none (as I take it) simply unlawful,
but ye tyrannical government which makes self-wil a law. And therefore this
both here and also by other places is simply forbidden to all Christians both
in civil and ecclesiastical government. Now to apply these more nearly by ye
authority ye bishops have in this realm, a matter so impugned by these men,
It cannot be resembled unto oeconomicall (albeit in some sense a bishop is
called the father of those in his charge, and the husband of that church
whereof he is bishop) and that for two causes: First, in that his authority is
not contained in the straites of one family, but reaches over many several
families, and congregations of people: Another, for that the bishops authority
is tied by laws, not only what not to do, but he is appointed also what to
do: whereas oeconomicall authority has no public laws positive,
commanding a man how to govern his family, but only negative, what they
may not do in that government, as not to wound nor kill wife, child, nor
servant, etc. As for supreme authority, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical,
absolute, or limited, our bishops neither have, nor claim. It is that which
they condemn in the Pope by this place, as well for that as successor of the
Apostles, he claims both swords, and all earthly kingdoms to be his to
dispose, sinon actu, saltem habitu, (as Bellarmin distinguishes:) as for that
in matters Ecclesiastical, he claims and usurps, not only Seigneuriall,
but even tyrannical authority. For he says he may judge all, and be judged
by none, may carry millions of souls to hell, and none may say to him, Domine
curita facis? Sir why do you so? may command Angels to carry and recarry
souls at his pleasure, may pardon sins past and to come, for so long or
short a time as him lists, and in matters of Ecclesiastical livings, nay in
all causes, may do what he list: and therefore is justly condemned by this
place, as (...) and (...) one exercising a Lordly, absolute, and tyrannous
authority. There rests then unto bishops of this Realm, none other but
subordinate or delegated authority, which they have partly from God, partly
from the sovereign christian Magistrate. From God they have, either first to
plant, or else to govern, and direct Churches already planted: to ordeine
ministers and deacons, and likewise the use of the keys, either by loosing the
penitent according to Gods word, or binding the impenitent, which last is done
by admonition, reprehension, suspension, excommunication, and by anathematisme.
The three first of which censures, are with us even in practice common to all
ministers of the word, so far as suspension is taken for debarring from the
sacrament of the supper. The last two, though by all practice of antiquity in
purer times they were principally and especially attributed to bishops: yet not
so, but that other ministers of the word (unto which the keys are annexed,)
may not unlawfully herein concur with them, if the laws of the Church (for
weighty causes) do not otherwise dispose, which they have done here in
England (as I take it) by reason of the sundry civil effects which
excommunication and anathematisme by law do work, and are such as without
great inconvenience and confusion cannot be permitted to every minister in his
cure, that have but slender skill, no direction of law in this behalf, none
autentique seals to certify of record, nor temporalities to be seized for not
performance of the Queens writtes, that lie in such cases: as de cautione
admittenda, de excommunicato deliberando, etc. And these former be the points
wherein bishops authority is from God, and not of man: but now from the
sovereign Prince by the mediating of laws, bishops have set down unto them
the places where, the compass of territory how far, the manner how, with
other circumstances of executing both the former authorities, and also their
jurisdiction, Likewise they have assistance of their jurisdiction sundry ways
from the Prince and laws, for the sounder execution thereof, and better
bridling of offenders, as to burn an Heretic, to imprison a person
obstinately remaining excommunicate above 40. days, with such like. Lastly,
they have the heads and matters wherein their jurisdiction is occupied by and
from the Christian Magistrates authority, in whom as supreme Governor, all
jurisdiction within her dominions, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, by Gods
and man's law is invested. Such matters in this Church of England so attributed
to bishops, are causes of titles of benefices, matters of maintenance for
Ministers, upholding of Churches and Churchyardes, of matrimonial contracts
and divorces, testamentarie, diffamatorie, (where there is breach of charity,
and none action lies thereupon at the Common law,) or lastly punishing of
sundry crimes termed Ecclesiastical, being such as are not at all punishable
at the Common law, or else are left by law to be punished by either authority.
And in this respect may this part of bishoply function not untruly be said to
be derived from the supreme Christian Magistrates authority and supremacy,
which they have under God. By which may appear both the undutifulness of Popish
Bishops, and of the factious Consistorials: the first whereof deriueth their
jurisdictions Ecclesiastical within all Christian kingdoms from the Pope: and
the other will needs derive theirs immediately from God, and that in larger
manner and in more matters then bishops in England may any way exercise: for
they of the faction attribute therein no more unto sovereign Princes, but to
be governed in that behalf by them, and to defend the exercise thereof by
their temporal sword: whereas our bishops cannot make any new
Ecclesiastical decrees, without the Princes authority both precedent and
subsequent, and in the whole course of their function are tied strictly and
precisely to observation of due course of law: which if either negligently or
wilfully they shall violate, it is remediable by appellation: the last resort
wherein is to the Sovereign Prince her self, who hears and finally
determines it by her Judges delegated. So that by this discourse it plainly
appears, that our Bishops neither claim nor yet exercise any civil
authority at all as Bishops, that their authority Ecclesiastical is but
subordinate under God and the Prince, moderated exactly both positiuely and
priuatiuely by good laws, derived for the most part from the Prince, and
reformable by her: Not supreme, not absolute, not tyrannical, not
Seigneuriall, nor Lordely, according to the Rulers lust: And therefore no way
touched or meant, much less by these places condemned, as the Demonstrators
Assumption more boldly then either skillfully or truly imports. But out of
these grounds thus we reason, and bend the nose of the Cannon against
themselves.

If the bishops authority be condemned by these two places, as they would
infer, then is all greater and more absolute authority exercised by persons
Ecclesiastical, much more to be condemned: But your selves do claim and
exercise greater and more absolute authority then the bishops: namely to have
your Consistoriall jurisdiction not derived from the Princes authority, but
supreme under God, and that in all causes of doctrine, or manners, so far as
appertains to conscience, to make laws and orders Ecclesiastical, without
her knowledge or consent, to sit and determine as your selves judge best,
without any guiding of laws, to have your sentences once given to stand in
force (though they be appealed from) until they be in the last insta^ce
reuersed, to excommunicate your Sovereign, and consequently to discharge your
selves for that time of all actual obedience, to call your Synodes and
Classies without her writ, and to have the last appellation not to run unto
the Prince, but unto a national Synod. All which being true notes of
sovereignty in jurisdiction, are at least, (...) Lordly or Seigneuriall, if
not tyrannical: ergo, that which is by you claimed and exercised, is in deed
by Christ there condemned. Neither is it the bare civil title of Lord, which
is given to bishops, without any authority in that respect, that will help
you against us here: for the Scripture gives not laws to words, but to the
matters themselves. Yours is Lordlines in deed, when you both practice these
things against her Majesty's royal supremacy, and will have her to throw her
scepter down, and to lick the dust of the feet of your Church, viz. your
Presbytery, an epitome or representation of every several Congregation or
Church.

The 3. Demonstration.

They that may not be Lords over Gods people, much less may be Lords over the
ministers, Demonstration.
who are above the people: but the first is true, ergo, the second.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor with a little more help will make themselves Lords. Remonstrance.
For I do assure you this, no Bishop is Lord over the people, but a Lord in
respect of his own Baronrie. It is more to be above the people in deed, then
to be a Lord unto the people in phrase of speech, or obsequious word. Now
forsooth the Ministers are above the people, that is, their betters, and in
authority over them, as this Mayor does import.

To the Minor.

Lordlines is one thing, in malam partem: Lordship is another. S. Peter (say
you) forbids it. 1. Pet. 5.3. (on whom you say we father Lordlines) to be
Lords of Gods heritage, (...). Nay Peter writes to the bishops, or governing
pastoral Elders, such as himself: (...) I a fellow elder, not to tyrannize
over the flock, but to be example to the faithful. The place of Peter and
your collection, makes against your selves, Retortion.
To say ministers may have dominion over the people, but Ministers may not have
dominion over ministers: that is, Ministers may rule, and not be ruled. The
drift of the place is, Ministers may not tyrannize or have absolute command
over the people, or over one another. I refer me to the answer made to the
second demonstration of this matter.

The 4. Allegation or Demonstration.

It is ordained that every man's fault must be heard, Demonstra. Cypr. lib. 1.
epi. 3. Remonstrance.
where the accusers and witnesses are: ergo, every Minister had authority over
his flock.

The Illatiue is, ergo, every bishop has his limited proper jurisdiction.
Cyprian complained thus: Paucis desperatis minor videtur esse authoritas
episcoporum in Africa. Certain desperate companions thought worse of the
bishops authority in Afrike, then else where. He found fault with those that
went to Rome out of the province, not for going out of the Parish with the
cause, as you insinuate.

The 5. Allegation.

Bishops in all the world are equal to Parish ministers: Demonstrat. Luth.
aduer. Papat. a Satana fundat. Remonstrance.
some are of better gifts, which gifts cause no Lordship.

Luther confuteth the supremacy of the bishop of Rome: Papam non esse caput
christianitatis, and Dominum mundi: And that all bishops whether of Eugub. or
Rome, Rheg. or Constantinople, Alexand. Tauis, are equal for the ministry
and heirs of the Sea Apostolic.

The 6. Allegation.

The Ministers in the Apostolic Church none above other, Demonstrat. Muscu. ^e
com. de verbi minist.
were subject to no Head nor President.

That is, no universal Head: otherwise Musculus upon the 20. Remonstrance.
of Matthew. allows Governors, Presidents, Rulers in the church.

The 7. Allegation.

A Bishop taking the honor from the Ministers, Demonstra. Idem super 2 Thessalonians
8.2.
was the first step to Papacy.

That is, translated from them to erect a new Ministry, Remonstrance.
or an illimitable authority in the Church, which a bishoprike under the
Gospel is not, neither of the 7. steps to Papacy.

The 8. Allegation.

Christ did forbid the Apostles primacie and dominion. Demonstraet, Confess.
Holuet.


That is absolute, worldly, auaritious, ambiti ous dominion, Remonstrance.
not all moderate government and authority whatsoever. Remonstrance.


The 9. Allegation.

Equal power is given to all Ministers, saving for order. Demonstrat. Confe
Hell. c. 18.


Order includes superiority, and excludes not dignity. Remonstr.


Nullus dominium in episcopos vsurpauit.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Christ 20. Demonstration.
Matthew. 25. v. forbids ambition, and not dominion, as Musculus does expound.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

Calvin and others, expound it against superiority: but admit that
dominion is ambition, because it causes a man to aspire above his fellow
Ministers.

There is no wit in this misshapen answer: Remonstrance with reply.
the objection does not permit so much unto you: dominion in the better part
taken for rule, is most contrarying to ambition. It must be unjust dominion
that causes ambition, as to conspire against his superior, and to aspire to an
higher place, or seat: your factious study may be called ambition.

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

The Greek word signifies rule with oppression, Demonstration.
which is forbidden.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

That is not so. Luke 22.25. v. uses the single verb to rule: the sons of
Zebedee desired not to oppress, but to rule.

It is certain, Remonstrance with reply.
one place must expound the other: the tenor of the text expounds all. (...)
and (...) is one and consignificant terms, which is absolutely, tyrannously,
or ambitiously to govern and rule, or violently to rule and ouerrule: or else
an absurd interpretation will follow of the word, 19. Act. 16. v. 19. Act. 16.
v.
The man in whom the ill spirit was, ran upon the vagabond Jews, and
overcame them and prevailed. (...) had violent dominion and maisterie over
them: or 1. Pet. 5.3. v. not as exercising a proud dominion over the Lords
heritage. If the word signify not so, S. Peter should forewarne them of that
which yourselues say is no fault: therefore it is as clear as noone day, the
children of Zebedee, and the Apostles were schooled for that same (...)
contentious, and ambitious desire of ruling, and that ciuilly and absolutely.

The 3. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Christ says not, No man shall be so: but he that will be so, desiring it.

Answer of the Demonstrator. Demonstra.


Luke says, Let the greatest be your servant, ergo, that is a shift.

Though our Savior say, Remonstrance with reply.
Vos autem non sic, and in Luke, Let him be your servant: the one does repress
the humor of ambition, the other clause does express Christian humility:
Christ was as their servant, (...) yet had he superior authority over them.

Assertion of the Demonstrator.

A Bishop should be resident in every Congregation. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

If a Bishop and a Minister be all one, then must there be a bishop in every
Congregation: but they are one, for S. Paul describes them and their qualities
all one, ergo,

The Antecedent I admit, Remonstrance.
if they be simply and absolutely all one.

To the Assumption.

We will not deny but the words Episcopus, Presbyter, Minister, Pastor, may
notify all one thing, or sometimes taken for all one, in describing one and
the same thing improperly taken. But in their more proper acceptance, a bishop
and a Presbyter must signify distinct things, both in office and in dignity.
This is a flat aequiuocation, to say Presbyter or pastoral elder, signifies
principally an inferior minister, ergo, it must notify as properly and
principally a bishop, and a minister. As for your witty reason, the bishop and
minister have one quality, ergo, are one thing, although I might answer you,
some of those qualities are not of pure necessity affixed to the bishop or
minister, as to be the husband of one wife: yet your answer shall be, all
these are not formal accidents, and do not properly distinguish. As for the
qualities of yemind, they make not special difference of offices in the Church.
It follows not, because they were a while in the foundation of the Church all
one, that therefore they do still in all respects continue all one, being
changed even in the Apostles times. But thus we retort:

If Presbyter and Episcopus be all one, then he that is not episcopus cannot be
termed Presbyter: idem numero sunt maxim idem, and conuertuntur: but your Lay
elders are not episcopi, ergo, they are not Presbyteri, no Elders at all, nor
so to be termed.

The 2. Demonstration.

S. Paul's Bishops and Deacons were appointed for one place: Demonstration.
S. Paul's Deacons were in every Congregation, Philip. 1. Act. 6.2. and
continued longer then the Bishops, Athan. 2. Apolog. Hierom. cont. Lucifer.
ergo, there ought to be a Bishop in every Congregation.

Unless you mean place to be a Congregation in the Mayor, there are 4.
termini in the whole Syllogism. Remonstrance.


To the parts.

S. Paul's Bishops and Deacons, etc.

This is a false copulative, and makes a fallacy of things that are separated
true, not conioined true, by fallacious composition. The multiplicitie of the
meaning breeds aequiuocation as before: viz. a bishop which is an ouerseer of
the flock, whom we call Presbyter, or Pastor, or Priest: and the Deacons are
for one Congregation: And a bishop who is above a Pastor or Priest, must be but
over one Congregation: the former is true, the later is false. Episcopus is a
word, (...) of many significations. S. Paul's bishop is in both significations.

To the Minor.

The Apostles did the office of Deacons for a time.

That they continued longer then Paul's bishops, it is false, since the equity
of the offices continues still: whether you take them for inferior ministers,
or distributers to the poor, they have never discontinued.

Unto the place of Athanasius and Hierom, which you do not cite, but aim to
every way and no way, I have nothing to say but this: Athanasius in the 2.
Apolog. defuga sua, has written nothing to countenance your assertion: you do
the better to quote nothing. And for Hierome, there he does prove, that Deacons
and Priests in that Church did baptize, being authorized from the bishops, who
gave an imposition of hands, or confirmation after they had baptized.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which Paul commanded Titus, Demonstration.
is to be practiced in like case: But he commanded him to ordeine Elders, which
is Bishops, Tit. 1.5. ergo, they must be in every place.

This is strange to refort to this place of Titus, which makes for
superiority, Remonstrance.
and against equality of ministers.

To the Minor.

Elders: all pastoral Elders, are in generality of signification bishops,
that is, overseers: all bishops are not inferior pastoral Elders. The answer
is before: the word Episcopus and Presbyter are (...) of many significations.

The 4. Allegation or Demonstration.

Every Church should have her communion table and bishop. Demonstr. Ignat. ad
Philodelph. epist.


None better then Ignatius distinguishes the orders.

His meaning is of an ouerseeing Pastor, Remonstrance.
or where it is expedient to have a chief bishop. This allegation is answered,
cap. 13.

The 5. Allegation or Demonstration.

Where any was found worthy to be a Bishop, there they appointed a Bishop:
Demonstration.
where there was not to furnish a bishop and an elder, he means the Doctor,
there the Apostles made the bishop, and left the Elder.

How injurious is the Demonstrator to Epiphanius, Remonstrance.
who disputes against Aerius heresy? Erat sermo Aerij furiosus magis quam
humanae conditionis: quid est episcopus ad Presbyterum? vnus or do, vnus honor,
vna dignitas. It was Aerius reasonlesse or furious, rather then reasonable
manner of speech. What is a bishop better then a pastoral elder or priest?
there is but one order of both, like honor, both one dignity. With what face
can he produce Epiphanius for equality? who says a bishop cannot rebuke an
elder, but because he has authority over him?

Now for Epiphanius, his words are otherwise, and the Demonstrator either
obliuious, or never read Epiphanius. Cum aute^ multitudo non esset non inuenti
sunt inter eos qui presbyteri constituerentur, had not the supply of many
priests or pastoral elders. They were contented only with a bishop, until
they might have complete number of such elders, over whom the bishop carried his
superior hand of authority. Finally, Epiphanius did not so much as dream of
this elder to be there an ordinary Doctor, since Presbyter with him is but an
inferior Pastor.

What Chamaeleon with changeable colors is our Demonstrator? An elder in this
new Tetrarchie sometimes is a parish bishop, elsewhere an Alderman governing
his ward, other times a grave and profound Doctor: all which to swear with
them, Epiphanius must be forced.

The 6. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstr. 2. Conc. Carth. 1. Tom. ca. 10.


If a bishop run into slander, and many bishops cannot suddenly be gathered,
the cause must be heard of 12. bishops.

You may be ashamed to allege that Council to confirm your parish bishops,
Remonstrance.
which distinctly sets down the authority of Metropolitan and dicecesan
bishops, as also of Presbyter and bishop in the same canon.

The 7. Demonstr. 3. Conc. Carth.
Allegation or Demonstration.

If an elder be accused, he may call 6. bishops from the place hard by.

These are fractions and not distinct demonstrations. Remonstrance.


Your allegation has an answer before. The paucitie or fewness of our BB.
does not make against the multitude of theirs, and therefore this demonstration
serves you to no use.

The 8. Demonstr. Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 16 Socrates 4.26. Quest. 16. did. 50.
Theod. li. 5. c. 4.
Allegation or Demonstration.

Stories make mention of one Sotichus bishop of village of Cuman.

Of one Mares of Solicha.

Gregory of Nazianzum a small City.

Bishop of a castle.

The town or place of their See might be little, their jurisdiction great:
Remonstrance.
I know not whether it be your or your Printers fault: Theodoret remembers one
Mares of Dolicha: as for the bishop of Solicha and the bishoprike of that, God
send all the pack of you no better bishoprikes. Dorchester was once the
bishops See of Lincoln, Shirburne of Sarum, Selsey of Cicester, Thetford of
Norwich, Cridie of Excester, etc. yet the jurisdictions and dicecesses as large
as now, and some of them much larger.

The 9. Allegation.

A minister, Demonstr. Hier. ad Euagr. super Titum ad Oceanum.
that is to say a bishop.

A minister and a bishop all one to Titus.

With the ancient fathers, bishops and ministers all one.

I must remember you what is said also in the same place, Remonstrance.
Presbyter and episcopus aliud aetatis, aliud dignitatis: Non dico de
presbyteris, non de inferiori gradu: ad episcopos venio. Priest, a name of age:
Bishop, of dignity and office: Priest, an inferior degree: other where
priests supply the Apostles place, the bishop supplieth Christ's place. Be
your own remembrancer in the epistle to Oceanus: the drift of Hierome is to
show a difference and odds between Deacon and Priest, because of certain who
made the Deacon equal to the Priest, and yet for all that always the
pre-eminence of the bishop before the Priest. Nam Alexandriae a Marco
Euangelista, vsque ad Heracliam and Dionysium episcopos presbyteri semper vnum
ex se electum in superiori gradu collocatum, episcopum nominabant. Even from
Mark the Evangelist downward to his time, the bishop of Alexandria had a
superior degree above the pastoral elders.

The 10. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstr. D. Barns Acts and Monum. fol.
216. in ye 6. art.


I will never believe one can be bishop over two or three cities, or a whole
country by the law of God.

I know not whether he says so or no: but if he have read and remembered that
Titus was bishop of Candie, Ignatius of Syria, Remonstrance.
with infinite more out of the Fathers and Councils, he would be of another
belief. Many things slipped such men upon hatred to popish bishops.

The 11. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstr. Hooper super 8. comm. pa. 90.


The office of a bishop is degenerate: In the primitive Church they had no
bishops as we have.

He speaks of bishops under the Popedom, Remonstrance.
or else the speech might very well be spared: his words are, If the fourth part
remain to the bishop, a third part to the teachers, two parts to the poor,
one part to the soldiers, it were better bestowed, etc. then it is bestowed
now. None of our bishops have a fourth part upon the division of all the
ecclesiastical revenues of his dioeces, and therefore no cause herein to
assign a fault in the division. But if there might be (as bishop Hooper
thought) a more equal division, what is this to prove a bishops authority in
every Pastor of a parish?

The eleventh Chapter.
Assertion of the Demonstrator.

THere must be Doctors in the Church, Demonstration.
which is an office different from a Pastor.

The 1. Demonstration.

That which the Apostles do distinguish, are distinct: but the Apostles
distinguish Doctors from Pastors, 12. Romans 7. Ephesians. 4.11. v. as he does
distinguish man from woman, Gal. 3.28. v. Ergo,

To the Minor.

The Apostle makes distinguishment of gifts, Remonstrance.
not of offices in the first two places: albeit distinct gifts and offices,
yet coincident in one. The Apostles did exhort, they did teach, Acts 2. Peter,
and Acts 7. Steven. Paul a Doctor, and yet spoke the word of exhortation. Of
every action or quality grows not a separable office and function perpetual
in the Church.

There are certain who must distribute, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
show mercy, prophecy, gainsay, and stop the mouths of the gainsaier: ergo,
there are several and set offices and officers, so many in number as are
qualities numbered. But the Demonstrator says, distinguished as man and woman,
Gal. 3. v. 28. S. Paul makes no distinguishment but a combination or connection
of all in Christ: he says not there is bond, there is free, male and female,
but neither male nor female, etc.

The Demonstrator had this objection for the acception of a copulative in that
place to the Galathians, out of the Fenny water of the Country-poison, but the
good soul understood it not. The meaning was, that (...) the copulative makes
a distinction between Doctor and Pastor, Ephesians. 4. as it does Gal. 3.
distinguish between male and female. But how like those two places are the one
to the other, to make any such show, I would those that have but a smacke of
Greek or of any judgment, would consider.

The 2. Demonstration.

As the gifts are diverse, Demonstration.
so the offices: but the gifts of Doctor and Pastor are diverse, 1. Cor. 12. as
also experience teaches: Ergo,

To the Mayor.

Diverse gifts make not diverse offices: Remonstrance.
many gifts go to one faculty, science, office: gift of memory, subtlety to
penetrate between the cause and the effect: judgment, action, eloquution to
an Orator. One man may be better able to divide his text, another to persuade,
and yet an office of a preacher.

To the Minor.

Though they be sundry gifts, yet are they not sundered into several offices:
Apollos was (...) eloquent and yet full of forcible persuasion, Act. 18. but
you could not have a more probable place against the making of the Pastor and
Doctor, two several offices, then this of the 1. Cor. 12. for the same
officers are here reckoned up that are in the 4. to the Ephesians, and yet no
mention here of Pastors, but only Doctors, which argues that under the word
(...) Doctors, Pastors be also contained: for else were the division imperfect,
and the Doctor might better then the Pastor have been omitted: whom you make
not so necessary as Pastor.

The 3. Demonstration.

They who are to take a diverse course, are diverse. The Pastor is to exhort,
Demonstration.
the Doctor to attend doctrine. ergo:

To the Mayor.

The Logician in his method goes up ab vltimo ad primum: Remonstrance.
other times comes down a primo ad vltimum, in the same predicament, ergo,
by your demonstration a Logician is simply diverse from him self.

The Galenist distributeth the whole into parts: Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
at other times collecteth the parts to make the whole: ergo, a Galenist or a
physician absolutely differs from himself. Or,

This man is to run up the hill, the other to run down: Ergo, this man
differs from the other as a man.

To the Mayor.

Paul bids Timothy attend to reading and doctrine. 1. Tim. 4. Ergo, by the
Demonstrator he forbids him to use exhortation in the course of preaching:
being the very word which he puts betwixt reading and doctrine: so that he
both exhorted and taught. Nay how can a man exhort to a thing without doctrine
precedent? Can a man feed and teach not? or teach and feed not? Is not
doctrine the food of the soul? The one affects the intellectual mind, the
other, the will. Besides, where does he find in Scripture, that he must be
called Pastor that exhorts, and he Doctor that teaches, and that one man
may not take both courses? I tell you we allow not the absurd Sermon upon the
12. Romans for Scripture.

The 4. Demonstration.

Ecclesiastical stories speaking of the church of Alexandria, Demonstration.
that there were Doctors and Bishops, make the usual difference.

The difference is of Catechists, as Origene, Remonstrance.
and after him Heraclius at Alexandria: Cyrill at Jerusalem: Deo gratias at
Carthage from Bishops. But what let them from exhortation or application of
doctrine? And Catechists that do but teach rudiments, are far from the
perfection and soundness of learning, of him that shall deserve the office of
a Doctor.

The 5. Demonstration.

Cathedral Churches have one to read a Lecture: Demonstration.
Ergo, a manifest separation of Doctor from Pastor.

The Lecturer neither is nor ought to be barred from the life of exhortation,
Remonstrance.
no more then your own pastors are barred from delivering doctine. But they
are not two full hereof, and make necessity not so much a virtue, as the
seueraltie of office a vain pretense.

The 6. Demonstration.

If the distinguishing of them make more for the building of the Church,
Demonstration.
then the uniting of them, then ought they to be distinguished. First is true:
Ergo, the second.

The antecedent stands upon a false supposall: Remonstrance.
for to use a Doctorship or explication without the lively application, is to
make a body not organized with a soul: Corpus inane animae, such cold
speculation is best for such cold prophets or Doctors of Vtopia. The
consequence is also false: for it would make more for the building of the
Church, to have a several expounder of every several book of the Bible, if
such might be had: and yet you may not make up so many distinct Church
officers, as there be books in the Bible.

To the Assumption.

It is less credit for a man to deliver the writing, and not the seal: he
that delivers the word of the doctrine, may be vouchsafed to deliver the
Sacrament and seal of the same: And he that propounds the verity of a
doctrine, may with persuasion urge the efficacy and use of the same, both
exhort and comfort: it is the sole and sound way of edification of Gods people.
The ancient fathers are of opinion that they signify not diverse offices, but
diverse acts of one man, and are therefore joined with the copulative, Ephe. 4.
It is but a new devise among your selves to require them as a necessary office
in every Church to countenance out Trauers, Fenner, and such like Doctors, who
nevertheless stood more upon exhortation and dehortation then upon doctrine.
The first admonition nor second, the French discipline, the Gernsey, the
Scottish require them not necessarily, neither are they of the Consistory or
Eldership in France. Beza at Geneua is both Pastor and Doctor.

The twelfth Chapter.
The Assertion.

THere ought to be Elders in every congregation.

The 1. Demonstration. Demonstration.


That which the Apostles established, ought to continue in every congregation:
The Apostles established elders Act. 14.23. not preaching elders, because of
scarcity: Paul sent Titus and Timothy to great cities: Ergo, governing Elders.

To the Minor.

Because the Mayor is so often answered, Remonstrance.
I answer to the Minor, that (...) in this place must signify preaching
Elders, not unpreaching prelates or governors, which their own reason
persuades unto: for if there were scarcity of doctrine, scarcity of
discipline was greater far: If seeds of doctrine did not plenteously grow,
to what end served the hedge or wall of discipline? It is preposterous in
course: holy manners before holy faith: before a conversion a religious and
sanctified conversation: many elders before many teachers of the word. This is
violence offered to the Text by the Demonstrator: who ever before these men
interpreted that place of unpreaching lay Elders? Nay himself and all the rest
use it as the only chief place to prove ministers elections by the people.

The 2. Demonstration.

The helpers in the buylding must be in every congregation: Demonstra.
But Christ has ordained helpers. 1. Cor. 12.28. Ergo, Elders.

To the Minor.

Whether ye mean 1. Cor. 12. (...) or (...) helpers, Remonstrance.
or gonernours, it is too general to restrain to unpreaching Elders. Those
words may concern all ordinary and extraordinary Christian Magistrates and
ministers, and nothing helps to introduce elders. There is never an office
mentioned in Scripture, but your elders will have a snatch at it rather then
sit out, as they are like from any patrocinie thence.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which wanting, the body cannot be entire, must be in every congregation:
Demonstra.
But the Elders cannot be wanting, and the Church entire. Romans 12. Ergo:

I will syllogize after this manner: Remonstrance.


That which superaboundeth, the body may lack: The Elders are ex
superabundanti: Ergo, they may lack.

To the Minor.

Either Bishops, or Deacons, or the words (...) governors or Presbyters import
the Elders: Not (...) for all such may minister the word and sacraments, and
also preach: Not Presbyteri, such are feeding and pastoral elders: nor the
Deacons, for they are underneath and inferior unto them: nor Bishops, for they
are Presidents and overseers over all, and are superior pastors: Ergo, the
elders are a superfluity, and an excremencie to be pared and cut away, and are
ex superabundanti to the Church and may very well be wanting. As for the place
Romans 12. (...) He that governs in diligence, concerns al governors
Ecclesiastical and civil.

The 4. Demonstration.

If the word has described the Elders, Demonstration.
then they must be: But the word has described. 1. Tim. 5.17. Ergo:

There is not so much as (...), any colorable description of Elders in these
words: Remonstrance.
The place gives commendation and great maintenance to all pastoral elders,
that govern their flocks well, but honorable commendation of those, who with
earnestnes labor in the word. So, (...) signifies: your elders have not any
maintenance of your Churches, but live of their crafts and trades: and
therefore yours cannot be there meant, which is spoken specially to establish
large maintenance by the Church toward the Elders there understood.

The 5. Demonstration or Allegation.

There is no Church which can stand without their Eldershippe or Council.
Demonstration. Ign. ad Tral. ep.


The words are: Remonstrance.
(...)

That is, the Elders, or Ministers, or Pastoral elders are a senate or
fellowship of the Apostles of Christ: without it there is no Congregation holy
or sacred, nor synod of Saints: and so say we. But this is a great distaunce
from your Laicall Eldership: this is our holy and sacred Convocation or
Chapter House, or whatsoever Ecclesiastical assembly and meeting. It
appears by sundry places of Ignatius, that the Presbyteri he speaks of,
did preach and minister the Sacraments: Ergo, he means not of yours. These
whom he means (he says) are successors of the Apostles, which hitherto I
have not heard any of you challenge for your Elders that be Lay men.

The 6. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstration. Tertul. de bape.


It belongs only to the Bishop to baptize, and to the Elder and Deacon upon
the Bishops license.

I would to God you would as well do after this golden sentence of Tertull. as
you can memoratiuely recite the same: Remonstrance.
the sense and sentence makes all for us. Dandi habet ius summus sacerdos, id
est, Episcopus, dehinc presbyteri and diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi
authoritate propter eeclesiae honorem, quo saluo salua pax est: As the Bishop
is a superior minister or priest, so Presbyter an inferior minister or priest:
for your elders you may go seek, for you permit neither your elder nor deacon
to baptize.

The 7. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstra. Iero^. con. Lucife.


Neither elder nor Deacon have right, but upon commandment of the Bishop, so
much as to baptize.

The words: Inde venit vt sine Chrismate and Episcopi iussione neque presbyter,
neque diaconus ius habeant baptizandi. That is, Remonstrance.
pastoral elder or priest: the words immediately antecedent speak of the
authority of the Bishop or chief priest, who does authorize other priests:
vt enim accepit quis, ita and dare potest. He speaks of Chrisme as well as of
the Bishops license, alluding to a particular custom: this cannot serve your
turns, for you hold that no Bishop may debar you of license to preach or
use your ministry, and your elders and deacons may not minister the
sacraments, though they were licenced, as your selves think.

The 8. Allegation or Demonstration.

Elders fell away upon the ambition of the Teachers. Demonstra. Amb. 1. Tim. 5.


Ambrose says, Synagoga and postea ecclesia seniores habuit. Remonstrance.
Ambrose says that state of the church for all that was tolerable.
Both the Synagogue and afterward the Church had Elders or Seniors before any
Christian magistrate had the preeminence in the Church, but no such elders as
you do platform. For these gave but counsel, yours do absolutely govern,
ordeine, censure, and all things, saving preaching and ministering Sacraments.

The 9. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstra. Possidon. in vita August.


Valerius the Bishop did contrary to the Apostolical custom, in appoynting
Augustine to preach being an elder.

The words are: Remonstrance.
contravsum and consuetudinem ecclesiarum Aphricanarum, against the use and
custom of the Aphrican churches, not of the Oriental Churches, where the use
was so: A custom particular misliked also by many of the fathers, you would
make Apostolical and general.

The 10. Allegation or Demonstration.

After Arrius was convict of heresy, Demonstrat. Socr. li. 5. ca. 22.
Elders might not preach: it was so decreed.

Caluins quotation is lib. 9. Socrat. tripartitae historiae, Remonstrance.
Alexandriae tantum institutum fuit: whence you borrow this: only at
Alexandria this was ordained, because Arrius had troubled the Church there. Is
not this curtalling of places an evident sign of the evil conscience you
have, if you know it: or of ignorance (joined with boldness) if you know it
not, and yet allege it?

The 11. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstrat. Bucer de reg. Chri. lib. 1.


The number of Elders of every Church must be increased according to the
multitude of the people.

Bucer by the words lib. 1. cap. 8. speaks of Curatorum ecclesiae and
seniorum, Remonstrance.
that is pastoral elders, as the marginall note understands the Ministers:
Ministros ecclesiae sarcire oportere quicquid fuerit neglectum.

The 12. Allegation or Demonstration.

Martyr 12. Romans lamenteth that they were fallen out of the Church,
Demonstration.
that the name scant remains.

Martyr cites S. Ambrose complaint of the want or defect of certain Elders
for advise, Remonstrance.
who were for a time in some Church, the Magistrate being unchristian: but you
find not that they were called Presbyteri, as signifying an office, which
title you give to yours, and the places where Presbyteri be named, you apply to
them.

The 13. Allegation or Demonstration.

Certain of the people were joined with the Pastor in Church-gouernment.
Demonstration. Idem 12. Co. 1.


Even so at this day: Remonstran.
in every parish are the like assistants, to gather and employ the alms of the
Church and for other provisions: The Puritanes know not their own Church, or
common wealth, and yet the meaning is but of Churches in great cities and
Cathedral.

The 14. Allegation or Demonstration. Demostran. Calvin. instit. li. 4. cap. 3.
sect. 8.


There were Elders in the Church.

(...) He said it, is no necessary Demonstration to prove it: Remonstrance.
he can never prove that they had jurisdiction, or ought to have of censures,
of ordinations, of law making, and all other government: or that they were Lay
men, and had no maintenance by the Church, or that they were annual or
biennall officers, as the Consistorials do now preach.

The 15. Allegation or Demonstration.

D. Whitgift page 638. confesses there were Elders. Demonstr.


Some were Seniors as Ambrose speaks of in the Church before any Christian
magistrate was pro tempore, Remonstrance.
for a stay and good advise in the Church: but none of this medley of
perpetuity, and with such government and authority as is now platted.

The 16 Allegation or Demonstration.

If the platform to Timothy be for all Churches, Demonstration.
then must Elders be in all. 1. Timoth. 6.14. But the first is true: Ergo, the
second.

This is answered before cap. 1. not to concern any policy of Elders:
Remonstrance.
but to keep the general commandment of the law of the spirit of life: they
might as well say that the commandment to drink no water were meant by that
place. The holy ghost has there warily used the singular number (...) which
now you would make to pertain to the perpetuity of every thing contained
in that Epistle: if it did so, yet could it not help you, for there is no such
commandment for any such Elders in that whole Epistle, no nor any mention by
the way of them.

The 17. Demonstration.

That which is in every ministers commission, must be in every congregation:
Demonstration.
But the ordination and practice of this office, Mat. 28.20. is so, or else they
ordained elders without warrant from Christ. Ergo they must be in every
congregation.

Ex nihilo nihil fit, Of nothing comes nothing. Remonstrance.
This is (...) a great space between these two: go, (...) make Disciples or
teach all nations: Ergo, make unpreaching Presbyters in all nations: This the
Demonstrationer made the Ministers Commission before, and is it now the
Commission for vnteaching Elders to be ordained in every place? The reason of
the Minor is false: for neither made they any such Elders in every
congregation, neither does their authority for ordinations and sundry other
points of Church-gourernment depend only upon that Commission, which respected
the ministry of the word and Sacraments.

The 18. Demonstration.

Where a Bishop must be, Demonstration.
Elders must be: A Bishop must be in every Congregation: Ergo, Elders.

This Demonstration is no guest but an ordinary servant: Remonstrance.
for this serves your turn often: (...) The one of these is no better known
then the other: there must be parish Bishops: Ergo, parish elders. And it
follows not by any coherence any more then this: There must be a Constable
in every town, Ergo, 24. Aldermen.

The 19. Demonstration.

If the Apostles established one uniform order in all Churches, Demonstration.
then there must be Elders in every congregation: but the first is true: Ergo,
the second. For S. Paul says thus: I teach in all Congregations.

To the Antecedent.

This is the fallacy of consequence. Remonstrance.


The Apostles did stablish uniformity for essential points of discipline, but
left not any policy for Lay elders. The consecution of the mayor is false: Can
there be none uniformity, except such your Elders were every where appointed,
who indeed were nowhere?

To the Assumption.

S. Paul might very well leave all points of wholesome doctrine, all good
order for the Church, but never institute the particularities of your
discipline.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

God has given sovereign authority over the Church to Christian Magistrates,
Demonstration.
which these Elders would abridge.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

No more then the eldership in David's time, did abridge David's sovereignty over
all Israel: for his government is temporal, theirs is spiritual.

O foolish answer, Remonstrance.
and fond conceit of an imaginable Elderdership in David's time? who can abide
this? Master Elders have spiritual government, but Kings and Queens (noursing
fathers and mothers of the Church) have but civil and temporal government
only: o tempora, o mores: or as the learned discourse says, The prince is but
a feeling member of ye church: the heads and chief governors are the
ecclesiastical Aldermen or presbytery of the Church. That yours abridge the
Queens sovereignty, is a little touched before, and shall more plainly be
showed when you are at leisure to hear.

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator. Demonstration.


Gualt. 1. Cor. 5. denies the presbytery to be needful under a christian
magistrate.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

Gualter denies excommunication to be lawful under a Christian magistrate: He
is as partial as D. Whitgift.

It may be Gualter and others may deny it to be of the essence of a Church, or
rash excommunication, Remonstrance with reply.
(then the which nothing is more Anabaptisticall) or where hope of repentance
is: he is not partial, nor he that takes part in a good cause. As for
Gualters opinion, if he utterly deny excommunication: Pro Coelio.
Nolo cuiusquam fortis, and illustris viri, vel minimum erratum cum maxima
laud coniungere: But it is untrue to say, he simply denies it: or if he did
err herein, does he therefore err in the other? But if you can so soon shake
off Gualter in this point, for his errout (as you fancy) in the other, then
may we also reject Calvin in a matter whereof he was first father, for his
error against the lawful supremacy of Christian princes in causes
ecclesiastical.

The 3. Objection of the Demonstrator. Demonstration.


The Prince has the authority which the Elders had.

Answer.

That is no truer then to say, the Prince has authority to preach, which he
must see done.

The Eldership (you say) may make ecclesiastical laws, Remonstrance with
reply.
may censure and excommunicate. In taking these from the Prince to be done by
her Delegates, do you not deny her Supremacy? as for any ordaining, she may
even as well as your Eldership do it: but God forbid she should claim it, as
they very absurdly do.

HIErgo, by this gross position the prince must wait in every place to see
the elderships their duties done: but it is certain, Ex quolibet sequitur
quidlibet, in maintaining this imagination, as for the Prince to see it done by
your Elderships, is a seruilitie and no sovereignty, especially when you say,
and T.C. before you, that the princes must subject them selves, and submit
their scepters, and throw down their crowns before the Church: and for the
Church you roundly interpret the Presbytery. Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
Princes must lieprostrate to the Presbytery. And if your Elderships in deed
have this authority by their right in causes ecclesiastical, which the Prince
must but see done, then do not they slander you which say you give to the
Prince potestatem facti non iuris, and so yield her just as large a supremacy
as the Papists do.

Demonstrations to prove the eldershippe necessary under Christian princes, as
in the Apostles time.

The 1. Demonstration.

The less able the ministers are to direct in godliness, Demonstration.
the more need they have of Elders: but ministers now under Christian
magistrates are less able by reason of ease and peace. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

Nay the more need they have of preachers and laborers in the harvest,
Remonstrance.
the more need of discreet overseers, not those pragmaticall busie-body
elders.

To the Minor.

Do not say that Solomon forbids you say: the days are worser now rather
then the days of old, for that were a foolish thing: Our days are blessed
days, bless God for them: This fallacy is secundum non causam vt causam. The
Judges and Justices are less able to execute the laws at full by reason of
men's insolency and custom of offenses: Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
Ergo, shall it follow that the Parliament must erect some other new kind of
magistracy? The consequencie is, Ergo they must execute the laws with more
severity. If the ministers be not able to direct in godliness, it is but a
poor help they are like to have of your Elders for such direction.

The 2. Demonstration.

If Christian magistrates must maintain the order set down by 1. Cor. 12.8.
Demonstration.
v. then Elders must be under a Christian magistrate: but they are etc. Ergo:
49. Esai 23.

You have been answered and reanswered again for that allegation of text 1.
Cor. 12.8. v. Remonstrance.
that you have no advantage for your elders to be deduced from that text: but
see see how the elder would obtain the title of a Christian magistrate.

As for the argument out of Esai 49. ca. 23. v. Kings and Queens they shall
worship thee with their faces toward the earth, Absurdity of the Demonstrat.
Ergo great homage belike shall be done to the eldership, the rather because it
shrowdeth it self under the appellation of a Christian magistrate.

The 3. Demonstration.

If the rule of Christ Dic Ecclesiae cannot be observed without elders,
Demonstration.
then may they be under a Christian magistrate: but the former is true Ergo
the latter.

To the Assumption.

By the Church is meant the Senate of ministers and elders, Remonstrance.
says the Demonstrator. This is new interpretation of dic Ecclesiae, this
were news in Christendom: a man cannot inform the Church of a matter,
unless he go to the Aldermen and ministers of every particular Church.

Dic Ecclesiae with Chrysostom, Chrysostom 61. Hom. super Matthew.
is tell the presidents and governors and prelates of the Church: Praesulibus
scilicet and praesidentibus. If none have need to tell the elders, then the
rule of dic Ecclesiae, tell the Church, may be kept without them: but no man
having ordinary and ecclesiastical lawful magistrates need to run to the
laicall elders: Ergo (for ought that I know) the rule may be kept without them.

The 4. Demonstration.

If the whole government of the Church be described to Titus and Timothy to be
observed to the end, then there must be elders under a Christian magistrate:
Demonstration.
but the first is true, Ergo the second. 1. Tim. 6.14. v.

To the Antecedent.

I deny the sequel of the Antecedent: Remonstrance.
for all the descriptions there, yet there are no elders. If you mean the
whole and sole government of the Church to be described, I deny the whole
Antecedent: for the deaconship of women is but a temporary, and no perpetual
thing, which is there described: so you are once again to seek for your
elders.

To the Assumption.

The ecclesiastical government is described, not in specie, but in genere, and
so it is prescribed.

The 5. Demonstration. Demonstration.


Where sin is most outrageous, there is need of all helpers to punish sin
etc. so it is under a Christian magistrate: Ergo, need of Elders.

There needs no new magistracy nor ministry in ye church, Remonstrance.
but the civil and ecclesiastical help that already is.

This is but a base and accidental original and birth of elders, Ex malis
moribus nascuntur bonae leges.

Because there are inordinate men, we must of pure needs have these ignoble
elders to correct them.

The thirteenth Chapter.
Assertion.

THere must be Deacons who must only receive and distribute the liberality of
the Saints, Demonstration.
and not intermeddle with the ministry.

The 1. Demonstration.

That wherein Stephen and the rest were employed, is the office of a Deacon,
but they were only for the poor, Acts 6.4. Ergo, the office of a Deacon is
only for ye poor.

To the Minor.

The Deacons served occasionally by reason of ye same (...), Remonstrance.
murmuring for relief of the poor, but principally they served for attendance
and ease of the ministry, and distribution to the poor. Not only therefore
for the poor: They were mensarum and viduarum ministri, says S. Hierom, at
which feasts it is known the communion was celebrated.

The 2. Demonstration.

That office which the Apostle makes distinct, Demonstration.
may not be mingled.

But Romans 12. distributing in simplicity is so: Ergo,

The Mayor lacks a word, perpetually distinct.

The Minor is false: Remonstrance.
the reason holds not from distinct virtues to offices. Let my reason bend
against you: Either all those, or some of those, or none of those, are
distinct: If all, why cause you not several offices out of all? None you will
not say, That were to gainsay you selves: If some are, and some are not, show
by some demonstration, and not by allegation, which are and which are not: Why
to distribute is perpetual and distinct, why to show mercy is not
perpetual, why a distributer is better then a shewer of mercy: may no man
that distributeth use simplicity, lest he incroch upon the Deacons office?

The 3. Demonstration.

That which the Apostles found themselves insufficient for, Demonstration.
that no man can now discharge: but they were insufficient for the Ministry
of the word and ministration to the poor. Act. 6.2. ergo,

The Mayor is false. Remonstrance.
The Apostles having the general care to plant Churches in all the world,
might be unmeet and so unfit to serve the tables of the widows of the Greeks
and Hebrews, after the Church so mightily increased: and yet some men now for
a narrowerprecinct, be able both to preach and to do the like: since the
seuering of those two offices in the Apostles time which is not clearly
demonstrated by you, is not to make them several for all succeeding times. The
Elders or Ministers after the seven were chosen, dealt with the Church stock,
Act. 11. and yet our bishops or ministers claim not this care from the Deacons.

To the Minor.

The word is, (...), it is not meet: they do not say, we are insufficient:
we may derive the care upon others, having extraordinary affairs to do for
the whole Church. They were able to do it, but it was unmeet for them to be
in (...), daily ministration. It is unmeet for a king to be a common soldier,
and yet he not insufficient to bear arms. The argument does hold: he is
insufficient, ergo, unmeet: e contrario, the conversion is not good.

The 4. Demonstration.

If the Ministeries of the word be perfect without the Deacon, Demonstration.
then he may not intermeddle in preaching of the word, where there is no need
of him: but it is so, Ephesians. 4.11. v. ergo,

Out of this fabulous conditional proposition. If, etc. it follows,
Remonstrance.
there are diversities of ministeries of the word, and all out of that place.
But I answer the Assumption.

No man is so rude to deny that to be a description of the ministeries of the
word, no man so bold to say that to be the only description of the
Ministeries of the word: for 1. Cor. cap. 12. has a perfecter description. If
the number of 8. octonarius be perfecter, then the number of 5. numerus par,
then numerus impar: But your number is 4. quaternarius: you are like the old
Thracians, of whom Aristotle writes, they cannot number beyond 4. they are so
gross: even as your Tetrarchie extends not beyond 4. But if this were a good
reason to debar a Deacon from preaching, how does that follow hereof, which
he is in hand to prove: viz. that he must only receive and distribute to the
poor, or that he must do it at all?

The 5. Demonstration.

If no quality be required in description of the Deacon, Demonstrat.
which is proper to the Ministry of the word, then he is not to meddle with
the same: but none 1. Tim. 3.8. is required, ergo,

This Hypotheticall Syllogism is false to begin withal. Remonstrance.
You cannot reasonably argue a destructione antecedentis ad destructionem
consequentis, or a positione consequentis ad positionem antecedentis, unless
you will commit the fallacy of the consequent: as if no quality be required
in the man, which is proper to the master, then may not he be another masters
man: but no quality is required, ergo, he must still be a maisterlesse man.

To the Assumption.

Some qualities are co^municable to the minister and to the deacon. This
destroys your assumption.

Connenit omni sednon soli, semper, and reciproce.

A deacon must be the husband of one wife, so must a minister. A deacon must
govern his house well, so must a minister. A deacon must not be given to much
wine: but sober, temperate. A deacon must be without blame, and so must a
minister and a Bishop. A minister may preach the word, the deacon upon leave.
A minister must be able to teach faith: the deacon have the ministry of faith
in a pure conscience, and yet have great boldness and liberty in the faith of
Christ, as Stephen who preached. Ministry is perfect and complete: the
deaconship a good degree unto the ministry: (...) attained to a good degree,
to be credited afterward with the full ministry. But thus we retort it upon
your selves.

If no quality be required in a deacon, Retortion.
by that place of S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. which is proper to one who is to receive
and distribute to the poor, then is he not to intermeddle therewith: But no
such, 1. Tim. 3. is required: Ergo a deacon (by your own rule) is not to
intermedle in distributing to the poor.

For proof of the Minor, peruse them, and you shall find no quality required
there in a deacon tending that way. In that he must not be (...), given to
filthy lucre or covetous, makes not any thing for this purpose: for this sin
is forbidden to every Christian, as the root of all evil, and to the Bishop
in that self same chapter: Yet you will not therefore gather, that all
Christians and Bishops, are officers only to distribute to the poor.

The 6. Demonstration.

If the deacons may meddle with the word and Sacraments also, Demo^strat.
then it is greater then the office of the Pastor: but it is not greater then
that, ergo,

To the Mayor.

It is not therefore simply greater in that respect: Remonstrance.
For then this absurdity might follow, One and the same thing might be
greater and lesser then it self: as the Apostles when they exercised all
themselves. It is not greater in dignity, but in some regard of present
service: Howbeit no man does defend that the decons may as far deal in the
word and Sacraments (and in provision for the poor also) as the pastors may.

If the delegates or high Commissioners may deal by commission from the Prince
in matters of the Church, Absurdity of the Demonstrator.
and in other capacities in civil matters also, then are they greater then
Counselors of state, or all as great as the Prince her self: This Mayor and
your Mayor are cousin germans, or very near of blood, and both untrue and
absurd.

The 7. Allegation, or Demonstration.

Deacons are ministers of tables, and not of holy things. Demonstrat. 6. conc.
Constant. cap. 16.


That is, rather of tables then of holy things: I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, that is, rather mercy then sacrifice: or else the words are to be
understand, Non de viris qui ministrant ministerijs, Remonstrance.
sed de ministerio quod in vsu mensarum adhibebatur, which is the
interpretation of the Council, Council. Neocaesariens. cap. 14. which made a
rule for 7. deacons in every city, though little: whose office was after the
poor were provided for, to preach the Gospel as they did.

The 8. Allegation of the Demonstrator.

Deacons have need of wisdom, Demonstrat. Chryso. 6. Art.
though they preach not: it is absurd they should do both.

The Demonstrator cobleth Chrysostomes words: Remonstra. Hom. 14. art. 6.
For this one in Chrysostom is two sentences. I answer it is an absurd thing
they should do both, and be tied as of necessity to do both: for otherwise
it is evident they preached in Chrysostomes time.

The 9. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstra. Conc. Vasens. c. 4.


In the Ministers sickness, the Deacons should read Homilies.

This is news to allege a Council for a reading ministry, Remonstr.
and reading Homilies, yet it makes against you: for if they may read
Homilies, then are they not only to distribute to the poor, and then may
Homilies be read in Churches.

The 10. Demonstra. Bulling. decad. 5. sermon 2.
Allegation or Demonstration.

Although the goods of the Church increasing, there were Deacons, Subdeacons,
Archdeacons, yet the Deacons were not mingled with the Bishops.

Even now they are kept from that mixture. Remonstr.


The 11. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstra. Bucer. de reg. Christ. cap. 4.


The office of Deacons was kept religiously, till Antichrist drove it out.

Bucer in the same place, Remonstra.
says: the ancient Church did admit their Deacons to the ministration of the
word, and their Sacraments, ergo, none of your fashion Deacons.

The 12. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstra. Idem de reg and superephe. 4.


The office must be restored as it is, Act. 6. if England receive Christ's
discipline.

The Deacons were not a mere corporal office of distributers to the poor,
Remonstrance.
but also in part ministers about the Sacraments, and attendants on the Pastors
to help them.

The 13. Allegation or Demonstration.

Martyr. To. 12. Demonstra.
lamenteth that the name was scant remaining.

He speaks of the policy of the Popish Church: Remonstrance.
Vehementer dolendum, etc. Substituerunt hijs cereferarios, acoluthos,
subdiaconos, which orders we have not.

The 14. Allegation or Demonstration.

Calvin. institut. li 4. ca. 3. sect. 9. Demonstrat.
says we ought to have the like.

So we have: Remonstrance.
for the book of ordination appoints them this office, where other order is
not taken. But Calvin proves women Deacons, and the perpetuity of them out
of the same place, which you give the slip unto.

The 15. Demonstration or Allegation.

Deaconship is an ordinary function. Demonstra. Beza confe. ca. 5. sect. 22.23.


What is this to the purpose? who makes it extraordinary but your selves? who
take away the attendance on the ministry, Remonstran.
his lawful help?

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Philip, one of the 7. Deacons did preach. Act. 8.8. Ergo, Demonstration.


The Answer of the Demonstrator.

He preached by virtue of being an Evangelist.

The words are: (...) Philip, after the persecution, Remonstran, with reply.
Herom. ad Luciferi. Scias Philippum eundem. Dominum Iesum Christum praedicasse,
diaconum certe fuisse eorum qui posteae manus imposuerunt.
preached Christ going down to Samaria, baptized also those whom he
converted: Ergo, he preached as a minister of the word, and of that Sacrament,
although by his first ordination a Deacon. Or show where he had new imposition
of hands, for the warrantie of that he did: Offices then were not so
precisely distinguished. I deny he was an Evangelist, as an officer distinct.
Ephe. 4. but is called an Evangelist, as every one may be that preaches the
Gospel, and as all might be that were dispersed. Act. 8.4. For all those (...),
went abroad preaching the word.

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Stephen being a Deacon, preaeched.

Answer. Demonstration.


It was an Apology and no Sermon.

It was an Apollogeticall Sermon, as his Sermon being an exact Sermon
declares: He was no private man, Remonstrance, with reply.
that was full of faith and power, refelled the Cyrenians, and Lybertines, and
did many signs, and confirmed his doctrine with his blood. You cannot show
so much pregnancie in all the scripture, that Philippe and Stephen ever
distributed to the poor, as does here appear for their preaching and
baptizing also, as Philip did.

The Assertion of the Demonstrator.

That there ought to be Deacons in every Congregation. Demonstra.


The 1. Demonstration.

That which every congregation has need of, ought to be: But every
congregation has need, because it has poor. Ergo,

That, Remonstrance.
or the equity of that ought to be: Our Collectors, our Churchwardens, our
Hospitals, Almes-houses, are in steed of that part of their corporal
ministration or Deaconship in many places. Our Savior Jesus, although he
faide, you shall have poor always with you, did not forth with send the
Deacons: therefore granting of poor, does not necessarily infer placing of
Deacons.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which is indefinitely appointed for the good of the Church, Demonstration.
must be in every Congregation: But such is. Timoth. 3.8. Ergo,

By your leave Sir, Remonstrance.
that which is definitely appointed, must rather hold in every Congregation:
for which cause we uphold the order of Deacons by institution Apostolical,
but neither manner of their election, nor number of 7, which the council of
Neocaesar. does allow, and is after repealed by an other Council. Your Mayor
is grossly false: Synodes and Classes are indefinitely appointed for the good
of the Church, as you say: Ergo, they must be planted, and continually settled
in every parish.

The 3. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstr. Igna. ad Philad.


Every Church must have the office of Deaconship.

Ignatius means by a Deaconship, attendaunce on the Bishop in his See,
Remonstrance.
not a corporal Deaconrie. The words are, (...) There is one Bishop with
the Elders and Deacons.

The 4. Demonstration.

All the reasons in the 12. chapter. for a Bishop in every Congregation,
Demonstration.
serve for a Deacon.

As good reason will be affoorded for a parish Bishop, as only a corporal
Deaconship, Remonstrance.
and the same answers will serve them.

The fourteenth Chapter.
The Assertion.

THe Eldership consists of a Pastor, or pastors, Demostrat.
(Doctor if there by any) and Elders.

Ergo, Remonstrance.
your Doctor is not of this indeclinable necessity, wherein you follow the
discipline of France: But how can you then urge the 4. Ephesians. for all these
offices to be in every congregation, and why does your last absolute plat
make them essential in every Church, so as it cannot be a Church without them?

1 The Eldership ought to be in every congregation. Demonstration.
2 The Eldership is perpetual. 3 The Church must be governed only by the
rules of Gods word.
The 1. Demonstration.

The means which Christ has ordained to keep men in obedience, must be in
every Congregation.

But Christ has or deyned the Eldership to that end. Mat. 18.15. Dic
Ecclesiae, Tell the Church, Ergo: it must be in every Congregation.

To the Minor.

Christ has neither ordained any Eldership, Remonstrance.
nor to any such end, (...). Tell the Church is not, (...) the promiscuous
multitude of men, women, and children, nor yet the Lay Elders, but the lawful
Ecclesiastical governors or magistrates of the Church.

It is one thing to say, Dic senioribus ecclesiae, tell the Seniorie of the
Church: another thing, tell the Governors of the Church, or the Church simply.

The 2. Demonstration.

Where all sorts of Elders must be, Demonstration.
there must be the joining of these offices in one: But all sorts of elders
ought to be in every Congregation, as in the chap. 10. for Bishops, 12. for
Elders. Ergo:

To the Mayor.

I doubt of the verity of this Mayor: Remonstrance.
for it is not needful where every sort of Ancients must be, there should
be combination and joining of the offices in one: for in the city of London
are the ancients of every Corporation and mystery to wait on the Lord
Mayor, and to assemble at a Folkemote: Ergo, after your mind they must join
their offices, companies, and mysteries all in one. They may join the presence
of their persons, they need not conioyne or confound the offices together in
one, to make one entire office consisting of them all.

To the Minor.

Preaching and unpreaching Elders, Doctorall and Pastoral cannot be in every
congregation, neither need be: for whence shall a man nourish them as
Demosthenes says? What, from heaven? for if they be nourished from the earth,
the increase thereof like unto the caterpiller, they will eat up every green
thing. If you say every sort of them is proved before: I am sure it is
disproued also before. This Minor is false: for if they ought to be, why do
you suffer the Doctor to be wanting? at least not to be of such necessity,
but that he may be spared?

The 3. Demonstration.

If no particular Congregation have privilege greater given then other,
Demonstrat.
then must either no Eldershippe be at all, or else in eurie Congregation: But
every Congregation has like privilege, because it is a perfect body. Ergo:

To the Assumption.

No Congregation has any privilege for Eldership, Remonstrance.
and yet is a body perfect of it self: To add any thing to the perfection
of Art is curiosity, to the perfection of nature monstruousnes: as for the
Charter of the privilege of your Eldership, you have not showed it.

Let our Syllogism be this:

If every Congregation have like privilege, then every one or none must have
Doctors: But every one need not (but where it may be, as you say) Ergo, none
must have a Doctor, or else your own collection is foolish.

The 4. Demonstration.

The same warrant that is for an Eldershippe in one place, is the warrant to
have it in all, Demonstrat.
for GOD tyeth it not to Churches in cities, but to the Church: But there is a
warrant to have in some, Ergo, in all.

To the Mayor.

You say the very truth: Remonstrance.
for your Consistoriall Eldership is warranted in no place: as for pastoral
Eldershippe, it is (...) expound it how you will, for towneship or city,
although Paul and Barnabas ordained them. Acts 14. (...) through Iconium,
Lystra, etc. for the commodity of the Church.

To the Minor.

The (...) your fansied Eldership appears in no place. If any man be
contentious for it, as for a divine institution, the Churches of God have
received no such custom, for 1550. years together.

The Assertion.

That the Eldership is perpetual. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

If the causes why Christ would have an Eldership be perpetual, then is the
thing it self perpetual: but the causes, vz. to govern the Church by the
rules of the word Ecclesiastically, are perpetual. Ergo.

The Antecedent is true, if all the causes be perpetual: Remonstrance.
but here is mention only of the final cause. But a man may atteyne well to
the end of government Ecclesiastical, and peace of conscience, without the
complot of this Eldership, Ergo, all this is but a strong imagination. Why man,
cannot the Church be governed by the rules of the word, under no kind of
persons government, but of such an Eldership?

The 2. Demonstration.

If Christ be the author, and left it by his Apostles, to be established,
Demonstration.
then it is perpetual: But Christ is the Authout in that he gave gifts for
the particular members, and the whole body thereof. So it appears, 1. Cor.
12.12. And the Apostles not going beyond their commission, established it.
Ergo, it is perpetual.

To the Mayor.

It is not necessarily true: Remonstrance.
for Christ by his spirit was the Author of that which the Apostles
established for absteining from blood and strangled, yet was not this
perpetual.

To the Minor.

The very place which you mean (but quote wrong) vz. 1. Cor. 12.12. and before,
neither proves any gifts given to the particular members of any such
eldership, nor to the whole body of it: the place is, as the body is one and
has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, is but one
body, so Christ. What? does this prove any gifts given either to the
particular members, or whole body of your Eldership? The gifts that a little
before are reckoned, to be severally given to several persons, are: The word of
wisdom, the word of knowledge, faith, gifts of healing, the working of
great or miraculous works, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diversity of
tongues, and interpretation of tongues. If enery of these be a several gift
for a several officer in your Elderships, then in steed of three, vz. Doctors,
Pastors, and Elders, (for I think you now have learned of the French discipline
to exclude Deacons) you have nine officers in all. To run over therefore but
those officers you are hitherto agreed on: which of these several gifts shall
the pastor have? which the Doctor? and which the Elders? He that has the
word of wisdom, shall he not have the word of knowledge, nor faith? and he
that has faith, the last of these three, shall he be known by it as by a
specificall difference from the rest, and have neither of the other? and he
that has knowledge, shall he neither have wisdom nor faith? Here you had
need to have Ariadnes threede to wind your selves out of this Labyrinth: and
how will ye accommodate the other six gifts, and to whom? the most whereof
(if not all) are long agone ceased. I know you cannot show an ocular
demonstration of these six gifts, remaining, (and achieved not by industry,
but without all ordinary means as it was then) in any Eldership or Synod in
the world, nor ever shall be able, if you live out Methuselah his years. You see
then the gross absurdities that follow your appropriating and tying of
several gifts to your several and peculiar officers: yet is it almost the
only reason in substance, which (with a little diversity of dressing) you
serve out in twenty several dishes. And you may with confusion of faces
acknowledge your licentious boldness in abusing the Scriptures both here and
elsewhere, to make show of serving your turns: Which arises hereof, that you
bring not your senses to the scripture, but draw the Scripture that is not of
private interpretation unto your own fantastical senses, and understandings.

The 3. Demonstration.

Whatsoever is commanded and never repealed, the Church must receive that as
perpetual: But such is the government of the Church by the Eldership,
Demonstration.
in that S. Paul mentions them, and are to be esteemed as commandments of
the Lord. 1. Cor. 14.37. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

One instance undoes this: to abstain (...) from strangled, Remonstrance.
was a commandment never repealed, yet not binding us, nor perpetual.

To the Minor.

That is not the meaning of S. Paul: Whosoever is a Prophet or spiritual, let
him acknowledge that the things which I write unto you are the Lords
commandments: what, for a presbytery or eldership? where is any such
commandment in S. Paul? if it be, we embrace it as the Lords.

The words alleged, are spoken of those Prophesyings in course by any
Christian to whom it was reueiled, which was an use of the primitive Church:
yet not retained now in any the reformed Churches, and is condemned even by our
Consistorials in the Barrowists, a brood of their own hatching. At Geneua,
Calvin once erected such prophesyings, at which a learned Physician would
often speak against the course of the doctrine of Predestination, in that sort
as Calvin taught it, whereupon Calvin caused that Exercise to be strangled in
his swaddling clothes, so that a more pregnant place could not be brought to
prove some commandments of Christ unto the first Church to be such, as cannot
be urged in perpetuity: but yet for any such Eldership, we hold there is
neither commandment, nor example for one time nor for other.

The 4. Demonstration.

That whose parts are perpetual, and perpetual gifts with it, that is
perpetual: Demonstration.
But the several parts of the Eldership, as Pastor, Doctor, Elder, are
perpetual as it is proved in the 10. and 12. cap. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

It is false: for that whose parts are decaying and ruinated, Remonstrance.
Plutarch in Theseo.
may nevertheless be continuing or perpetual: as the ship wherein Theseus
sailed into Candie to subdue the Minotaure, kept by the Athenians unto the time
of Pericles, every planke and piece altered, and yet the same ship: as also
our common wealth and Universities are the self same they were 200. years
ago, though never a man of that age of life.

To the Minor.

Your answer has bin many times before: they are not perpetual as parts of
any eldership. Pastors and Doctors are perpetual, as an entire office or
ministry in the Church: as for Elders (as you mean them) they are in
praedicamento nusquam, and therefore they and their gifts are no parts, nor
yet entire officers in the Church. I take your fallacy to be, Elder is
perpetual, and ship is perpetual, which are parts: Ergo, the whole
Eldership is perpetual: or that your eldership is in the letters of the
Alphabet, Ergo, in the scripture.

The 5. Demonstration.

That which is grounded on the general commandment of scripture,
Demonstration.
is perpetual: but the government by the Eldership in election, ordination,
censure, etc. is so proved in the several. Ergo:

This Syllogism is (...) mere trifling and tumbling up and down in clouds of
generality, Remonstrance.
a mere daliance, and fails of proving. If elections and ordinations be
named in scripture, cannot they be done by any means, but by such an eldership
as you speak of? your Minor is false.

The 6. Demonstration.

That government which has power from God to begin, continue, and strengthen
both the governors, Demonstration.
and the people in their callings, and obedience to Christ, that is perpetual:
But so is the government by the eldership, because the Apostles used none
other. Ergo:

The Mayor draws a goodly large compass, Remonstrance.
yet false: (as you think) for the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets had
that virtue, and yet are ceased. But prove the Minor by some quotation of a
Text, that your Eldership is so because the Apostles used no other, and that
they used it: or else I will not believe it for your sake, or for T. C. your
master, for whose sake you believe it. In the mean season, all that you
depaint out for your Eldershippe, is a picture or poetry: vt pictura posuerit.

The 1. Demonstration.

That government which the twelve Apostles, Demonstrat.
and Paul before they consulted together, did uniformly agree upon and never
repealed, must needs be of God and perpetual: But such is the Eldership, as
all the adversaries do agree thereupon. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is a contradiction to your own conscience: Remonstrance.
for what reason may this be, They did neither confer upon it, nor consult
together, nor made another privy, nor asked one another advise, nor by
commandment enjoined, nor by tradition received it, and yet they did
uniformly according to one form and pattern condescend and agree upon it? as
much to say they did agree, that is, they did not agree, vele contra, did not
agree, Ergo, agree.

To the Minor.

Such is not the eldership: for the Demonstrator has no scripture, no Synod of
the Apostles for it. It is a shame to charge us with the acknowledging of it.

The 8. Demonstration.

That which has the same grounds, Demonstration.
which the preaching of the word and ministration of the Sacraments, that is
perpetual: but such is the eldershippe grounded upon the commandment of
Christ and his Apostles, and their practice. Ergo.

To the Minor.

This is saucily spoken: but not so soon proved, Remonstrance.
To make your eldership equiuale^t in durablenes with the word of God, which is
more lasting then heaven and earth: for the heaven and earth shall pass, but
the word of the Lord endures for ever. The eldershippe after your project is
not so much, nor ever was temporary, much less perpetual, either by
commandment or practice.

The 9. Demonstration.

That which has like grounds to be perpetual, as the Apostles, Demonstration.
Prophets, Evangelists to be temporal, that is perpetual: but such is the
Eldership: for the gifts of the immediate calling are gone, and the gifts of
these are left: Ergo

To the Mayor.

I deny the Mayor, if you mean every Apostleshippe, Remonstrance.
Evangelist or Prophets office: for there are yet Apostles: Legatione pro
Christo fungimur: we are Ambassadors or Apostles for Christ, though not
immediately called thereunto. It is showed before, that they be in that place
perpetual as well as Pastors or Doctors (...) till we all meet together etc.
Ephesians. 4. but that which was extraordinary in their offices is ceased, as the
immediate calling, which the Demonstrator absurdly calls a gift. Pastors also
then had gifts extraordinary of healing and working other miracles: which
though they be ceased, the whole office is not.

To the Minor.

There is no proportion between ens and non ens, between Eldership which
never was, and the Apostles 12. or 72. that sometime were. The gifts for
teachers and spiritual governors are left: but the figment of the Eldership
has no show of them. What gifts of government has one of your Elders after
imposition of hands more then before? and do you choose all that can govern?
neither part of your Minor is true: for neither are sundry of the Apostles,
Evangelists, or Prophets gifts ceased, neither have your Elderships any
peculiar gifts to such an office remaining in every congregation.

The 10. Demonstration.

The ordinary remedy to cure diseases is perpetual: Demonstration.
the Eldership is so, for Dic Ecclesiae will cure the diseases of the Church.
Ergo.

To the Mayor.

This Mayor will make Apostles, Remonstrance.
Evangelists, and Prophets perpetual, who were such remedies in their times.

To the Minor.

Supposing that which ought not be supposed, any conclusion follows thereupon:
as for the elderships physic or chirurgerie, all that follows thereupo^ is
but palliatiua cura a pretense of cure: and if by dic Ecclesiae the eldership
be meant, then shall the church be an ordinary remedy to cure the diseases of
the Church, that is of it self.

The 11. Demonstration.

That government which was under the law, and in respect of the substance
continued in the Gospel, Demonstration.
and bettered by the accidents, that is perpetual: but such is the Eldership:
12. reason of the 1. cap. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

If you can or have proved the beginning of the eldership in the law,
Remonstrance.
continuance in the Gospel, let it stand to the worlds end: if not, quid
dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?

To the Minor.

The mad sickness of your reason and disproportion appears in the answer
there. There is no correspondence of any eldership either to (...) of the
greater number of 70. or of the 23. which is said to be the less: which do you
challenge? (...), or (...); speak plainly if you dare, or else the reason
will retire upon you thus,

That government which never was under law or Gospel, Retortion.
for essence or accidence of Church policy, may not be continued or begun in
the Church: The eldership fancied over men and matters has neither original
of time, nor privilege of authority, Ergo, the golden eldership may not begin
or continue in the Church.

The 12. Demonstration.

If this eldership be alterable being once settled, Demonstration.
either it is in respect of the extraordinary offices ceased, or of the
addition of the magistrate: Not the first, for if the Church does need, God
does ever give gifts extraordinary, nor the second, for the magistrate is to
defend the building of the church. Ergo.

You might have saved your pains in the antecedent: Remonstrance.
for alteration follows or succeeds that which was, and does not succeed
that which is not. That which never was in the church admits no alteration,
no more then Tragelapsus, or Hyppocentaurus, or the man in the moon: if you
will have an issue in the question, let it be this: where a Christian magistrate
is, there needs no eldership, it is ex super abundanti: and where it wants,
God also has other ways then by such mixture of offices to govern the
church. But thus I retort: To every institution of his that has need, Gods
sends gifts extraordinary: To your elders that want ordinary gifts fit for
so great government, he sends no gift extraordinary: Ergo your Eldership is
not his institution.

The 13. Demonstration.

Either this is the best government and perpetual, or none at all:
Demonstration.
but some government must be the best and perpetual: Ergo this is perpetual.

This is handsomely concluded: this is best and worst, Remonstrance.
or none at all: better none at all then never a whit the better: better
nothing then this Anarchicall or tumultuarie government: unless perchance you
hold praestat male esse quam non esse. But there is a Christian
ecclesiastical government already, though you will not see it: Christ in the
midst of us, though some do not know it. You must prove your disjunctive
Mayor a litter better.

The 14. Demonstration. Demonstrat. Cofes. Helue. Tig. Ber. Genesis Pol. Hu. Scot.
Horm. Cap. 8.


No man may justly forbid de to return to the old constitution of the Church
of God.

If you prove this to be the old, and the institution to be for a perpetuity,
then this old constitution is the best. Remonstrat.


The 15. Demonstration.

Experience teaches this order was not for one, but necessary for all ages.
Demonstrat, Calvin inst. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8.


It is certain that experience proves it not so necessary nor profitable:
for else the Apostles would not have instituted, and al succeeding ages
followed so diverse an order of Church government by Bishops, which Zanchus
thinks was of the holy Ghost.

The 16. Demonstration.

Though the common wealth change her government, Demonstra. P. Mar. 3. Rom
the Church must keep hers.

That is, Remonstrance.
the laws of the eternal lawgiuer for the essential matters of the Church
government, not external policy which is variable. Belike your meaning is,
our common wealth must change our Monarchy into Tetrarchie to establish your
Tetrarchicall government of the Church.

The 17. Demonstration.

Bucer dereg. Christi lamenteth that some would not have the same discipline
used now adays which was used in the Apostles time. Demonstration.


And so may we lament the foolish and proud resistance which is made to the
superiority of our prelates and governors, Remonstrance.
which is no other then that was.

The 18. Demonstration.

Whittaker contra Duraeu^ speaking of discipline, Demonstration.
The Apostles have written these laws, not for a day or for the first age, but
for all times to come, and that with obtestation. 1. Timoth 6.

Aetatem habet, Remonstrance.
the man is of discretion, let him answer for him self: It cannot be he meant
your rules of discipline, he knows the absurdity of it, and that your
presbyterium est figmentum humanum, and is no such commandment as Paul makes
obtestation to have kept.

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

By this every Parish shall follow? Demonstration.
their Seniors, and then there will be so many diverse fashions, seeing one may
not meddle with another.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

The government desired is uniform for every Church, and admits no change
not in outward ceremonies, without a Synod of choice men out of every
Eldership.

Here is nothing but eldership upon eldership, Remonstrance with reply.
infinite elderships which the word of God describes not: what need we
excha^ge the uniformity which we already have, for that which is at the least
suspicious to any well-sighted eye, if not pernicious? But if one Eldershippe
will breed molestation in the planting of it, at all adventures, what a do
will it make in the supplanting thereof? Quae nascentia mala sunt, ea
crescentia peiora. They must have (he says) uniformity even in ceremonies not
to be changed without a Synod of choice men: And were not ours so established?
And yet they will not observe them: May not we make as bold with their
ceremonies, and use as small uniformity as they do now?

The 2. objection of the Demonstrator.

If the Eldership being mean men choose an Earl, he must be at their beck.

The answer of the Demonstratour. Demonstrat.


No man chosen is compelled against his will: but he that despises to consult
with others in Gods matters, because they be poor, reprocheth God that made
them. 17. Prou. 5.

Hear this O ye princes and Earls of the land: you must be at the Elders
beck and command, Remonstrance.
or else you blaspheme your and their maker. Salomons words are 17. Prou. 5.14.
cap. 31. verse, He that mocketh or he that oppresses the poor: not a word of
Elders. This is a contradiction to your self: Any Earl or any man may choose
or refuse to take it upon him, because every one has a negative voice, and yet
he must be taken to disdain if he do refuse.

The 3. objection of the Demonstrator.

It ouerburdeneth the Parish to provide for so many Elders to be nourished.
Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

They shall not need, unless they need the liberality of the Church.

They shall not need unless they need: This is a fine reciprocation.
Remonstrance.
They will need forth with, and be idle and busiebodies, if they may have
maintenance. This Eldership is no vocation by the word of God, and therefore
burdensome to the Church. But if the Church be not bound to maintain them,
then they are none of those Elders that are worthy double honor, 1. Tim. 5.
For by double honor, liberal mainteinance is there chiefly understood, as the
reasons annexed and circumstances of that place do import.

The 4. objection of the Demonstrator.

It brings in a new Popedom or tyranny in the Church. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

It is blasphemy to term the government so: for shall we not yield our
obedience to the Scepter of Christ?

Nay it is a name full of blasphemy, Remo^strance with reply.
and the mystery of Antichrist, to call the babble of their Eldership (as they
describe it) by the name of the Scepter of our blessed king and Savior Jesus
Christ, and to challenge to themselves the obedience due to our Lord Christ.
Nay, if many Antichrists be worse then one, and many tyrants more intoilerable
then one: then this, to tyrannize in the conscience by many Elderdomes and
Popedomes, is Mysterium iniquitatis, which does advance against Christ. Has
Christ no Scepter to govern his Church by, but in their hands? Do all deny
Christ to be their king, that refuse or have not your Elderships? With what
face can you deny Barrowes conclusions, that yield him these premises to
conclude by?

The 5. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It is a kind of Donatisme to challenge such authority over Princes.
Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

It is flattery to suffer Princes to do what they list: This is Gualters
objection, an enemy to discipline.

Gualter is no enemy to discipline, Remonstrance with reply.
but to Anabaptisticall discipline. As for this discipline in use, it is no
flattery of Princes: but if your Assertion might sway, we should have flat
rebellion and insurrection against al Christian Kings, especially against the
sacred Majesty of our most gracious and glorious Prince. What can the Papists
imagine of greater weight to be holden from them, then the Scepter and kingdom
of Christ as you do? And you are as tickle headed and handed being discontented
as they are.

The 6. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It takes away the Princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

No more then it did from David in his time, not so much as the Bishops do now:
for the Prince requires but this to see the Church well ordered, which the
Eldership allows and craves.

There was no such Eldership in David's time: Remonstrance with reply.
Ergo no comparison between this and that time. But this impeacheth her
Majesty's Prerogative and preeminence given by all the Peers, Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, the Commons in the lower house, Convocation house,
to set up a Consistory over all causes and persons, yea, over herself: For
these men dream, that all sheaues must bow to their sheaues, (which God
forbid) for they are a quintessence of Eldership, above Sun and moon, above
the Imperial firmament. It is a slander to say, not so much as Bishops: for
Bishops have none authority of jurisdiction, but derived from the Prince, unto
whose regal authority of the crown all commanding superiority is annexed.
But you claim other and far greater, as elsewhere is showed.

The 7. objection of the Demonstrator.

It transformeth the state of the Common wealth into a mere popularitie,
Demonstrat.
and will alter this government.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

No, for what damage comes by this discipline to the Magistracy, from the
office of the Prince to the Headboroughes?

Because the Prince must govern after their direction, Remonstrance with reply.
as the learned discourse does say: The Prince shall be but a feeling member, not
an head or supreme governor of the Church: Princes must cast down their
Crowns, and submit their Scepters to the scepter of the Presbytery: nay which
is more odious, as T.C. does apply, must lick up the dust of their feet, that
is of the Church, which is the Presbytery: Because her Majesty must not only
be directed by the regencie of the Eldership, but upon their judgments
corrected also. They will make laws, call Synodes, have the last appellation,
and many such like, as has been before touched. Finally, because her Majesty
has neither dispositiue not co^sultatiue voice, she may not be privy what the
Presbytery does, by her own presence or by sending her Attorney: with many
more as they shall hear.

The 8. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It will send contention and partiality in judgment. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

Where can it be greater then in the Bishops kingdom?

Yes forsooth, greatest of al in the Tetrarches Popedom: Remonstrance with
reply.
But this is but to answer with recriminatio^, or reaccusing one another.
Verily as for the Bishops ministry, it is no kingdom, neither your kingdom
or tetrarchie any ministry. They are governed by laws in all their
proceedings, but you will have self will and law of your own mind, and
blasphemously father it upon scripture and Gods word: and so you do all most
absurd and unequal decrees of your elderships, as in many particulars (where
they reign) is showed.

The 9. objection of the Demonstrator.

It will be contemned, and so good order neglected. Demonstrat.


Answer.

Nay God will procure awe to it: It is the Bishops pomp and officers, which
deserve contempt.

But before in the 4. it was tyranny, Remonstrance, with Reply.
here contemptible, these are contrary.

God will not honor those that honor not him, or who with a new invention
glorify themselves. If the Bishops are in contempt, you are the men that
contemn, Fastum Platonis maiore fastu. As for tyranny and contempt, they are
seated well in you: For Psalm. 12. When Impij circumquaque obambulant quando
exaltantur vilitas filijs hominum: the word in Hebrew is Zuloth. When your
Elders shall be exalted and ride upon the Cherubims, when the many, or baser sort
do tyrannize, it will be a contemptuous tyranny in deed.

The 10. objection of the Demonstrator.

All alterations be dangerous. Demonstration.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

Never from Antichrist to Gods obedience: this might be Stephen Gardiners
Argument.

All alterations are dangerous, Remonstrance, with reply.
where things are religiously established, as with us. As for Stephen
Gardener, he made arguments De vera obedientia, which you, nor T.C.I.P. nor
any Papist who (alike with you) impugn supremacy of Princes in causes
Ecclesiastical, can ever answer. De mortuis nil nisi bonum: pascitur in viuis
liuor, post fata quiescit: So it should be.

The Assertion.

The Church must be ruled by the rules of Gods word, etc. and not by the
cursed and monstrous Canon law. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

All governors are to execute their authority by the same warrant from which
they have it: But the governors of the Church have their warrant only from
the word, 1. cor. 12.28: Ergo, only by the word.

Here be quatuor termini. Remonstrance.
It should be thus framed: By what warrant they have government, by the same
warrant they must execute it: By the warrant of the word they have their
government, Ergo, by the warrant of the word they must execute it.

This we grant, that as well the warrant to have government, as to execute it,
must be grounded in the word: But hereof it follows not, that all particular
and specificall points that may happen in and about the execution, are set
down in the warrant. Else what needed rules of discipline and Church
government for France, Scotland, Gernsey and Geneua, to be set down as they
are, if they were all before expressed in Scripture? Nay they make them mutable
upon occasions, and therefore not commanded by Scripture, which now in your
last platform you distinguish to be understood not of the holy discipline
which you say is Essential, but of the Synodicall, belike neither holy, nor
Essential: and yet this moveable part contains these Chapters or heads: Of
the necessity of vocation, the manner of vocation and bounds of it, of
election, of the manner of exercising a man's vocation, the office of the
Ministers, and of the manner of the Liturgy, of making Sermons to the Church,
of Catechism, of other parts of Liturgy, of Sacraments, of Baptism, of the
Supper, of fastes, of holy days, of Marriages, of Schools, of students in
Divinity and their exercises, of Elders, of Elderships, of Censures, of Church
assemblies, of Classes or conferences, of Synods, with the judgment touching
all the Discipline.

If the warrant both to have a government, and to execute it, Absurdity of the
Demonstrator.
be derived from the commission of the prince, does it follow that all
particular directions that may happen to be needful about the execution of
it, are there also set down? But this sort of persons weigh not how their
speeches agree, either with their own words, with their practice, with
reason, or with truth, so they may make a vain show of some appearance to
their simple followers that are not able to judge.

I do not think this man can be angry with the letter of the Canon law, but
with the Canonists, Sacerdotes iuris, the Priests and interpreters of the
Law, who have inflicted upon him some censure of the Law. I know not what
the quarrel is, but this I am sure, he does drive out by curse of the
Sanedrim or Presbytery, the whole course of the Law: Me think all his fight
is Lapitharum pugnae, disorderly fight.

The 2. Demonstration.

The Church must be governed by that which the Ministers must teach:
Demonstration.
The Ministers may teach nothing but the word. 1. Cor. 11.23. Ergo.

Here is another transposition of the parts of the Syllogism, Remonstrance.
or no Syllogism at all.

To the Mayor.

This is strange doctrine, there must be no law in particular in the Church,
but the Minister must at first teach. This is a confusion of divinity and law.
If the meaning be that by nothing it must be governed, but what the Minister
must teach (as it must needs be, for else he says nothing:) Then is the Mayor
false, and the whole Syllogism more false, as consisting al of mere
negatiues, for only is an implied negative, as only man is reasonable, is as
much as nothing is reasonable besides man: and then it stands thus, By
nothing must the Church be governed but what the Minister must teach: The
Ministers may teach nothing but the word, Ergo by nothing but the word must
the Church be governed. If the Syllogism were good, the untruth of some part
of it might thus appear: By nothing but the word of God must the Church be
governed: Neither your Synodical and variable discipline, nor your Eldership is
the word of God: Ergo, by your Synodical discipline or by your Elderships, the
Church may not be governed.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which makes the Church obedient to Christ, Demonstrat.
must be the direction whereby it is governed: The only word makes the
Church obedient to Christ: Ergo, It is to be governed by the rules of Gods word.

This is a spare demonstration, Remonstrance.
and might be granted also being truly understood of the general rules
drawn out of Gods word, but there is no coherence in the Mayor. The Minor is
false speaking properly: for it is the spirit of God that works in us
obedience to Gods will.

The 4. Demonstration.

Every kingdom and household must be governed by the laws of the king:
Demonstrat.
The Church, etc. Ergo.

Occidit miseros crambe repetita magistros: Remonstrance.
Coleworts twice boiled. This was the 2. demonstration of the first Chapter.

The 5. Demonstration.

That which was ordained to destroy the Church of God, Demonstrat.
cannot be a rule to govern the same: But such is the Canon law, Abstract.
Ergo.

To the Mayor.

Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem: Remonstrance.
This man knows not neither Paragraphe nor Rubric of the law: he produces
the Abstract, as honest a man as himself: he will be tried by his fellow,
because he will not willingly trouble the country. Canon law (viz.) decrees
of godly Councils, was in use before Antichrist came in, if you take the vulgar
computation of Antichrists coming in: what thereof is retained, is before
showed. Was there not as heedefull advise taken, and by as sufficient men, as
met about setting down of their discipline? I would they would but take the
pains themselves to confer the Canon law, and their own platform
together, for causes Matrimonial that often may happen: and then judge whether
they have prescribed sufficient direction for all or most occurrences that may
happen in the compass of their government.

The 6. Demonstration.

That which was invented by the Dragon to persecute the Church, Demonstrat.
cannot be good for the Church: But the Canon law. Ergo.

If you mean Draco the Athenian, he writ his laws in blood: Remonstrance.
If you mean the Dragon in the Revelation, he writ no laws, unless he be
penman of the Presbytery laws. He might have made several Demonstrations like
this, one with the Devil, another with Satan, the third with Beelzebub, etc.

The 7. Demonstration.

That which strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, Demonstration.
is not good for the Church: But the Canon law increases Popery, for scarce
any officer of knowledge toward it, but is a Papist, Ergo.

To the Minor.

It is rather as a medicinable poison to expel another: Nothing better is to
overthrow the Papacy, then by the Canons of his own law. As for your
prosyllogisme, It increases Papists, Ergo. Popery, the officers are much
beholding to you: O cancred mind and venomous tooth and mouth. There be
officers that know it and have studied it, which are able to reason more
soundly against Popery, then the haughtiest Rabbyn of you all. Alas the
Jesuits desire no better match, then to have a Puritan come to reason with
them, they are so far to seek in the controversies. I am assured more sound
arguments may be drawn out of that Law against the Pope and Popery, then
three of the best of our Puritanes can bring out of all their readings.
Gentiletus a Protestant lawyer has confuted the Tridentine Council, even out
of the Decrees of Gratian.

The 8. Demonstration.

That which destroys the Church, Demonstra.
cannot be good to rule: But the Canon law destroys it, for it crosses
every faithful Minister in discharge of his duty. Ergo.

Hinc illae lachrymae. Remonstrance.
Lex non est posita justice: there is no law but for lawless men. If all the
old Canons and course of law were gone, then you were safe enough, you and
your Elders would be Popes in your own Parishes. And is in deed the Church
destroyed, when any of you be crossed in your manner of discharging your
Ministry? The Church (I perceive) with you has many significations.

The 9. Demonstration.

That which has bread more traitorous Papists in England, Demonstrat.
then the Seminaries of Rhemes and Rome, cannot be good: but the Canon law,
etc. Ergo.

This is a seditious and frantic Paradoxe: Remonstrance.
well, you shall have somewhat for the making: your credit shall be in the next
Demonstration: none shall believe you. Belike they were converted to Popery by
the study of the Canon law: even as like, as if a man would say, that your
discipline is able to convert from Popery to the Gospel.

The 10. Demonstration.

That which nourishes the hope of Antichrist to come in again, Demonstrat.
cannot be good: But the Canon law: for it keeps the cages of these unclean
birds, as Archbishops, Lord bishops, Arches, Cathedral Churches: Ergo.

This bird would sing in a Bridewell cage, Remonstr.
if he be not caged in another manner of cage, or deplumed rather for libelling
against Judgment seats, and Colleges of the Prophets: O shameless folly: as
if Popery were come in, it could not bring with it the whole Popes law,
though it were abrogated in the mean time.

The 11. Demonstration.

That which all the Churches have cast off as unfit, Demonstrat.
cannot be good: But all the Churches that have forsaken the Pope, have cast it
off. Ergo.

The Mayor tends to Donatisme or Brownists Antichristianitie. Remonstr.


To the Minor.

An instance is: The reformed Churches of Germany, Denmark, and Sweden, that
retain much of it: and so our Church: But they will deny ours perhaps to be
a Church reformed. What folly were it where a case happens with a just and
equal decision, to determine the contrary, because he was an ill man under
whose authority it was first published? Though Rich. 3. was an usurping
tyrant, his laws were very good and are yet retained, and so are the sound
judgments that were given in times past by Papists, Judges, and badde men.

The 12. Demonstration.

We our selves mislike it, as appears by a statute of Edward the 6.
Demonstration.


We do not mislike but abridge: Remonstrance.
an abridgement or exception unto part, is not misliking of the whole: By an
abridgement no more was intended then to have it perfectly known what was
profitable to be retained, as not contrary to the prerogative Royal, nor laws
of the land. O golden Demonstrations of a leaden Demonstrator.

The fifteenth Chapter.
Assertion.

Governors of the Church may not meddle but in matters Ecclesiastical only:
as vocation, abdication, Demonstration.
in deciding of controversies, in doctrine and manners, as far as appertains
to the conscience and censures of the Church.

This Assertion is laid out by him, Remonstrance.
not so much to signify what apperteineth to Church governors, as what not
apperteineth: viz. civil causes: which he fancieth that Bishops do exercise,
and to claim as appertayning unto their functions. By abdication he means
deposition of Church officers: the word signifies properly a voluntary
putting away of an office, but he thinks it is abdication when it is taken
away against a man's will: such a fault may be forgiven to a poor smatterer in
learning, when he takes it up at a more learned man's hand per fidem
implicitam, and he only to be blamed that thus served him on trust. The French
disciplines both, and their practice together with the book written in
confirmation of that discipline, do attribute to every consistory or Eldership
authority and power to make laws ecclesiastical. This part of power our men
never reach at plainly and in direct terms, because it were likely to be
envious, and perhaps would prove either too hot or to heavy unto them. And
it is wisely (me thinks) considered of them besides: for when all other laws
for Church government are once taken away, then shall their power be more
absolute, if none in their stead be set down, but all left to their own
wills. And seeing they have left to themselves deciding of all controversies in
doctrine and manners, as far as appertains to the conscience, there is
still measure large enough in their own hands to supply this want at the
full: for this one limme of authority will carry all causes (though most
civil in their nature and practice) out of all Courts in the land unto their
Elderships. First the Chancerie, that decideth matters of controversy by
conscience, is clearly dammed up and may go pick paigles. And are any other
civil Courts in better case? no verily: for can any controversy be betwixt
man and man, but it appertains to conscience, to give the matter contended
for, unto him to who^ of right it is due? You may not therefore marvel
hereafter if you chance to hear a man excommunicated by them (among whom this
discipline reigns) for refusing to cancel a band, if they think it
unconscionable, or denying to acquitte a debte, though it were with the
creditors undoing. This (forsooth) is no civil cause or matter at the common
law, though Littleton would depose twenty times that it were. By vocation I
think they mean the first nomination of a man unto the people for an
ecclesiastical office. They leave out election, because they would seem more
popular then the French discipline that gives to the Eldershippe both vocation
and election: but by that time the cards be dealt out, you shall see all
comes to one pass: for whom they nominate, he is thereby chosen, if the people
do not gainesay it: and if they all do, there must also a cause be both
alleged, and allowed by the Eldershippe, before he can be rejected.

They mention not here ordination by imposition of hands upon the elected by
the Eldershippe: but we see by other places that they have an eye unto it not
to loose it. I will ask therefore all the learned of that side, where, by any
pregnant place they find ordination of Ministers of the word with imposition
of hands, or the censures of the Church inflicted in or since the Apostles
time, by or under the authority of those that themselves are no ministers, but
in all other respects are mere lay men, and but annual or biennall officers
in the Church? If they cannot show it, let them for ever hereafter hold their
peace, and confess it to be (in truth) a devise of man's brain, which they
would seem so much to detest in Church government.

The 1. Demonstration.

That which our Savior Christ refused ruling and governing the Church,
Demonstration.
and teaching the Church, that is not lawful for an ecclesiastical person to
do: but Christ refused to divide the inheritance, Luke 12.14. Ergo
Ecclesiastical persons may not judge in civil matters.

The syllogism is to be concluded new again: Remonstrance
here are four termini four terms in three quarters of a year. One
conclusion is, Ergo ecclesiastical persons may not judge in civil causes:
another should be, Ergo ecclesiastical persons may not divide land or
inheritance: Amphor a caepit institui, currente rota, sic vrceus exit.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor is to be denied: all that our Savior refused, every of us may not
refuse: he because he came to be a mediator between God and man, would not
become a common diuider, and judge of every secular cause of title of land: who
made me? etc. neither my heavenly father sent me to that end: neither have I
commission from thy brother to send thee into the moietie of the possession.
Besides, if he had intermedled in the matters of the common weal, it would
have strengthened the conceipte, that he sought an earthly kingdom, and to
dispossess the Romans. To reason from Christ's refusal, is the refuse of all
good reason, a non facto ad ius: Christ would not or did not answer Pilate in
judgment: must we therefore conclude, Ergo at the tribunal of a Judge, it is
at our discretion to answer or not to speak? Christ did not condemn the
woman taken in the act of adultery: shall not therefore officers
Ecclesiastical condemn any such sinner?

To the Minor.

Christ refused to divide the inheritance: it was because he would not use
the authority that he had as Lord of Heaven and earth when he came as a
servant: not because either a Christian magistrate or minister should after
his example lay aside all authority: (...); who has appointed me, emplieth
rather, that if he had been appointed by both the parties, he might have done
it, and so may any minister arbitrate and compounde a controversy civil that
is committed unto him. If any Christians may be judges of civil matters 1.
Cor. 6. why may not some ministers in some civil matters? If then he may
whom the Church appoints, nay whom two private men consent upon, though he
be a person ecclesiastical: may not the Christian Sovereign Prince much more
commit a civil cause unto them, and they lawfully deal in it? Or if it will
be said, they may not so deal in causes civil delegated unto them: is then
the sin hereof in him who delegateth, or who is delegated, or in both? But I
need not wade further into this matter, I have spoken something to it before.
More authority civil then is delegated unto them, no Bishop has, may have,
or does claim in this Realm: and therefore except they will impugn this
point, their labor is superfluous. By the way I will propounde this unto them:
If all civil rule and authority be denied to persons Ecclesiastical (as in
it self impious) how may they rule their wives, children, and household,
which is oeconomicall power, and therefore civil, as civil is opposite to
ecclesiastical? Likewise how may they cast their accounts, receive their
rentes, etc. Nay when they are rubbed with their lay Elders, and can no where
find them, then they say they are not lay, but Ecclesiastical persons,
because they have imposition of hands. If they be therefore so to be
accounted, Country poison.
then how may they lawfully even in the year of their Eldership, be also
civil magistrates, as Sheriffs, Justices of peace, masters of their
companies, counselors, Syndicks, and what not though most civil, as daily
experience teaches where that discipline is in ure? Belike their assertions
and rules are made only against bishops, not against themselves.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which was forbidden to the Apostles, Demonstration.
is unlawful for ecclesiastical officers: but such dominion was forbidden, Luke
22.28. which is to rule ciuilly. Ergo.

That which was forbidden etc. is unlawful. Remonstrance.


But ambition, tyranny, and contention for absolute, seigneurial and civil
authority was forbidden, not a modest, either civil or ecclesiastical
superiority: ergo, to be ambitious, and contentious, etc. is unlawful. In that
here he applies that of Luke to civil rule, he clears our Bishops from
the danger of it, in exercising any authority Ecclesiastical. This Argument
is answered before.

The 3. Demonstration.

If necessary duties are to be left rather then our duty in the Church,
Demonstration.
then may not a Church Officer deal in civil jurisdiction: but the former is
true, for a man may not bury his father. Luc. 6.59. Ergo,

I deny the sequel of the Antecedent: Remonstrance.
albeit some corporal or bodily offices, which duty bids to be done, may
upon Christ's commandment be left undone, yet this is no bar to ministers
and preachers of the Gospel, to deal in any necessary civil cause. And how
is it proved that no civil jurisdiction may stand with doing of his Church
duty? There is none of themselves, but they can be content to be executors to
a wealthy widow, or such like: being no more afraid of it then they are to
bury them.

To the Assumption.

Your quotation should be the 9. of Luke: the meaning of which place is, All
Christians must lay aside all impedimentes and hinderaunces, that may draw
them from coming to Christ: but some civil authority amongst Christians, is
rather a furtherance.

What consequence call ye this? A man may not bury his own father, rather then
not follow Christ, or if Christ otherwise encharge him, Ergo, a minister that
lives in a Christian common wealth, may not lawfully have a branch of
commission from the prince for civil jurisdiction?

The 4. Demonstration.

If he that has an office must attend on his office, Demonstration.
then may he not intermeddle with another office: But the first is true, Romans
12.7. Ergo, not with civil jurisdiction.

He may not intermeddle without lawful calling or vocation, Remonstrance.
yet the connection has no sequel: Do you not see some that have two offices
look near enough to both? This will roaue at temporal men, as well as at
ecclesiastical.

S. Paul disputes of diligence in our function, not of diversity of
functions, which diverse functions may concur in one. See the answer to the
first: thus I retort against your selves: He that has an office may not
intermeddle with another. Retortion.
A Pastor has an other office in the Church then his Presidentship in their
Eldership: Ergo, A pastor may not intermeddle in the Consistory or Eldership.

The 5. Demonstration.

As the Soldier is in warfare, Demonstrat.
so is the Church Officer in ruling of the church: but the soldier entangleth
not himself with things of this life: which place Cyprian alleges against a
minister that became an executour of his friends will. Ergo, Church Officers
not with things of this life.

To the Mayor.

The Mayor holds wherein the proportion is to be held, Remonstrance.
for readiness and expedition.

To the Minor.

The soldier is not to be a pragmatical fellow in other worldly affairs,
(...). No more the Divine or preacher to be a worldling. As for the place of
Cyprian lib. 1. epi. 9. it may serve any of your elders, that would encomber
themselves either with that or any other troublesome execution: yet it is
spoken of a tutorship or Gardianship which was by the Roman law more
troublesome, and less beneficial then an executorship, and often times very
dangerous to the state of the Tutor.

The 6. Demonstration.

Things of contrary qualities cannot concur. Demonstrat.


The government of the Church and common weal are so: for they are both next
special members of one general: the one spiritual, the other temporal: the
one for the soul, the other for the body. Ergo,

To the Mayor.

Things of contrary qualities may concur in vno subiecto, Remonstrance.
in one subject, not in extremities of degrees, but remissiuely, not in intenso
gradu: but the Mayor is the contradiction of the Minor: where you say they are
special members of one general, etc. I take your meaning and not your words,
things desparated are not verifiable one of another, or one of these two
differences are not coincident one upon another. True it is, civil government
is not Ecclesiastical, nor Ecclesiastical civil: Ergo, say you, these cannot
meet in one. This is most false: for Moral virtues are not intellectual, nor
intellectual moral, Ergo, shall it follow, none shall have them both? they may
be in vno subiecto communi, and adequato, not proprio. Occonomie is not
policy, nor policy Oeconomie, Ergo, none can govern his house and private
wealth, and the common wealth also. This is also false.

As for the addition of your Minor, the one, etc.

Ecclesiastical government is not only spiritual, which concerns the
conscience inwardly: but Christian magistracy is also spiritual concerning
the visible Church. The other temporal. It is not only temporal, unless ye
mean amongst the Church: spiritual government respects principally the
soul, not only the soul: Temporal government not only the body, but
secondarily touches the conscience and soul, unless you can feign a body
without a soul. Here is your error: you do not understand that Christ does
govern by the magistrate and minister both spiritually and externally: howbeit
by himself only spiritually, which does plunge you in this Turkish error.

The 7. Demonstration.

If the whole government of the Church in particular office, Demonstra.
and in the whole Eldershippe be of great weight, then may not a Church
officer intermedle in any other calling: But the first is true. Ergo, the
second.

If you mean your imaginable Eldershippe, Remonstrance.
and offices of your own creation, upon your own surmise you may conclude
what you list: if you mean pastoral eldership, and our rightful officers, the
sequel of the antecedent may justly be denied. For if the Church-gouernment be
never so weighty, yet it is not diminished by laying on the commission of some
civil authority derived especially from the supremacy of the prince.

Let my reason march upon you thus.

If their Eldership over all men's doctrine and manners, be too ponderous a
weight for (...) certain private men, artisans, and plowe men, and others for
to bear, then may they well forbear: But the former is true, Ergo, the later.

The 8. Demonstration.

If the Apostles were unfit for two offices both ecclesiastical, Demonstration.
then is the best church-gouernor unfit for two: the one of the common wealth,
the other of the Church: But the first is true. Act 6.2. Ergo,

This Antecedent comes to this sum: Remonstrance.
If the Apostles were unfit to be Deacons and ministers, then is no Christian
or the best governor for two more different offices unfit.

First, the Apostles were not unfit for it: but it for the Apostles.
Secondly, the text speaks not of unfitness or insufficiency, but of
inconueniencie or vnmeetnesse. (...). Thirdly, though it were unmeet for the
Apostles to leave the ministration of the word, and to minister unto tables:
(because other might be found, who were meet for that place) Nevertheless,
they being Apostles, and extraordinary men, might at their discretion
relinquish one office, and exercise another. It must not necessarily follow
hereupon, that none being Ecclesiastical men may bear a civil office amongst
Christians, and for Christian men.
To the Assumption.

That is denied to be expressly in the text: But let the argument be drawn
indifferently for us both.

Either you account those two offices, of Deaconrie and ministry, greater, or
less then a civil office and Ecclesiastical all in one. If greater, why then
you see that successively for the commodity of the Church, the Apostles used
both. If less, how holds your argument from the less to the greater, or
from the greater to the less, since with you the least Ecclesiastical officer
for the soul, is greater then any civil officer for the body?

But if your reason be thus, One man may not bear two hie offices, both of
great importance: Ergo, he may not bear one ecclesiastical office, another
civil, the one of great, the other of less credit: The reason does bend
against your selves: the Apostles did exercise one office of greater, another
of less weight, for the well ordering of the Church in their own person: For
where have you proved, that they did clean relinquish and put off the same?
Since Saint Paul was careful for collection and distribution of alms, 1. Cor.
16. cap. Ergo, an Ecclesiastical person may have in remissis gradibus, both
authorities in a Christian Common wealth, which neither is nor ought to be
secluded from the Church. Go and reconcile your self with your brother, that
writ so absurdly and confusedly de Politia Civilly and ecclesiastica: for he is
directly against you herein.

The 9. Demonstration.

That which was intolerable in the Papists, in us is unlawful: Demonstrat.
To bear both swords was intolerable in them, Ergo in us.

To the Minor.

To bear both swords for the Q. or Prince, that is, Remonstrance.
to receive as well temporal as spiritual jurisdiction from and for God and
the Prince, is not intolerable neither repugnant to the word. To usurp
Christ's office, or to usurp supreme civil power iure diuino as certain
Bishops of Rome have done and claim, or to place themselves in Princes
thrones, that is unlawful: You can never show any such resemblance betwixt a
Bishop being a Justice of peace or counselor, and the Popes usurped authority
claimed as due unto him.

The 10. Demonstration.

If it be lawful for an Ecclesiastical man to exercise the office of a civil
magistrate, Demonstrat.
then e contra, for the civil magistrate to exercise the office of an
Ecclesiastical person: but the later is unlawful, ergo the former.

The one is not as lawful as the other, Remonstrance.
though upon a lawful calling I see no reason why a civil magistrate may not
exercise, etc. But where the example of the one is more frequent then the
example of the other, there it may seem more lawful for the one then for the
other. It was lawful for Samuel to kill Agag, which was the office of Saul:
but not lawful for Saul to offer sacrifice, which was the office of Samuel.
The office of the civil magistrate may by commission or deriuation of power, be
committed to whom best pleases him, not e contra: The reason is, the civil
government is a matter of accident, not of the essence of the Ministry.

I see no refusal you can make of this absurdity, Absurdity of the
Demonstrator.
if you so deem it: If a civil man may exercise the office of an
Ecclesiastical person, then may an Ecclesiastical man much rather execute the
office of a civil person, for that is but an accessorie thing to the principal
office which he bears: But a civil man may be an Elder, that is an
Ecclesiastical officer, and the most honorable may not refuse without
disdain of God (as you say,) Ergo the Ecclesiastical person may bear the
office of a civil magistrate.

The 11. Demonstration. Demonstrat.


They may not entangle themselves with worldly affairs, Can. aposto. c. 80.
but Ecclesiastical.

He must commodum se exhibere vsibus Ecclesiasticis, Remonstrance.
so that he may best serve for the uses and services of the Church: Or so that
one be not an impediment to another.

The 12. Demonstration or Allegation. Demonstrat.


None of the clergy shall receive charges of those who are under age, Conc.
Calcedon. ca. 3. and 7.
or be steward to noblemen, or receive any secular honor.

That is, Remonstrance.
none of the Clergy shall take the tutorship of any, or make a confusion of
callings and functions: otherwise the Canon carries no sense.

The 13. Demonstration, Demonstrat.
or Allegation.

The Bishops shall only attend to prayer, 4 Conc. Carth. ca. 20.
and preaching, and reading.

The words are, Episcopus nullam rei familiaris curam ad se reuocet:
Remonstrance.
Or he shall be so employed unless upon lawful command and calling. His
household cares may not make him forget his charge: yet he must have care
thereof, and been praeesse propriae domui, as S. Paul teaches. But do you
think this Canon barreth you from providing for your household affairs, or to
be masters in your own houses?

The 14. Allegation, or Demonstration.

Calvin. Institut. lib 4. cap. 11. sect. 9. brings diverse reasons to prove
that Bishops may neither take nor usurp any civil office. Demonstrat.


Calvin brings them, Remonstrance.
but you can not bring forth the reason, but like god Mercury in the high way
point which way they go, but utter nothing. There is never an one of his
reasons concludent, to prove it simply unlawful, but by way of that which may
happen by it.

The 15. Allegation, or Demonstration.

Beza confess. cap. 5. Sect. 32. and 42. shows the distinguishment of
offices, Demonstrat.
and how the fathers dealt in things of this life, and how the Apostles
punishments were extraordinary.

Ergo is not so clear on your side: Remonstrance.
for if the Apostles censures were extraordinary, how dare you draw some of
them into consequence? If giving of advise in all matters of war and peace,
and in determinations judicial be matters of this life, then Beza himself
uses civil authority as much as any one Ecclesiastical man in any reformed
Church in Europe.

The 16. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstrat.


When both offices meet in one, the one hinders the other. Martyr. 13. R^.


That is, when the civil power is excessive or illimitable: Remonstrance.
The same Martyr out of Chrysostom says, The Gospel was given to stablish the
policy and government of Princes, and why not the policy of Princes for the
Gospel?

The 17. Allegation, or Demonstration. Demonstrat.


There is no man so wise and holy, able to exercise civil and ecclesiastical
power. Bucer 5. Matthew.


That is, in plenitudine potestatis. Remo^strance


The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

It countenanceth and mainteineth religion. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

It is the Papists reason which Calvin confuteth. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect.
9. for the two swords.

The reason is no worse whose reason soever it be, Remonstrance with reply.
but to two swords it serves not: there is one indepriuable authority to
bear the sword.

The 2. objection of the Demonstrator.

It is good to punish vice by corporal punishment, that the word may be
obeyed. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

It is good to preach the word, that they may obey their Prince for conscience
sake. May the magistrate therefore preach? We must do good agreeable to our
calling.

Yea therefore it is good, Remonstrance with reply.
being granted from the Christian magistrate to punish sin corporally: as for
the wanderment of your instance, if the magistrate be so called, he may preach
obedience in his own person: and he that inflicteth corporal punishment, do
no more then may stand with his calling.

The 3. objection of the Demonstrator.

Eli and Samuel were both Priests. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

They were extraordinary, and so was Eliahs killing of Baals priests, and
Christ's whipping of buyers, etc. God separated them in Moses and Aaron.

Cohanim in Hebrew signifies princes and priests, Remonstrance with reply.
and therefore that is doubtful. Though the men were extraordinary, the
offices are not always so: but they leave the use of corporal infliction, to
punish Atheism and Idolatry, and to augment godliness. It is ordinary with
you to answer all things by extraordinary, when you can hit of none other:
all the old Testament is full of such examples of Ecclesiastical men, who
exercised civil power, yea not being delegated by any superior Magistrate,
and therefore seems ordinary that falls out so often and in so many.

The 4. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Peter killed Ananiah: Demonstrat.
Ergo Bshops may have prisons.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

It was with the word only. If they can do like, Peter's example will serve:
If not, then it is extraordinary.

Hierom epistola ad Demetriadem is not of your mind: Remonstrance with reply.
Petrus nequaquam imprecatur eis mortem vt stultus Porphirius calumniatur, sed
Dei iudicium prophetico spiritu annunciat, did not curse them by his word as
Porphirie the fool would, but in a prophetical spirit tells them of Gods
judgment that was at hand.

First we make no such objection: The Bishops have no prisons, they had lately
custodias of clerks convict, but they were not carceres unto which they
committed them for their offense done, but were sent thither to be in safety
(being persons found guilty) till by course of law (as it then stood) they
should be delivered. Yet in one case they may as Bishops by a statute of H. 7.
imprison at this day: viz. a minister of his Diocese convicted of
incontinencie, he may commit to a private prison, and enjoin him what strait
diet or penance he thinks fit. I think so they and their Eldership might
have this authority, they would let it pass the musters. But that the
hypocrisy of them may better appear (who here speak against Bishops prisons
and civil punishments) it would be asked of them, what difference (in the
substance of the matter) it is, for an ecclesiastical person to commit a man to
prison himself, or for their Elderships to have a bedle or Sergeant of the
civil Magistrates attending on their Consistories every Court day, who both
brings thither by force such as will not come being sent for, and carries
such to prison as the Eldership judge to deserve it? as the use of Geneua is:
or to procure governors of Bridewell to whippe one of their Church that abused
the Minister in speeches (sitting with his Eldership in Consistory) as not
long since one of the French Church in London was used? Belike it is lawful
for us to cry, Take him away, crucify him, but we may not in any case kill or
punish any man our selves: Oh that were civil authority, far be it from us.

The argument should proceed thus: Peter killed Ananias by civil
extraordinary jurisdiction, and not by his word only: although they cannot
do the like. Nevertheless, by ordinary power committed to them, they may do
the less: and therefore imprison for disciplining the inordinate and
correction of the badde, where the magistrate imparteth to them such authority.

The sixteenth Chapter.
Assertion.

THe placing of Church Officers pertains to the Eldership, Demonstration.
and also the displacing.

The 1. Demonstration.

They who are lawfully called from heaven to the ministry, and outwardly, by
the means of men may not be displaced being blameless. 1. Timoth. 3.10. But
such are the ministers, whom the Bishops do displace.

Ergo,

How does this agree with the issue, Remonstrance.
or Assertion he takes upon him to prove? vz. that as he has proved (he
says) before the Eldershippes authority of placing, so now he proves that
they have the displacing of ministers. What? even without the peoples consent?
Beware this be no tyranny by your own constructions: Cuius est instituere,
eius est destituere, and e conuerso. But I pray, good Demonstrationers, does
this follow? Bishops displace men whom they ought not, because they are
blameless men, Ergo, displacing of ministers belongs to the Eldership? yet
this is your reasoning in this Chapter. Your brother Martine Malapert in
Thesibus, will ease both Bishops and Eldership of this labor. For he says,
that a minister once called may upon none occasion, by any humane authority
be displaced, or put from preaching. Belike it shall be a sanctuary for him,
though he preach daily treason, or commit any wickedness whatsoever: your
grief is only because you with your Eldership have not the displacing of
them: for if you had, it should then well be seen, how far one man
differs from another, and that the commissioners ecclesiastical are but
silly fellows in comparison of you, at removing of a minister. O beware at a
dead lift, (as long as you live) of half a score substantial fellows bredde
up at home.

To the Minor.

How many such are there of them, whom the Bishops have displaced?

Numero vix totidem quot Thebarum portae, vel diuit is ostia Nili: Not so many
as the gates of Thebes have been ever so displaced: nay, name one and we
grant all. They are othergates men then you bear the world in hand: men
cankered with malice, pyning away with envy of the present flourishing estate,
swollen with pride and ouerweening of themselves, whose learning is contention,
whose zeal is singularity and factious study, ingendring schism and heresy
in the Church. As for the difference between us and them, even so great as is
between obedience and rebellion to God and the Prince: these are the men the
Bishops have displaced, let them name their own selves: but his meaning is, so
long as they broch their own fancies of their Church-gouernment to the people
seditiously, revile and traduce the persons of Church-gouernors unjustly,
inueigh against our public Lyturgie, the laws, orders, and rites of this
Church ragingly, break all orders, and the precious bond of peace and unity
schismatically and wickedly, so long they are blameless, and not to be
displaced. Then turn the case the other ways: imagine your Discipline were
up, and a foot, and I a poor minister of that Church, and that I will not
observe the order of praying, preaching, ministering of Sacraments, and
marrying, prescribed unto all ministers by the Synod, (but in steed of it)
either that which I do now use, or any other clean differing devised by my
self: I will likewise inueigh against the injustice and tyranny of your
Eldershippes and Synodes, and of them who assemble there: I will confute that
kind of government which my self have subscribed unto, and condemn it as a
tumultuous popularitie, a new fiction of man's brain, a multiplied popedom,
having neither reason, practice, nor commandment for it: and yet otherwise
(I hope) you shall not distaine me for life, or unsound doctrine: shall In
euerthelesse be accounted blameless, and not be displaced by you? Nay, will
you rest in displacing? I hold that I escape well if I escape with banishment,
and so save my life, as I know to have been practiced upon less occasions
then these, by your Eldershippes. You will say, you have good grounds to
inueigh against ours, and that we may not do so against yours, because it is
holy, pure, reformed Discipline and proceeding: then here ought to be the
issue, and not to be offended that you are displaced as disturbers of the peace
of the Church. For I tell you we think no less evil of your government then
you speak of ours: Qui hominem legibus belluam, qui legem hominibus deum
praeponit, says Aristotle 3. Polit. And therefore in that all your government
is grounded upon Law-will-I, and chested up Popelike in your Elders breasts to
do as shall like them best, we hold it very tyranny, and as ill as
Antichristian government.

And thus I retort your reason:

Whosoever be not blameless may be displaced: Those who break the peace of
the Church, and charity, (as before) are not blameles, Ergo, they may be
displaced. And again: They whose calling to the ministry is not from heaven,
nor outwardly lawful by means of men, they may be displaced: Your calling to
the ministry in this Church of England is such, as being unlawful and
Antichristian, (as you say:) Ergo, (by your own rules) you may be displaced,
for you were never well placed, and as you ought to have been: Ex ore tuo
teipsum iudico serve nequam.

The 2. Demonstration.

Men careful to discharge their duties without impiety cannot be displaced:
Demonstration.
Such are these ministers. Ergo,

Here is a goodly praise and applauding to themselves: Remonstrance.
they have bin careful indeed to discharge that charge, that their provincial
has laid upon them to trouble the Church.

Your Mayor is not necessarily true: for a man may be careful to do his
duty, and yet by preposterous zeal be carried to heresy and schism.

The 3. Demonstration.

To deprive Gods people of spiritual comfort is wickedness: Demonstration.
To put to silence such ministers, is to deprive. Ergo,

To put to silence such, Remonstrance.
is to stop the mouths of the Praecision now, as of the concision of old:
of whom S. Augustine speaks super 34. Psalm. quare in praecisione vultis
magnificare nomen Domini? The Mayor here is as the other next before: I have
known a most lewd wretch, who preached so commendably that the people took
marvelous comfort to hear him, and to be instructed by him: yet the most
partial of your Elderships would not have to lerated him in the ministry.

The 4. Demonstration.

That which is scandalous, is an horrible sin: Demonstration.
To deprive the people is scandalous. Ergo,

To the Minor.

It is scandal taken and not given. Remonstrance.


The people had better learn nothing, then learn the sin of disobedience.
These reasons are as much, as if a man should affirm, none could preach well
but Schismatikes: Scilicet.

The 5. Demonstration.

They whose labors God blesses, Demonstr.
cannot be displaced without impiety: such are the ministers. Ergo,

God does bless your such labors, no more then Judas his labors,
Remonstrance.
nor so much, who for a while preached the Gospel: yet may a bad man cast good
seed into the ground. Do as they say, not as they do, says Christ.

The 6. Demonstration.

That which gives the enemies cause to rejoice, is an offense: To displace the
ministers, Demonstration.
gives the enemy, etc. Ergo,

If any rejoice in evil, let them answer for it themselves. (...) is a fault:
Remonstrance.
but Bishops do their duties to displace schismatikes: that is but per
accidens, that it is to the rejoicing of the enemy: and they will not let to
rejoice, if an adulterous minister also be displaced, being glad that they
may say such be among us.

The 7. Demonstration.

That which causes the doers to be esteemed enemies to the Gospel, is an
heinous sin: Demonstration.
such is the silencing of those. Ergo,

I answer with that sentence of Tully: Non est tanta potest as in stultorum
suffragijs. Remonstrance.
There is no such estimate, or read in a fools voice, or suffragie: They are
not worthy to rule in the Church, that tender more what the ill advised say of
them, then they do the peace of Christ's body the Church.

The 8. Demonstration.

That which lets wickedness to come in, must needs be a sin:
Demonstration.
To displace the ministers does so. Ergo,

It follows not upon every sectarie ministers displacing: Remonstran.


This is a partial Syllogism, and in favor of themselves: No Sir, I doubt
not but better come in their places, if they may have like maintenance.

The 9. Demonstration.

That which interrupteth the course of the Gospel without warrant from Gods
Law, or law of the land, is a sin: But to displace is so. Ergo, Demonstra.


It is likely this man has been conuented for his schism, Remonstrance.
and turbulencie of spirit, and would not be interrupted without a warrant
from heaven, or the law of the land: there is statute law, and Canon law
authorized by statute, to pluck up such briars and thorns of these
Malcontents out from amiddest the land, and no danger to interrupt thereby the
course of the Gospel: most of them preach nothing but inuectiues against things
established. Is this to preach the Gospel of peace?

The seventeenth Chapter.
Assertion.

ADmonition belongs to the Eldership. Demonstration.


The 1. Demonstration.

1 That which private men are commanded to seek unto being offended, for
redress of the offense. Matthew. 18.15. that is a necessary and ordinary way
for those who publicly offend. 2 That which is more available to repentance.
3 That which makes men more afraid to offend. 4 That which has a greater
promise to do good. 5 That without which all duties of charity cannot be
exercised toward sinners. 6 That which bridleth outrageous sins.
But such is the admonition of those, who carry the name of the Church, vz. the
Eldership. Ergo, admonition longs to them.

One Minor serves right well for all these propositions, Remonstrance.


That the venerable Eldership who carry the Church, and bear it up as Atlas
with his shoulders Caelum humeris tor quet stellis ardentibus aptum. Must give
this admonition in public proclamation.

My answer hereunto is: It is a sacrilegious robbery to give and appropriate
that unto the Eldership which is proper to the ministers of the Gospel, and
such as exercise lawful authority in the Church: it makes as much for
Presbiter John, or John's Eldershippe, as any of your Elderships in the Church.
Besides, I might trauerse the mayor Propositions. As for example, Private
reconciliation is commanded, and yet no necessary or ordinary way to be
publicly established in the Church. And if admonition be necessary, does it
hereof follow it must be done, and only done by such an Eldership?

The eighteenth Chapter.
Assertion.

SVspension from the Lords supper, Demonstration.
or from an office in the Church, must be by the Eldership.

The 1. Demonstration.

Whatsoever is enjoined as a duty to be done by every Christian man, if he
leave it undone, he is to be compelled by the governor of the Church, Luke
14.17.23. But if a man's brother have any thing against him, Matthew. 5.24. he is
to be compelled to leave his gift: Ergo, Separation from the Lords supper is
warranted by the word.

This Demonstration is neither compound, Remonstrance.
nor simple Syllogism, nor in any mood and figure, nor proves the Assertion
any way: for must it needs follow, he must be suspended: Ergo, by the
Eldership. Then thus: The people must have Sacraments ministered and preaching:
ergo, the Eldershippe must do it. If you say, it is disposed according to any
mood and figure, why is there more in the conclusion then in the premises? or
show in which 1, 2, or 3. figure you have concluded, that separation by the
eldership is warrantable by the word.

If you say the Syllogism is hypotheticall, why do you assume the consequent
to conclude the antecedent, which is a Paralogisme? or in very deed assuming
the consequent, conclude nothing to the purpose, or a new and strange thing:
Ergo, separation from the supper of the Lord is to be done by the Eldership,
or is warranted by the word. In those places of Luke they were compelled to
come in to the supper, yea, the halte, the lame, etc. And can you hereof prove
that such as are lame in soul must be suspended and kept from the Supper? If
you have no better reasons then this for suspension, it will be lamely proved to
be of use in the Church: the parable rather makes against it. As for the
reason it self, I have lived long, and yet never heard such an one made,
except it were in mockery.

The 2. Demonstration.

If the commandment, Give not holy things to dogs, Demonstration.
is neither properly understood of infidels, nor excommunicate men, then is it
understood for separation of the unworthy: But the first is true, for the
Jews knew that holy things belonged not to such: and the commandment had
been needless. Ergo, Suspension is warranted.

To the Antecedent and the sequel.

Why not as properly to be understood of them, Remonstrance.
since it is allegorically to be understood of whomsoever? We deny not the
matter, but this reason does simply prove it: Look Erastus, and your selves
will mislike it. If the Jews knew that this commandment belonged not to
infidels, nor to excommunicate persons, they knew more then was true: for if
infidels and persons excommunicate be not dogs from whom holy things must
be kept, then much less are such as do not so deeply offend, to be
accounted such dogs as from whom holy things should be kept.

The 3. Demonstration.

If some deserve excommunication, and some Suspension, Demonstra.
then is this course good: But some do, etc. Ergo.

The course is good, if it be held by them that indeed have authority and
judgment in the Church: if by the Eldership, Remonstrance.
it is to be withheld.

The 4. Demonstration.

The course prescribed in the shadow must be in the body, Demonstration.
in respect of substance in the spiritual cleansing for corporal uncleanness
they were separated. Ergo: for some sins now.

The Argument holds not from the ceremony to the Gospel. Remonstran.


The Eldership did not separate under the law, ergo, Eldership not under the
gospel: for it was the priests under the law that had judgment, and direction
of such clensings: but your selves make not your Elders, to answer unto
Priests, but either unto Levites, or I know not what governors under the law.

The 5. Demonstration.

The Church cannot suffer a man vehemently suspected to continue in a public
function: Demonstration.
But the church cannot displace such a man at the first Ergo, he must be
separated for a time.

Were it not for the ambiguitie of the word Church, Remonstrance.
which with you is always the Church Aldermen: all this may be granted.

The 6. Demonstration.

That which was commanded to be done to the Priest, Demonstrat.
being a Leaper, must be done to the Church officer, being an offender: But the
one was to be separated. Ergo, the other.

Though it may be lawful to make proportionable arguments from the law to the
Gospel: Remonstrance.
you may not conclude Identitatem, the one by the other, for that is Iudaisme.
And by this reason you would make your Elderships to answer to the Priest
under the law: they are as gladius Delphicus, they serve to all uses, and
answer to all types and figures of the old Testament.

For the profitable use of Suspension

1 That which keeps the godly in obedience is profitable. Demonstration.
2 That which remoueth appearance of sin. 3 That which declares to the
world, that the Church of God is careful to practice. 4 That which exercises
the Church in actions of religion. 5 That which is a special means to procure
the Lord in mercy to continue his word unto his Church, that is profitable
for the same. Such is Separation. Ergo,
You might have bound these five Demonstrations in a bundle, and thrown them
all away. Remonstrance.


The question is not whether the Church in discretion may separate and
suspende: but whether your fashion eldership may separate or suspende: not of
our rightful use, but of your abuse. The best is, such stuff stands you in
little charges.

The nineteenth Chapter.
Assertion.

EXcommunication may not be done but upon great and weighty occasions.
Demonstration.


2 It may not be done by any one man, but by the Eldership, the whole Church
consenting thereunto.

The first Assertion needs no demonstration: Remonstrance.
but because the Demonstrator says our church does excommunicate for a
sixpenie matter, I answer, be it for an halfepeny in the very original, yet it
is not for that but for the contumacie, aggravating the fault and injustice: as
a man for default of answering (perhaps afalse plea) may have an attachment, or
proclamation of rebellion or outlawry come out against him. Quo minor res, eo
mayor contumacia. I would ask this question: if a man in their Church will not
(being of good ability) give to the poor or to the minister by any means,
and yet will thrust in among them, will they not for this contumacie at last
excommunicate him?

1. Demon. for the first Assertion.

That which Christ has ordained for the last remedy against sin,
Demonstration.
may not be used but upon extremity: so is excommunication. 18. Math. 15. Ergo.

This is no issue between us and you: Remonstrance.
we say wilful disobedience is greatest sin. If a man (do what you can)
will not appear, though (perhaps) if he did, he be guiltless, shall he not at
last be excommunicate? The Lawyers call it vltimum in jurisdiction non facere.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which gives a man over to Satan, may not be used but in great
extremity: Demonstration.
but excommunication so does. 1. Cor. 5.5. Ergo.

To the Minor.

(...), Remonstrance.
To deliver one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, was but a
temporary chastisement and of extraordinary power, as is very probable:
though I doubt not but he which claue non errante is excommunicated and cut
from the Church, is deeply in the power of Satan.

The 3. Demonstration.

That which a man will do in cutting off his hand, that must be done in
excommunication: Demonstration.
but a man will not do that but in extremity. Ergo.

Yet it is to be feared that if excommunication were in some of your hands,
Remonstrance.
it would be always drawing against mean faults, if the persons did not
like you: I know your disposition where I dwell.

The 4. Demonstration.

That which is contrary to natural affection, and works the trembling of the
very heart, Demonstration.
may not be done but in extremity: So is excommunication. Ergo.

Why are not you afraid in your own cause, since many of your crew stand
excommunicate, Remonstrance.
and yet like profane Esau or Lucian the dog, make a ieste of it? if you
esteem it not because Bishops do inflict it, we will and may upon better
ground contemn yours that lay elders determine, whenever you set up shop.

The 2. Assertion of the Demonstration.

Excommunication must be done by the Elders, Demonstration.
not by one man.

The 1. Demonstration.

That which Christ commanded to be done by the Church, may not be done by one
man: but Christ commanded so 18. Mat. 15. Ergo.

What force is in your Mayor? Remonstrance.
The Church must pray for princes, Ergo no one man may: Christ commanded at
one time the Apostles to preach, Ergo all must preach together, and no one of
them.

To the Minor.

This is most absurd: for then he commanded to be done and ouerdone, that is
both done and undone, viz. both by the Presbytery, and then by the whole
Congregation, for so you teach. If in those words, Tell the Church, the
Church is the Eldership, then the rest of the Congregation has not any warrant
to give consent or to deal in it, which elsewhere you require. For when the
Church that Christ committed it unto, have once determined the matter, what
have those to do further that were not meant nor thought of by him? And if he
that tells the Eldershippe any thing, tells it to the Church, what need any
more be acquainted with that belonges not to them? For if they be of the
Church, they know it already: Et qui certus est, amplius non debet certiorari:
if they be not, then let them pacify themselves: but if the whole Congregation
be theremeant, then has not the Eldershippe therein authority given by that
place. And if the Church be the Eldershippe, then the one is the other: idem
numero conuertuntur: so that he that is not of the Eldership is none of the
Church. To avoid these absurdities, they will say the Eldershippe is called
the Church, because it has herein the authority of the Church: This is
strange. Shall they be the Church it self, that have herein the Churches
authority? then he is a king that in some thing has the kings authority.
Well let it go: Those that with us do excommunicate have the Churches
authority also: and let them show a reason out of the word of God, why the
Church may not give her authority to one, as well as to many? If this be one
of your essential points, that the Church cannot give it to one: for shame
find some Scripture for it. If you say that the Church being a collectiue must
needs be more then one: true, but yet one or a few may have the authority
of many committed to them, as one man may be Syndic or Legate for a whole
common weal. If it cannot be represented but by a number, then two may serve:
else show by how many, and both of these by Scripture: or confess your
government not to be grounded on Scripture. And when such authority is given
to many, show that any thing may be done, except every of them agree: for if
you say as you practice, that the most voices overcome the fewer: show
Scripture for that, and how the odd voice (that makes the greater number)
has such a power, as to make that to be the determination of the Church,
which otherwise were not so. And if in such case, one odd voice (perhaps of a
very odd fellow) may have such force, why may not a Bishops voice be of as
great force in this matter, where the Church committes it to him? That by this
place the power general of excommunication is not established, may thus
appear. For if this be the very warrant and commission that it has, then may
none excommunication proceed in any other matter then upon private offenses
originally and only by the same degrees that there be propounded: otherwise
the commission were violated. That an Eldershippe, (as is fancied) should have
that power here given to them, cannot be intended: for if Christ had ordained
them before this time, then their authorities whatsoever, were (no doubt) given
withal unto them: but we read no such thing. The policy of the Jewish
Synagogue had still his continuance, and Christ had not yet settled the Church
which he was in gathering. That by these words at this time it was erected,
it could not be: for neither were the officers before ordained of which it
consists, viz. of Elderly doctor, and Pastor: vndoctorly and vnpastorally
Elder, and of deacons: nor yet were they here ordained. For the Apostles could
never out of this single word (...) the Church have picked this great variety
and distinction of officers, and their authority which they had never heard of
before. But Christ speaks hereof to them as of a thing known, whereunto in
like case resort might be had. But if it were here appointed consisting of
Christ and his Apostles, then was Christ's headshippe of the Church taken from
him, and he ranged with his Apostles as his colleagues in the Eldershippe. Then
also must they either say that Christ was not perpetual president in such
eldership, but as it fell to his lotte or choice (as they now practice in
Synodes and conference, albeit the Pastor in their Elderships be the President
perpetual) or they must have a perpetual president in all their Synodicall
assemblies to be conformable to this, being the best and first. It will also
hereof follow, if your Elders mind to be successors of the Apostles in an
eldership here, they must be ministers of the word and Sacraments, as the
Apostles and all the first Elders were. Then also cannot your Eldership have
any other parts of authority then Christ at this their institution here
bestowed upon them, as namely you must abandon ordinations, depositions, and
other government. Lastly, if he meant to erect an office or authority that
before was not, the words would have been praeceptiue and dispositiue for such
purpose, not imperative, commanding only a course to be holden before such a
tribunal, as was not before erected or heard of: for it would thus or in some
like form have been conceived: let such and such Church governors be
erected, to whom you may always tell it.

If therefore to avoid these inconveniences it will be said, that he made
allusion to the Jewish Sanhedrim or College of 72. in use with them, and well
known to them, with insinuation, that as the Jews had, so he would have
established in his Church, which should after be gathered of the Jews and
Gentiles: Besides that, it is likely the name of Sanhedrim would have been
retained, rather then changed for a name of so strange signification (as to
understand an Eldership by this word Church) especially Christ having before in
an other matter used the very word (...): Matthew. 5.
I must then also tell you, that the insinuation wrapped up in one single word,
is over secret and mystical for a man to build his faith and conscience upon,
for such a solemn, perpetual, and necessary Co^sistories establishing, that is
endued with so manifold and large authorities. But if it were meant that the
Samplar (a thing well known) should be followed wholly, then is the Eldership
quite overthrown. For not only the Sanhedrim had (as is notorious) but this
Church whatsoever (that is meant in this place) must have determination of all
weighty matters, as well civil as Ecclesiastical. That this Church here must
so have, it is manifest, in that this place contains a course and process to
be holden with a brother, who shall in any matter scandalize or offend them.
But the most offenses betwixt man and man grow not upon matter Ecclesiastical,
but upon matters of this life, mere civil causes. Then by this reckoning
(even under a Christian magistrate) must the Eldership have a set Court for all
matters as well civil as Ecclesiastical, as the Sanhedrim did at Jerusalem,
least otherwise the wounds be far greater then the plaster can cover. But
this dealing in civil matters they seem to detest in others, howsoever
underhand they will embrace it, or dispense with it in themselves. The
Sanhedrim were ordinary Judges of the highest Court of that nation, for all
politic temporal causes besides Ecclesiastical. There were 72. of it, there
was no more such in that land, and it consisted of the high Priest, other
Priests, Levites, and the chief and grauest of the people. If therefore they
will conform theirs unto this, then are parish Elderships abroad, and all
Courts of Record at Westminster supped up at once in this one Consistory of
Sanhedrim, and all Ecclesiastical men shall be for ever at liberty to meddle
with matters civil as in their own right, which were absurd. Besides, the
Sanhedrim made laws, as John 9.22. they directed Commissions forth, as to
Paul in the Acts for attaching and imprisoning, which the patrones of
Elderships will pretend not to like of. They had none ordination, no placing,
nor displacing of Priests or Levites, nor yet censures of excommunication, for
any thing I can yet read sufficient to satisfy me. Shall then the Eldership
have no such authorities? If it be said the two former were corruptions, First
I would have it proved: then I answer that Calvin makes the whole
Sanhedrim it self but a corruption of that state. Lastly they must grant
either that Christ alluded not unto it at all, nor made it any Samplar for his
Church, or else made it a perfect samplar entierly, and always even under a
Christian magistrate to be followed: for we find none exceptions in Scripture.
How then it may be followed in some part, and despised in an other, let the
first deuisers discuss.

The 2. Demonstration.

That which S. Paul enjoined the Church to do when they came together, may not
be done by one man: Demonstrat.
But he commanded them to excommunicate the incestuous person. Ergo.

There is an aequiuocation in the word Do in the Mayor, and it is false,
Remonstrance.
as is showed: But I distinguish upon the Minor. Paul commanded them only to
denounce and publish, not to excommunicate. The words are (...). I as absent
in body but present in spirit, have already decreed and judged, as if I were
present in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. from whom this branch of
his authority is derived. Ius excommunicandi, the right of excommunication was
in himself: Howbeit the words, (...), You being congregated or assembled
together, and my spirit with the power, etc. argues the presence of the
people, a full Congregation to denounce an excommunication, not the right or
interest to excommunicate in all. As for the presence of the people, it is
required now at denunciation. But what, were all the people here of the
Presbytery? or had they none such? For here all are mentioned to whom he writ.
How does this prove the Eldership to have such power, or to be necessary in
every Church, if they had none Eldership?

The 3. Demonstration.

That which has need of greatest advise and authority, Demonstrat.
is not to be done by one man: But so is excommunication. Ergo.

To the Mayor.

Many instances may be framed to this: Preaching of the Gospel, Remonstrance.
prophesying, 1. Corinthians. 14. ministration of Baptism and the Lords supper,
supreme authority and judgment of a King, and many other matters of great
importance, cannot be done but by one man at one time.

To the Minor.

Excommunication is not greater then absolution, which is also to be done by
one man. To save a soul is greater then to destroy a soul, and yet by the
preaching of Peter being one man, were added unto the Church three thousand
souls. The work of our redemption is but one man's work, and the greatest
work. You have no skill of the old rule nullum proprium datur in gradu
superlatiuo. And may not one man's advise directed by law, 5. Topic.
be more sound then an hundredth running on head, and but otherwise unlearned?

The 4. Demonstration.

They must excommunicate who are to deal in other parts of discipline:
Demonstrat.
but the other are not exercised by one. Ergo neither this.

This is obscurum per obscurius: or to beg that which is in question still.
This defaceth themselves: Remonstrance.
for Deacons deal in other parts of their discipline, and yet being
discipliners are none of the Eldership. And I never heard before they might
excommunicate. Cathechizing, preaching, teaching, public praying, baptizing,
and celebrating the Supper, blessing of marriages, etc. are parts of the
Discipline, yet exercised by the doctor alone, or pastor alone.

To the Minor.

There is none of these offices which are mainteinable in our Church, but may
be executed by one, if it shall seem best for the commodity and service of
the Church.

The 5. Demonstration.

As it was amongst the Jews, so it must be in the Church for ever, Demonstrat.
as it appears by this: for it is translated from them to us: as the Greek
word (...) being by corrupt imitation called Sanhedrim by the Rabbynes does
import, and had nothing ceremonial in it: But it was executed by the Church
amongst them, and not by one, John 9.22. Ergo the Church is to excommunicate
and not one man.

Here the Demonstrator leaves off his Christianity, and will become a Jew,
Remonstrance.
and erect the Jewish policy of governing the Church.

To the Mayor.

By the Jews you may mean either the Jewish Synagogue, or the Apostles and
disciples in Iewrie: The later you cannot mean, for the practice of their
Religion, and the outward profession was not authorized. If you mean the
former, say plainly you mean Sanhedrim or Synagoga: if Sanhedrim, that either
as political only, or political and Ecclesiastical together: and that again
either as the first institution supposed by some, or as the deprauation was at
the coming of Christ, for what was that else but a mixed and compound
Presbytery, as in Christ's time? And then Christ should send us to the
Synagogue, which Calvin likes not, and we should require a gift and an altar,
as it is Matthew. 5.24. v. So this is the greatest improbabilitie in the world,
viz. that as it was amongst the old or latest Jews, so it must be in Christ's
Church. Now unto the reason of the Mayor: That it is translated unto us from
them, etc. You must prove the translation, and show in one demonstration,
time, place, etc, or any other circumstance, to euince it or prove the
erection or ordination of this discipline in stead of that. Otherwise to say
there was an allusion unto that, or a respective looking of Christ upon that,
is but a mere collusion with Gods truth. To say (...) which was a session of
72. with the prince, etc, was the Image of your imagined Presbytery,
especially a corruption, and not to be found in Scripture but in the Thalmud,
is to carry away the matter with a bold forehead, and impudent outfacing. This
I have also spoken unto before in this Chapter.

To the Minor.

This is not ad idem: For it is one thing (...), another thing with us to be
excommunicate: as for the place of John 9. it deciphreth not whether one or
many had authority to cast out of the Synagogue, but that a decree was so made
that he should be cast out, not telling how, or by how many it was to be
executed.

Finally, in saying the Sanhedrim had nothing ceremonial, belike it had the
more judicial or moral: whether it were the one or other, it is questionless
how it was a corruption of a better thing, but carried not the resemblance of
the thing which you would have, as is sufficiently before showed. If Judicial,
we are no Jews, and therefore not tied to it: if Moral, then show the
Commandment, and retain it not by piece meele, but either wholly, or if but in
part, say you break therein the Moral law of God.

The 6. Allegation or Demonstration.

Cyprian lib. 3. ep. 10. would do nothing in his charge without counsel of
Elders, Demonstrat.
and consent of people.

His meaning is: he would do nothing, me a priuatim sententia, Remonstrance.
by any domestical determinations, but with the priuitie and counsel and
consent of the clergy: that is, but in consistory openly: or which was
consulted and concluded upon in Synod publickely before, so that nothing
should be prejudicial. But these were Ministers that assisted him a Bishop.

The 7. Demonstration, or Allegation.

The Elders and other officers have power to absolve as well as the Bishops.
Demonstrat. Cypr. epist. 14. Remonstrance. Lib. 3. epist. 14.


You quote not the book: as for the place, it makes against the presumption
of your Elders or any pastoral Elders, who gave ius communicationis without the
leave of the Bishop, as certain then did. As for the words manus impositionem
Episcopi and cleri, it strengthens the hand of authority in a Bishop, who
is perpetual President of his clergy.

The 8. Allegation or Demonstration.

For as much as absolution longs unto all, I dare not do it. Demonstrat. Idem
epist. 19. Remonstrance.


Cyprian says, Praeiudicare ego and solum mihi rem communem vendicare non
audeo. In case the absolution of certain did concern many as well as himself,
he would not do that to restore the offenders to their state.

The 9. Allegation or Demonstration.

If there be any that has done such a fault that is to be put away from
partaking prayer of the Church, etc. Demonstrat. Tertul. apolog. cap. 39.
there do bear rule certain approved Elders of the Church.

The words, Summum futuri iudicij praeiudicium est, Remonstrance.
si quis ita deliquerit vt a communicatione orationis and conuentus, and omnis
sancti commercij relegetur: praesident probati quique seniores honorem istum
non pretio sed testimonio adepti. The words following give not the censure of
excommunication to these Elders or arbiters any time, much less perpetually,
if at that time of persecution they had a censure over manners. But let it be
proved that they were not Ministers of the word and Sacraments, but mere
annual officers, and without maintenance of the Church, as yours are.

The 10. Allegation, or Demonstration. Demonstrat.


It helps much to make the party ashamed, that he be excommnnicate by the
whole Church: Augustine lib. 3. contra. epistol. Parmen. the Donat.
as also in his books of Baptism against Donatists often.

Tunc timore percutitur and pudore sanatur, cum ab vniuersa Ecclesia
anathematizatum se cernens, Remonstrance.
so are the words: when the whole Church shall expel and blame him by their
judgment also, as the magistrate by his own censure.

The 11. Allegation or Demonstration.

The Elders have interest in other censures, Demonstrat. Hierom epist. 1. ad
Demetriade^.
and the Church it self in excommunication.

The words are, We speak not of all, but of such as sometimes the Church it
self blames: Remonstrance.
whom sometime it casts away, and against whom the censure of Bishops and
Presbyterorum viz. of Ministers is sharp. Here is no special mention of
excommunication nor interest of any unto it, much less the interest of lay
Elders. We grant that Bishops had the assistance of Ministers about them,
both in censures and other matters and so may have: but this argues not your
Elderships interest, nor that a Bishop alone may not do it, where the order of
the whole Church has so received it.

The 12. Demonstration, or Allegation. Demonstrat. Bucer de reg. Christ. li. 1.
ca. 9.


Paul accuses the Corinthians, because the whole Church had not excommunicate
the incestuous person.

The words are, Remonstrance.
Quod non incestum illum consortio suo eiecissent: Because the Corinthians were
swollen, and had kept company with such an incestuous person. But if the whole
Church should do it, then there needs none Eldership, neither is this their
authority: otherwise the Church might not usurp it from them. And if it be
the whole Churches, the Eldership may not preiudicate them by their
determinations aforehand: For if they disagree, whether shall stand in force?

The 13. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstrat. P. Mart. 1. cor. 5.


The Elders had the government in excommunication.

P. Martyr says, there were two sorts of Elders: Remonstrance.
the one which did teach and minister the Sacraments, and did govern with the
Bishops: which Elders we now have, who exercise the censure of excommunication
as they are called unto it. As for the second, they were not unlike our Church
wardens or Sidemen, if any such were, which I rather believe not.

The 14. Allegation or Demonstration. Demonstrat. Idem ibidem.


It is dangerous to permit to one man.

He does not say, It is unlawful for one to do it, Remonstrance.
neither can it be dangerous in open Consistory, being directed by law when,
wherefore, and against whom to do it: for so it is less dangerous, then if
many had to do in it, going only of head, and without all form or direction
of law, as is used by your Elderships.

The 15. Allegation, or Demonstration. Demonstrat. Calvin instit. li. 4. c. 11.
sect. 6.


It opens a way to tyranny, and abrogateth the Ecclesiastical Senate
ordained by Christ.

It is false: For under a Christian Prince and pastoral Elders the spiritual
jurisdiction is exercised lawfully without tyranny. Remonstrance.
Why bring you not Cartwr. also to prove it? Calvin was the first in all the
world that erected such a Senate.

The 16. Allegation.

The Bishops of themselves if they excommunicate, do it ambitiously contrary
to the Canons; See Bucer against Gropper, and Ephesians. 4. de animi cura,
Demonstrat. Idem Instit. 4. li. 12. cap. Sect. 6.
and Swinglius in Ecclesiast.

According to your quotation, I find no such place in Calvin. Remonstrance.
When you allege thus in gross, you must not look to be answered in
particular: As for the Bishops excommunication, it is according to S. Paul's
practice, 1. Corinthians. 5. where he excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, 1.
Tim. 1. ca.

The 17. Allegation. Demonstrat. See the Abstract page 165.


It is forbidden by that filthy puddle the Canon law.

That is filthily spoken. Remonstrance.
If the Abstracter had understood the laws he brings, he might have
found an answer where he found the objection: But is this with our
Demonstrator a good argument, The Canon law forbids it, Ergo unlawful? It so
forbids Priests marriage, and the Communion in both kinds: Are they
therefore unlawful?

The 1. Objection of the Demonstrator.

The right of excommunication was in S. Paul and not in the rest. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

He gave only the direction, otherwise if they had not done it, he had
remained vnexcommunicate.

If they never had denounced and published the excommunication, yet S. Paul had
nevertheless excommunicated him, Remonstrance with reply.
and also the chastisement had proceeded on him. And might they lawfully have
disobeyed the Apostles judgment, or crossed his determination?

The 2. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Christ gave Peter and every Apostle power to bind and loose, which the
interpreters expound excommunication. Demonstrat.
Matthew. 18.

Answer of the Demonstrator.

That was power of preaching in denouncing Gods judgment, or pronouncing his
mercies, not of this action.

It is to be understood of both: Remonstrance, with reply.
the words are almost all one John 20.22. v. Matthew. 16.20. v. and Matthew. 18.
Albeit the place includes that binding and loosing which is by preaching of
the word, it does not exclude binding and loosing, which is in
excommunication and absolution by power of the word: See Chrysostom super
Matthew. 16. What impudency is this, to deny that an Apostle had authority to
excommunicate, who could take life and sight away from an offender? But see
how he contrarieth himself. For if this be not meant of excommunication, why
do you before bring it to prove that your Eldership is thereby authorized to
excommunicate?

The 3. Objection of the Demonstrator.

Paul did excommunicate Hymenaeus and Alexander. Demonstrat.


Answer of the Demonstrator.

That is, he was but moderatour of the action, or did pronounce it: even so
Ambrose and the fathers did.

Nay, Remonstrance with reply.
he did it without consent of the Church of Ephesus: for there was some more
castigation understood and emplied in those words, 1. Timoth. 1.20. v. I have
delivered them to Satan. The argument does hold good, S. Paul 1. Cor. 5. did
it, and seconded the action: Ergo S. Paul was alone a doer in the action. If
without Scripture or reason a man may surmise and add what he list, and when
he list, then we may also as well say that the whole senate of Rome consented
with him in that action. You find no consent of Eldershippe or people in
Ambroses action requested. Either leave falsifying and mangling, or give over
demonstrating.

Conclusion.
IF the Demonstrator cannot, neither as yet has shown by the light of nature,
clearenesse of reason, report of history, allegation of Council, testimony
of fathers, ground of law, evidence of Scripture, nor ever shall be able to
prove by necessary demonstration any exact platteforme for particularities of
government and external Church policy that Christ has prescribed: any such
four Tetrarchies of speculatiue Doctor, who must teach and not apply: any
such abstractiue Pastor, who must exhort and not teach: any such governing
Elder, who may neither exhort nor teach: any such Deacon, whose deaconshippe
is distribution to the poor only, that is, a mere corporal office and no
attendance on the ministry: any such tumultuary election to be perpetuated
by the common people, and their approbation of ministers election: any such
prophanitie of ordination and censuring by lay Elders: any such Democracie in
the Church, or equality of all to be parish Bishops: any such indefatigable
continual residence of Pastors on the place without natural or legal
dispensation for absence upon any occasion: any such laicall or mixed
Aldermanshippe or Eldershippe over all men's doctrine, manners and matters in
the Church: any such censure of admonition, suspension, excommunication, by a
company of Church Aldermen, as in their own right: Then let the Demonstrator
blush and be ashamed of so many fabulous narrations, absurd collections out of
text, brutish reasons so many, and so many falsifications of authorities,
childish paralogismes and anapodicticall or vndemonstrable demonstrations, and
let him be touched in conscience, and repent of all his slanderous and
calumnious speeches, wherewith he has blasphemed this Church of England.

And in the name of God let our Church be governed still by rules of Gods
word, by such canons of the Apostles and Councels, and provincial
constitutions and ordinances, subordinate to the word of God, ratified by our
most Christian and virtuous Prince.

Let us thank God for our governors, Archbishops, Bishops, and superior
ministers and magistrates, whose offices and equity of the offices are in the
word, and continued practice of the Church hitherto: and let the inferior
ministers of what name or calling soever, be governed by them as law
prescribes.

Let the examination be by the Ordinaries and Diocesans of men eligible and
ordinable, who know more then a thousand unlearned.

Let the ordination be by the imposition of the Bishops, and other pastoral
Elders and ministers hand.

Let the execution of their offices be still with diligence in preaching,
exhorting, ministering of the Sacraments, providing for the poor, as God gives
ability.

Last of all, let the exercise of the whole ecclesiastical discipline be put
in use by word of admonition or censure of suspension or excommunication,
where need is, by those able governors whom God, the Prince, Synod, and
Parliament have put in trust withal: and let us hold on one and the same
tenor of doctrine and discipline, which (maugre this wooden Demonstrator and
T.C. Demost. 1. Olynth.
that is tryfling curiosity) we have held. (...) would all were well for every
man's sake.

Laus Deo.
Errata.
Fault. Correction. In the Preface page 3. line 24. equinoction equivocation.
P. 5. lin. 12. dele ergo. P. 13. li. 6. demonstrate demonstration. P. 20. li.
6. 20. two. P. 25. li. 31. Syndicts Syndics. P. 26. li. 20. any some one. ibi.
li. 32. ordiancion ordination. P. 27. li. 21. members numbers. P. 33. li. 17.
(...) (...) P. 37. li. 34. revenge him reueage himself. P. 49. li. 11. demises
devises. Ibi. marg. example epistle. P. 53. li. 21. whole while. P 72. li. 33.
breed bredde. P. 75. li. 6. is the is in the. P. 77. li. 16. lay ministering
lay vnministring. Ibi. li. 22.6.1. 1. and 6. P. 81. li. 26. low lower. Ibi.
li. 38. columned continued. P. 83. li. 32. run not run riot. P. 87. li. 37.
Irenaeus Grinaeus. P. 109. li. 5. vnliable unable. P. 110. li. 26. sense it
sense as it. P. 128. li. 33. by to P. 138. li. 18. Cicester Chichester. P. 147.
li. 11. preach practice P. 164. li. 34. posuerit poesis erit. P. 166. li. 3.72.
72. Evangelists. P. 167. li. 14. Tragelapsus Tragelaphus. P. 176. li. 28. were
come were to come. P. 177. li. 6. Papists, Popish. P. 108. li. 22. they they of
the faction P. 201. li. 26. did had.


