FOUR SERMONS, Viz. I. Sins contagion, or the sickness of the soul. II.
The description of a Christian. III. The blindness of a wilful sinner. IV. A
Race to Heaven.


Published by WILLIAM RESSOLD, Master of Arts and Minister of Gods Word at
Debach in Suffolk.

IOH. 8.47. He that is of God hears Gods Word: ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for GEORGE LATHVM, at the Bishops head in Paul's
Churchyard. Anno 1627.

Nobili, and modis omnibus generosissimo Domino, domino EDMVNDO BACON Equiti
aurato, hujus vitae foelicitatem, and futurae gloriam.
QVoties mecum cogito (and saepe cogito Vir insignissime) qua mente and quo
studio in Republica versaris, toties Deo optimo maximo summas habeo gratias, te
ad excellentiae culmen evehi, quo pro authoritate possis, and pro pietate
cupis, parcere bonis, and animadvertere in malos. Tempora nostra (illustrissime
Vir) periculosissima sunt, omni impietatis genere exundantia: quid igitur magis
necessarium, quam virtuti omni modo indulgere, and vitia debellare? hanc tibi
personam Deus imposuit. Tibi (...) commissa est innocents protegere, and
nocentes profligare. Sed quorsum haec? quia (generosissime Maecenas) facile
videamus, and tu procul dubio pro singulari prudentia tua, vnus omnium maxim
animadvertis, tam projectam esse quorundam ad quidvis audaciam, quod impunitate
and lenitate armantur; and non nisi debita punitione coerceri possint: and tam
in aliis imbecillimum esse virtutis studium, quod non nisi magna protectione
and animatione se illi incumbunt. His vero positis, imbecillima quaeque quasi
robusta and invicta redduntur. Sed tibi (spectatissime Vir) non multis est
opus. Quis haec in te non perspicue videat? Tu es Patronus, tu Pater, quid ni
dicant pii, si deseris tu, perimus? Nunc vero has conciones in lucem
provenientes, cui potius quam tibi, qui non es (...), sed (...), dedicarem? vt
tibi vivant, vt sub vmbra favoris tui nutritae, fortiores sint adversus
quoscunque malevolos. Paeterea, observantia mea erga te non mediocris, hoc a me
vehementer flagitaret, si in istis legendis, spendorem orationis, aureumque
illud flumen eloquentiae, rerum sententiarumque divitias, quibus alii multi
luxuriant, non inveniae, paupertas mea me excusabit. Cum opulenti in aures,
bracteasque aureas offerrent, tabernaculo domini struendo, etiam grata Deo erat
pauperum (...), pelles filaque tenaia offerentium. Si forte aliquando, quasi ad
idem redire videor, in mentem, quaeso, illud Socratis revocetur, cui placebat
(...) sane est (Vir insignissime) axionia illud. Tantum quisque scit, quantum
operatur: Quidam sciunt and multum and multa, nolunt vero prodire vel
timiditate quadam (quod pusilli animi, and otia nimium colentis, inditium est)
vel superbia elati alios quoscunque scriptores naso suspendunt. Objiciant
fortasse nonnulli juventutem mihi, ideoque silentium quinquennale potius
indicerent. Quibus nihilominus respondeo, in hac aetate juvenili quinquennalem
taciturnitatem effluxisse. Siquis insuper sortem meam, and locum in Ecclesia
mediocrem objiciat, hunc omitto: nam dona Theologica qualiacunque sunt, ab
aestimatione fortunae, and dignitate loci pendere non debent. Necesse habui
contra eruditorum censuras seviores scuto instar Fabii defensionem parare: Pro
caeteris vero qui minus literati, hujus orationis sensum non percipiunt, nihil
extra conciones afferre decrevi, quia cum his non est tam agendum clypeo Fabii,
quam gladio Marcelli: scilicet errores and peccata ipsis aggredi concionibus
potius, quam in principio longiores ambages contexere. Quod reliquum est, oro,
Vir amplissime, ut hoc qualecunque mei in te studii, and observantiae
testimonium aequo animo acceptes; animumque meum tui nominis, and publicae
vtilitatis studiosissimum, pro tua virili magis ac magis confirms. Haud
inauspicate in mentem venit quo tuae excllentiae hunc meum quantulumcunque
laborem, quem assumpsi, fidenter dedicarem, plenissimae agnoscens minime
displicere pietati tuae quicquid in Christianae Religionis profectum, and Dei
gloriam in lucem venit. Denique has primitias, quales sint, tuo Patrocinio
(clarissime Vir) humiliter offero, teque illas non ex illarum dignitate, sed ex
animomeo aestimare obsecro, and hoc me a te impetraturum pro singulari
clementia, and pietate tua non minime spero: qua spe fretus Deum ter optimum
maximum precor, te omnibus thesauris coelestibus magis magisque ditare ad suam
ipsius gloriam, and Reipublicae vtilitatem diu incolumem servare. Been vale
(illustrissime Vir) and in Christo Jesus salvatore nostro his fruere foeliciter.

Dignitatis tuae observantissimus, GVLIEL. RESSOLDVS.

HOSEA 14.5. I will heal their Rebellions.


THe worthy Prophet does in this present Chapter, Verse. 2.
not only invite the people to repentance, and to revert from their wicked
ways, Verse. 3.
but does also show unto them the manner how they should perform it: Take unto
you words, and return unto Iehova, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously, and we will render unto thee the Calves of our lips,
etc.

And to animate and strengthen them herein, he does plainly show them, that
this their humiliation and reversion shall not be in vain; but God will
answer them in a most compassionate and comfortable manner, I will heal their
Rebellions, I will love them freely, etc.

The limit of my now intended discourse lies within the compass of these
words, I will heal their Rebellions. In which I consider the subject and the
predicate; the matter subject in these words, I will heal; the predicate in
these words, their Rebellions. And first for the matter subject: In which I
consider two things, the Person, and the Action: The Person emphatically set
forth unto us in the pronoune Ego, I. The Action in the word Heal, I will
heal. And first for the Person, I: In which we may briefly consider two
things, first, that it is God that does Esaias 43.25.
heal Sin; secondly, that he is ready to perform that Cure. First, that it
is God that does heal Sin, I will heal their Rebellions: and that two
manner of ways, first by not imputing Sin; secondly by quenching the flame
thereof, burning and arising within us, by the force of his Holy Spirit. First
by not imputing Sin, therefore says the Lord to his people, I have put away
thy Transgressions like a Cloud, Esaias 42.22. Heb. 10.17. Romans 8.1
and thy Sins as a Mist, that is, in respect of imputation: So that to these
there is no condemnation; wherefore, says David, Blessed is the man, to whom
the Lord imputes not Sin. Psalm. 32.
Again, he heals our sin by quenching the inherent flame thereof by the
force of his Holy Spirit: for it is the operation of Gods Spirit to beat down
sin, Romans 6.6.
to mortify corruption, and to renew in us the Image of God. Thus we see,
Ephesians. 4.24.
that it is God that heals sin, as the efficient and principal Agent:
Therefore to him let us seek, of him let us desire the pardon and remission of
our sins, of him let us entreat for the force of his Holy Spirit, to quench
the flame of our inborne Corruption, bidding a farewell to all Romish
superstitions, indulgences, satisfactions and invocations of Saints, for our
God is a jealous God, and will not give his Glory to another.

Again, as it is proper unto God alone to heal Sin, so he is most ready to
perform that Cure, which is, the second point to be considered. No sooner did
Ephraim submit himself, and entreat the pardon of iniquity, but presently the
Lord replies, I will heal their Rebellions; plainly witnessing that he is not
wanting to us, if we be not wanting to our selves: but if we acknowledge our
misery, and moure for our transgression, he is most ready to cure us: Oh how
frequent are examples in this kind! When David from his mourning soul did cry
out, 2. Sam. 12.15.
peccavi, I have sinned, presently God had his Messenger ready to speak
comfort to his soul, Thy Sin is put away. When that Luxurious son, that
had prodigally spent his portion, Luke 15.
did but once cry out, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and against thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, presently his loving Father did
run to meet him, he did embrace him in his arms, he did kiss him with the
kisses of his mouth, and gave him royal entertainment. Alas, Luke 7.38.
when deep wandering Mary had the feeling of her Misery, that she came and
stood at the feet of CHRIST, wept and mourned for her transgression, oh how
soon were the gates of Mercy opened unto her; how soon did she hear a
comfortable absolution? Oh that then we would be cautions, that we be not
wanting to our selves by the hardness of our hearts, refusing this blessed
Cure: Cant. 5.2.
we have Christ Jesus crying unto us with sweet and familiar terms, Open unto
me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. Rev. 3.20.
He tells us, that he stands and knockes at the door: If any man open unto
him, he will come unto him, and will supp with him. Oh that then we would
endeavor to open our hearts to entertain this heavenly Physician, that he
might heal and cure the deep corruptions of them, lest whilst we keep fast
the door of our hearts, at length the door of mercy be shut against us, and
we perish in the loathsome desease of our sin and wickedness: And so much
briefly for the person, emphatically set forth in the pronoune Ego, I; I will
heal their Rebellions.

Come we now unto the Action, expressed in the word heal; by which Metaphorical
speech is plainly intimated, that sin is a desease: for as there are
corporeal Maladies that do affect the body, so there are spiritual Maladies
that do affect the soul.

Wherefore to insist upon this Metaphor, and the more clearly to show, that
sin is a desease, even a furious and a grievous desease, that does in a
special manner oppress, contaminate and infect the soul; we may fitly
compare it to a Fever, to a Leprosy, to a Frenzy, to a Lethargy. And first
unto a Fever, and that in a fivefold respect; first in regard of debilitation:
for as a Fever does wonderfully debilitate and weaken the body, making it unfit
to perform any validious exercise, so deals sin with the soul, it so
weakens it that it becoms unable to perform any holy duty, Prove. 15.18.
any fit action pleasing in the sight of God: for what says Solomon? The
sacrifice of the wicked is abominable unto God, Heb. 11.6.
all he does is odious in his sight: for, as the author to the Hebrews
speaks, without faith it is impossible to please God. But where sin has
plenall domination, there saving faith has no impression: therefore it
follows, that all that these do, is utterly dispeasing unto God. Thus first
sin is fitly compared unto a Fever in respect of debilitation, it so weakens
the soul, that it makes it unable to do any thing that is savorie in the
sight of God.

Secondly, sin is fitly compared unto a Fever propter gustum, in respect of
taste: for as to him that is affected with a vehement Fever the most sweetest
things become bitter and distasteful, so is it where the soul is laden with
impiety, Psalm. 19.10.
there the most wholesome and pleasant things (that which David proclaims was
sweeter to him than honey and the honey comb) becomes most sharp and unsavory.
What could be more sweet than Christ's most heavenly speech delivered in the
sixth of John? Ioh. 6.53, 54.
Except ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life, etc. Oh
what could be more sweet than this heavenly voice? but what could be more
harsh, Ioh. 6.60.
or more distasteful to the soule-sick carnal Capernaites? therefore they cry
out (...): oh this is a hard speech, who is able to hear it? Again what could
be more sweet than our Saviors blessed speech to that penitent sinful woman,
Luke 5.
pronouncing to her a most comfortable absolution, Thy sins be forgiven thee?
yet what could be more displeasing to the arrogant Pharisees? Luke 7.49.
therefore they murmured among themselves, Who is this, that even forgiveth
sins? Thus secondly sin may fitly be compared to a Fever propter gustum,
in respect of taste: for it makes the sweetest and most savorie nutritives, to
seem as if they were most sharp and violent distructives.

Thirdly, sin is fitly compared to a Fever, in respect of digestion: for as
the fierce inflaming Malady does so oppress the stomach, that it disables it
to admit digestion to the most wholesome food, but often makes it become so
loathsome to it, that it does evomere, send it forth again; so deals sin
with the soul, it disables it to admit digestion to the most heavenly things,
but makes them so loathsome to it, that it suffers it not to possess so much
as any quiet impression: Hence it was, that though Noah spoke to the old world
to return from their impieties, Genesis 6.3.
or else the Lord would destroy them by a general deluge from off the face of
the earth: though he did build the Arc in their sight, to show the certainty
of this judgment, unless they would revert, and continued this admonition by
the space of a hundred and twenty years; yet behold their miserable state,
they admit it no digestion, but did as it were evomere, send it forth again:
for their souls were full of sin, the imaginations of their heart even
altogether wicked. Genesis 19.14.
Though Lot proclaimed the voice of God to the wicked Sodomites, that they
should depart from that pernicious city, for God would destroy it: alas, they
held it ridiculous, they admit it no digestion, for their souls were full of
sin. Exodus 5.1.
Though Moses delivered the express word of God to Pharaoh, that he should let
his people go, and free them from their grievous captivity: alas, his stomach
would not bear it, he would give it no passage, but it was loathsome unto him.
therefore he replied, Ver. 2.
Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? what, is there any that can
command me? any, to whom my Scepter should stoup? for his soul was full gorged
with horrid sins. So though the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 18.11.
did plainly witness against the wicked ones of those times, that he had
prepared a plague for them, that he had purposed a thing against them, and
therefore invited them to return from their sinister ways, to prevent that
fearful stroke of his justice: alas, they would none of it, they admit it no
digestion, but return it up again, Ier. 18.1^.
desperately answering, We will walk after our own imaginations, we will
do every man after the stubbornness of his wicked heart, for their souls
were full of sin. So our blessed Savior gave that yongue Man in Mathewes
Gospel a special Cordial, to revive his dying spirits, Mat. 19.21.
to cure that great disease, the Philarguria of his soul, but oh the misery of
that fearful sin, it suffers it not to work upon him, it sends it up
again: alas, he went away sorrowing. Mat. 19.22.
Feign he would have retained Christ's blessed potion, but the strength of his
disease would not admit it; therefore he bids a farewell to Christ Jesus. Thus
thirdly sin is fitly compared to a fever. It takes away the stomach of the
soul, and makes it unable to digest the most wholesome things.

Fourthly, sin is fitly compared to a Fever propter inflammationem, in respect
of fierce and violent inflammation: for as that virulent Malady burns, and
with its unnatural heat torments all the vital and spiritual powers, so
deals sin with the soul, for even often in this life, it fearfully inflames
it, burns it, and fills it full of wrathful horror: For although wicked and
profane persons do many times pass by the remembrance of their sins,
either by lascivious discourses, vain societies, dissolute sports or the deep
habit of sin, for, as Bernard speaks, Bern Ser. 8. in Cant. Isid. (...).
an evil habit does harden, and, as Isidore speaks, makes us become even
without sense and feeling; But what? oh, yet sin lies at the door, it waits
opportunity to plunge the soul with fearful misery, Genesis 4.7.
pursuing the conscience as a swift hunting Nimrod, Genesis 10.9.
as a speedy footed Nimshi. There was a time when Cains conscience had no
feeling of that great sin of murder, which he had committed, nay though God
spoke to him, and asked him, Where is thy brother? Genesis 4.9.
which a man would think should have made Cain, to have looked down upon his
guilty conscience, and to have stood amazed, shakt and trembled at this voice:
but alas, it stird him not at all, he was stout, and stood as it were at
defiance with God, as if he had done him the greatest wrong that could be, so
much as to insinuate such a matter with him: Therefore he insolently replied, I
cannot tell, am I my brothers keeper. As if he should say, I hope you will not
lay his death to my charge, will you offer me that indignity? So that here
Cain was without all touch of conscience, his great crying sin of murder
troubled him not at all: but what? was this always Cains state? oh no, at
length you may behold the fearful fury of this sin, so flame up in his soul
and conscience, that the extreme burning heat thereof, did make him cry out,
My sin is greater than can be forgiven. Genesis 4.13.
Strange alteration, of late he saw no sin, it troubled him not at all; and
now he sees so huge a burning flame, that he thinks all the ocean of Gods
mercy is not able to quench it: therefore he cries out, My sin is greater
than can be forgiven. Again, there was a time when treacherous Judas had no
taste nor feeling of his wickedness, he plotted and practiced against his most
innocent Master, he combined and conspired with the Scribes and Pharisees,
Christ's most cruel enemies, he concluded with them, Mat. 26.14.
to betray him into their hands, and that for a mean and a base reward: and
what? Verse. 15.
was he touched for this sin? oh no, he came into his masters presence with
the rest of the Apostles, and heard him openly divulge, One of you shall betray
me: Ioh. 13.21.
yet it stird him not at all, it wrought nothing upon his fast clasped
conscience, but he was bold, and questioned his Master, Mat. 26.25.
as if he had been as clear a man as could be. Is it I, Master? As if he
should say, I hope, Master, of all the rest, you will not think that I would
do such a deed: what I betray you? I, your servant, an Apostle, whom you have
preferred to be Treasurer, and Keeper of your store: what, I, betray you? my
Master, my most loving Master, an innocent Lamb, a blessed Savior? oh pray
think not that I would do such a deed. Nay though Christ answer him and tell
him plainly, Thou have said, oh Judas, thou art the Man, how smoothly and
cunningly soever thou carry it; yet it moved him not at all, all this while
his conscience was asleep, and so on it goes, Judas takes his money, Christ is
betrayed, he is condemned, he must dye. And what, still asleep, Judas? oh no,
now the case begins to be altered; now his sin begins to rouse him up; now it
makes such a fire in his soul, that he has no rest, but runs up and down
like a Mad man; now the treacherous hier, which was before more dear to him
than his Masters life, oh now he cannot endure it, but up he takes it, Mat.
27.3, 4.
and down to the Priests and Elders he goes, throws it them again, and
cries out unto them, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. And thus
he runs to and fro in the fury of his inflamed sin, without all ease,
without all rest, as if he were in hell already, until at length he becomes
his own executioner, the worst hands living executing the worst man living.
But what should I speak of these thus deeply wicked? If Gods own children
shall dare to be so bold to suffer sin to rest upon their souls; oh, in
these it will break forth into a fiery flame that will grievously scortch,
Holc^t in I^br. Sap. Peccatum inquietat hominem, nec permittit habere pacem.
burn and torment their consciences: for sin, it disquiets a man, generally
all sorts of men, and suffers them not to possess any true peace of
conscience. When Adam had once committed sin against God, oh how he was
vexed, how his soul burnt with fear and trembling; Genesis 3.9.
so that he ran away from God, he hid himself from his presence, that God
was feign to call after him, Where art thou Adam? When Jonah, Gods own
Prophet, had disobeyed the voice of the Lord, oh how he was stung in
conscience, he had no rest, he fled from place to place, he shipped himself to
sea, he bestowed himself in the lowest houldes, Ion. 1.1^.
to hide himself from God, and to pass by the fury of his burning sin, he
betook himself to sleep, but all in vain, he is roused up again; for
without the wind and the waves pursue him, the Lot discovers him; within his
conscience huntes him with a fiery flame, which makes him cry out, Take me, and
cast me into the sea, so shall the sea be calm to you; for I know (oh the
force of a guilty conscience) that for my sake this great tempest is come upon
you. This was David's state, Psalm. 38.3, 4.
which made him complain, There is no rest in my bones, because of my sin,
my iniquities are gone over my head, they overwhelme me, and are as a sore
burden too heavy for me to bear, oh inflamed conscience. This was Hezekiahs
state, which made him conclude, That it broke his bones like a Lion, Esa.
38.13, 14.
and enforced him to cry like a Crane, to chatter like a Swallow, and mourn
like a Dove; nay (which far exceeds all comparison) when that blessed
Savior, that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, which had no sin inhesive, sin
only imputative, ours, none of his own, when he in this kind did bear our
sins, it made him grovell upon the earth, Luke 22.44.
it made him distill down drops of blood, Mat. 27.46.
and at length mournfully to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

So that sin is fitly compared unto a Fever propter inflammationem, in
respect of the burning heat it brings upon soul and conscience, perplexing
the very Saints of God; yea (as we see) often deeply plunging the most
cauterized conscience. Wicked men may for a while brave out their sins, and
pass them by with a senseless heart, despising and casting off the testimony
of their conscience, Without remorse of conscience. Senec. ^p. 43, Oh te
miserum, si contemnis hunc testem.
as did those Gentiles which the Apostle tells us were (...), past feeling, by
which, as Seneca speaks, they became the more miserable and inthralled; yet
this will hardly be always their estate, sometimes the horror of conscience
will broile up in their souls, as an unquenchable fire, for, as Iuvenall
speaks, Iuvenal. de scelerat. Nocte dieque suum gestant in pectore testem.
they do day and night carry their witness in their breasts, which will
sometime or other pierce them, and make them to hear his voice: therefore
faith the Prophet Esaias, Esa. 57.20.
The wicked are like the raging sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire
and dirt; the filth of their sins and abominations, to the most grievous
terror of their souls, Esa. 57.20. For, as Isidore speaks, nulla gravior
poenae quam mala conscientia, no greater punishment than an evil conscience.
Prove. 13.21.
For there is no peace, says my God, unto the wicked. Hence it is that Solomon
tells us, That afflictions do follow sinners, even wrath, anguish and horror
of soul: they may seek many means to pass them by, but their wickedness
will lie in wait for them, to scorch and burn them with unappeasable misery.

Lastly, sin is fitly compared unto a Fever propter privationem, in respect of
privation: for as that fierce malady does often times deprive of all vital
power, The axiom (a privatione ad habitum impossibilis est regressus) may well
be said to be true in respect of this spiritual death.
and brings down the body to the dust of the earth, so is it with sin, it
does often times so seize upon the soul, that at length it deprives it of all
spiritual life, and throws it down to eternal misery never to be
recovered. So that in this respect well may we say that true is the axiom,
that from the privation to the habit, the return is impossible: for whom sin
has once totally slain and thrown down to the grave of miserable
impenitencie, there is no return again. This was the estate of the aspiring
Angels, sin slew them, and deprived them of all spiritual life, and threw
them down to eternal misery, never to be regained again: So deals sin
with all profane persons, who continue it and nourish it in their souls, at
length it utterly kills them, takes from them all hope of life, all hope of
felicity, all grace in this world, all glory in the world to come, and makes
them owners of eternal thraldom.

Thus we see sin is a desease; and therefore first in a fivefold respect
fitly compared unto a Fever.

Secondly, the malady of sin is fitly compared to a Leprosy, and that in
regard of a threefold Sympathy, Separation, Infection and Curation. Esa. 59.2.
This separation is not the least punishment that shall befall the wicked: for
if Absalom did desire rather to die, than not to behold the face of his father
David, what great dolor shall it be to the wicked, that they shall be
separated from the presence of God, and all the godly for ever? Chrysostom.
concludes, that omnes poena non sunt illi poena comparari, all punishments are
not to be compared to it.
First, it is fitly compared unto a Leprosy, in respect of Separation: for as
that loathsome malady does occasion a man to be separated from the company of
men, so deals sin by the soul, it does cause a separation, and that a most
grievous one, between the Creature and the Creator, between God and our
souls; and therefore from all Grace and Glory, from all holy men and Angels.
This the worthy Prophet declares to be the force of sin, Your iniquities
(says he) have separated between you and your God, and caused him to hide his
face from you, that he will not hear. This, the last sentence to be
pronounced against the wicked does plainly witness, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. Go; there is the separation of most grievous nature, even
from God and all the godly, from all joy and comfort, from all bliss and
happiness unto endless misery. Thus first sin is fitly compared unto a
Leprosy in respect of separation.

Secondly, it is fitly compared unto a Leprosy, in respect of infection, and
that in a twofold kind: for first, as that grievous malady is of that nature,
that it does soon spread an infectious steame unto all those that associate
themselves with these, Senec. Vitia serpunt in vicinos, and contactunocent.
so deals sin, it does soon (as Seneca speaks) taint and infect the
neighboring parts. Hence it was that our grant-parent Eve associating her
self with the wicked Serpent, Genesis 3.
became soon infected with his contagion, to her great misery, and the
misery of all her posterity. Hence it was that godly Joseph living in the
polluted Court of Pharaoh, became soon tainted with the contagion thereof,
Genesis 42.15.
to swear by the life of Pharaoh, and to speak against his own knowledge and
conscience. Genesis 42.9.
Hence it was that the Apostle Peter conversing with the wicked company, Mat.
^6.58. Luke 12.55.
the enemies of Christ Jesus, became so far infected with their foul
pollution, as to deny his most loving Master: Aug. in Ps 99. Inter malos boni
gemunt, sic ut grana inter paleas, sicut lilium inter spinas.

Bern. Heu mihi, quia undique mihi pericula, undique mihi bella, undique mihi
tela volant, un^ique tentamenta, quocunque me vertor nulla securitas.


Therefore well might Austine say inter malos boni gemunt, etc. the godly do
groan amongst the wicked, as the wheat amongst the chafe, as the lilly among
the thorns: well might Bernard complain, woe is me, for dangers are on every
side, wars on every side, darts do fly on every side, on every side
temptations, whither soever I turn me there is no security. The people of
Israel had great experience hereof, whilst the Cananites became as thorns in
their sides, deeply piercing them with the foul infection of their loathsome
impieties. Thus we see that sin is fitly compared unto a Leprosy in respect
of infection, spreading it self abroad unto remote and neighboring parts.

Judge. 2.3.
Secondly, sin is fitly compared unto a Leprosy, in regard of infection more
proximate and personal: for as that disease does spread it self all over the
body, infecting every part thereof with its foul contagion, so deals sin by
the soul, it spreads it self all over it, it annoyes and polluts every part
thereof, it blindes the understanding that it cannot discern the excellent
things contained in Gods word, it dulls the will, and makes it froward in the
ways of God, most backward to all goodness, most forward to all evil, it
depraves the affection, and makes it alienate from God: for as one speaks, a
sinner is dumb and blind, Parat Ser. de Temp. Peccator mutus and cecus est.
he has neither will nor tongue that prayseth and magnifieth God, he has
neither understanding, nor heart apprehending, or taking knowledge of his sacred
mysteries; for as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things that are of the Spirit of God: they
are foolishness unto him; he cannot know them for they are spiritually
discerned. Thus we see, that sin is fitly compared unto a Leprosy, both in
respect of remote and proximate infection.

Lastly, it is fitly compared unto a Leprosy, Principiis obsta sero Medicina
paratur.
in respect of curation; for although it be a worthy rule concerning all
maladies, to stay them in the beginning for fear they grow incurable, yet is
it most especially urgent concerning this foul contagion: for if this be not
soon looked unto, even in his very entrance, alas, it grows forever
incurable: Such a disease is sin if it be not carefully looked unto in the
very beginning of it, Peccator inveteratus per peccatum induratur.

Hieron. Dum parvus est hostis interfice.


it will soon take strength and grow exceeding dangerous; for a sinner grown
old in sin, becomes hardened by sin: therefore Hierome gives worthy
counsel, to destroy this enemy whilst he is small, even when it is but in
thought: for as Bernard tells us, Evil thoughts whilst they dally with us,
they throw us down to destruction. Bernard. Malae cogitationes dum ludunt
illudunt.
Thus we see that sin is fitly compared unto a Leprosy in respect of
separation, infection, and curation.

Thirdly, Sin fitly compared unto a Frenzy propter securitatem, stoliditatem,
violentiam.
the disease of sin is fitly sympathized by a Frenzy, and that in a
threefold kind; in regard of security, in regard of stolidity and
foolishness, in regard of fierceness and violence. First, in respect of
security; for those thus affected, how much the more grievously the malady
does possess them, (...), or common sense is so offended in those troubled
with Frenzy, that they cannot rightly judge of the nature of any thing, as
Arist. does witness, lib. 3 de anim. cap. 2.

Helcot in Lib. Sap. Peccator quanto pejor tanto minus se reputat peccatorem.

Prove. 18.3. 1. Sam. 15.32.


so much the more secure they are: careless of any thing, presumptuous in all
things, fearing no danger, as having lost the use of common or reflecting
sense, by which they should judge of the nature of things. So is it with those
laden with the Frenzy of sin; how much the more deep in iniquity, so much
the more secure: for it is truly said, that a sinner how much the more worse
he is and deep in sin, so much the less does he repute or reckon himself
a sinner: whence it is that Solomon tells us, that a wicked man when he comes
into the depth (of wickedness) he contemnes, that is, all admonitions, all
conceit of misery, and becomes most presumptuously secure, never considering
any imminent danger, or stroke of justice ready to be imposed for sin
committed; as Agag when he was ready to be hackt in pieces, he securely
concluded, the bitterness of death was past: So pernicious Babel when God was
ready to throw down judgment against her, Esa. 47.8.
she presumptuously resolved, I shall be a Lady for ever, misery shall never
seize upon me. So Nebuchad-nezzar, when he was ready to be rejected, and made
as a beast of the field, he securely proclaimed a most enduring pomp, Is not
this great Babel that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might
of my Power, for the honor of my Majesty? Dan. 4.27.
As if he should say, my state shall never be changed, who can bring down my
might and power? So that pampered Epicure, though God had sent out a decree
against him, that very night to take his soul from him, Luke 12.
yet silly sot (the picture of this mad world) he went to bed with a
wonted song of presumptive security; Soul take thine ease: thou have much
goods laid up in store for many years; little thinking that that very night
should put a period to his life, and turn his long hoped joys to present
everlasting woes: therefore first sin is fitly compared to a Frenzy in
respect of security.

Secondly, it is fitly compared to a Frenzy propter steliditatem, in regard
of the foolishness of him that is troubled with this disaster; The reason of
usual Laughter in such as are distracted, is, because the fantasy of such do
continually err in the judgment of the object, so that they cannot discern
between matter of joy and matter of sorrow: now it is clear, where there is
no judgment, there can be no distinction or discretion of objects: and humane
nature is rather carried to laughter than to sorrow, especially where the
disease is not of melancholy, very fierce and servent, for man is naturally
animal visibile, a creature apt to laugh, albeit the temperament of the humors
do often hinder the production thereof, and makes them become (...), as
Crassus and Heraclitus, which were seldom seen to laugh.
for when he is in the greatest misery, most oppressed with the strength of
his disease, yet still you shall behold him as it were to laugh and carry a
pleasant countenance: so is it with him whose soul is troubled with the
disease of sin, when he is extremely miserable, when the strength of his
foul sins are ready to throw him down to destruction, yet still you shall
see him to be full of jollitie, and to carry a pleasant countenance. This was
the state of Jerusalem, who troubled with the Frenzy of sin, became passing
pleasant, never discerning the time of their visitation, never considering
their imminent distress. Christ wept for them, but they never wept for
themselves, but became full of mirth and insultation, even when Christ was
ready to denounce a woeful curse against them, Behold your habitation shall be
left unto you desolate. And such we may daily see to be the state of all
inveterate in sin: they walk with lifted up countenances full of jollitie
and insultation, yea even those that would be accounted the sons and
daughters of Sion, we may behold them to be haughty, Esaias 3.16.
to walk with stretched out necks, and wandering eyes, as the worthy Prophet
speaks, showing much more insultation than humiliation, carnal jollitie than
religious piety. Thus we see that sin is fitly compared to a Frenzy, in
respect of the mad folly of them affected with that disaster.

This is the quality of those, the ground of whose distraction is fervent
burning mellancholie.
Thirdly it is fitly compared to a Frenzy propter violentiam: for as he that
is distracted becoms fierce and violent, full of rage, seazing upon any, even
his dearest friends, and is not reclaimed but by bands and fetters; so deals
sin with the soul, it makes it fierce and cruel against God: for when the
Holy Ghost would describe a man laden with the Frenzy of sin, he tells us,
that he sets his mouth against Heaven, Psalm. 73.9.
he wars with God himself, and is never reclaimed but by the special power
of his justice. Exodus 14.8.
This was Pharaohs state, which made him stand against God and all his power:
the ten mighty strokes which he struck at him, they danted him not at all,
but still he maintained his war against God, and went on in the pursuit of
his violent will, and never left till God was feign to strike him down with
the hand of his judgment, and swallow him up, and his whole host in the
furious waves of the sea. And such become all those that deeply lade themselves
with the Frenzy of sin, they grow fierce and mad against God, and nothing
can remove them, no voice of God, no mercy nor menace, but on still they go
with all violence, as if they would pull God out of his throne, until at
length he is feign to rowse himself up like a Giant, and by the invincible
hand of his justice throw them down to eternal misery; for as the Prophet
Esaias speaks, Let mercy be showed to the wicked, Esaias. 26.10
(corrective mercy in punishing and afflicting them to turn them from the
evil of their ways) yet they will not learn righteousness etc. they will
not behold the high hand of God, but will still war against his Majesty.
Thus we see that sin may fitly be sympathized by a Frenzy, in respect of
security, in respect of foolishness, in respect of fierceness and violence.

Lastly, sin is fitly compared unto a Lethargy: for as this disease, as
Aequieta writes, draws upon the body even a continual sleepiness, and as
Trallianus says, such a forgetfulness, that they forget what to speak or
what to do, yea as Constantius speaks, the necessary actions of life; so
deals sin with the soul, it draws upon it such a deadly and fearful
sleep, that these thus affected, forget the most necessary things, that which
most specially concerns them, even all the ways of God, all reverent fear
and obedience to his Majesty, all peace of conscience, all salvation of their
souls, all eternal joy and felicity, in a word, all consideration of their
estate and condition. Oh do but survaie the passage of a wicked man, and is it
not clear that his soul is thus affected? alas, he goes on in a fearful
way, and seems not to remember so much as what way it is, or whither it tends,
or what will be the end of it; he has a soul an immortal essence, and a
body the organ of that soul, both which must appear before Gods Tribune, 2.
Cor. 5.10.
to receive a sentence according to their works; but he seems utterly to
forget it, as if he had no answer to make, or doom to receive, or soul and
body to be saved, or condemned: for who so did but duly consider amongst many
other the like passages, that only which the Apostle does plainly witness,
That an account must be given for all the things done in our bodies, whether
they be good or evil: how could it but restrain the force of sin, and beat
down the height of wickedness? but the long continued Lethargy of their
impieties has drawn so deadly a sleep upon their souls, that they become
even utterly forgetful of their miserable estate and condition, never
remembering that which Augustine does plainly witness, Aug, Quae cunque facio,
ante te facio, and illud quicquid est quod facio melius tu vides quam ego qui
facio. Heb. 4.13. Romans 2.16. Ezech. 7.9.
that whatsoever they do, they do it before the face of God, and that
whatsoever it is that they do, that he sees it better than they themselves
that do it. All things, as the Apostle speaks, being naked and open to his
eyes with whom we have to do, even their secrets, which he will judge by
Jesus Christ; nor will his eye spare them, not will he have pity upon them,
but will lay upon them all their ways, and their abominations shall be in the
midst of them, and they shall know that he is Iehova that smites: all which
the deadly sleep that the Lethargy of their sin brings upon them, seems to
draw into an utter oblivion. And thus we see that sin is fitly compared to a
Fever, to a Leprosy, to a Frenzy, to a Lethargy.

Oh now, what shall this impresse within us? Is this the nature of sin? is it
a disease? a disease so grievous? so hard to be cured? how well might this
instruct us to relinquish sin, to be wary how we entertain that dangerous
malady? But what? may we not here stand a pauld and amazed? may we not well
cry out, oh tempora, oh mores? for what heart can conceive, what ear has
heard, or what tongue can express the misery of these times? oh that the
eternal power would inspire some power of his spirit, to make our dull and
earthie minds fit to record, and apt to utter some breviat of this wicked age.
Alas, forsake our sins? wary how we give entertainment to sin? a strange
discourse: oh how the flintie heart returns it back again, and seems to
echo in my ears, Tush, tush, a voice for heaven but not for earth; what,
should we become the wonder of the world? it is not the fashion of this strong
stomackt age, to make a question how full they gorge themselves with sin.
Most true indeed, what can be more clear? The opinion of the world.
for now the trade of sin is grown full ripe, * he is held a sot of no regard
that treads but ordinary stepps of sin: but dives he down to hell, and
fetch he thence some strange unheard of damned plot, that may amaze the mind,
astonish modest ears, and be a wonder to the world; (...), c^leritas ad
nequitiam. (...) malign diligens. Such, amongst other of this time, seem
those to be (in the Romish judgment) that plotted that horrid stratagem, the
powder treason.
has he not only (as Basil speaks) a notable dexterity to invent mischief,
but (as Eustathius speaks) becomes most diligent and watchful to put it in
practice; oh he is the man, surpassing wise, a worthy politician, oh none to
him. Those gross and common sins, ebrietie, adultery, base usurie, and
foul blasphemy, become such hacknies of the world, so frequent and familiar
in every place, that these, they seem no sins at all, they will tell you
they can prescribe, If you commence a suit, they will plead a custom, If you
urge it further, they will prohibit, and draw you down to the judgment of the
world, Egregious wickedness reckoned by unhallowed spirits for wise political
inventions.
where you may be sure they will prove their suggestions: So that these foul
sins by their community and continuitie, seem to have purchased to
themselves such a kind of immunitie, that you may behold them to walk up and
down the streets without control, very gravely, very gentleman-like, as if
they had nothing to do with the society of hell, as if these were no sins
at all: for in this deep transgressing age, nothing seems worthy of that
name, The indulgent judgment that men use to have of sin and wickedness.
but some horrid-acted stratagem, that may seem to put the very Devils
themselves to school; now none seem to be wicked, but such as are (...),
extremely wicked, wicked as it were beyond comparison. oh such be our times,
so strange be our affections: but oh wretched creatures, whither do you bend
your course? oh see your estate, observe your condition, you are full of foul
diseases, your souls are laden with the burning Fever of sin, with a
loathsome Leprosy, whose great contagion is ready to make a separation betwixt
you and your God; alas! with a violent Frenzy, which makes you war against
God, grow insensible of your misery, and smile when your destruction
approaches; even with a grievous Lethargy, which makes you sleep in sin, and
continue in wickedness, never remembering either heavenly joys, or hellish
miseries. And what, will you still remain in this estate? will you take no
notice of your great distress? shall neither the burning of the Fever, nor the
contagion of the Leprosy, nor the violence of the Frenzy, nor the oblivion
of the Lethargy work any impression upon you? shall they be no motives to
you, to make you forsake your impieties, and to become wary how you entertain
any sin, which ever carries with it the nature of all these grievous
diseases. Oh then what can remain to you, but endless woe and misery? what
can be your estate? but as David spoke of the mountains of Gilboa, never dewes
to fall on you more, no showers of grace to mollify your hearts, but as you
have begun in sin, so to end in sin, through the strength of your disease
by which you have so violently resisted the sweet fountains of Gods mercies,
so often compassing your souls. But blessed be the hills of Armenia, which
give rest unto the Ark of the Lord, oh blessed those that give way to this
voice of God, and become moved to forsake their sins, and cautious how they
ever entertain that grievous disease, which seeks to inthrall them with an
incurable distress. And thus much for the action Metaphorically set forth in
the word, heal, plainly showing sin to be a dangerous disease, and
consequently never able to be cured by any, but by God himself, as the
principal efficient, which concludes the scope of my first part, the matter
subject, I will heal.

Proceed we now unto the second general, the predicate, Rebellions: I will
heal their Rebellions. When sins of infirmity or sins of ignorance are
committed, these do taint the soul, and make it liable to eternal death;
Romans 6.23.
for the reward of sin (of any sin whatsoever) is death: but when we lade
our selves with rebellions, sins pertinaciously committed, and continued in
against our knowledge and our conscience, oh these may well be said to
exasperate and incense a speedy passage of Gods justice against us; for as the
Prophet Samuel speaks, Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is wickedness and idolatry, as proceeding from the same
loathsome sink, an incredulous unbeleeving heart, yet even this great
wickedness the Lord is content to heal and cure it to the repentant and truly
humbled; I will heal their Rebellions: plainly showing, that great sins
limit not Gods mercies, but if we truly mourn for sin, and become sincerely
humbled for our impieties, endeavoring to apply his blessed mercies unto them,
desiring them in the merit and mediation of that loving Savior Jesus Christ,
he will not fail to heal even the rebellious soars of our souls. When
bloody Cain and treacherous Judas had committed great and grievous wickedness,
whence was it that they perished in their evils? alas! not because Gods
mercies were not able to cure them, but because they desperately despaired, and
never fixed eye upon those sovereign comforts: We may see in Mathewes Gospel
our Savior tells us, he would have gathered together wicked and rebellious
Jerusalem, as the hen her chickens, but they would not, they regarded not his
loving mercy, they would not discern the time of their visitation; no, though
that blessed Savior did seek to move them unto it, Luc. 19.42. August. Non
ideo non habet homo gratiam, quia Deus non dat, sed quia homo non accipit.
even with mournful tears from his eyes, crying out, Oh if thou had known
at the least in this thy day those things that belong unto thy peace. It is a
worthy speech of a learned Father, that man becomes hardened and wants grace,
not because God does not offer it, but because man receives it not when it is
offered: for the Lord himself protests, that as he lives he disires not the
death of the wicked, but that he should turn from his way, and live;
therefore he concludes with a serious invitation, Turn you, turn you from
your evil ways, for why will ye dye oh ye house of Israel? We may see in
the first of Esaias, that having earnestly invited that Rebellious people to
turn from their pernicious courses, presently he inferrs, Esa. 1.18.
And then let us reason together, then I will admit conference with you, to the
great peace and comfort of your souls, that were your sins as crimson, they
shall be made as white as snow, though they were red like scarlet, they shall
be as wool: oh then, as Austine speaks, cast not away your selves, refuse
not his mercy when it is offered; for we see it clear, that great sins
limits not Gods mercies, but, Aug. in Psalm.
as the same worthy Author speaks, as the earth abounds with man's misery, so
it superabounds with Gods mercy, yea, says he, that very thing shall be
required of a wicked man, Ibid.
that he would not receive mercy when it was offered. We reason not here what
inabilitie man has brought upon himself by the distempered surfeit of sin,
Eccles. 7.31.
but let us all understand that to be true which Solomon records, That God
made man righteous, but he has sought many inventions; many sinister courses
to load his soul with sin; Ion. 2.8.
and wilfully following lying vanities, does (as the Prophet Jonah speaks)
forsake his own mercy; that we may well say with the Prophet Hosea, That his
destruction is of himself, even by his wilful contracting and going on in
sin, Hos. 13.9.
obstinately hardening his heart against the many loving and merciful
invitations of the Lord, Mat. 23.37.
who would gather these together as the hen her chickens: oh then let me invite
you all with that worthy speech of the Holy Ghost, To day if you will hear his
voice harden not your hearts; Psalm. 95.7.8.
oh harden them not against the merciful voice of the Lord, against the
operation of his holy spirit, which seeks to heal even the rebellious soars
of your souls. Let me say to you with worthy Augustine, Aug. in Psalm.
Receive mercy, my Brethren, even the mercy of humble and penitent hearts,
the mercy of remission and pardon of your sins, to the which the Lord
invites you, for which the Lord now knocks at the door of your hears: Oh let
us all receive it, let none of us sleep or drowse in the receiving of it, Rev.
3.20.
lest he be one day rowsed up to render an evil, and a grievous answer before
the tribune seat of Jesus Christ, when in the terror of his wounded soul for
the guilt of his many sins committed, Rev. 6.16.
he shall wish that the mountains and rocks would fall on him, and hide him
from the presence of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb; and shall seek for death and shall not find it, Rev. 9.6.
and shall desire to dye (which yet nature abhorres as the most terrible of all
terrible things, Anst.
as the very Heathen man concludes) but death shall fly from him. Oh then
receive we this mercy from our God who thus lovingly offers it, Hos. 14.3,
and let us, as this worthy Prophet advises, take unto us words, and turn
unto the Lord, and say unto him; Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips, that he may yield us a
comfortable answer, I will heal your Rebellions; even the greatest soars of
your souls, to the eternal peace and comfort of your consciences. oh blessed
those that thus receive the mercy of their God. Wherefore this wisdom, to
attain the cure of our long festered soars of sin (some tending to schism
and faction, some to atheism and profannesse, but all grievously dangerous)
the eternal Father impresse within us, for the precious merits of his dear
son Christ Jesus. To whom with their most holy sanctifying spirit, three
persons and one indivisible essence, be all praise, power and glory, ascribed,
from this time forth for evermore.

FINIS.
JOHN 10.27. My sheep do hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.


We may see (Right Worshipful and well beloved in our Savior Christ) in the
twenty fourth verse of this chapter, that the Jews did compass about our
Savior, demanding of him, how long he would hold them in suspense; If thou
art the Christ tell us plainly. A strange demand, for this blessed Savior had
both by word and work plainly witnessed that he was the Messiah: therefore he
replies unto them, I have told you, and you believe not, the very works which
I do, do testify of me (that I am the Christ) but you believe not. And he
shows them the reason of this their unbeleefe, The proposition considered
separatively, is categoricall; considered as it is connexive and knit together
by conjunctions, it may be said to be hypotheticall, that is, materially.
for that they were none of his sheep: that they were none of his sheep he
proves Categorically, thus:

My sheep hear my voice, but ye hear not my voice; therefore ye are not my
sheep. Or because the proposition considered in the whole words is connexive,
as consisting of diverse branches: we may frame the assumption accordingly, the
Major lying thus in my text.

My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: but you hear
not my voice, I know not you, you follow not me; therefore you are none of my
sheep.

Briefly in this proposition I consider three things, as three special marks
of the true sheep of Christ: A subject urgently necessary in these our times,
Beza Multum scientiae paru^ conscientiae.
wherein there is much science, but little conscience, when the pallats of many
be grown so strange that that only yeeldes some kind of relish, that is
admirable and surpassing ordinary capacity; for in this our wantonizing age,
we deal with sermons as Gentlewomen with their fancie-flowers, we use them for
show, not for savor, for fashion, not affection: And therefore (like them)
when the night of our wonted sins approach, we cast down all fragrant
adminition at our unhallowed heels. Vrgently necessary is it then, to
discover the property of the true sheep of Christ, that we may discern them
from the goats of these corrupted times: Consider we therefore the three
special marks of the true sheep of Christ, infolded within the compass of
this Text: Audition, Cognition, Prosecution. Audition in the first branch, My
sheep hear my voice: Prosecution is here to be taken in the good part for the
earnest following of Christ.
Cognition in the second, and I know them: Prosecution in the last, and they
follow me. And first for the foremost, Audition or Hearing, My sheep hear my
voice, that is, in a fivefold manner, frequently, intelligently, humbly,
delightfully, obediently. First frequently, so the true sheep of Christ do
hear the voice of Christ, not rarely, not seldom, now and then for fashion,
but upon every opportunity whenever it shall be delivered; not like those in
John's Gospel of whom our Savior complains (...), Ioh. 5.40.
but ye will not come to me that so ye may have life: but ye should be like
unto good Cornelius in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 10.33.
who tells the worthy Apostle Peter, that he and his company were there
present before God, to hear all things commanded him of God, that is, all
things that he should then speak, or the next day, or at any time during his
abode with them. This was the worthy practice of those Religious converts,
Acts. 2.46. Act. 2.46.
who continued daily with one accord in the Temple, that is, hearing the divine
mysteries and holy truth propounded unto them. And this has been the usual
practice of the Saints of God, Mat. 14.
to be frequent in the hearing of the word of God; so frequent and fervent,
that in regard of this, Mat. 15.32.
they scarce permitted themselves time to strengthen their fainting bodies with
corporeal sustenance. Antonius a man unlearned, by frequent hearing of the
word of God, retained it perfectly in memory. Aug.
And Augustine speaking of Antonius a man illiterate, says that he was so
frequent in the learning of the word of God, that he did, scripturas divinas
audiendo, memoriter tenere, by hearing retain (perfectly) in memory the holy
scriptures: Which worthy practices of the true sheep of Christ duly considered,
reproves the sinister courses of many in these our times, who are strangely
remiss in these holy duties, who very seldom frequent the house of God; for
many times may Gods word be sounded forth, but there are a sort that will not
afford so much as their presence at it, as if they had no souls to be saved,
Romans 1.16. Romans 10.17.
as if this were not the power of God to salvation, as if this were not the
only ordinary means to beget faith in their souls, and to implant them in
Jesus Christ; in a word, as if there were no Heaven of happiness, nor Crown
of immortal glory for the godly, nor Hell of misery, nor Gulf of endless
torment for the wicked. But in the mean time understand we, that these
contemners of holy things, do plainly show they are no sheep of Christ; for
Christ himself tells us, That his sheep do hear his voice, that is,
frequently upon all due opportunity. Oh, whose sheep are they then, that are
thus careless or rather contemptuous of Gods sacred truth, who are so
penurious in affording their presence in the house of God? alas! their fruit
does soon descrie them, and gives great evidence that they are of Satan's
sheepfold; for he is a deep contemner of holy things, and labors to work the
same effect in all his adherents: oh that therefore these would consider their
estates, is it a small misery to be a sheep of Satan's fold? oh, know we that
he is a dangerous and a cruel enemy; a dangerous enemy, full of subtlety,
for, as Bernard speaks, habet mill nocendi arts, he has a thousand cunning
ways to do thee mischief; yea, says Hugo, naturam uniuscujusque scrutatur,
and inde se applicat, ubi aptum hominem ad peccandum repirit, he pries into the
nature of every one, and there applies his bait, where he finds a man aptest to
(entertain) a wickedness; for he comes not to every one in every kind, but
he subtly sorts himself to the inclination of all: Genesis 3.5. Josh. 7.21. 1.
Sam. 25.36. 2. Kin. 3.22. 1. King. 21. Judge. 16.1. John 12.6. Gregor.
he has honor for Eve, he has a wedge of Gold for Achan, he has wine for
drunken Nabal, he has bribes for Gehazi, a vinyard for greedy Ahab, a Dalilah
for Sampson, and a bagg for Judas; yea says Gregory, Diabolus uniuscujusque
mores respicit, cui vitio sit propinquior, and illud ponit ante faciem, the
Devil notes the manners of everyone, to what vice he is most prone, and that
he presents before him. Again, he is a cruel enemy, for whither tends all
his travells, all his plots, and cunning suggestions, all his intising objects?
alas! utterly to overthrowe thee, and to cast thee into endless misery:
therefore says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 5.8.
He goes about as a roaring Lion, Genesis 3.1.
seeking whom he may devour. He surprised our first parents in that sacred
place of Paradise: Job 1. 6, 9, 10
he accused innocent Job in the very presence of God: yea, he durst set upon
Christ himself, that Lion of the Tribe of Judah, endeavoring, as a cruel
enemy, by all cunning utterly to supplant and overthrow them: for, Matthew. 4.3.
as Gregory speaks, malitiam art palliat, he covers his malice with
(notable) cunning. Oh then, will any be so pernicious to rest in this misery?
will they be sheep of this fold? oh how much rather should they use all
diligence to break from this grievous estate, and become frequent in the
hearing of Christ's voice, to give some demonstration, that they are of his
blessed fold! for we hear Christ's own conclusion, My sheep (says he) hear
my voice, that is, frequently upon all due opportunity.

Secondly, the sheep of Christ do hear the voice of Christ Intelligently,
that is, John 6.53.
with understanding and knowledge, not like those carnal Capernaites in John's
Gospel, who when our Savior told them of that great mystery, the eating of
his flesh, and the drinking of his blood, John 6.60.
they dreampt of a carnal and corporeal eating thereof; therefore they cry out
(...), this is a hard speech, who is able to abide it? Such also were those in
the second of John, who required a sign of our Savior: Ioh. 2.18.
To whom he replied, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up
again: but alas, they understood him not, he meant the corporeal Temple of
his body, Ioh. 2.20.
and they meant the matereall Temple of Jerusalem: Therefore they reply, Forty
six years was this Temple a building, and will thou raise it up again in
three days? And such are many in these times, they do not truly understand
the word of God, but are apt to pervert it and abuse it, to the deep dishonor
of God, and burden of their own souls. But those that are the sheep of
Christ, they hear his voice intelligently, with understanding and knowledge;
for these, John 4.26.
they are (...), they are taught of God, that is, John 16.13.
of the spirit of God, which teaches them all things, as Saint John speaks,
and leads them into all truth, that is, all truth necessary for salvation.
Therefore the Apostle Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 2.15.
that he that is spiritual discerns all things, that is, all things
pertinent to spiritual happiness. Hence it is that our Savior, says in
Mathewes Gospel to the affected with his spirit, Mat. 13.11.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; to you
that are inspired with my spirit. From all which it is clear, that the true
sheep of Christ do hear his voice Intelligenly, with true understanding and
knowledge. And let it be here observed, that we mean not a mere
theoreticall, Iam. 2 19.
or bare historical knowledge, which is in the very Devils, and may be often
found in ungodly men; John 2 4.
but we speak of a knowledge practical, according to Saint John, who tells
us, That if we say we know God, and yet keep not his commandments, we are
liars, Bern. sup. Cant. Sermon. 36. Sunt qui scire volunt eo sine tantum ut
sciant, and turpis curiositas est: and sunt qui scire volunt, ut sciantur ipsi,
and turpis vanitas est; qui prosecto non evadent substannantem Satyricum: scire
tuum nil est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter. Per. Sat. 1. Nazianz (...).
Arist. in primis metaphys. ter^. (...). 1. Cor. 8.1. Arist. 5. ethic, 3 cap.
Varia^u^ rerum scientia sine morum cultura, and honestatis, nil aliud est quam
gladius in manu hominis suriosi. Mat. 13.13. Esa. 6.9, 10.
and the truth is not in us. For those then that seek to know, only that they
may know, or that seek to know, that they may be known, or that seek to
know, that they may pervert and abuse Gods sacred truth, and take his weapons
to fight against himself, these hear not the voice of Christ Intelligently,
with true knowledge, but to the dishonor of God and prejudice of their own
souls. Therefore Gregory Nazianzen does well conclude, Knowledge is the
greatest decor and ornament of life; but (says he) if thou use it not well,
it is the greatest evil. It is true that the Heathen man speaks, All men by
nature desire to know: but it is most ture that the Apostle speaks (...),
Knowledge (if it be not watered with the dewes of Grace) is apt to puff (men)
up, and to transport them from all true rules of Piety. Therefore the very
Philosopher worthily tells us, that the knowledge of diverse things without
practice, is nothing else, but as a sword in the hand of a mad man. Briefly,
for those stupidious hearers, who, as our Savior speaks, do see and yet
perceive not, that hear and understand not, whose hearts are waxed fat in
wickedness, whose ears are dull of hearing, which do as it were wink with
their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, etc. for these, they are frozen in the dreggs
of their iniquity, and do plainly show they are no sheep of Christ; for the
Text is clear, His sheep do hear his voice, that is, Intelligently, with
true understanding and knowledge.

Thirdly, his sheep do hear his voice humiliter, humbly, confessing their
sins, and acknowledging their transgressions; Prove. 28.13.
for they know that to be true that Solomon records, That he that hides his
sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses, and forsakes them, shall
have mercy; yea they know that the promise of Gods mercy and favor is
limited with this condition, as Saint John does plainly witness; 1. John 1.9.
If (says he) we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
our sins: therefore no acknowledgement, no pardon. But says Chrysostom,
confessio reddit Deum propitium, Chrysostom. in Psalm.
confession makes God to be merciful. This the blessed Prophet David does
witness unto us by his own experience, bending his speech unto God, I
acknowledged my sin (says he) and thou forgavest the punishment thereof.
Psalm 32 5.
August.
Wherefore Augustine gives worthy advice dimitte Satanam, and teipsum accusa,
ut accusatione tua veniam habeas, let Satan go, and accuse thy self, that by
thy accusation thou may obtain pardon; for the Apostle tells us plainly,
1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, Bern.
we should not be judged. Oh, says Bernard judicatus, and non judicandus,
already judged, and not to be judged: Gloss. Quando homo detegit, Deus tegit.
Aug. Quando homo tegit, Deus denudat.
for as the Gloss speaks, When man discovers, God covers; but as Augustine
speaks, When man covers, then God discovers. As we may see clearly in
pernicious Cain, he braved out his sin; when God asked him for his brother,
he insolently replied, Genesis 4.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? But God discovered his bloody treachery, to the
perpetual horror of his soul and conscience. Josh. 7.18.
So sacrilegious Achan cunningly concealed his private thieft: but God by lot
discovered him, 2. Reg. 5.^5.
to the utter ruin of him, and his whole family. It was easy with Gehazi to
deny his symonicall bribes, smoothly answering, Thy servant has been no
where: 2. Reg. 5.27.
but God discovers it to his Master Elisha, and makes him the instrument to
denounce a grievous scourge against him and his posterity for ever. Acts 5.
Ananias and Saphira may closely conceal their Hypocrisy, they may boldly and
impudently deny their private fraud: but God will manifest it, and by the
mouth of his Apostle deprive them of all vital power. And in these our times
many such may we behold, that are far from that humble hearing of Christ's
voice, as entirely to acknowledge their sins and transgressions, but are apt
to brave them out with a proud and an arrogant countenance: And therefore do
plainly show, they are far from being the sheep of Christ; for they do
humbly hear his voice, acknowledging and confessing their transgressions, yea
they are apt mournfully to cry out with the prodigal child, Father, Luke
15.18, 19
we have sinned against Heaven and against Thee, and are no more worthy to be
called thy children. And indeed when was it that sinful Mary found peace to
her soul, but when she kneeled at the feet of Christ, Luke 7.48.
and powered forth even a flood of tears to wash the feet of Christ, and wipt
them with the hairs of her head, therein mournfully confessing her sin and
her transgression? which so inkindled compassion in this blessed Savior, that
presently he pronounces to her a comfortable absolution, Thy sins are
forgiven thee.

If therefore we will be the sheep of Christ, we must hear his voice humbly,
truly and mournfully confessing our impieties: for, to brave out sin, or to
lay some color upon it, is to aggravate sin, and make it greater: for, as
Chrysostom speaks, malum est peccare, Chrysostom.
sed gravius negare, aut indulgere; it is evil to sin, but it is a greater
(evil) to deny it, or indulge it by any color whatsoever. No evil so great
but a wicked man may lay some kind of color upon it.
For what sin is so vile, that a wicked man may not lay some kind of color
upon it? The base drunkard may say it was company that induced him to that
foul pollution: the savage murderer may enforce it was fury and choler that
moved him to that horrid act; the damnable swearer may say it was rash inflamed
passion that moved him to blaspheme the name of God.

The Adulterer may allege, it was lust and concupiscence that was the cause of
his base wickedness: the greedy insatiable worldling that prosecutes
oppression, and with the teeth of fraud, deceit, and cruelty feeds upon living
men; how easily may he enforce that he does it to maintain his reputation, to
sustain his charge, to leave large revennues to his posterity? But alas,
these are foolish excuses, the fruits of old Adam, they do not minuere but
augere crimen, they do not diminish but increase the fault, and therefore are
never able to stand the trial of Gods piercing judgment. Oh then as the true
sheep of Christ, hear his voice humbly, entirely confessing thy transgression:
Aug. Non crubuisti peccare, and erubescis, confiteri.
for, as Austine speaks, wast thou not ashamed to sin, and art thou ashamed
to confess thy sin? oh let this be far from a Christian heart.

Fourthly, as a fourth special instance, the true sheep of Christ do hear
the voice of Christ delightfully: Oh it is a joy and a pleasure to their souls,
no voice so welcome to them; they long after it, they hunger and thirst after
it, Psalm. 42.
as David does witness of himself, who being in banishment, and not able to
come to the house of God to hear his voice, he mournfully proclaims, that as
the Heart desired the water brooks, so his soul longed after God, yea (says
he) my soul is a thirst for the living God, oh when shall I come to appear
before his presence? Bern. in Cant. Suavia ad gratiam, foecunda ad sensus,
profunda ad mysteria. Psalm. 19. Psalm. 1.19.
And no marvel, for (as Bernard speaks) his words are sweet unto grace,
pleasant unto the senses, profound unto mysteries; yea, says the Psalmist,
they are sweeter than honey and the honey comb: and therefore concludes, they
were dearer to him than thousands of gold and silver.

And this for special reason: Ioh. 11.43 44. Luke 7.14, 15. Mat. 9.33. Mat.
8.32. Luke 9.42.
for it is a precious treasure, of admirable force and power; for by this mighty
voice, the voice of Jesus Christ, the dead were raised, the dumb did speak, the
deaf did hear, and devils did depart; yea by this most powerful voice, the
hardened hearts of men that raged against this blessed Christ, were so far
pierst, Acts 2.37.
that it did make them to cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? yea by
this the darkened world, eclipsed with the clouds of sin, Gentiles in the
flesh, Ephesians. 5.8.
strangers from the covenant of promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
without God in the world, by this powerful voice are made to be no more
strangers nor forreiners, Ephesians. 2.19.
but citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God; Ephesians. 5.8.
no more darkness but light in the Lord, even professors of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. Well therefore might the Apostle call this blessed voice the
power of God to salvation: Romans 1.16.
well might he conclude that this is a lively voice, mighty in operation,
sharper than any two-edged sword, entering through, Heb. 4.12.
even to the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit. In a word, well may
the sheep of Christ delight in this voice, for it does enrich their souls
with incomparable happiness, true repentance, with mournful tears to condole
their sins and their transgressions. Now (says Chrysostom) tears are the
sponges of sin, Chrysostom. Lachrimae sunt spongia peccatoru^.
to wash them and purge them (clean away): It does enrich them with true faith
to apprehend Christ Jesus, by which they are made one with him, Romans 10.17.
Ioh. 17.22. 1. Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 1.22.23 Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Ephesians. 5.23. Romans
8.17.
the mystical body of that mystical head, and therefore heirs and co-heyres
of his eternal kingdom. Hence it is that the worthy Prophet does conclude
them to be blessed that live in the house of the Lord, to be partakers of this
heavenly voice, Blessed (says he) are they that dwell in thy house, Psalm. 84.4.
they will ever praise thee. Yea, hence was it that it was such a special joy
to his soul to hear any speak of recoursing to those holy places, as
himself does plainly witness, I rejoiced when they said unto me, Psalm. 122.1,
2.
we will go unto the house of the Lord: our feet shall stand in thy Courts O
Jerusalem. O worthy affection prudently directed: for, as Augustine speaks,
Aug. in soliq. Divina dulcedo quae omnem praesentem mundi amaritudinem toll it.
in this voice there is a divine sweetness, which takes away all the present
bitterness of the world, all contempts and disdaines, all distresses and
afflictions, and fills the soul with such a secret inward consolation, that it
makes it conclude with the Apostle, Romans 8.18.
that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the joys that shall be
revealed: yea it so assures it, that it makes it able to say, Romans 8.38, 39.
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate it from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus. For this heavenly voice, the pledge of Gods favor, the anchor of the
faithful, it is so fastened to their souls by the strength of Gods spirit,
Bern.
that (as Bernard speaks) it is not broken off by any disease, by decrepit
age, by the intercourse of things, by the change of times; briefly, not by
death it self, but shall rest as a sure comfort and consolation upon the soul
for ever. Oh therefore, Esa. 52.7.
as the Prophet Esaias speaks, how bewtifull are the feet of those that declare
and publish this message unto the mountains! that is, to the sheep of Christ,
whose affections are lifted up from the dirtie valleys, and loathsome puddles
of terrene things, to delight in the voice of Jesus Christ, gasping after the
comforts thereof as the withered mountains do after the showers of heaven. How
bewtifull are the very feet of these to those? for they, as the true sheep
of Christ, are in love with his blessed voice, and therefore become indeared to
the very propounders of this message. Woe then to the contemptible hearers of
Christ's voice, that hear it with disdainful ears and loathing affections,
that seem to say with wicked Pharao, Who is the Lord, Exodus, 5.2.
that (we) should hear his voice?

Woe again to the dull and drowsy creatures, those dead-hearted hearers, that
slugge and sleep when this sacred voice is propounded: Oh, woe to these; for
they have no pleasure in this message, it is not welcome to their souls, but
loathsome to their affections. But let these know, yea even all the unhallowed
blood that have no taste nor relish in the voice of Christ; let all these
know, that they are no sheep of Christ, nay, that the very enemies of Christ
that were sent to take this blessed Savior, shall rise up in judgment against
their: for they in the hearing of Christ's voice were so far affected, that
they openly divulged, Ioh. 7 47.
Never man spoke like this man.

Let me therefore say to those that have yet any compunction of soul, with
worthy Austine, Discite non diligere ut discatis diligere: Learn not to love
that you may learn to love; Aug.
learn not to love the hardness of your hearts, and the frowardness of your
ways, that you may learn to love the blessed voice of Jesus Christ. Thus we
see the sheep of Christ do hear his voice Delightfully.

Lastly, they hear his voice Obediently, as desirous to do whatsoever he
enjoynes: oh this, it is the very sinew and strength of a Christian consolation,
not to reason the case with flesh and blood, not to dispute the case with God,
but obsequiously to obey that which he commands: for (as the Prophet Samuel
does clearly witness) obedience is better than sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15.22.
and to harken, that is, to the voice of the Lord, it is better than the fat of
Rams. Oh this, it is that which God does deeply desire: Oh (says he) that my
people would have hearkened to my voice: Psalm. ^1.13.
Oh that Israel would have walked in my ways. And in the fifth of Deuteronomie
we may see it clear, where God does earnestly wish, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
Oh that there were such a heart in them, to fear me and keep my
commandments always. Ezech. 33.11.
And in Ezech. 33. to show how specially he is affected to obedience, he does
seriously protest, that as he lives he does nor desire the death of the
wicked: and therefore vehemently exhorts them, Turn you turn you from your
evil ways, Luke 19.42.
for why will you perish O, house of Isreal's? But most clear is this from our
Saviors course with Jerusalem, where he weeps over it, where he cries out
concerning it, Oh if thou had known at the least in this thy day those
things that belong to thy peace. Luke 19.42.


Briefly, how excellent a virtue is obedience? it argues not, it repines not,
it murmurs not, it distrusts not the providence of God, but wholly resignes it
self unto his will; the Lord speaks, and obedience obeyes: how pleasing is
obedience in the sight of God? Genesis 22.2.
Oh it was no small matter that God required at the hand of Abraham, and Abraham
if ever he had survayed it with a carnal eye, would soon have argued with
God, What? shall I offer up my son? what my only son, the son of the
covenant, the promised seed, in whom all nations should be blessed? and am I
old and not likely to generate? and is Sara so aged she has no hope to
procreate? what then shall become of this promise? But all this past by, the
Lord commands and he obeyes; which was so pleasing, Genesis 22.16, 17
that the Lord protests, Because thou have done this thing, and have not spared
thine only son, therefore will I surely bless thee, and will greatly
multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven, and as the sands that is by the
Sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies. Oh then the
worth of obedience, Aug. Nil tam expedit homini quam obedire, sola obedientia
tenet palmam.
what impression it makes in the presence of God! that Austine might well say,
there is nothing so expedient for a man as to obey: for obedience only gains
the victory. Oh a renowned victory, a crown of immortal glory: Psalm. 119.1,
2.
therefore says David, Blessed are those that walk in Law of the Lord blessed
are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart, with
a true and sincere obedience. Oh blessed these, for they (as Saint John says,
Rev. 21.7.
shall inherit all things, all the joys, all the comforts of Gods eternal
kingdom. Therefore the sheep of Christ are industrious to hear the voice of
Christ, with true obedience, with ready hearts to do that which the Lord
imposes. The sins of profits and the sins of pleasure, the Lord calls them
from them, therefore they abandon them: the works of piety and remorsefull
charity, the Lord invites them unto them, and they willingly obey his heavenly
voice, esteeming nothing so dear as obedience to this blessed Savior, desiring
to resign themselves wholly to his good will and pleasure; that as he says
unto them, Seek ye my face, so their souls do answer, Psalm. 27.8.
Thy face Lord will we seek, even in humble obedience all the days of our
lives.

For those then who notwithstanding any voice of Christ, are pleased to make
the world their God, and pleasure to be their souls delight; for those whom we
may clearly see by their base practices to be as alienate from Piety as
profane Esau, to be as remorselesse as churlish Nabal, to be as cruel as those
wicked ones in the eighth of Amos, that did long to have the new Moon past,
Amos. 8.5, 6.
and the Sabbath to be gone, that they might grind the faces of the poor, to
sell the distressed for silver, and the needy for shoe: in a word, for those
who make religion a cloak for their private frauds and cunning oppressions,
for those who content themselves with a mere verbal profession, without any
sincere practice in conversation; oh know we that these are none of the sheep
of Christ: for his sheep do hear his voice obediently, endeavoring to do
whatsoever the Lord prescribes. Nay, know we that the wrath of God is imminent
over these: for as obedience is a pleasing sacrifice, so disobedience, oh it is
displeasing, and deeply provokes the wrath of God. Will Adam dare to disobey?
Genesis 3.23.
oh no privilege shall serve his turn, God will presently throw him out of
Paradise. Genesis 19.24.
Will Sodom and Gomorrah pierce the heavens with their crying sins? oh know,
the heavens will soon pierce them with showers of fire, to destroy and burn
them from the face of the earth: yea, if the whole world will conspire against
God, and rebel against his sacred Majesty; he will swallow them all up with a
general deluge, and will only show mercy to obedient Noah and his family:
Genesis 7.21, 22.
Oh then as the true sheep of Christ hear we the voice of Christ obediently,
Genesis 7.1.
with willing hearts to do that which he enjoynes.

And thus we have here the special marks of those that belong to the blessed
fold of Christ Jesus, they hear his voice Frequently, Intelligently, Humbly,
Delightfully, and Obediently: what now remains? Will we demonstrate that we
are of that blessed number, sheep of that sacred fold? O then abandon we all
profaneness, all mere verbal profession, all insolent braving our of sin,
all loathing and fastidiousnesse of sacred mysteries, all rebellion against God
and violent cruelty against men, our pronenes to devour our fellow creatures,
to make no question to swear and for swear to enlarge our estates, or revenge
our private malice; Exodus 20.16. Lo thahhanah berahhecha hhed scheker.
for it is Gods own injunction, (...) Thou shall not answer a false testimony
against thy neighbor. Abandon we therefore these base affections, and hear
we the voice of Christ with all due frequency, with understanding hearts, with
humble affections, with fervent delight as the very joy of our souls; and as
the sum of all, with entire obedience, ready to do what the Lord injoynes,
resigning our wills to his blessed will, both for our condition in this life,
and our eternal happiness in the life to come: For our condition in this
life, to keep us free from all unlawful designments, from all ungodly courses;
Job. 7.20. netser haadam.
for as Job speaks, he is (...), the preserver of men, yea, as the Prophet
Esaias speaks, Esaias 59.15.
we are written upon the palms of his hands our walls are ever in his sight
therefore he concludes by his Apostle, that he will never fail us, Heb. 12.5.
that he will never forsake us. Resign we then our wills to his blessed will
even for our estate in this life. Again, for our eternal happiness, that he
will never take his holy spirit from us, that he will break the power of the
grave: Hosea 13.14. ephdem she ol miiad etc.
it is his own promise (...), I will redeem them from the hand of the grave, Oh
death I will be thy death, oh grave I will be thy destuction and will bring
them to a blessed kingdom. Our Savior himself does witness it, Fear not
little fl^^^, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom, Luke 12.32.
(...) an eternal kingdom for ever. He therefore that labors to frame his
life in this prescribed path of entire obedience, the very nerve and sinew of a
christian profession, as he plainly shows himself to be the sheep of that
blessed savior Jesus Christ, so he shall be sure to be comp^st about with
mercies in this life, and a crown of immortal glory in the life to come. And
thus much for the first points namely Addition, expressed in these words, My
sheep hear my voice.

Come I now unto the second point, Cognition, contained in these words, And I
know them. In a threefold manner may this blessed Savior be said to know his
sheep, observatively, preservatively, remissively. First he may be said to know
them observatively, as noting all their steps and passages, be they of what
nature soever. Psa. 139.2.3.4.
This the prophet David does plainly witness, Thou know my sitting and my
rising, thou understandest my thoughts a far off; thou compassest my paths,
and my lying down, and art accustomed to all my ways: there is not a word in
my tongue, but lo thou know it wholly, oh Lord. Job 13.27.
This is Jobs acknowledgement, Thou look narrowly unto all my paths: And
again, Thou numbrest my steps, Job 14.16.17.
and do not delay my sins, mine iniquity is sealed up as i^ bag: As if he
should say, so present is it unto thy Majesty, as things that are used to be
kept under seal. And concerning this particular, the observation of sin even
in the sheep of his own fould, it is the confession of the whole Church, Psalm.
90.8.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance. Many places might be alleged to like purpose, but these
may be sufficient to any sober spirit, truly qualified with grace, to show that
Christ does know his sheep observatively, as marking all their steps and
passages, even their sins and their trangressions. As for that error so
familiarly divulged in these parts, that God can no way see any sin in the
justified person, it is more gross than the darkness of Egypt, and worthy to
be abhorred of all true christian hearts: for the imputation of Christ's
righteousness is not (as it is divulged) a real making of the creature
righteous* as if he were righteous subjectively, and not relatively, for so to
hold; is to hold a notable dream of papisme; Faith the form of Justification,
and therefore it is clear that God sees sin in the justified notwithstanding
justification, and does often punish them for their sins, as the Scriptures
plainly witness, that is, correctively, though not vindicatively. And whereas
some are so nice that they will not have the afflictions that are imposed upon
Gods children to be called punishments: herein they (at least) much forget
themselves; for they seek to pull away the genus from the species, for the
word punish is the genus, and respects any affliction whatsoever: correction is
the species or determinate kind, showing it is a punishment for amendment, and
to bring them to Christ. So in like manner revenge may be said to be the species
of the punishment inflicted upon the pertinacious wicked, as proceeding wholly
from the wrath of God against their sins. Now it is a clear rule that the
genus and the species have a mutual relation, that that which may be spoken of
the one may be spoken of the other, and therefore the corrections imposed upon
Gods children may truly be called punishments. Nor does this distinction or
difference of the species take away or destroy the unity of the genus, as it
is objected, for these rules are clear, that distinctio specierum non tollit
unitatem generis: again, perficitur genus determinations oppositarum,
differentiarum.
Imputation being an externe act and out of us, in regard of the matter
imputed, and is only internal and within us, not materially, but formally, as
far forth as it is apprehended by faith, and so applied unto the soul and
conscience, and therefore cannot be a real or material making (which is
justification) but reputing of the creature righteous, which is our
justification. And thus we see how first Christ may be said to know his sheep.

Secondly, he knows them preservatively, and that internally, and externally:
First internally to preserve them from the fury and violence of sin; oh else
how soon would sin extirpe and root out all grace from their souls? but
this blessed Savior preserves them, and keeps down the violence of sin,
continually nourishing in them faith and obedience. Hence it comes, that though
grievous disertions do oft-times afflict the very sheep of Christ yet their
faith never totally fails, sins never comes to have plenall domination: for,
as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, the Lord has written his laws upon their
hearts; and, as the same Prophet speaks, has so put his fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from him, that is, totally and altogether
(as afterward I shall more clearly show) wherefore the sheep of Christ may
well say with blessed David, Psalm. 23. The Lord is our Shepherd, he restores
our soul, alas our sliding soul, and leads us in the paths of righteousness,
even for his Names sake. Thus first he knows them preservatively internally,
to keep them from the fury of sin. Secondly, he knows them preservatively
externally, to keep them from the rage of Satan and his wicked accomplices, who
if they might be left unto their swinge, how soon would they root out the godly
from the face of the earth? for (as the Psalmist says) the wicked does watch
the righteous to slay him. Oh how did wicked Iezabell lie in wait to destroy
the fervent zealous servant of God Eliah? how did cruel Saul plot and practice
against innocent David? nay, the wicked and ungodly who love not each other,
yet these (as we often see) can be content to join hands together to conspire
a mischief against the righteous: Luke 23.12. Aug. in Psalm. 36 Conc. 2.
Injusti vix se patiuntur etc: tunc autem secum concordant, quum in perniciem
iusti conspirant: non quia se amant, sed quia cum qui amandus erat simul
oderunt. Psalm. 129.2 3 4
Pilate and Herod will be friends together to supplant Christ Jesus. This is
that which Augustine speaks, The wicked can hardly abide one an other, etc.
but, says he, then they agree together, when they conspire to destroy the
godly, not for that they themselves love one an other, but for that they both
hate him whom they ought to love. But let this be the comfort of the godly,
that their blessed Savior Christ Jesus has stood for their defense, and will
stand for their defense for ever. For the whole flock of Christ may well say,
They have often afflicted me from my youth, oh they have often afflicted me
from my youth; but they could not prevail against me. The plowers plowed upon
my back, and made long furrows: but the righteous Lord has cut the cords of
the wicked. Psalm. 34.19.
For it is clearly true, that many are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers them out of all: he will not leave them in the hands (of the
wicked) that is, Psalm. 37.33.
wholly and altogether, but will so preserve them, that he will give them happy
deliverances here, Rev. 21.4.
or translate them, where all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, where there
shall be no more mourning nor lamentation, 1. Cor. 15.28. Psalm. 16 11.
but God shall be all in all: before whose face there is fulness of joys for ever.
Thus we see that Christ knows his sheep preservatively, to keep them both
from the fury of sin, and the rage of Satan, and all his pernicious co^plices.

Not that the knowledge of God is remissive by proper speaking, but in regard
of effects. Esa. 59.2.
Thirdly, he does know them remissively, that is, to forgive and pardon all
their sins and their transgressions. Oh this is the special happiness of a
Christian condition; for, how grievous a thing is sin? it separates between
the Creator and the creature. For one sin, and that but in thought, the
Angels were cast out of Heaven. Genesis 3.17. Genesis 6.7. Genesis 18.20.
For sin Adam was thrown out of Paradise. For sin the old world was drowned,
and those flourishing cities Sodom and Gomorrah, Deuteronomy. 19.23.
Admah and Zeboim were consumed with fire from Heaven. Oh says the Prophet
Jeremy, Lam. 3.39.
wherefore is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his sin: yea, so
grievous a thing is sin, that when once the greatness of it is discerned,
and the deepnesse of Gods judgments against it; oh how it terrifies the soul!
It made Cain to cry out, My sin is greater than can be forgiven. Genesis 4.13.
Mat. 27.5.
It made Judas to lay violent hands upon himself, yea it sometimes strickes no
small terror into the very Saints of God. It made David to cry out, Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are as a weighty burden, too
heavy for me to bear. We see when that innocent lamb Christ Jesus did bear
the burden of our sins, oh how they plunged him! Mat. 6.38.
they made him mournfully complain, (...).
My soul is heavy (round about) unto the death: Matt. 26.39.
they made him grovell upon the earth, they made him distill down sweat like
drops of blood, and at length to cry out, Luke 22.44.
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh then how grievous a thing is
sin? Mat. 27.46.
how happy are they that have the remission and pardon thereof? that well might
David say, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, whose sin is covered; that
is, from the revenging eye of Gods justice. Oh blessed these, for they have
great peace of conscience, Romans 5.1.8.
assurance that God is their loving Father, assurance that they are coheires
with Christ of his glorious kingdom; Heb. 9.14.
blessed therefore are these. Romans 8.17.
Hence it is that the Apostle Paul does place our whole justification in this
special point, Remission of sins, the privative form thereof. From all
which it is clear, that the blessedness of a Christian does not consist in
this, Romans 4 7.
that he has no sin, or that God cannot see any sin in him; but in this,
that his sins are pardoned, and not imputed to him for the precious merits
and satisfaction of Jesus Christ: and therefore when these do at any time
through frailty and weakness fall into any sin, God does punish these
only correctively, to amend them, and bring them home to himself, not
vindictively, to condemn them for their sins; Romans 8.1.
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And thus we see
that Christ does know his sheep remissively, to pardon and forgive their
iniquities.

Come I now unto the third general, Prosecution, and they follow him. that is,
in a threefold manner: willingly, patiently, perseveringly. First willingly,
not mercenarily for temporal respects: so the carnal may sometime follow
Christ. Our Savior himself does witness it of those that followed him from
Galile to Capernaum, Ioh. 6.26.
Ye seek me, said Christ, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye
ate of the loaves, and were filled. This is that, for which God does tax those
rebellious ones in the prophecy of Hosea, Mos. 7.14.
who assembled themselves for corn and wine, that they might have plenty in
those things; but otherways were rebellious against God, and had no affection
to his Majesty. Again, others there are that follow Christ, not willingly
because they have hearts bent unto Christ, to practice that which he injoynes,
but dissemblingly, for show sake, because they would be accounted religious:
Mat. 7.16.
But as our Savior Christ speaks, Ye shall know them by their fruits; for
observe them, and ye shall clearly see, that all their religion consists in
the ear and in the tongue. These hear as often as any, they will speak as
freely of the word as any; but for holy practice, the works of piety, and
remorsefull charity, the evidence of a true and lively faith, oh, none so
barren as these; but under this mask of colored religion, you shall have them
to drink deep in the sink of wickedness, to make no question to lie for
gain, to deceive for profit, to oppress and gripe with a devouring hand
whatsoever comes near them, yea, though they be holy things, such as God has
sequestered to himself for the promoting of his worship, Prove. 20.25.
and does conclude it to be an abomination to devour them; yet these, these
make no question to swallow up, and Viperlike to wound and destroy their own
Mother. Which plainly shows, they are abortive Impes, and never truly
begotten. But what should I speak of this cause? oh how miserable is the state
of the Church in this behalf? Rent by Schismatiques, wounded by Atheists,
pierst by Hypocrites, devoured by Customs, confronted by every wrangling
Spirit, who like the Edomites to exasperate the Babilonians cruelty, seem to
cry out, Down with it, down with it, even to the foundation thereof. Alas,
Psalm. 127.7.
to torture blessed Christ Pilate and Herod will be friends, to wound the holy
church, Luke 23.12.
and to supplant Gods sacred worship, those meager Coridons, Genesis 34.25. Genesis
49.5.
that love not each other, will yet lincke together like Simeon and Levi,
brethren in mischief.

Wherefore to pass by this particular, which finds so few to take compassion
upon it though it mournfully cry out, Lam. 7.12.
Have ye no regard all ye that pass by this way? behold and see if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow; to pass by this grievous misery, to regard
which all ears seem to be deaf, all eyes to be blind, all tongues to be
silent, all hands to be claspt, all hearts to be hardened, and to return again
unto those dissembling followers of Christ, no small enemies in this kind, to
whom it is common to press great labors from the Preacher, but if he touch
them in their temporals, and expect his due from them, oh then they cry out
Toll, away with him, he is no man for us; for these follow Christ merely for
private respects, to be talkers and no doers: for if Christ required practice,
Mat. 19.21.
and would rather have them to sell that they have, than charity should be
wanting, or the distressed unrelieved, or Gods worship suppressed, then like
that yongue man in Matthewes Gospel, Mat. 19.22.
they bid a farewell to Christ. For these be like that fig tree that Christ
did curse, they have goodly leaves, Mat. 21.19.
but alas nothing but leaves. If Christ be ahungred and seek for fruit from
these, he shall be sure to find none at all. Thus we see there be some that
follow Christ, but not willingly, but mercenarily; not willingly but
dissemblingly, for show not for substance.

Lastly, others there be that follow Christ, not willingly but constrainedly,
as provokt thereunto by the revenging hand of God. This made Pharaoh to cry
out, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked; Exodus 9.27.
and to be so far obsequious as for the present to consent to let the people
go. This made corrupt Balaam in stead of cursing to bless the people of the
Lord. Numb. 23.8, 9.
This made wicked Ahab to humble himself in sackcloth before this mighty
God. 1. King. 21.27.
And we may see by experience, that this makes ungodly persons so to follow
Christ as to entreat mercy and favor at his hands, when God does execute his
justice upon them: Phil. 2.10, 11.
yea, this at length shall make the most stubborn and rebellious spirits to
bow at the name of Jesus, and to confess him to be the Lord, unto the glory
of God the Father. But, as our Savior himself does witness, not every one
that says unto him That is, superficially or constrainedly. Mat. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of his father which is in heaven. Therefore the true sheep of Christ do
follow him willingly, with ready hearts, and inclinde affections to do
whatsoever he injoynes. And thus we see the scope of the first point, how the
sheep of Christ do follow him, namely, willingly.

Secondly, they do follow him patiently, not murmuring, not repining at the
afflictions which befall them in the profession of the Gospel: for they
remember that Christ himself does witness, Mat. 16.24.
that if any will follow him, they must forsake themselves, and take up their
cross and follow him: yea, they know that he has left it as a legacy unto
his children, that in him they shall have peace, Ioh. 16.33.
but in the world affliction. In him a blessed peace, the peace of conscience
in this life, and the peace of glory in the life to come. The incomparable
solace whereof, is so engraven upon their hearts by the spirit of God, that
they with cheerful patience undergo all the storms that Satan and his
confederates can afford, Heb. 11.25, 26
Choosing rather (with blessed Moses) to suffer adversity, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches
than all the treasures of (the) Epypt (of this world) for they have respect
unto the recompense of the reward: Romans 8.18.
which makes them to conclude, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy
of the joys that shall be revealed: but that, as the same Apostle speaks, 2.
Cor. 4.17.
their light affliction which is but for a moment, shall cause unto them a
far more excellent, and an eternal weight of Glory. Therefore our Savior
Christ does strictly lay this charge upon his servants, Luke 21.19.
by patience to possess their souls: for, as the Apostle speaks, James 1.20.
The wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. (...) Psalm.
37.7.
Therefore the holy Ghost commands, Keep silence to the Lord: oh murmr not
against those things which the Lord does suffer to be imposed; but endure them
with an equal mind. Job 1.21.
This was Jobs wisdom; therefore amidst his great afflictions he patiently and
worthily concludes, The Lord has given it, and the Lord has taken it, blessed
be the name of the Lord. Indeed many and even innumerable are the afflictions
of the Saints of God in this life, many inwardly, many outwardly, many
spiritually, many corporeally, many by the fury of sin, many by the subtlety
of Satan, many by the plots and practices of ungodly persons; Psalm. 34.19. Rev.
21.4.
but here is their comfort, the Lord delivers them out of all, and will at
length wipe away all tears from their eyes, and bring them to that glorious
place, where they shall need no light of the Sun, but God himself shall be
their light, Rev. 22.5.
and they shall reign for evermore.

Thus the true sheep of Christ do follow him patiently, not murmuring, not
repining at the incident calamities of this life, but do with a patient, and
with a pious undaunted affection, undergo whatsoever is imposed, Romans 8.38.
concluding, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other thing shall be able to separate them from the love of God which is in
Jesus Christ. For those then who are so far from the patient following of
Christ, that every little affliction withdrawes them, that every scandalous
tongue removes them, and makes them shrink away from Christ; for those who
seem to be ashamed in any forward manner, to profess Christ Jesus for fear
of the brand of ignominy; how far are these from the patient following of
Christ? how far from the practice of the true sheep of Christ? as examples
do plainly witness. How excellent herein was that worthy servant of Christ,
Ignatius the martyr destroyed by Lions.
Ignatius? who was so fervent a follower of Christ, and so patient in suffering
afflictions for his sake, that he concluded, So I may find Christ, and embrace
him, I would there should come unto me, fire, gibbets, beasts, crashing of
bones, renting of all the body, and all the torments of the Devil: and when
he heard the roaring of Lions which should devour him, he joyously said, I am
the wheat of Christ, let me be ground with the teeth of beasts, that I may
be found to be pure and fine manchet. Yea, Sozomenus speaking of the great
patience of the Saints of God under the cross of Christ, that nothing could
withdraw them from their Master Christ, and from the hope of that glorious
happiness which he had provided for them; says, Sozom. l. 1. c. 1.
The Christians being spoiled of their goods, and regarding nothing that they
had, being hanged on gibbets, (...).
and suffering all manner of torments, so without care or sense, as if their
bodies had not been their own, neither allured with flattery, nor amazed
with threats; they gave all men hereby to understand, (...).
that they suffered these things for some great reward.

This was so great a motive to Iustine the Martyr when he was a heathen
Philosopher, Iustine the martyr.
that seeing the great patience of Christians in suffering whatsoever was laid
upon them, at length himself became a Christian: for thus Eusebius reports his
words; I my self taking pleasure in Plato's doctrine, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.
and hearing the Christians evil spoken of, and seeing them to go
courageously and boldly to their death, and to suffer all such things as were
thought most terrible, I thought it a thing impossible that such men should
live wickedly, or in wantonness. And many examples might be given of far
nearer times, as may be plainly seen in the book of Acts and Monuments, where
we may behold the great patience of the servants of God set down, to be so
great in the suffering for Christ, that no death, no cruel death could
withdraw them from the sincere following of their Master Christ. Oh then how
clear is it that they are far from the true following of Christ, that seem
to repine and murmr at every affliction, that are apt upon every small
occasion to start aside from Christ like a broken bow, and to be distasted with
him; like those rebellious Israelites, who when they were in some distress in
the wilderness, then they murmured and cried out, Oh that we had died by the
hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, Exodus 16.3.
when we sat by the flesh pots, when we ate our bellies full: Job 2.9.
or like to Jobs wife, who when prosperity failed, and adversity was imposed,
she labored to have the Lord provoked, that death might be imposed: Greg.
moral. l. 3. Verba post vulnera in tulit, ut cum vis doloris ingrauesceret,
facile persuasionis suggestio perversa praevale^et.
and that most cunningly; for as Gregory speaks, she used her words when
the wounds were fresh, that when the force of pain and grief did vex and
trouble, the perverse suggestion of persuasion might easily prevail.

Oh that therefore we would give diligence as the true sheep of Christ, with
patience to follow Christ. For how excellent a virtue is patience! Tert. in
lib. suo de patientia, Fidem munit, pacem gubernat, humilitatem instru^t,
poenitentiam expectat, exhomologesin assignat, carnem regit, spiritum servat,
linguam fraeuat, manum continet, tentationes inculcat (id est, conculcat)
scandala pellit, martyria consummat, pauperem consolatur, divito^ temperat,
infirmum non extendit, valentem non consumit, fidelem delectat, gentilem
invitat, servum Domino, Dominum Deo commendat, etc.

Cypr. in lib. de bono patientiae. Late patet patienciae virtus and ubertas
ejus and largitas de unius quidem nominis font proficiscitur, sed exunda^
tibus venis, per multa gloriarum itinera diffunditur, nec proficere aliquid in
actibus nostris potest ad consummandam laudem nisi inde consummationis accipiat
firmitatem. Pationtia est quae nos Deo and dommendat. and servat, ipsa est quae
^ra^ temperat, quae linguam fraenat, mentem gubernat, pacem custodit,
disciplinam regit, libidinis impetum frangit, etc.


oh (says Tertullian) it armeth faith, it guides peace, it instructs
humility, it expects penitencie, it assigns confession, it rules the flesh,
it keeps the spirit, it bridles the tongue, it restraines the hand, it beats
down temptations, it drives away scandals, it consummates martyrdomes, it
comfort the poor, it tempereth the rich, it presses not the weak, it
consumes not the strong, it delights the faithful, it invites the gentle, it
commends the servant to the Master, the Master to God, it bewtifies the woman,
it approves the man, it is loved in the child, it is praised in the yongue
man, it is desired in the old man, it is bewtifull in every sex, in every
age. To this purpose also speaks Cyprian: The virtue of Patience (says he) is
very large, and her fertility and amplenesse does spring from a fountain of
one name, but the veins thereof overflowing, it is dispersed through many
passages of glory: Nor can we profit any thing in our actions to consummate
praise, unless thence it receive strength of consummation. It is patience that
both commends us and keeps us to God: it is she which tempereth wrath, which
restraines the tongue, which governes the mind, which keeps peace, guides
discipline, breaks the force of lust, appeaseth the violence of pride,
extinguisheth the fire of private hatred, restrains the power of the rich,
nourishes the distress of the poor, does defend a blessed integrity in
virgins, a laborious chastity in widows, an individual charity in married
folks: it makes men humble in prosperity, strong in adversity, gentle
against injuries and reproaches; it teaches, quickly, to pardon them that
offend; if thou thy self offendest, to entreat and ask for favor, long, and
very much; it vanquisheth temptations, it suffers persecutions, it perfecteth
passions and martyrdomes, it is she which does firmly settle the grounds of
our faith, it is she which does carry up on high the increments of hope, it
is she that directs the bow, that we may hold fast the life of Christ, whilst
we proceed and go on by his sufferance; it is she that makes that we persevere
and continue the sons of God, whilst we imitate the patience of the Father.
Oh then how excellent a virtue is Patience! how worthy to be entertained of
all! witness Christ himself our blessed Savior, Luke 21.19.
who bids us by Patience to possess our souls: Romans 8.17
witness the Apostle, who tells us, If we suffer together with Christ, we
shall be glorified together with him. Aug. in Psalm. 55 Quilonge est a passione,
videat, ne longetur a sanctis.
But (says S. Augustine) he that is far from suffering, let him take heed
lest he be far from being any of the Saints of God. In a word, vincit qui
patitur, he overcomes that (patiently) suffers: but (says the Apostle) he that
overcomes, Rev. 12.7.
shall inherit all things. Oh that therefore we would as the true sheep of
Christ, follow him with all Patience, quietly undergoing the storms of this
combustious world, that so in the fitness of time he might receive us into an
eternal rest in his most holy kingdom. And so much for the second point, that
the sheep of Christ do follow him Patiently.

Lastly, they follow him Perseveringly: Gal. 3.3.
they are not like the foolish Galathians, to begin in the spirit and to end in
the flesh, they are not like that vertiginous multitude in John's Gospel, that
so followed Christ, as to cry Hosanna one day, John 12.12, 13
but Crucifige the next day, one day to strew his path with boughs, the next
day to crown his head with thorns: nor are they like the inconstant
Capernaites, that follow Christ for a season, John 6.66.
but are apt to break away from him upon every humorous distaste: but the true
sheep of Christ do constantly and perseveringly follow him. Tertull Fides
electorum sit mota, non amota, concussa non excussa, omne vere continens est
perpetuo continens.
Many may be the falls, and great the desertions of the sheep of Christ, but
never such, as totally to fall away from Christ: for although their faith may
be moved, yet never wholly removed; although it may be shaken, yet never
utterly shaken off: for every true virtue is perpetual.

But saving faith is a true virtue; for it is a special gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8.

Therefore it is perpetual.

2 God has promised that the Elect shall not fall from him, as the scriptures
cleerlie witness. Isa. 59.21. Ier. 32.39, 40.


But they fall from God that fall from faith.

Therefore the Elect shall not fall from faith.

3 Where God has placed a true and a perpetual fear of himself, these
cannot totallie depart from God.

But he has placed such a fear in the Elect.

Therefore they cannot totally depart from God.

The Minor I prove thus*

The fear that God does place in his children, is either temporary or
perpetual.

But not temporary, for that is the fear of Hypocrites.

Therefore it is perpetual, and so consequently these never totally depart
from God.

4 Those whom God has married to himself for ever in righteousness and
faith, these can never totally depart from him; for how then should the
marriage be perpetual and for ever in righteousness and faith?

Hos. 2.19, 20.
But thus he marries the Elect unto himself, as God himself does witness by
his Prophet Hosea.

Therefore it follows, these can never totally depart from him.

5 Those whom God loves with a perpetual love, can never totally fall from
him.

Ie. 31.3. John 13.1.
But he loves the Elect with a perpetual love, so the scriptures plainly
witness.

Therefore these can never totally fall from him.

6 That which Christ by his prayer obtained for Peter, he obtained for all the
Elect which should believe in him: for, that which he prayed for Peter, he
prayed for all that should believe in him, as Christ himself does clearly
testify

John 17.20. The prayer of our Savior Christ, spoken of, Luk 22.32. is as well
to be understood of all the faithful as of Peter. So Aug. Tom. 7. de corrept.
and great. Luk 6.48.
But he obtained for Peter that his faith should not totally fail.

Therefore he obtained the same for all the Elect which should believe in him.

7 Those which are built upon Christ cannot be pulled from him, by any storms
or insultations of the world or of Satan, for they are, as our Savior himself
does witness, as a house that is built upon a rock, which stands firm
notwithstanding all the violence of rain, floods and winds.

But all the faithful are founded and built upon Christ, and are coupled and
knit unto him, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
as the mystical body unto their mystical head.

Therefore they cannot be pulled from him, by any storms of the world, of
sin or of Satan.

8 The Regenerate are compared in scripture to a tree that is planted by the
water side, Psalm. 1.3. Ier. 17.8.
which always retains humor and moisture in the root, and remains alive; so
that it brings forth fruit in due season, and the leaves thereof fade not away.

But the vital humor in the Regenerate is Christ apprehended by faith; for he
himself does witness, I am the life, etc.

Therefore the Regenerate once ingraffed into Christ by true faith, and his
spirit, John 11.25. John 14.6.
cannot any more fall away from faith, and from Christ.

9 They that sin not with full swinge of will cannot totally fall away from
God. 1 John 3.9. The sins of the regenerate never committed with a full
consent, or plenall swinge of will, but are either sins of ignorance or
sins of infirmity and frailty: they delight not in sin, but do hate it;
they continue not in sin without repentance, but do weep and mourn for it.
Romans 7.15. etc.


But the Regenerate sin not with full swinge of will; for, as Saint John
speaks, whosoever is borne of God, sins not, that is, ex animo, or tota
voluntate, from his heart, or with a full swinge of will: for, as Saint Paul
speaks, the evil which they do, they allow not, but do hate it, and are
delighted with the law of God according to the inner man: only in the flesh,
the part corrupt and unregenerate, there dwells no good thing; in respect
thereof they are led captive (that is against their wills) unto the law of
sin.

Therefore it follows, that the Regenerate cannot totally fall away from God.

10 If faith may be lost, and so a total desertion made from God, then all the
fruits and effects of faith.

But these cannot all be wholly lost; for the Regenerate are never brought to
that extremity, As we may see in Cain and Judas. Genesis 4.13. Mat. 27.5.
as to contemn God, and utterly to despair of God: for this is proper to the
Reprobates only.

Therefore faith it self cannot wholly be lost, and consequently the
Regenerate never totally fall from God.

Hence it is, to show the constant perseverance of the faithful, that our
Savior concludes, that those whom his Father has given him, none shall take
them out of his hands; John 4.14.
that they which shall drink of the water which he shall give them; shall
never thurst again, but it shall be in them a well of water springing up unto
everlasting life. This happy persevering estate of the faithful, the Apostle
Paul knew right well; therefore he was constantly persuaded that neither death
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, Est in nobis per Dei gratia^ in bono
recipiendo and perseveranter tenendo, non solum posse quod velinus, vetum etiam
velle quod possumus Aug. Tom. 7. de correp. and great. cap. 12. col. 1342. Nunc
vero sanctis in regnum Dei, per gratiam Del praedestinatis, non tantum tale
adjutorium perseverantiae datur (scilicet, ut possint perseverare, si velint;
sicut datum fuit Ad^) sed tale ut ^is porseverantia ipsa donctur. August, Tom.
praed. Colum. 1343.
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature should be able to separate him from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. To this purpose, to witness the perseverance of the
faithful, speaks S. Augustine, There is (says he) in us by the grace of God
in the receiving good, and the holding it perseveringly, not only an ability
to do that which we will, but also to will that which we can do. And again:
Now (says he) to the Saints predestinate to the kingdom of God by grace, is
given not only such a help of perseverance (that is, that they might persevere
if they would, as was given to Adam) but such a help, that perseverance it
self is given unto them. To this purpose speaks also Chrysostom, Neither man
(says he) nor time, Chrysostom. in cap. 5. Epist. ad Romans (...). Romans 8.26. Psalm
31.5.
nor the change of things, nor the Divill himself, nor approaching death, can
drive us away from those things; that is, from the graces of God: but when we
dye then we hold them more certainly, and always profiting we enjoy more.
Here therefore may we clearly behold the third special quality (observed in
this last general, prosecution) of the true sheep of Christ, they follow him
perseveringly. So that in their latest gasp, in the peace of conscience, and
assurance of Gods love toward them (the spirit of God witnessing togerher with
their spirit that they are the sons of God) they are able to say, Into thy
hands, oh Lord, do we commend our spirit. Blessed therefore they that be the
true sheep of Christ: for these we see, by the strength of his holy spirit
dwelling in them, overcome all the strength of sin, all the fury of Satan,
all the seducing objects of the world, all the inducing provocations of the
wicked, and so persevere, Rev. 21.7.
that at length they come to inherit all things, all the joys of heaven, Psalm.
84.10.
all the comforts of Gods everlasting kingdom, where one day is better than a
thousand else where: Psalm, 16.11.
for in the presence of our God, oh there is the fullness of joys, and at his
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Blessed therefore these, and truly
prudent they that make this the subject of their affection, and the special
scope of their practice, that they may be found to be of this blessed number,
even the true sheep of Christ. The which heavenly wisdom the eternal Father
be pleased to vouchsafe to impresse within us, for the precious merits of his
dear son Christ Jesus. To which Father and Son with their most holy
Spirit, three persons and one indivisible essence, be all praise, power,
glory and dominion ascribed, from this time forth for evermore.

FINIS.
ROMANS 1. ult. Which knowing the justice of God, that they which do such things
are worthy of death, not only do them, but favor those that do them.


RIght Worshipful and beloved in our Savior Jesus Christ, the worthy Apostle
having first generally and afterward by particular enumeration, set forth the
horrid pollutions of the Gentiles, wherewith they were infected, at length he
comes to an (...) of the accusation, showing with what violence and wilfulness
they committed these sins; removing from them all pretext and color of
ignorance and infirmity: of ignorance, for knowing the justice of God, they
committed these things: of infirmity, for they did not only do them
themselves, but they favored them that did them. Where, for method sake and
better apprehension, I consider the twofold gradation of the pollutions of the
Gentiles; the first in respect of their own proper sins, the second in respect
of the sins of others: the first in these words, They committed things worthy
of death: the second in these words, that they not only did such things, but
they favored those which did them. And first for their pollutions in respect
of their own proper sins: wherein I consider both the matter and the form.
The matter set down in general, They committed things worthy of death: the
form, that they committed these things wilfully and willingly, against their
knowledge and their conscience; for they did commit them, knowing the justice
of God, that they which did such things were worthy of death. And first for the
matter, they committed things worthy of death. Wherein I consider three things:
first, the blindness of man in corrupted nature. Secondly, the patience of God
in executing revenge upon the wicked. Thirdly, the equity of God in punishing
sin.

First, the blindness of man in corrupted nature, from the plurality of the
sins committed: for the Apostle says not, they committed some thing worthy
of death, but things worthy of death. Secondly the patience of God, that he
forbears to throw them down to death, though they commit things worthy of
death. Thirdly, the equity of God, that he throws down none to death but for
things worthy of death. And first for the foremost, the blindness of man in
corrupted nature, intimated from the plurality of the sins committed.

It is a grievous and a miserable estate to commit any thing worthy of death,
that is, of eternal death, the due reward of sin: Genesis 2.17. Romans 6.23.
for what is the force of eternal death? oh exceeding grievous. It does not
only sever a man from all joy, from all bliss and glory, but loads him with
all woe and misery: inwardly, with the sting and worm of conscience to
torment him: outwardly, with burning fire for ever to afflict him, and yet
never consume him; for, as S. Augustine speaks, the motion of the heaven
ceasing, there shall be no passion material but spiritual. Aug. l. 21. de
Civit. Dei. Cessante motu coeli nulla fiet passio materialis sed spiritualis.
But man blinded with corrupted nature discernes not this, whence it comes to
pass, that he does not only commit some thing worthy of death, but things
worthy of death, even many foul and odious sins, thereby increasing the
eternal wrath and judgment of God against him. For as the sin, so shall be
the punishment; many sins, many punishments. One sin may bring thee to
eternal condemnation, but many sins will aggravate the judgment, and heap
up an increase of wrath. We know what the Lord speaks by the Prophet Esaias,
Esa. 28.17.
that he will lay judgment to the rule: and Christ himself tells us, that as
Babylon has sinned, Rev. 18.7.
so she shall be rewarded. But corrupted man, he takes no knowledge of this,
therefore he goes on, every hour increasing his judgment; for every hour
he commits things worthy of death. Oh think you, if wicked Pharaoh had truly
discerned that the multiplying of sin had multiplied the judgments of God
against him, As we may see from Exodus 3. to 14.
would he then so often have opposed the express voice of the Lord? Or think
you that if pernicious Abab had truly understood, that his deep heap of
sins would have drawn a deep heap of judgments against him, 1. King.
21.25.
would he have committed so many things worthy of death? would he have sold
himself to commit wickedness? Oh by no means. Or can we think, that if that
Epicure spoken of by our Savior Christ, had truly discerned that his heap of
impieties, Luke 16.
his pampered feeding, his unhallowed drunken discourses, his cruel
uncharitable affection, that would hear no plaint nor mourning of poor
distressed Lazarus, that yet did crave but the crummes that fell from his
Table: think we if he had truly discerned that his foul heap of sins
would have brought upon him such a heap of punishments, as to force him to cry
out for one drop of water, such a drop as might hang but on the tip of a
finger; Verse. 24.
and that poor Lazarus should bring it, whom before he held so base, as not
worthy of the crummes that fell from his table; and that to cool but the fury
of his tongue only: a small request, only one dip of but the tip of a finger
to cool only the raging heat of one small part? oh slender ease and if it had
been granted: but can we think, that if he had truly understood that his so
great heap of sins would have acquired so great a heap of judgments, that
ever he would have contracted them? oh void of question he would not. Or shall
we think, that if the ungodly creatures of these times (that run headlong
the path of sin and wickedness) did clearly see their miserable estate,
would they then commit so many things worthy of death, to the daily increase
of their punishment? would they so violently reject all exhortations, all
motions of the spirit, and so furiously heap up sin upon sin, adding not
only rebellion to their sins, but strength to their rebellions? oh void of
question they would not. But alas, they are covered over with the dark veyle
of sin, and corrupted nature, so that they do not truly discern their
miserable estates.

This was the condition of the Gentiles; for although they knew in the
general, that they which committed such things were worthy of death, yet in
the particular application they failed: for in the soul of man two things are
to be considered, the (...), and the (...): the (...) respects the
understanding, which comprehends certain principles of nature, as that
murder, adultery, and such like be sins, and worthy of punishment: the (...)
respects the conscience, which makes the assumption or particular application
after this manner: But we have committed such things; therefore we are worthy
of punishment. Now observe we, that in the (...) or general apprehension of
the understanding, the Gentiles discerned these things to be sin, and worthy
of death, but in the (...) or particular application of the conscience, they
greatly failed, namely that they were guilty of these, and therefore that
eternal death belonged unto them. From all which, clearly appears the verity
of my first observation, the blindness of man in corrupted nature, intimated
from the plurality of the sins committed: for in this estate he goes on in
sin, he commits things, even many things worthy of death, to heap up
judgment, and to aggravate his punishment. Oh what shall this then enforce
unto us, but earnestly to labor for the grace of Gods spirit, to purge and
drive out this corrupted nature? for were men once truly seasoned with the
strength of heavenly grace, it would make them mourn and deplore their sin
and transgression; Psa. 6.7.
as blessed David speaks of himself, Every night (says he) did I make my bed
to swim, and watered my couch with my tears: and no marvel; Seneca.
for vulnera clausa plus cruciant, wounds being stopped they are the more
grievous: but, says Chrysostom, mournful tears are (as it were) the spunges
of sins to wipe them and wash them clean away. Chrysostom. Lachrimae sunt spongia
peccatoru^.
Yea, grace, that worthy virtue, would make them see the odiousness of the
intertaine of sin, how displeasing it is to God, and burdensome to the
soul: as we may clearly see in religious Joseph, who being truly seasoned
with the graces of Gods spirit, would not be drawn to commit wickedness by
any persuasion, but in contempt of it breaks forth, Genesis 39.9.
How should I commit this wickedness, and so sin against God? Oh therefore labor
we earnestly for the graces of Gods spirit be infused into us, to drive away
the darksome clouds of corrupted nature, and to make us see the odiousness of
the entertain of sin, and the special worth of grace and piety; for the
natural man discerns it not. 1. Cor. 2.14.
And because the word of God is the ordinary means to work this upon our
souls, for which cause the blessed Gospel of Christ is called the
ministration of the spirit, 2. Cor. 3.8. Romans 1.16. 1. Pet. 1.23. 2. Tim. 3.15.
the power of God to salvation, an immortal seed, able to beget us anew, and
to make us wise unto salvation; oh therefore frequent we it diligently, and
hear we it with all reverent attention for the happy infusion of heavenly
grace: Pro. 13.13.
for he that despises this sacred truth shall be destroyed, Pro. 28.9.
he that turns his ear away from it, his very prayer shall be abominable: it
shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of judgment than for that
man; Mat. 10.15.
Ier. 29.18.19.
the Lord will make him a curse, an astonishment, a hissing and a reproach
among all nations. And thus beloved in Christ Jesus we see the first point,
the blindness of man in corrupted nature, intimated from the multiplicitie of
sins; for he commits not only some thing, but things, even many things
worthy of death.

Come I now unto the second point, the patience of God in executing revenge
upon the wicked, intimated in this; that though they commit things worthy of
death, yet he forbeares, and does not presently throw them down to death.
The Gentiles committed things worthy of death, even many things worthy of
death, eternal death; yet God with patience did forbear, and did not
presently execute upon them the strength of his justice, nor cast upon them his
final wrath, Romans 6.23.
when yet as the Apostle speaks, The wages of sin is death, even of any
sin whatsoever. Behold then here the greatness of Gods patience: sin is
committed, yet God forbeares; nay sins, things worthy of death, many
loathsome and odious sins, yet God forbeares to execute the (due) deserved
stroke of his justice: that well might Chrysostom say, Chrysostom. Deus quasi
invitus compellitur, cum magno dolor peccatores condemnare. Ezekiel. 33.11:
God is (as it were against his will) with great sorrow compelled to condemn
(stubborne-hearted) sinners, and to throw them down to eternal death: for,
as himself does seriously protest, he does not desire the death of the
wicked, but does earnestly invite them, Turn you, turn you from your evil
ways; for why will ye dye, oh ye house of Israel? Aug. Aversos benign
revocat, and cu^ ferire potuit, praemia promittit.
Oh says Aug. he calls back the averse and froward (spirits) and when he might
strike them (with the final stroke of his justice) he rather does promise them
rewards, to move them to revert and turn from their evil ways, God is
patient toward man intensive. extensive, durative.
though they commit things worthy of death. Thus God is patient, sparing man in
sin, sparing man the subject of sin, long sparing him, though he has
committed things worthy of death. How well therefore might this instruct us, to
be cautious, that we no longer abuse the patience of our God, but now
presently revert from our evil ways, and turn unto his blessed Majesty; for
God himself tells us, My spirit (says he) shall not always strive with man.
Genesis 6.3.
When God would prescribe repentance to that spacious city of Ninive, Ion. 3.4.
he offords it but forty days, Yet forty days, and Ninive shall be destroyed.
And to his own particular people, he limits them only a month, A month
(says he) shall devour them with their portions. Hos. 5.7.
Oh that then, we would even now return from our evil ways, and turn to
this loving God abusing his patience no longer: for we have his own word,
Zach. 1.3.
Turn unto me (says the Lord of Hosts) and I will turn unto you. Oh if we
turn to him with mourfull hearts, deploring our transgressions, how soon will
he turn to us, speaking peace to our souls and consciences? Psalm. 51.17.
for a contrite spirit is a sacrifice unto God; yea, these Christ himself
invites, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden (you that grown under
the burden of your transgressions) and I will refresh you, Mat. 11.28.
I will speak peace to your souls, and comfort to your consciences. But if we
will yet be so pernicious as to despise the patience and long sufferance (of
our God) by which he would lead us to repentance, Romans 2.4.
oh then remember we what Solomon tells us, Eccle. 8.12, 13.
that though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolong his days,
etc. yet it shall not be well with the wicked, etc. God will not always spare
him; Aug. Tunc Deus i^ascitur quando non irascitur. Genesis 19.23, 24
for, as Austine speaks, then is God angry, when he seems not to be angry.
We may see, that when the Sun did rise upon Sodom, and there was no
expectation of judgment, then the Heavens were opened, then fire and brimstone
was poured out upon it, utterly to destroy it. Mat. 3.10.
Oh take we knowledge therefore, that now the axe is laid unto the root of the
tree, if we will yet bring forth no fruit, no true repentance for sin, but
we will still abuse the patience of our God, and still commit things worthy of
death, that it is just with him, to hew us down, and cast us into the fire,
even eternal fire, never to be extinguished. And thus much for the second
point, the patience of God in executing revenge upon the wicked, intimated in
this, That though the Gentiles did commit things worthy of death, yet God did
patiently forbear, and did not presently throw them down to death.

Come we now unto the third point observed in the matter of this pollution,
the equity of God in punishing the wicked, expressed in this, that he throws
down none to death, but for things worthy of death; they committed things
worthy of death. Sin is the cause of Gods wrath and man's misery, Esaias 59.2.
Your iniquities (says the Prophet Esaias) have separated between you and your
God: your sins have hid his face from you. Lam. 3.39. Jude ver. 6.
Wherefore (says the Prophet Jeremy) is the living man afflicted? man
suffers for his sins. For sin the Angels were thrown down from Heaven,
for sin Adam was thrown out of Paradise, Genesis 3.24. Genesis 6.7. Genesis 19.24.
Cassio. Tantum unusqulsqua repellitur and dividitur a Divinitate, quantum ejus
peccata cumulantur.
and a curse denounced against him and his posterity, for sin the old world
was drowned, and Sodom and Gomorrah burned: oh, says Cassiodorus, so far is
every one repelled and divided from the divine power, as his sins are heaped
up: many sins makes a deep separation; nay, if we consider the eternal
decree of God, or as it is manifested in time, and this either negatively, or
affirmatively, that is, as he denies saving grace unto some, or as he wills to
throw them down to endless misery; sin is the cause: for, for the foreseen
sins of the wicked, the Lord decreed to forsake them, and to impose upon them
everlasting horror. Therefore says the Lord by the Prophet Ezechiell, That
soul that sins, that soul shall dye: Ezech. 18.
with which the Apostle Paul accords, Ephesians. 5.6.
For these things (says he) comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. Hence it is, Hos. 13.9.
that the Lord concludes by the Prophet Hosea, Thy iniquity has destroyed
thee, oh Israel. Furthermore, hatred and wrath, as they are punishments, are
not infflicted but for sin.

But God hated Esau penally, and he will show his wrath in the destruction of
the wicked, therefore for sin.

Briefly, the doctrine is clear, he delivers none to death, but for things
worthy of death; for the wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.
How fitly therefore might this instruct us to remove all murmuring, and to
loath and detest all sin and wickedness? First, to remove all murmuring and
repining against God; for, is the hand of God upon thee? and does he begin to
execute his wrath? murmr not against him, but look into thine own soul, and
behold thy sins and thy transgressions: for they have caused that judgment:
Ezech. 33.17.
and remember that the way of the Lord is equal; for he delivers none to
death, but for things worthy of death; but that thine own way is unequal, for
thou have wilfully heaped up sins against his Majesty, and therefore have
deserved wrath and judgment from the hand of the Lord. We may see, 1. Sam. 15.
that God rejected Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
but what was the cause? why his transgression and rebellion: wherefore the
Prophet tells him, that to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken is
better than the fat of rams; but that rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry. We may also see in
the twenty fourth verse of this chapter, that the Lord delivers up the Gentiles
unto their hearts lusts, etc. and unto vile affections; but what was the
reason? why (as the coherence of the text does plainly show) their former
gross and odious sins was the cause of it; for these the Lord delivered them
up unto a reprobate condition. Oh then, if the justice of God seize upon thee,
murmr not against his Majesty, but rather cry out against thy self, who by
thy sins have provoked the Lords wrath against thee; for he is so equal
that he throws none to death, but for things worthy of death. Secondly, this
should instruct us to loath and detest sin and wickedness: for as God is so
equal that he throws none to death but for things worthy of death, so we see
he is so just, that for things worthy of death he throws them down to death.
Oh then, why should any be so bold to entertain sin and wickedness? Esaias
9.18.
oh remember we that wickedness burns like fire, all wickedness whatsoever,
Ecclus. 7.8.
inkindling and inflaming the wrath of God against us: therefore says Sirach,
Bind not two sins together, Eccles. 8.12, 13
for in one thou shall not go unpunished. For Solomon does plainly tell us,
that though a sinner do evil a hundred times and God prolong his days etc.
yet it shall not be well to the wicked; Psalm. 92.7.
but when the workers of wickedness do flourish, then they shall be destroyed
for ever, Psalm. 73.19.
then shall they suddenly perish, etc. and come to a fearful end.

Oh that the ungodly did clearly see this, which draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes, Esaias 5.18.
and as Solomon speaks, rejoice in doing evil, Prove. 2.14.
and seem to invite each other unto wickedness, Come let us enjoy the
pleasures that be present, Wisd. 2.6.
etc. let us oppress the poor that is righteous, let us not spare the widow,
nor reverence the white hairs of the aged that have lived many years, Ver. 10.
let our strength be the law of unrighteousness, etc. let us defraude the
righteous, Ver. 11.
for he is not for our profit, but is contrary to our doings, he checketh us
for offending against the Law, Ver. 12.
and blames us as transgressors of discipline. In a word, who seem as David
speaks, Psalm. 36.1.
to have no fear of God before their eyes, but seem by their pernicious
stratagems in sin, to disdain all piety and religion, and to declame against
God and all his ways, with those wicked ones in Jobs history, Job 21.14, 15.
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: who is the
Almighty that we should serve him? or what profit should we have if we should
pray unto him? Oh that the ungodly that are so bold and greedy to entertain
any sin and wickedness, oh that they did clearly see the misery that sin
brings upon them, that so they might loath and detest all sin and
wickedness: Oh that this instruction might receive due impression upon their
souls: for we see it plain, that as God is so equal that he throws down
none to death but for things worthy of death, so the consequent arising from
hence, tells us, that he is so just, that for things worthy of death he will
throw men down to death. And so much (beloved) for the matter of the pollution
of the Gentiles, They committed things worthy of death.

Come I now unto the form of their pollution, how they committed these things,
namely, wilfully and willingly; for, knowing the justice of God, that is,
against these sins, yet they committed them. Wherein I consider, first, how God
may be said to be just: secondly, what is meant by justice in this place.

For the better opening whereof, consider we that a thing may be said to be
just in a threefold manner; We are justified by Christ's righteousness, not
subjectively but effectively, not materially as inherent within us, but
relatively and by way of imputation, God in his mercy reputing it to every
believer, as his own proper righteousness; wherefore when the Scriptures in
any place express the Saints of God to be just or justified, the meaning is
not that they have no sin, but that it is not imputed: for the material or
blot of sin remains in some measure in the best of Gods children during
their whole life in this world, as the Scriptures plainly witness; only it is
taken away in respect of the formal thereof, that is, in respect of the guilt
thereof and the vindictive punishment.
by Grace, by voluntary obedience, or by Nature. First by Grace; so the Saints
and servants of God may be said to be just, subiectively or inhesively, only
inchoatively, which is their sanctification; relatively, imputatively, Christ's
righteousness thorough faith being reckoned and imputed as theirs, which is
their justification. Again secondly, by voluntary obedience one may be said
to be just; so was Adam just in the state of innocence; so is it most truly
said of Christ, who by his voluntary and perfect obedience fulfilled the whole
law of God. Thirdly, by nature one may be said to be just, and that either as
made so by the benefit of another, or else originally by himself and of his
own nature: in the first kind, it may be truly spoken in like manner of the
first Adam who was just by nature, as being made so by the benefit and bounty
of his Creator: and most truly may it also be spoken of the second Adam Christ
Jesus, who was conceived in the womb of a virgin, without any spot of sin by
the vertuall operation of the holy Ghost. But now concerning God, he is just
in a far different, and far more excellent manner; for he is not made
just, but he is just originally of himself and by himself in his essence and
nature: therefore it is only true of God, that he is simpliciter justus,
simply just, which cannot be said of any other thing whatsoever; for although
it may be said of the regenerate, that by remission of sins and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness they are perfectly just, yet it is false
and erroneous to say that they are simply just; nay, Christ himself although
as he is man he may be said to be just, naturally, habitually, and
hypostatically, yet simply he cannot be said to be, because whatsoever justice
he has as he is man, he has it by participation from his divine nature. But
God is so just, that he is his own justice; for justice is not in God, as an
accident in the subject, or by way of composition, but of essential union; for
all the proprieties of God are essential, he is essentially just, he is
essentially good, and therefore justice and goodness it self, and
consequently it is true only of God, that he is simply just. This our Savior
Christ does plainly witness, Mat. 19.17.
who tells us, There is none good but God, that is, simply and absolutely good,
as of himself and by himself, nay, if we speak properly and strictly, none
can be said to be so much as perfectly good, Quod tale est ex participatione
imperfecte tale est.
or perfectly just, or perfectly holy, neither Angels, nor men; for it is a
clear rule, that that which is such as it is by participation, is imperfectly
such; as the water, or iron, made hot by the fire is imperfectly hot, as
having their heat not naturally, but accidentally and by participation. And
thus we see how God may be said to be just, namely, simply and absolutely, in
a far more excellent manner than any other thing whatsoever, as being
originally and essentially just.

But come we now to consider what is meant by justice in this place: for
although properly there be but one justice in God, as there is but one essence,
yet in regard of the diverse respects or diverse persons which God in a certain
kind may be said to bear, his justice also may be said to be diverse. As he
is a most free Lord doing whatsoever he pleases, In regard of diverse respects
God may be said to be just in a fourefold manner: Vt liber Dominus, Vt Deus
omnium, Vt Deus and Pater electoru^. Vt omnium Iudex. As a free Lord, as the
God of all, as the God and Father of the elect, as the Judge of all.
his will is his justice; as he is the Creator, Conserver and Governor of all
things, his goodness is his justice; as he is a special Favourer of the
elect, his mercy and his truth in his promises, is his justice; as he is the
Judge of all, giving to every one according to his works, his due punishment
of the nocent, and absolving of the innocent, is his justice, which is the
justice which is meant in this place; and is called the distributive or
iudiciarie justice of God, because by it he gives unto every one according to
his works. Now observe we, this distributive or iudiciarie justice of God the
heathen knew: and that in a threefold kind; by the light of nature, by the
testimony of their own consciences, and by the examples of Gods justice in the
world. First, by the light of nature, they knew many divine things; as that
their was an eternal power; for they concluded, Euripides (...) (nuncupavit).
that this glorious frame of the world had some excellent builder. They had
also some knowledge of the providence of God, that it is he that disposes and
works all things: Anaxag. (...), It is God that disposes and works all
things. To which purpose also speaks Orpheus, Sophocles, Pythagonas with
diverse others.

Phocylides. (...), the soul is immortal, never waxing old, lives ever.

The Chaldaean precept: (...). Phocylid. (...). Hierocles. (...) etc. Plat. in
Gorgia. and Virg. Aeneid. 6.

And D^aco a Heathen man so far discerned this judiciarie justice, that he
appointed death for all sins, the light of Nature teaching him that sin
deserved death. Romans 2.15.


they also understood the immortality of the soul, as, besides diverse others,
Phocylides does plainly witness: The soul (says he) is immortal, never
waxing old, but living ever. They had some knowledge of a place of joy and
comfort provided for it, as the Chaldean precept does witness; Seek Paradise
the most splendant region of the soul: they had some taste of that great point,
the resurrection of the body, as the former Author Phocylides does manifestly
testify, We hope (says he) shortly to return from the earth to the light,
that is, an eternal and a heavenly light. And concerning this distributive or
iudiciarie justice (the subject of this discourse) by the light of nature they
also plainly understood it, as amongst others Hierocles does testify, who
showing a reason why the ungodly would not have their souls to be immortal,
speaks after this manner, A wicked man (says he) would not have his soul to
be immortal, lest he should come to the judge (that is the eternal judge)
there to be tormented with punishments. Yea, hence it was, that Plato, a
heathen man, did appoint Elisian fields unto them of upright conversation, and
an (...), or place of torment for the wicked, the very light of nature teaching
him this distributive justice of God. Wherefore we see first of all that the
heathen knew this justice of God by the light of nature.

Secondly, they knew it by the testimony of their own consciences; for, as the
Apostle speaks, their conscience did bear them witness, either accusing
them, or excusing them: And Hercules after he had slain his wife and children,
became so perplexed in conscience, that in the horror of it he concluded, Nemo
pollutojqueat animo mederi none of a polluted conscience can be cured. And
Aristotle was able to say of the wicked in the 9. of his Ethics (...). Zeph.
3.5.
therefore Alexander a heathen man having slain his dear friend Clitus,
became grievously troubled in his conscience, his very conscience accusing him
for that barbarous and savage cruelty.

Thirdly, they knew this distributive or iudiciarie justice of God by the
examples of Gods justice; for that has been true and shall be true for ever
which the Lord sets down by the Prophet Zephany, Every morning does he bring
his judgments to light, and fails not. Therefore when Tull. Hostilius was
slain by lightning from heaven, and his house burned, the Gentiles understood
this to be the justice of, God against him for his irreligious exorcismes.

So that we see it clear, the Gentiles did know this iudiciarie justice of
God, yet wilfully against their own knowledge and conscience, they committed
things worthy of death. A grievous wickedness; for if every sin deserve
death, even sins of infirmity and ignorance, as the Prophet David does
witness, and therefore does cry out unto God, Psalm. 19.12.
Oh cleanse me from my secret sins: how much more sins of wilfulness
committed against the full swinge of knowledge and conscience, 1. Ioh. 3.8.
as were the sins of these Gentiles? for knowing the justice of God, they
committed them: therefore says the Apostle, Romans 1.18.
They detayned the truth in unrighteousness; they knew it, but they wilfully
rejected it. Now, says our Savior, Luke 12.47.
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes. And we may see that the Prophet Samuel calls the sin committed
against knowledge and conscience, 1. Sam. 15.23.
a rebellion, and compares it to those great sins, witchcraft and idolatry;
and Saul being guilty of this, the Lord reiects him for ever. What should this
then impresse within us (beloved in Christ Jesus)? oh how well might it serve
to instruct us to be cautious, how we entertain, or live in any sin against
our knowledge and our conscience? First, to be cautious how we entertain any
sin, against our conscience; 1. John 3.20.
for if, as Saint John speaks, our conscience condemn us, God is greater than
our conscience, and knows all things. If therefore we commit those things
that our own knowledge and our conscience is able to condemn us, and
pronounce judgment against us for it, how much more then shall the Lord
condemn us and judge us for these sins, to whom they are far better known
than to our own consciences? Besides, if our conscience be able now to accuse
us for these sins, how much more shall it be able to do it at the final
judgment, Rev. 20.12.
when the books shall be opened, even the book of conscience, and by the
vigor of the divine power shall be made able to call to remembrance all the
thoughts, words and actions whatsoever, Romans 2.15.
had, spoken, or done by us, and to accuse us, or excuse us for them, according
as they have been agreeable, or dissenting from the Law of God? how much more
then shall our consciences be able to accuse us for all our sinister passages,
when they shall be thus opened, and as it were quickened and awaked by the
mighty power of God? for oftentimes in this life, through the long habit and
continuance in sin, the conscience becomes as it were dead, and the dictamen,
or voice thereof strangely quailed: but at length the Lord shall quicken it,
even the conscience of the most wicked: as he did sometimes Cains, which made
him cry out, Genesis 4.13.
My sin is greater than can be forgiven: or as he did sometimes Iudases, which
did so torment him, that it made him bring back his base corrupted hyer, and
to throw it down at the feet of the Priests and Elders, Matt. 27.
openly confessing, I have sinned, betraying the innocent blood, and, as weary
of his life, desperately deprived himself of all vital power. Oh therefore be
we cautious how we entertain sin against our knowledge and our conscience.

Secondly, be we cautious how we live in any sin against our knowledge and
our conscience; for this is a dangerous estate: for saving Faith receives no
impression where the conscience is wounded with plenall reigning sins,
committed against our knowledge and our conscience. Therefore the Apostle
ioynes these two together, 1. Tim. 1.19.
Faith and a good conscience, that is, a conscience purged and purified from
reigning sins; for these do vastare conscientiam, they wast and destroy the
conscience: therefore to these there is no comfort, no peace with God, no peace
in conscience: for there is no peace, Esaias 48.2^.
says the Lord, unto the wicked. In these that thus live in sin, committed
with full consent of will against their knowledge and their conscience, there
is no piety nor religion, there is no true fear of God, nor obedience unto
his sacred Word. Psalm. 36.1.
Oh that we would therefore be cautious how we live in any sin against our
conscience: for if the Gentiles (as the Apostle shows us) had no pretext to
excuse their sins, whose chiefest Schoolmaster to show them Gods justice
against their sins, was yet but the light of Nature, if these were void of
excuse, oh then what shall we say to our selves? If we live in sins against
our knowledge and our conscience, even those gross sins which we see daily
familiarly entertained, drunkenness, adultery, deceit, oppression, envy,
malice, and that hell-bred sin of usurie; how inexcusable shall we be to live
in these sins, who have not only the light of Nature, Romans 6.23.
but the clear and manifest word of God, to show us the justice of God against
these sins, nay the excellent and precious gospel of Christ, Mark 1.15.
promising to the repentant that forsake their sins and believe this sacred
truth, Ioh. 3.16, 17, 18.
eternal felicity and happiness? oh then how void of pretext shall we be,
yea, how greatly shall this aggravate judgment against us, to live in sins
against our knowledge and our conscience, to whom Gods justice is so clearly
manifested, Heb. 2.2, 3.
to whom so great means is afforded to reclaim us and recall us? Oh know we,
if we against our knowledge and conscience will thus still continue our
violence in sin, notwithstanding this great means afforded us, it shall be
easier for these Gentiles at the day of judgment than for us. And thus much
(beloved) for my first general part, the pollution of the Gentiles, in respect
of their own proper sins.

Come I now unto the second observed general, the pollution of the Gentiles in
respect of the sins of others: which the Apostle sets down as a deep
aggravation of their wickedness, and is thus enforced to us, in that they not
only committed things worthy of death themselves, but favored them that did
the same.

It was a grievous wickedness for them themselves to commit things worthy of
death by their own proper sins, but to favor and patronize the same in
others, was most intolerable, and declared them to be even of an incurable
nature. (...).
The word used here by the Apostle does not signify merely an assent, but an
approbation or patronizing, or (as some read) an applauding of others in their
wickedness, which was a thing common amongst many of the heathen: So ^iscator.
for they mainetained and defended publicly those things which by the light of
nature they knew to be sins, and to deserve death: as Fornication, Idolatry,
yea, Murder it self; as amongst diverse others we may see in Anaxarchus,
Aristander and Calisthenes, who when Alexander had slain his friend Clitus,
they became patrons of that horrible wickedness. For, the first (an Epicure)
persuaded all things was lawful for Kings; the second (a Stoic) referred it
wholly to fate and destiny; the third used moral and civil persuasions
only: but none of them laid open unto him the greatness and foulness of his
sin, but did sooth him and defend him in that his horrid wickedness.
Briefly, for the further manifesting and opening this great and odious guilt,
consider we how many ways we may become partakers of the sins of others;
which we may reduce unto twelve particulars. 1. Iubendo.
First therefore understand we that iubendo, by bidding and commanding a
wickedness to be done, we become to participate of that wickedness. So Saul
became guilty of the murder of innocent Abimelech and his associats, 1. Sam.
22.18.
because he did command this wickedness to be done. Dan. 3.
So Nebuchadnezzer became guilty of the peoples Idolatry, in falling down and
worshipping the golden Image, because he commanded it to be done. Mat. 1.
So wicked Herod became guilty of that great slaughter of infants done in
Bethlehem, and in the Coasts round about, because he commanded that bloody
stratagem to be acted. So also that Herod spoken of Mar. 6. Mark 6.
became guilty of the death of that bright shining light John the Baptist,
because he commanded it to be done. Thus first iubendo, by commanding a
wickedness to be done, we become guilty of the sin of others.

2. Obediendo.
Secondly, obediendo, by obeying such unlawful commands, we become to
participate of the sins of others. Dan. 3.
This Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego knew right well, and therefore no violent
threats nor terrors could draw them to yield to an unlawful command. This the
worthy Apostles knew most clearly; wherefore when the Priests and Elders
commanded them that they should teach no more in the name Jesus, Acts 4.18, 20.
they plainly answer, We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard. This was the fault of treacherous Doeg, by which he became to
participate of the wickedness of Saul: for although Saul commanded his footmen
that stood by him to slay Abimelech and his associates, not a hand was stirred
nor foot moved to that bloody action; 1. Sam. 22.17, 18.
but as soon as he spoke to Doeg, he became presently a ready instrument to
execute his cruel and unlawful command. This also was the fault of Ioab: for
David writing to him that Vriah should be put in the forefront of the battle,
2. Sam. 11.15, 16.
and that there should be a reculing back from him that he might be smitten
and dye; presently he consents unto this unlawful command, sinisterly to
betray the life of an innocent man, and so became to participate of that bloody
sin. 2. Sam. ^4.
So also when David commanded him to number the people, though he misliked it,
and his conscience told him it was an evil, yet he desisted not, but became
the instrument of this sin. This was also the fault of those corrupt Judges,
1. Kings 21. 1. King. 21.
for pernicious Iezabel writing a letter to them in Ahabs name, that they
should get two wicked men to swear against poor Naboth, that they had heard
him blaspheme God and the King, and so to stone him to death, they performed it
with all expedition, and so became guilty of that crying sin, the shedding of
the innocent blood of poor Naboth: oh how much better had it been for them,
to have undergone the frown of Iezabel, and the anger of Ahab, than thus to
have enthralled their souls with the guilt of a grievous crying sin? And
thus we see obediendo, by obeying the unlawful commands of others, we become
guilty of sin and wickedness.

Thirdly, consulendo, by giving advice and counsel unto sinister and ungodly
passages, we become guilty of the sins of others. 2. Sam. 15.
So Achitophel was guilty of the conspiracy of Absalom against his Father
David, 2. Sam. 16.21. 2. Sam. 17.1. Ver. 14.
because he did advise and counsel him therein. So in like manner the
youngsters of Rehoboam were guilty of his violent answer to the people of
Israel, 1. King. 12.
and consequently of the rending of the ten Tribes from the two, because they
did advise and counsel him to that virulent reply. So also pernicious
Herodias became guilty of the death of John the Baptist, Mark 6.
because she did counsel and advise her daughter to make that the subject of
her request. And so we may see in the twenty third of Jeremy those false
Prophets were guilty of the sins and errors of the people, Ier. 23.26, 27.
because they did advise them to false and evil things, the deceits of their
own heart. Thus consulendo, by advising and counselling unto evil, we become
culpable of that evil.

Fourthly, adiuvando, by giving any help or assistance unto evil we become
guilty of the evil, whether it be personally, 1. King. 22.
verbally, or manually. First personally; so was Iehosophat guilty of the sin
of the Idolatrous King of Israel, because he did personally assist and aid him
in his rash and violent enterprise. Again, verbally we become guilty of this
sin, when we yield any assisting speeches to exasperate or set forward an
evil. So were the Edomites guilty of the cruelty of the Babylonians against
Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.7.
because, to exasperate and set forward the mischief, they cried out, Down
with it, down with it, even to the ground. So in like manner were the
Israelites guilty of the abomination of Baal, Judge. 6.29, 30.
whilst they used strong assistant speeches for him; who has done this thing?
who has thus dishonored Baal, as to break down his Altar? and when they
find it was Gideon the son of Ioash, Ver. 31.
they cry out, Bring out thy son that he may dye, that Ioash was feign to
say, Will ye plead the cause of Baal? will you use assistant speeches for him,
and so participate of that wickedness? Thus verbally, using assisting speeches
for sin and wickedness, we may become guilty of that sin.

Again, manually we become guilty of the sins of others; and that three
manner of ways: by imposition, scription, and subscription. First by
imposition, that is, of hands: so men of spiritual rank, that have power to
ordain others, become guilty of their sins, when they promote unworthy
persons unto that sacred function: therefore that worthy Apostle Saint Paul
gives this as a serious charge to Timothy, Lay hands (says he) on no man
rashly; 1. Tim. 5.22.
be not partaker of other men's sins: keep thy self pure. Again, by
scription or writing we become to participate of the sins of others; 2. Sam.
11. 1. King. 21. Neh. 6.6.
and that not only when we write for an evil, as David to Ioab, Iezabel to
the corrupt Judges, Sanballat to Nehemiah, but when we write any thing that may
give assistance to an evil. So Rabshakeh was guilty of blasphemy, and the
heap of his Masters evils, whilst in the writing to Hezekiah to daunt him, he
prefers him before the God of Heaven and Earth, and makes his Master (the King
of Assiria) his success over Idol gods, and Idolatrous nations, an argument
that even Iehova, the Lord of Hosts should not be able to stand before him.
Thus manually by scription or writing we may make the sins of others to
become ours.

Thirdly, by subscription we come to participate of the sins of others, when
we subscribe and set our hands to that which is erroneous or evil. The example
of this in the scriptures is somewhat rare, though the practice of it be very
frequent in these our times; for there is almost no person so evil, nor evil
so great, but we are apt to subscribe and testify therein, and to use any
assistance to countenance, extenuate, or color it. But the times, it seems,
not being anciently so evil, no marvel if the scriptures be something silent
herein, only some sympathy hereof we may see in the sixth of Daniel; Dan. 6.7,
8, 9.
for when the Governors of Darius had conspired a mischief to entrap Daniel,
and had drawn a decree to that purpose, that no petition should be asked of
any, saving of Darius, and that by the space of thirty days, and who so should
attempt the contrary, to be thrown into a den of Lions: when this decree was
brought to Darius, he confirmed it, that is, by subscription and sealing of
it, and so became guilty of their sin. And thus adiuvando, by giving any
help or assistance unto evil, whether it be personally, verbally, or
manually, we become guilty of that evil.

Actual consent is when we entertain personal society with the wicked in
their evils. Psalm. 50.18. 2. Ioh. v. 10.
Fifthly, consentiendo, by consent we come to make the sins of others to become
ours; and that in a threefold kind; actually, verbally, and silentially. Of
the first, the Prophet David speaks, describing the nature of a wicked man,
When thou see a thief thou consentest with him, and art partaker with the
adulterers. Of the second, Saint John speaks, who tells us, that if any
deliver erroneous things, not bringing the doctrine of Christ, we are not to
bid them so much as God speed; for by that consent, he tells us, we become
partaker of (their) evil deeds. Thirdly, silentially we become guilty of
this sin: for there is consensus silentii, a consent of silence; as when we
see sin and say nothing of it, which is contrary to Gods iniunction, Lev.
19.17.
Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer him to sin; and
contrary to the Apostle, 1. Tim. 5.20.
Those (says he) that sin rebuke openly, that the rest may fear: and it is a
clear rule, that as malum consilium inducit in peccatum, so malum silentium
relinquit in peccato, as evil counsel leads (a man) into sin, so evil
silence leaves (a man) in sin. Therefore what the holy Ghost speaks concerning
the wicked man, Psalm. ^0.21. I will reprove thee, and will set thy sins in
order before thee.
is fit to be observed by all, a due respect being had to time, to place and
person. And thus by consenting to the sins of others, whether it be
actually, verbally, or silentially, we become guilty of the sins of others.

Sixthly, indulgendo, by indulging and flattering others in sin we become
culpable of their sin: so the wicked are said to bless the covetous, that
is, to indulge and flatter them in their evil. A dangerous course; for, as
Austine speaks, Aug. in Ps. Adulantium linguae alligant animas in peccatis.
Ezech 13.22. Indulgence is so great an evil, that Antisthenes was wont to say,
(...), It is better to fall among ravening Crows, than among flatterers.
the tongues of flatterers do bind the souls of men in sin. This was that
for which the Lord did cry out against the Prophets of Jerusalem, witnessing
that they did strengthen the hands of the wicked (so indulging and flattering
them in their sins, that none could return from their wickedness) for which
the Lord does testify against them, that they were to him as Sodom, and as the
inhabitants of Gomorrah: for to them that did despise him, they proclaimed,
they should have peace; and to them that walked after the stubbornness of
their own hearts, they concluded, no evil should come unto them; so
flattering them in their evils, that they did bind up their souls in sin.
A sin so familiar in these times, that there is scarce any wickedness so
great, or error so odious, but it finds some Parasite or other to flatter and
indulge it: but he, says Solomon, Prove. 24.24.
that says to the wicked, Thou art righteous enough (thereby flattering him
and strengthening him in his sin) him the people will curse; yea, Ezach. 13.18.
against such as these the Lord himself does denounce a woe, plainly
testifying he will execute upon them the fierceness of his wrath. And thus we
also see that by indulging and flattering others in sin, we become partakers
of their sin.

Seventhly, recipiendo, by receiving into our houses and societies wicked and
ungodly persons, we come to participate of their evils. This was Saul's fault,
who entertained wicked Agag into his Court, 1. Sam. 15.
whom the Lord had accursed. Exodus 17.14.
This was the fault of the Israelites, who received into their society
irreligious and profane women, Judge. 2.3.
who became as thorns in their sides, to infect them with their evils, and to
exasperate the wrath of the Lord against them. This also was Salomons defect,
1. King. 11.1, 2 9.
who by his entertain of Egyptian women, and diverse others of Heathenish and
Idolatrous condition, became culpable of their evils, to the deep tainture of
his soul with sin, and the no small provocation of the wrath of God against
him. Be we therefore wary how we receive into our houses or societies known
wicked and irreligious persons. This was David's wisdom, worthy of imitation,
Psalm. 101.6.
Mine eyes (says he) shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way shall be with me. And thus
recipiendo, by receiving into our houses and societies wicked and ungodly
persons, we become culpable of their evils.

Eighthly, possidendo, by possessing evil gotten goods we become guilty of
the sins of others: so the children may be said to be guilty of their
fathers sins, whilst they possess the goods and revennues which they have
gotten by oppression, by usurie, by fraud and deceit, or any other unlawful
means. So Ahaziah might be said to be guilty of the sin of his father Ahab,
in possessing that which he got wickedly and by the effussion of innocent
blood. Yea, this is an evil which God does often scourge with a strict hand of
justice; for we may many times behold the children to wast and consume
dissolutely, what their fathers did raven and gripe together wickedly: De male
quaesitis, non gaudet tertius haeres.

The goods which were ill gotten by the Sire, are seldom seen to last to the
third heir. Ier. 22.19. Ver. 24.25. Job 20.26.


and it is seldom seen that evil gotten goods do continue unto the third
generation. Hence it was that Iehoiakim having enlarged himself by wicked and
unlawful means, the Lord did not only denounce that he should be buried as an
Ass is buried, but did also testify, that though his son Coniah were as the
signet of his right hand, yet he would pluck him thence, and would give him
into the hands of them that should seek his life, etc. This is that which
Zophar speaks in Jobs History of them that got their wealth wickedly and
unconscionably, growing great by the ruins of other men, Ver. 27.
that though they and theirs may flourish for a time, Ver. 28.
yet (says he) the fire that is not blown shall devour them, and that which
remains in their tabernacle shall be destroyed; the Heaven shall declare
their wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against them, the increase of
their house shall go away, it shall flow away in the day of Gods wrath; Job
27.1^.
for his house (that is, his state, his wealth, his pomp, his glory) is as the
building of a moth, that is, not only by the hurt and ruin of others, but also
frail and fickle, (as a watchman makes his lodge) for a small season; it shall
never remain long to his posterity: for as the Prophet Habakuk speaks, Hab.
2.11.
there is as it were a loud clamor between the walls, and in the buildings of
the wicked, the stones, as it were, crying out, We were laid here by
oppression and usury; and the timber as it were answering it, We were framed
and erected by bribes and corrupt rewards, by fraud, Prove. 20.25.
deceit and falsehood, by sacrilege and devouring of holy things. So that David
might well say, A small thing that the righteous has, that is, gotten lawfully
and with a good conscience, Psalm. 37.16.
is better than great riches to the wicked and mighty, that is, gotten sinfully
and corruptly. And thus we see, that possidendo, by possessing evil gotten
goods and revennues, we become guilty of the sin of others.

Ninthly, caelando, by keeping close and concealing the sins of others we
become culpable of their sins. Genesis 34.13.
So Symeon and Levi were mutually guilty of each others bloody intention
against the Shichemites. So Dalilah and the Philistims became mutually culpable
of each others wicked practice against Sampson. Judge. 16.5.
Acts 5.2.
So also Ananias and Saphira became tainted with each others hypocrisy. So
Judas and the Jews became in like manner guilty of each others conspiracy
against that innocent Lamb Christ Jesus: Mat 26.15.
for these (even all of them) concealed and kept close their wicked practice.
Briefly, many are the particulars unto which this sin might be branched, but
to avoid prolixitie, and to sort it according to the time, it may most fitly
reflect upon Jurors, to whom it belongs, by the obligement of their oath, to
inform against the sin and wickedness of others, their drunkenness, their
adulteries, their blaspheming of Gods sacred name, their contempt of his holy
ordinances, sins open, and notoriously famous, usual and frequent; for these
therefore to conceal and bury in silence (without any due information) these
foul and odious sinnnes they draw the guilt of them upon their own souls and
consciences, and that in a high and a special manner: for by this means they
strengthen the hands of the wicked, and keep them back from repentance,
Ezech. 13.22.
and the turning from sin. For by informing against sin, it comes to be
punished, and punishment is an excellent means to incite and stir up
deplorement and penitencie for sin. 2. King. 21.16.
When will wicked Manasses that made Jerusalem to flow with blood, when will
he be brought to see his sin, and to deplore his wickedness? alas, never
until he be in captivity, until he be clogged with fetters, 2. Chro. 33.11.
and bound with chains, oh then he will see his sin, and acknowledge his
wickedness, Verse. 12
then he will humble himself, and entreat mercy and favor at the hands of
the Lord. Yea, by the strength of punishment, hard hearted Pharaoh himself
will be brought to confess that the Lord is righteous, Exodus 3.27.
but he and his people are wicked. Yea some are (...), indomitable, such whose
evils are hardly suppressed, though there be asperitie of punishment.
And we may clearly see by daily experience some to be so impudent in sin,
that by impunitie they become animated, and are only by due punishment
restrained. Therefore Solon and Democritus were wont to say, there were two
divine lights, Rewards and Punishments, the one to animate virtue, and the
other to restrain wickedness. And here we may behold the strange abuse of
things (...) a man be diligent to recourse to hear the word ther^ ^od for the
benefit and comfort of his soul, a (...) eye is soon set upon him: Let him be
religious without faction, and he shall hardly find favor of any side; But
let him be a Libertine, let him spend the time in Ebrietie and Drunkenness, or
in other gross and loathsome sins, let him have some fanaticall
intoxication, 1. Cor. 5.6.
some corrupt leaven that is apt to sower a whole lump, and this is past by in
silence, John 15.19.
for the world loves his own. Oh grievous impiety! for what is this, but to
spare the ravening Crows (that are apt to prey upon every carrion) and to vex
the innocent Doves? Dare veniam Corvis, and vex^re Columbas.
As therefore you regard the conversion of others, as you tender your own
salvation, as you would be free from contracting upon your souls the heavy
burden of other men's loathsome sins, so be you cautious duly to inform
against their impieties, that God may be honored, sin may be suppressed,
and your consciences may be discharged. And thus we see caelando, by concealing
and keeping close the sins of others, we become partakers of them, and draw
their guilt upon our souls.

Tenthly, irritando, by stirring up and provoking others unto evil, we become
culpable of that evil. So Balaack became guilty of Balaams wicked action in
coming to curse the people of God, Numb. 22.15, etc.
because he did stir him up, and provoke him unto that mischief. So that woman
in Solomon, Prove. 7.18.
besides her own personal wickedness, became culpable of the sin of that
yongue man, because she did incite him, and stir him up to commit adultery
with her. So the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, Ezra 4.1, 5.
became guilty of the hindering of the building (...) the Temple of Jerusalem,
because they stir (...) and provoked the Kings of Persia thereunto. Cyrus and
Artaxerxes.
(...) in like manner the Luxurious Libertines of this time, become culpable of
the sins of others, whilst they provoke them, and stir them up to foul and
odious sins, proclaiming with those wicked ones in Solomon, Come, cast in
your lot with us, Prove. 1. Wisd. 2.6.
let us possess the pleasures that be present: taking it for a special glory
to lade them with ebrietie and drunkenness, and to ensnare their souls with
wickedness; entering into no small rage, if any shall refuse to run with them
to the same odious excess, 1. Pet. 4.4. One beaten to death for refusing and
distasting excess in drinking, and by using some interceptive speech in their
obscene passages. 1. Sam. 2.31.
as we have even lately experience: which crying sin, were worthy to receive
exemplary punishment, to the terror of others. And thus we see, irritando, by
stirring and provoking others unto evil, we become culpable of that evil.

Eleventhly, connivendo, by connivencie and winking at the sins of others,
we make them to become ours. This was the fault of old Eli; for by his
connivencie and winking at the sins of his children, 1. Sam. 3.14.
he became to participate of their wickedness: for which, the Lord did
witness, that he would cut off his arm, and the arm of his Fathers house,
that there should not an old man be left in it, and that this wickedness
should not be purged with sacrifice or offering. 1. Cor. 5 6.
This was that which the Apostle did so sharply reprove in the Corinthians,
concerning the incestuous person, because they did wink at his evil, and not
rather abandon his society; for knew ye not (says he) that a little leaven
does leven the whole lump? This therefore is a great wickedness in any, and
makes them partakers of the sins of others; for it is a rule in general,
that qui tolerat aliena peccata, cum tollere possit, sua facit, he (that by
connivencie) suffers the sins of others, when (by due reproof) he may take
them away, makes them his own: but yet it is most intolerable in those of
public place, be they of Ecclesiastic or of Civil condition. Esaias 58.1
For, concerning the first, it is Gods own iniunction that they must cry
aloud, and must not spare, but must lift up their voices like trumpets to tell
the people of their sins (even) the house of Jacob of their transgressions:
the contrary whereof is deeply distasteful, as God himself does witness; Oh
Israel (says he) thy Propbets are like the foxes in the wast places, Ezech.
13.4, 5.
they rise not up in the Gaps, they make not up the hedge for the house of
Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord. And we may see in the
second of the Revelation, that the Lord rebukes the Angel, that is, the Pastor
of the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2 15, 20.
because by his connivencie he suffered the pernicious doctrine of the
Nicholaitans to be spread abroad, to the dishonor of God, and the prejudice of
his people. So in like manner he reproves the Angel of the Church of
Thiatira, Bern. Mihi non licet tacere cui ex officio incumbit peccantes
arguere. Ezech. 33. Isidor. de summo bono, cap. 36. Si cos ^ut ignorantes non
rudiant, aut peccantes non arguant.

Chrysostom. super matthew. in opere. impers. hom. 31. Sacerdos est populo, sicut
radix in arbore and sicut stomachus in corpore, etc.


because he permitted Iezabel, that seeming Prophetess, to seduce the people
from the true service of God unto odious Idolatry. Oh, says Bernard, it is
not lawful for me to hold my peace, to whom it belongs of duty to reprove
those that sin; the neglect whereof, God himself has bound with no less
penalty, than life for life, than soul for soul: therefore well might Isidore
conclude, that to these of this rank there remains extreme misery, if
either they instruct not the ignorant, or reprove not them that sin. For as
Chrysostom speaks, These are to the people, as the root to the tree, as the
stomach to the body; if therefore there be a defect in the Root, if it
communicate not due juice and vigor, the Tree must needs pine away and wither,
if the Stomach be full of crude and raw humors, the Body must needs be
grievously distempered. Thus we see these of Ecclesiastic condition, by
connivency, become guilty of the sins of others.

Secondly, those of public rank in respect of civil and political
government, by connivencie do make the sins of others to become theirs: for
these have special power to suppress evil, as those to whom the sword of
justice is committed, as those which are the ministers of God to take vengeance
on them that do evil; therefore connivencie in these, Romans 13.4. Or Deacon of
God. (...).
oh it is the very nurse of evil, and tends to the ruin of Church and
Commonwealth. What special care ought these therefore to have, that neither
by neglect, oppression or partiality they taint themselves with any
injustice? Not by neglect, this was the fault of Demetrius the King of Macedon,
who neglecting the complaints of the people, did alienate and withdraw their
affections, to the prejudice of himself, and the damage of his whole country:
whereas, says Ambrose, Ambr. de Abrahae, c 6. and l. 5. in Lucam. Vir justus
magnus murus patriae illius nos fides servat, justitia ab excidio defendit.
Amb. sup. Psalm. Iudicet ille, qui ad pronunciandum nullo odio, nulla
offensione, nulla levitate ducatur.
a just man is a special wall to his Country, whose fidelity keeps it,
whose justice defends it from destruction. Again, not by oppression or
partiality; for, as Gregory speaks, a Magistrate, as he is a Magistrate,
ought neither to have amicum nor inimicum, nor friend nor foe, nor favorite nor
opposite: therefore, says Ambrose, let him judge, which is led to pronounce
(his sentence) by no hatred, by no prejudice, by no lightness or partial
respect. Wherefore Iethro would have such to be Justices as are not only men of
courage, such as might not pullos interimere and gallinas praeterire, strike
the lesser and pass by the greater, as if the Laws were like to Spider-webs,
to catch the little flies, but to let the greater break away; but as the
dignity and greatness of the person does increase the fault (as Seneca
speaks) and makes it fouler, Senec. Dignitas auget crimen.
so it should increase the punishment and make it the sharper. Papinianus.
Wherein Papinianus was so absolute, so void of respect of persons, that he
chose rather to dye than to excuse the parricide of Antonius Bassianus. Observe
we therefore, Iethro would not only have these to be men of courage, such as
might not be daunted to execute justice for the great looks or proud carriage
of any person, but also men fearing God, Ecclus. 14.5.
such as had religion in their hearts: for ( cui bonus, qui sibi nequam, to
whom can he be good, that is evil to himself?) how can he execute justice
abroad that has a corrupt conscience at home? Amb. sup. Psalm. and sic
exprimitur in Can. 3. qu. 7. Iudicet ille de alterius errore qui non habet quod
in seipso condemnet: judicet ille qui non agit eade^ quae in alio putaverit
punienda, ne cum de alio judicat, in se ferat sententiam. Romans 2.3. Genesis 18.25.
If our own hearts be infected with the gross epilepsies of ebrietie,
adultery, contempt of God and his Ordinances, or with the unsavourie seeds of
exorbitancie or faction, we will hardly duly punish these in others: therefore
(says Ambrose) let him judge of the fault of another, which has not, that he
may condemn in himself; let him judge which does not the same things which he
thinks fit to be punished in another, lest whilst he judge of another, he
pronounce sentence against himself. For, as the Apostle speaks, think
thou, O man, that iudgest them which do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God? for, as Abraham worthily speaks, shall
not the Judge of all the world do right? Take we heed therefore that we
execute justice at home (mortifying and beating down our own private
corruptions) that we may the better judge others abroad. For this purpose
Aristotle does call a Judge a living law, Arist. 5. Eth. c. 4 (...).
to show that he should ever retain due vigor and strength of virtue at home in
his own conscience, that he might never be queld nor tainted with sinister
passages abroad to others. Briefly, the matter of injustice (in what kind
soever) was ever so odious, that ancient Laws prescribe severe punishment
against it, as appears by Tully in his Oration for the Law Manilia, by the
Code, by the Digests: where it is set down, that if it were in a pecuniarie
matter, there should be a threefold restitution, and a removeall from
authority; but if it were in a criminal cause, there should be a confiscation
of all their goods, and a perpetual banishment. Yea Gellius tells us, Gell. l.
20. c. 1.
that by the Law of the twelve Tables this evil was punished with no less
than death it self. O but observe we now, in how great a measure were it
within the compass of this guilt, if by connivencie upon sinister respects
there should be a passing by of those gross criminal offenses, so frequent in
these times, as first, the great contempt of Gods word, wherein many may be
found that very rarely, that very seldom recourse to the house of God to
hear his sacred truth propounded unto them; great demonstration of Atheism.
Lev. 12.45.
We may see that the Law of God provided that the Lepers (to the end they
might be known of all, and as infectious persons shunned of all) should have
their clothes rent, their head bare, a covering upon their lips, and were
enjoined to cry, I am unclean, I am unclean: And shall these, far more
dangerous than Lepers, whose contagion tends to the ruin of soul and body,
shall these receive no due punishment, that all might note them and shun them?
Oh know we that, as Seneca speaks, vitia serpunt in vicinos and contactu
nocent, sins are infectious, and do breathe forth a contagious steame to the
neighboring parts. Again, we see if the credit and reputation of men be
touched by the taint of unsavory tongues, the laws soon yield a remedy: but
oh strange times! shall the sacred name of God be deeply blasphemed? shall
unhallowed creatures by their horrid oaths pierce the very Heavens? and by
their hell-bred execrations affront the very throne of God? and shall none
regard it? though God himself, as jealous of his own reputation, Exodus 20.7.
do plainly tell us, that he will not hold these as guiltless, but does
clearly conclude, Though none shall regard to punish it, yet he himself will
revenge it with some grievous misery; for (says the Lord) Because of oaths
the whole Land shall mourn.

Ierem 23.10.
Thirdly, for those two foul concurrent sins, drunkenness and adultery,
confederate mischiefs, monsters begot by hellish spirits, These two sins are
not only frequently combined together, but do strangely abound in each place.
burdensome to the earth, offensive to the heavens, loathsome to all true
Christian affections, how uncontrouleable walk they in our streets? how
disdainful of our reproves? and what? shall justice smile at these foul
sins? shall now, great looks, swaggering habits, large purses, or some
secret soliciting Parasits work favor to these base designs? Oh remember
we, that the very heathen by the light of nature knew these sins to be
odious; Leart. l. 1.
and therefore in the Athenian Commonwealth, by the Law of Solon, they were
punished with no less, Philip. action 9.
than death it self. Oh know we, that now in these our times, these sins
become impostumated, sweld so high, that it is time (all favor laid aside) to
lance them with the sword of justice; for they so pester each place, that they
become more noisome than the loathsome frogs to the land of Egypt. Oh
therefore suffer not these foul sins, by connivencie, to reflect upon your
souls, let God have his glory, Phocyl. (...): Postellus, cap. 4. AEsc. in
Timarchum. and Sigon. l. 3.

They used to give judgeme^t not so much by the words of the pleaders, or the
witnesses, as by that conscience which they perceived of the matter in the
hearing of it. A worthy course. Cicero. 3 o^fic. Heraclides de Ten. Extat
haec Lex apud Damasc. hisce verbis. (...). Psalm. 82.1, 2. Senec. Si accusasse
sufficit, quis innocens erit?


let sin have his due desert. You might remember what the very heathen man
exhorts, Distribute (says he) that which is just unto all, wrest not
judgment unto (partial) favor: for which cause the Areopagites were wont to
judge by night in the dark, that they might not respect those that did speak,
but the things that were spoken; not the person, but the cause.

You might remember what Tullie tells you, that you have God the witness of
your judgments: or you might call to mind the absolute integrity of worthy
Tennes, whose own son being taken in evil, he referred him to due course
of Law, and would use no partiality: or you might present to consideration,
that worthy course of justice sometime exercised among the Indians, That if an
Artificer were deprived of a hand, or of an eye, he was to dye that had done
it, whatsoever he was; how much more then if pernicious Libertines should
wholly deprive such a one of vital power? But howsoever, this you must
remember, you are bound in conscience to remember it; for the holy Ghost does
tell it you, that the God of Heaven does sit in the midst of your assemblies,
declaming and crying out against all sinister passages, How long will ye judge
uniustly, and favor the person of the wicked? As therefore every information
is to be diligently searched, how true it is (for if it be sufficient to
accuse, who shall be innocent?) so it being found to be true oh let it receive
no indulgence, but a due impression of justice; for you see it is clear, that
by connivencie you make the sins of others to become yours, even these
gross, these foul and loathsome sins. And thus you may observe the scope of
the eleventh point, how we come to participate of the sins of others.

Lastly, defendendo, by defending the sins of others we come to make their
sins to be ours. So was wicked Iezabell guilty of the base Idolatry of the
Priests of Baal; 1. King. 19.2.
for she did defend them, and maintain them, and in their cause protested
revenge against religious Eliah. So in like manner Corah and his accomplices,
Numb. 16.3.
became guilty of the looseness and wickedness of the people; for they
defended them that they were holy and righteous enough. So, as my Text tells
you, the Heathen were guilty of the sins of others; Lawyers ought not to
plead those causes which in their own consciences they know to be naught and
impious, for it is a thing odious thus to have (...) a tongue and a tongue,
that is, so basely mercenary, as for rewards to speak any thing.
for they did defend, patronize, and applaude them in their wickedness. A
sin common in these our times; for first, What cause is there so bad, but
some Lawyer, that has sold his conscience for money, will defend it, and plead
for it, and labor till he blow again, that you may easily behold the weight
of the Fee, in the very force of the words? Again, what matter is so vile, or
savours of so much deceit, oppression, or sacrilege, but the inferior troop
(the Seminaries of dissension) I mean wrangling Atturnies (I speak only of
those, for as many as be honest, it concerns them not) will greedily snatch at
it, as having sold their honesty for petty Fees, and bought them a leaden
heart, and a brazen face, to be daunted at nothing, to be ashamed of nothing,
that wax fat by sucking upon the juice of men's violent and furious affections,
that cloth themselves and their dependants by inflaming strifes and
contentions, that grow rich by the falls and ruins of other men: the bitter
taint of whose infection does daily increase more and more, as experience does
clearly witness. And would to God some steps of this evil were not to be
seen even in the Tribe of Levi: for how prone may we see certain of this
rank, to nourish (some) the factious, extenuating and patronizing their false
and erroneous passages, censuring them as wicked and malicious, that oppose
their ungodly designs? Again, some others defending even the most profane
(that live in daily gross and odious impieties) that they are righteous
enough: 2. Tim. 4.2. That there is little or no use of Preaching, people being
converted, is a pernicious drug of Anabaptisme, for they affirm, as it
appears by their writings and Faith they publish, Conclus. 60.61.62.63.

That the new creature, which is begotten of God, needs not the outward
Scriptures, creatures or ordinances of the Church to support him, but is above
them; by which is excluded that principal ordinance the preaching of the Word,
and is clean contrary to S. Peter, who bids us to desire the sincere milk
of the word that we may grow thereby. 1. Pet. 2


for (say they) now in a planted Church, all are converted, or at least soon
and easily to be converted; and therefore infer, that now there is little use
of the preaching of the word; that, that charge of Paul to Timothy, to be
instant to preach the word, both in season and out of season, is corruptly
alleged to prove a necessity of preaching in these times. Oh what strange
Anabaptisticall fancies be these? tending to the dishonor of God, to the
contempt of his ordinance, to the offense of the weak, to the nourishment of
Atheism, and so to strengthen the hands of the wicked, as still to inthrall
them in the miserable snare of their pollutions. An evil so great, that God
does witness such as these to be unto him, as Sodom, Mat. 28.19. Romans 10.14,
15. Romans 1.16. Ephesians. 6.17. 2. Tim. 3.15.
and as the inhabitants of Gomorrah. Oh that we would therefore speak more
reverently of the Preaching of the word, as of the ordinance of God, his power
unto salvation, the sword of the spirit, to cut down the weeds of the soul,
by which we are made wife unto salvation, and to grow up in Christ, Ephesians.
4.15. Phil. 3.14.
which is the head, pressing hard toward the mark, until at length we come
unto a perfect man, that is, a full perfection of grace in Gods everlasting
Kingdom; Ephesians. 4.13.
in regard whereof the Apostle did conclude, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Necessity was laid upon him, and woe unto him if he did not preach the
Gospel.

And thus we see, beloved in Christ Jesus, how many ways we become partakers
of the sins of others; but especially (as we see unfolded unto us, as the
most grievous of all) we become tainted with this guilt, by defending and
patronizing the sins of others: a wickedness that does aggravate our sin,
and hasten the justice of God against us, as we see clear example in these
Gentiles spoken of by the Apostle, Romans 1.24.
who for this foul contagion were delivered over into a reprobate nature, and
that most condignly: for if the defense of our own proper sins be (as Origin
speaks) limen inferni, the very next step to hell; if it does duplicare
peccatum, double the sin, Aug. in Psalm.
as Augustine speaks, how much more grievous is it then, and worthy of the
strictest stroke of justice, when we be come to that height of wickedness, as
not only to defend our own proper sins, but to applaude and patronize the
sins of others? Briefly, since this evil is so great, since by this and by
many other ways (as has been made known unto us) we become partakers of
the sins of others, to the heavy burthening of our souls, and the deep
exasperating of the wrath of God against us: Oh let it impresse within us these
necessary duties.

First of all to be cautious to work out our salvation even with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12.
casting far from us the unbridled raines of dissolute affections, of all
carnal presumption and security.

Secondly, that we would entreat the heavenly Father to purge out of us the
leaven of our corruption, and daily to weaken in us the strength of sin, that
does so much press us down, Hebr. 12.1.
and hang so fast upon us, that so, considering our ways, we may every one of
us in our several places, both superior and inferior, every day turn our
feet more and more unto Gods sacred testimonies. And lastly, Psalm. 119.59.
Bern. Ve mihi misero cum venerit dies judicii and aperti erunt libri in quibus
omnes actiones meae, and cogitationes, praesente Domino, recitabuntur, tunc
demisso capite pro confusione conscientiae, stabo trepidus, and anxius, utpote
commemorans commissa sceleroru^ meorum, cum dicetur de me, ecce homo and opera
ejus.
that we would be moved earnestly to desire him to prevent in us the
participation of the sins of others: for if (as Bernard speaks in his own
person) our own proper sins be so grievous, that they be able to make us
stand before the Tribunal seat of Christ, trembling and heavy, with heads
hanging down for shame and confusion of conscience, as remembering all our
wickedness, when it shall be said unto us, behold the men and their works;
how much more then when the foul heap of other men's sins shall be laid to our
charge, which we have wilfully contracted upon our souls, and made them ours
by participation? How fit is it therefore, that to prevent this great misery,
we would cry out with worthy David, Let us not commit wicked works with them
that work iniquity, let us not eat of their delicates; but keep us Lord
from their snare, even from the grins of the workers of iniquity; Ver. 9.
setting not only a watch before our lips, Psalm, 141.3.
and keeping the door of our mouths, but guarding every part of us,
preserving us as the apple of thine own eye, setting us as a seal upon thine
heart, Cant. 8.6. Psalm. 92.13.
and as a signet upon thy arm, that we thy servants may flourish in thy
courts, by a strength of grace in this life, and by a state of glory in thy
everlasting kingdom for ever. The which pious care, that we may attain to
that glorious rest, the heavenly Father be pleased to ingrave upon our souls
and consciences, for the precious merits of his only Son Christ Jesus: To
which Father and Son, with their most holy Spirit, three persons and one
indivisible essence, be all praise, power and glory, of all creatures in heaven
and in earth, from this time forth, and for evermore.

FINIS.
1. COR. 9.24. Run so that ye may obtain.


THe Apostle in this present Chapter, does very diligently set forth (beloved
in our Savior Christ) how far we are to descend from that Christian liberty
(which otherwise we might lawfully use) when it tends to the edifying and
gaining of them that be weak. In which respect he says, I am made all things
to all men, Ver. 22.
that I might by all means save some. By which speech we are to understand,
that the Apostle reflects upon things in their own nature Indifferent, but not
upon things Dogmaticall; for when the Apostle makes speech of points of
Doctrine, Gal. 1.8.
we may see he is of another mind, Whosoever (says he) shall teach otherwise,
etc. let him be accursed. Besides, we are to distinguish between the
observation of things, and the opinion of them: for, concerning the first, the
Apostle was contented to give way to the weak Jews and Gentiles, to win them
to the Gospel; wherefore he says, I do all things for the Gospel sake. 1.
Cor. 9.23.
For although the Ceremonies were to end in the death and resurrection of
Christ, Aug. ep. 19. ad Hier.
as then breathing out their latest breath, yet the Apostles would not
presently profanely cast them away, as loathsome dead carkases, but would
rather religiously (by degrees) bury them, yet so, The Apostles gave way for a
time to legal ceremonies, and indulged both Jew and Gentile for edification
sake, not with an opinion of necessity, but that by this indulgence they might
the better win them to the truth of the Gospel, lest contrary to our Saviors
example they should have quenched the smoking flax, and broken the bruised
reed. Act. 16.3. Gal. 2.3. Romans 14.19. Gal. 4 10, 11. 1. Tim 4.1.3.
as they did it for edification sake, to draw on the weak and ignorant to
entertain the Gospel, which was yet but in the cradle of infancy; but not
with any opinion of necessity, as if they were necessary to salvation, or to
give way to the stubborn, to whom the truth was clearly revealed, but yet
would wilfully refuse it: for although for avoiding of offense he did
circumcise Timothy, yet he utterly refused to circumcise Titus, when it was
urged as a matter of necessity. Hence it was, that writing to the Romans, he
permits free liberty concerning meats, and observations of days, as things
indifferent in their own nature, either to be used or not to be used,
according as the strength of their conscience did persuade them, for the
conserving of peace, and the edifying one of another. But in his Epistle to the
Galathians, he vehemently reproves this liberty, because they observed it
with an opinion of necessity, as being necessary to justification, and to
obtain salvation. Hence it was that the Apostle to Timothy does call the
abstinence from meats, the doctrine of Devils, that is, being commanded and
enjoined as a necessary part of Gods worship. From whence we may see it clear,
that the Apostle made himself all to all, concerning things in their own
nature indifferent for edification sake, to gain the weak, and that for a
time only, until the Gospel were more clearly known unto them; but not in
points of doctrine, or with any opinion of necessity, as if they were any part
of Gods worship, or necessary to salvation. In which the Apostle gives us this
general instruction, That we use our Christian liberty not scandalously, but
to the edification of others. And now the Apostle having showed his practice,
he comes to this worthy Moral exhortation, Run so, that ye may obtain: as
if he should say, Strive and contend so to frame all your passages to the
glory of God, and the benefit of others, that you may at length possess a
Crown of immortal glory. Thus (beloved) you see the scope of the Apostle,
you see his worthy exhortation, most fit to be recorded in the soul of every
Christian, Run so, that ye may obtain. In which I might consider the action,
and the limitation thereof: the action in the word Run, the limitation in
these words, so that ye may obtain: or we may consider in them, the
material, the formal, and the final: the material in the word Run, the
formal, Run so, the final, that ye may obtain; or if this be too prolixe,
we may by a (...), bury the final in the formal, and so present unto you
only matter and form; the matter in the word Run, the form, so that ye
may obtain. And first for the matter, Run. Which I may consider, first in
the abstract, as it implies a Race: secondly, in the concrete, with the
coherence of the Text, as it implies a certain special kind of Race: and
first for it in the abstract. The state of man in this world, may fitly be
compared to a Race, whether we respect quantity or quality, the natural
life of man, or his corrupted nature. First, Aug. Quid est vita praesens, nisi
quidam cursus ad mortem? Chrysostom. in Ps.
the natural life of man, what is it, but a speedy Race that is soon run? Oh,
says Augustine, what is this present life, but a certain course unto death?
Every step we tread, says Chrysostom, does tend unto a privation: therefore
Job concludes, My days (says he) are more swift than a Runner, Job 9 25, 26.
they have fled away and seen no good thing, they are passed as the most swift
ships, and as the Eagle that flies to the prey.

Hence it is, that in the seventh of his History he compares the life of man
to a hireling: Job 7.1.
and in the foureteenth, Job 14.2.
unto a flower and a shadow, which do soon pass away, and is of no
continuance. And Moses compares it to a dream, Psalm. 90.5.9.
that is soon had and soon forgotten, and to a word, that does fade and
vanish away in the very sound thereof: yea, God himself bids the Prophet Esaias
proclaim to the world, that this vital power it is but as grass that does
soon wither way; Esaias 40.6.
Cry, etc. that all flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof, as the flower
of the field. So that we see it clear, that the state of man in respect of his
natural life, may well be said to be as a swift Race, that soon speedes
unto an end. Which might well serve as a caution to the secure Nabals of these
times, to whom it is common with greedy pursuit to prosecute the world, 1. Sam.
25.11.38.
to bar their hearts against all remorsefull charity, and to involve
themselves in deep impiety, without any sense or feeling of the sicklenesse
of their estates, Psalm. 73.19.
which are subject suddenly to perish, and come to a fearful end. Again, this
might well be a remembrance to the pampered Libertines of these times, with
whom it is familiar to cheer their souls in luxury, Luke 12.19, 20.
never considering the voice of Gods spirit to the Epicure, Thou fool, this
night shall thy soul be taken from thee.

Again, if we consider the state of man, as for his natural life, so also for
his corrupted nature, it may fitly be compared unto a Race; for, how prone are
men, clothed with the clouds of vicious nature, to prosecute sin? oh, how
swift are the ungodly unto evil? how speedy are they in this Race? when any
are about any thing that is good, oh, how long are they in determination? how
slowly do they bring it into action? We see in diverse it is long before they
have so much as a determination to leave sin, but when do they proceed to
practice? oh, how slow are they in this kind? We may often hear the ungodly
say, when God does execute some stroke of justice upon them, Oh, if we be
delivered from this destresse, we will never do as we have done: but we have
seen it fare with diverse of these, even as it did with obdurate Pharaoh, Exodus
9.27, 28.
who when the hand of God was upon him, then he sends for Moses and Aaron to
pray for him, then he cries out, acknowledging his wickedness, I have sinned,
the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: then he concludes, Ver
34.
he will be obedient to Gods voice, he will let the people go; but let the
Lord withdraw his hand of justice but a while, and he will harden his heart
again, and become more rebellious than ever he was before. Such steps may we
sometime behold in ungodly persons, some determination to leave sin, but how
intolerably slowly do they bring forth the practice thereof? So that we may
see it clear, it is a long time in diverse before they determine any thing that
is good, but to proceed from determination to practice, oh, how rare are they
in this kind?

But in the case of sin and wickedness, we may see it far otherwise. Genesis
4.8.
Cain was speedy to determine his Brothers death, and he was speedy to put it
in practice. Herodias was speedy to determine her cruel revenge against John
Baptist, Mark 6.19.24
and she was swift to put it in action, preferring her determined revenge,
before the half of a Kingdom. Yea the blessed Evangelist does witness unto
us, that when the wicked and bloody Jews had got the Coat of Christ into
their hands, Ioh. 19.23, 24.
they speedily determined what they would do with it, and presently they put
it in practice, they cast lots for it: but oh that the Coat of the righteous
should ever come into the hands of the wicked! But here we may see it clear,
that the ungodly are speedy in the course of mischief. This Solomon does
plainly confirm, Their feet (says he) does run to evil: Prove. 1.16.
Yea (says the Prophet Michah) they imagine iniquity upon their beds, Mich.
2.1.
and as soon as the morning yields light, they practice it, speedy in the
determination, speedy in the execution of evil. Oh, how great experience have
we hereof in these our corrupted times? wherein we may behold many not only, as
the Prophet Esaias speaks, to draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with cart ropes, Esaias 5.18.
or, as Job speaks, to drink it in like water; Job 15.16.
but to run the Race of sin like speedy feeted Nimshi's, casting away all
fear of God, all regard of his worship, all respect of his sacred word, never
fixing an eye upon it, but when they make it a cloak for their base
designements. But let these know that are so swift in the course of evil,
that, that shall be true of them for ever, that the holy Ghost sets down of
them by Zophar in Jobs History, Job 20.12. etc.
When wickedness is sweet in the mouth of the wicked, when (they) hide it
under their tongues, when (they) favor it, and will not forsake it, but keep
it close in (their) mouths, then shall the meat in their bowels be turned,
and the gall of Aspes shall be in the midst of them, and the substance they
have devoured, they shall vomit it, God shall draw it out of their bellies.
Thus we see it clear, that the state of man may well be deciphered by a Race,
whether we respect quantity or quality, his natural life or his corrupted
nature. And thus much for the word Run, in the Abstract, as it simply impies
a Race.

Come we now to consider it in the Contret, with the coherence of the Text, as
it implies a certain special kind of Race. And because in every Race two
things are specially remarkable, the terminus a quo, and the terminus ad quem,
the place from which, and the place to which we bend our passage: consider we
therefore, here in this spiritual Race, the thing from which we are to run,
and the thing to which we are to speed our course. And observe we, That that
from which we are to bend our passage, is the loathsome sink of sin, our heap
of foul corruptions. And this for special reason: for, as the Prophet Esaias
speaks, Esaias 59.2.
sin makes a divorse between God and us, Your iniquities (says he) have
separated between you and your God, and have caused him to hide his face from
you. Sin, oh it is odious in Gods sight; for, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
11.5.
his soul abhors all them that love iniquity: yea, Hab. 1.13.
says the Prophet Habacuck, his eyes are pure eyes, and can behold no
wickedness, that is, to favor it, Sin, as much as in it lies, is
distructive of the very nature of God.
or approve it wheresoever. And no marvel; for sin as much as in it lies, is
distructive of the very nature and essence of God, that is, though not really,
yet intentatively, although not in respect of the real inferring of an evil
(for nothing can be opposed to God immediately in himself, Nil Deo immediate
in seipso opponatur contrary vel privative. (Impius) omnino vellet Deum
peccata sua aut vindicare non posse, aut nolle aut ea nescire Bern. Sermon. 3. de
resurrect. Dom.
either contrarily or privatively) yet by attempting it, and therefore in
regard of will and affection: for, as Bernard speaks, a wicked man would by
all means, that either God could not revenge his sins, or that he would
not, or that he did not know them, to be revenged of them; therefore great
reason all sin should be odious in Gods sight, as endeavoring as much as in
it lies to destroy the very nature of God: for if that could befall God, which
a wicked man desires, he could not be God, it would destroy his Deity. Romans
6.23.
Hence therefore it is, that the Apostle worthily concludes, that the wages of
sin is death, and that not only temporal and corporeal, but eternal, of
soul and body for ever. And this also most justly: for, what can be more
equal, than that there should be an eternal and an infinite punishment
imposed upon that which carries with it a certain kind of infinity? But
sin does carry with it a kind of infinity; though not Non secundum Physicam
entitatem.
physically or intrinsically, yet morally and extrinsically, or avertively and
obiectively: avertively, as it is an evil turning man from an infinite good:
Peccatum non est infinitum in genere morali, ut est malum hominis, sed ut est
malum avertens ab infinito bono. Peccatum contra Deum commissum quandam habet
infinitatem ex infinitate divinae Majestatis; tanto enim offensa est gravior,
quanto major est ille in quem delinquitur. Aquinas.
obiectively, in regard of the person against whom it is committed; for, as
Aquinas speaks, the offense is so much the greater, by how much the person is
greater against whom it is committed: as therefore God is the object against
whom sin is committed, so sin carries with it a certain kind of
infiniteness. In a word, many are the instances of Gods loathing and abhorring
sin and wickedness. Genesis 6.13.
We need never speak of the old worlds many sins, for which she was absorpt
and swallowed up with a general deluge: Genesis 7.^^.
we need never speak of Sodomes heap of crying sins, Genesis ^8.^0. Esaias
9.18.
for which she was destroyed with fire from Heaven; for, as the Prophet Esaias
speaks, wickedness burns like fire, all wickedness whatsoever. Alas, Genesis
19.24.
for one sin Adam was thrown out of Paradise, and became a prey to Satan,
Genesis 3.19.23.
a terror to himself, a scourge to his posterity, obnoxious unto death, even
a threefold death, corporeal, spiritual, and eternal: nay look we upon the
second Adam Christ himself, that immaculate lamb, which had no inherent spot
of sin, no sin of his own, Esaias 53.5.
sin only imputative and no more: for he was wounded for our
transgressions, and was broken for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, Matt. 26.39.
yet when this blessed Savior beheld the wrath of God against this sin, Luke
22.44.
it made him grovell upon the earth, it made him distill down sweat like drops
of blood, it made him mournfully complain, My soul is heavy round about unto
the death, it made him earnestly entreat, Father, Mat. 26.33.
if it be possible let this cup pass from me.

From all which it is clear, that sin is loathsome in Gods sight, all sin
whatsoever; what then can be more fit for us than to run from the sink of
foul corruptions, daily mortifying them, The terminus ad quem, or a place
unto) which we are specially to bend our Race. 1. Cor. 2, 9.
and as it were leaving them behind us, continually more and more bending our
whole course unto the blessed state of glory? (This is the second branch, the
terminus ad quem, or place unto which we are to speed our passage.) Oh this is
a blessed state indeed, such as the eye has not seen, such as the ear has
not heard, nor can come into the heart of man to conceive; Rev. 21.4.
where (as John speaks) all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, where
neither death, nor sorrow, 1. Cor. 15.28.
nor pain shall ever have any entrance, but God shall be all in all, Rev.
22.4. Psalm. 16.11.
and they shall behold the face of God, before whose face (says the Psalmist)
there is the fullness of joys, at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore: pleasures so absolute and full of delectation, that when Peter had
but some glimmering taste hereof in the transfiguration of our blessed Savior
upon mount Tabor, it so ravished his affections, that forgetful of his own
redemption, and of the redemption of all the elect, he brake out, Master, Luke
9.33.
it is good being here; let us build three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for
Moses, and one for Elias, but wist not what he spoke. When worthy David had
but some secret taste of this incomparable bliss by the intimation of Gods
Spirit, Psalm. 84.10.
he concluded that one day in the Courts (of God) were better than a thousand
elsewhere: Psalm. 42.1, 2.
yea he did long after it; Like (says he) as the chased Heart does bray after
the water brooks, so does my soul cry unto God: my soul is a thirst for God,
even for the living God, when shall I come and appear before the face of God?
Oh how fit therefore that we should Run from the loathsome heap of our
corruptions, 1. Cor. 15.50.
and bend our Race wholly unto eternal glory? for corruption cannot inherit
incorruption. Rev. 21.27.
No unclean thing shall enter into the new Jerusalem, nor any thing that
works abomination: Psalm. 5.4.
for, as the holy Ghost speaks, our God is not a God that loves wickedness,
nor shall evil dwell with him. Oh, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 69.10.
know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolators, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God: yea, Rev. 21.^.
says Saint John, the fearful and the unbeleeving, the abominable and
murderers, and adulterers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Without, Rev. 22.15.
says the same Apostle (as excluded from Gods Kingdom) shall be dogs, and
inchanters, and adulterers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves
or makes lies, Amos 6.3.
even all the troop of unhallowed creatures, who (as the Prophet speaks) do
cast far from them the evil day, living wickedly, and dying impenitently.
Oh, how fit is it therefore, that we should run from the odious sinck of our
sins, whose loathsome steam have long pressed the very Throne of God for revenge
against us? and now at length, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3.2.
to set our affections on things which are above, bending our whole course unto
the blessed state of Glory. And thus much for the Material in the word Run.

Come I now unto the Formal, expressed in these words, so that ye may obtain.
Which we may fitly consider, antecedently, and consequently, that is, in
respect of the primitive, and subsequent things, As the primitive and
principal thing necessary in the form of this Race, we must run opportune,
in due season.
necessary for the expressing of the form of this Race. First primitively
therefore as the chief and principal in this Race, we are to be cautious
that we run opportune, in due season, whilst grace is offered, before our
hearts grow hardened, and even incurable through the custom of sin. For know
we, The diverse stairs or steps of sin. 1. Grave. There is even in evil, as
Aquinas speaks Ordo ab imperfecto ad persectum. 2. Step. Leve, light. 3. Step.
Delectabile, delightful. Prove. 2.14.
if sin be entertained but a while, it will bring a grievous obduracie: for,
how soon does sin by certain steps and degrees come to an incurable height?
Sin at the first entrance is grave, heavy, troublesome and burdensome to the
conscience, especially where there has been any good education: but stay it
but a while, and it will grow leve, light, a matter of small weight, little or
nothing troublesome at all; but lodge it yet a little longer, and it will grow
delectabile, thou will delight in it, it will be a joy and a pleasure to thy
affections; as Solomon speaks of some wicked ones, that having some space of
time continued in their impieties, he tells us, they did rejoice in it, and
delight in their base ungodly courses: but lodge it yet a while longer upon thy
soul, 4. Step. Insensibile, insensible. Prove. 30.20.
and it will become insensibile, sin will seem to thee no sin at all, as
Solomon speaks of the adulterous woman, who (says he) wipt her mouth, and
said, she had not committed iniquity. Ephesians. 4.19.
Such were the Gentiles spoken of by the Apostle, past feeling; given to work
uncleanness with greediness; for, consuitudo peccandi, tollit sensum peccati,
5. Step. Desiderabile. Mich. 2.1. Amos 8.4, 5.
the custom of sin takes away all sense and feeling of sin: but let it yet
stay a while longer upon the soul, Or as those greedy Carnalists that did long
to have the new Moon past, and the Sabbath to be gone, that they might by a
small Ephah, and false deceitful weights, devours and swallow up the poor.
and it will grow desiderabile, thou will desire and long to commit
wickedness, as those pernicious ones in the Prophet Michah, which did invent
mischief upon their beds, and did practice it as soon as the morning was
light, to show their indearment unto wickedness: or as those cruel Jews
which did desire and long to destroy the Apostle Paul: or as wicked Herodias,
Act. 23.12. Mar. 6.19.
which did thirst to be revenged of John Baptist for reproving her abominable
incest: 6 Step, Defensibile. Esaias. 5.20.
but stay it yet a while longer upon the soul, and it will become defensibile,
thou will maintain and defend thy wickedness. Oh, this is a grievous estate,
and even an incurable misery, cursed by the holy Ghost, Woe to them that
speak good of evil, woe to them that defend sin and wickedness: oh, says
Origin, peccatum parta est mortis, defensio limen inferni, sin (even any
sin) is the gate of death, but the defense of it, is the (very next) step to
hell. Such was the condition of those rebellious Jews spoken of by the
Prophet, who being reproved for their Idolatry, Ier. 44.16.17.
insolently replied in the defense of their wickedness, We have followed
strange gods, and we will follow them still. Such were they, spoken of by the
Psalmist, who arrogantly in the defense of their unhallowed speeches,
proclaimed, Psalm. 12.4.
With our tongue we will prevail (we will speak fraudulently, falsely and
deceiptfully) our lips are ours (therefore we may speak what we please) who
is Lord over us? who shall control us for that we speak? But stay sin a
while longer upon the soul, and it will grow to the greatest height, 7. Step,
Ostentibile.
it will become ostentibile, thou will not only speak in the defense of
sin, but thou will boast and glory in it, seeking (as it were) praise and
commendation for thy wickedness. This is a very dangerous condition, oh, when
will these be cured? therefore the holy Ghost declames against such as
intolerable pernicious, Why boastest thou in thy wickedness? Such were those
spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 3.9.
who did declare their sins as Sodom; they did boast in their wickedness,
and glory in their mischief: therefore he concludes against them with a
grievous curse, Woe unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves. Such are many ungodly persons in these our times, they boast
themselves in their drunkenness, and glory in their adulteries, they vaunt in
their impostures, frauds, and deceits, and bless themselves in their base
impieties, as if sin were a virtue, and wickedness deserved praise, as if
there were no God to revenge, nor Hell to torment. And thus we see, if sin
be but a while lodged upon the soul, oh how it hardens the heart? into what a
grievous estate it brings it? Oh therefore, run we in due season, whilst
grace is offered, before our hearts become hardened: for, as the very Heathen
man can tell us, (...). Arist.
he that hardneth his heart can never be cured: These thoughts (says
Aquinas) can never be altered; for these (as the Apostle speaks) have gotten
to themselves (...), Romans 2.5.
a heart that cannot repent. Therefore says Bernard, Ber. l. 1. de conside. ad
Eug. cap. 1.
What is a hardened heart? oh, says he, a hardened heart is that, which is
neither cut by compunction, nor softened by godliness, nor moved with prayers,
nor yields to threatening, nor is any thing helped, but rather hardened by
chastening: An hard heart is that which is ungrateful to Gods benefits,
disobedient to his counsels, made cruel by his judgments, dissolute by his
allurements, unshamefast to filthiness, fearlesse to perils, uncourteous in
humane affairs, careless in things pertaining to God, forgetful of things
past, negligent in things present, improvident for things to come; oh what a
grievous estate is this! Therefore the Apostle gives this worthy exhortation,
Take heed, Heb. 3.12.13.
etc. lest there be in any of you a heart hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin. Sin is like a Cancker, it soon creepes and infects the soul, it
soon draws upon it the habit of evil: Philo. (...).
for custom (as Philo speaks) arises from a small beginning, and what then
follows, but an incorrigible hardened heart? Behold we therefore, how urgently
necessary it is, that we run opportune, in due season, whilst grace is
offered, before our hearts become hardened through the continuance in sin? oh
remember we, what that bright shining light John Baptist did proclaim, Now
(says he) is the axe laid to the root of the tree; and why may we not with
him conclude, Mat. 3.10.
that every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and
cast into the fire. Consider we the voice of the holy Ghost, it calls us to a
present conversion, Psalm. 95.7.8.
Today if you will hear his voice harden not your hearts. Oh, now is grace
offered, now are we invited unto this holy Race: if therefore we will not
harden our hearts, and, as the Prophet speaks, Jonah 2.8.
by waiting upon lying vanities forsake our own mercies; oh then, let us now,
in due season, whilst grace is offered, forsake the sink of our sins, and
bend our course unto the blessed state of Glory. For, how know we whether God
will ever extend his favorable mercy to us any more, but that rather for our
wilful and violent contempts of his compassionate love, he will leave us to
the hardness of our hearts? Me thinks (beloved in Christ Jesus) we should
never forget that remarkable example set down by our Savior in Saint Lukes
Gospel; Luke 14.24.
there we see was but one invitation, which being carelessly refused, oh behold
the conclusion, the Master of the feast does plainly witness, that none of
those shall taste of his supper, nor favor, nor mercy should ever be offered
to them more. How plainly is this expressed unto us in the foolish Virgins?
Matt. 25.5.
they had opportunity to have furnished their lamps with oil, but they (as we
are prone) sleeping in the dreggs of their evil, regardlesse of their estates,
carelessly and securely past it by: Ver. 12.
but what was the sequel? why, the door of mercy was shut against them for
ever; a definite sentence was pronounced upon them, I know you not: a doleful
voice, excluding all favor and mercy, including all woe and misery. We may
further see in the prophecy of Jeremy, Ier. 14.11.
that when the people had hardened their hearts, and contemptibly abused the
time of Gods mercy and favor, it so exasperated him, that he forbids the
Prophet so much as to pray to do that people good, and does plainly witness,
that by this their pravitie, his love was so withdrawn from them, Ier. 15.1.
that though Moses and Samuel stood before him (those two religious servants,
dear in his sight, that had obtained great matters from him, though these
stood before him, and should entreat for this people) yet his affection could
not be toward them.

Zachar. 7.9, 10
If we look into the prophecy of Zachary, we may there see that the Lord
offered that people mercy, he seriously exhorted them to turn from their
unhallowed courses, to execute judgment, to show mercy and compassion every
man to his brother, to oppress no more the widow, nor the fatherless, the
stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil in your heart. Verse
11.
But when they refused to hearken, when they pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears that they should not hear, Verse. 12.
when they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the
Law, Verse. 13.
etc. then came there great wrath from the Lord of hosts, then it came to
pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried and he would
not hear, etc. Yea, we clearly see that when Christ's mercy to Jerusalem was
refused, Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41.
who would have gathered them together as the Hen her Chickens, but they
would not; whose stubborn pertinacy, as it drew compassionate tears from his
blessed eyes, so it provoked him to denounce a final judgment against them,
Behold, your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Oh, remember we, it is
Gods own voice, Genesis 6.3.
My Spirit (says he) shall not always strive with man; he will not always
be offering mercy and favor; but if a man will not turn, he will whet his
sword, Psalm. 7.12.13.
he will bend his bow, etc. and will prepare for him deadly weapons. Oh then,
that we would be cautious to run in due season whilst grace is offered,
before our hearts become hardened in sin, and the gates of mercy shut against
us; though then we should roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves, though
then we should cry like the Pelican, and pierce the heavens with our skreekes
like the Ostritch, yet there would be no favor, no compassion: Genesis 25.33.34
profane Esau that more regarded a mess of pottage than a birth right, may
seek a blessing with tears and never find it. Heb. 12.17.
Oh therefore, as we respect our salvation, let us now run this holy Race in
due season whilst mercy is offered, whilst Christ does knock at the door of
our souls, before we be shut up in the hardness of our hearts.

And for this purpose prevent we sin in the very beginning thereof. Hieron.
Dum parvus est hostis interfice.
Oh (says Hierome) whilst the enemy is small, destroy him. We are wont to
say that thought is free, but we are mistaken; for, as Bernard worthily
speaks, Bern. in Cant. Malae cogitatationes dum ludunt, illudunt Ier. 4.14.
evil thoughts whilst they dally with us, they throw us down to destruction:
therefore for evil thoughts the Lord cries out against Jerusalem, How long
shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? and Solomon tells us, that evil
thoughts they are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.26. Wised. 1.3.
they separate from his Majesty. And no marvel; for, Greg. Mor. 6.
as Gregory speaks, omnis prius in cogitatione arescit, every one grows
first barren in his cogitation: for lodge an evil thought a while, and it
begets delight, delight begets consent, consent begets action, action begets
custom, Ier. 13.23. Acts 7.51.
custom begets hardness of heart, and hardness of heart makes us resist the
Spirit of God, and to pass by all mercy and favor; what then remains but
that preventing all slights of sin and Satan, we run opportune, in due
season, whilst grace is offered, before our hearts become hardened? And thus,
Beloved, we see the scope of the first point, that primitively as the chief
and principal, we be cautions to run in due season.

Secondly, for the subsequent things necessary in the form of this Race, four
things are specially remarkable: First, that we run ardenter, with an
earnest and a fervent zeal and resolution; not slowly, not coldly, not
luke-warmly; these God will spue out of his mouth: but like blessed David, Rev.
3.16. Psalm. 119.46.
who concludes he will speak of Gods testimonies before Kings, and will not
be ashamed. Oh how fervent was Eliah in this holy Race, when as to mainetaine
the glory of God, the honor of his Name, 1. King. 18.40. 1. King. 19.4.
and the reverence of his Worship, he slew all the Priests of Baal, and was
content to become as a banished man in the wilderness! Oh how fervent in this
course was religious Phineas, when as jealous of the honor of the Lord, Number.
25.8.
and to stay his revenging hand, he slew those idolatrous creatures, Zimri and
Cozbi, adulterators of the Worship of the true God! Number. 25.^.^.
How strongly fervent was godly Joshua in this kind, when as to maintain the
true Worship of the Lord, he burnt the groves, 2. King. 23.4.
overthrew the high places, and sacrificed the Idoll-Priests upon the altars?
But we may come to nearer times, where we may behold the blessed Apostles so
fervent in this kind, that no threats, nor menaces, Acts 4.17.18.
nor violence inflicted, could withdraw them from the promoting of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. And many instances might be given of far nearer times,
wherein the Saints of God have been so fervent in this Race, that no terror,
no death, Acts and Mon.
no not the cruellest death could ever remove them from this holy Race. But
strange are the times wherein we are fallen, when every little gust; Gust,
said I! alas we will endure no storms; nay, when every seeming profit, when
every seeming pleasure, when every brainsick humor, makes us step aside from
this holy Race; when we have so little zeal of Gods glory, that we can be
content to passe-by any wickedness whatsoever; when for gain or favor we
can be content to intercourse with any, be they never so open Atheists, be
they never so great enemies to Piety and Religion. But we may clearly see that
worthy David was of another mind; for he was able to make this Apology for
himself to God in the midst of great distress; Psalm. 26.4.5.
I have not haunted with vain persons, nor kept company with the dissemblers,
I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not companied with the wicked:
and in Psalm. 139. he cries out in the fervent zeal of his affection; Psalm.
139.19.
Oh that thou would slay the wicked, oh God, etc. which speak wickedly of
thee, Verse. 20.
thy enemies, which have lift up themselves in vain; and to show his special
fervency, that he did not this for any private respect of his own, but for
the glory of God, he emphatically proceeds, Do not I hate them, Verse. 21.
oh Lord, that hate thee? do not I earnestly contend with those that rise up
against thee? I hate them with an unfeigned heart as if they were mine enemies.
Verse. 22.
Oh holy and religious Prophet; rarely imitated in this our age. In a word, so
grievous are our times, that we may well say with the holy Apostle, 1. Cor.
15.32. Like Cyclops in Homer. (...).
We have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men: we have to do
with profane ones, strangely monstrous, which live as if there were no divine
Power, which deride and scorn all Gods judgments, which have no fear of his
sacred Majesty; for the wickedness of the wicked man has said in the midst of
my heart there is no fear of God before his eyes; Lucretius. Deus, illa, facit
Deus, optime Memmi, Depulit ex animo, qui mons^ra, metusque D^^ru^.
yet these some Lucretius will commend: for the world does love his own.
Again, we have to do with Sectaries, which will either have a Religion and a
God of their own devising, or else they will have none at all. We have to do
with Neuters, fit for any Religion, but truly affected to no Religion. But
what should I speak of these things? alas, obsequium amicos, veritas odium
parit, they seem to be of no value now a days, that do plainly and truly
confront Satan's kingdom: If they scarce touch the disease of sin, but do
rather guild over impiety, the world will proclaim as it were an Hosanna
presently; but let the ungodly be duly scourged for their profane abuse of
holy things, they will cry crucifige quickly. We need not go far for proof
of this: see we it not clear by experience that they are but contemptible,
that do content themselves with the simple truth, unless they mix it with
some dram of Schism, or Papisme, or Parasitisme, or one foul drugge or
another, seeking rather by policy to gain favor, and by new inventions vain
glory, than by sincerity to discharge a good conscience? Oh, such be our
dangerous times, such itching ears, such inconstant minds, such vertiginous
affections our age affords. But no marvel if these be no more fervent in the
ways of the Lord: Mat. 7.16.
Can men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? alas, what sweetness
in Sepulchers? what certainty in Camelions? what confidence in Sirens? But let
all those (beloved in Christ Jesus) that hope for a Crown of immortal glory:
Oh let these run fervently in this holy Race, as zealous of Gods glory, as
loving to his Majesty, as obedient to his truth, so pure and constant in their
affections, that in the fervent resolution of their hearts, they may say with
the blessed Apostle, That neither death, nor life, Romans 8.38.39.
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate
them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And thus we see,
Beloved, that as the first subsequent thing necessary in the form of this
Race, we must run fervently, with an earnest zeal and resolution.

Secondly, as the second subsequent thing necessary in the form of this Race,
Bernard.
we must run festinanter, speedily: for as Bernard speaks, vita brevis, via
longa^ our life is short, but the way is long; therefore we must use a speedy
course: as David worthily resolved, Psalm. 119.32. Interius vacui, Exterius
exonerati.
I will run (says he) the way of thy precepts. Now know we, that for this,
two things are specially necessary: That we become inwardly emptied, and
outwardly disburdned. First inwardly emptied of the heap and burden of our
sins and transgressions, daily lessening them more and more; Genesis 4.13. Mat.
27.5.
for sin is so heavy a weight it utterly overthrowes this spiritual Race.
Oh, this made Cain despair, and Judas to lay violent hands upon himself; yea
so heavy a burden is sin (though the world understand it not) that it made
blessed David himself cry out, Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities (says he) are gone over my head, and are as a grievous
burden made more heavy than I can bear: Oh they greatly hindered him in this
spiritual Race. Job 13.26.
This was Jobs case, which made him cry unto God, Thou writest bitter things
against me, Romans ^.24. (...).
thou makst me to possess the iniquities of my youth: yea, this heavy weight
so troubled the blessed Apostle Paul, that it made him grievously complain; Oh
man that I am, wearied with continual sightings, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? Therefore that we may run speedily in this holy
Race, we must endeavor to become inwardly emptied, daily lessening the heavy
weight and burden of our sins, else we shall never so run as to obtain.

Secondly, to run speedily, we must become outwardly disburthened, that is,
Luke 16.13. Gregory. Nil laboriosius, quam terrenis desideriis aestuare. Aug.
in Psalm. 122. Qui majora cupit, etc. Ad hoc accesserunt divitiae, ut egestas
cresceret. Aug. in Psalm. 137. Avaris ipsa foecunditas molesta est. Aug. in
Psalm. 29. Timoribus cruciantur, tristitia contabescunt. An insatiable worldling
carries always a kind of hell about him in his conscience.
from the earnest prosecution of terrene things; we cannot serve God and
Mammon, we cannot prosecute the world and run to obtain a heavenly kingdom:
Therefore says Gregory, There is nothing more laborious than to burn with
earthly desires; this is the most miserable poverty of all: for fertility and
plenty is a punishment unto these; for they are tormented with fears, and do
pine away with sorrow and anguish. Alas, the world is like to Judas, whom it
kisses, it cries out against him presently, This is he, lay hold on him; fill
him with cares and distractions, fears and horrors, let him taste of hell
before he come to hell. Now these thus affected (or rather infected) whither
tend all their passages? what is their daily labor? why to enlarge themselves
to get the earth in possession, to make their yongsters gallants of this age,
whom we may often see to consume prodigally, what their parents did get
miserably. But what a distressed condition is this? when will these so run as
to obtain a Crown of immortal glory? Alas this is impossible, until they
become disburthened of these terrene prosecutions. We may see in Matthewes
Gospel, Mat. 19.22.
that that yongue man would feign have followed Christ, but the world plucks
him utterly away, and makes him forsake that blessed Savior Christ Jesus.

Act. 8.20.
We may see in the Acts of the Apostles, Simon Magus would feign have been a
Religionist, but the world so clogged him, it wholly overthrew him. Saint Paul
does tell us, 2. Tim. 4.10.
that Demas began this Race, he gave his name to Christ, he was an associate
of the Apostles, he followed him in his travells, but this enchanting Paramour
the world it pulled him clean away, 2. Pet. 2.22.
to turn with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to wallow in the mire.
Therefore well might the Apostle call this snare, 1. Tim. 6.10.
the very root of all evil: well might Chrysostom declame against it, (...).
Oh common plague! oh deep destruction of men! for once ensnared in this
evil, they hardly or never get out of it to obtain a heavenly kingdom. Oh!
Mat. 19.24.
so hardly, that our Savior himself concludes it easier for a cable to pass
thorough the eye of a needle; which we know can never be but by great
untwining. Luke 19.7.
We may see that Zacheus was sometime thus burdened and ensnared: but when did
he break out from it? oh never, until he came to this resolution, Ver. 8.
Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; if I have taken from
any man by false accusation, Ver. 9.10.
I restore him fourefold: Lo then Christ concludes, This day salvation is come
unto this house: then he proclaims him to be the son of Abraham. Esaias 3.15.
Ier. 5.26.
Oh when will our greedy worldlings take this course, that live by usurie, and
oppression, by grinding the faces of the poor, These are hardly removed from
the outward act of these sins, much less from the inward affection of them,
and therefore are far from the integrity of restitution.
by laying snares and making pits to catch men? when will these make
restitution? nay, when will they be persuaded so much as to desist from the Act
and violent prosecution of these loathsome sins?

But let them know, and all other dull-hearted Christians, which have books in
their hands, and Christ in their mouths, but the world in their hearts, that
unless they run this holy Race, disburthened of terrene prosecutions, they
shall never run so speedily as to obtain, that is, a heavenly and a glorious
Kingdom. Thus we see, that as the second subsequent thing necessary in this
Race we must run festinanter, speedily, inwardly emptied of sin, outwardly
disburthened of terrene prosecutions.

Thirdly, as the third thing necessary, we must run patienter, patiently, that
so we may obtain. Oh this, it must be as it were the Anchor of a Christian
soul, Genesis 22.10.
to make it firm and steadfast against the high swelling waves of this world:
it must be as a Jacobs staff to help us to pass the jorden of this earthly
mansion; for many are the rocks, and rough the passages, incident in this way,
subject to hinder this spiritual Race. Gen 14.12.
It was no small obstacle that Lot did meet withal, when he was captivated
amongst the heathen, and all he had was taken from him. Oh how rough a way did
good Eliah meet withal, when he was so wearied in the passage of this Race,
1. King. 19 4.
that he vehemently desired an end of his days, crying out unto God, Oh it is
now enough, oh Lord take my soul, I am no better than my Fathers. Jonah 4.3.
Oh how rockie was that passage that Jonah meet withal in this Race, when he
was so perplexed that he ernestly entreated the Lord to take his life from him,
concluding it was better for him to dye than to live? Oh how stormy and full of
bitterness was that passage wherein the Prophet Jeremy was so wearied, Ier.
20.14. etc.
that he was forced into those deep imprecations, Cursed be the day wherein I
was borne, cursed be the man that showed my Father, a man child is borne unto
thee; Oh that my mother had been my grave, or her womb a perpetual
conception. Oh how great a need was here of patience, as an anchor, to
withstand the fury of this tempest? But most remarkable is that worthy example
of Job; Oh how many rocks did he meet withal, Job 1.
fiercely affronting him in this holy Race? all his goods taken from him, all
his children slain in a moment, Job 2.7.8.9.
his very wife offensive to him, his servants rebellious, his vital and
spiritual powers disturbed, Job 19.15.
his body disastered from the crown of the head unto the soale of the foot,
and which was most grievous, his neighbors contemned him, Job 19.19.
and his familiar friends became dangerous enemies, to accuse him for an
hypocrite, as a man rejected of God, to inthrall his soul in deep despair:
Oh rough and troublous passages! oh high and swelling rocks! but how climbes
he these? why patience, the attending handmaid of a lively faith, becomes his
stay and strong support, which made him thus to conclude amidst his many
miseries, Job 19.25. etc.
I am sure that my Redemer lives, and he shall at the last rise up upon the
earth, although after my skin the worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God
in my flesh, I shall behold him in me, mine eyes shall see him, and none other,
etc.

In a word, many are the rocks, and sinister the passages, hindering and
perplexing the Saints of God in this holy Race: within them they have inborne
corruptions, struggling and striving; without them they have Satan supplanting,
the world inducing, the ungodly, some seducing, some oppressing, some scoffing,
and contemning, all conspiring and combining to overthrow this Christian Race.
So that patience had need be the souls continual attendant to help her in
these deep distresses: for as the holy Ghost speaks, Psalm. 34.19.
Many are the tribulations of the righteous (but here is the comfort, to settle
in their souls the patient enduring of them) the Lord will deliver them out of
all. Psalm. 37.6.
Therefore says the blessed Prophet, Wait patiently upon the Lord, and he
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy just dealing as the
noone day; and he spoke it by good experience: Oh, says he, Psalm. 40.
I waited patiently upon the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry;
he drew me forth from the pit of perdition, from the lake of ruin, and set my
feet upon a rock, and ordered my goings. Let me therefore conclude unto you
with the worthy Apostle, Heb. 12.1.
Cast away (says he) every thing that presses down, and the sin that
hangs so fast on (and) let us run with patience the Race that is set before
us. A worthy instruction; oh let it be our direction, that so in the latest
period of this Race, we may be able (in the assurance of Gods love, and
comfortable testimony of our approaching happiness) to commend our souls into
the hands of God, to rest with him in true felicity for ever: And thus we see
(Beloved) that as the third subsequent thing necessary in this Race, we must
run patiently, that so we may obtain.

Lastly, as the last thing necessary for the full finishing and accomplishing
this Race, we must run perseveringly; for, as Hierome speaks, Not to begin,
Hieron. Non incipisse, sed perfecisse virtutis est.
but to perfect a thing, is truly virtuous. Therefore though many be the
obstacles of this Christian Race, yet the Saints of God will persevere; they
will, Alciat. in Epig. Nititur in pondus Palma, and consurgit in altum, Quo
magis and premitur, hoc mage, tollit onus. The Palm tree strives against (all)
weight, and rises up on hie, The more it is pressed, so much the more to yield it
does deny.
as David speaks, flourish like the Palm tree; (no pressures shall totally
suppress them) but they will grow as the The faithful are compared to the
Cedar, because of the validious enduring nature thereof, as not being subject
to rottenness, or to be worn out with age. Plin. lib. 13. Psalm. 92.12. Psalm.
84.7. Gen, 21.9. 2. Sam. 6.16.22* 1. Kin. 19.2.14. Dan. 3.19. Psalm. 16.5.6.
Cedar in Lebanon (that is, strongly and perseveringly) they will bring forth
fruit in their age: for, they are planted in the house of the Lord, etc. and
will go from strength to strength, until they see the God of gods in Sion.
Let therefore Ismaell scoff and contemn never so much, Isaac will persist in
piety and godliness, let profane Michol disdain at blessed David, yet he
will dance before the Ark of the Lord, to show his humility, fervency, and
alacrity in the service of his God: Nay, let wicked Iezabel threaten godly
Eliah, and bind it with a deep imprecation, The gods do so to me, and more
also, if I make not thy life like one of theirs by to morrow this time; yet he
will persevere in his holiness, and will still be jealous of the honor and
glory of the Lord. Let cruel Nebuchad-nezzar prepare an oven made seven times
hoter than ordinary custom, to consume Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, yet
they will never be withdrawn, but will still persist in the true worship of
God. Briefly, let the world and all the baits thereof compass about the true
servants of God, yet it can never totally remove them from the love and
obedience of the eternal God; for they will still say with holy David, The
Lord is our portion, he will maintain our lot, our lines are fallen unto us
in a pleasant place, we have a goodly heritage. This is the wisdom of the
Saints of God, engraven upon their souls by the Spirit of God, by which they
hold fast unto their God: for they know, that they which endure to the end,
they only shall be saved; Mat. 24.13. 1. Cor. 9.24. 2. Cor. 4.17.
they only run so as to obtain, that is, an eternal weight of glory. The
which heavenly wisdom, that we may run so perseveringly as to obtain that
glorious rest, the eternal Father be pleased plentifully to afford unto us,
for the precious merits of his dear Son Christ Jesus: To which Father and
Son, with their most holy Spirit, three persons and one God, be all praise,
power, and glory, of all creatures in heaven and in earth, from this time forth
for evermore.

(...)
FINIS.

