A Strange Report of Six most notorious Witches, who by their devilish
practices murdered above the number of four hundred small Children: besides the
great hurtes they committed upon diverse other people:

Who for the same, and many other like offenses, were executed in the princely
City of Manchen in high Germany the. 29. of July. 1600.

Printed at Nuremberge by Lucas Mayr Ingrauer, dwelling in Kramergesle: and now
translated out of Dutch, according to the same Copy there imprinted.



AT LONDON, Printed by W. W. for T. Pauier, dwelling at the sign of the Cat
and Parrets near the Exchange.

1601.

The strange Report of Six most notorious Witches.
THere is not any Christian (I am sure) but in heart will relent, and with
great admiration, lift up his eyes toward heaven, and stand amazed at the
wicked practices of six of the most notorious wicked Witches that ever they
heard of: who (giving both bodies and souls to eternal damnation) committed
so many inhumaine Murders, so many strange Robberies, Pillages, and Riottes;
spoiling both Corn and Cattle: causing strange hayle and tempest, and such
like annoyances to the inhabitants of Germany, that I think it a matter
worthy to be kept in memory, whereby the shameful end of such malafactors,
may serve as a notable example to our eyes, a grief to the godly, and a
terror to the wicked and reprobate people. The names of these vile offenders,
and of their wicked dealings, hereafter follows.

First, Paul Gamperle, alias Poppenhamor. Second, Anne Gamperle, wife to the
said Paul. their two Sons.
Third, Simon Gamperle, Fourth, Jacob Gamperle,
Fifth, Vllrich Seheltibaum, Armorour. Sixth, George Smallts, Tailor.
These six persons, being many years (before this) held in great suspicion
for practicing Witchcraft, yet not any sufficient proof thereof, were now
taken altogether, near to the Town of Dettwenge, in a Cave or Uault deep in
the ground, where many times before they had likewise met, and as they thought,
there to remain still secure from the knowledge of their neighbors, fell to
their accustomed practices: and by their Witchcraftes raised so great a storm
or tempest, that all the Towns and Uillages were greatly indamaged thereby:
But God not suffering these vile offenders to remain any longer undiscovered,
brought all their actions to light: and by the howling of a Dog stricken madd
with the fearefullnes of that tempest, certain of their neighbors were
brought to the said Cave or Uault, where they wear all six attached, and the
next day, being the. xxiiii. of July, were brought before the Governor of
Manchen, who finding them guilty by their examinations, commanded them to
prison.

But now mark what happened: the Governors Clarke or Secretary, when he
took paper in his hand to make a Warrant, sodaynely both his feet were taken
from him: by reason whereof he had such a fall, that the huckle bone of his
thigh was stricken out of joint, whereof within three days after he dyed.

Hereupon the Governor commanded them to be searched by his Officers, where
they found hidden under every one of their clothes next to their skins, a
bag of Swines dounge: which being taken away, stounke so fylthely, that no
man could endure the smell. And in Paul Gamperles boosome, (being their
principal, or ringleader) they found a devilish Book of Coniuration, and
the picture of a man made in Tin, holding in his hand a scrowle or writing,
containing these three words, Magoll, Cumath, Hellbeza: By the same, were so
plainly manifested their wicked practices, that they immediately confessed
(without any further trouble) all their murders and execrable feats that ever
they had committed in their life times, as it does well appear hereafter.

The Confession of Paul Gamperle.
Paul Gamperle, alias Poppenhamor, of the age of eight and fifty years,
confessed that he had used the practice of Witchcraft from his childhood, and
that he had bin trained up in the same by his old Graundmother, a woman dead
many years ago.

In like manner he confessed, that he had murdered in his time by Witchcraft
and sorcery, about the number of a hundred small children.

In like manner he confessed, that he had made lame and crooked ten of the
richest Citizens of Manchen, because they would not forgive him certain debts
he owed them.

In like manner he confessed, that by Witchcraft he had made away two of his
Uncles, to come by their goods.

In like manner he confessed ten Church-robberies, fifteen Murders by the high
ways side, robberies by night in Merchants* sellers by him self done four
and twenty several times: and that no lock nor door could withstand him,
but by Witchcraft he could make fly open.

Finally, he confessed that in his life time, he had by night fyered eight of
his neighbors houses, whereby were burned in their beds both men, women, and
children, to the number of sixteen: besides diverse other mischiefs by him
committed, to the great annoyances of the whole Country.

The Confession of Anne Gamperle.
ANne Gamperle his wife, of the age of threescore years, confessed that in her
life time, she had murdered likewise by Witchcraft to the number of a hundred
small children.

In like manner she confessed, that she had deformed and made crooked, and
withal murdered by Witchcraft, to the number of nineteen old people.

In like manner she confessed, that by Witchcraft she had caused an Inkeepers
wife to run into a hot burning Oven, where she burned her self to death:
and likewise caused the same woman's husband to be so miserably vexed, that he
thrust his head into a swilling Tubbe full of Swines meat, and there smothered
him self.

In like manner she confessed, that she had spoiled Cattle in great abundance,
with Corn upon the ground often times: and that she had set fire upon two Hey
stacks, which had fiered a whole Uillage, had not help of people prevented it.
From the like, God of his mercy deliver us all.

The Confession of Simon Gamperle.
SImon Gamperle their natural son, of the age of two and twenty years,
confessed that he had murdered by Witchcraft, to the number of thirty small
Children, beside six old folks which he likewise made crooked and lame, and
after killed.

Moreover he confessed, that he had committed nine Church robberies, four
robberies by the high way side, twelve robberies done in Merchants Warehouses:
Riot, and Pillage, committed by night six times: spoiled with Hayle and
Tempests Cattle and Grounds often times.

Moreover he confessed, that by Witchcraft he had made himself invincible, by
which means, he alone set upon six persons at a time, and robbed them, and
after killed them every one: with many other practices of theft and murder,
which here I omit.

The Confession of Jacob Gamperle.
Jacob Gamperle their other Son, of the age of one and twenty years,
confessed that he had murdered to the number of three score and five small
Children: beside five old folks that he had made lame and crooked, and after
murdered.

Moreover, he confessed five Church robberies, ten Robberies in Merchants
houses, four Robberies committed by the high way: five houses set on fire,
Ryots and Thefts by night in the streets, committed twelve several times.

Moreover he confessed, that by Witchcraft he had caused a heard of Cattle in
a Tempest to be blown into a river, and there drowned: and the said Tempest or
storm to be so violent, that Travelers could hardly travel by the high way:
with many other like wicked practices.

The Confession of Vllrich Sehelltibaum.
VLlrich Sehelltibaum of Dettwenge, of the age of three score and eight years,
confessed that in his life time, he had murdered by Witchcraft to the number
of three score and ten small children, and had made crooked and killed thirty
old folks.

Moreover, he confessed Robberies in Churches, and Merchants Sellars, thefts
and murders by night, Cattle and Grounds spoiled* in such abundance and so
often times, that he could not well reckon them.

The Confession of George Smaltes,
GEorge Smaltes Tailor of Peon, of the age of fifty years, confessed in his
life time he had murdered to the number of thirty six small Children, beside
old people made crooked and killed the number of fifteen: Murders by the high
way, Robberies in Uillages, Fireing of Houses, Robbing of Churches, I think it
needs not to number down: but to conclude, it was his custom above the rest,
to ransake by night dead men's graves, and to make pillage of what he there
found whether it were linen or otherwise: for badder livers then these six
were, I think are not now remaining upon the earth. Therefore let all
Christians pray, that God in his mercy may bless us and all others, from the
like practices: and to weed from the face of the earth all such like offenders
as he did these, and with the like shame and punishment reward them O God I
beseech thee.

These aforesaid confessions being taken before the Governor, and other
Burgesses of the City of Manchen, they were arraigned, convicted, and
condemned: and upon the nine and twenty of July were executed in this manner
and form following.

First, they were all six brought before the town house of Manchen, where the
Woman (being placst betwixt her two Sons) had both her Breasts cut off: with
the which Breasts, the Executioner stroke her three times about the face: and
in like manner her two Sons, who sat on each side of her, were likewise
beaten about the face with their mothers Breasts three times apeece. This
being done in the presence of many people, the Woman had six stripes given
her with a Whip of twisted Wier: and after, had both her Arms broken with a
Wheel, and then set in a settle made of purpose: her body was immediately burnt.

After this, the other five men-Witches, had also six stripes apeece, and both
their Arms likewise broken with a Wheel, and four of them tied unto a stake
in the same place, and burnt: But Paul Gamperle, the father and master Witch
of them all, was spitted alive, and so roasted to death, and after had his body
likewise burnt into sinders.

Thus gentle Reader, have thou heard the life and death of these six most
notorious and wicked Witches. For the truth whereof, let no man make doubt: for
it is not only reported of by many men of good sufficiency, but translated
out of the Dutch Copy as it was there first imprinted. Therefore let us all in
general, fall down upon our knees, and with contrite hearts, desire of his
Majesty, by whose sufferance all their wicked practices were committed, that
he will abate the pride and malice of Satan, now reigning amongst mankind,
and to put in our hearts such strong faith, that the like assaults never
assail us, but that we may serve him in perfect love and godliness, who is the
mighty Ring of all Kings: to whom be all praise, glory, and dominion, for
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

