THREE TREATISES OF

The Uanity of the Creature. The Sinfulness of Sin. The Life of Christ.
BEING THE SVBSTANCE OF SEVERAL SERMONS PREACHED AT LINCOLNS INN:

BY EDWARD REYNOLDES, PREACHER to that Honorable Society, and late Fellow of
Merton College in Oxford.

GAL. 2. 20. Not I, but Christ lives in me. LONDON, Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston for Robert Bostocke, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Kings Head. 1631.

HONORATISSIMO ET CELEBERRIMO DOCTISSIMORVM Iurisprudentium Collegio, Hospitij
Lincolniensis Magistris Uenerabilibus, Socijsque universis, Auditoribus suis
faventissimis,
EDWARDVS REYNOLDES EIDEM HETAERIAE A SACRIS CONCIONIBVS; Tres hosce Tractatus:

De Rerum Secularium vanitate. De Peccato supra modum peccante. De Christi in
Renatis vita ac vigore:
MINISTERII IBIDEM SVI (...) quaedam, Exile quidem and perexiguum, perpetuae
tamen observantiae, Summaeque in Christo Dilectionis pignus, Humiliter and
Devote D. D. D.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The first Treatise. The Vanity of the Creature. ECCLES. 1. 14.
PRoportion and Propriety the grounds of satisfaction to the soul. Page 3 The
Creature insufficient to satisfy the Desires of the soul. 4 The Ground
hereof* The vast disproportion between the soul and the Creature. 7 The
Creature vain, 1. in its nature and worth. 9 Therefore we should not trust in
it, nor swell with it. 11 The Creature vain, 2. in its deadness and
inefficacie. 15 Therefore we should not rely on it, nor attribute sufficiency
to it. 19 How to use the Creature as a dead Creature: 1. Consider its
dependence and subordination to Gods power. 22 2. Sanctify and reduce it to
its primitive goodness. 24 How the Creature is sanctified by the word and
prayer. 26
3. Love it in its own order. 34
The Creature vain, 3 in its duration. 36 The Roots of Corruption in the
Creature. 38 Corrupt minds are apt to conceive an immortality in earthly
things. 46 The proceedings of Gods providence in the dispensation of earthly
things wise and just. 48 Correctives to be observed in the use of the Creature.
1. Keep the intellectuals sound and untainted. 52 2. By faith look through
and above them. 55 3. Convert them to holy uses. 58
Great disproportion between the soul and the Creature. It is vexation of
spirit. 59 Caresare Thorns, because, first, they wound the spirit, secondly,
they choke and overgrow the heart, thirdly, they deceive, fourthly, they
vanish. 59 Degrees of this vexation: 1. In the procuring of them. 62 2. In the
multiplying of them, 64 3. In the use of them. Discovered, 67 1. In knowledge,
natural and civil. 68 2. In Pleasures. 70 3. In Riches. 72
4. In the Review of them. 74 5. In the disposing of them. 75
The Grounds of this vexation: 1. Gods Curse. 76 2. The Corruption of nature.
78 3. The deceitfulness of the Creature. 80
It is lawful to labor and pray for the Creature, though it vex the spirit.
84 We should be humbled in the sight of sin which has defaced the Creation.
86 We should be wise to prevent those cares which the Creatures are apt to
breed. 89 Irregular cares are both superfluous, and sinful. 90 How to take
away or prevent Vexation: 1. Pray for that which is convenient to thy abilities
and occasions. 94 2. Take nothing without Christ. 95 3. Throw out every
execrable thing. 97 4. Keep the spirit untouched, and uncorrupted. 98
What it is to set the heart on the Creature. 99 The spirit is the most tender
and delicate part of man. 100 A heart set on the world is without strength^
Passive or Active: 1. Unable to bear temptations: 1. Because Satan
proportioneth temptations to our lusts. 101 2. Because temptations are edged,
with promises and threatenings. 105 3. God often gives wicked me^ over to
believe lies. 107
2. Unable to bear afflictions. 108 3. Unable to perform any active obedience
with strength 110
How to use the Creature as a vexing Creature. 113
The second Treatise. The sinfulness of Sin.ROMANS 7. 9.
Natural light not sufficient to understand the Scriptures. 118 How the
Commandment came to Saint Paul, and how he was formerly without it. 119 A man
may have the Law in the Letter, and be without it in the Power and Spirit. 121
Ignorance does naturally beget blind zeal, and strong misperswasions. 122
Saving knowledge is not of our own fetching in. The Spirit by the Commandment
convinces a man to be in the state of sin. 123 Nature teaches some things,
but it cannot thoroughly convince. 125 The Spirit convinces: first, by opening
the Rule, which is the Law. 129 The strength of sin twofold to Condemn us.
Operate or stir in us.
It has the strength of a Lord. 129 Husband. 129
How sin has its life and strength from the Law by the Obligation. of it.
130 Irritation. of it. 130 Conviction. of it. 130
The Spirit by the Commandment convinces us, 1. Of Original sin; either
imputed, as Adams sin. 134 Or inherent, as the corruption of Nature. 135

In natural corruption consider, 1. The universalitie of it in Times. 136
Persons. 136 Parts. 136
Corruption of the Mind. 139 the Conscience and Heart. 140 the Will. 141 the
Memory and whole man. 142

2. The closeness and adherency of it to nature. 143 How the body of sin is
destroyed in this life. 144 Why God suffers the remainders of corruption in
us. 147
3. The contagion of it on our best works. 149 4. The fruitfulness of it
bringing fruit suddenly. 151 continually. 151 desperately. 151 unexpectedly. 151
5. The temptations of it. 155 6. The war and rebellion of it. 157 7. The
wisdom and policies of it. 161 8. The strength and power of it. 164 9. The
madness of it, and that twofold: 1. Fierceness and rage. 167 2.
Inconsiderateness and inconsistency of reason. 184
10. The indefatigablenesse of it. 185 Being natural and 186 Unsatisfiable. 188

11. The propagation of it. 193
The great error of those who either mitigate* or deny original sin. 199 In
our humiliations for sin we should begin with our evil nature. 212 We should
be jealous of our selves and our evil hearts. 213 We should hold war with
our corruptions. 215 We should be patient under the weight of our
concupiscence. 216 Wherein the strength of lust lies. 218 How to withstand
concupiscence in all the ways thereof. 221 The Spirit by the Commandment
convinces us, 2. Of actual sin, with the several aggravations thereof. 226
The Spirit convinces, 2. by discovering the condition of the state of sin.
1. It is an estate of extreme impotency to good, 233 because of our natural
Impuritie. 234 Enmity. 234 Infidelity. 234 Folly. 234


In the wicked there is a total impotency. 237 Whether all the works of
natural men are sinful. 237 How God rewards the good works of wicked men.
244 How the good works of wicked men proceed from Gods Spirit. 245 Whether a
wicked man ought to omit his alms, prayers, and religious services? 246 In the
best there is a partial impotency. 250 What a man should do when he finds
himself disabled and deaded in good works. 253 2. It is an estate of extreme
enmity against God and his ways. 255
How the spirit by the Commandment does convince men to be in the state of
sin. 258 The spirit by the commandment convinces men to be under the guilt
of sin. 260
There is a natural conviction of the guilt of sin: and 260 There is a
spiritual and evangelicall conviction of the guilt of sin. 261 What the
guilt and Punishments of sin are. 262 ROMANS 6. 12.
Sin will abide in the time of this mortal life in the most Holy. 273 Our
death with Christ unto sin is a strong argument against the reign of it. 275
Difference between the regal and tyrannical power of Sin. 277 Whether a
man belong unto Christ or sin. 279 Sin has much strength from it self.
282 from Satan and the world. 285 from us. 285
What it is to obey sin in the lusts thereof. 286 Whether sin may Reign in
a regenerate man? 288 How wicked men may be convinced, that sin does reign
in them. Two things make up the reign of sin.
1. In sin power. 290 2. In the sinner a willing and uncontrolled subjection.
290
Three exceptions against the evidence of the reign of sin in the wicked.
291 1. There may be a reign of sin when it is not discerned. 292 Whether
small sins may reign? 293 Whether secret sins may reign? 294 Whether sins
of ignorance may reign? 295 Whether natural concupiscence may reign? 296
Whether sins of omission may reign? 296
2. Other causes besides the power of Christ's Grace may work a partial
abstinence from sin, and conformity in service: 1. The power of restraining
grace. 298
Differences between restraining and renewing Grace:
2. Affectation of the credit of godliness. 302 3. The Power of pious
education. 304 4. The legal power of the word. 305 5. The power of a natural
illightned Conscience. 305 6. Self love and particular ends. 307 7. The
antipathy and contradiction of sins. 309
3. Differences between the conflicts of a natural and spiritual conscience:
1. In the Principles of them. 310 2. In their seats and stations. 313 3. In
the manner and qualities of the conflict. 314 4. In their effects. 316 5. In
their ends. 317

Why every sin does not reign in every wicked man. 317
2. COR. 7. 1.
The Apostles reasons against Idolatrous communion. 321 The doctrine of the
pollution of sin. 322 The best works of the best men mingled whith
pollution. 325 The best works of wicked men full of pollution. 237 What the
pollution of sin is. 328 The properties of the pollution of sin: 1. It is a
deep pollution. 329 2. It is an universal Pollution. 330 3. It is a spreading
Pollution. 330 4. It is a mortal Pollution. 332
Why God requires that of us which he works in us. 335 How promises tend to
the duty of cleansing ourselves: 1. Promises contain the matter of rewards,
and so presuppose services. 337 2. Promises are efficient causes of
purification: 1. As tokens of Gods love. Love the ground of making, fidelity of
performing Promises. 338 2. As the grounds of our hope and expectations. 340 3.
As objects of our faith. 342 4. As the rays of Christ to whom they lead us.
345 5. As exemplars, patterns, and seeds of purity. 346
3. Many promises are made of purification itself. 347
Rules directing how to use the Promises: 1. General Promises are
particularly, and particulars generally appliable. 350 2. Promises are
certain, performances secret. 352 3. Promises are subordinated, and are
performed with dependence. 357 4. Promises most useful in extremities. 359 5.
Experience of God in some promises confirms faith in others. 360 6. The same
temporal blessing may belong to one man only out of providence, to another
out of promise. 361 7. Gods promises to us must be the ground of our prayers to
him. 364

ROMANS 7. 13.
The Law is neither sin nor death. 368 The Law was promulgated on Mount Sina
by Moses only with Evangelicall purposes. 371 God will do more for the
salvation, then for the damnation of men. 372 The Law is not given ex primaria
intention to condemn men. 385 The Law is not given to justify or save men.
386 The Law by accident does irritate, and punish or curse sin. 386 The Law
by itself does discover and restrain sin. 387 Preaching of the Law
necessary. 388 Acquaintance with the Law strengthens Humility, Faith, Comfort,
Obedience. 392

The third Treatise. The Life of Christ. 1. IOH. 5. 12.
ALL a Christians excellencies are from Christ. 400 1. From Christ we have our
life of righteousness. 401 Three Offices of Christ's mediatorship. His Payment
of our debt. 401 Purchase of our inheritance. 401 Intercession. 401
Righteousness consists in remission and adoption. 402 By this Life of
righteousness we are delivered from 1. Sin. 403 2. Law, as a Covenant of
righteousness. Law full of Rigor. Curses. Bondage.


2. From Christ we have our life of holiness. 407 Discoveries of a vital
operation. 407 Christ is the Principle of our holiness. 409 Christ is the
pattern of holiness. 410 Some works of Christ imitable, others unimitable.
410

Holiness bears conformity to Christ's active obedience. 412 How we are said
to be holy, as Christ is holy. 413 Holiness consists in a conformity unto
Christ. Proved from 1. The ends of Christ's coming. 415 2. The nature of
holiness. 416 3. The quality of the mystical body of Christ. 418 4. The
unction of the Spirit. 418 5. The sum of the Scriptures. 419
The proportions between our holiness and Christ's must be, 1. In the seeds
and principles. 419 2. In the ends, Gods glory, the Churches good. 420 3. In
the parts. 4. In the manner of it. Self-denial. 421 Obedience. 422
Proficiencie. 423

What Christ has done to the Law for us. 423 We must take heed of
will-holinesse, or being our own Rule. 425 Christ's life the Rule of ours. 427
3. From Christ we have our life of glory. 429 The attributes or properties of
our Life in Christ: 1. It is a hidden life. 432 2. It is an abounding life. 437
3. It is an abiding life. 438
No forrsigne assult is too hard for the life of Christ* 439 Arguments to
reestablish the heart of a repenting sinner against the terror of some great
fall, from 1. The strength of Faith. 442 2. The love and free grace of God. 446
3. Gods Promise and covenant. 448 4. The obsignation of the spirit. 449 5. The
nature and effects of Faith. 449

THE VANITY OF THE CREATVRE, AND VEXATION OF THE SPIRIT:

By EDWARD REYNOLDS, Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolns Inn.

PAX OPVLENTIAM. SAPIENTIA PACEM.
FK

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Bostock. 1631.

Christian Reader, Importunity of Friends has overruled me to this
Publication; and importunity of business crossing me in the putting of these
pieces together, has made the whole savor of my distractions, and caused more
escapes in the Print, then otherwise should have been. The principal I have
here corrected; those which are smaller may in the reading be easily discerned.

Page 92. line 17. for Jeroboam, read Iehosaphat* p. 122. l. 16. f. dependant,
r. dependence. p. 130. l. 16* f. hastened, r. hartned. p. 134. l. 21. f.
enticeth, r. entitleth. p. 140. l. 14. f. bow, r. bough. p. 148. l. 9. f. he, r
me. p. 159. l. 33. f. honor in, r, honor of God in. p. 167. l. 6. blot out
the. p. 212. l. 15. leave out these. p. 278. l. 20. f. rageing r. reigning. p.
295. l. 18. f. darkness, r. dark. p. 299 l. 28. f. possessions, r. passions.
p. 355. l. 16. f. we, r. he. p. 401. l. 34. f. fulfill, r. fulfild. p. 405. l.
26. f. terrifire, r. testifies. p. 407. l. 27. f. discourses, r. discoveries.
p. 434. l. 23. after, even as we are known. add, Secondly, in regard of
accomplishment and consummation. p. 440. l. 33. f. reject, r. eiect. p. 442. l.
16. f. that faith, or made unable, r. faith, or made that unable. p. 464. l.
34. f. it, r. them. p. 484. l. 34. f. as, r. was. p. 485. l. 19. f. conviction.
r. conclusion. p. 487. l. 26. f. were, r. wear. p. 501. l. 11. f. the, r.
these.

THE VANITY OF THE CREATVRE.
ECCLESIASTES 1. 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the sun,
and Behold, All is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.
TO have a selfe-sufficiencie in being and operation, and to be unsubordinate
to any further End above himself, as it is utterly repugnant to the Condition
of a Creature, so amongst the rest to Man especially; who besides the
limitednesse of his nature, as he is a Creature, has contracted much
deficiencie and deformity as he is a Sinner. God never made him to be an End
unto himself, to be the Center of his own motions, or to be happy only by
reflection on his own excellencies. Something still there is without him, unto
which he moves, and from whence God has appointed that he should reap either
preservation in, or advancement and perfection unto his nature. What that is
upon which the desires of man ought to fix as his Rest and End, is the maine
discovery that the Wise Man makes in this Book. And he does it by an
historical and penitential review of his former Enquiries; from whence he
states the point in Two maine Conclusions. The first the Creatures
Insufficiency, in the beginning of the Book, Vanity of Vanities, All is
vanity. The second Man's Duty to God, and Gods All-sufficiencie unto man, in the
End of the Book, Let us hear the Conclusion Eccles. 12. 13.
of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is Totum
hominis, the whole Duty, the whole End, the whole Happiness of Man. The former
of these two, namely the Insufficiency of the Creature to satiate the desires,
and quiet the motions of the Soul of man, is the point I am now to speak of,
out of these words.

For understanding whereof, we must know that it was not God in the Creation,
but sin and the curse which attended it, that brought this Vanity and
Vexation upon the Creature. God made Every thing in it self very Good, and
therefore very fit for the desires of man some way or other to take
satisfaction from. As pricks, and quauers, and rests in music serve in their
order to commend the cunning of the Artist, and to delight the Ear of the
hearer, as well as more perfect notes: so the meanest of the Creatures were at
first filled with so much goodness, as did not only declare the glory of God,
but in their rank likewise minister content to the mind of man. It was the
sin of man that filled Romans 8. 20, 22.
the Creature with Vanity, and it is the Vanity of the Creature that fills the
Soul of man with Vexation. As Romans 3. 23.
sin makes man come short of Glory, which is the rest of the Soul in the
fruition of God in himself; so does it make him come short of Contentation
too, which is the rest of the Soul in the fruition of God in his Creatures.
Sin took away Gods favor from the Soul, and his Blessing from the
Creature. It put bitterness into the Soul that it cannot relish the Creature,
and it put Vanity into the Creature, that it cannot nourish nor satisfy the
Soul.

The Desires of the Soul can never be satisfied with any Good, till they find
in it these two qualities or relations, wherein indeed the formalitie of
Goodness does consist; namely Proportion and Propriety. First nothing can
satisfy the desires of the Soul till it bears convenience and fitness
thereunto; for it is with the mind as with the body, the richest attire that
is if it be either too loose or too strait, however it may please a man's
pride, must needs offend his body. Now nothing is Proportionable to the mind
of man, but that which has reference unto it as it is a spiritual Soul. For
though a man have the same sensitive appetites about him which we find in
beasts; yet, in as much as that Appetite was in man created subordinate unto
reason, and obedient to the spirit; the case is plain, that it can never be
fully satisfied with its object, unless that likewise be subordinate and
linked to the Object of the superior faculty, which is God. So then the
Creature can never be Proportionable to the Soul of Man, till it bring God
along with it. So long as it is empty of God, so long must it needs be full of
Vanity and Vexation.

But now it is not sufficient that there be Proportion, unless withal there
be Propriety. For God is a Proportionable Good unto the nature of devils as
well as of men or good angels, yet no good comes by that unto them, because he
is none of their God, they have no interest in him, they have no union unto
him. Wealth is as commensurate unto the mind and occasions of a beggr as of a
prince; yet the goodness and comfort of it extends not unto him, because he
has no propriety unto any. Now sin has taken away the Propriety which we
have in Good, has unlinked that golden chain, whereby the Creature was joined
unto God, and God with the Creature came along unto the mind of man. So that
till we can recover this Union, and make up this breach again, it is
impossible for the Soul of man to receive any satisfaction from the Creature
alone. Though a man may have the possession of it, as a Naked Creature, yet not
the fruition of it, as a Good Creature. For Good the Creature is not unto any
but by virtue of the Blessing and Word accompanying it. And man naturally has
no right unto the Blessing of the Creature; for it is Godliness which has the
Promises, and by consequence the Blessing as well of this as of the other life.
And God is not in his favor reconciled unto us, nor reunited by his Blessing
unto the Creature, but only in and through Christ. So then the mind of a man
is fully and only satisfied with the Creature, when it finds God and Christ
together in it: God making the Creature suitable to our inferior desires, and
Christ making both God and the Creature Ours; God giving Proportion, and Christ
giving Propriety.

These things thus explained, let us now consider the Insufficiency of the
Creature to confer, and the Vnsatisfiablenesse of the flesh to receive any
solid or real satisfaction from any of the works which are done under the
Sun. Man is naturally a proud Creature, of high projects, of unbounded
desires, ever framing to himself I know not what imaginary and fantastical
felicities, which have no more proportion unto real and true contentment, then
a king on a stage to a king on a throne, then the houses which children make of
cards, unto a princes palace. Ever since the fall of Adam he has an itch in
him to be a god within himself, the fountain of his own goodness, the
contriver of his own sufficiency; loath he is to go beyond himself, or what
he thinks properly his own, for that in which he resolves to place his
rest. But alas, after he has toiled out his heart, and wasted his spirits, in
the most exact inventions that the Creature could minister unto him, Solomon
here, the most experienced for inquiry, the most wise for contrivance, the
most wealthy for compassing such earthly delights, has, after many years
sitting out the finest flower, and torturing nature to extract the most
exquisite spirits, and purest quintessence, which the varieties of the
Creatures could afford, at last pronounced of them all, That they are Vanity
and vexation of spirit: Like Thorns, in their gathering they prick, that is
their Uexation, and in their burning they suddenly blaze and waste away, that
is their Uanitie. Vanity in their duration, frail and perishable things; and
Vexation in their enjoyment, they nothing but molest and disquiet the heart.
The eye, says Solomon, is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing. Notwithstanding they be the widest of all the senses, can take in more
abundance with less satiety, and serve more immediately for the supplies of
the reasonable Soul, yet a man's eye-strings may even crack with vehemency of
poring, his ears may be filled with all the variety of the most exquisite
sounds and harmonies, and lectures in the world, and yet still his Soul within
him be as greedy to see and hear more as it was at first. Who would have
thought that the favor of a prince, the adoration of the people, the most
conspicuous honors of the court, the liberty of utterly destroying his most
bitter adversaries, the sway of the stern and universal negotiations of
state, the concurrency of all the happiness, that wealth, or honor, or
intimatenesse with the prince, or Deity with the people, or extremity of
luxury could afford, would possibly have left any room or nooke in the heart
of Haman for discontent? and yet do but observe, how the want of one Jews
knee (who dares not give divine worship to any but his Lord) blasts all his
other glories, brings a damp upon all his other delights, makes his head hang
down, and his mirth wither: so little leaven was able to sour all the Queens
banquet, and the Kings favor. Ahab was a king, in whom therefore we may
justly expect a confluence of all the happiness which his dominions could
afford; a man that built whole cities, and dwelt in Ivorie palaces, and yet the
want of one poor Vineyard of Naboth brings such a heaviness of heart, such a
deadness of countenance on so great a person, as seemed in the judgment of
Iezabel far unbeseeming the honor and distance of a prince. Nay Solomon, a
man every way more a king both in the mind and in the state of a king then
Ahab, a man that did not use the Creature with a sensual, but with a critical
fruition, To find out that good which God had given men under the sun, and
that in such abundance of all things, learning, honor, pleasure, peace,
plenty, magnificence, fortaine supplies, royal visits, noble confederacies, as
that in him was the pattern of a complete prince beyond all the plat-formes
and Ideas of Plato and Zenophon; and yet even he was never able to repose his
heart upon any or all these things together, till he brings in the fear of the
Lord for the close of all. Lastly, look on the people of Israel; God had
delivered them from a bitter thraldom, had divided the sea before them, and
destroyed their enemies behind them, had given them bread from heaven, and fed
them with angels food, had commanded the rock to satisfy their thirst, and
made the Cananites to melt before them; his mercies were magnified with the
power of his miracles, and his miracles crowned with the sweetness of his
mercies, besides the assurance of great promises to be performed in the holy
land: and yet in the midst of all this we find nothing but murmuring and
repining. God had given them meat for their faith, but they must have meat for
their lust too; it was not enough that God showed them mercies, unless his
mercies were dressed up and fitted to their palate, They tempted God, and
limited the holy one of Psalm. 78. 41.
Israel, says the Prophet. So infinitely unsatisfiable is the fleshly heart of
man either with mercies or miracles, that bring nothing but the Creatures to it.

The ground whereof is the Vast disproportion which is between the Creature
and the soul of man, whereby it comes to pass, that it is absolutely
impossible for one to fill up the other. The soul of man is a substance of
unbounded desires: and that will easily appear if we consider him in any
estate, either Created or Corrupted. In his Created estate he was made with a
Soul capable of more glory, then the whole earth or all the frame of nature,
though changed into one Paradise, could have afforded him: for he was fitted
unto so much honor as an infinite and everlasting Communion with God could
bring along with it. And now God never in the Creation gave unto any Creature a
propercapacitie of a thing, unto which he did not withal implant such motions
and desires in that Creature as should be some what suitable to that capacity,
and which might (if they had been preserved entire) have brought man to the
fruition of that Good which he desired. For notwithstanding it be true, That
the glory of God cannot be attained unto, by the virtue of any action which man
either can, or ever could have performed: yet God was pleased out of Mercy,
for the magnifying of his name, for the Communicating of his glory, for the
advancement of his Creature, to enter into Covenant with man, and for his
natural obedience to promise him a supernatural reward. And this, I say, was
even then out of Mercy; in as much as Adams legal obedience of works could
no more in any virtue of its own, but only in Gods merciful contract and
acceptance, merit everlasting life, then our Evangelicall Obedience of faith
can now. Only the difference between the mercy of the first and second
Covenant (and it is a great difference) is this. God did out of mercy propose
Salvation unto Adam as an Infinite Reward of such a finite Obedience, as Adam
was able by his own created abilities to have performed. As if a man should
give a Day-laborer a hundred pound for his days work, which perform indeed
he did by his own strength, but yet did not merit the thousandth part of that
wages which he receives: But Gods mercy untous is this, That he is pleased to
bestow upon us not only the reward, but the work and merit which procured the
reward, that he is pleased in us to reward another man's work, even the work
of Christ our head; as if when one only Captain had by his wisdom
discomfited and defeated an enemy, the prince notwithstanding should reward
his alone service, with the advancement of the whole army which he led. But
this by the way. Certain in the mean time it is, that God created man with
such capacities and desires, as could not be limited with any or all the
excellencies of his fellow and finite Creatures.

Nay look even upon Corruptednature, and yet there we shall still discover
this restlesnesse of the mind of man, though in an evil way, to promote it
self: whence arise distractions of heart, thoughts for to morrow, rovings and
inquisitions of the soul after infinite varieties of earthly things, swarms
of lusts, sparkles of endless thoughts, those secret flowings, and ebbes, and
tempests, and Estuations of that sea of corruption in the heart of man, but
because it can never find any thing on which to rest, or that has room
enough to entertain so ample and so endless a guest? Let us then look a
little into the particulars of that great disproportion and Insufficiency of
any or all the Creatures under the sun to make up an adequate and suitable
Happiness for the soul of man.

Solomon here expresses it in Two words, Vanity and Uexation. From the first
of these we may observe a threefold disproportion between the Soul and the
Creatures. First in regard of their nature and worth, they are base in
comparison of the Soul of man: When David would show the infinite distance
between God and man in power and strength, he expresses the baseness of man
by his vanity, To be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then
vanity. Psalm. 62. 9. And surely if we weigh the Soul of man and all the
Creatures under the Sun together, we shall find them lighter then Vanity it
self. All the Goodness and honor of the Creature arises from one of these
Two grounds: Either from man's coining or from Gods, either from Opinion imposed
upon them by men, or from some Real qualities, which they have in their
nature. Many things there are which* have all that worth and estimation which
they carry amongst men, not from their own qualities, but from humane
institution, or from some difficulties that attend them, or from some other
outward Imposition. When a man gives money for meat, we must not think there
is any natural proportion of worth between a piece of silver and a piece of
flesh; for that worth which is in the meat is its own, whereas that which is
in the money is by humane appointment. The like we may say for great titles of
honor and secular degrees, though they bring authority, distance, reverence
with them from other men, yet notwithstanding they do not of themselves, by
any proper virtue of their own, put any solid and fundamental merit into the
man himself. Honor is but the raising of the rate and value of a man, it
carry, nothing of substance necessarily along with it: as in raising the
valuations of gold from twenty shillings, to twenty two, the matter is the
same, only the estimation different. It is in the Power of the king to raise a
man out of the prison like Joseph, and give him the ^^xt place unto himself.
Now this then is a plain argument of the great baseness of any of these
things incomparison of the Soul of man, and by consequence of their great
disability to satisfy the same: for can a man make any thing equal to
himself? can a man advance a piece of gold or silver into a reasonable, a
spiritual, an eternal substance? A man may make himself like these things,
he may debase himself into the vileness of an Idol, They that make them are
like unto them; he may under-value and uncoyne himself, blot out Gods Image
and Inscription, and write in the image and inscription of earth and Satan, he
may turn himself into brass and iron and reprobate silver, as the Prophet
speaks; but never can any man raise the Creatures by all his estimations to
the worth of a man: we cannot so much as change the color of a hair or add a
cubite to our stature, much less can we make any thing of equal worth with
our whole selves. We read indeed of some which have sold the righteous, and
that at no great rate neither, for a pair of shoes. Joel 3. 6. Amos 2. 6. but
we see there how much the Lord abhorred that detestable fact, and recompensed
it upon the neck of the oppressors. How many men are there still that set
greater rates upon their own profits, or liberty, or preferments, or secular
accommodations, then on the Souls of men, whose perdition is oftentimes the
price of their advancements? but yet still Saint Paul's rule must hold, For
meat^ destroy not the work of God, for money betray Romans 14. 15. 20.
not the blood of Christ, destroy not him with thy meat, with thy dignities,
with thy preferments, for whom Christ died. We were not redeemed with silver
and gold from our vain Conversation, says the Apostle 1. Pet. 1. 18. and
therefore these things are of too base a nature to be put into the balance
with the souls of men; and that man infinitely undervalues the work of God*
the Image of God, the blood of God, who for so base a purchase as money, or
preferment any earthly and vainglorious respect does either hazard his own,
or betray the Souls of others commended to him.

And therefore this should reach all those upon whom the Lord has bestowed a
greater portion of this Opinionative felicity, I mean, of money, honor,
reputation, or the like; First not to Trust in uncertain Riches, not to rely
upon a foundation of their own laying for matter of Satisfaction to their
Soul, nor to boast in the multitude of their riches, as the Prophet speaks,
Psalm. 49. 6. (for that is certainly one great effect of the Deceitfulness of
Riches, spoken of Matthew. 13. 22. to persuade the Soul that there is more in
them then indeed there is) and the Psalmist gives an excellent reason in the*
same place, No man can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a
ransom for him, for the Redemption of their Soul is Precious.

And secondly, it may teach them as not to Trust, so not to Swell with these
things neither. It is an argument of their windiness and emptiness that they
are apt to make men swell; whereas if they cannot change a hair of a man's
head, nor add an inch to his stature, they can much less make an accession of
the least dram of merit, or real value to the owners of them. And surely if
men could seriously consider, That they are still members of the same common
body, and that of a twofold body, a civil and a mystical body, and that
though they happily may be the more honorable parts in one body, yet in the
other they may be the less honorable; that the poor whom they despise may in
Christ's body have a higher room then they (as the Apostle says, Has not God
chosen the poor in this world, Rich in faith, Iam. 2. 5.) I say, if men could
compare things rightly together, and consider that they are but the greater
letters in the same volume, and the poor the smaller, though they take up more
room, yet they put no more matter nor worth into the word which they compound,
they would never suffer the tympanie and inflation of pride or
superciliousnesse, of selfe-attributions, or contempt of their meaner brethren
to prevail within them. We see in the natural body though the head have a
Hat on of so many shillings price, and the foot a Shoe of not half so many
pence, yet the head does not therefore despise the foot, but is tender of it,
and does derive influence as well unto that as to any nobler part: and surely
so should it be amongst men, though God have given thee an Eminent station in
the body, clothed thee with purple and scarlet, and has set thy poor
neighbor in the lowest part of the body, and made him conversant in the dirt,
and content to cover himself with leather, yet you are still members of the
same common body, animated with the same spirit of Christ, molded out of the
same dirt, appointed for the same inheritance, borne out of the same Ex eodem
utero ignorantiae. Tertul.
womb of natural blindness, partakers of the same great and precious promises
(there was not one price for the Soul of the poor man, and another for the
rich, there is not one table for Christ's meaner guests, and another for his
greater, but the faith is a Tit. 1. 4.
Common faith, the salvation a Iud. verse 3.
Common salvation, the Gal. 3. 16. Phil. 3. 16.
rule a Common rule, the Ephesians. 4 4.
hope a Common hope, one Lord, and one Spirit, and one Baptism, and one God
and Father of all; and 1. Cor. 3. 11.
One foundation, and Ephesians 2. 19. Ephesians. 3. 15. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
One house, and therefore we ought to have 1. Cor. 12. 25.
Care and Compassion one of another.

Secondly, consider that Goodness and value which is fixed to the being of the
Creature, implanted in it by God and the institution of nature, and even thus
we shall find them absolutely unable to satisfy the desires of the reasonable
and spiritual soul. God is the Lord of all the Creatures, they are but as his
several moneys, he coined them all. So much then of his Image as nay Creature
has in it, so much value and worth it carries. Now God has more communicated
himself unto man, then unto any other Creature; in his Creation we find man
made after the Genesis 1. 27.
similitude of God, and in his restoration we find God made after the 1. Tim.
3. 16. Romans 8. 3.
similitude of man, and man once again after the Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
similitude of God. And now it is needless to search out the worth of the
Creature, Our Savior will decide the point, What shall a man gain though he
win the whole Matthew. 16. 26.
World, and lose his own soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? To which of the Creatures said God at any time, Let us create it after
our image? of which of the Angels said He at any time, Let us restore them to
our image again? there is no Creature in heaven or earth, which is recompense
enough for the loss of a Soul. Can a man carry the world into hell with him
to bribe the flames, or corrupt his tormentors? No says the Psalmist, His
glory shall not descend after him, Psalm. 49. 17. but can he buy out his pardon
before he comes thither? no neither, the Redemption of a Soul is more
precious, verse. 8. we know the Apostle counts all things Dung, Phil. 3. 8. and
will God take dung in exchange for a soul? Certainly, Beloved, when a man can
sow grace in the furrows of the field, when he can fill his barnes with glory,
when he can get bags full of salvation, when he can plow up heaven out of the
earth and extract God out of the Creatures, then he may be able to find that
in them which shall satisfy his desires. But till then, let a man have all the
exquisitest Curiosities of nature heaped into one vessel, let him be molded
out of the most delicate ingredients, and noblest principles that the world can
contribute, let there be in his body a concurrency of all beauty and feature,
in his nature an Eminence of all Sweetness and ingenuity, in his mind a
conspiration of the politest, and most choice varieties of all kind of
learning, yet still the spirit of that man is no whit more valueable and
precious, no whit more proportionable to Eternal Happiness, then the soul of
a poor and illiterate beggar. Difference indeed there is, and that justly to
be made between them in the eyes of men, which difference is to expire within
a few years: and then after the dust of the beautiful and deformed, of the
learned and ignorant, of the honorable and base are promiscuously intermingled,
and death has equaled all, then at last there will come a day when all
mankind shall be summoned naked, without difference of degrees before the same
tribunal; when the Crowns of kings and the shackles of prisoners, when the
robes of princes and the rags of beggars, when the gallants braverie and the
peasants russet, and the statists policy, and the Courtiers luxury, and the
scholars curiosity shall be all laid aside; when all men shall be reduced unto
an equal plea, and without respect of persons shall be doomed according to
their works; when Nero the persecuting emperor shall be thrown to Hell, and
Paul the persecuted Apostle shall shine in glory, when the learned Scribes and
Pharisees shall gnash their teeth, and the ignorant, and as they term them,
cursed people shall see their Savior: when the proud antichristian prelates,
that dyed their robes in the blood of the Saints, shall be hurried to
damnation, and the poor despised martyrs whom they persecuted shall wash their
feet in the blood of their enemies; when those puntoes, and formalities, and
cuts, and fashions, and distances, and complements, which are now the darling
sins of the upper end of the world, shall be proved to have been nothing
else but well-acted vanities: when the pride, luxury, riot, swaggering,
interlarded and complementall oaths, nice and quaint lasciviousness, new
invented courtings and adorations of beauty, the so much studied and admited
sins of the gallantrie of the world, shall be pronounced out of the mouth of
God himself to have been nothing else but glittering abominations; when the
adulterating of wares, the counterfeiting of lights, the double weight and
false measures, the courteous equivocations of men greedy of gain, which are
now almost woven into the very arts of trading, shall be pronounced nothing
else but mysteries of iniquity and selfe-deceivings: when the curious
subtilties of more choice wits, the knottie questions, and vain strife of
words, the disputes of reason, the variety of reading, the very circle of
general and secular learning pursued with so much eagerness by the more
ingenious spirits of the world, shall be all pronounced but the thin
cobwebs, and vanishing delicacies of a better tempered profaneness; and
lastly, when that poor despised profession of the power of Christianity, a
trembling at the Word of God, a scrupulous forbearance not of oaths only, but
of idle words, a tenderness and aptness to bleed at the touch of any sin, a
boldness to withstand the corruptions of the times, a conscience of but the
appearances of evil, a walking mournfully and humbly before God, a heroical
resolution to be strict and circumspect, to walk in an exact and geometrical
holiness in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, the so much
conclamated and scorned peevishness of a few silly, unpolitique, unregarded
hypocrites as the world esteems them, shall in good earnest from the mouth of
God himself be declared to have been the true narrow way which leads to
salvation, and the enemies there of shall, when it is too late, be driven to
that desperate and shameful confession, We fools counted their life madness,
and their end to have been without honor; how are they now reckoned amongst
the Saints, and have their portion with the Almighty?

A second Branch of the disproportion between the soul of man and the
Creatures, arising from the Vanity thereof, is their Deadness,
unprofitablenesse, inefficacie by any Ier. 16. 19.
inward virtue of their own to convey or preserve life in the Soul.
Happiness in the Scripture phrase is called Life, consisting in a Communion
with God in his Holiness and glory. Nothing then can truly be a prop to hold
up the Soul, which cannot either preserve that life which it has, or convey
unto it that which it has not. Charge those, says the Apostle, that are rich
in this world, that they be not high minded, neither trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, 1. Tim. 6. 17* he opposes the life of God to
the vanity and uncertainety, the word is, to the Inevidence of Riches, whereby
a man can never demonstrate to himself or others the certainety or happiness
of his life. The like opposition we shall find excellently expressed in the
Prophet Jeremy, My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of Living water, and have hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns
that can hold no water. Ier. 2. 13. That is, my people are willing to attribute
the blessings they enjoy, and to sue for more rather unto any cause then unto
me the Lord. She did not know, says the Lord else where, that I gave her her
corn and her Hos. 2. 8. 12.
wine, and multiplied her silver and gold, etc. but said of them, these are my
rewards which my lovers have given me. But says the Lord, so long as they
trusted me, they rested upon a sure fountain that would never fail them; with
thee, says the Psalmist, is the Fountain of life: And Psalm. 36. 9.
so says the Apostle too, Let your conversation be without covetousness, that
is, Do not make an Idol of the Creature, do not heap vessels full of money
together, and then think that you are all sure, the Creature has no life in
it, nay it has no truth in it neither, there is deceit and cozenage in riches;
but says he, Let your conversation Matthew. 13. 22.
be with contentment, consider that what you have is the dimensum, the portion
which God has allotted Prove. 30. 8.
you, that food which he finds most convenient for you; he knows that more
would but cloy you with a surfeit of pride or worldliness, that you have not
wisdom, humility, faith, heavenly mindedness enough to concoct a more
plentiful estate; and therefore receive your portion from him, trust his
wisdom and care over you, For he has said, I will not fail thee nor forsake
thee. Heb. 13. 5.
Well then, says the Lord, so long as they rested on me, they rested upon a
sure supply (All his mercies are sure mercies) upon a Fountain which would
never fail Act. 13. 34.
them: But when once they forsake me, and will not trust their lives in my
keeping, but with the prodigal will have their portion in their own hands,
their water in their own Cisterns, their pits prove unto them but like lobs
torrent, deep and plentiful though they seem Job 6. 18.
for a time, yet at length they make those ashamed that relied upon them. And
so I find the Prophets assuring us, that Israel which put so much confidence
in the carnal 1. King. 12. 26.
policies of Jeroboam for preserving the kingdom of the ten tribes from any
reunion with the house of David, was at last constrained to blush at their
own Ier 48 13. Esai 30 3. Esai. 20. 5.
wisdom, and to be ashamed of Bethel their confidence. Briefly then for that
place, there are two excellent things intimated in those two words of Cisterns
and Broken Cisterns. First the wealth and honor which men get not from the
Lord, but by carnal dependencies, are but Cisterns at the best, and in that
respect they have an evil quality in them, they are like dead water, apt to
putrify and corrupt; being cut of from the influence of God the Fountain of
life, they have no favor nor sweetness in them. Besides they are Broken
Cisterns too, as they have much mud and rottenness in them, so they are full
of chinkes, at which whatever is clear and sweet runs away, and nothing but
dregs remain behind. The worldly pleasures which men enjoy, their youthful
vigor that carried them with delight and fury to the pursuit of fleshly
lusts, the content which they were wont to take in the formalities and
complements of courtship and good fellowship, with a storm of sickness, or
at farthest a winter of age blows all away, and then when the fruit is gone,
there remains nothing but the diseases of it behind, which there surfeit had
begotten, a conscience worm to torment the soul.

Thus the life which we fetch from the Cisterne is a vanishing life, there is
still, after the use of it, less left behind then there was before: but the
life which we fetch from the fountain is a fixed, an Abiding life, as S. John
1. Ioh. 3. 15.
speaks, or, as our Savior calls it, a Life that Abounds, like Ioh. 10. 10.
the pumping of water out of a fountain, the more it is drawn, the faster it
comes.

We grant indeed that the Lord, being the Fountain of life, does allow the
Creature in regard of life temporal some subordinate operation and
concurrencie in the work of preserving life in us. But we must also remember,
That the Creatures are but Gods Instruments in that respect: and that not as
servants are to their masters, Living instruments, able to work without
concurrence of the superior cause; but Dead instruments, and therefore must
never be separated from the Principal. Let God subduct from them that
concourse of his own which actuates and applies them to their several
services, and all the Creatures in the world are no more able to preserve the
body or to comfort the mind, then an axe and a hammer and those other dead
instruments are able by themselves alone to erect some stately edifice. It is
not the corn or the flower, but the staff of bread which supports the life,
and that is not any thing that comes out of the earth, but something which
comes down from heaven, even the blessing which sanctifies the Creature* for
man lives not by bread alone, but by the word which proceeds out of Gods
mouth. The Creature cannot hold up it self, much less contribute to the
subsistence of other things, unless God continue the influence of his blessing
upon it. As soon as Christ had cursed the fig tree, it presently withered
and dried up (...) Mark. 11. 20.
from the roots; to show that it was not the root alone, but the blessing of
Christ which did support the fig tree. The Creatures of themselves are
Indifferent to contrary operations, according as they have been by God
severally applied. Fire preserved the three children in the furnace, and the
same fire licked up the instruments of the persecution. Fire came down from
heaven to destroy Sodom, and fire came down from heaven to advance Elias; the
same sea a Sanctuary unto Israel and a grave unto Egypt; Jonah had been
drowned if he had not been devoured, the latter destruction was a deliverance
from the former, and the ravine of the fish a refuge from the rage of the sea;
pulse kept Daniel in good liking, which the meat of the kings table could not
do in the other children: for indeed Life is not a thing merely 1. Tim. 4. 8.
2. Tim. 1. 1.
natural, but of promise, as the Apostle speaks; Let the promise be removed,
and however a wicked man lives as well as a righteous man, yet his life is
indeed but a breathing death, only the cramming of him to a day of slaughter:
When the blessing of God is once subducted, though men labor in the v^ry fire,
turn their vital heat Habac. 2. 13.
with extremity of pains into a very flame, yet the close of all their labor
will prove nothing but Uanitie, as the Prophet speaks. We should therefore
pray unto God that we may live not only by the Creature, but by the word which
sanctifies the Creature, that we may not lean upon our substance, but upon
Gods promises, that we may not live by that which we have only, but by that
which we hope for, and may still find God accompanying his own blessings unto
our Soul.

But here the vanity and wickedness of many worldly men is justly to be
reproved, who Rest on the Creature as on the only staff and comfort of their
life, who count it their principal joy when their corn, and wine, and Habac.
1. 15. 16. Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5.
oil increases, who magnify their own arts, sacrifice to their own net and
drag (which is the Idolatry of Covetousness, so often spoken of by the
Apostle, when all the trust, and hope, and glory, and rejoicing which men have
is in the Creature, and not in God.) They boast, says the Psalmist, in the
multitude of their Riches. Psalm. 49. 6.
Nay so much sottishness there is in the nature of man, and so much sophistry
in the Creature, that the proud fool in the Gospel from the greatness of his
wealth, Luke 12. 19.
concludes the length of his life, Thou have much laid up for many years, and
the certainety of his mirth and pleasure, Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. Their inward thought is that their houses shall endure for ever, and
Psalm. 49. 11. Psalm. 10. 6.
their dwelling places to all generations. And David himself was over-taken
with this folly, I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved. Yea so much
seed is there of pride in the heart of man, and so much heat (as I may so
speak) and vigor in the Creature to quicken it, as that men are apt to Deifie
themselves in the reflection on their own greatness, and to deifie any thing
else which contributes to the enlargement of their ambitious purposes. Uid
Brisson. de Regno Pers. lib. 1. page 8. 14.
The greatness of the Persian Emperors made them all usurp religious worship
from their subjects. The like insolence we find in the Babilonish monarchs,
they exalted themselves above the height of the clouds, and made themselves
equal to the most high, Esai. 14. 14. yea their pride made them forget any God
save themselves, I am, and there is none besides me, Esai. 47. 7. 8. It Zeph.
2. 15.
was the blasphemous arrogance of Tyrus the rich city, I am a God, I sit in
the seat of God, I have a heart like the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28. 26. neither
are these the sins of those times alone; the fountain of them is in the
nature, and the fruits of them in the lives of those, who dare not venture
upon the words: For albeit men with their mouths profess God, there is yet a
bitter root of Atheism Psalm. 9. 20.
and of Polutheisme in the minds of men by nature, which is mightily actuated
by the abundance of earthly things. Where the treasure is there is the heart,
Matthew. 6. 21.
where the heart there the happiness, and where the happiness there the God.

Now worldly men put their trust in their riches, set their heart upon them,
make them their strong city, and Psalm. 49 6. Psalm 62. 10. Prove. 10. 15.
therefore no marvel if they be their Idol too. What is the reason why
oftentimes we may observe rich and mighty men in the world to be more
impatient of the Ier. 43. 2. Obad. ver. 3.
Word of God, more bitter scorners of the power of religion, more fearfully
given over to the pursuit of fleshly lusts and secular purposes, to vanity,
vainglory, ambition, revenge, fierce, implacable, bloody passions, brazen and
boasting abominations, then other men, but because they have some secret
opinion that there is not so great a distance between God and them, as
between God and other men; but because the abundance of Psalm. 17. 10. Psalm.
10. 4, 5. Job 20. 7. 15.
worldly things has brawned their heart, and fatted their conscience, and
thickened their eyes against any fear, or faith, or notice at all of that
supreme dominion and impartial revenge which the most powerful and just God
does bear over all sinners, and against all sin? What is the reason why many
ordinary men drudge and moile all the year long, think every hour in the
Church so much time lost from their life, are not able to forbear their
covetous practices on Gods own Day, count any time of their life, any work of
their hand, any sheaffe of their corn, any penny of their purse thrown quite
away, even as so much blood powered out of their veins, which is bestowed on
the worship of God, and on the service of the Altar; but because men think
that there is indeed more life in their money, and the fruits of their ground,
then in their God or the promises of his Gospel? Else how could it possibly
be, if men did not in their hearts make God a lier, as the Apostle speaks, 1.
Ioh. 5. 10.
That the Lord should profess so plainly, from this day upward, since a stone
has been laid of my house, since Hag. 2. 15. 19.
you have put your selves to any charges for my worship, I will surely bless
you, and again, Bring all my tithes into my house, and prove me if I will not
open the windows of heaven, and power a blessing upon you that there shall
Mal. 3. 10.
not be room enough to hold it: and again, He that has pity on the poor
lends unto the Lord, and that which he Prove. 19. 17.
has given, will he pay him again: and again, If thou will hearken unto me,
and observe to do all these things, Deuteronomy. 28. 2. 14.
then all these blessings shall come on thee and over-take thee, blessings in
the city and in the field, etc. If men did in good earnest personally, and
hypothetically, believe and embrace these divine truths, How could it be, that
men should grudge Almighty God and his worship every farthing which he requires
from them of his own gifts, that they should date let the service and house of
God lie dumb and naked, that they should shut up their bowels of compassion
against their poor brethren, Matthew. 25. 42.
and in them venture to deny Christ himself a morsel of bread or a mite of
money, that they should neglect the obedience, profane the name, word, and
worship of God, use all base and unwarrantable arts of getting, and all this
out of love of that life, and greediness of that gain, which yet themselves,
in their general subscription to Gods truth, have confessed, will either never
be gotten, or at least never blessed, by such cursed courses? so prodigious a
property is there in worldly things to obliterate all notions of God out of the
heart of a man, and to harden him to any impudent abominations. I Ier. 22. 21.
spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, says the Lord, but thou said, I will not
hear. According to their pasture, so Hos. 13. 6.
were they filled, they were filled and their heart was exalted, therefore have
they forgotten me. Take heed, lest Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 18. Iam.
2. 5. Matthew. 11. 5. 25
when thou have eaten and art full, thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget
the Lord thy God. Therefore it is that we read of the Poorerich in faith, and
of the Gospel preached to the Poor, and revealed unto babes; because
greatness and abundance stops the ear, and hardens the heart, and makes men
stand at defiance with the simplicity of the Gospel.

Now then that we may be instructed how to use the Creature, as becomes a
dead and impotent thing, we may make use of these few directions. First, have
thine Eye ever upon the Power of God, which alone animateth and raises the
Creature to that pitch of livelihood which is in it, and who alone has
infinite ways to weaken the strongest, or to arm the weakest Creature against
the stoutest sinner. Peradventure thou have as much lands and possessions, as
many sheep and oxen as Job or Nabal; yet thou have not the lordship of the
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 2. ad pop. Antioch.
clouds, God can harden the heavens over thee, he can send the mildew and
canker into thy corn, the rot and murren into thy cattle; though thy barnes
be full of corn, and thy fats overflow with new wine, yet he can break the
staff of thy bread, that the flower and the Hos. 9. 2.
winepresse shall not feed thee; though thou have a house full of silver and
gold, he can put holes into every bag, and chinkes into every Cisterne, that
it shall all sink away like a winter torrent. God can either deny thee a
Eccles. 6. 1, 2.
power and will to enjoy it, and this is as sore a disease as poverty it self:
or else he can take away thy strength Quantumlibet delectent jactantia
divitiarum, and tumor honorum, and vorago popinarum, and bella theatricorum,
etc. Aufert omnia ista una febricula, and adhuc viventibus totam falsam
beatitudine^ subtrahit; remanet inanis and saucia consciencia. Aug. de
Catechiz. Rud. ca. 16. Genesis 4. 7.
that thou shall not relish any of thy choicest delicates; he can send a stone
or a gowte that shall make thee willing to buy with all thy riches a poor and
a dishonorable health; and, which is yet worst of all, he can open thy
conscience, and let in upon thy Soul that lion which lies at the door, amaze
thee with the sight of thine own sins, the history of thine evil life, the
experience of his terrors, the glimpses and preoccupations of hell, the
evident presumptions of irreconciliation with him; the frenzy of Cain, the
despair of Judas, the madness of Achitophel, the trembling of Felix, which
will damp all thy delights, and make all thy sweetest morsels as the white of
an Egg; at which pinch, however now thou admire and adore thy thick clay,
thou would count it the wisest bargain thou did ever make, to give all
thy goods to the poor, to go bare-foote the whole day with the Prophet Esaias,
to dress thy meat with the dung of a man, as the Lord commanded the Prophet
Ezekiel, to feed with Micajah in a dungeon on bread of affliction and water of
affliction for many years together, that by these or any other means thou
might purchase that inestimable peace, which the whole earth, though changed
into a Globe of Gold, or Center of Diamond cannot procure. So uttterly unable
are all the Creatures in the world to give life, as that they cannot preserve
it entire from foreign or domestique assaults, nor remove those dumps and
pressures which do any way disquiet it.

Secondly, to remove this natural deadness of the Creature, or rather to
recompense it by the accession of a Blessing from God, use means to reduce it
unto its primitive Goodness. The Apostle shows us the way. Every Creature of
God is good, being sanctified by the 1. Tim. 4. 4.
Word of God and by Prayer. In which place, because it is a text then which
there are few places of Scripture that come more into daily and general use
with all sorts of men, it will be needful to unfold; 1. What it meant by the
sanctification of the Creature. 2. How it is sanctified by the Word. 3. How we
are to sanctify it to our selves by Prayer.

For the first, The Creature is then sanctified, when the curse and poison
which sin brought upon it is remooved, when we can use the Creature with a
clean conscience, and with assurance of a renewed and comfortable estate in
them. It is an Allusion to legal purifications and differences of meats,
Levit. 11. No Creature is impure of it self, says the Apostle, in its own
simple created nature: Romans 14. 14.
But in as much as the sin of man forfeited all his interest in the Creature,
because eo ipso a man is legally dead; and a condemned man is utterly deprived
the right of any worldly goods (nothing is his ex jure, but only ex largitate)
and in as much as the sin of man has made him* though not a sacrilegious
intruder, yet a profane abuser of the good things which remain, partly by
inditect procuring them, partly by despising the author of them, by mustering
up Gods own gifts against him in riot, luxury, pride, uncleanenesse, earthly
mindedness, etc; hereby it comes to pass that to the unclean all things are
unclean, because their minds and consciences Tit. 1. 15.
are defiled. Now the whole Creation being thus by the sin of man unclean,
and by consequence unfitted for humane use, as Saint Peter intimates, I never
eat any Act. 10. 14.
thing common or unclean, it was therefore requisite that the Creature should
have some Purification, before it was unto men allowed: Which was indeed
legally done in the Ceremony, but really in the substance and body of the
Ceremony by Christ, who has now unto us in their use, and will at last for
themselves in their own being, deliver the Creatures from that vanity and
malediction, unto which by reason of the sin of man they were subjected, and
fashion them unto the glorious Romans 8. 20, 21.
liberty of the Children of God, make them fit palaces for the saints to
inhabit, or confer upon them a glory which shall be in the proportion of
their natures a suitable advancement unto them, as the glory of the Children of
God shall be unto them. The blood of Christ does not only renew and purify
the soul and body of man, but washes away the curse and dirt which adhereth
to Ephesians. 5. 26.
every Creature that man uses; does not only cleanse and sanctify his church,
but renews all the Creatures, Behold, Revel. 21. 5.
says he, I make All things New; and if any man be in Christ, not only He is
a New Creature, but says 2. Cor. 5. 17.
the Apostle, All things are become New. Those men then who keep themselves
out of Christ, and are by consequence under the Curse, as their persons, so
their possessions are still under the curse, as their consciences, so their
estates are still unclean; they eat their meat like Swine rol'd up in dirt,
the dirt of their own sin, and of Gods malediction. So then the Creature is
then sanctified, when the curse thereof is washed away by Christ.

Now secondly, let us see How the Creature is sanctified by the Word.

By Word we are not to understand the Word of Creation, wherein God spoke and
all things were made Good and serviceable to the use of man. For sin came
after that Word, and defaced as well the goodness which God put into the
Creature, as his Image which he put into man. But by Word I understand first in
general Gods Command and Blessing which strengthens the Creature unto those
operations for which they serve: in which sense our Savior uses it, Matthew. 4.
4. and elsewhere, If ye call those Gods unto whom the Word of God Ioh. 10. 35.
36.
came, that is, who by Gods Authority and Commission are fitted for subordinate
services of Government under him, say ye of him whom the Father has Heb. 5.
5. Ioh. 6. 27. 37. 40. Act. 4. 27. Ioh. 10. 18.
sanctified, that is, to whom the Word of the Father and his Commission or
Command came, to whom the Father has given Authority by his Ioh. 5. 22. 27.
30. Matthew. 28. 18.
Power, and fitness by his Esai. 11. 2, 3, 4. Ioh. 3. 34, 35.
Spirit to Judge, and save the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am
the Son of God? Secondly, by that Word I understand more particularly the
Fountain of that Blessing, which the Apostle calls in general the Word of
Truth, and more particularly, The Gospel of Salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13.
and this word is a sanctifying Word; Sanctify them by Ioh. 17. 17.
thy truth, thy Word is Truth: and as it sanctifies us, so it sanctifies the
Creatures too, it is the Fountain not only of Eternal, but of Temporal
Blessings. And therefore we find Christ did not only say unto the sick of
the Palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee, but also Arise and Matthew. 9. 2, 6.
walk, intimating, that Temporal Blessings come along with the Gospel, it
has the Promises as well of this life 1. Tim. 4. 8. Psalm. 37. 25. Heb. 13. 5.
as that to come. I never saw the righteous forsaken, says the Prophet David
(suitable to that of the Apostle, He has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee) nor their seed begging their bread; That is, never so wholly by
God forsaken, if they were the seed of the Righteous, inheritors of their
fathers hope and profession, as to make a constant trade of begging their
bread, and so to expose the promises of Christ, that they which seek the
kingdom Matthew. 6. 33.
of heaven shall have all other things added to them, unto reproach and
imputation from wicked men. Or thus, I never saw the righteous forsaken, or
their seed forsaken by God, though they begged their bread, but even in that
extremity God was present with them, to sanctify to their use, and to give
them a comfortable enjoyment of that very bread which the exigencie of their
present condition had constrained them to beg. Thus we see in general, That
the Blessing or Command of God, and the fountain of that blessing, the Gospel
of Salvation, do sanctify the Creature.

But yet neither by the Blessing nor the Gospel is the Creature effectually
sanctified unto us, till it be by us apprehended with the Word and Promise, and
this is done Heb. 4. 2.
by Faith; for the Word, says the Apostle, profited not those that heard it,
because it was not mingled or tempered (...). in 1. Cor. homil. 2. Chrysostom.
with faith. For Faith has this singular operation, to particularize and
single out God and his Promises unto a mansselfe; So then the Creature is
sanctified by the Word and Blessing believed and embraced, whereby we come to
have a nearer right and peculiarity in the Creatures which we enjoy: for being
by Faith united unto Christ Ephesians 3. 17. Gal. 2. 20.
and made one with him (which is that noble effect of faith to incorporate
Christ and a Christian together) we thereby share with him in the inheritance,
not only of Romans 8. 17.
Eternal life, but even of the common Creatures. Fellow Heirs we are and
Copartners with him; therefore in as much as God has appointed him to be Heir
of All Heb. 1. 2.
things, as the Apostle speaks, we likewise, in the virtue of our fellowship
with him, must in a subordinate sense 1. Ioh. 1. 3.
be Heirs of all things too. All is yours, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. 21,
23. Romans 8. 32. Aug. epist. 89.
and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Fidelibus totus mundus divitiarum
est, The Saints, says Saint Austin, have All the world for their possession.
And if it be here demanded how this can be true, since we find the Saints of
God often in great want, and it would doubtless be sin in them to usurp
another man's goods upon presumption of that promise that Christ is theirs, and
with him all things: To this I answer, first in general, As Christ though he
were the Heir of All 2. Cor. 8. 9.
things, yet for our sakes became poor, that we by his poverty might be made
rich: so God oftentimes pleases to make the faithful partake not only in the
privileges, but in the poverty of Christ, that even by that means they may be
rich in faith and dependence upon God, as Saint James spoke, Having nothing,
and yet possessing Iam. 2. 5.
All things. Secondly, All is ours in regard of 2. Cor. 6. 10.
Christian liberty, though our hands are bound from the possession, yet our
Consciences are not bound from the use of any. Thirdly, Though the faithful
have not in the right of their inheritance any monopoly or ingrossement of the
Creatures to themselves, yet still they have and shall have the service of them
All. That is thus; If it were possible for any member of Christ to stand
absolutely in need of the use and service of the whole Creation, All the
Creatures in the world should undoubtedly wait upon him, and be appropriated
unto him. The Moon should stand still, the Sun go back, the Lions should
stop their mouths, the Fire should give over burning, the Ravens should bring
him meat, the Heavens should rain down bread, the Rocks should gush out
with water, all the Creatures should muster up themselves to defend the Body of
Christ. But though no such absolute necessity shall ever be, yet ordinarily we
must learn to believe, That those things which God allows us are best
suitable to our particular estate, God knowing us better then we do our
selves: that as less would happily make us repine, so more would make us full,
and lift up our hearts against God, and set them on the world; so that All is
ours, not absolutely, but subordinately, serviceably according to the exigence
of our condition, to the proportion of our faith and furtherance of our
Salvation.

The third particular inquire into was, How we do by Prayer sanctify the
Creature to our selves? This is done in these three courses. 1. In procuring
them. We ought not to set about any of our lawful and just callings without a
particular addressing our selves unto God in Prayer. This was the practice of
good Eleazer Abraham's servant, when he was emploi'd in finding out a wife for
his masters son, Genesis 24. 12.
O Lord God of my master Abraham I pray thee send me good speed this day: and
this also was the practice of good Nehemiah in the distresses of his people,
Nehem. ^. 4.
I prayed unto the God of heaven, and then I spoke unto the king. And surely
the very Heathen themselves shall in this point rise up in judgment against
many profane Christians, who look oftener upon their gold then upon their God,
as Salvian speaks. We read often in their writings that in any general
Morbis grassantibus vel prodigijs nunciatis Pacem Deum exposci moris erat, vide
Brisson. de Formul. lib. 1. pa. 81. edit. 1592
Calamity they did jointly implore the peace and favor of their idolatrous
gods; that in any Plin. Panegyr. Been ac sapienter majores instituerunt ut
rerum agendarum, ita dicendi ini^ium a Precationibus capere, etc. Sueton. in
Aug. cap. 35. vid. Brisson. de Form. lib. 1. page 42. Et Coqu(...)^ommentaria
in Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 8. number. 2.
matter of consequence they made their entry upon it by Prayer, commending the
success thereof to the power and providence of those deities which they
believed. In so much that we read of Livius li^. 26. A. Gel. Noct. Attic. lib*
7. cap. 1. C^^^s ab A(...) describitur (...) dedita, (...) Civit. Dei. lib. 3..
cap. 21.
Pub. Scipio a great Roman, that he ever went to the Capitole before to the
Senate, and began all the businesses of the Commonwealth with Prayer. How much
more the^ ought we to do it, who have not only the Law and Dictate of nature
to guide us, who have not deaf and impotent idols to direct our Prayers to, as
their gods were; but have first The Law of Christ requiring it; ^ph. 6. 18. 1.
Thell. 5. 17. Phil. 4. 6.
Pray Always. Pray without ceasing. In every thing by Prayer and Supplication
with Thankesgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Who have secondly
the Example of Christ to enforce it, for not only Mark 1 35.
Morning and Matthew 1^. 23.
Evening was it his Luke 21. 39.
Custom to Pray; but upon every other solemn occasion. Before his Mark 1. 3^.
38.
Preaching, before his Mark. 6. 41.
Eating, before the Luke 9. 12, 13.
Election of his Disciples, before his Luke 9. 28.
Transfiguration in the mount, Matthew. 26. 36. Ioh. 17. 1.
before and Heb* 5. 7.
in his Passion; Who have thirdly from Christ That Legitimate, Ordinary,
Fundamental Prayer, as (...) orat. cap. 9.
Tertullian calls it, The Lords Prayer, as a Rule and Directorie by him framed
to instruct us how to Pray, and to bound and confine our extravagant and vast
desires; Who lastly have also the Altar of Christ to receive, the Incense of
Christ to perfume, the Name and Intercession of Christ to present our Prayers
unto God by, who have Christ sanctifying, and, as I may so speak, praying our
prayers unto hi^ Father for us; as we read of the Angel of the Covenant, who
had a golden Censer Revel. 8. 3, 4.
and much incense, to offer up the Prayers of the Saints, which was nothing
else but the mediation of Christ bearing the iniquity of our holy things, as
Aaron was appointed Exodus 28. 38.
to do; nothing but his intercession for us at the right Romans 8. 34.
hand of his Father. I say, how much more reason ^ave we, then any Gentile
could have, to consecrate all our enterprises with Prayer unto God? Humbly to
acknowledge how justly he might blast all o^r businesses, and make us labor in
the fire; that unless he keep the City the watchman watches but in vain;
that unless he build the house their labor is in vain that build it; that
unless he give the increase, the planting of Paul, and the watering of Apollo
are but empty breath; that it is only his blessing on the diligent hand which
makes rich without any sorrow; that unless he be pleased to favor our
attempts, neither the plotting of our heads, nor the solicitous^esse of our
hearts, ^or the drudgerie of our hands, nor the whole co^currence of our
created strength, nor any accessorie assistances which we can procure will be
able to bring to pass the otherwise most obvious and feasible Events: and
therefore to implore his Direction in all our counsels, his concurrence with
all our Actions, his blessing on all our undertakings, and his glory as the
sole end of all that either we are or do. For by this means we do First
acknowledge our dependencie on God as the first cause, and give him the glory
of his sovereign Power and Dominion over all second agents, in acknowledging
2. Chron. 20. 6. 2. Chron. 14. 11 Matthew. 8. 2.
that without him we can do nothing, and the power of God is the Ground of
Prayer. Secondly, by this means we put God in mind of his Promises, and Esai.
43. 76.
so acknowledge not our dependence on his power only, but on his Truth and
Goodness too: And the Promises and Truth of God are the foundation of all our
Prayers. That which encouraged Daniel to set his face Dan. 9 1, 2, 3.
to seek unto God in Prayer for the restitution of liberty out of Babylon was
Gods Promise and Truth revealed by Jeremy the Prophet, that he would
accomplish but s^ventie years in the desolation of Jerusalem. That which
encouraged Iehosaphat to seek unto God against 2 Chronicles. 20. 9.
the multitude of Moabites which came up against him, was his Promise that he
would hear and help those that did pray toward his house in their
affliction. That which encouraged David to pray unto God for the stability of
his house, was the Covenant and Truth of God, 2. Sam. 7. 27, 28, 29.
Thou have revealed to thy Servant, saying, I will build thee an house,
therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray this Prayer unto thee.
And now, O Lord, thou art That God, that is, the same God in thy fidelity and
mercy, as then thou were, and thy words be true, and thou have promised this
goodness to thy servant; therefore let it please thee to bless the house of
thy Servant, etc. Excellent to this purpose is that which S. Austin observes of
his mother, who very often and earnestly prayed unto Aug (...). lib. ^. cap. 9.
God for her son when he was an Heretic, Chirographa tua ingerebat tibi,
Lord, says he, she urged thee with thine own handwriting, she challenged in
an humble and fearful confidence the performance of thine own obligations.
Thirdly and lastly, by this means we hasten the performance of Gods decreed
mercies; we retardate, yea quite hinder his almost purposed and decreed
Judgments. The Lord had resolved to restore Israel to their wonted peace and
honor, yet for all these things Ezekiel. 36. 37.
will I be enquired unto by the House of Israel to do it for them, says He in
the Prophet. The Lord had threatened destruction against Israel for their
Idolatry, had not Moses Psalm. 106.
stood before him in the breach to turn away his wrath, as the Psalmist
speaks. And we read of the Primitive Justin Martyr Apolog.
Christians, that their prayers procured rain from heaven, when the Armies of
the Emperors were even Tertul. Apol. c. 5.
famished for want of water, and that their very persecutors have begged their
prayers.

Secondly, as by prayer the Creature is sanctified in the procurement (for no
man has reason to believe that there is any blessing intended unto him by God
in any of the good things which do not come in unto him by prayer) so in the
next place the Creature is by Prayer sanctified in the fruition thereof;
because, to enjoy the portion allotted us, and to rejoice in our labor, is the
Gift of God, as Solomon speaks. The Creature of it Eccles. 5. 19.
self is not only Dead, and therefore unable to minister life by it self
alone, but, which is worse, by the means of man's sin, it is Deadly too, and
therefore apt to poison the receivers of it without the corrective of Gods
Grace. Pleasure is a thing in it self lawful; but corruption of nature is apt
to make a man a lover of pleasure, more 2. Tim. 3. 4.
then a lover of God, and then is that man's pleasure made unto him the
metropolis of mischief, as Clemens Alexand^inus speaks. A good name is better
then sweet Eccles. 7. 1. Pro^. 22. 1.
ointment, and more to be desired then much riches; but corruption is apt to
put a fly of vainglory and selfeaffectation into this ointment, to make a
man foolishly feed upon his own credit, and with the Pharisees to do* Matthew.
23. 5. Ioh. 5. 44. 12. 43.
all for applause, and prefer the praise of men before the glory of God; and
then our sweet ointment is degenerated into a curse; Woe be unto you, when all
men shall Luke 6. 26.
speak well of you. Riches of themselves are the good gifts and blessings of
God, as Solomon says, The blessing of the Lord makes rich, but corruption is
apt to breed by this means covetousness, pride, selfe-dependency,
forgetfulness of God, scorn of the Gospel, and the like; and then these
earthly blessings are turned into the curse of the earth, into Thorns and
Briers, as the Apostle speaks, They that will be rich pierce themselves through
1. Tim. 6. 10.
with many sorrows. Learning in it self is an honorable and a noble
endowment; it is recorded for the glory of Moses, that he was learned in all
the wisdom Act. 7. 22.
of the Egyptians: but corruption is apt to turn learning into leaven, to
infect the heart with pride, which being armed and seconded with wit breaks
forth into perverse disputes, and corrupts the mind. Therefore Col. 2. 4. 8.
Saint Paul advised the Christians of his time, to beware lest any man spoil
them through Philosophy and begvile them with entising words. And the ancient
Fathers counted the Tertul. de praescript. cap. 7. de Idolatr. cap. 10. Hieron.
contr. Luciser. cum praefat. Erasmi. vid. Pet. Erodium. Decret. lib. 1. Tit.
6.. 2. Hook. l. 5.. 3.
Philosophers the Seminaries of heresy. Proof whereof, to let pass the
Antitrinitarians and Pelagians, and other ancient Here^ikes, who out of the
niceness of a quaint wit perverted Gods truth to the patronage of their lies;
and to pass by the Schoolmen and Jesuits of late Ages, who have made the way
to heaven a very labyrinth of crooked subtilties, and have weaved Divinity into
Cobwebs; we may have abundantly in those Libertines and Cyrenians, who
disputed See Reynolds (...). c. 2. diuis. 3 p^g. 72. Act 6. and 17. Eccles. 12.
12. Romans 1. 22. 2. Tim. 3. 9.
with Stephen, and those Stoics that wrangled with Saint Paul about the
resurrection. And now learning being thus corrupted is not only turned into
weariness, but into very notorious and damnable folly, for thinking themselves
wise, says the Apostle, they became fools, and their folly shall be made
k^owne unto all men. To get wealth in an honest and painful Calling is a
great blessing* for the diligent hand makes rich; but corruption is apt to
persuade unto cozenage, lying, equivocation, falls weights, ingrossements,
monopolies and other Arts of cruelty and unjustice, and by this means ou^ law
full Callings are turned into abominations, mysteries of Deuteronomy. 25. 14. 16.
Prove. 20. 10. 23. Prove. 21. 6.
iniquity, and a pursuit of death. Every creature of God is good in it self,
and allowed both for necessity and delight; but corruption is apt to abuse the
Creatures to luxury and excess, to drunkenness, gluttony and inordinate
lusts, and by this means a man's table is turned into a Snare, as the Psalmist
speaks. Now then since all the world is thus bespread with ginnes, it mainely
concerns us always to pray, that we may use the world as not abusing it, that
we may enjoy the Creatures with such wisdom, temperance, sobriety, heavenly
affections, as may make them so, many ascents to raise us nearer unto God, as
so many glasses in which to contemplate the wisdom, providence, and care of
God to men, as so many witnesses of his love, and of our duty. And thus does
prayer sanctify the Creature in the use of it.

Lastly, and in one word, Prayer sanctifies the Creatures in the review and
recognition of them. and Gods mercy in them, with thanksgiving and thoughts of
praise, as Jacob, Genesis 32. 9. 10. and David, 2. Sam. 7. 18. 21. looked upon God
in the blessings with which he had blessed them. And now since Prayer does
thus sanctify the Creatures unto us, we should make friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that we may by that means get the prayers of the poor
Saints upon us and our estate, that the eye which sees us may bless us, and
the care that hears us may give witness to us; that the loins and the
mouths, the backs and the bellies of the poor and fatherless may be as so
many real supplications unto God for us.

The third and last direction which I shall give you to find life in the
Creature, shall be to look on it, and love it in its right order, with
subordination to God and his promises; to love it after God, and for God, as
the beam which conveyes the influences of life from him; as his instrument,
moved and moderated by him to those ends for which it serves; to love it as the
Cisterne, not as the fountain of life; to make Christ the foundation, and all
other things but as accessions unto him. Otherwise if we love it either alone,
or above Christ, however it In cofundamentum non est Christus cui cae^era
praeponuntur. Aug. de Civ. dei. lib. 21. cap. 26. Luke 12. 25.
may by Gods providence keep our breath a while in our nostrils, and fatten us
against the last day, yet impossible it is that it should ever minister the
true and solid comforts of life unto us, which consists not in the abundance
of things which a man possesses, as our Savior speaks. Life goes not upward*
but downward, the inferior derives it not on the superior; therefore by
placing the Creature in our estimation above Christ, we deny unto it any
influence of livelihood from him, whom yet in words we profess to be the
fountain of life. But men will object and say, This is a needless caution not
to prefer the Creature before the Creator, as if any man were so impious and
absurd. Surely Saint Paul tells us, that 2. These. 3. 2. Multi no^ a Christi
vnitate sed a suis commodis nolunt recedere. Aug. de Baptis. lib 4. c. 10. Mark
5. 17. Psalm. 106. 24. Act. 7. 39. Mal. 1. 7. Zech. 11. 12. Uti volunt Deo vt
fruantur mund^. Aug. de Civ. dei. lib. 15. cap. 7.
men without faith are impious and absurd men, who do in their affections and
practices as undoubtedly undervalue Christ, as the Gadarens that preferred
their Swine before him. What else did Esau, when for a mess of pottage he sold
away his birthright, which was a privilege that led to Christ? What else did
the people in the Wilderness, who despised the holy Land, which was the type
of Christ's Kingdom, and in their hearts turned back to Egypt? What else did
those wicked Israelites, who polluted the Table of the Lord, and made his Altar
contemptible, which was a type of Christ? What else did Judas and the Jews,
who sold and bought the Lord of glory for the price of a beast? What else do
daily those men, who make Religion serve turns, and godliness wait upon
gain? who creep into houses with a form of piety, to seduce unstable
fowls, and pluck off their feathers to make themselves a neast? The Apostles
Rule is general, that sensual and earthly-minded men are all the enemies of
the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. 19.

The third and last disproportion between the soul of Man and the Creature
arising from the vanit^e thereof, is in regard of duration and continuance. Man
is by nature a provident Creature, apt to lay up for the time to come, and that
disposition should reach beyond the forecast of the Fool in the Gospel for
many years, even for immortality it self* For certainly there is no man who
has but the general notions of corrupted reason alive within him, who has
not his conscience quite vitiated, and his mind putrified with noisome lusts,
who is not wrapped up in the mud of thick ignorance, and palpable stupiditie,
but must of necessity have oftentimes the immediate representations of
immortality before his eyes. Let him never so much smother and suppress the
truth, let him with all the Art he can divert his conceits, and entangle his
thoughts in secular cares, let him shut his eyelids as close as his nail is
to his flesh, yet the flashes of immortality are of so penetrative and
searching a nature, that they will undoubtedly get through all the obstacles,
which a mind not wholly over-dawb'd with worldliness and ignorance can put
between. Therefore the Apostle uses that for a strong argument, why rich men
should not trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, and should be
rich in good works, That so, says he, they may lay up in store a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life,
1. Tim. 6. 17. 19. Wicked men indeed lay up in store, but Amos. 3. 10. lam. 5.
3.
it is not riches, but wrath, even violence and oppression against the last
day. But by trusting God, and doing good a man lays up durable Riches, as the
wise Man Prou. 8. 18.
speaks; in which respect he presently adds, That the fruit of wisdom is
better then Gold. For though Gold be of all Metals the most solid, and
therefore least subject to decay, yet it is not immortal and durable riches;
for the Apostle tells us, that silver and gold are corruptible 1. Pet 1. 18.
Iam. 5. 2.
things, and that there is a rust and canker which (...) up the gold and silver
of wicked men. I confess the hearts of many men are so glewed unto the world,
especially when they find all things succeed prosperously with them that they
are apt enough to set up their rest, and to conceit a kind of steadfastness
in the things they possess. Because they have no changes. says the Prophet
Psalm. 55. 19.
David, therefore they fear not God. But yet I say, where the Lord does not
wholly give a man over to heap up 2. Pet. 3. 4.
treasures unto the last day, to be eaten up with the canker of his own
wealth, the soul must of necess^y sometime or other happen upon such sad
thoughts as these. What ailes my foolish heart thus to eat up it self with
care, and to rob mine eyes of their beloved sleep for such things, as to the
which the time will come when I must bid an everlasting farewell? Am I not a
poor mortal Creature, brother to the Worms, sister to the Dus^? Do I not
carry about with me a soul full of corruptions, a skin full of diseases? Is
not my breath in my nostrils, where there is room enough for it to go out,
and possibility never to come in again? Is my flesh of brass, or my bones of
iron, that I should think to hold out, and without interruption to enjoy these
earthly things? Or if they were, yet are not the Creatures themselves subject
to period and mortality? Is there not a Moth in my richest garments, a Worm
in my tallest Cedars, a Canker and rust in my fi^nest Gold to corrupt and eat
it out? Or if not, will there not come a day, when the whole frame of Nature
shall be set on fire, and the Elements themselves shall melt with heat, when
that universal flame shall devour all the bags, and lands, and offices, and
honors, and treasures, and store*houses of worldly men? When Heaven and Hell
shall divide the World; Heaven, into which nothing can be admitted which is
capable of Moth or rust to corrupt it, and Hell, into which if any such things
could come, they would undoubtedly in one instant be swallowed up in those
violent and unextinguishable flames? And shall I be so foolish as to (...) my
felicity in that which will fail me, when I shall stand in greatest need, to
heap up treasures into a broken bag, to work in the fire where all must
perish? Certainly the soul of a mere worldly man, who cannot find God or
Christ in the things he enjoyes, must of necessity be so f^rre from reaping
solid or constant comfort from any of these perishable Creatures, that it
cannot but ache and tremble, but be wholly surprised with dismal passions, with
horrid preapprehensions of its own woeful estate, upon the evidence of the
Creatures mortality, and the unavoideable flashes and conviction of its own
everlastingnesse.

Now if we consider the various roots of this corruption in the Creature, it
will then further appear unto us, that they are not only mortal, but even
momentarie and vanishing:

First, by the Law of their Creation they were made subject to alterations,
there was an enmity and reluctance in their entirest being.

Secondly, this has been exceedingly improved by the s^ne of man, whose evil,
being the lord of all Creatures, must needs redound to the misery and
mortality of all his retinue. For it was in the greater World, as in the
administration of a private family; the poverty of the Master is felt in the
bowels of all the rest, his stain and dishonor runs into all the members of
that society. As it is in the natural body some parts may be distempered and
ill affected alone, others not without contagion on the rest; a man may have a
dim eye, or a withered arm, or a lame foot, or an impedite tongue without
any danger to the parts adjoining; but a lethargy in the head, or an
obstruction in the liver, or a dyspepsie and indisposition in the stomach
diffuseth universal malignity through the body, because these are sovereign
and architectonicall parts of man: so likewise is it in the great and vast body
of the Creation. However other Creatures might have kept their evil, if any
had been in them, within their own bounds, yet that evil which man, the Lord
and head of the whole brought into the world, was a spreading and infectious
evil, which conuey'd poison into the whole frame of nature, and planted the
seed of that universal dissolution which shall one day deface with darkness
and horror the beauty of that glorious frame which we now admire. It is said
that when Corah, Dathan, and Abiram had provoked the Lord by their rebellion
against his servants to inflict that fearful destruction upon them, the earth
opened her Numb. 16. 32.
mouth and swallowed not only them up, but all the houses, and men, and goods
that appertained to them. Now in like manner the heaven and earth and al
inferior Creatures did at first appertain to Adam: the Lord gave him the free
use of them, and dominion over them: when therefore man had committed that
notorious rebellion against his maker, which was not only to aspire like Corah
and his associates to the height and principality of some fellow Creature, but
even to the absoluteness, wisdom, power and independency of God himself, no
marvel if the wrath of God did together with him seize upon his house, and all
the goods that belongd unto him, bringing in that confusion and disorder which
we even now see does break asunder the bonds and ligaments of nature, does
unjoynt the confedera^ies and societies of the dumb Creatures, and turns the
armies of the Almighty into mutinies and commotion, which in one word has so
fast manicled the world in the bondag^ of corruption, as that it does already
Rom 8. 2^.
groan and linger with pain under the sin of man and the curse of God, and
will at last break forth into that universal flame which will melt the very
Elements 2. Pet. 3. 10.
of Nature into their primitive confusion. Thus we see besides the created
limitednesse of the creature, by which it was utterly unsuteable to the
immortal desires of the soul of man, the sin of man has implanted in them
a secret worm and rottenness which does* set forward their mortality, and by
adding to them confusion, enmity, disproportion, sedition, inequality (all the
seeds of corruption) has made them, Aristet. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 1. 10.
not only as before they were mortal, but which adds one mortality to
another, even momentary and vanishing too. When any Creature loses any of its
native and created vigor, it is a manifest sign that there is some secret
sentence of death gnawing upon it. The excellency of the Heavens we know is
their light, their beauty, their influences upon the lower World, and even
these has the sin of man defaced. We find when the Lord pleases to
reveal his wrath against men for Romans 1. 18.
sin in any terrible manner, he does it from Heaven; There shall be wonders
in the Heaven, blood and fire, and Joel 2. 30.
pillars of smoke, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon
into blood; and the day of the Lord is called a day of darkness, and
gloominesse, and thick darkness. Zeph. 1. 15.
How often has Gods heavy displeasure declared it self from Heaven in the
confusion of nature? in storms ^sal. 11. 6. Psalm. ^8. 12. Ier. 4. 23. 28. Esaias
13. 10. Eusebius. H^st. l. 3. cap 8 and Joseph. de Bello Iudaico lib. 7. cap. 12.
and horrible tempests? in thick clouds and dark waters? in arrows of
lightning and coals of fire? in blackness and darkness? in brimstone on
Sodom, in a flaming sword over Jerusalem, in that fearful Star of fire to
the Christian World of late years, which has kindled those woeful combustions,
the flames whereof are still so great, as that we our selves, if we look
upon the merits and provocations of our sins, may have reason to fear, that
not all the Sea between us and our neighbors can be able to quench till it
have scorched and singed us. We find likewise by plain experience how languid
the seeds of life, how faint the vigor either of heavenly influences, or of
sublunary and inferior agents are grown, when that life of men, which was
wont to reach to almost a thousand years, is esteemed even a miraculous age,
if it be extended but to the tenth part of that duration. We Genesis 3. 17. 18.
Hos. 10. 8. Esaias 34. 13.
need not examine the inferior Creatures, which we find expressly cursed for
the sin of man with Thorns and Briers (the usual expression of a curse in
Scripture.) If we but open our eyes and look about us, we shall see what
pains Husbandmen take to keep the earth from giving up the Ghost, in opening
the veins thereof, in applying their Soil and Marle as so many Pills or
Salves, as so many Cordials and preservatives to keep it alive, in laying it
asleep, as it were, when it lies fallow every second or third year, that by
any means they may preserve in it that life, which they see plainly
approaching to its last gasp.

Thus you see how besides the original limitednesse of the Creature, there is
in a second place a Moth or Canker by the infection of sin begotten in them,
which hastens their mortality, God ordering the second causes so amongst
themselves, that they exercising enmity one against another, may punish the
sin of man in their contentions, as the Lord stirred up the Babylonians
against Ier. 43. 8, 13.
the Egyptians to punish the sins of his own people. And therefore we
find, that the times of the Gospel, when holiness was to be more
universal, are expressed by such figures, as restore perfection and peace to
the Esaias 30. 23.
Creatures. The Earth shall be fat and plenteous, there shall be upon every
high hill Rivers and Streams of water, the light of the Moon shall be as the
light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven
days. Esaias 11. 6. 7. locl 3. 18. Amos 9. 13.
And again, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the leopard shall lie
down with the kid, and a Calfe, and a young Lion, and a fatling together, etc.
Which places, though figuratively to be understood, have yet me thinks thus
much of the letter in them, to assure us that whatever blemish since the
Creation any of those glorious heavenly bodies are either in themselves, or by
interposition of foggy vapors subject unto, what ever enmities and destructive
qualities enrage one beast against another, they are all of them the
consequents of that finne which nothing can remove but the Gospel of Christ.
And this is that universal contagion which runs through the whole frame of
Nature into the bowels of every Creature.

But yet further in a third place there is a particular ground of this
mortality to many men, namely the Particular curse upon that place or creature
which men enjoy. For as a piece of oak besides the natural corruptiblenes of
it, as it is a body compounded of contrary principles, whereby it would of it
self at last return to its dust again, may further have a worm like Jonah
his Gourd eating out the heart of it, and by that means hastening its
corruption; and yet further besides that may be presently put into the fire,
which will make a more speedy riddance then either of the former: Or as in the
body of a man, besides the general consumption, which lingringly feeds upon
the whole, each particular member may have a particular disease, which may
serve to hasten that corruption to it self, which the other threatens to the
whole: so may it be, and often is in the Creatures of God. Besides Quodcunque
nunc (...), mundi ipsius senectute degenerat, ut nemo mirari debea^ singula in
mundo coepisse desicere, cum totus ipsetam mundus in defectione (...). Cyprian.
(...). Them. Hol. 5. 12.
their natural finitenes, and their general bondage of corruption, which by a
hidden and insensible insinuation does emasculate the vigor and strength of the
Creatures, there may be a Particular Curse, which may serve speedily to hasten
that decay, which, without any such concu^rence, would have made have enough to
leave the possessors of them in everlasting penury. I will be unto Ephraim as
a moth and to the house of Judah as rottennes, says the Lord. That is Gods
first Instrument of mortality whereby he will certainly though indeed
lingtingly consume a thing. But now if for all this when the Moth secretly
consumes him, so that he sees his sickness and feels his wound, he will yet
trust in his own counsels and confederacies, sacrifice to his own net, go to
Assyria or King Iareb for succor, I will then be unto Ephraim as a Lion, in a
more sudden and swift destruction. As he deals thus with men, so with the
things about them too, first he puts a Moth into them, rust in our gold, canker
in our silver, hartlessenesse in our earth, faintness in the influences of
heaven; and if notwithstanding all this men will still trust in the Cisterne,
God will put holes into it too, which shall make it run out as fast as they
fill it; he Prove. 23. 5.
will give wings to their money, increase the occasions of expense: and if they
clip their wings, that they fly not away, he will make holes in the bottom of
their baggs Eccles 5. 11.
that they shall drop away: he will not only send a* Moth and rust which
shall in time eat them out, but he Hag. 1. 6.
will send a Thief upon them too, which shall suddenly break through and
carry them away. So many steps and gradations are there in the mortality of the
creature, when God pleases to add his curse unto them for sin. As for
Ephr^im, says the Lord, their Glory shall fly away Hos. 9. 11.
like a Bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.
Observe the gradations of mortality in the best blessings we enjoy, in our very
glory, namely our Psalm. 127. 3. 5.
children, which are called an Inheritance and reward to take away shame from
their parents. They shall fly away like a bird, that notes the swiftness of
the Judgment, and that first from the birth; as soon as they are borne the
murderer shall destroy them: yea from the womb; before they be borne they
shall perish, nothing of them shall be enjoyd but the hope, and if that be too
much, here is a degree as low as can be, from the very conception they shall
miscarry and prove abortive. I Amos 3. 15.
will smite the winter house and the summer house, the houses of Ivori^, and
the great houses shall have an end. If the Lord undertake to smite, if he send
abroad the fire of his wrath, it shall seize on those palaces and great houses
Amos 1. 4. Psalm. 49. 11.
which men thought should have endured unto all generations. For that Flying
role, importing Judgment decreed, Zach. 5. 4.
and sudden, which was sent over the whole earth against the Thief and the
swearer, did not only smite the man, but his house, and like a leprosy
consume the very timber and stones thereof. Therefore we read in Levit. 14.
35. 55.
the Leviticall law of leprosies not in men only but in houses, and garments,
intimating unto us, that sin derives a contagion upon any thing that is about
us, and like Ivy in a wall, or that wild Caprificus, will get rooting in the
very substance of the stone in the wall, and break it asunder. What ever it is
that men can find out under the Sun to fasten their hearts upon for
Satisfaction and comfort, this leprosy will defile it, and eat it out. If
silver Iam. 5. 1.
and gold, besides their secret rust and proper corruption, the Lord can make
the thief rise up suddenly, and bite the possessors, and so unlade them of
their thick Habak. 2. 6. 7.
clay: If Real substance and increase, the Lord cast^th away, Prove. 10. 3. Job
20. 28.
says the wise man, the substance of the wicked, and the increase of his
house, says Job, shall depart and flow away. If greatness and high places,
the Lord can put ice under Psalm. 73. 18. 19.
their feet, make their places slippery, and subject to a momentarie
desolation: If a great name and glory, the Lord cannot only suffer time and
ignorance to draw out all the memory of a man, but can presently rot his Prove.
10. 7.
name from under heaven: If Corn and the fruits of the Earth, the Lord can
kill it in the blade by withholding Amos 4. 7.
rain three months before the Harvest: He can send a Thief, a Caterpiller,
a Palmer worm to eat it up. If it Verse. 9.
hold out to come into the barn, even there he can blow upon it and consume it
like chafe. However men think when they have their Corn in their houses, and
their Wine in their C^llars they are sure and have no more to do with God, yet
he can take away the staff and lif^ of it in our very houses. Yea when it is
in our mouths and Psalm. 78. 30. 31.
bowels, he can send leanenesse and a curse after it. Awake ye Drunkards, and
howl ye drinkers of wine, says the Prophet, because of the new wine, for it
is cut off from Io^l. 1. 5.
your mouths. The Lord could defer the punishment of these men till the last
day, when undoubtedly there will be nothing for them to drink but that Cup of
the Lords Habak. 2. 16. Isai. 51. 17. 22. Ezekiel. 23. 33.
right hand as the Prophet calls it: a Cup of fury and trembling, a cup of
sorrow, astonishment, and desolation; a Cup which shall make all that drink
thereof to be Ier. 25. 16. 27.
moved and mad, to be drunken and fall, and spue, and rise up no more, even
that fierce and bitter indignation, in the pouring out of which the Lord shall
put to his right Esai. 62. 8. 2. These. 1. 9.
hand, his strong arm, not only the terror of his presence, but the glory of
his power: I say the Lord could let drunkards alone till at last they meet with
this Cup, (which undoubtedly they shall do, if there be either truth in Gods
word, or power in his right hand, if there be either Justice in heaven, or fire
in hell) till with Belshazzar they meet with dregs and trembling in the bottom
of all their Cups: but yet oftentimes the Lord smites them with a more sudden
blow, snatcheth away the Cup from their very mouths, and so makes one Curse
anticipate and prevent another. Though Haman and Achitophel should have lived
out the whole thread of their life, yet at last their honor must have lain
down in the dust with them; Though Judas could have lived a thousand years,
and could have improved the reward of his Masters blood to the best advantage
that ever Usurer did, yet the rust would at last have seized upon his bags, and
his money must have perished with him: but now the Lord sets forward his Curse,
and that which the moth would have been long in doing, the gallows dispatcheth
with a more swift destruction. Thus as the body of a man may have many summons
and engagements unto one death, may labor at once under many desperate
diseases, all which by a malignant con^unction must needs hasten a man's end (as
Caesar was stabd with thirty wounds, each one whereof might have served to let
out his soul) so the Creatures of God laboring under a manifold corruption,
do as it were by so many wings post away from the Owners of them, and for that
reason must needs be utterly disproportionable to the condition of an Immortal
Soul.

Now to make some Application of this particular before we leave it, This does
first discover and shame the folly of wicked worldlings both in their opinions
and affections to earthly things. Love is blind and will easily make men
believe that of any thing which they could wish to be in it: and therefore,
because wicked men wish with all their hearts, for the love they bear to the
Creatures, that they might continue together for ever, the Devil does at last
so deeply delude them as to think that they shall continue for ever. Indeed in
these and in the general, they must needs confess that one generation comes
and another goes: but in their Eccles. 1. 4.
own particular they can never assume with any feeling and experimental
assent the truth of that general to their own estates: And therefore what
ever for shame of the world their outward professions may be, yet the Prophet
David assures us, That their inward Psalm. 49. 11.
Thoughts, their own retired contrivances and resolutions are, that their
houses shall endure for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; and
upon this Immortality of stones and monuments they resolve to rest. But the
psalmist concludes this to be but brutish and notorious folly, This their way
is their folly, they like sheep are laid down in their graves, and death
feeds upon them. And indeed what a folly is it for men to build upon the sand,
to erectan Imaginary fabric of I know not what Immortality, which has not so
much as a constant subsistence in the head that contrives it? What man will
ever go about to build a house with much cost (and when he has done, to
inhabit it himself) of such rotten and inconsistent materials, as will
undoubtedly within a year or two after fall upon his head, and bury him in the
ruins of his own folly? Now then suppose a man were lord of all the World,
and had his life coextended with it, were furnished with wisdom to manage and
strength to run through all the affairs incident to this vast frame, in as
ample a measure as any one man for the government of a private family: yet the
Scripture would assure even such a man, that there will come a day in which the
heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall 2. Pet. 3. 7. 10.
melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt
up, and that there is but one hour to come before all this shall be, Behold
now is the last 1. Ioh. 2. 18.
hour: And what man upon these terms would fix his heart and ground his hopes
upon such a tottering bottom, as will within a little while crumble into dust,
and leave the poor soul that rested upon it to sink into hell? But now when
we consider that none of us labor for any such inheritance, that the
extremity of any man's hopes can be but to purchase some little patch of earth,
which to the whole World cannot bear so near a proportion, as the smallest
molehill to this whole habitable earth; that all we toil for is but to have
our load of a little thick clay, as the Prophet speaks, that when we have
gotten it, neither we nor it shall continue till the universal dissolution,
but in the midst of our dearest embracements we may suddenly be pulled asunder,
and come to a fearful end, it must needs be more then brutish stupidity Esai.
59. 5.
for a man to weave the Spiders webs, to wrappe himself up from the
consumption determined against the whole earth in a covering, that is so
infinitely too Esai. 28. 20.
short and too narrow for him. We will conclude this particular with the doom
given by the Prophet Jeremy. As the Partridge sits on eggs and hatcheth
them not, Ier. 17. 11.
(she is either caught by the fowler, or her eggs are broken) so he that
gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days,
and in the end shall be a fool.

Secondly, this serves to justify the wisdom and providence of God in his
proceedings with men: The wicked here provoke God, and cry aloud for vengeance
on their own head, and the Lord seems to stop his ears at the cry of sin,
and still to load them with his blessings, he makes their way to prosper,
they take root, and Ier. 12. 2.
grow and bring forth fruit: they shine like a blazing Comet, and threaten
ruin to all that look upon them; they carry themselves like some Tyrant in a
Tragedy, that scatters abroad death with the sparkles of his eyes, and darts
out threats against the heaven above him; they are like Agag before Samuel,
clothed very delicately, and presume that there is no bitterness to come. And
now the impatiency of man, that cannot resolve things into their proper issues,
that cannot let iniquity ripen, nor reconcile one day and a thousand years
together, begins to question Gods proceedings, and is afraid le^t the World be
governed blindfold, and blessings and curses thrown confusedly abroad for men
as it were to scramble and to scuffie for them. But our God who keeps times
and seasons in his own power, who has given to every Creature under the Sun
limits which it shall not exceed, has set bounds unto sin likewise wherein
to ripen. The Stars howsoever they may be sometimes ecclipsed, have yet a
fixed and permanent subsistency in their Orbs; but these Comets though they
rise with a greater train and stream of light, yet at last vanish into ashes,
and are seen no more: the Tyrant though in two or three Acts or Scenes he
revell it, and disturb the whole business, yet at last he will go out in
blood and shame* even so, though wickedmen flourish and oppress, and provoke
God every day, and rage like the Sea, yet the Lord has set their bounds which
they shall not pass, they have an appointed time Psalm. 124. 5.
to take their fill of the creature, and then when they have glutted and cloid
themselves with excess, when their humors are grown to a full ripeness, the
Lord will temper them a potion of his wrath, which shall make them Habak. 2. 16.
turn all up again, and shameful spuing shall be on their glory. Thus says
the Lord, For Three transgressions and Amos 1. 2.
for four I will not turn away the punishment of Damascus and those other
Cities. So long as the wicked commit one or too iniquities, so long I forbear,
and expect their repentance; but when they proceed to three, and then add a
fourth, that is, when they are come to that measure of sin which my patience
has prefixed, then I will hasten my revenge, and not any longer turn away the
punishment thereof. In the fourth generation, says God to Abraham, thy
posterity shall come out of the Land where they shall be strangers, and shall
inherit this Land, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. There
Genesis 15. 16.
is a time when sin grows ripe and full and then the sickle comes upon it.
When the Prophet saw a basket of summer fruits, that were so ripe as that they
were gathered Amos 8. 1, 2.
off the tree, (which was a type of the sins of Gods people, which are sooner
ripe then the sins of Heathen that knew him not, because they have the
constant light and heat of his Word to hasten their maturitie) then, says the
Lord, The end is come upon my people, I will not passeby them any more, I will
have no more patience toward them. Jeremy what see thou? I see Ierem. 1. 11.
^2.
the rod of an Almond tree. Thou have well seen, says the Lord, for I will
hasten my Word to perform it. When men hasten the maturity of sin like the
blossoms of an Almond tree, (which come soonest out) then says the Lord will
I hasten the Judgments which I have pronounced. Zachar. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
We read in the Prophet Zachary of an Ephah, a measure where into all the
wickedness of that people, figured by a woman, shall be thrown together, and
when this measure of sins is full to the brimme, then there is a mass of
Lead importing the firmness, immutabilitie, and heaviness of Gods Decree and
counsel, which seals up the Ephah, never more to have any sin put into it,
and then come two women with wind in their wings, which are the executioners
of Gods ^wift and irreversible fury, and carry the Ephah between heaven and
earth, intimating the public declaration of the righteous Judgments of God,
into the Land of Shinar, to build it there an house, denoting the constant and
perpetual habitation of the wicked in that place of bondage whither the wrath
of God shall drive them (for building of houses argues an abiding.) Put you in
the sickle for the harvest Joel 3. 13.
is ripe; come get you down, for the press is full, the fats overflow, for
the wickedness is great. The revenge of sin is here and elsewhere compared
to reaping, and treading Math. 13. 30. Esaias 63. 3. Lament. 3. 15.
the winepresse; and the greatness of sin is here called the ripeness of the
harvest, and the ouerflowing of the fatts, to show unto us that there is a time
and measure of sin, beyond which the Lord will not defer the execution of
his vengeance. There are days of visitation and recompense for sin, which
being come, Israel which Hos 9. 7. Esai. 26. 11. Esai. 42. 25. Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
35. Esai. 65. 6. Ier. 17. 1. Hos. 13. Ier. 2. 22. 24. Hag. 2. 18.
would not know before shall know, that God keeps their sins in store sealed
up amongst his treasures, and that therefore their foot shall slip in due time,
namely in the day of their calamity, or in their month, as the Prophet
speaks. As Gods blessings have a punctual time, from the four and twentieth
of the ninth month, from this day I will bless you: so likewise have his
Judgments too. The days of Man shall be a hundred and Gen 6 3.
twenty years, to the old World: nor are years only, but even months
determined with him, Now shall a month Hos. 5. 7.
devour them with their portions, to idolatrous Israel. Nor months only, but
days and parts of days; In a morning shall the King of Israel be cut off, his
destruction Hos. 10. 15.
shall be as sudden as it is certain. The wicked plotteth against the (...),
and goasheth upon him with Psalm. 37. 17.
his teeth: but though he plot, he shall not prosper, though he gnash with
his teeth, he shall not bite with his teeth, for the Lord shall laugh at him*
because he sees that His Day is coming. So much mischief as he can do
within the compass of his chain, the Lord permits him to do; but when he is
come to His Day, then all his thoughts and projects perish with him.
Excellently has holy Job stated the Point, with whom I mean to conclude,
Their good* says he, is not in their Hand. Riot it Job. 21. 16.
indeed they do, and take their fill of pleasure for a time, as the fish of
the bait, when he has some scope of line given him to play; but still their
Good, their Time, their line is in Gods hand, they are not the Lords of their
own lives and delights. God lays up his iniquity for his children, that is,
the Lord keeps an exact account of his sins, which happily he will r^pay upon
the heads of his children, however he himself shall have no more pleasure in
his house after him, when once the number of his months is cut off in the
midst; and in the mean time however he be full of strength, wholly at ease and
quiet, yet says he, The wicked is reserved to the day of destructiction; He is
but like a prisoner, shackled peradventure in fetters of Gold, but he shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath, and though he could rise out of the grave
before Christ's tribunal, as Agag appeared before Samuel delicately clothed,
yet the sword should cut him in pieces, and bitterness should overtake him.
Thus we see how infinitely unable the Creature shall be to shelter a man from
the tribunal of Christ, and how wise, just, and wonderful the Lord is in the
administration of the World in bearing with patience the vessels of wrath
fitted to destruction, and suffering them to muster up his own blessings
against himself.

Lastly, this must serve for a needful Caution to us, to take heed of deifying
the Creatures* and attributing that Immortality to them which they are not
capable of. But Solatia miscrorum non gaudia beatorum. Aug. E^ist. 119.
Imaginaria in seculo and (...) very. Tertul. de coron. mil. ca. 13.
in as much as they are only for present refreshment in this vale of misery,
and have no matter of real and abiding happiness in them, not to look on
them with an admiring or adoring eye, but to use them with such due correctives
as become such mortal and mean things.

First in using the Creature, be sure thou keep thine intellectuals untainted;
for earthly things are apt to cast a filme over men's eyes, and to misguide them
into corrupt apprehensions and presumptions of them. We find nothing more
frequent in the Prophets then to upbraid the people with their strange
co^fidences which they were wont to rest upon against all the judgments which
were denounced against them, by objecting their wealth, greatness, strong
confederacies, inexpugnable munitions, their nests in the clouds, and their
houses amongst the stars: they could never be brought to repent for sin, or
to tremble at Gods voice, till they were driven off from these holds. A man can
never be brought to God till he forsake the Creature, a man will never forsake
the Creature till he see vanity in the Creature. Turn away mine eyes from
beholding vanity. David intimates that a man can never heartily pray against
fixing his affections on earthly things, till he be really and experimentally
convinced of the vanity of them. This rule Solomon observes to withdraw the
desires of young men, who have strongest affections and smallest experience of
the deceit of worldly things, Though thou rejoice and cheer up thy self, and
walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, yet Know
thou that for all these Eccles. 11 9.
things God will bring thee to judgment, a time will come when thou shall be
stripped of all these, when they shall play the fugitives, and the years of
darkness shall draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them:
and then the Lord will revenge thy great ingratitude in forgetting and
despising him amidst all his blessings, in ^dolizing his gifts, and bestowing
the attributions of his glory, and the affections due unto him upon a
corruptible Creature. In the Roman Triumphs Tertull. Apolog. cap. 33. Brisson.
de Formul. lib. 4. Aug^stus n^cturno visu s^ipem quota^is die cert^ (...) a
p^pulo cavam man^m asses ^orr. gentibus praebens. Sue^on. in Aug. cap 9^.
the General or Emperor, that rode in honor through the city with the
principal of his enemies bound in chains behind his chariot, had always a
servant running along by him with this Corrective of his glory, Resp^ce post
te, hominem memento te. Look behind thee, and in the persons of thine enemies
learn that thou thy self art a man subject to the same Casualties and
dishonors with others. Surely, if men who had nothing but the Creatures to
trust to, being Aliens from the Covenant of promise, and without God in the
world, had yet so much Care to keep their judgments sound touching the vanity
of their greatest honors, how much more ought Christians, who profess
themselves heirs of better and more abiding Promises. But especially arm thy
self against those vanities which most easily beset and beguile thee; apply
the authority of the Word to thine own particular sickness and disease,
treasure up all the experiences that meet thee in thine own course, or are
remarkable in the lives of others, remember how a moment swallowed up such a
pleasure, which will never return again, how an indirect purchase embitter'd
such a preferment, and thou never did feel that comfort in it, which thy
hopes and ambitions promised thee, how a frown and disgrace at another time
dashed all thy contrivances for further advancement, how death seized upon such
a friend, in whom thou. Had laid up much of thy dependence and assurances,
how time has not only robbed thee of the things, but even turned the edge of
thy desires* and made thee loath thy wonted idols, and look upon thy old
delights as Ammon upon Tamar with exceeding hatred. But above all address thy
self to the throne of Grace, and beseech the Lord so to sanctify his
Creatures unto thee, as that they may not be either thieves against him to
steal away his honor, or snares to thee to entangle thy soul. We will
conclude this first Direction with the words of the Apostle: The Time is short:
It remains that both they that 1. Cor. 7. 29.
have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep as though they
weep'd not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that
buy as though they possessed not, and they that use this world as not abusing
it, that is, as not to be drowned and smothered in the businesses of this life,
as if there were any fundamental and solid utility in them; for says he, The
fashion of this world passes away. The Apostles exhortation is beset at both
ends with the same enforcement from whence I have raised mine. First, The Time
is short; The Apostle, as the learned conceive, uses a Metaphor from Sails or
Curtens, or Shepherds tents (as Ezekiah makes the comparison) Esai. 38. 12.
such things as may be gathered up together into a narrow room. Time is short,
that is, That time which the Lord has spread over all things like a sail,
has now this five thousand years been roling up, and the end is now at hand,
as S. Peter speaks; the day is approaching 1. Pe^. 47.
when time shall be no more. And so the words in the original will well bear
it, (...), The Remainder of time is short, or time is short for so much as yet
remains of it to be folded up, and therefore we ought so to behave our selves
as men that have more serious things to consider of, as men that are very near
to that everlasting haven, where there shall be no use of such sails any more.
And in the Apostles close the same reason is farther yet enforced: For the
fashion of this world passes away. (...) The figure, intimating that there is
nothing of any firmness or solid consistencie in the Creature; it is but a
surface, an outside, an empty promise, all the beauty of it is but
skinne-deepe; and then that little which is desirable and precious in the eyes
of men (which the Apostle calls, The lust of the world, 1. Ioh. 2. 17.) (...),
It passes away, and is quickly gone. The word, as the learned differently
render it, has three several Arguments in it to express the Apostles
exhortation.

1. It deceives or coozens, and therefore use it as if you used it not; use it
as a man in a serious business would use a false friend that profers his
assistance, though his protestations be never so fair, yet so employ him as
that the business may be done though he should fail thee.

2. Transversum agit, It carries a man headlong, the lusts of the world are so
strong and impetuous, that they are apt to inflame the desires, and even
violently to carry away the heart of a man; and for this cause likewise use it
as if you used it not, engage your self as little upon it as you can, do as
Mariners in a mighty wind, h^ise up as few sails, expose as few of thy
affections to the rage of worldly lust as may be; beware of being carried where
two seas meet, as the ship wherein Paul suffered shipwreck, I mean, of
plunging thy self in a confluence of many boisterous and conflicting
businesses, least for thine inordinate prosecution of worldly things, the Lord
either give thy Soul over to suffer shipwreck in them, or strip thee of all
thy lading and tackling, break thine estate all to pieces, and make thee glad
to get to Heaven upon a broken planke.

3. The fashion of this world passes over, it does but go along by thee and
salute thee, and therefore use it as if thou used'st it not; do to it as thou
would do to a stranger whom thou meetest in the way, he goes one way and
thou another; salute him, stay so long in his company till from him thou have
received better instructions touching the turnings and difficulties of thine
own way, but take heed thou turn not into the way of the Creature, least thou
lose thine own home.

Secondly, Get an Eye of Faith, to look Through and Above the Creature. A man
shall never get to look of from the world, till he can look beyond it. For
the Soul will have hold-fast of something, and the reason why men cling so
much to the earth is, because they have no assurance if they let go that hold
of having any subsistence elsewhere. Labor therefore to get an interest in
Christ, to find an everlasting footing in the steadfastness of Gods Promises
in him, and that will make thee willing to suffer the loss of all things, it
will implant a kind of hatred and disestimation of all the most precious
endearements which thy soul did feed upon before. Saint Peter says of wicked
men, that they are Purblinde, they cannot see a far off; they can see nothing
but that 2. Pet 1. 9.
which is next them, and therefore no marvel if their thoughts cannot reach
unto the End of the Creature. There is in a dim eye the same constant and
habitual indisposition which sometimes happens unto a sound eye by reason of
a thick mist, though a man be walking in a very short lane, yet he sees no end
of it; and so a natural man cannot reach to the period of earthly (...).
Arist. Rhet. lib. 2.
things, death and danger are still a great way out of his sight, whereas the
eye of faith can look upon them as already expiring, and through them look
upon him who therefore gives the Creatures unto us, that in them we might see
his power and taste his goodness. And nature it self me thinks may seem to
have intended some such thing as this in the very order of the Creatures.
Downward a man's eye has something immediately to fix on; All is shut up in
darkness save the very surface, to note that we should have our desires shut
up too from these earthly things which are put under our feet, and hid from
our eye^, and buried in their own deformity. All the beauty, and all the
fruit of the earth is placed on the very outside of it, to show how short and
narrow our affections should be toward it. But upward the eye sindes scarce
any thing to bound it, all is transparant and d^aphanous, to note how vast our
affections should be toward God, how endless our thoughts and desires of his
kingdom, how present to our faith the heavenly things should be even at the
greatest distance. The Apostle says, That Faith is the Substance Heb. 11. 1.
of things hoped for, that it gives being and present subsistency to things
far distant from us, makes those things which in regard of natural causes
are very remote, in regard of Gods Promises to seem hard at hand. And
therefore though there were many hundred years to come in the Apostles time,
and, for ought we know, may yet be to the dissolution of the world, yet the
Apostle tells us that even then it was the last hour, because faith being able
distinctly to see the truth and promises of God, and the Endlesnesse of that
life which is then presently to be revealed, the infinite excess of vastness
in that made that which was otherwise a great space seem even as nothing, no
more in comparison then the length of a Cane or Trunk, through which a man
looks on the heavens, or some vast country. And ever the greater magnitude
and light there is in a body, the smaller will the medium or distance seem
from it; the reason why a perspective glass draws remote objects close to the
eye, is because it multiplies the species. We then by faith apprehending an
infinite and everlasting Glory, must needs conceive any thing through which we
look upon it to be but short and vanishing. And therefore though the promises
were a far off in regard of their own existence, Heb. 11. 13.
yet the Patriarchs did not only see, but embrace them; their faith seemed to
nullify and swallow up all the distance. Abraham saw Christ's day and was glad,
he looked upon those many ages which were between Ioh. 8.
him and his promised seed as upon small and unconsiderable distances in
comparison of that endless glory into which they ran, they were but as a
curten or piece of hangings, which divide one room in a house from another*
Labor therefore to get a distinct view of the height, and length, and breadth,
and depth, and the unsearchable love of God in Christ, to find in thine own
soul the truth of God in his promises, and that his word abides forever, and
that will make all the glory of other things to seem Esai 40. 8.
but as grass.

Lastly, though the Creature be mortal in it self, yet in regard of man, as
it is an Instrument serviceable to his purposes, and subordinate to the graces
of God in him, it may be made of use even for Immortality. To which purpose
excellent is that speech of Holy Austin, If you Si desunt, non per mala opera
quarantur in mundo, si adsunt, per bona opera serventur in coel^. Epi. 205.
Luke 16. 9.
have not these earthly Goods, says he, take heed how thou get them by evil
works here, and if thou have them, labor by good works to hold them even
when thou art gone to heaven. Make you friends, says our Savior, of the
unrighteous (...), that when you fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations; a religious and merciful use of earthly things makes way to
Immortality and Blessedness. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many
days thou shall find it. It is an allusion unto husbandmen. They do not eat
up and sell away all their corn, for then the world would quickly be
destitute, but the way they take to perpetuate the fruits of the earth, is to
cast some of it back again into a fruitful soil where the waters come, and
then in due time they receive it with increase: so should we do with these
worldly blessings, sow them in the bowels and backs of the poor members of
Christ, and in the day of harvest we shall find a great increase. If then draw
out thy soul to the righteous, and satisfy the afflicted soul, Esai. 58. 10,
11.
then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noone
day, then thy waters shall not lie unto thee; that happiness which it falsely
promises unto other men, it shall perform unto thee. And so much be spoken
touching the great disproportion between the Soul of man and the Creature, in
regard of the Vanity of it.

The next disproportion is in their Operation, They are vexing and molesting
things. Rest is the satisfaction of every Creature, all the rovings and
agitations of the Soul are but to find out something on which to rest; and
therefore where there is Vexation, there can be no proportion to the soul of
man; and Solomon tells us, That All things Eccles. 1. 8.
under the Sun are full of labor, more then a man can utter. He was not used
as an Instrument of the Holy Ghost to speak it only, but to try it too; the
Lord was pleased for that very purpose to confer on him a confluence of all
outward happiness, and inward abilities which his very heart could desire,
that he at last might discover the utter insufficiency of all created
Excellencies to quiet the Soul of man. But if we will not believe the
Experience of Solomon, let us believe the authority of him that was greater
then Solomon; who has plainly compared the things and the cares of the earth
to Thorns, Matthew. 13 22. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
which as the Apostle speaks, Pierce or bore a man thorough with many sorrows.

First, They are Wounding Thorns; for that which is but a prick in the flesh
is a wound in the spirit: because the spirit is most tender of smart: and the
wise man calls them Vexation of spirit. The Apostle tells us they beget many
sorrows, and those sorrows bring death with 2. Cor. 7. 10.
them. If it were possible for a man to see in one view those oceans of blood
which have been let out of men's veins by this one Thorn; to hear in one
noise all the groans of those poor men, whose lives from the beginning of the
world unto these days of blood wherein we live have been set at sale, and
sacrificed to the unsatiable ambition of their bloody rulers; to see and hear
the endless remorse and bitter yellings of so many rich and mighty men as are
now in hell, everlastingly cursing the deceit and murder of these earthly
Creatures, it would easily make every man with pity and amazement to believe,
that the Creatures of themselves without Christ to qualify their venom and to
blunt their edge, are in good earnest Wounding Thorns.

Secondly they are Choking Thorns; they stifle and keep down all the
gracious seeds of the word yea the very natural sproutings of nobleness,
ingenuity, morality in the dispositions of men. Seed requires emptiness in the
ground that there may be a free admission of the rain and influences of the
heavens to cherish it: And so the Gospel requires nakedness and poverty of
mind, a sense of our own utter insufficiency to our selves for happiness,
in which sense it is said that the poor receive the Gospel. But now earthly
things meeting with corruption in the heart are very apt, First, To Fill it,
and secondly, To Swell it, both which are conditions contrary to the
preparations of the Gospel.

They Fill the Heart. First, with Business Yokes of oxen, Luke 14. 18, 20.
and farms, and wives, and the like contentinents take up the studies and
delights of men, that they cannot find out any leisure to come to Christ.

Secondly, They Fill the Heart with Love, and the Love 1. John 2. 15.
of the world shuts out the Love of the father, as the Apostle speaks. When
the Heart goes after covetousness, the power and obedience of the word is shut
quite out. Ezeck. 33. 31.
They will not do thy words, says the Lord to the Prophet, for their heart
goes after their covetousness. A dear and superlative Love, such as the
Gospel ever requires (for a man must love Christ upon such terms as to be
ready without consultation or demurre, not to forsake only, but to hate father
and mother, and wife, and any the choicest worldly endearments for his Gospels
sake) I say such a Love admits of no Corrivalty or competition. And therefore
the love of the world must needs extingvish the love of the word.

Lastly, they fill the heart with fear of forgoing them; and fear takes of
the heart from any thoughts save those which look upon the matter of our
fear: when men who make Gold their Confidence hear that they must forsake all
for Christ, and are sometimes happily put upon a trial, they start aside,
choose rather securely to enjoy what they have present hold of, then venture
the interuption of their carnal contentments for such things, the beauty where
of the Prince of this world has blinded their eyes that they should not see.
For certainly till the mind be settled to believe that in God there is an ample
recompense for any thing which we may otherwise forgo for him, it is
impossible that a man should soundly embrace the love of the truth, or renounce
the love of the world.

Secondly, as They Fill, so they Swell the Heart too, and by that means work
in it a contempt and disestimation of the simplicity of the Gospel. We have
both together in the Prophet, According to their pasture so Hos. 13* 6. Psalm.
10 4.
were they Filled; they were filled, and their heart was Exalted, therefore
have they forgotten me. Now the immediate child of Pride is selfe-dependence
and a reflection on our own sufficiency, and from thence the next issue is a
contempt of the simplicity of that gospel which would drive us out of our
selves. The Gentiles out of the pride of their own wisdom counted the
Gospel of 1. Cor. ^. 25.
Christ foolishness, and mocked those that preached it unto them: and the
Pharisees, who were the learned Act. 17. 32. Ier. 43. 2.
Doctors of Jerusalem, when they heard Christ preach against earthly
affections, out of their pride and covetousness Derided him as the Evangelist
speaks. Nay further Luke 16. 14.
they stifle the seeds of all nobleness, ingenuity, or common virtues in the
lives of men; from whence come oppression, extortion, bribery, cruelty, rapine,
fraud, injurious, treacherous, sordid, ignoble courses, a very dissolution of
the Laws of nature amongst men, but from the adoration of earthly things, from
that Idol of covetousness which is set up in the heart?

Thirdly, they are Deceitful Thorns, as our Savior expresses it. Let a man
in a tempest go to a thorn for shelter, and he shall light upon a thief in
stead of a fence, which will tear his flesh in stead of succouring him, and
do him more injury then the evil which he fled from; and such are the
Creatures of themselves, so far are they from protecting, that indeed they
tempt, and betray us. The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, thou Obad
verse. 3. 4. Habak. 2. 9. 10. Ezekiel. 28. 17. Zeph. 2. 15.
that dwell in the Clefts of the Rocks, thou that say in thine heart,
Who shall bring me down? I will bring thee down, says the Lord to Edom.

Lastly, they are vanishing Thorns. nothing so apt, Psalm. 58. 9. 118. 12.
nothing so easy to catch fire, and be presently extingvished. They are
quenched like a fire of Thorns.

To consider yet more distinctly the vexation of the Creature, we will observe
first the Degrees; secondly, the Grounds of it; and thirdly, the Uses which we
should put it to.

Five Degrees we shall observe of this Vexation. First, the Creatures are apt
to molest the spirit in the procuring of them, even as Thorns will certainly
prick in their gathering. They make all a man's days sorrow, and his Eccles.
^. 22. 23.
travel grief, they suffer not his heart to take rest in the night, as the
Wise man speaks. What pains will men take? what hazards will they run to
procure their desires? Pains of body, plotting of brain, conflicts of
passions, biting of conscience, disreputation amongst men, scourge of tongues,
any thing, every thing will men adventure, to obtain at last that which it may
be is not a competent reward for the smallest of these vexations. How will men
exchange their salvation, throw away their own mercy, make themselves
perpetual drudges and servitors to the times, fawn, flatter, comply, couple
in with the instruments or authors of their hopes, hazard their own blood in
desperate undertakings, and stain their consciences with the blood of others,
to swim through all to their adored haven. Ad^rare vulgus, iacere oscula, and
omnia serviliter pro imperio. The Historian Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
spoke it of Otho that Roman Absalom, he worshipped the people, dispensed
frequently his courtesies and plausibilities, crouched and accommodated
himself to the basest routs, that thereby he might creep into an usurped
honor, and get himself a hated memory in after ages. And that the like
vexation is ordinary in the procurement of any earthly things will easily
appear, if we but compare the disposition of the mind with the obstacles
that meet us in the pursuit of them. Suppose we a man importunately set to
travel unto some place where the certainty of some great profit or preferment
attends his coming, the way through which he must go is intricate, deep,
unpassable, the beast that carries him lame and tired, his acquaintance none,
his instructions few, what a heavy vexation must this needs be to the soul
of that man to be crossed with so many difficulties in so eager a desire? Just
this is the case with natural men in the prosecution of earthly things. First,
the desires of men are very violent (which the Scripture uses to express by
making haste, greedy coveting, a purpose to Prove. 21. 5. 26. 1. Tim. 6. 9.
be rich) Qui Dives fieri vult, and cit^ vult fieri, they that will be rich,
cannot be quiet till their desires are accomplished: and therefore we find
strong desires in the Scripture Phrase expressed by such things as give
intimation of pain with them. The Apostle describes them by gro^ing and
sighing; the Prophet David by panting Romans 8. 23. 26. Psalm. 42. 1. Cant. 2. 5.
2. Sam. 13. 2. 1. King. 21. 4.
and gasping; the Spouse in the Canticles by sickness, I am sick with love.
Thus Ammon grew lean for the desire of his sister, and was vexed and sick;
thus Ahab waxed heavy, and laid him down on his bed, and turned away his face,
and would not eat because of Naboths Vineyard. So that very importunity of
desires is full of vexation in itself. But besides, the means for fulfilling
these desires are very difficult, the instruments very weak and impotent:
peradventure a man's wits are not suitable to his desires, or his strength not
to his wits, or his stock not to his strength, his friends few, his corrivals
many, his businesses tough and intricate, his counsels uncertain, his projects
waylaid and prevented, his contrivances dashed and disappointed, such a
circumstance unseen, such a casualty starting suddenly out, such an occurrence
meeting the action has made it unfeasible, and shipwrack'd the expectation. A
man deals with the earth, he finds it weak and langvid, every foot of that
must often times lie fallow, when his desires do still plow; with men, he
finds their hearts hard, and their hands close; with servants, he finds them
slow and unfaithful; with trading he finds the times hard, the World at a
stand, every man too thrifty to deal much, and too crafty to be deceived; so
that now that vexation which was at first begun with vehemence of desire, is
mightily improued with impatiency of opposition, and lastly much increased with
the fear of utter disappointment at last. For according as the desires are
either more urgent, or more difficult, so will the fears of their miscarriage
grow; and it is a miserable thing for the mind to be torn asunder between
two such violent passions as Desire and Fear.

The second Degree of vexation is in the multiplying of the Creature, that men
may have it to look upon with their eyes, and to worship it in their
affections. And in this Case the more the heap grows, the more the heart is
enlarged unto it; and impossible it is that that desire should be ever quieted,
which grows by the fruition of the thing desired. A Wolf that has once
tasted blood is more fierce in the desire of it then he was before, experience
puts an edge upon the Appetite; and so it is in the desires of men, they grow
more savage and raging in the second or third prosecution then in the first. It
is a usual selfe-deceit of the heart to say and think, If I had such an
accession to mine estate, such a dignity mingled with mine other preferments,
could but leave such and such portions behind me, I should then rest satisfied
and desire no more. This is a most notorious cheat of the fleshly heart of
man; first thereby to beget a secret conceit, that since this being gotten I
should sit quietly down, I may therefore set my self with might and maine to
procure it, and in the mean time neglect the state of my soul, and
peradventure shipwreck my conscience upon indirect and unwarrantable means
for fulfilling so warrantable and just a desire. And secondly thereby likewise
to inure and habituate the affections to the love of the world, to plunge the
soul in earthly delights, and to distill a secret poison of greediness into
the heart. For it is with worldly love as with the Sea, let it have at the
first never so little a gap at which to creep in, and it will eat out a wider
way, till at last it grow too strong for all the bulwarks and overrun the
soul. Omne peccatum habet in se mendacium: there Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 14. c.
4.
is something of the lie in every sin, but very much in this of worldliness,
which gets upon a man with slender and modest pretenses, till at last it gather
impudence and violence by degrees; even as a man that runs down a steep
hill is at last carried not barely by the impulsion of his own will, but
because at first he engaged himself upon such a motion, as in the which it
would prove impossible for him to stop at his pleasure. We read in Saint
Austens confessions Confess. lib. 6. c. 8.
of Alipius his Companion, who being by much importunity overcome to accompany
a friend of his to those bloody Roman Games, wherein men killed one another to
make sport for the people; and yet resolving though he went with his body, to
leave his heart behind him, and for that purpose to keep his eyes shut, that
he might not stain them with so ungodly a spectacle, yet at last upon a mighty
shout at the fall of a man, he could not forbear to see the occasion, and upon
that grew to couple with the route, and to applaud the action as the rest did.
In another place of the same book we read of Monica, the mother of that
Coofess. lib. 9. c. ^.
holy man, that she had so often used to sip the wine that came to her fathers
table, that from sipping she grew to loving, and from thence to excessive
drinking, which particulars are by him reported, to show the deceitfulness of
sin in growing upon the conscience, if it can but win the heart to consult,
to deliberate, to indulge a little to it self at first: for it is in the case
of sin, as it is in treason, qui deliberant desciverunt, to entertain any
the modestest Tacit.
terms of parley with Gods enemy is downright to forsake him. And if it be
so in any thing, then much more in the love of the World; for the Apostle tells
us, (...) that is a Root, and therefore we must expect, if ever 1. Tim. 6. 10.
it get (...) in us, partly by reason of its own fruitful quality, partly by
reason of the fertile soil wherein it is, the corrupt heart of man, partly by
reason of Satan's constant plying it with his husbandry and suggestions, that it
will every day grow faster, settle deeper, and spread wider in our souls. By
which means it must needs likewise create abundance of vexation to the spirits
of Exodus 16. 20.
men. For as Manna in the Wilderness, when the people would not be content to
have from God their daily bread, but would needs be hoarding and multiplying of
it, bred worms and stanke; so when men will needs heap up wealth and other
earthly supplies beyond stint or measure, they do but store up worms to
disquiet their minds, that which will rot and annoy the owners. They pant after
the Dust of the Earth on the head of the Amos 2. 6, 7.
poor, says the Prophet of those cruel oppressors that sold the righteous
for shoes; it notes how the fierceness of a greedy and unsatiable desire will
wear out the strength of a man, make him spend all his wits, and even gasp
out his spirits, in pursuing the poor unto the dust, sucking out their very
livelihood and substance, till they are feign to lie down in the dust. Woe
unto him, says Habak. 2. 6.
the Prophet, that increases that which is not his, enlarging his desires as
Hell and death, that loadeth himself Amos 3. 10. James 5. 3.
with thick clay, that is in other expressions, that storeth up violence and
robbery, that heapeth treasures against the last day; the words show us what
the issue of vehement and indefatigable affections is, they do but create
vexations to a man's own soul, and all his wealth will at length lie upon his
conscience like a load and mountain of heavy earth.

The third Degree of vexation is from the enioyment, or rather from the use of
earthly things. For though a (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. ^.
wicked man may be said to use the Creatures, yet in a strict sense he cannot
be said to enjoy them. The Lord makes his Sun to shine upon them, gives
them a lawful interest, possession, and use of them; but all this does not
reach to a Fruition. For that imports a delightful sweet orderly use of them,
which things belong unto the blessings and promises of the Gospel. In which
respect the Apostle says, that God gives unto us (...), 1. Tim. 6. 17.
All things richly to enjoy. This is the maine sting and vexation of the
Creature alone without Gods more especial blessing, that in it a man shall
still taste a secret curse, which deprives him of that dearness and
satisfaction which he looks for from it. False joy like the crackling of
Thorns he may find, but still there is some fly in the ointment, some death
in the pot, some madness in the laughter, which in the midst of all dampes and
surprizeth the soul with horror and sadness; there are still some secret
suggestions and whisperings of a guilty conscience, that through all this
Jordan of pleasure a man swimmes down apace into a dead Sea, that all his
delights do but carry him the faster unto a final Judgment, Ressevera Senec.
ep.
est verum gaudium: True joy, says the Heathen Man, is not a perfunctory, a
floating thing, it is serious and massy, it sinkes to the Center of the heart:
As in Nature, the Heavens we know are always calm, serene, uniforme,
undisturbed; they are the clouds and lower regions that thunder and bluster;
The Sun and Stars raise up no Fogges so high, as that they may imprint any
real blot upon the beauty of those purer bodies, or disquiet their constant
and regular motions; but in the lower regions, by reason of their nearenesse to
the earth, they frequently raise up such Meteors as often break forth into
thunders and tempests; so the more heavenly the mind is, the more untainted
does it keep it self from the corruptions and temptations of worldly things,
the more quiet and composed is it in all estates; but in minds merely
sensual the hotter Gods favors shine, and the faster his rain falls upon
them, the more Fogges are raised, the higher Thorns grow up, the more
darkness, and distractions do shake the soul of such a man. As fire under
water, the hotter it burns, the sooner it is extingvished by the overrunning
of the water: so earthly things raise up such tumultuary and disquiet thoughts
in the minds of men, as does at last quite extingvish all the heat and comfort
which was expected from them.

Give me leave to explane this Vexation in some one or two of Salomons
particulars, and to unfold his enforcements thereof out of them. And first to
begin with that with which he begins. The Knowledge of things, either natural
in this present text, or moral and civil. verse. 17. of both which he
concludes that they are Uanitie and vexation of spirit. The first argument he
takes from the weakness of it either to restore or correct any thing that is
amiss. That which is crooked cannot be made strait. We may understand it
several ways. First, All our knowledge by reason of man's corruption is but a
crooked, ragged, impedite knowledge, and for that reason a vexation to the
mind: for rectitude is full of beauty, and crookedness of deformity. In man's
Creation his understanding should have walked in the strait path of truth,
should have had a distinct view of causes and effects in their immediate
successions; but now sin has mingled such confusion with things, that the
mind is feign to take many crooked and vast compasses for a little uncertain
knowledge. Secondly, The weakness of all natural knowledge is seen in this
that it cannot any way either prevent or correct the natural crookedness of
the smallest things, much less make a man solidly and substantially happy.
Thirdly, That which is crooked cannot be made strait. It is impossible for a
man by the exactest knowledge of natural things to make the nature of a man,
which by sin is departed from its primitive rectitude, strait again, to
repair that Image of God which is so much distorted. When they knew God, they
glorified Romans 1. 22.
him not as God, they became vain in their imaginations and their foolish
heart was darkened. It is the Apostles speech of the wisest heathen. Aristotle,
the most rational Ethic. lib. 7. c. 3. and 4. Vide de philosophis Impudicis
and veritatem corrumpentibus. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 46. Tacit. An. lib. 13. Dio.
Tacit. Annal. lib* 6. Aristotel. Polit. lib* 1. cap. 10. Uid. Rosin* Antiq.
lib. 8. cap. 20.
heathen man that the world knows of, in his Doctrine confesses the
disability of moral knowledge to rectify the intemperance of nature, and made
it good in his practice; for he used a common strumpet to satisfy his lust.
Seneca likewise the exactest Stoic which we meet with, then whom never any
man writ more divinely for the contempt of the world, was yet the richest
usurer that ever we read of in ancient stories, though that were a sin
discovered and condemned by the heathen themselves.

A second Ground of vexation from knowledge is The Defects and Imperfections of
it. That which is wanting cannot be numbered. There are many thousand
conclusions in nature which the most inquisitiue Judgment is not able to
pierce into, nor resolve into their just principles. Nay still the more a man
knows, the more discoveries he makes of things which he knows not.

Thirdly, in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow. In civil wisdom, the more able a man is the more service
is cast upon him, the more businesses run through him, the less can he
enjoy his time or liberty. His Eminence lodes him with envy, jealousies,
observation, suspicions, forces him oftentimes upon unwelcom compliancies,
upon colors and inventions to palliate unjust counsels, and stop the clamors
of a gainsaying Conscience, fills him with fears of miscarriage and disgrace,
with projects of honor and plausibility, with restless thoughts touching
discoveries, preventions, concealements, accommodations, and the like, in one
word is very apt to make him a stranger to God and his own soul. In other
learning, let a man but consider, First, The confusion, uncertainty,
involvednesse, perplexities of causes and effects by man's sin; Secondly, The
pains of the body, the travel of the mind, the sweat of the brain, the
tugging and plucking of the understanding, the very drudgery of the soul to
break through that confusion, and her own difficulties; Thirdly, the many
invincible doubts and errors which will still blemish our brightest notions;
Fourthly, the great charges which the very instruments and furniture of
learning will put men to; Fifthly, the general disrespect which, when all is
done, it finds in the world, great men scorning it as pedantry, ordinary men
unable to take notice of it, and great scholars feign to make up a theater
amongst themselves; Sixthly, the Insufficiency thereof to perfect that which is
amiss in our nature, the malignant property thereof to put sin into armor,
to contemn the simplicity and purity of Gods Word; And lastly, the near
approach thereof to its own period, the same death that attends us being
ready also to bury all our learning in the grave with us: these and infinite*
the like considerations must needs mingle much sorrow with the choicest
Learning.

Secondly, let us take a view of pleasure. There is nothing does so much
disable in the survey of pleasure as the mixture either of folly or want. When
a man has wisdom to apprehend the exquisitnes of his delights, and variety to
keep out the su^fet of any one, he is then fittest to examine what compass
of Goodness or satisfaction is in them. First then Solomon kept his wisdom,
he pursued such manly and noble delights as might not vitiate but rather
improve his intellectuals. Chap. 2. verse. 1. 2. 3. Secondly, his wisdom was
furnished with variety of subjects to enquire into, he had magnificence and
provisions suitable to the greatness of his royal mind. Sumptuous and
delicate diet under the name of wine. verse. 3. stately Edifices. verse. 4.
Vineyards and Orchards, yea very Paradises, as large as Woods. verse. 5. 6.
Fish Ponds, and 1. King. 4. and 10.
great Waters, multitudes of attendants and retinue of all sexes. Mighty herds
of Cattle of all kinds. verse. 7. Great treasures of silver and gold, all
kinds of music vocal and isntrumental; Thirdly, Solomon exceedes in all
these things all that ever went before him. verse. 9. Fourthly, As he had that
most abundant, so likewise the most free, undisturbed, unabated enjoyment of
them all, He withheld not his heart from any joy; there was no mixture of
sickness, war, or any intercurrent difficulties to corrupt their sweetness,
or blunt the taste of them. Here are as great preparations as the heart of man
can expect to make an universal survay of those delights which are in the
Creature: and yet at last upon an impartial inquiry into all his most
magnificent works, the conclusion is, they were but vanity and vexation of
spirit, verse. 11. Which vexation he further explanes. First, by the necessary
divorce which was to come between him and them, He was to leave them all.
verse. 18. Secondly, by his disability so to dispose of them as that after him
they might remain in that manner as he had ordered them. verse. 19. Thirdly,
by the effects which these and the like considerations wrought in him; they
were so far from giving him real satisfaction, as that First, he Hated all
his works, for there is nothing makes one Hate more eagerly then
disappointment in the good which a man expected. When Ammon found what little
satisfaction 2. Sam. 13. 15.
his exorbitant lust received in ravishing his Sister Tamar, he as fiercely
hated her after as he had desired her before. Secondly, He Despaired of finding
any good in them* because they be get nothing but travel, drudgery, and
unquiet thoughts.

Lastly let us take a view of Riches, the ordinarily most adored Idol of all
the rest. The wise man says first in general, neither Riches nor yet
abundance of Riches will satisfy the soul of man. Eccl. 5. 10. This he more
particularly explanes. First, from the sharers which the increase of them does
naturally draw after it. verse. 11. and between the Owners and the sharers
there is no difference but this, an empty speculation, one sees as his own,
what the other enjoyes to those real purposes for which they serve as well as
he. Secondly, from the unquietnes which naturally grows by the increase of
them, which makes an ordinary drudge in that respect more happy. verse. 12.
Thirdly, from the hurt which usually, without some due corrective they bring.
verse. 13. either they hurt a man in himself, being strong temptations and
materials too of pride, vainglory, covetousness, luxury, intemperance,
forgetfulness of God, love of the world, and by these of disorder,
dissoluteness, and diseases in the body; or else at least they expose him to
the envy, accusations, violences of wicked men. Fourthly from their
uncertainty of abode, they perish by an evil travel, either Gods curse, See
Io^ 20. 15. -- 29.
or some particular humor, lust, or project overturnes a great estate, and
posterity is beggerd. Fifthly from the certainty of an everlasting separation
from them. verse. 15. 16. and this he says is a sore evil, which galls the
heart of a worldly man, that has resolved upon no other heaven then his
wealth, when sickness comes to snatch him away from this his Idol, there is not
only sorrow, but wrath and ^ury in him. verse. 17. Sixthly, from the disability
to use or enjoy them, when a man through inordinate love, or distrustful
providence, or sordidnesse of spirit, or encumbrances of employments, will not
while he lives enjoy his abundance, and when he dies has not, either by his
own covetous prevention, or his successors inhumanity, an honorable burial.
Chap. 6. verse. 1. 2. 3. Seventhly, from the narrowness of any satisfaction
which can be received from them, verse. 7. All the wealth a man has can reach
no higher then the filling of his mouth, then the outward services of the body,
the desires of the soul remain empty still. A glutton may fill his belly, but
he cannot fill his lust; a covetous man may have a house full of money, but he
can never have a heart full of money; an ambitious man may have titles enough to
overcharge his memory, but never to fill his pride; the agitations of the
soul would not cease, the curiosity of the understanding would not stand at a
stay, though a man could hold all the learning of the great library in his head
at once; the sensuality of a lascivious man would never be satiated, it would
be the more enraged, though he should ty^e out his strength and waste his
spirits, and stupifie all his senses with an excessive intemperance. When men
have done all they can with their wisdom and wealth they can fill no more but
the mouth, and poverty and folly makes a shift to do so too. verse. 8. the
desires wander, the soul ^oves up and down as ever. verse. 9. Eighthly, from
their disability to protect or rescue a man from evil, to advance the strength
of a man beyond what it was before. verse. 10. Though a man could scrape all the
wealth in the wo^ld together, he were but a man still, subject to the same
dangers and infirmities as before, nothing can exalt him above, or exempt him
from the common Laws of humanity: neither shall he be ever able to contend
with him that is mightier then he. All his wealth shall be never able to blind
the eye, or bribe the Justice, or testraine the power of Almighty God, if he
be pleased to inflict the strokes of his vengeance upon his Conscience.

The fourth degree of vexation is from the Review of them. First, if a man
consider the means of his getting them. His conscience will oftentimes tell
him, that peradventure he has pursued indirect and unwarrantable ways of
gain, has ventured to lie, flatter, swear, deceive, supplant, undermine, to
corrupt and adulterate wares, to hoard up and dissemble them t^l a dearer
season, to trench upon Gods Day for his own purposes, that so he might not
only receive, but even steal away blessings from him. Secondly, if a man
consider the manner, the inordinate and over-eager way of procuring them. How
much precious time have thou spent which can never be recal'd again, for one
hour whereof a tormented soul in hell would part with all the World if he had
the disposal of it, to be but so small a space within the possibilities of
salvation again, how much of this precious time have thou spent for that which
is no bread, and which satisfies not? How many golden opportunities (...).
Chrysostom. ad pop. (...). ^om. 2.
of increasing the graces of thy soul, of feeding thy faith with more noble
and heavenly contemplations on Gods truth and promises, on his Name and
Attributes, on his Word and worship, of rouzing up thy soul from the sleep of
sin, of stirring up and new enflaming thy spiritual gifts, of addressing thy
self to a more serious, assiduous, durable communion with thy God, of mourning
for thine own corruptions, of groaning and thirsting after heavenly promises,
of renewing thy vows and resolutions, of besieging and besetting heaven with
thy more urgent and retired prayers, of humbling thy self before thy God, of
bewayling the calamities, the stones, the dust of Sion, of deprecating and
repelling approaching Judgments, of glorifying God in all his ways, things of
precious, spiritual and everlasting consequence, how many of these golden
opportunities has thy too much absurd love and attendance on the world stolen
from thee? and surely to a soul illightned these must needs be matters of much
vexation. Thirdly, if a man consider the use he has made of them: How they
have stolen away his heart from trusting in God to rely on them; how they have
diverted his thoughts from the life to come, and bewitched him to dote on
present contentmens; to love life, to fear death, to dispense with much unjust
liberty, to gather rust and security in Gods worship? How much excess and
intemperance they have provoked, how little of them have been spent on Gods
glory and Church, how small a portion we have repaid him in his Ministers or in
his Members? how few naked backs they have clothed? how few empty bellies they
have filled? how few langvishing bowels they have refreshed? how few good
works and services they have rewarded? These are considerations which unto
sensible consciences must sometime or other beget much vexation. Fourthly, if a
man consider his own former experiences, or the examples of others that bring
the vanity of these earthly things into mind. How some of his choysest
pleasures have now outlived him and are expired; how the Lord has snatched
from his dearest embracements those Idols which were set up against his glory;
how many of his hopes have failed, of his expectations and presumptions proved
abortive; how much money at one time a Sickness, at another a Suite, at a third
a Thief, at a fourth a shipwreck or miscariage, at a fifth, yea at a twentieth
time a lust has consumed and eaten out; How many examples there are in the
world of withered and blasted estates, of the Curse of God not only like a
moth insensibly consuming, but like a Lion suddenly tearing asunder great
possessions.

The last Degree of Uexation from the Creature is from the Disposing of them.
All Creatures, sinners especially, that have no hope or portion in another
life, do naturally love a present earthly Immortality: and therefore though
they cannot have it in themselves, yet as the Philosopher says of living
Creatures, the reason why they generate is, that that Immortality which in
their own particulars they cannot have, they may (...) so far as they are
able procure in the species or kind which they thus preserve; so rich and
worldly men, though they cannot be immortal on the earth themselves, yet they
affect an immortality in their names and dwelling places, Psalm. 49. 11. and
therefore they desire to transmit their substance unto such successors as may
have wisdom and nobleness of mind to continue it. Now then if a man either
have no heir, or one that is so active as to alter, or so careless and supine
as to ruin all, either base to dishonor the house, or profuse to overthrow it,
these and many other the like doubts must needs infinitely perplex the minds
of men, greedy to perpetuate their names and places, Eccles. 2. 18. 19.

The second thing which we proposed to consider in this argument was the
Grounds of this Vexation. I shall name but Three. Gods Curse; Man's Corruption;
and the Creatures Deceitfulness.

I have at large before insisted on the Curse considered alone, now I am to
show in one word the issuing of Vexation therefrom. The curse of the Creature
is as it were the poison and contagion of it; and let a man mix poison in the
most delicate wine, it will but so much the easier, by the nimblenesse of the
spirits there, invade the parts of the body, and torment the bowels. Gold of it
self is a precious thing, but to be shackled with fetters of gold, to have it
turned into a use of bondage, adds mockery to the affliction; and far more
precious to a particular man is a chain of iron which draws him out of a pit,
then a chain of gold which clogs him in a prison; a key of iron which lets him
out of a dungeon, then a bar of gold that shuts him in. If a man should have
a great Diamond curiously cut into sharp angles, worth many thousand pounds,
in his bladder, no man would count him a rich, but a miserable and a dead man;
this is just the case between a man and the Creatures of themselves without
Christ to sanctify them unto us; though the things be excellent in their own
being, yet mingled with our corruptions and lusts, they are turned into poison,
into the Gall of Aspes within a man, they will not suffer him to feel any
quietness in his belly, in the fullness Job 20. 14. 16. 20. 22. 23.
of his sufficiency he shall be in straights, and while he is eating, the
fury of wrath shall rain down upon him. Let a man's meat be never so sweet
in it self, yet if he should temper the sauce with dirt out of a sink, it
would make it altogether loathsome; and a wicked man eats all his meat like
swine wrapped up and overdawb'd with dirt and curses. A little, says Solomon,
which the righteous has is better then great riches of the ungodly: In se it
is not, but Quoad hominem, in regard of the man it is: for that little which a
righteous man has is to him an experience of Gods Promise, a branch of his
love, a means of thankful affections in him, a viaticum unto heaven; whereas
the wicked man's abundance turns into his greater curse, their table becomes
their snare, and those things which should have been for Psalm. 69. 22.
their good prove unto them an occasion of falling. God makes his Sun to
shine on the Just and on the unjust, on a garden of spices and on a dunghill:
but in the one it begets a sweet favor of praise and obedience, in the
other it raises up noisome lusts, which prove a savor unto death. And who had
not rather be free in a cottage, then condemned in a palace? Saint Paul
distinguishes of a Reward and a Dispensation. If I preach 1. Cor. 9. 17.
the Gospel willingly I have a Reward, if against my will a Dispensation is
committed unto me. We may apply it to our purpose. Those good things which the
faithful enjoy though but small are yet Rewards and Accessions unto the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and so long they bring joy and peace
with them; but unto the wicked they are merely a Dispensation, they have only
the burden and business, not the Reward nor benediction of the Creature.

The second Ground is the Corruption of nature, which makes bitter and
unclean every thing that touches it. Tit. 1. 15. Hag. 2. 12, 13, 14 Revel.
10. 9.
It polluteth holy flesh, much more will it pollute ordinary things. We read
of a Roll which was sweet in the mouth, but bitterness in the belly: Such
are the Creatures; In the bowels of men, their hearts and consciences (which
are the Seminaries of Corruption) they turn into gall, however in the mouth
they have some smatch of honey in them. For this is a Constant Rule, Then only
does the Creature satisfy a man when it is suitable to his occasions and
necess^ies. The reason why the same proportion is unsufficient for a prince,
which is abundant for a private man, is because the occasions of the prince are
more vast, massy, and numerous then the occasions of a private man. Now the
desires and occasions of a man in Christ, that does not ransacke the Creature
for Happiness, are limited and shortened, whereas another man's are still at
large: for he is in a way, his eye is upon an end, he uses the world but as an
Inn, and no man that travels home-ward will multiply businesses unnecessarily
upon himself in the way. In his house he can find sundry employments to busy
himself about, the education of his children, the government of his family,
the managing of his estate are able to fill up all his thoughts, whereas in the
Inn he cares for nothing but his refreshment and rest: So here, The faithful
make their home their business, how to have their conversation in Heaven, how
to have a free and comfortable use of the foo^e of life, how to relish the
mercies of God, how to govern their evil hearts, how to please God their
father and Christ their husband, how to secure their interest in their expected
inheritance, how to thrive in grace, to be rich in good works, to purchase to
themselves a further degree of glory, how to entaile their spiritual riches to
their posterity in a pious education of their children, these are their
employments: the things of this life are not matters of their Home, but only
comfortable refreshments in the way, which therefore they use not as their
Solatia non negotia.
grand occasions to create businesses to them, but only as interims and
necessary respites. So that hereby their occasions being few and narrow, those
things which they here enjoy are unto those occasions largely suitable, and by
consequent very satisfactory unto their desires. But worldly men are here at
Home, they have their portion in this life: hereupon their desires are vast,
and their occasions springing out of those desires, infinite. A man in the
right way finds at last an end to his journey, but he that is out of the way
wanders infinitely without any success. Rest is that which the desires and
wings of the soul do still carry men upon. Now the faithful being always in
the way, do with comfort go on, though it be peradventure deep and heavy,
because they are sure it will bring them home at last; but wicked men in a
fairer way are never satisfied, because they have not before (...). Arist.
polit. lib. 2. cap. 7.
them that rest which their soul desires. For inordinate lusts are ever
infinite. What made the heathen burn in lust one toward another, but because
the way of nature is finite, but the way of sin infinite? What made Nero that
wicked emperor have an officer about him, who was called Arbiter Neroniana
libidinis, the Inventer and Contriver of new ways of uncleanness, but because
lust is infinite? What made Messalina, that prodigy of women, whom I presume
Saint Paul had a particular relation to, Romans 1. 26. Profluere ad incognitas
libidines, as the Historian speaks, prostitute her self with greediness unto
unnatural and unknown abominations, but because lust is infinite? What makes
the ambitious man never leave climbing, till he build a nest in the stars;
the covetous man never leave scraping, till he (...). Arist. polit lib. 1. cap.
9.
fill bags, and chests, and houses, and yet can never fill the hell of his
own desires; the epicure never cease swallowing, and spuing, and staggering,
and inventing new arts of catches, and rounds, and healths, and caps, and
measures, and damnation; the swearer find out new gods to invocate, and have
change of oaths as it were of fashions; the superstitious Traveller run from
England to Rhemes, and from thence to Rome, and from Rome to Loretto, and after
that to Jerusalem to worship the milk of our Lady, or the cratch and tomb of
our Savior, or the nails of his Cross, or the print of his feet, and I know
not what other fond delusions of silly men, who had rather find salvation any
where then in the Scriptures; what is the reason of these and infinite the like
absurdities, but because Lust is infinite? and infinite Lust will breed
infinite occasions, and infinite occasions will require infinite wealth, and
infinite wit, and infinite strength, and infinite instruments to bring them
about: and this must needs beget much Vexation of mind not to have our
possessions in any measure proportionable to our occasions.

The third and last ground is the Creatures deceitfulness, there is no one
thing will more disquiet the mind then to be defeated. Those things wherein
men fear miscarriage, or expect disappointment, they prepare such a
disposition of mind as may be fit to bear it: but when a man is surpised with
evil, the novelty increases the vexation. And therefore the Scripture uses
to express the greatness of a judgment by the unexpectedness of it: Esai.
64. 3. Esai. 30. 13. Esai. 47. 9. Psalm. 58. 9. 2. Pet. 2. 1.
When thou did terrible things which we looked not for. The unexpectance does
add unto the Terror. A breach in an instant, a momentary, a sudden
destruction, a swift damnation, a flying roll, a winged woman; such are the
Zach. 5. 2. 9.
expressions of a severe Judgment. And therefore it was a wise observation
which Tacitus made of a great Roman, he was Ambiguarum rerum sciens, eoque
intrepidus; He foresaw, and by consequence was not so much troubled with evil
events, as those whom they did surprise. Now men are apt to promise themselves
much con^entment in the fruition of earthly things, like the fool in the
Parable, and to be herein disappointed is the ground of much vexation. When a
man travels in deep way and sees before him a large smoothe plain, he
presumes that will recompense the wile he was formerly put to; but when he
comes to it, and finds it as rotten, as full of sloughs, and bogs and
quagmires as his former way, his trouble is the more multiplied, because his
hopes are deceived: The devil and the world beget in men's minds large hopes,
and make profuse promises to those that will worship them; and a man at a
distance sees abundance of pleasure and happiness in riches, honors, high
place, eminent employments, and the like; but when he has his hearts desire,
and peradventure has out-climb'd the very modesty of his former wishes, has
ventured to break through many a hedge, to make gaps through Gods Law and his
own conscience, that he might by shorter passages hasten to the idol he so
much worshipped, he finds at last that there was more trouble in the fruition,
then expectation at the distance; that all this is but like the Egyptian
Temples, where through a stately Clem. Alex. in Paedag. li. 3. ca. 2.
frontispice and magnificent structure a man came with much preparations of
reverence and worship but to the Image of an ugly ape, the ridiculous idol of
that people. A man comes to the world as to a lottry with a head full of hopes
and projects to get a prize, and returns with a heart full of blankes, utterly
deluded in his expectation. The world uses a man as Ivy does an Oak, the
closer it gets to the heart, the more it clings and twists about the affections
(though it seem to promise and flatter much) yet it does indeed but eat out
his real substance and choke him in the embraces.

First then they deceive our judgments, make us think better of them then
they deserve; they deal with us as the Philistines with Sampson, they begin at
our eyes. Thus the devil began to beguile Eve, When she saw that the Genesis 3.
6. 1. Tim. 2. 14.
Tree was good, and pleasant to the eyes, then being thus first deceived, she
became a transgressor: and thus Esau disputes himself out of his birthright;
I am at the point Genesis 25. 32.
of death, the pottage will make me live, the birthright will not go into the
grave with me; I will prefer my life before my privilege.

Secondly, they deceive our hopes and expectations. Achan promised himself
much happiness in a wedge of gold and Babylonish garment; but they were
denoted and cursed things, they did not only deceive him, but undo him; The
wedge of gold (if I may so speak) did serve to no other purpose but to cleave
asunder his soul from his body, and the Babylonish garment but for a shroud.
Gehazies presumptions were vast, and the bargain he thought very easy to buy
garments, and olive yards, and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and manservants
and maide-servants at the price of an officious and mercenarie lie, he thought
he had provided well for his posterity by the reward of Naaman; but the event
proves quite contrary, he provided nothing but a leprosy for himself and his
seed forever.

They deceive our hopes in respect of Good; They promise long life, and yet the
same night a man's soul is taken Luke 12. 20. Ezekiel. 28. 9.
from him, and they the instruments of that calamity: How many men have
perished by their honors? how many have been eaten up by their pleasures? how
many has the greedy desire of wealth powered out into the grave? They promise
peace and safety (as we see Ier. 2. 36.
how Israel boasted in their mountains, confederacies, supplies from Egypt and
Assyria, in their own counsels Hos. 10. 6. Esaias 10. 7. 16. Esaias 47. 8. 11. Job
6. 19. 20.
and inventions) and yet all these end in shame and disappointment; They
promise liberty, and yet make men slaves unto vile lusts: they promise fitness
for Gods service, and nothing more apt to make men forget him or his worship:
Thus all those fantastical felicities, which men build upon the Creature,
prove in the end to have Psalm 62 9. Hos. 10. 13. Ier. 16. 19.
been nothing else but the banquet of a dreaming man, nothing but lies and
vanity in the conclusion.

Lastly, They Deceive us likewise in respect of evil. No Creatures, however
they may promise Immunitie and deliverance, can do a man any good when the
Lord will be pleased to send evil upon him. And yet it is not for nothing that
a truth so universally confessed should yet be repeated in the Scripture, That
silver, and gold, and corruptible 1 Pet. 1. 18. Psalm. 49. 7. 8.
things are not a fit price for the souls of men. Doubtless the holy men of
God forsaw a time when false Christ's, and false Prophets should come into the
Revel. 18. 13.
world, which should set salvation to sale, and make merchandise of the Souls
of men (as we see at this day in popish Indulgences, and penance, and the like
no less ridiculous then impious superstitions). Neither is it for nothing that
Solomon tells us, That riches yea whole Treasures Prou. 11. 4. 10. 2. Ezekiel. 7.
19. Zeph. 1. 18.
do not profit in the day of death: a speech repeated by two prophets after
him. For surely those holy men knew how apt wealth and greatness is to bewitch
a man with conceits of Immortality, as has been showed. Who were they that
made a covenant with death, and were at Esaias 28. 14. 15.
an agreement with hell to pass from them, but the scornful men, the Rulers
of the people, which had abundance of wealth and honor? Who were they that did
put far away the evil day, and in despite of the Prophets threatenings did
flatter themselves in the conceit of their firm and inconcussible estate, but
they who were at ease in Sion, who trusted upon the Mountains of Samaria, who
Amos 6. 1, 7.
lay upon beds of I^orie, and stretched themselves upon their couches. But we
see all this was but deceit, they go captive with the first of those that go
captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves is removed. All
earthly supports without God are but like a stately house Amos 2. 14 16.
on the sand, without a foundation; a man shall be buried in his own pride. He
that is strong shall be to seek of his strength, he that is mighty and should
deliver others, shall be too weak for his own defense, he that is swift shall
be amazed, and not dare to fly; if he be a bowman, at a great distance, if he
be a rider and have a great advantage, he shall yet be overtaken, and he that is
courageous, and adventures to stand out, shall be feign to fly away naked at
the last. Amos 9. 2. 5. Obad. verse. 3. 9. Esaias 57. 13. Ier. 2. 28. Deuteronomy. 32.
37. 42. Ier 11. 12. Esaias 10. 3. 4. Ezekiel. 22. 14. Ier. 4* 30. Esaias 31. 3.
What ever hopes or refuges any Creature ca^ afford a man in these troubles,
they are nothing but froth and vanity, the Lord challenges and derides them al.
And the Prophet Esaias gives a sound reason of it all, The Egyptians are men and
not God, and their horses are flesh and not spirit, when the Lord shall stretch
out his hand, both he that helps, shall fall, and he that is helpen shall fall
down, and they al shall fail together.

Before we proceed to the last thing proposed; here is a question to be
answered. If the Creatures be so full of Vexation, It should seem that it is
unprofitable and by consequence unlawful either to labor or to pray for them.
Which yet is plainly contrary to Christ's direction, Give us our daily bread,
and contrary to the practice of the Saints who use to call for the fatness of
the earth and dew of heaven, peace of walls and prosperity of Palaces upon
those whom they bless.

To which I answer. That which is evil by accident does not prejudice that
which is Good in it self and by Gods ordination. Now the vexation which has
been spoken of is not an effect flowing naturally out of the condition of the
creature, but arises merely by accident, upon the reason of its separation
from God, who at first did appoint his own blessed communion to go along with
his Creatures. Now things which are good in themselves, but accidentally evil
may justly be the object of our prayers and endeavors: And so on the
otherside, many things there are which in themselves alone are evil, yet by
the providence and disposition of God they have a good issue, they work
together for the best to them that love God. It was good for David that he had
been afflicted: yet we may not lawfully pray for such evils on our selves or
others, upon presumption of Gods goodness to turn them to the best. Who
doubts that the calamities of the Church do at this time stir up the hearts
of men to seek the Lord and his face, and to walk humbly and fearfully
before him; yet that man should be a curse and prodigy in the eyes of God and
men, who should still pray for the calamities of Sion, and to see the stones of
Jerusalem still in the dust. Death is in it self an evil thing (for the
Apostle calls it an enemy, 1. Cor. 15.) yet by the infinite power and mercy of
God, who delights to bring good out of evil, and beauty out of ashes, it has
not only the sting taken away, but is made an entrance into Gods own
presence, with reference unto which benefit, the Apostle desires to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Now notwithstanding this
goodness which death by accident brings along with it, yet being in it self a
Destructive thing, we may lawfully in the desires of our soul shrink from it
and decline it. Example whereof we have in the death of Christ himself, which
was of all as the most bitter, so the most precious: and yet by reason of that
bitterness which was in it, he prays against it, presenting unto his Father
the desires of his Soul for that life which he came to lay down: as his
obedience to his Father, and love to his Church made him most willingly embrace
death, so his love to the integrity of his humane nature, and fear of so
heavy pressures as he was to feel, made him as seriously to decline it. And
though the Apostle did most earnestly desire to be with Christ, yet he did in
the same desire decline the common rode thither through the dark passages of
death, 2. Cor. 5. 4. Unlawful indeed it is for any man to pray universally
against death, because that were to withstand the Statutes of God, Heb 9. 27.
but against any particular danger we may; as Ezechiah did, 1. King. 20. 1, 2.
reserving still a general submission to the will and decrees of God. For we
are bound in such a case to use all good means, and to pray for Gods blessing
upon them, which amounts to a prayer against the danger it self. So then, by
the Rule of contraries, though the Creatures be full of vanity and vexation,
yet this must not swallow up the apprehension of that goodness which God has
put into them, nor put off the desires of men from seeking them of God in those
just prayers which he has prescribed, and in those lawful endeavors which he
has commanded and allowed.

The third thing proposed was the consideration of that Use which we should
make of this vexation of the Creature. And first the consideration thereof
mingled with faith in the heart must needs work humiliation in the spirit of
a man, upon the sight of those sins which have so much defaced the good
Creatures of God. Sin was the first thing that did pester the earth with
thorns, Genesis 3. 17. 18. and has filled all the Creation with vanity and
bondage. Sin is the ulcer of the soul; touch a wound with the softest Lawne,
and there will smart arise; so though the Creatures be never so harmless, yet
as soon as they come to the heart of a man, there is so much sin and
corruption there, as must needs beget pain to the soul. The palate,
prepossest with a bitter humor, finds it own distemper in the sweetest meat
it tastes; so the soul, having the ground of bitterness in it self, finds
the same affection in every thing that comes near it. Death it self, though it
be none of Gods works, but the shame and deformity of the Creature, yet
without sin it has no sting in it, 1. Cor. 15. 55. how much less sting,
think we, have those things which were made for the comforts of man's life, if
sin were not the Serpent that did lurk under them all? Do thou then in
thy swiftest careere of earthly delights, when thou art posting in the ways of
thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, feel a curb privily galling thy
conscience, a secret dampe seizing upon thy soul, and affrighting it with
dismal suspicions and trembling pre-occupations of attending judgments, see a
hand against the wall writing bitter things against thee? Do thou in all thy
lawful Callings find much sweat of brow, much toil of brain, much plunging
of thoughts, much care of heart in compassing thy just and lawful intendments?
Do not lose the opportunity of that good which all this may suggest unto
thee, take advantage to fish in this troubled water. Certainly there is some
Jonah that has raised this storm, there is some sin or other that has
caused all this trouble to thy soul. Do not repine at Gods providence, nor
quarrel with the dumb Creatures, but let thine indignation reflect upon thine
own heart; and as ever thou hopest to have the sweat of thy brow abated, or
the care of thy heart remitted, or the curse of the Creature removed, cast thy
self down before God, throw out thy sin, awake thy Savior with the cry of
thy repentance, and all the storms will be suddenly calmed. Certainly the
more power any man has over the corruption of his nature, the less power has
the sting of any Creature over his heart. Though thou have but a dinner of
herbs with a quiet conscience, reconciled unto God, thou do therein find
more sweetness then in a fatted Ox with the contentions of a troubled heart.
When ever therefore we find this Thorn in the Creature, we should throw our
selves down before God, and in some such manner as this bewail the sin of
our heart, which is the root of that Thorn. Lord, thou art a God of peace and
beauty, and what ever comes from thee must needs originally have peace and
beauty in it. The Earth was a Paradise when thou did first bestow it upon me,
but my sin has turned it into a Desert, and cursed all the increase thereof
with Thorns. The honor which thou gave me was a glorious attribute, a
sparkle of thine own fire, a beam of thine own light, an impresse of thine
own Image, a character of thine own power; but my sin has put a Thorn
into mine honor, my greediness when I look upward to get higher, and my
giddiness when I look downward for fear of falling, never leaves my heart
without angvish and vexation. The pleasure which thou allowest me to enjoy is
full of sweet refreshment, but my sin has put a Thorn into this likewise;
my excess and sensuality has so choked thy Word, so stifled all seeds of
nobleness in my mind, so like a Canker overgrowne all my precious time,
stolen away all opportunities of grace, melted and wasted all my strength, that
now my refreshments are become my diseases. The Riches which thou gave me, as
they come from thee, are sovereign blessings, wherewith I might abundantly
have glorified thy Name, and served thy Church, and supplied thy Saints, and
made the eyes that saw me to bless me, and the ^ares that heard me, to bear
witness to me, wherewith I might have covered the naked back, and cured the
bleeding wounds, and filled the hungry bowels, and satisfied the fainting
desires of mine own Savior in his distressed members; but my sin has put
in so many Thorns of pride, hardness of heart, uncompassionatenesse, endless
cares, security and resolutions of sin, and the like, as are ready to pierce
me through with many sorrows. The Calling wherein thou have placed me is honest
and profitable to men, wherein I might spend my time in glorifying thy Name, in
obedience to thy will, in attendance on thy blessings; but my sin has
brought so much ignorance and inapprehension upon my understanding, so much
weakness upon my body, so much intricatenesse upon my employments, so much
rust and sluggishnes upon my faculties, so much earthlymindednesse upon my
heart, as that I am not able without much discomfort to go on in my Calling.
All thy Creatures are of themselves full of honor and beauty, the beams and
gli^pses of thine own glory; but our sin has stained the beauty of thine
own handyworke, so that now thy wrath is as well revealed from Heaven as thy
glory, we now see in them the prints as well of thy terrors as of thy
goodness. And now, Lord, I do in humbleness of heart truly abhor my self,
and abominate those cursed sins, which have not only defiled mine own
nature and person, but have spread deformity and confusion upon all those
Creatures, in which thine own wisdom and power had planted so great a
beauty, and so sweet an order. After some such manner as this ought the
consideration of the thornynesse of the Creature humble us in the sight of
those sins which are the roots thereof.

Secondly, the consideration hereof should make us wise to prevent those cares
which the Creatures are so apt to beget in the heart: those I mean which are
branches of the Vexation of the Creature. There is a two fold Care, Regular and
Irregular. Care is then Regular, First, when it has a Right end, such as is
both suitable with and subordinate to our maine end, the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness. Secondly, when the means of procuring that end are right;
for we may not do evil to effect Good. Recovery was a lawful end which
Ahaziah did propose, but to enquire of Baalzebub was a means which did poison
the whole business: nay Saint Austin is resolute, that if it were possible by
an officious Aug. de Mendac. ad Consent. lib.
lie to compass the redemption of the whole world, yet so weighty and
universal a good must rather be let fall, then brought about by the smallest
evil. Thirdly, when the manner of it is good, and that is, first, when the
Care is moderate, Phil. 4. 5, 6. Secondly, when it is with submission to the
will and wisdom of God, when we can with comfort of heart, and with much
confidence of a happy issue recommend every thing that concerns us to his
providence and disposal, can be content to have our humors mastered, and
conceits captiuated to his obedience, when we can with David resolve not to
torment our hearts with needless and endless projects, but to roll our
selves upon Gods protection. If I shall find favor in his eyes, he will bring
me again, 2. Sa. 15 25. 26.
and me show both the Arc and his habitation; But if he say thus unto me, I
have no delight in thee, let him do to me as seems good unto him. Such was
the resolution of Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Such
1. Sam. 3. 18.
the submission of the disciples of Cesarea, when they could not persuade Paul
to stay from Jerusalem, The Act. 21. 12. 14.
will of the Lord be do^e. Clean contrary to that wicked resolution of the
King of Israel in the famine, This evil is 2. King. 6. 33.
of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer. Now in this respect
care is not a vexation but a duty; he is worse then an Infidel that provides
not for his own. 1. These 5. 8.
Our Savior himself had a bag in his family, and Solomon sends foolish and
improvident men unto the smallest Creatures to learn this care. Prove. 6. 8.

That Care then which is a branch of this Vexation is not (...) but (...), a
cutting, dividing, distracting care, against which we ought the rather to
strive, not only because it is so apt to arise from the Creature coupling in
with the corruption of man's heart, but also because of its own evil quality,
it being both Superfluous and sinful. First, Irregular cares are superfluous,
and improper to the ends which we direct them upon, and that not to our maine
end only, Happiness, which men toyling to discover in the Creature where it
is not, do instead thereof find nothing but trouble and vexation; but even to
those lower ends which the Creatures are proper and suitable unto. For unto us
properly belongs the Industry, but unto God the care, unto us the labor and
use of means, but unto God the blessing and success of all. 1. Cor. 3. 6.
Though Paul plant and Apollo waters, it is God only that can give the
increase, he must be trusted with the events of all our industry. Peter never
began to sink till Matthew. 14. 28.
he began to doubt, that was the fruit of his carking and unbelief. Which of
you by taking thought can add one Luke 12. 25.
cubit to his stature, says Christ, our cares can never bring to pass our
smallest desires; because I say the care of events was ever Gods prerogative
and belonged wholly to his providence. Upon him we must cast our care, upon 1.
Pet. 5. 7.
him we must unload our burdens, and he will sustain Psalm. 55. 22.
us. We are all of one family, of the household of God Ephesians. 2. 19. Gal. 6. 10.
and of faith, now we know children are not to lay up for parents, but parents
for children. If we should see a child carke and toil for his living, we
should presently conclude that he was left to the wide world, and had no father
to provide for him; and that is our Saviors argument, take no thought, for
your heavenly Father knows Matthew. 6. 32.
you have need of these things. Let us therefore learn to cast our selves upon
God. First, Infaith depending upon the truth of his promises, He has said I
will not fail thee nor forsake thee, and upon the All Sufficiency of his
Power, Heb. 13 5. Dan. 3. 17.
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us. This was that which comforted
David in that bitter distress, when Ziglag was burnt by the Amalekites, his
Wives taken 2. Sam. 30. 6.
captive, and himself ready to be stoned by the people, He encouraged himself
in the Lord his God. This was that which delivered Asa from the huge host of
the 2. Chron. 14 11. 12. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
Lubims and Ethiopians, because he rested on God; and all which afterward he
got by his diffidence and carnal projects, was to purchase to himself
perpetual wars. That which grieved the Lord with his people in the Numb. 14.
11.
Wilderness was their distrust of his power and protection, Can he spread a
Table in the Wilderness? Can he Psalm. 78 19. 20. Psalm. 106. 24.
give bread also and flesh for his people? And indeed as Caines despair, so in
some proportion, any fainting under Genesis 4. 13.
temptation, any discontent with our estate, proceed from this, that we
measure God by our selves, that we conceive of his power only by those issues
and ways of escape which we are by our own wisdoms able to forecast, and
when we are so straitened that we can Ezekiel. 37. 11. Esaias 49. 24 25.
see no way to turn, there we give over trusting God, as if our sins were
greater then could be forgiven, or our afflictions then could be removed. It is
therefore a notable means of establishing the heart in all estates, to have
Hab. 3. 3. 18. Zach. 4. 6. 10. Esaias 55. 8. 12. Hos. 11. 9. 2 Chro. 20. 6. 12
the eye of Faith fixed upon the power God, to consider that his thoughts and
contrivances are as much above ours, as Heaven is above the Earth; and
therefore to resolve with Jeroboam, that when we know not what to do, yet we
will have our eyes upon him still. Son of Man, says the Lord to Ezekiel, can
these dead bones Ezekiel. 37. 3.
live; and he answered, O Lord God thou know. Thy thoughts are above our
thoughts; and where things are to us impossible, they are easy unto thee.
Secondly, by Mat. 10. 16. 17.
Prayer. This is a maine remedy against careful thoughts. When the Apostle had
exhorted the Philippians, that their Moderation, that is, their Equanimitie and
calmness of mind in regard of outward things, should be known unto all
men, he presses it with this excellent reason, The Lord is at hand, he is ever
at home in his Phil. 4. 5. 6. 7.
own family, he is near to see the wants, and to hear the cries of all that
come unto him; therefore says he, Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving (thankesgiving for what you
have, and prayer for what you want) let your requests be made known unto God,
and he shall furnish you with peace in all estates. A notable example of which
promise we have in Anna the Mother of Samuel; In the 1. Sa. 1. 7. 10. 18.
bitterness of her soul she wept, and did not eat (namely 1. Chron. 29. 9.
Deuteronomy. 12. 18. Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Mal. 2. 13.
of the Sacrifices, which were to be eaten with rejoicing) then she prayed, and
vowed a vow unto the Lord, and having cast her cares upon him, she then went
her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. Ezekiah in his
sickness chattered like a Swallow, Esaias 38. 14. 20.
and mourned as a Dove; but after his prayer he sung Hab. 3. 2. 16. 18. 19.
songs of deliverance to the stringed instruments. Habaknk before his prayer
trembled, but after his prayer he triumphed in the midst of death. David full
of heaviness Psalm. 6. 6. 9.
and of gronings in his prayer, but after as full of comfort against all his
enemies.

Secondly, as Irregular Cares are needless and superfluous, so they are
sinful too. First, In regard of their object, they are worldly cares, the
Cares of the men of this world: therein we declare our selves to walk in
conformity to the Gentiles, as if we had no better foundation of quietness
and contentment then the heathen Ephesians. 4. 17. Matthew. 6. 32.
which know not God. And this is Christ's argument, after all these things do
the Gentiles seek. We are taken out of the world, we have not received the
spirit of the world, Ioh. 15. 10. 1. Cor. 2. 10. Romans 12. 2. Psalm. 4. 3. Tit.
2. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 9. Cyprian.
and therefore we must not be conformable unto the world, nor bring forth the
fruits of a worldly spirit, but walk as men that are set apart, as a peculiar
people, and that have heavenly promises, and the Grace of God to establish our
hearts. Illi terrena sapiant qui promissa coelestia non habent, It is seemly
for those alone who have no other portion but in this life, to fix their
thoughts and cares here. Secondly, they are sinful in regard of their
Causes, and they are principally two. First, Inordinate lust or coveting, the
running of the heart after covetousness; Secondly, Distrust of Gods
providence, for those Iam. 4. 3.
desires which spring from lust can never have faith to secure the heart in the
expectation of them. Lastly, they are sinful in their Effects. First, They
are murdering 2. Cor. 7. 10.
cares, they work sadness, suspicions, uncomfortablenes, and at last death.
Secondly, They are Choking cares, Math. 13. 22.
they take of the heart from the word, and thereby make it unfruitful.
Thirdly, they are Adulterous cares, they Iam 4 4.
steal away the heart from God, and set a man at enmity against him. In all
which respects we ought to arm our selves against them.

Which that we may the better do, we will in the last place propose two sorts
of directions. First, How to make the Creature no vexing Creature. Secondly,
How to use it as a vexing Creature: for the former. First, pray for
conveniencie, for that which is suitable to thy mind, I mean not to the
lusts, but to the abilities of thy mind. Labor ever to sure thy occasions to
thy parts, and thy supplies to thy occasions. If a ship out of greediness be
overloaden with gold, it will be in danger of sinking, notwithstanding the
capacity of the sides be not a quarter filled; on the other side fill it to the
brimme with feathers, and it will still toss up and down for want of due
ballasting: so is it in the lives of men, some have such greedy desires, that
they think they can run through all sorts of business and so never leave
loading themselves, till their hearts sink and be swallowed up with worldly
sorrow and security in sin: others set their affections on such trivial
things, that though they should have the fill of all their desires, their
minds would still be as floating and unsettled as before. Resolve therefore to
do with thy self as men with their ships. There may a Tempest arise, when thou
must be constrained to throw out all thy wares into the Sea; such were the
times of the Apostles and after bloody persecutions, when men were put to
forfake Father, Mother, Wife, Children, nay to have the ship it self broken to
pieces, that the Mariner within might escape upon the ruins. But besides
this, in the calmest and securest times of the Church these two things thou
must ever look to, if thou tender thine own tranquillity. First, fill not thy
self only with light things. Such are all the things of this world in
themselves, besides the room and cumbersomenesse of them (as light things take
up ever the most room) they still leave the soul floating and unsettled. Do
therefore as wise Mariners, have strong and substantial ballasting in the
bottom, faith in Gods promises, love and fear of his name, a foundation of
good works, and then what ever becomes of thy other loading, thy ship it self
shall be safe at last, thou shall be sure in the greatest tempest to have thy
life for a prey. Secondly, Consider the burden of thy Vessel; All ships are
not of an equal capacity, and they must be fraighted, and manned, and
victualed with proportion to their burden. Al men have not the same abilities,
some have such a measure of grace as enables them with much wisdom and
improvement to manage such an estate as would puff up another with pride,
sensuality, superciliousnesse, and forgetfulness of God. Again some men are
fitted to some kind of employments, not to others, as some ships are for
merchandise, others for war; and in these varieties of states every man
should pray for that which is most suitable to his disposition and abilities,
which may expose him to fewest temptations, or at least by which he may be
most serviceable in the body of Christ, and bring most glory to his Master.
This was the good prayer of Agur, give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me
with food convenient for me: this is that we all pray, Give us Our daily
Bread, that which is most proportioned to our condition, that which is fittest
for us to have, and most advantageous to the ends of that Lord whom we serve.

Secondly, labor ever to get Christ into thy ship, he will check every
tempest, and calm every vexation that grows upon thee. When thou shall
consider that his truth, and person, and honor is embarked in the same vessel
with thee, thou may safely resolve on one of these, either he will be my
Pilot in the ship, or my planke in the Sea to carry me safe to Land; if I
suffer in his company, and as his member, he suffers with me, and then I may
triumph to be made any way conformable unto Christ my head. If I have Christ
with me, there can no estate come which can be cumbersome unto me. Have I a
load of misery and infirmity inward, outward, in mind, body, name or estate,
this takes away the vexation of all, when I consider it all comes from Christ,
and it all runs into Christ. It all comes from him as the wise disposer of
his own body, and it all runs into him as the compassionate sharer with his
own body: It all comes from him who is the distributer of his Fathers gifts,
and it all runns into him who is the partaker of his members sorrows. If I am
weak in body, Christ my head was wounded, if 2. Cor. 8. 9. Phil. 2 7. Matthew.
12. 24. Act. 27. 23.
weak in mind, Christ my head was heavy unto death. If I suffer in my
estate, Christ my head became poor, as poor as a servant, if in my name
Christ, my head was esteemed vile, as vile as Beelzebub. Paul was comforted in
the greatest tempest with the presence of an Angel, how much more with the
Grace of Christ; when the Thorn was in his flesh, and the buffets of Satan
about 2. Cor. 12. 7. 9.
his soul, yet then was his presence a plentiful protection, my Grace is
sufficient for thee, and he confesses it elsewhere, I am able to do all
things Phil. 4. 13.
through Christ that strengthens me. Christ's head has sanctified any thorns,
his back any surrowes, his hands any nails, his side any spear, his heart any
sorrow that can come to mine. Again, have I a great estate, am I laden with
abundance of earthly things, this takes away all the Vexation that I have
Christ with me; his promise to sanctify it, his wisdom to manage it, his
glory to be by it advanced, his word to be by it maintained, his Anointed Ones
to be by it supplied, his Church to be by it repaired, in one word his poverty
to be by it relieved. For as Christ has strength and compassion to take of the
burden of our afflictions, so has he poverty too, to ease that vexation which
may grow from our abundance. If thou had a whole wardrobe of cast apparel,
Christ has more nakedness then all that can cover; if whole barnes full of
corn, and cellars of wine, Christ has more empty bowels then all that can
fill; if all the precious drugs in a country, Christ has more sickness then all
that can cure; if the power of a mighty Prince, Christ has more imprisonment
then all that can enlarge; if a whole house full of silver and gold, Christ
has more distressed members to be comforted, more breaches in his Church to be
repaired, more enemies of his Gospel to be opposed, more defenders of his faith
to be supplied, more urgencies of his Kingdom to be attended, then all that will
serve for. Christ professes himself to be still hungry, naked, sick, and
Matthew. 25.
in prison, and to stand in need of our visits and supplies. As all the good
which Christ has done is ours, by reason of our communion with him, so all the
^vill we suffer is Christ's, by reason of his compassion with us. The Apostle
Ephesians. 2. 6. Col. 1. 24.
says that we sit together with Christ in heavenly places, and the same
Apostle says, that the sufferings of Christ are made up in his members. Nos ibi
sedemus, et ille hic laborat. Aug.
We are glorified in him, and he pained in us, in all his honor we are honored,
and in all our affliction he is afflicted.

Thirdly, cast out thy Jonah, every sleeping and secure (...), etc. Chrysostom.
ad pop. Antioch. hom. 5.
sin that brings a Tempest upon thy ship, vexation to thy spirit. It may be
thou have an execrable thing, a wedge of gold, a babylonish garment, a bag
full of unjust gain, gotten by sacrilege, disobedience, mercilesnes,
oppression, by detaining Gods, or thy neighbors rights; It may be thou have a
Da^la, a strange woman in thy bosom, that brings a rot upon thine estate, and
turns it all into the wages of a whore; what ever thy sickness, what ever thy
plague be, as thou tenderest the tranquillity of thine estate rouse it up from
its sleep by a faithful, serious and impartial examination of thine own
heart, and though it be as dear to thee as thy right eye, or thy right hand,
thy choicest pleasure or thy chiefest profit, yet cast^ out in an humble
confession unto God, in a hearty and willing restitution unto men, in opening
thy close and contracted bowels to those that never yet enjoyed comforts from
them; then shall quietness arise unto thy soul, and that very gain which
thou throwest away is but cast upon the waters, the Lord will provide a Whale
to keep it for thee, and will at last restore it thee whole again.

The last direction which I shall give to remove the vexation of the Creature
is out of the text, and that is, To keep it from thy Spirit, not to suffer it
to take up thy thoughts and inner man. They are not negotia but viatica only,
and a man's heart ought to be upon his business and not upon accessories. If in
a tempest men should not address themselves to their offices, to loose the
tacklings, to draw the pumpe, to strike sails, and lighten the vessel, but
should make it their sole work to gaze upon their commodities, who could
expect that a calm should drop into such men's laps. Beloved when the
Creatures have raised a tempest of vexation, think upon your Offices, to the
pumpe, to power out thy corruptions, to the sails and tackling, abate thy
lusts and the provisions of them, to thy faith, to live above hope, to thy
patience, It is the Lord, let him do as seems good to him, to thy
thankfulness, the Lord gives and the Lord takes away, Blessed be the name of
the Lord. If Job should have gazed on his children or substance, he might have
been swallowed up in the storm; but God was in his heart, and so the vessel
was still safe. But what is it to keep the Creature from the spirit? It is
Psalm. 6^. 10.
in the phrase of Scripture, Not to set the Heart upon riches. Apponere cor, to
carry a man's heart to the creature, the Prophet gives a fit expression of it
when he says, That the heart does g^t after covetousness; when a man makes
all the motions of his soul wait upon his lusts, and drudgeth for them, and
brings his heart to the edge Nec vulnus adactis debetur gladijs, percussum
est pectore ferrum. Luc.
of the creature: for the world does not wound the heart, but the heart
wounds it self upon the world. And it is not the rock alone that dasheth the
ship, without its own motion being first tossed by the wind and waves upon the
rock; so it is a man's own lust which vexes his spirit, and not the things
alone which he possesses.

To set the heart on the Creature denotes three things. First, to pitch a man's
thoughts and studies, to direct all the restless enquiries of his soul upon
them, and the good he expects from them. This in the Scripture is expressed by
Mic. 2. 1.
Devising, Hab. 2. 10.
Consulting, Luke 12. 17. 18.
Thinking within ones self, being tossed like a Luke 12. 29. (...).
Meteor with doubtfulnesse of mind and careful suspense, Hos. 4. 17.
Joining ones self, making Romans 13. 14.
Provision for lusts, etc. Secondly, to care for, to employ a man's affections
of love, delight, desire upon them, to set a high price on them, and over-rate
them above other things. For this cause covetous men are called Ephesians. 5* 5. Col.
3. 5.
Idolaters, because they prefer money, as a man does his God, before all
other things. When the women would have comforted the wife of Phineas with the
birth of a son, after the captivity of the Arc, it is said she regarded it
not, the Text is, she did not put her heart 1. Sam. 4. 20. Ioh. 16. 21.
upon it: though a woman rejoice when a man child is borne, yet in comparison
of the Arc she no more regarded the joy of a son, then a man would do if
the sun should be blotted out of heaven, and a little star put in the
room; and therefore, though children be the glory Hos. 9. 11.
of their parents, yet she professes that there was no glory in this to have
a son, and lose an Arc, a star without light, a son without service, a
levite borne and no Arc to wait upon; and therefore she did not set her heart
upon it. They will not set their heart upon us, 2. Sam. 18. 3.
say the people to David, for thou art worth ten thousand of us; that is, they
will no whit regard us in comparison of thee: so then a man's heart is set on
the Creature, when he prizeth it above other things, and declares this
estimation of his heart by those eager endeavors with which he pursues them
as his God and Idol. Thirdly, to rely upon, to put trust and affiance in the
Creature: and this is imported in the word by which the Prophet expresses
riches, which signifies strength of all sorts, vires, and propugnaculum, the
inward strength of a man and the outward strength of munition and
fortification: therefore, says Solomon, the rich man's wealth is his Prove. 10.
15. Psalm 49. 6. 1. Tim. 6. 17. Ier. 9. 23.
strong city, and rich men are said to Trust and Glory in their riches,
examples whereof the Scripture abundantly gives in Tire, Babylon, Ninive, Edom,
Israel, etc.

Now a man ought not thus to set his heart on the Creature; first, because of
the Tenderness and delicacie of the spirit, which will quickly be bruiz'd
with any thing that lies close upon it and presses it. As men wear the
softest garments next their skin, that they be not disquieted, so should we
apply the tenderest things, the mercies and the worth of the blood of Christ,
the promises of grace and glory, the precepts and invitations of the Spirit
unto our spirits. And now as subterraneous wind or air being pressed in by
the earth, does often beget concussions and earthquakes; so the spirit of a
man being swallowed up and quite closed in earthly things must needs beget
tremblings and distractions at last to the soul. The word here which we
translate Vexation is rendered likewise by Contritio, a pressing, grinding,
wearing away of a thing, and by Depastio, a feeding on a thing, which makes
some render the words thus, All is vanity and a feeding upon wind. That as
windy meats, though they fill and swell a man up, they nourish little, but
turn into crudities and diseases; so the feeding upon the Creature may puff
up the heart, but it can bring no real satisfaction, no solid nutriment to the
soul of man. The Creature upon the spirit is like a worm in wood, or a moth
in a garment, it begets a rottenness of heart, it bites asunder the threads
and sinews of the soul, and by that means works an ineptitude and
undisposednesse to any worthy service, and brings a decay upon the whole man;
for cares will prevent age, and change the color of the hair before the Hos.
7. 9. 11.
time, and make a man like a silly Dove, without any heart, as the Prophet
speaks.

Secondly, because the strength of every man is his spirit; Men's cujusque is
est quisque. Now if the Creature seize on a man's strength, it serves him as
Dalilah did Sampson, it will quickly let in the Philistines to vex him.
Strength has Two parts or offices, Passive in undergoing and withstanding
evil, and Active in doing that which belongs to a man to do. Now when the
heart and spirit of a man is set upon any Creature, it is weakened in both these
respects.

First, it is disabled from bearing or withstanding evil. We will consider it,
First in temptations; Secondly in afflictions. First, A man who has set his
heart inordinately upon any Creature is altogether unfit to withstand any
temptation. In the Law when a man had new married a wife, he was not to go to
war that Deuteronomy. 24. 5.
year, but to rejoice with his wife. One reason whereof I suppose was this,
because when the mind is strongly set upon any one object, till the strength
of that desire be abated, a man will be utterly unfit to deal with an enemy:
so is it with any lust to which a man weds himself, it altogether disables him
to resist any enemy: after Hannibals army had melted themselves at Capua with
sensuality and luxury, they were quite strangers to hard service and rigid
discipline, when they were again reduced unto it.

The Reason hereof is, first The subtlety of Satan, who will be sure to
proportion his temptations to the heart, and those lusts which do there
predominate, setting upon men with those persuasions wherewith he is mos likely
to seduce them; As the Grecians got in upon the Trojans with a gift, something
which they presumed would find acceptance. The devil deals as men in a
siege, casts his projects, and applies his batteries to the weakest and most
obnoxious place. Therefore the Apostle Iam. 1. 14. Causas corruptelarum non in
illecebris, sed in cordibus habemus, and vitiositas nostra men's nostra est.
Salvi. de Guber. lib. 6.
says, that a man is tempted, when he is led away of his own lust and
enticed; the devil will be sure to hold intelligence with a man's own lusts,
to advise and sit in counsel with his own heart, to follow the tide and
stream of a man's own affections in the tempting of him. Adam tempted in Genesis
3. 5.
knowledge, Pharaoh by lying Exodus 7. 23.
wonders, the Prophet by pretense of an 1. King. 13. 18.
Angels speech, Ahab by the consent of 2. Chro. 1^. 11
false prophets, the Jews by the Ier. 7. 4.
Temple of the Lord and carnal privileges* the heathen by pretense of Act.
19. 27.
universality, and Act. 17. 19.
antiquity. When David's heart after his adultery was set upon his own glory
more then Gods, how to save his own name from reproach, we see as long as that
affection prevailed against him, as long as his heart was not so thoroughly
humbled as to take the shame of his sin to himself, to bear the indignation
of the Lord, and accept of the reproach of his iniquity, he was overcome with
many desperate temptations: he yields to be himself a temper of his neighbor
to unseasonable pleasures, to drunkenness and shame, to be a murderer of his
faithful servant, to multiply the guilt, that he may shift of the shame of
his sin, and provide for his own credit. Peter's heart was set upon his own
life and safety more then the truth of Christ or his own protestations, and
Satan fitting his assault to this weakness prevails against a rock with
the breath of a woman. They that will be rich, says the apostle, who set their
hearts upon 1. Tim. 6. 9, 10.
their riches, whose hearts run after their covetousness, fall into
temptation and a snare, into many foolish and hurtful lusts. Such a heart is
fit for any temptation. Tempt Acha^s covetous heart to sacrilege, and he will
reach forth his hand to the accursed thing; Tempt Iudaes his covetous heart to
treason, and he will betray the precious blood of the Son of God which is
infinitely beyond any rate of silver or gold for a few pieces of silver, the
price of a little field; Tempt Gehazies covetous heart to multiply lie upon
lie, and he will do it with ease and greediness for a few pieces of money,
and change of raiment; Tempt Saul's covetous heart with the fattest of the
Cattle, and he will venture on disobedience, a sin worse then witchcraft,
which himself had rooted out; Tempt the covetous heart of a Judge in Israel to
do injustice, Amos 2. 6.
and a pair of shoes shall spurn righteousness out of doors, and pervert
judgment; Tempt the covetous Prove. 1. 18, 19.
heart of a great oppressor to blood and violence, and he will lie in wait for
the life of his neighbor; Tempt the covetous heart of a proud pharisee or
secure people Luke 16. 14. Ezekiel. 33. 31.
to scorn the word out of the mouth of Christ or his prophet, and they will
easily yield to any infidelity. The like may be said of any other lust in its
kind. If the heart be set on Beauty; Tempt the Sons of God to forsake
their covenant of marrying in the Lord, the Israelites to the idolatry of Baal
Peor, Sampson to forsake his vow and calling, easily will all this be done, if
the heart have the beauty of any creature as a treacher in it, to let in the
temptations, and to let out the lusts. How many desperate temptations does
beauty cast many men upon? bribery to lay down the price of a whore, gluttony
and drunkenness to inflame and ingenerate new lusts, contempt of the Word and
Judgments of God to smother the checkes of conscience, frequenting of Satan's
palaces, plays and stews, the chapels of Hell and nurseries of uncleanness,
challenges, stabbes, combats, blood, to vindicate the credit and comparisons of
a strumpets beauty, to revenge the competition of unclean Corrivals. Thus will
men venture as deep as Hell to fetch fire to power into their veins, to make
their spirits fry, and their blood boil in abhorred lust. If the heart be
set on wit and pride of its own conceits, tempt the Libertines and Cyrenians
to dispute against the truth, the Greeks to despise the Gospel, the wise men
of the world to esteem the ordinance of God foolishnes of preaching, the false
teachers to foist their straw and stubble upon the foundation, Achitophell to
comply with treason, Lucian to revile Christ, and deride religion, easily will
these and a world the like temptations be let into the heart, if pride of wit
stand at the door and turn the lock.

Whence is it that men spend their precious abilities in frothy studies, in
complements, forms and garbes of salute, satyrs, libels, abuses, profanation
of Gods Word, scorn of the simplicity and power of godliness, with infinite
the like vanities, but because the^ hearts are taken up with a foolish
creature, and not with God and his fear? If the heart be set on Ambition,
tempt Corah to desperate rebellion, Absalom to unnatural treason, Balaam to
curse the church, Diotrephes to contemn the Apostles and their doctrine,
Julian to apostacy, Arius to heresy, the Apostles themselves to emulation and
strife, easily* will one lust let in these, and a thousand more. What else is
it that makes men to flatter profaneness, to adore golden beasts, to admire
glistering abominations, to betray the truth of the Gospel, to smother and
dissemble the strictness and purity of the ways of God, to strike at the sins
of men with the scabberd and not with the sword, to deal with the fancies of
men more then with their consciences, to palliate vice, to dawbe with
untempered mortar, to walk in a neutralitie and adiaphorisme between God and
Baal, to make the souls of men and the glory of God subordinate to their lusts
and risings, but the vast and unbounded gulf of ambition and vain glory? The
like may be said of several other lusts. But I proceed.

Secondly a Heart set on any lust is unfit to withstand temptation, because
temptations are commonly edged with Promises or Threatenings. Now if a man's
heart be set on God, there can no promises be made of any such good as the
heart cares for, or which might be likely to ouer-poise and sway to the
temptation, which the heart has not already; spiritual promises the Devil
will make few, or if he do, such a heart knows that evil is not the way to
good; if he make promises of earthly things, such promises the heart has
already from one who can better make them, 1 Timothy 4. 8 neither can he promise
any thing which was not more mine before then his; for either that which he
promises is convenient for me, and so is Manna, food for my nature, or else
Inconvenient, and then it is Quails, food for my lust. If the former, God
has taught me to call it mine own already, give us our Bread, and not to go
to the Devils shambles to fetch it; If the other, though God should suffer the
Devil to give it, yet he sends a curse into our mouths along with it. And as
such a heart neglects any promises the Devil can make, so is it as heedlesse
of any of his threatenings, because if God be on our side, neither
principalities, ^or powers, nor things present, nor things to come, can ever
separate from him; stronger is he that is with us then he that is with the
world, it is the business of our calling to fight against spiritual
wickednesses, and to resist the Devil. But when the heart is set on any
creature, and has not God to rest upon, when a man attributes his wine and
oil to his lovers and not to God, his credit, wealth, subsistency to the
favors of men and not to ^he all sufficiency of God, then has the Devil an
easy way to win a man to any s^ne, or withdraw him from any good, by
pointing his temptations with promises or threatenings fitted to the things
which the heart is set on.

Let the Devil promise Balaam honor and preferment, on which his ambitious
heart was set, and he will rise early, run and ride, and change natures with
his Ass, and be more senseless of Gods fury then the dumb creature, that he
may curse Gods own people: let the Devil promise thirty pieces of silver to
Judas, whose heart ran upon covetousness, and there is no more scruple, the
bargain of treason is presently concluded: Let the Devil tempt Michaes Levite
with a little better reward then the beggarly stipend which he had before,
Theft and Idolatry are swallowed down both together, and the man is easily
won to be a suare and seminary of spiritual uncleanness to a whole tribe.
On the other side, Let Satan threaten Jeroboam with the loss of his kingdom,
if he go up to Jerusalem, and serve God in the way of his own worship, and
that is argument enough to draw him and all his successors to notorious and
Egyptian idolatry; and the reason was because their hearts were more set upon
their own Counsels, then upon the worship or truth of God. Let the Devil by
the edicts and ministers of Jeroboam lay snares in Mizpah, Hos. 5. 4. 11.
and spread nets upon Taber, that is, use laws, menaces, subtilties to keep
the people from the City of God, and to confine them to regal and
state-Idolatrie, Hos. 13. 1.
presently the people tremble at the iniunction of the king, and walk
willingly after the Commandment. Let (...) erect his prodigious ^dole and
upon Dan. 3. 6, 7.
on pain of a (...)* furnace require All to worship, it and all people,
nations, and languages are presently upon their faces. Let the Devil threaten
Demas with persecu^ion, and presently he forsakes the fellowship of the
Apostles, and imbraceth this present world. And as it was heretofore so is it
still.

If a man's heart be not set on God, and taught to rest upon his providence, to
answer all Satan's promises with his All-sufficiencie to reward us, and all his
threatenings, with his All Sufficiency to protect us, how easily will promises
begvile, and threatenings deter unstable and earthly minds? Let the Devil
tell one man, All this will I give thee, if thou will speak in a Cause to
pervert judgment, how quickly will men create subtilties, and coin evasions
to rob a man and his house, even a man and his inheritance? Let him say to
another, I will do whatsoever thou say unto me, if thou will dissemble thy
conscience, divide thy heart, comply with both sides, keep down the power of
godliness, persecute zeal, set up will worship and supersti^ions, how quickly
shall such a man's religion be disgviz'd, and sincerity, if it were possible,
put to shame? If to another thou shall by such a time purchase such a Lordship,
out such a neighbor, swallow up such a prodigal, if thou enhance thy rents,
enlarge thy fines, set unreasonable rates upon thy Farms, how quickly will men
grind the faces of the poor, and purchase ungodly possessions with the blood
of their tenants? If to another, beware of laying open thy conscience, of being
too faithful in thy Calling* too s^rupulous in thy office, least thou purchase
the dis-favour of the World, lest the times cloud overthee, and frown upon
thee, lest thou be scourged with persecuted names, and make thy self obnoxious
to spies and censures, how will men be ready to start back, to shrink from
their wonted forwardness, to abate their former zeal, to co^ple in with, and
connive at the corruptions of the age, in one Word to tremble when Ephraim
speaks, and not to tremble when God speaks? So hard is it when the heart is
wedded to earthly things, and they are gotten into a man's bosom, to bear the
assaults of any temptation.

Lastly* this comes from the just and secret wrath of God, giving men over to
the deceitfulness of sin, and to the hardness of their own hearts, to
believe the lies 2. These. 2 9. ^2.
and allurements of Satan, because they rejected the counsel of God, and the
love of his truth before. In the influences of the Sun we may observe, that
the deeper they work the stronger they work; the beams nearer the Center
meeting in a sharper point do consolidate and harden the very Element; so the
Creatures by the justice of God, when they meet in a man's Center, reach as
far as his heart, do there mightily work to the deceiving and hardening of
it: the eye, nor any other outward sense, can find no more in the Creature,
then is really there; it is the heart which mis-conceives things, and
attributes that Deity and worth to them, which the senses could not discover.
If men then could keep these things from their spirits, they should ever
conceive of them according to their own narrow being, and so keep their
hearts from that hardness which the Creatures, destitute of Gods blessing, do
there beget, and so work in the soul a disposition suitable to Satan's
temptations.

Secondly, a Heart set upon any lust is unfit likewise to Mark. 10. 22.
bear any affliction. The Young man whose heart was upon his riches, could not
endure to hear of selling all, and entering upon a poor and persecuted
profession. First, Lusts are choice and dainty, they make the heart very
delicate, and nice of any assaults. Secondly, they are very wilful, and set
upon their own ends, therefore they are expressed by the name of
concupiscence, and (...), Ephesians 2 3.
The wills of the flesh, and wilfulness is the ground of impatiency. Thirdly,
they are natural, and move strongly to their own point; they are a Body, and
our very members; no marvel then if they be sensible of Col. 2. 11. and 3. 5
Heb. 12 11.
pain from afflictions, which are contrary unto nature. The stronger the water
runs, the more will it roar and some upon any opposition: lust is like a
furious beast enraged with the affliction, the chain that binds it. Fourthly,
Lusts are very wise after a fleshly and sensual Romans 8. 6.
manner, and worldly wisdom is impatient of any stoppage or prevention of any
affliction that crusheth and disappoints it. Therefore the Apostle does herein
principally Iam: 3. 13. 17.
note the opposition between heavenly and carnal wisdom, that the one is
meek, peaceable, and gentle, the other divelish and full of strife. Fifthly,
Lusts are Ezekiel. 28. 5. Psalm. 10. 4. Obad. v. 3. Esaias 10. 12. Ier. 22. 21. and
43 2. Hos. 13. 6.
proud, especially those that arise from abundance of the Creature, and pride
being set upon by any affliction makes the heart break forth into Mal. 3. 13.
14. Nehem. 9. 29. Ier. 13. 17.
impatience, debates, and stoutnesse against God; a proud heart grows harder
by afflictions, as Metals or Clay after they have past through the furnace. It
is said of Exodus 7. 23. and 9. 17.
Pharaoh, that he did not set his heart to the Judgments of God, but exalted
himself against his people; Pride grew stronger by Affliction. Besides, Psalm.
10. 6. Ier. 21. 13. Ezekiel. 28. 2.
pride in earthly things swallows up the very expectation of Afflictions, and
therefore must needs leave the heart unprepared against them. Sixthly, Lusts
are rooted in 2 Timothy 3. 2.
self-love, and therefore when Christ will have a man forsake his lusts, he
directs him to Mat 1^. 24.
deny himself. Now the very essence of Afflictions are to be grievous and
adverse to a man's self. Seventhly, Lusts are Iam 4. 1. 4. 1. Pet. 2. ^1.
contentious, armed things, and their Romans 8. 7.
enmity is against God, and therefore utterly unfit to Levit. 26. 41.
accept of the punishment of sin, and to Mic. 7. 9.
bear the ^ndignation of the Lord, or to submit unto any afflictions.
Eighthly, Lusts 2. Tim 3 8. Ier. 12. 21. Zech. 7* 9. 12. Luke 16. 14. Acts 7.
51. 2. Cor. 10. 3. 5.
resist the truth, set up themselves against the Word, and thereby utterly
disable men to bear Afflictions, for the Psalm. 1 19 92. 114. 143 165..
Word sanctifies, and lightens all Affliction, the Word shows Gods Ier. 30.
11. Esaias 63. 13. Esaias 28. 27. 18. Hab. 3. 3. Psalm. 78. 38.
moderation and Heb. 12, 6. 10. 11. Esaias 10. 12.
intention in them, an 1. Cor. 10. 13. Zech. 1. 16. 4. 6. 7. Esaias 64. 7. 12.
Hab. 3. 17. 19 Prove. 10. 3 Ier. 17. 8.
issue out of them, the Psalm 119. 71. Heb. 12. 11.
benefits which will come from them, the 2. Cor. 12. 9. Phil. 1. 29. Phil. 4.
12. 13. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
supplies of strength and abilities to bear them, the 2. Cor. 4 17. Esaias 6. 7.
and 54. 8.
promises of a more abundant and exceeding weight of glory, in comparison
whereof they are as nothing. Lastly, if we could conceive some Afflictions not
contrary to lust, yet Afflictions are ever contrary to the Romans 13. 14.
provisions of lust, to the materials, and instruments of lusts, such as are
health, pleasure, riches, honors, etc. And in all these respect a Heart set
upon lust is weakened and disabled to bear Afflictions.

Secondly, when the Heart is set upon the Creature, it is utterly disabled, in
regard of its active strength, made unfit to do any duty with that Deuteronomy. 6 5.
strength as Gods requires. First, because Bonum fit ex causa integra, A good
duty must proceed from an entire Cause, from the whole heart. Now Hos. 10. 2.
James 1. 8.
lust divides the Heart, and makes it Psalm. 78. 37.
unstedfast, and unfaithful unto God. There is a twofold unstedfastnesse, one
in degrees, another in objects, the former proceeds from the remainders of
corruption, and therefore is found in some measure in the best of us, the other
from the predominancy of lust which overswayes the heart unto evil. Good
motions and resolutions in evil hearts are like violent impressions upon a
stone, though it move upwards for a while, yet nature will at last prevail,
and make it Act. 7 39. Ier. 11. 10.
return to its own motion. Secondly, a Heart set on lusts mooves to (...)
ends but its Phil. ^. 21. Esaias 56. ^1. Ezekiel. 34. 2.
ow^e, and selfe-ends defile an action though otherwise never so specious;
turns 2. King. 9. 7. 10. 10. 16. Hos. 1. 4.
zeal it self and obedience into murder, hinders Ioh. 5. 44.
all faith in us, and acceptance with God, nullifies all other ends, swallows
up Gods glory and the good of others, as the lean Kine did the fat; as a Wenne
in the body robs and consumes the part adjoining, so do selfe-ends the right
end. Thirdly, the Heart is a fountain and principle, and Iam. 3. 12.
principles are ever one and uniforme, out of the same fountain cannot come
bitter water and sweet, and therefore Iam. 1. ^.
the Apostle speaks of some, that they are doubleminded men, that have a heart
and a heart, yet the truth is, that is but with reference to their pretenses;
for the Heart really and totally looks but one way. Every man Romans 7 3. 4.
is spiritually a married person, and he can be joined but to one; Christ and
an Idol (as every ^ust is) cannot Matthew. 6. 24.
consist, he will have a chaste spouse, he will have all our Ephesians. 5. 27.
Psalm. 45. 10. Matthew. 10. 37. Cant. 5. 10. 16. Phil. 3. 8.
desires and affections subject unto him; if the Heart cannot count him
altogether lovely, and all things else but dung in comparison of him, he will
refuse the match, and withold his consent.

Let us see in some few particulars what impotency unto any good the Creatures
bring upon the hearts of men. To Pray requires a hungry spirit, a heart
convinced of its own emptiness, a desire of intimate communion with God; but
now the Creature draws the heart, and all the desires thereof to it self, as
an ill spleen does the nourishment in a body. Lust makes men pray amiss, Iam.
4. 3.
fixes the desires only on its own provisions, makes a man unwilling to be
carried any way toward heaven but his own. The Young Man prayed unto Christ
to show him the way to eternal life; but when Christ told Mark. 10. 21. 22
him that his riches, his covetousnes, his bosom lust stood between him and
salvation, his prayer was turned into sorrow, repentance and apostasy.

Meditation requires a sequestration of the thoughts, a mind unmixt with other
cares, a sincere and uncorrupted relish of the Word; now when the heart is
prepossest with lust, and taken up with another treasure, it is Matthew. 6. 21.
as impossible to be weaned from it, as for an hungry Eagle (a Creature of the
sharpest sight to fix upon, and of Matthew. 24. 28.
the sharpest appetite to desire its object) to forbear the body on which it
would prey; as unable to conceive aright of the pretiousnesse and power of the
Word, as a feverish palate to taste the proper sweetness of the meat it
eats.

In Hearing the Word, the heart can never accept Gods Commands, till it be
first empty, a man cannot receive the richest gift that is, with a hand that
was full before. Now thorns, which are the cares of the World, filling the
heart, must needs choke the feed of the Word. The Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the counsel Luke 7. 29. 30.
of God against themselves, because their pride would not let them yield to
such a baptism, or to such a doctrine as requires emptiness, confession of
sins, justifying of God, and condemning of themselves (for these were the
purposes of Iohus Baptism, and of the preaching of repentance.) That man comes
but to be rejected who makes love to one who has fixed her heart and affection
already. A man must come to Gods Word as to a Physician, a mere patient Mat.
9. 12. 13.
without reservations, or exceptions, he must set his corruptions as an open
mark for the word to shoot at, he must not come with capitulations and
provisoes, but lay down the body of sin before God to have every earthly
member hewed of. Till a man come with such a Iam. 1. 21.
resolution as to be willing to part from all naughtiness, he will never
receive the ingrafted Word with meekness, and an honest heart; a man will
never follow Christ in the ways of his Word, till first he have learned to
deny himself, and his own lusts. Nay if a man should bind his devotion to
his heart With v^ws, yet a Dalila in his bosom, a lust in his spirit, would
easily nullify the strongest vows. The Jews made a serious and solemn
protestation to Jeremy that they would obey Ier. 42. 5. 6.
the voice of the Lord in that which they desired him to enquire of God about
whether it were good or evil; and yet when they found the message cross their
own lusts and reservations, their resolutions are turned into rebellions,
their pride quickly breaks asunder their vow, and they tell the Prophet to his
face that he dealt falsely Ier. 43. 2.
between God and them; a refuge which they were well Ier. 5. 12. Ier. 17. 15.
2. Chro. 36. 16.
acquainted with before. Some when then conscience awakens and begins to
disquiet them, make vows to bind themselves unto better obedience, and forms
of godliness; but as Sampson was bound in vain with any cords so long as his
hair grew into its length; so in vain does any man bind himself with vows,
so long as he nourishes his lusts within; a vow in the hand of a fleshly lust
will be but like the chains and fetters of that fierce Luke 8. 19.
^unatick, very easily broken asunder. This is not the right way. First, labor
with thy heart, cleanse out thy corruptions, purge thy life as the Prophet did
the waters, with seasoning and rectifying the fountain: It Is one thing to give
^ase from a present pain, another thing to root out the disease it self. If
the chinkes in a ship be unstopt, it is in vain to labor at the pumpe; so
long as there is a constant in let, the water can never be exhausted; so is it
in these formal resolutions and vows, they may ease the present pain, let
out a little water, restrain from some particular acts, but so long as the
heart is unpurged, lust will return and predominate. In a word whereas in the
Service of God there are two maine things required, faith to begin, and courage
or patience to go through, lust hinders both these. How can ye believe since
ye seek for glory one from another? Ioh. 5. 44. when persecution arose
because of the word, the Temporary was presently offended. Matthew. 13. 21.

Thirdly and lastly in one word. A man ought not to set his Heart on the
Creature because of the Nobleness of the heart. To set the heart on the
creature is to set a diamond in lead, None are so mad to keep their Jewels in a
cellar, and their coals in a closet; and yet such is the profannesse of wicked
men to keep God in their lips only, and Mammon in their hearts, to make the
earth their treasure, and heaven but as an accessorie and appendix to that. And
now as Samuel spoke unto Saul, set not thine heart upon thine Asses, for the
desire of Israel is upon 1. Sam. 9. 20.
thee; Why should a Kings heart be set upon Asses? so may I say, why should
Christians hearts be set upon earthly things, since they have the desires of
all flesh to fix upon?

I will conclude with one word upon the last particu lar, How to use the
Creatures as Thorns, or as vexing things. First Let not the Bramble be King,
Let not earthly Judge 9. 14. 15.
things bear rule over thy affections, fire will rise out of them, which will
consume thy Cedars, emasculate all the powers of thy Soul. Let Grace sit in
the throne, and earthly things be subordinate to the wisdom and rule (...)
servi, ne^ domini deteriores. 2. Sam. 23. 6. 7.
of Gods Spirit in thy heart. They are excellent servants, but pernicious
Masters. Secondly, Be armed when thou touchest, or medlest with them: Armed
against the Lusts and against the Temptations that arise from them. Get faith
to place thy heart upon better promises; enter not upon them without prayer
unto God, that since thou art going amongst snares, he would carry thee through
with wisdom and faithfulness, and teach thee how to use them as his
blessings and as instruments of his glory. Make a covenant with thine heart, as
Job with his eyes, have a jealousy and suspicion of thine evil heart, lest it
be surpised, and bewitched with finfull affections. Thirdly, touch them
gently, do not hug, love, dote upon the Creature, nor graspe it with
adulterous embraces; the 1. Ti^. 6. 10. Iam. 4. 4. 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
love of money is a root of mischief, and is enmity against God. Fourthly, use
them for Hedges and fences, to relieve the Saints, to make friends of
unrighteous Mammon, to defend the Church of Christ, but by no means have them
In thy field, but only About it; mingle it not with thy Corn least it choke
and stifle all. And lastly use them as Gedeon, for weapons of Just revenge
against Judge. 8. 16.
the enemies of Gods Church, to vindicate his truth and glory, and then by
being wise, and faithful in a little, thou shall at last be made ruler over
much, and enter into thy Masters Joy.

FINIS.
THE SINFVLNES OF SIN:

Considered in the State, Guilt, Power, and Pollution thereof:

By EDWARD REYNOLDS Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolns Inn.

PAX OPVLENTIAM. SAPIENTIA PACEM.
FK

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Bostocke. 1631.

THE SINFVLNESSE OF SIN.
ROMANS 7. 9. For I was alive without the Law once: but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died.
WE have seen in the foriner Treatise, that man can find no Happiness in
the Creature; I will in the next place show; That he can find no happiness in
Himself; It is neither about him, nor within him: In the Creature nothing but
vanitis and vexation, in Himself nothing but Sin and Death. The Apostle in
these words sets forth three things. First, The state of Sin, Sin Revived:
Secondly, the Guilt of Sin, I Died, or found my self to be a condemned man
in the state of perdition. Thirdly, the evidence and conviction of both, When
the Commandment came, which words imply a conviction and that from the spirit.
First, a conviction, for they infer a conclusion extremely contradictory to
the conclusions in which Saint Paul formerly rested (which Elen^hus est
Syllogismus cum contradiction^ conclusionis. Arisi.
is the form of a conviction) Saint Paul's former conclusion was, I was alive;
but when the commandment came, the conclusion was extremely contrary, I Died.
Secondly, It was a spiritual conviction. For Saint Paul was never literally
without the Law, but the va^le till this time was before his eyes, he is now
made to understand the Law in its native sense and compass; the Law is
spiritual, v. 14. and he is enabled to discern it spiritually. Absurd is the
1. Cor. 3. 14.
Doctrine of the Vid. Jacob. Portum contra Ostorod. cap. 1.
Socinians, and some others, That unregenerate men by a mere nature all
perception, without any divine superin^us'd light (they are the words of Sine
lumine supernaturali potenti^ superinfuso. Episcop. disput. 3.
Episcopius, and they are wicked words) may understand the Armin. in Romans 7.
page 843. Remonstr. Declar. fidei. cap. 1.. 14* Exam. Censur. cap. 1. ^l. 33.
37.
whol^ Law, even all things requisite unto faith and godliness. Foolishly
confounding, and impiously deriding the spiritual and divine sense of holy
Scriptures with the grammatical construction. Against this we shall need use no
other argument, then a plain Syllogism compounded out of the very words of
Scripture, Darkness does not comprehend light, Ioh. 1. 5. (...) men are
Darkness. Ephesians. 5. 8. 4. 17. 18. Act. 26. 18. 2. P^t. 1. 9. yea Held under the
power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. and the word of God is light, Psalm. 119. 105.
2. Cor. 4. 4. therefore unregenerate men cannot understand the ^d in that
spiritual compass which it carries. There is such an asymmetry and
disproportion between our understandings, and the brightness of the word,
that the Psalm. 119. 18. 27. 73. 125. 169. Phil. 3. 10.
Saints themselves have prayed for more spiritual light, and understanding to
conceive it. That knowledge which a man ought to have (for there is a knowledge
which is not such as it 1. Cor. 8. 2.
ought to be) does pass knowledge, even all the ^ength of mere natural
reason ^ Ephesians. 3. 19.
to attain unto, Ioh. 104. 14.
peculiar to the sheep of Christ. Natural men have their principles vitiated,
their 2. Cor. 3. 14.
faculties bound, that they 1. Cor* 2. 14. Ier* 6* 10.
cannot understand spiritual things till God have as it were ^nplanted a 1.
Ioh. 5. 20.
^ew understanding in them, Acts 16. 14.
framed the heart to attend, and set it at 2. Cor. 3. 17. 18 Lu^. 24. ^5.
liberty to see the glory of God with open face. Though the veil do not keep
out Grammatical construction, yet it blinds the heart against the spiritual
light and beauty of the Word. We see even in common sciences where the
conclusions are suitable to our own innate and implanted notions, yet he that
can distinctly construe, and make Grammar of a principle in Euclide, may be
ignorant of the Mathematical sense, and use of it: much more may a man in
divine truths be Spiritually ignorant even where in some respect he may be
said to know. For the Hos. 7. 9. Esaias 42. 25.
Scriptures pronounce men ignorant of those things which they see and know. In
divine doctrine John 7. 17. Psalm. 25 9. 14. Romans 12. 2. Matthew. 11. 25.
obedience is the Ground of knowledge, and Holiness the best qualification to
understand the Scriptures. If any m^n will do the will of God, he shall know
of the doctrine whether it be of God. The (...) will he teach his way, and
^eale his secret to them that fear him, to babes, to those that conform not
themselves to this evil world.

To understand then the words, we must note* first, that Ante omnia opu^ est
Dei Timore ad ipsum converti, ut eius voluntatem cognoscamus -- in tantum non
vident in quantum hui^ secul^ vivunt. Aug. de Doctr. Christi. l. 2 c. 5. Deus
nos Adiuvat and ut Sciamus, and Am^mus. epist. 143. Non doctrina extrinsecus
insonante, sed inte^na, occulta, mirabili, ine^fabili potestate operatur Deus
in cordibus hominum and U^ras Revelationes and bonas voluntates. de Great.
Christi. c. 24 And elsewhere he recants his opinion, Quod, ut praedicato
Eva^gelio con^tiremus, nostrum esset proprium and ex nobis. Adprosper. and
Hilar. lib. 1. cap. 3.
there is an opposition between (...) and (...), those two Clauses in the Text,
Once, and When the Commandment came. It is the conceit of So^. Armin. Tolet.
vid. ^xam. censur. c. 11. fol. 129.
some, that the latter as well as the former is meant of a state of
unregeneration; and that Saint Paul all this Chapter over speaks in the
person of an unregenerate man; not intending at all to show the fleshlinesse
and adherency of corruption to the holiest men, but the necessity of
righteousness by Christ, without the which, though a man may, when once the
Commandment comes and is fully revealed, will good, hate sin; in sinning do
that which he would not consent unto, and delight in the Law, feel a war in
his members, mourn and cry out under the sense of his own wretchedness, yet
for all this he is still an unregenerate man: an opinion tending directly to
the honor of Pelagianisme, and advancement of nature, which made Saint Austen
in that ingenuous and noble work of hi^ retractations to recant it, and in all
his writings against the Pelagians (in which, as in other polemicall works,
where the vigilance of an enemy, and fear of advantages makes him more
circumspect how he speaks, his expositions of Scripture are usually more
literal and solid, then where he allows himself the scope of his own
conceits.) He still understandes those passages, of the complaints of a
regenerate man against his inherent Contr. Iu^. lib. 6. cap. 23. and cont. 2.
Epist. Pelag. lib. ^. cap. 8. 9. 10. 11.
concupiscence. We are therefore to resolve that the opposition stands thus.
Once in my state of unregeneration, I was without the law, that is, without the
spiritual sense of the Law, but when the Lord began to reveal his mercy to me
in my conversion, then he gave me eye to understand it in its native and proper
compass. The Apostle was never quite without the Law (being an Hebrew, and
bred up at thefeet of Gamali^l) therefore the difference Phil 3. 5. Act. 22. 3.
2. Tim. 1. 3.
between being without the Law, and the coming of the Law, must be only in
modo exhibendi; before he had it in the letter, but after it came in its own
spiritual shape. And there is some emphasis in the word ca^e, denoting a
vital, moving* penetrative power, which the Law had by the spirit of life, and
which before it had not as it was a Dead letter.

Secondly, we must note the opposition between the two estates of Saint Paul.
In the first he was Alive, and that in two respects. A live in his
performances, able as he conceived to perform the righteousness of the law
without bla^e Phil. 3. 6. A live in his Presumptions, mispersuasions,
selfe-justifications, conceits of righteousness, and salvation. Act. 26. 9.
Phil. 3. 7. In the second estate Sin revived, I found that that was but a
sopor, a benumdnesse, which was in my apprehension a death of sin: and I
died, had experience of the falsenesse and miseries of my presumptions. The
life of sin and the life of a sinner are like the balances of a pair of
scoles, when one goes up the other must fall down, when sin lives, the man
must dye; man and sin are like M^entius his couples, they are never both
alive together.

Many excellent points, and of great consequence to the spirits of men would
rise out of these words thus unfolded: as, First, that a man may have the Law
in the Church wherein he lives in the letter of it, and yet be without the Law
in the power and spirit of it by ignorance, misconstructions, false glosses,
and perverse wrestings of it; as a covetous man may have the possession of
money, and yet be without the use and comforts of it. 2. Cor. 3. 6. 2. P^t. 3.
16. Matthew. 5. 21. 22. 27. 28. 31. 32. 33. 38.

Which should teach us to beware of Ignorance; It makes the things which we
have unusefull to us. If any man have the Law indeed he will labor First to
have more acquaintance with it, and with God by it. The more the Saints know of
God and his will, the neere^ communion do they desire to have with him. We
see this heavenly affection in Jacob. Genesis 32. 26. 29. Genesis 49. 18. in Moses.
Exodus 33. 12. 18. in David. Psalm 119. 18. 125. in the Spouse Cant. 1. 2. in
Manoah. Iud. 13. 17. in Paul. 2. Cor. 5. 2. Phil. 3. 13. 14. As the Queen of
She ba 1. King. 10. 7.
when she had heard of the glory of Solomon was not 2. Sam. 14. 32.
content till she came to see it; or as Absalom being restored from banishment,
and tasting some of his Fathers love, was impatient till he might see his face;
so the Saints, having something of Gods will and mercy revealed to them, are
very importunate to enjoy more. Secondly, to be more conformable unto it, to
Judge and measure himself the oftener by it. Psalm. 119. 11. The law is utterly
in vain, no dignity, no benefit nor privilege to a people ^er 8. 8. Hos. 8.
2. Romans 2. 13. 17.
by it, if it be not obeyed. Thirdly, to love and praise God for his goodness
in it. Ioh. 14. 21.

Secondly, ignorance of the true meaning of the Law, and resting upon false
grounds does naturally beget these two things. First, blind zeal, much active
and in appearance unblameable devotion. As it did here, and elsewhere in Saint
Paul, Phil. 3. 6. Act. 22. 3. in the honorable women, Act. 13. 50. in the
Pharisees, Matthew. 23. 15. in false brethren, Col. 2. 23. in the Jews, that
submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God. Romans 10. 2. 3. In the
papists in their contentions for trash, rigorous observation of their own
traditions, outsides, and superinducements upon the precious foundation.
Secondly, strong mis-perswasions and selfe-justifications, dependant upon our
works, and rigid endeavors for salvation at the last, Hos. 12. 8. Esai. 48. 1.
2. 58. 2. 7. Amos 5. 18. 21. 25. Mic. 3. 11. 12. Zech. 7. 3. 4. 5. 6. Hos. 8.
2. 3. Luke 18. 11. 12. unregenerat men are often secure men, making De arbitris
sensus sui Deum pensitant. Tertu. con^. mar. l. 2. c. 2
principles and premises of their own to build the conclusions of their
Salvation upon. But beware of it. It is a desperate hazard to put eternity upon
an adventure, to trust in God upon other terms then himself has proposed to
be trusted in, to lay claim to mercy without any writings, or seals, or
witnesses, or patents, or acquittance from sin, to have the evidences of
hell, and yet the presumptions of heaven, to be weary of one sabbath here, and
yet presume upon the expectation of an eternity which shall be nothing else but
sabbath. In Iudicia domestica. Tertull. Apol. (...) Clem. Alex.
the Civil Law, Testes domestici, Household witnesses (who might in reason be
presumed parties) are invalid and uneffectuall. Surely in matters of Salvation
if a man have no witness but his own spirit, misinformed by wrong rules,
seduced by the subtilties of Satan, and the deceit of his own wicked heart,
carried away with the course of the world, and the common prejudices and
presumptions of foolish men, they will all fail him when it shall be too late;
God will measure men by his own line, Esai. 28. 15. 17.
and righteousness by his own plummet, and then shall the Hail sweep away
the refuge of lies, and waters overflow Deuteronomy. 19. 19, 20.
the hiding place of those men that made a covenant with death. Secondly,
beware of proud resolutions, self love, reservations, wit, distinctions,
evasions to escape the word; these are but the weapons of lust, but the
exaltations 2. Cor. 10 4, 5.
of a fleshly mind; but submit to the word, receive it Iam. 1. 21.
with meekness, be willing to count that sense of scripture truest which most
restrains thy corrupt humors, and crosses the imaginations of thy fleshly
reason. Our own weapons must be rendered up before the sword of Luke 11. 22.
Qui se dedebant arma tradiderunt. Brisson. deformul. lib. 4.
the spirit, which is the word of God, will be on our side; Love of lusts and
pride of heart can never consist with obedience to the word. Nehem. 9. 16. Ier.
13. 17. 43. 2.

Thirdly, converting and saving knowledge is not of our own fetching in or
gathering, but it is (...), a Doctrine that comes unto us, and is brought by
that sacred blast of the spirit which blows where he lifts. We do not
first come and are then taught, but first we are taught and then we Come. Ioh.
6. 45. Esai. 55. 5. 65. 1. we must take heed of attributing to our selves,
boasting of our own sufficiencies, congtuities, preparations, concurrencies,
contributions unto the word in the saving of us; Grace must prevent, follow,
assist us, preoperate and cooperate, Christ must be All in All, the Author and
the Finisher of our faith; of our selves we can do nothing but disable our
selves, resist the spirit, and pull down whatever the word does build up
within us. Ever therefore in humility wait at the poole where the spirit
stirs, Give that honor to Gods ordinances as when he bids thee do no great
thing, but only wash and be clean, hear and believe, believe and be saved,
not stoutly to cast his Law behind thy back, but to humble thy self to walk
with thy God, and to see his name and power Mic. 6. 8, 9.
in the voice which cries unto thee.

Fourthly, though sin seem dead to secure, civil, moral, superstitiously
zealous men, in regard of any present sense or sting, yet all that while it is
alive in them, and will certainly, when the book shall be opened, either in
the ministry of the word to conversion, or in the last judgment to
condemnation, reviue again. All these points are very natural to the Text,
but I should be too long a stranger to the course I intend if I should insist
on them. I return therefore to the maine purpose. Here is the state of sin,
sin revived; the Guilt of sin, I died; the Conviction of it by the spirit
bringing the spiritual sense of the Commandment, and writing it in the heart
of a man, and so pulling him away from his own Conclusions.

The Doctrines then which I shall insist on are these two. First, the spirit by
the Commandment convinces a man to be in the state of sin. Secondly, the
spirit by the Commandment convinces a man to be in the state of death because
of sin. To convince a man that he is in the state of sin is To make a man
so to set to his own seal and serious acknowledgement to this truth That he
is a sinner, as that withal he shall feel within himself the quality of
that estate, and in humility and selfe-abhorrencie conclude against himself
all the naughtiness and loathsome influences which are proper to kindle and
catch in his nature and person by reason of that estate: and so not in
expression only but in experience, not in word but in truth, not out of fear
but out of loathing, not out of constraint but most willingly, not out of
formality but out of humility, not according to the general voice but out of a
serious scrutinie and self examination, load and charge himself with all the
noisomenesse and venom, with all the dirt and garbage, with all the malignitie
and frowardness that his nature and person do abound withal even as the
waves of the sea with mire and dirt; and thereupon justify almighty God, when
he does charge him with all this, yea if he should condemn him for it.

Now we are to show two things. First, that a mere natural light will never
thus far convince a man. Secondly, that the spirit by the Commandment does.
Some Act. 17. 23. 27.
things nature is sufficient to teach, God may be felt and found out in some
fence by those that ignorantly worship him. Nature does convince men that they
are not so good as they should be, the Law is written in the Romans 2. 15.
hearts of those that know nothing of the letter of it; Idleness, beastiality,
lying, luxury the Cretian poet could Tit. 1. 12, 13.
condemn in his own contrymen; Drinking of Ester. 1. 8.
healths ad plenoscalices, by measure and constraint, condemned by Law of a
heathen prince, and that in his luxury. Long hair condemned by the dictate of
nature 1. Cor. 11 14.
and right reason, and the reason why so many men, and whole nations
notwithstanding use it, is given by Saint Hieronym. in 1. Cor. 11. 14.
Hierome, Quia a natura deciderunt, sicut multis alijs rebus comprobatur. And
indeed as Tertullian says of women's long hair, that it is, Humilitatis suae
sarcina, the De Coron. mil. cap. 14.
burden as it were of their Humility, so by the warrant of that proportion
which Saint Paul allows, 1. Cor. 11. 14. 15. We may call men's long hair
Superbiae suae sarcinam, nothing but a clogge of pride. Saint Austin has
written three whole chapters together against this sinful custom De opere
mon. cap. Aperte contra Apostoli Praeceptum. Manifesta verba Apostoli in
perversam detorquere sententiam.
of nourishing hair, which he says is expressly against the precept of the
Apostle, whom to understand otherwise then the very letter sounds, is to wrest
the manifest words of the Apostle unto a perverse construction. But to return,
these Remnants of nature in the hearts of men are but like the blazes and
glimmerings of a candle in the socket, there is much darkness mingled with them.
Nature cannot thoroughly convince.

1. Because it does not carry a man to the Root, Adams sin, concupiscence,
and the corrupted seeds of a fleshly mind, reason, conscience, will, etc.
Mere nature will never Teach a man to feel the weight and curse Romans 5. 12.
of a sin committed above five thousand years before himself was borne, to
feel the spirits of sin running in his blood and sprouting out of his nature
into his life, one unclean thing out of another, to mourn for that Job 14. 4.
Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 7. 7.
filthiness which he contracted in his conception, Saint Paul professes that
this could not be learned without the Law.

2. Because it does not carry a man to the Rule, which 1. Ioh. 3 4. Psalm. ^ 19.
96.
is the written Law, in that mighty wideness which the Prophet David found in
it. Nature cannot look upon so bright a thing but through vailes and glosses
of its own. Evil hates the light, neither comes to the Ioh. 3. 20.
light, cannot endure a through scrutinie and ransacking left it should be
reproved. When a man looks on the Law through the mist of his own ^usts he
cannot but wrest and torture it to his own way, Saint Peter gives two reasons
of it, because such men are (...). 2. Pet. 3. 16. 1. Unlearned men, namely in
the mystery of Godliness, have not been taught of God what the Ioh. 5. 45.
Ephesians. 4 20.
truth is in Jesus; till that time a man will never put off his lusts, but
defend them, and rather make crooked the rule, coin distinctions and evasions
upon the law it self, then judge himself and give glory to God. 2. Fickle,
unstable men, men apt to be tossed up and down like Ephesians. 3. 17. 4. 14. Psalm.
78. 37.
empty clouds with every blast, never rooted nor grounded in the love of the
truth, unstedfast in the Covenant of God, that Esaias 56. 2, 6. Heb. 6. 18. Act
11. 23.
lay not hold on it, and are therefore altogether undisposed to 1. Tim. 4. 16.
2. Tim. 3. 14. Tit. 1. 9. Iud. v. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
Continue or hold fast the truth. A man in his lusts is like a man in a
disease, not long well in one way, but is ever given to changes and
experiments, and as he changes, so does he ever new shape the scripture and
dragge it down to the patronage of his own ways. So that the Law in a wicked
man's heart is like a candle in a foul lantern, or as a straight oar in
troubled water, or the shining of light through a color'd glass, wried and
changed into the image of the corrupted mind wherein it lies. The Law in it
self is Psalm. 19. ^.
Perfect, Psalm. 119. 128.
right, Ibid. v. 140.
pure, Ibid. v. 138. Psalm. 19. 7.
sure and faithful, Rom 7. 12. 14.
holy, just, and spiritual, Psalm 119 50. Heb 4. 12.
lively and operative, and men by nature are unlike all this, Eccles. 7. 29.
degenerate and Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
crooked, Iam. 1. 8.
wavering and unfaithful, 2. Tim 3. 13.
deceiving and being deceived, Gen 6. 5. Tit. 1. 15.
unholy, carnal and impure, Col 2 18.
fleshly minded, Romans 1. 18 (...).
dead and reprobate to every good work. Such a great disproportion is there
between Nature and the Law.

3. Because it does not Drive us out of our selves for a Remedy; The sublimest
philosophy that ever was did never teach a man to deny himself, but to build
up his house with the old ruins, to fetch stones and materials out of the
wonted quarrie. ^am. 4. 10.
Humiliation, Dan. 9. 7.
confusion, Ezta. 9. 6. Ezekiel. 16. 63.
shame, Ezekiel. 36. 31. Genesis 18. 27. Job 42. 6.
selfe-abhorrencie, Job 40. 4. 2. Sam. 6. 22.
to be vile in a man's own eyes, 2. Cor. 1^. 11.
to be nothing within himself, to be willing to Nehem. 9. 33.
own the vengeance of almighty God, and to 1. Cor. 11. 31.
judge our selves, to Ezra. 9. 13. Psalm. 51. 4.
justify him that may condemn us, and be witnesses against our selves, are
virtues known only in the book of God, and which the learnedest Philosophers
would have esteemed both irrational and pusillanimous things.

4. Because natural 2. Tim. 3. 8. Tit. 1. 15.
judgment is so thoroughly distorted and infatuated, as to Esai. 5. 2^.
count evil good and good evil, light darkness and darkness light: to
Prove. 14. 12.
persuade a man that he is in a right way when the end thereof will be
theissues of death, that he is Rev. 3. 17. Hos. 12. 8. Prove. 21. 2.
Rich and in need of nothing, when in the mean time he is miserable, poor,
blind and naked; Arist. polit. lib. 2. cap. 1, 2.
Platoes community, Eudem, lib. 3. cap. 7. mag. moral. cap. 31. Ethic. lib. z.
c. 8. lib. 4. cap. 14. lib. 4. cap. 7, 8.
Aristotle's Vrbanitie and magnanimity, Alicubi Quintilia.
Ciceroes blinding the eyes of the Judges, De petitione consulatus ad M.
fratrem.
and his officious dissimulation and compliancie, the Stoics apathie Quintil.
lib. 12. cap. ^.
and officious lies that so much admired Tertul Apolog. cap. 46.
stoutnesse, or rather sullenness of those rigid Heathen that pulled out their
own eyes that they mighy be chaste, and killed themselves to be rid of evil
times, nay more, Luke 18. 11. 12. Act. 26 5. Ios^ph. Antiq. lib. 18. c. 2. De
Bello Iudaico lib. 1. cap* 4. (...) ^d. Epipha^m contra Haeres. lib. ^. to
Haeres. 16.
the Pharisees strictness, the zeal and unblameablenesse of Paul, the
devotions of obstinate Jews, Prove. 21. 27. Hag. 2. 12.
all the strength of civil, moral, formal shows and expressions of
goodness, though specious in the eyes of men, yet in the eyes of God that
sees not as manseeth, they are all but sinful and filthy, loss and dung.

Lastly, because nature in particular men never knew, nor had experience of a
better estate, and therefore must needs be ignorant of that full Image in
which it was created, and unto which it ought still to be conformable. As a man
borne in a dungeon is unable to conceive the state of a Palace, as the Child
of a Noble man stolen away, and brought up by some lewd Beggar, cannot
conceive, or suspect the honor of his blood: so utterly unable is corrupted
nature, that has bin borne in a womb Psalm. 51. 5. Genesis 6. 5.
of ignorance, bred in a hell of uncleanness, enthralled from the beginning to
the prince of darkness, to conceive, Genesis 8. 21. 1. Cor. 7. 14. Esaias 1. 4.
Prou. 22. 15.
or convince a man of that most holy and pure condition in which he was
created, the least deviation where-from is sin unto him.

Now then since Nature cannot thus convince, the spirit in the Commandment
must. We have no inward principle but these two. We grant there is a difference
to be made between the illumination and Renovation of the Heb. 6. 4.
spirit; men may be illightned, and yet not sanctified; as a false Star, or
an ignis fatuus may have light without influence or heat: yet withal it is
certain too, that it is impossible to know sin in that hatefulness which is
in it, with such a knowledge as begets hatred and detestation of it, or to know
divine things with such a knowledge a^ is commensurate to them, such as in
their spiritual and immediate purity they are apt to beget, but that knowledge
must work admiration, delight, love, endeavors of conformity unto so heavenly
truths. No comprehension of things divine without love. Ephesians. 3. 17. 18. the
Sacros Scripturae libros ^ull us inimicus cognoscere sinitur. Aug. de Mor.
Eccles^. l. 1. c. 25. Si voluntatem Dei nosse quisquam desiderat fiat Amicus
Deo -- Hoc si haberent non essent Haeretici. Idem de Genesis contr. Manich^os. l.
^. c. 2.
reason why God gives men over to strong delusions, to believe lies, is because
they did not receive the love of the truth that they might be saved. 2. These.
2. 10. 11.

This conviction then of sin the spirit works: First, by revealing the
Rule: Secondly, by opening the condition of the state of sin: Thirdly, by
giving a heart experimentally and reflexively to understand all, or by shaping
and framing the heart to the Word, and so mingling them both together.

The Apostle says, that By the Commandment sin revived. By the life of
sin I understand the strength of it, and that is twofold: A strength to
condemn, and a strength to operate, or work in a man obedience to it self: a
strength to hold a man fast, and to carry him its own way. Sin is a body, and
has earthly members, Col. 3. 4. which are very active and vigorous; the
Apostle speaks of a holding property which it has, Romans 7. 6. and this
strength has the sinews of all strength in it; It is a Lord, and so it has
the strength of power to command, and it is a husband, and so it has the
strength of love to persuade and prevail.

First, it is a Lord and Master, in which respect it has these ties upon us:
First, a Covenant, there is a virtuall bargain between lust and a sinner,
Esaias 28. 15. we make promise of serving, and obeying sin, Ioh. 8. 34. Romans 6.
16. and that returns unto us the wages of iniquity, and the pleasures of
sin, 2. Pet. 2. 15. Heb. 11. 25. Secondly, love unto it, as unto a bountiful
and beneficial Luke 22. 25.
Lord. Sin exercises authority over us, and yet we account it our
benefactor, Hos 2. 5. 12. 13. Job 20. 12. 13. Thirdly, an easy service, the
work of sin is natural, the instruments all ready at hand, the helpers and
fellowservants many to teach, to encourage, to hasten, and lead on in the broad
way. Fourthly, in sin it self there is a great strength to enforce men to
its service: First, it is edged with malice against the soul, armed with
weapons 1. Pet. 2. 11.
to fight against it, and enmity is a great Whetstone to valor. Secondly, it
is attended with fleshly wisdom, suppported with stratagems and deceits,
hastened and set on by the assistance of Satan and the world, Ephesians. 4. 22 Heb.
3. 13. Thirdly, it has a Judicature and regiment in the heart, it governes by
a Law, it f^nds forth lusts axnd temptations like so many edicts into the
soul; and when we object the Law of God against the service that is required,
then as that Persian King, who could not find out Herodot.
a Law to warrant the particular which he would have done, found out another,
That he might do what he would; so sin when it has no reason to allege,
yet it has Self-will, that is, all Laws in one, Genesis 49. 6. 2. Pet. 2. 10.
Romans 7. 23. In one word, the strong man is furnished with a whole Armor. Lu^.
11 (...).


Secondly, sin is a Husband, Romans 7. 1. 5. and so it has the power of love,
which the wise Man says, is as strong as death, that will have no denial when
it comes. S. Paul tells us, there is a constraining power in love, 2. Cor. 5.
14. Who stronger then Sampson, and who weaker then a woman? yet by love she
overcame him, whom all the Philistimes were unable to deal with. Now as
between a man and a strumpet, so between lust and the heart, there are first
certain cursed dalliances and treaties, by alluring temptations, the heart is
drawn away from the sight of God and his Law, and enticed and then follows
the accomplishment of uncleanness. Iam. 1. 14. 15. This in the general is
that life or strength of sin here spoken of.

We are next to observe, that the ground of all this is the Law: The sting of
Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, 1. Cor. 15. 56 1. Ioh. ^.
4. from the Law it is, that sin has both strength to condemn, and to
command us, or have dominion over us, Romans 6. 14. Now the Law gives life or
strength to sin three ways: First, by the curse and obligation of it, binding
the soul with the guilt of sin unto the Judgment of the great Day. Every
sinner has the sentence past upon him already, and in part executed; He that
believes not is condemned already, the wrath of God abides on him. All men
come into the world with the wrath of God like a talent of lead upon their
soul, and it may all be poured out within one hour upon them, there is but a
span between them and judgment. In which interim, First, the Law Romans 3. 19.
stops the mouth of a sinner, Romans 11. 32. Gal. 3. 2^.
Shuts him in, and Romans 7. 6.
holds him fast under the guilt of his sin. Secondly, it passes Gal. 3. 10.
13. 2. Cor. ^. 7. Mark. 16. 16. 1. Cor. 14. ^5.
sentence upon his soul, sealing the assurance of condemnation and wrath to
come. Thirdly, it begins even Hos 6. 5.
to put that sentence in execution, with the Romans 8. 15.
spirit of bondage and of 2. Tim. 1. 7.
fear, shaking the conscience, wounding the spirit, and scorching the heart
with the pre-apprehensions of Hell, making the soul see some portion of that
tempest which hangs over it, rising out of that sea of sin which is in his
life and nature (as the 1. Kin. 18. 44.
Prophets servant did the Cloud) and so terrifying the soul with a certain
Heb. 10. 26.
fearful expectation of Judgment. Thus the Law strengthens sin, by putting
into it a condemning power.

Secondly, by the Irritation of the Law. Sin took occasion, says the Apostle,
by the Law, and so by the commandment became exceeding sinful. Romans 7. 8.
when lust finds it self universally restrained meets with Death and Hell at
every turn, can have no subterfuge nor evasion from the rigor and
inexorablenesse of the Law; then like a River that is stopped, it rises, and
fomes, and rebels against the Law of the mind, and fetches in all its force
and opposition to rescue it self from that sword which heweth it in pieces.
And thus the Law is said to strengthen sin, not perse, out of the Intention
of the Law, but by Accident, antiperistasis, exciting* and provoking that
strength which was in sin before, though undiscerned, and less operative*
For as the presence of an enemy does actuate, and call forth that malice which
lay habitually in the heart before: so the purity of the Law presenting it
self to concupisence in every one of those fundamental obliquities wherein it
lay before undisturbed, and way* laying the lust of the heart, that it may have
no passage, does provoke that habitual fierceness and rebellion which was in
it before, to lay about on all sides for its own safety.

Thirdly, by the conviction and manifestation of the Law; laying open the
wideness of sin to the conscience. Man naturally is full of pride and
self-love, apt to think well of his spiritual estate upon presumptions and
principles of his own; and though many profess to expect salvation from
Christ only, yet in as much as they will be in Christ no way but their own,
that shows that still they rest in themselves for salvation. This is that
deceit, and Guile of spirit, which the scripture mentions, which makes the way
of a fool right in his own eyes. The Philosopher tells us of a Sea, wherein,
by the hollownesse Aristot. Problem. sect. 23. quest. 5. Tertul^de Anima, cap.
52.
of the earth under it, or some whirling and attractive property that sucks
the vessel into it, ships use to be cast away. in the midst of a calm: even
so many men's souls do gently perish in the midst of their own securities
and presumptions. As the fish Polypus changes himself into the color of the
Rock, and then devoures those that come thither for shelter: so do men shape
their mis-perswasions into a form of Christ and faith in him, and destroy
themselves. How many men rest in pharisaicall generalities, plod on in their
own civilities, moralities, external Justice, and unblameablenesse, account
any thing indiscretion and unnecessary strictnes that exceeds their own
model; every man in Hell that is worse then themselves ( I am not as this
Publican) and others that are better, but in a fools paradise? and all this
out of ignorance of the Law. This here was the Apostles Case, when he lived
after the strictest sect of the Pharisees* sin was dead, he esteemed himself
blameless: but when the Commandment came, discoverd its own spiritualnes,
and the carnalnesse of all his performances; removed his curtald glosses, and
presumptuous prejudices; opened the inordinatenes of natural concupiscence,
showed how the lest atome does spot the soul the smallest omission qualify for
hell, make the conscience see those infinite sparkles and swarms of lust that
rise out of the heart, and that God is all eye to see, and all fire to consume
every unclean thing, that the smallest sins that are, require the pretiousest
of Christ's blood to expiate and wash them out; then he began to be co^vinc'd
that he was all this while under the Hold of Sin, that his conscience was yet
under the paw of the Lion; as the Serpent that was dead in snow, was reviu'd at
the fire; so sin that seems dead when it lies hid under the ignorances and
misperswasions of a secure heart, when either the Word of God (which the
Prophet calls fire) or the last Judgment) shall open it unto the conscience,
it will undoubtedly revive again, and make a man find himself in the mouth
of Death. Thus we see, that unto the Law belongs the Conviction of sin, and
that in the whole compass of evil that is in it. Three hateful evils are in
sin, Aberration from Gods Image, obnoxiousnesse to his wrath, and rejection
from his presence. Stain, Guilt, and misery (which is the product or issue of
the two former). Now, as we say, Rectum est sui index and obliqui, The Law is
such a Rule as can measure and set forth all this evil; Ir is Holy, Just, and
Good. Romans 7. 12. Holy, fit to conform us to the image of God, Just, fit to
arm us against the wrath of God, and Good, fit to present us unto the presence
and fruition of God. According unto this blessed and complete pattern was man
created; An universal rectitude in his nature, all parts in tune, all members
in joint: light and beauty in his mind, conformity in his will, subordination
(...) Ge^rg. (...). con^ d^ (...) Dei. cap. 4. (...) 4* 8
and subjection in his appetites, serviceablenesse in his body, peace and
happiness in his whole being. But man, being exactly sensible of the
excellency of his estate, gave an easy ^are to that first temptation which
laid before him a hope and project of improving it: and so believing Satan's
lie, and embracing a shadow, he fell from the substance which before he had,
and contracted the hellish and horrid image of that Tempter which had thus
deceived him.

Having thus considered in the general how the Law may be said to quicken or
revive sin, by the obligation, Irritation, and Conviction of it: We will in
the next place look into the life of those particular species or ^ankes of
sin which the spirit in the Commandment does convince men of. Wherein I
shall insist at large only upon that sin which is the subject of this whole
Chapter, and (if not solely) yet principally aimed at by the Apostle in my
Text, namely those evils which lie folded up in our original concupiscence.

Here then first the Spirit by the Law entiseth us to Adams Ioh. 3 5 6. Romans 5
12, 16, 17, 18. 1. Cor. 15. 17, 48, 49.
Sin, as a derivation from the root to the branches; As poison is carried
from the fountain to the Cisterne, as the children of traitors have their
blood ^ainted with their Fathers treason, and the children of bondslaves are
under their parents condition. We were Omnes in Ada^ (...), quia ^mnes (...).
Aug. Traxit (...) ho^, quia unus erat cum (...) quo traxit* Aug. ^p 23. pres^
(...). coll. c. 18. Genus H^manumin parente* primo ^elut in radiceputruit.
Gregor.
all one in Adam, and with him; In him legally in regard of the (...) Chrysostom
apud Au^. vid. Ge^ard. voss. (...). (...). ^. part. 1. and 2.
stipulation and covenant between God and him, we were in him parties in that
covenant, had interest in the mercy, and were liable to the curse which
belonged to the breach of that Covenant; and in him naturally, and therefore
unavoidably subject to all that bondage and burden which the humane nature
contracted in his fall. And though there be risen up a (...) Institut. vid.
Jacob. Portum. cap 27. Remonst. exam. censur. cap 7. sect 4. Quis ante
prodigiosu^ Coeles^ium Re^tu praevari^ationis Adam omne genus (...) n^g. vit
(...) Vincent. Lirinens advers. Haeres. c. 34.
sect of men, who deny the sin of Adam to be our sin or any way so by God
accounted, and to us imputed, yet certain it is that before that arch-heretick
Pelagius, and his disciple Caelestius did vex the Churches, never any man
denied the guilt of Adams sin (and guilt is inseparable from the sin it
self, being a proper passion of it) to belong to all his posterity. This then
is the first charge of the spirit upon us, participation with Adam in his
sin. And in as much as that Commandment unto Adam was the (...) L^x, and
Matrix praeceptorum Dei. Tertul. contra Iudae^s c. 2.
primitive Law, so justly required, Possibile a^ ^cile praeceptum. Aug. cont.
Iul. l. 3. c. 18. Aug. Enchirid. c 45.
so easily observed, therefore exceeding great must needs be the Transgression
of it. Pride, Ambition, Rebellion, Infidelity, Ingratitude, Idolatry,
Concupissence, ^heft, Apostasy, unnatural Affection, Violation of covenant,
and an universal renunciation of Gods mercy promised; these and the like were
those woeful ingredients which compounded that sin, in the committing whereof
we all were sharers, because Adams person was the Fountain of ours, and Adams
Aug. Retract. li^. 1. cap. 13. Aquin. Andrad. Orthodox. expli^. lib. 3.
Will the Representative of ours.

The second charge is touching universal corruption which has in it Two great
evils. First, A general defect of all righteousness and holiness in which
we were at first created; and secondly, an inherent (...). Iuoledientia.
Vivacitas, libido. ^orbidus, affectus. Aug. deperfect. In^. c 4 de Civ. Dei. l
14. c 15. (...). (...). l. 4. c. 13 de (...). and con^. lib. 2. c. 13. Retract.
lib. 1. cap. 15. (...). Instit. Martyr. (...) Anglic. Art. 9.
Deordination, pravitie, evil disposition, disease, propension to all
mischief, Antipathy and aversation from all good, which the Scripture calls
the Ioh 3. 6.
flesh the Rom 8. 6, 7. lam. 3 15.
wisdom of the flesh, the Romans 6. 6 Ephesians. 4. 22.
body of sin, Colos. 3. 5.
earthly members, the Romans 7. 23.
Law of the members, 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
the works of the Devil, Ioh 8 44.
the lusts of the Devil, the Iam. 3. 6.
Hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire. And this is an evil, of
the through malignity whereof no man can be so sensibly and distinctly
convinced, as in the evidence of that conviction to cry out against it with
such strange, strong and bitter complaints Rom 7 24. 1. Cor. 12 8.
as Saint Paul does till his Luk 24 45.
understanding be by Christ opened to understand the Romans 7. 14. Ioh 4. 24.
Spiritualnesse, Heb 4 12.
penetration, and Psalm. 119. 96.
compass of that holy Law, which measures the Luke 10. 27.
very bottom of every action, and condemns as well the (...) Ori^ (...),
(...) and (...) non (...) quam (...) Tertull. de p^dicit. c 6.
originals as the acts of sin. And hence it is that (...) con^ (...) 1. S^to
de natura and grat^a, li^ 1. c. 3. And^ad (...). explic. lib. 3. p. 217. ^er.
in Genesis lib. 5. de (...). Inn^nt. (...) excel. 4 (...). 4. number. ^64. (...). de
gratia (...), cap. 5. (...). (...). (...). cap. 8.. 1. qu^m (...) ho^ (...) re^
(...) n^ Deus Author (...). lib. 2. cap. 7. and (...) esse dicit. de gratia and
lib. Arbitrio.
many men plead for this sin, as only an evil of nature rather troublesome
then sinful. That concupiscence was not contracted by nature de novo in the
fall, but that it is annexed to nature by the Law of Creation, that it
belongs to the constitution and condition of a sensitive Creature, and that
the bridle of original and supernatural Ri^hteousnesse being removed, the
Rebellion of the fleshly against the spiritual, that is, as these men most
ignorantly affirm, of the sensual against the reasonable part which was by
that before suspended, did discover it self. It will not be therefore a miss
to open unto you what it is to be in the State of original sinn^, and what
evils they are which the Commandment does so discover in that sin, as
thereby to make a man feel the burden of his own nature, smell the sink and
stinch of his own bosom, and so (as the Prophet speaks) abhor himself,
and never open his mouth any more, either proudly to justify himself, or
foolishly to charge God; but to admire and adore that mercy which is pleased to
save, and that power which is able to cure so leprous and unclean a thing.

First, consider the universalitie of this sin, and that manifold.
Vnivers^litie of Times: from Adam to Mos^s, even when the Law of Creation was
much defaced, and they that sinned did not sin after the similitude of Adam,
against the clear Revelation of Gods pure and holy will. For that I take to be
the meaning of the Apostle in those words, Until the Law sin was in the
world; but sin is not imputed where there is no Law. Though the Law seemed
quite extinct between Adam and Romans 5. 13, 14, 20, 21.
Romans 2* 12, 14.
Moses in the wicked of the world, and with it sin, because sin has no
strength where there is no Law; though men had not any such legible Characters
of Gods will in their nature as Adam had at first, and therefore did not sin
after the similitude of his prevarication; yet even from Adam to Moses did
sin reign over all them, even the sin of Adam, and that lust which that
sin contracted. And if sin reigned from Adam to Moses* in that time of
ignorance, when the Law of not lusting Ro^. ^. ^.
was quite extinct out of the minds of men, much more from Moses after; for the
Law entered by Moses that sin might abound, that is, That that concupiscence
which reigned without conviction before, during the ignorance of the original
implanted Law, might by the new edition and publication of that Law be known
to be sinful, (...). ^. 13.
and thereby become more exceeding sinful to those who should be thus convinced
of it: that so the exceeding sinfulness of sin might serve both the sooner
to compel men to come to Christ, and the Grace of Christ might thereby appear
to be more exceeding gracious: for the Law was revived, and promulgated anew
merely with relation to Christ and the Gospel; and therefore the Apostle
says, It was added and ordained by Angels in the Gal. 3. 19. Phrasis (...)
notat ministerium Legati. Tarnou. ex^rcit. biblic. page 83. edit. ^.
Hand of a Mediator, or by the ministry of a Mediator. Where there are three
reasons to show Gods Evangelicall purpose in the publication of the Law anew.
First, it was not published alone, but as an Additament, with relation to the
Evangelicall promise which was before made. Secondly, the service of Angels, or
Messengers; which shows, that in the Law God did send from Heaven anew to
instruct men, and therein to take care of them, and prepare them for salvation;
for Angels minister Heb. 1. 14.
for this purpose, that men might be heirs of salvation. Thirdly, the ministry
of a Mediator, namely, Moses, who Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
was Mediator in the Law, with reference whereunto Christ is called Mediator of a
better Covenant, and was Heb. 8. 6.
faithful as Moses. Now where there is a Mediator appointed, Heb. 8. 6.
therein God declares his purpose to enter anew into a treaty with men, and to
bring them to terms of agreement and reconciliation with him. Men were rebels
against God, held under the sentence of death and vengeance; they are in
darkness, know not whither they go, are well pleased with their own estate,
give no heed to any that would call them out. For this reason, because God is
willing to pull me^ out of the fire, he sends first Moses armed with thunder,
and brightness, which Exodus 34. 30. 2. Cor. 3. 7.
can not be endured (for the shining of Moses his face, which the people could
not abide, denotes the exceeding purity and brightness of the Law, which no
sinner is able Deuteronomy. 5 25. Heb. 2. 15. Romans 8. 15. Heb. 12. 18-20.
with peace to look on) and he shows them whither they are hastening, namely to
eternal death, and like the Angel that met Balaam in a narrow room shuts
them in, that either they must turn back again, or else be destroyed: and
in this fright, and anguish, Christ, the mediator of a better covenant,
presents himself, as a Sanctuary and refuge from the condemnation of the Law.
Secondly, there is universalitie of men, and in men universality of parts, All
men, and every part of man shut up under the guilt and power of this sin.
Both these the Apostle proves at large, Jews, Gentiles, all under sin, none
righteous, To. 3. 9-19. 23.
no not one, all gone out of the way, altogether become unprofitable, none that
does good, no not one; Every mouth must be stopped, all the world must be
guilty before God, all have sinned and come short or are destitute of his
glory. God has concluded all in unbelief, the Scripture has shut up all
under sin; this shows the universality of persons. Romans 11. 32* Gal. 3. 22.
The Apostle adds, Their throat is an open sep^lcher, with their tongues they
have used deceit, the poison of aspes is under their lips, their mouth full of
cursing and bitterness, their feet swift to shed blood, destruction and
unhappiness are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known,
there is no fear of God before their eyes, these particulars Genesis 6. 5. 8. 21.
are enough to make up an Induction, and so to infer a universalitie of
Parts. Every purpose, desire, Imagination, incomplete and inchoate notion,
every figment, so the word properly signifies (with reference Amama.
Antibabaris. biblic. l 2 P. 395. Heb. 4. 13. Mark. 7. 21. Col. 2. 11. 3. 5. 9.
Licet facultates non fuerunt per lapsum abolitae, determinatio tamen earum ad
obiecta spiritis* alia fuit protinus extincta. Zexman de Imag Dei. cap. 7.
Ephesians. 4. 17. Romans 1. 28. Romans 3. 11. (...). Theophilus ad Antolis. l. 1. Romans
1. 18, 2, 22, 28. 1. Tim. 6. 4. 5. 2. (...). 2. 16, 23. 1. Tim. 6. 20. 2. Cor.
10 5. Ephesians 4. 21.
whereunto the Apostle, as I conceive, calls sin The creature of the Heart,
and our Savior, the Issue of the Heart) is evil, only evil, continually
evil. Original sin is an entire body, an old man (which word notes not the
impotencie or defects, but the maturity, wisdom, cunning, covetousness, full
growth of that sin in us;) and in this man, every member is earthly,
sensual, and divelish. As there is chafe about every corn in a field,
saltness in every drop of the sea, bitterness in every branch of wormwood,
so is ehere sin in every faculty of man. First, look into the mind: you
shall find it full of vanity, wasting and wearying it self in childish,
impertinent, unprofitable notions. Full of ignorance and darkness, no man
knows, nay no man has so much knowledge as to enquire or seek after God in
that way where he will be found; nay more, when God breaks in upon the mind
by some notable testimony from his Creatures, Judgments, or providence, yet
they like it not, they hold it down, they reduce themselves back again to
foolish hearts, to reprobate and undiscerning minds, as naturally as hot water
returns to its former coldness. Full of Curiosity, Rash unprofitable
enquiries, foolish and unlearned questions profane bablings, strife of words
perverse disputes, all the fruits of corrupt and rotten minds. Full of Pride
and contradiction against the Truth oppositions of science, that is, setting up
of philosophy and vain deceit, Imaginations, thoughts, fleshly reasonings
against the spirit and truth which is in Jesus. Full of domestical Principles,
Rom* 8. 7.
fleshly wisdom, humane Inventions contrivances, 1. Cor. 1. 23. 1. Cor. 3.
12. 19. Col. 2. 23. Iam. 1. 8.
super-inducements upon the precious foundation, of rules and methods of its
own to serve God and come to happiness. Full of Inconsistency and roving,
swarms of empty and foolish thoughts, slipperinesse, and unstablenesse in all
good motions.

Secondly, look into the Conscience, you shall find it full of
Insensiblenesse, the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4. 19.
That they were past feeling, and of the Apostates in the latter times, that
they had their consciences seared with 1. Tim. 4. 2.
a hot iron, which things though they be spoken of an Habitual, and acqui^'d
hardness which grows upon men by a custom of sin, yet we are to note that
it is originally in the Conscience at first, and does not so much come unto it,
as grow out of it. As that branch which at first shooting out is flexible and
tender grows at last even by it own disposition into a hard and stubbo^e bow,
as those parts of the nail next the flesh which are at first softer then the
rest, yet do of themselves grow to that hardness which is in the rest; so the
consciences of children have the seeds of that insensibility in them, which
makes them at last dea^e to every charm, and secure against all the thunder
that is threatened against them. Full of Impurity and disobedience, dead,
rotten, Tit. 1. 15. Heb. 9. 14.
unsavorie works. Full of false and absurd excusations, and accusations,
fearing where there is no cause of fear, and acquitting where there is great
cause of fear as Saint Paul's here did.

Look into the Heart, and you shall find a very He^ of uncleanness. Full of
deep and unsearchable deceit Ier. 17. 9. Ier. 8. 5.
and wickedness. Full of hardness, no sins, no judgments, no mercies, no
allurements* no hopes, no fears, no promises, no instructions able to startle,
to awaken, to melt, or shape it to a better image, without the immediate
omnipotency of that God which melts the mountains, and turns stones into
sons of Abraham. Full of Ro^ 2. 4. E^y 57. 11. (...) 9. 15. 16. 18. 30.
Impenitencie, not led by the very patience and long-suffering of God, no^
allured by the Invitations and entea^ies of God to return to him, not
persuaded by the fruitlesnesse and emptiness of all sinful lusts to forsake
them. Full of ^llr it is bound up, riveted fast into the heart of a Prove. 22.
15. 1. Cor. 3. 19. Ier. 8. 9. Romans 1. 21. E^cles 9. 3. Heb. 3. 12. Psalm. 1 c 6.
24. Psalm. 78. 18, 19, 20, 12. Mat 15. 19. Heb 4. 1^. Iam. 3. 6. Ier. 6. 10.
Romans 8. 7. Ier. 2. 27. Neh. 9. 29. Man. 1. 13. Zach. 7. 11. Libertas as Arbi^
perijt qu^ntum ad Iu^itam, non quantum ad naturam aut peccatum. Vid. ^ag. cont.
2. epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 2. c. 5. and ^nchirid. c. 30. 31.
(...), and there from childish folly grows up to wise and sober folly, (as I
may so speak) till the heart be changed into a cell of darkness. Full of
madness, and ^age, in ^dnen is in the hearts of men while they lieu, all the
creatures in the world are not able to cure it. Full of Infidelity. A Heart
that departs from God, undervalews his precious promises, and mistrusts his
power. In one word full of all pollution and uncleanness, that Forge where all
sins are framed in secret intents, desires, purposes, lusts, and from whence it
springs forth into the life, the flames of it breaking out into the tongue,
and into every other member in adulteries, murders, thefts, blasphemies, and
every wicked word and work.

Look into the will, and you shall find it, First, full of Disability unto
any good, It cannot hearken, nor be subject unto the law of God. But there may
be weakness where yet there is a good will and affection; not so here, it is
Secondly, full of loathing and aversation, It cannot endure to hear or see any
thing that is good, casts it behind the back, and turns away the shoulder from
it. But there may be a particular nausea or lothing of a thing out of some
distemper and not out of antipathy: a man may loath the sight of that in a
disease, which at another time he loves. But the will does not sometimes loath,
and sometimes love, but Thirdly, it is full of enmity against that which is
good, It looks upon it as a base thing and so it Psalm. 106. 24. Luke 6. 14.
Exodus 5. 2.
scorns it, and it looks on it as an adverse thing, and so sets up
resolutions to Matthew. 23. 37. Act 7. 39. 51. Act. 13. 46. Luke 7. 30. Luke ^9.
14.
withstand it, and it looks upon it as an unprofitable thing and so Mal. 3. 14.
slights and neglects it. But enmity is seldom so rooted, but that it may be
overcome, and a reconciliation wrought; not so here, the fleshly will may be
crucified, it will never be reconciled; for Fourthly, it is full of (...), and
Gal. 5. 17. Ier. 2. 25. Esaias 30. 15, 16. Ier. 6. 17. and 7. 27. I^r. 44. 16, 17.
contrariety, which is a Twisted enmity (as I may so speak) which cannot be
broken. One contrary may expel another, but it can never reconcile it. The
flesh will never give over the combat, nor forbear its own contumacie and
resolutions to persist in evil.

Look into the memory, and you shall find it very unfaithful to retain
good, very tenacious to hold anyevill; It is like a Heb. 2. 1. Nehem 9. ^7.
leaking vessel, lets out all that is pure, and retains nothing but mud and
dregs. The Lord made great promises to the people of Israel to bring them into
the holy land, began to fulfill them, in wonders, in terrible wonders, in
mercies, in multitudes of mercies (and nothing fo fit to make impressions on
the memory as promises, miracles, and multiplied deliverances) and yet as if
they meant to contend with God, which should be the greatest, the wonder of his
goodness or the wonder of their unthankfulnes, all this was not long a wearing
out, for it is said, They did soon forget it all. Look into the Psalm. 106. 7.
and 13. 21.
whole man, and you shall find him full of perturbation and disorder. A man
cannot trust any member he has alone, without Jobs covenant, without David's
bradle to Job 31. 1. Psalm. 29 1.
keep it in. If thou have occasion to use thine eye, take heed unto it, It is
full of the seeds of adultery, pride, envy, Matthew. 20. 15. 2. P^t 2. 14. 1.
Ioh. 2. 16.
wrath, covetousness, there are Lusts of the eye. If to use thy tongue, Trust
it not alone, set a door before thy lips, there is a Hell within thee that can
set it all on fire, that Iam. 3. 6.
can fill it with rotten and stinking communication, there is blasphemy,
persecution, theft, murder, adultery, curses, revilings, clamors, bitterness,
crimson and hellish, fiery and brimstone abominations in that little member,
able to set the whole frame of nature on fire about the ears of ungodly men.
If to use thy hands or feet, look unto them, there are seeds of more sins,
theft, bribery, murder, adultery (what not?) then there are joints or sinews
in those members. If to use thine ear, be slow to hear, take heed how you
hear, it is easily open to vanity, lies, slanders, calumniations, false
doctrines, trashie and empty doctrines. Thus all over we find a Body of
sin; And which is yet more strange, this sinnefulnesse cleaves not to our
members only, but runs over with a prodigious exuberancie into our very
excrements, and adjacents. Absalom proud of his hair, Iezabel proud of her
paint, Herod proud of his robes; and though the word be^ a sword and a fire,
yet it cannot cut of no^ melt away any of this pride, till Absoloms hair
become his halter, till Iezabels paint be washed of with her own blood, and
vermin make the robes of Herod baser then a menstruous cloth, or a beggars
rags. Thus we see how universala corruption original sin is; Therefore in
Scripture the whole man is 1. Cor. 3 3. Ioh. 8. 44.
called flesh, because in carnal works we work secundum hominem, when we are
carnal we walk as men, as our Savior, says of the Devil when he speaks
a lie he speaks De suo, of his own, according to his own nature; so when
men walk after the flesh, they work of their own, they walk according to
themselves. For of our selves we can do nothing as the Apostle speaks but
only sin, when we do any good it is by the grace of God, but lusts, which
are the fountain of evil, are all our 2. Cor. 3. 5.
own, God gave the Heathen over to the lusts of their 1 Cor. 15. 10. Romans 1.
24.
own hearts; and every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust
and enticed. So then we are all over Iam. 1. 14. Col. 2. 18.
flesh; The mind, a fleshly mind, the will a fleshly will, the affections and
lust, all fleshly. So that as the Aposile Ephesians. 2 3. Gal. 5. 24.
says of the Body, many members but one 'Body; so we of original sin, many
lusts but one body, therefore the Apostle ca^s it (...) in the singular number
sin, upon (...) in Ioh. 1. 29. Romans 7. 17. Vid. Scultet. (...). Evang. lib.
1. page 87.
which excellent is the observation of the Author of the book De Duplici
Martyrio among Saint Cyprians works, plus est tollere peccatum quam peccata,
It is more difficult to root out this sinning sin, then to overcome many
actual.

Secondly, consider the closeness and adherency of this sin. It cleaves as
fast to our nature, as Blackness to the skinme of an Ethiopian, that cannot
possibly be washed off. As fast as Ivy to a wall (it is the similitude of
Epiphan. Hares. l. 2. H 64.
Epiphanius) though a man may lop and shorten the branches, yet the roots are
so fastened to the joints and intralls of the wall, that till the stones be
pulled all asunder, it will not be quite rooted out. As that house wherein there
was a fretting and spreading Leprosy, though it Levit. 14. 41-45
might be scraped round about, and much rubbish and corrupt materials
removed, yet the Leprosy did not cease, till the house with the stones, and
timber, and mortar of it was broken down: so original concupiscence cleaves
so close to our nature, that though we may be much repaired, yet corruption
will not leave us, till our house be dissolved. As long as Corn is in the
field, it will have refuse and chafe about it; as long as water remains in
the Sea, it will retain it saltness, till it be defecated and cleansed in its
passage into the Land; and so is it with the Church while it is in the world,
it will have the body of sin about it, it will be beset with this Sin. In
the Apostle it is for this reason called (...) Heb. 12. 1. Uid.
Glassi^philolog. Sacram. lib. 1. Tract. 2. page 168.
an encompassing sin, a sin that will not be cast off, that does easily
occupate and possess all our members and faculties; a man may as easily shake
off the skin from his back, or pour out his bowels out of his body, as rid
himself of this evil inhabitant: It is an evil that is ever present with us,
and dwelling in us. Romans 7. 20-23.


But it may be objected, Does not the Apostle say, that by being baptized into
Christ, or planted into the likeness Romans 6. 3-8. 11. and 7. 3. 4.
of his death, our old man is crucified, the body of sin is destroyed, we are
freed from sin, as a woman is from a dead husband, we have put off the body
of the Col. 2. 11. Glass^philolog. Sacr. l. 2. page 425 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision made without hands that is, by
Baptism and the Spirit? Does not the Apostle Saint John say, He that is borne
of God, that is, he that is Regenerate by Water and the Spirit. sins not,
neither can sin? To this I answer in general with the same Apostle, If we
say we have no sin, we deceive our Ioh. 3. 5.
selves, and there is no truth in us. More particularly, we 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
must distingvish both of Death and of sin. There is a twofold Death; an
Actual, or Natural Death, when the essential parts of a living Creature are
taken asunder, and the whole dissolved: and a Virtuall or Legal Death; when
though the party be naturally Alive, yet he is Dead in Law, and that notes
two things: First, a designation unto a certain Death at hand, and ready to
be executed: Secondly, a disabilitie unto many purposes which lay before in
the man's power; as a man condemned, though he have his life out of indulgence
for a short space, yet he is then set apart, and appointed for death, and in
the very sentence disabled to order or dispose of any thing which was then his
own. When a woman is divorced for adultery from her husband, though she be
Alive naturally, yet Legally and to the purpose of marriage she is Dead to her
husband, so that though she should live in the same house, yet she should have
nothing to do with his bed or body. And thus the Apostle speaks of sinful
Widows, that they are Dead while they Live, 1. Tim. 5. 6.

In sin likewise we may consider, The guilt of it whereby it makes us accursed;
and the dominion of it, wherewith it brings us into bondage: in these two
principally consists the life and the strength of sin, which it has from the
Law. Now by being baptized into Christ we are delivered from the Law. Romans 6.
14. Gal. 3. 25. First, from the covenant of the Law, Christ has put an utter
period to the Law quoad officium Iustificandi, he is the end of the Law for
righteousness. We are righteous now Romans 10. 4.
by Grace and Donation, not by nature, or operation: by Romans 3. 20. 21. Phil 3.
9. Ephesians. 2. 8. 10.
the righteousness of God, not that whereby God is righteous, but that which
God is pleased to give us, and stands in opposition to a man's own
righteousness, which is by working.

Secondly, from the Rigor of the Law which requires perfect, and perpetual
obedience, Gal. 3. 10. Though the Plane dicimus decessisse legem quoad onera,
non quoad Iustitiam. Tertull.
Gospel command holiness, Matthew. 5. 48. and promise it, Luke 1. 74. and work
it in us, Tit. 2. 10. 11. yet when the Conscience is summoned before God to be
justified or condemned, to resolve upon what it will stand to for its last
trial; there is so much mixture of sin, that it dares trust none but Christ's
own adequate performance of the Law: this is all the salvation, the maine
charter and 2. Sam. 23. 5.
privilege of the church. We are not therefore rigorously bound either to a
full habitual holiness in our persons, which is supplied by the merit of
Christ, nor to a through actual obedience in our services, which are covered
with the Intercession of Christ. We are at the best full of weakness, many
remnants of the old Adam hang about us, this is all the comfort of a man in
Christ, that his desires are accepted, God regards the sincerity of his 2. Cor.
8 12. Mal. 3. 17.
heart, and will spare his failings, even as a man spares his Son that
desires to please him, but comes short in his endeavors; that he will not
look on the iniquity of his holy things, but when he falls will pity him, and
take him up, and heal him, and teach him to go; thus we are Hos. 11. 3. Hos.
14 5.
delivered from the rigor of the Law, which yet is thus to be understood; That
though we be still bound to all the Law as much as ever under peril of sin
(for so much as the best come short of fullfilling all the Law, so much they
sin) yet not under pain of Death which is the rigor of the Law. And
therefore

Thirdly, we are delivered from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13.
from the vengeance and wrath of God against sin. Christ was made a curse for
us, Esaias 53. 3.


Lastly, from the Irritation of the Law, and all compulsorie and slavish
obedience: we love by Christ all the principles and grounds of true obedience
put into us. First, knowledge of Gods will, the spirit of Revelation, Col. 1.
9. Phil. 2. 13.
wisdom and spiritual understanding. Secondly, will to embrace and love what
we know. Thirdly, strength in some measure to perform it. And by these means
Phil. 4. 13. Luke 1. 74. Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 110. 3. Mic. 4. 2. Romans 5 5. (...)
Cor. 3. ^7. 2. Tim. 1. 7. Ioh. 13. 34. Iam. 1. 25. Matthew. 11. 30. 1. Ioh. 5.
(...).
the Saints serve God without fear, with delight, willingness, love, liberty,
power, the Law is to them a new Law, a Law of liberty, a light yoke, the
Commandments of God are not grievous to them.

Being thus Dead to the Law, we are truly Dead to sin likewise, and sin to
us, but not universally. Dead in regard of its strength, but not in regard of
its being. To apply then the premises. Sin is Dead naturally quoad Reatum, in
regard of the gvilt of it, that is, that actual guilt of sin, whereby every man
is borne a child of wrath, and made obnoxious to vengeance, is done quite away
in our regeneration, and the obligations cancelled. Col. 2. 14.

Secondly, sin is Dead Legally, quoad Regnum, in regard of the dominion and
government of it, in regard of the vigorous operation which is in it. First,
sin is condemned, Romans 8. 3. and therein destinated, and designed to death,
It shall fully be rooted out. Secondly, in the mean time, it is disabled from
a plenarie Rule over the conscience, though the Christian be molested and
pestered with it, yet he does not henceforth serve it, nor become its
instrument, to be subject in every motion thereof, as the weapon is to the
hand that holds it: but Christ and his love bear the sway, and hold the Stern
in the heart, Romans 6 6. (...). Cor. 5. 14, 15. 1. Pet. 4. 1, 2.

Thirdly, the sentence of the Law against sin is already in execution. But we
are to note, that sin though condemnd to die, yet (such is the severity of
God against it) it is adjudg'd to a lingering death, a death upon the Cross: Ut
sentiat se mori. (...).
and in the faithful sin is already upon a Cross, fainting, struggling, dying
daily; yet so, as that it retains some life still, so long as we are here,
sin will be as fast to our natures, as a nailed man is to the Cross that
bears him. Our Thorn will still be in our flesh, our Canaanite in our side,
our Twinns in our womb, our counterlustings, Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 5.
and counterwillings; though we be like unto Christ per primitias spiritus; yet
we are unlike him per Reliquias Depeccator: merit. and Remiss. lib. 2. cap. 7 8
28. Contra I^lian. lib 6. cap. 16. Contraduas epist. P^lag. lib. 3. c. 3.
Hicron. ^p. 8. 9. Fulgent. ad Mon. lib. 1. Psalm. 19 12. Pro^. 20 6. 1. Cor. 4.
4. 1. Ioh. 3. 20. Exam. Censur. cap. 11.. 6 fol. 132 133.
vetustatis, by the remainders of our flesh; not to sin is here only our
Law, but in heaven it shall be our Reward. All our perfection here is imperfect;
Sin has its deaths blow given it, but yet like fierce and implacable beasts
it never lets go its hold till the last breath, Animamque in vulnere ponit,
never cease to infest us, till it cease to be in us. Who can say, I have
made my heart clean? Cleanse thou be (says holy David) from my secret sins.
Though I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified, says the
Apostle; and the reason is added, He that iudgethme is the Lord; which Saint
John further unfolds, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things.
Which places (though most dangerously perverted by some late Innovators, which
teach, That a man may be without secret sins, that he may make his heart
clean from sin, and that Saint Paul was so) do yet in the experience of the
holiest men that are, or have been, evince this truth, that the lusts of the
flesh will be, and work in us, so long as we carry our mortal bodies about
us. And this God is pleased to suffer for these and like purposes: First, to
convince and humble us in the experience of our Vid. Aug. de not. and great. c.
27. Socrat. ^ccl. Hist. lib. 5. c. 16. 2. Cor. 12. 7. Ezekiel. 36. 31.
own vileness, that we may be the more to the praise of the glory of his
great grace. As once Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria dealt with the Egyptian
Idols, after the embracement of Christianity; most he destroyed, only one of
their Apes and Images he kept entire, not as a monument of Idolatry, but as a
spectacle of sin and misery, that in the sight thereof the people might after
learn to abhor themselves that had lived in such abominable Idolatries.
Secondly, to drive us still unto him, to cast us always upon the hold and use
of our Faith, that our prayers may still find something to ask which he may
give, and our repentance something to confess, which Aug despir. and lit cap.
ult.
he may forgive. Thirdly, to proportion his mercy to his justice, for as the
wicked are not presently fully destroyed, have not sentence speedily executed
against them, but Eccles. 8. 11. Job 21. 30. Psalm. 37. 13. 38.
are reserved unto their Day, that they may be destroi'd together, as the
Psalmist speaks; even so the righteous are not here fully saved, but are
reserved unto the great day of Redemption, when they also shall be saved
together, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Fourthly, to work in us a
greater hatred of sin, and longing after glory, therefore we have yet but the
first fruits of the spirit, that we should groan and wait for the Adoption
and Romans 8. 23. 2. Cor. 5. 2, 3, 4.
Redemption, therefore are we burdened in our earthly tabernacle, that we should
the more earnestly groan to be clothed upon with our House which is from
Heaven. Fifthly, to magnify the power of his Grace in the weakest of his
members, which, notwithstanding that inhabiting Traitor, which is ready to let
in and entertain every temptation, shall yet make a poor sinful man stronger
in some respect then Adam was himself, even able to overcome at last the
powers of darkness, and to be sufficient against all Satan's buffets. Lastly,
to commend the 2. Cor. 12. 9.
greatness of his mercy and salvation when we shall come to the full fruition
of it, by comparing it with the review of that sinful estate in which here we
lived when we were at the best, without possibility of a total deliverance.

Thirdly, consider the great Contagion, and pestilentiall humor which is in
this sin, which does not only cleave unseparably to our nature, but derives
venom upon every action that comes from us. For though we do not say That the
good works of the Regenerate are sins, and so hateful to God (as our
adversaries belie K^liisons survay. li. 6. cap. 5. B. (...) opus^. Tom 1. op 6.
Bellarm. de Iustisic. l. 4. c. 10.
and misreport us) for that were to reproach the spirit and the grace of Christ
by which they are wrought: yet this we affirm constantly unto the best work
that is done by the concurrence and contribution of our own faculties such a
vitiousnesse does adhere, such stubble of ours is superinduced, as that God may
justly charge us for defiling the grace he gave, and for the evil which See
this point learnedly stated by D. Reynolds Confer. with Heart. cap. 8. Divis.
4. page 525. 528. and by D. John White in his Way to the Church. Digress. ^7.
Vid. Calvinum hec ^ore suo, nempe p^sime and (...) tractantem. (...). lib. 3 c.
14. Aug. (...). mer. and remissi. lib 2. (...) 18. Numb. 19 22. (...). 2. 14.
we mix with them may turn away his eyes from his own gifts in us* Sin in
the faculty is poison in the fountain, that sheds infection into every thing
that proceeds from it. Ignorance and difficulty are two evil properties which
from the fountain do in some measure diffuse themselves upon all our works.
Whenever thou art going about any good this evil will be present with thee,
to derive a deadness, a dampe, a dullness, an indisposednesse upon all thy
services, an iniquity upon thy holiest things, which thou stand in need of
a priest to bear for thee, Exodus 28. 38. and to remove from thee. In the Law
whatsoever an unclean person touched was unclean, though it were holy flesh;
to note the evil quality of sinful nature, to stain and blemish every good
work which comes from it. This is that which in thy prayers deads thy zeal,
fervencie, humiliation, selfeabhorrencie, thy importunity, faith, and close
attention, this like an evil savor mingleth with thy sacrifice, casts in
impertinent thoughts, wrong ends, makes thee rest in the work done, and never
enquire after the truth of thine own heart, or Gods blessing and success to
thy services. This is it that in reading and hearing the Word throws in so
much prejudice, blindness, inadvertency, security, infidelity, misapplication,
misconstruction, wresting and shaping the word to our selves. This is that
which in thy meditations makes thee roving and unsettled, driving to no point
nor issue, running into no conclusion nor resolutions of further obedience in
faith and godliness. This is that which in thy converse with others mingles so
much frowardness, levitie, unprofitablenesse to or from them. This is that
which in thy calling makes so unmindfull of God and his service, aim at
nothing but thine own emoluments; Where is the man who in all the ways of his
ordinary calling labors to walk in obedience and fear of God, to carry
always the affections of a servant, as considering that he is doing the Lords
work? That consecrates and sanctifies all his courses by prayer, that beggeth
strength, presence, concurrence, supplies of spirit from God to lead him in the
way which he ought to go, and to preserve him against those snares and
temptations which in his calling he is most exposed unto? that imploreth a
blessing from heaven on his hearers in their conversation, on his clients in
their cause, on his patients in their cure, on himself in his studies, on the
state in all his servlees? That is careful to redeem all his precious time,
and to make every hour of his life comfortable and beneficial to himself and
others? Where is the man whose particular calling does not trench and incroach
upon his general calling, the duties which he owes to God? That spares
sufficient time to humble himself, to study Gods will, to acquaint himself
with the Lord, to keep a constant Communion with his God? nay that does not
adventure to steal from Gods own day to speak his own words, to ripen or
set forward his own or his friends advantages? In all this take notice of that
naughty Inmate in thy bosom; set thy self against it, as thou would do
against the Stratagems of a most vigilant enemy, or of a perfidious friend,
Qui inter amplexus strang^lat; that like Dalilah never comes alone, but with
Philistimes too; like Iael, never comes with Milk and Butter alone, but
withal with a nail and a hammer, to fasten not thy head alone, but, which is
worse, thy heart also unto earthly things.

Fourthly, consider the Fruitfulness of it. It is both male and female, as I
may so speak, within it self, both the Tempter, and the seed, and the womb.
Suppose we it possible for a man to be separated from the sight and
fellowship, from the contagions and allurements of all other wicked men; kept
out of the reach of Satan's suggestions and solicitations; nay to converse in
the midst of the most renowned Saints that are; yet that man has enough in
himself, and would quickly discover it, to beget, to conceive, to bring forth,
to multiply, to consummate actual sins. The Apostle S. James sets forth the
birth and progress of actual sin, Every man is tempted when he is drawn
away and enticed of his own lust, there Lust is the father, the adulterer; and
Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin, there Lust is the mother too;
and there is no mention of any seed but the temptation of lust it self, the
stirrings, and flatteries, (...). Romans 7. 5. Iam. 3. 6.
and dalliances of the sinful heart with it self. Iam. 1. 13, 14, 15. The
same Apostle compares it to Hell, which notes the unsatiablenesse of the womb
of sin, that does enlarge its desires as the grave; nay to the fire of Hell;
nothing so apt to multiply as fire, every thing ministers occasion of increase
unto it; but then ordinary fire works out it self, and dies; but. Lust as it
is like fire, in multiplying, so it is like Hell fire in abiding, it is not
preserved by a supply of outward materials to foment and cherish it, but it
supports its self. It is like a troubled Esaias 57. 20.
sea, which casts up mire and dirt, a fountain out of which every day issue
Adulteries, thefts, murders, evil Matthew. 15. 19.
thoughts, etc It brings forth fruit like Summer fruit: Who has heard such
a thing, who has seen such things? Esaias 66. 8.
shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day, says the Prophet: yet
consider how suddenly this sin brings forth. When you see in your children of
a span long their sin show it self before their hair or their teeth,
vanity, pride, frowardness, self-love, revenge, and the like, then think
upon your own infancy, and bewail ^ lib. 1. cap. 7.
Adams image so soon in your selves, and yours in your children. I have seen,
says Saint Austin, a sucking infant, that was not able to articulate a word,
look with a countenance even pale for Envy, upon his fellow Suckling, that
shared with him in the same milk; upon which consideration the holy man
breaks forth into this pious complaint, Ubi Domine, quando Domine, where ever
was the place, O Lord; when ever was the time, O Lord, that I have been an
Innocent Creature? Secondly, consider how continually it brings forth, even
every day, Genesis 6. 5. or all the day long, as fast as the Sun begets swarms
of vermin, or the fire sparkles. Thirdly, consider how desperately it breaks
forth: When thou see a man wallow like a beast in his own vomit, dart out
blasphemies against heaven, revile the Gospel of Salvation, tear the blessed
name of God in pieces with abhorrid and hideous oaths; Cain murdering his
brother, Judas betraying his master, Ananias lying to the Holy Ghost, Lucian
mocking the Lord Jesus as a crucified Impostor, Julian darting up his blood
against heaven in hatred of Christ, the Scribes and Pharisees blaspheming the
holy spirit, then reflect on thy self, and consider that this is thine own
image, that thou have the same root of bitterness in thy self, if the Grace
of God did not hinder and prevent thee. As face answers unto Prove. 27. 19.
face in water, renders the self same shape, color, lineaments, proportion;
so the Heart of man to man, every man may in any other man's heart see the
complet image, deformities, uncleanness of his own. Suppose we Two Acorns of
a most exact and geometrical equality in seminall virtue, planted in two
several places of as exact and uniforme a temper of earth, needs must they
both grow into trees of equal strength and (...), unless the benignity and
influences of heaven do come differently upon them. Our case is the same, we
are all naturally cast into one mould, all equally partake the self same
degrees and proportions of original lusts, our hearts equally by nature
fruitful in evil; If then we proceed not to the same compass and excess of
riot with other men, we must not attribute it to our selves, or any thing in
our natures, as if we had made our selves to differ; but only to the free and
blessed influences of the Grace of Christ, and his Spirit which blows where
it lists.

Lastly, consider how unexpectedly it will break forth. 2. King. 8. 13.
Is thy servant a Dog that he should do this great thing, To dash children to
pieces, and rip up women with child? It was the speech of Hazael to Elisha the
Prophet. As if he should have said, I must cease to be a man, I must put off
all the principles of humanity, I must change natures with fierce and bloody
Creatures that are not capeable of pity, before I can do such facts as these:
Is thy servant a Dog? Yes, and worse then a dog; when pride, ambition,
selfe-projections, the probabilities, and promises, the engagements and
exigencies of a Kingdom shall enliven and rouse up that original inhumanitie
that is in a man, he will then be not a Dog only, but a Woolte, and a Lion. I
will not deny thee, I will dye for thee, though all Mat. 26. 33, 35.
should be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended. They were
the words of a great Disciple; Alas Peter, thou know not thine own hear^;
it is but like a quiet Sea, when the wind, the Temptation shall blow, thou will
quickly be troubled and find an alteration, thy tide will turn, and an ebb
of thy zeal will follow. Who could have expected or feared adultery from such
a man as David after such communion with God? Impatiency from such a man as
Jeremy after such revelations from God? Idolatry from such a man as Solomon
after so much wisdom from God? Fretfulnesse and frowardness of spirit in
such a man as Jonah after such deliverances from God? Fearfulness in such a
man as Abraham after so much protection from God? Cursing from such a man as
Job, after so much patience and experience from God? O in such examples learn
thy self and fear thyself. The Disciples could say, Master is it I that shall
betray thee. Peter did not ask, Master is it (...)? ^or John, Master is it
Thomas? but every one, Is it I? True indeed, I have a deceitful flesh, a
revolting heart, a Traitor in my bosom, It may as soon bed as another man. If
anyone fall, Restore him with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6. 1.
says the Apostle, considering thy self, that is, do not rejoice against thy
brother, nor insult over him, do not despise him in thy heart, nor exalt thy
self; thou art of the same mould, thou have the same principles with him; that
God which has forsaken him may forsake thee, that temptation which has
overcome him may happen unto thee, that enemy which has sifted him may winnow
thee, and therefore in his fall learn compassion toward him, and jealoufie to
thy self, Restore him, and consider thyselfe.

Fifthly, consider the temptations that arise from this sin, the daily and
hourly solicitations wherewith it sets upon the soul, to unsettle it in
good, and to dispose it unto evil. Satan is emphatically in the Scripture called
a Tempter; and yet as if his were but halfe-temptations, Matthew. 4. 3. 1. These.
3. 5.
S. James says, that a man is indeed tempted by his own lusts, when he is
drawn away, and enticed. First, Iam. 1. 14.
drawn away from God out of his sight and presence, and then solicited unto
evil, either evil simply, or evil concomitantly, in doing good duties
formally, blindly, unzealously, unconstantly* unspiritually. If a man shoot an
arrow against a rock, it may be broken, but it cannot enter: no more can Satan's
temptations prevail against the Soul, without something within to give them
admittance. Therefore though he tempted Christ, yet he prevailed not, and our
Savior gives the reason; He has nothing Ioh. 14. 30.
in me, nothing to receive his darts. But now in us the flesh holds
treacherous compliancie with Satan and the world, and is ready to let them in
at every assault: This is a great part of the cunning of wicked Angels to
(...). Just. Martyr. Apol. ^. Bernard.
engage and bribe over a man's own concupiscence to their party. Seed will
never grow into a living Creature without a womb to foster it, there must be
(...) cordis as well as Seminarium Hostis, the conception of the heart, as the
temptation of Satan. Temptations may vex, but they cannot corrupt us without
our own sinful Quid tibi facturus est Tentator? Te vinceand mundus est
victus. Quid tibi facturus est Tentator extranius -- Adsit intus castitas,
victa est foris iniquitas. -- Si non in te inventa fuerit Avaritia, remansit
frustra extenta muscipula, etc. Aug. tom. 10. Sermon. 9. de Diversis, cap. 9. Non
diabolus voluntatem delinquendi imponit, sed materiam voluntatis subministrat.
Tertull. exhort. castitat. cap. 2. Vid Aug. contr. 2. cp. Pelag. lib. 1. c. 2.

Eos qui soris nobis oppugnant intus vincimus vincendo concupiscentias per quas
nobis dominantur. Aug. tom. 3 lib. de Ag^ne Christiano, cap. 2.


entertainment; as a chaste woman may be solicited by some base ruffian, but
yet no whit in danger while she retains her chastity, It may grieve her, but
it cannot defile her. Many points of temptation the Devil can compass alone.
Suggestions, persuasions, arguments, instigations, injections of blasphemous or
Atheistical notions; but all these are at the worst but as the violence of a
man that ravisheth a Virgin; If we can wholly keep in our hearts from
affording their embraces, and accepting the offers of Satan, if we can with
all the strength of our soul cry out like the Ravished woman in the Law, they
are the sins of Satan and not ours But here is the misery, Satan knows how
ou^ tide stands, he searches out our dispositions, and thereunto sorteth his
temptations, and takes ingredients of our own to temper with them, and to
sweeten them, As Agrippina when she poisoned her husband Claudius tempered the
poison in the mea^e which he most delighted in: One man has lust and wit,
Satan tempts him to scorn and slight the humility of the ways of God, and
the simplicity of the Gospel; another has lust and money, Satan tempts him
to pride and oppression, to earthly mindedness, and trust in his strong tower;
another has lust and poverty, Satan tempts him to murmuring, discontent,
rebellion, another has lust and youth, Satan tempts him to vanity and
intemperance, another has lust and learning, Satan tempts him to
vainglory, and ambition. There is in every man much need of spiritual
wisdom to observe where he lies most obnoxious, where Satan does most plant
his forces, and direct his attempts, and ever to apply our strongest watch, our
most importunate prayers, to those gapps of our calling, which are most naked *
Weems Christian. S^ag. De^* 2^. 27.
to those lusts in our nature which are most predominant. ^ I^sum delectabili
cibo boletorum venenum. Tacit. An. Boletum (...) Avidissime ^iborum ^alium
(...). Su^t.


Sixthly* consider the War and Rebellion of this sin; I find Romans 7. 23. Gal.
5. 17. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
a Lawin my members warring against the law of my mind. The flesh lusts
against the spirit. Fleshly lusts war against the soul. Which passages are
not so to be understood, as if when lust does fight it fights against nothing
but the spirit, but yet it may be so dishartned and crushed, that it shall not
always rebel (which is the late, wretched, and ignorant gloss of our new
Pelagians, who expressly contrary to the doctrine of S. Paul, and the Articles
of the Church of England, with the Harmony of other Reformed Churches, deny the
sinfulnes of original concupiscence, or that it always lusts against the
spirit;) but the meaning of them is, that while we are in the Militant*
Church, we shall have hourly experience of this traitor in our bosom; and
whenever we go about any spiritual work, this evil will be present with us,
and fight against us. And this war is not at a distance, but it is an
intimate and close contrariety in the same part, like the combat between
heat and cold in the same water, no room nor space to hold a Mediator, or to
entertain a Treaty, or to shift and evade the conflict. The same soul Quid
est hoc monstrum? Imperat animus corpori, and paretur, Imperat animus sibi and
resistitur, etc. Aug. confess. lib. 8. c. 9. 10.
that commands obedience does it self resist it. In the same mind the
wisdom of the flesh which is sensual and divelish fighting against the
wisdom of the spirit which is meek and peaceable. In the same will a delight
in the Law of God, and yet a bias and countermotion to the law of sin. In the
same understanding a light of the Gospel, and yet many relikes of humane
principles, and fleshly reasonings; much ignorance of the purity, excellency,
and beauty of the ways of God. In the same heart singleness and sensiblenesse
of sin, and yet much secret fraud and prevarication, hardness and
dis-apprehension of sin and wrath. In the same affections, love of God and love
of the World, fear of God and fear of men, trust in God and doubting of his
favor. Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief, was the cry of Mark. 9 24.
the poor man in the Gospel; and such must be the complaints of the best of
us: Lord, I will, help thou mine unwillingnesse: Lord, I hear thee, help
thou my deafness; Lord, I remember thee, help thou my forgetfulness: Lord,
I press toward thee, help thou my weariness: Lord, I rejoice in thee, help
thou my heaviness: Lord, I desire to have more fellowship with thee, help
thou my strangeness: Lord, I love and delight in thy Law, help thou my
failings. Such tugging is there of either nature to preserve and improve it
self. Jacob was a man of contention and wrestling from the beginning. Genesis 25.
22, 26. Genesis 27. Genesis 32. 24. Genesis 29. 25. Genesis 31, 36-41
Contention with his brother in the birth, contention for the birthright,
contention with an Angel for the blessing, contention for his wife, and for
his wages with Laban. He was a Typical man, his name was Israel, and he was a
pattern to the Israel of God. We must be all men of contention, wrestlers not
only with God in strong and importunate prayers for his blessings, but with
our elder brother Esau, with the lusts and frowardness of our own hearts. The
Thief on the Cross was a perfect emblem of the sin of our nature, he was
naild Luke 23. 39.
hand and foot, destined unto death, utterly disabled from any of his wonted
outrages, and yet that only part which was a little loose, flies out in
reviling and reproaching Christ: Our old man by the mercy of God is upon a Gal.
5. 24.
Cross, destined to death, disabled from the exercise of that wonted violence
and dominion which it used; and yet so long as there is any life or strength
left in him, he sets it all on work to revile that blessed spirit which is
come so near him. The more David prevails the more Saul 1. Sam. 18. 7, 8. and
28. 9. Genesis 38. 28.
rages and persecuteth him. As in the womb of Tamar there was a strife for
precedencie, Zarah thrust out his hand first, and yet Pharez go^ fo^th before
him: so in a Christian many times the (...) thru^ out the hand, and begins to
work, and presently the flesh grows sturdie and boisterous and gets first
into the action. A man sets himself to call upon God, lifts up his hand with
the skarlet thread, the blood of Christ upon it, is in a sweet preparation to
power out his complaints, his requests, his praises to his father; and ere he
is aware, pride ln the excellency of Gods gifts, or deadness, or worldly
thoughts intrude themselves, and justle-by Gods spirit, and cast a blemish upon
his offering. A man is setting himself to hear Gods word, begins to attend and
relish the things that are spoken as matters which do in good earnest
concern his peace, begins to see a beauty more then ordinary in Gods service,
an excellency with David in Gods Law, which he considered not before,
resolves hereafter to love, frequent, submit, believe, prize it more then he
had ever done; presently the flesh sets up her mounds, her reasonings, her
perverse disputes, her own principles, her shame, her worldliness, her want
of leisure, her secular contentments, and so resists the spirit of God, and
rejects his counsel. I have enough already, what needs this zeal, this
pressing, this accuratenesse, this violence for heaven? strive we what we
can, our infirmities will encompasse us, our corruptions will be about us. But
yet Beloved as in a pyramide, the higher you go the less compass still you
find the body to be of, and yet not without the curiosity and diligence of
him that framed it: so in a Christian man's resurrection, and conversation with
Christ in heaven, the nearer he comes to Christ, the smaller still his
corruptions will be, and yet not without much spiritual industry and
christian art. A Christian is like a flame, the higher it ascends the more
thin, purified and azurie it is, but yet it is a flame in green wood, that
wants perpetual blowing and encouragement. A man sets himself with some good
resolution of spirit to set forward the honor in questioning, in discovering,
in shaming, in punishing (within the compass of his own calling and warrant)
the abuses of the times, in countenancing, in rewarding, in abetting and
supporting truth and righteousness: his flesh presently interposeth, his quiet,
his security, his relations, his interests, his hopes, his fears, his
dependencies, his plausibility, his credit, his profit, his secular provisoes,
these blunt his edge, upbraid him with impoliticknes with malecontentednes,
with a sullen and cynicall disposition against men and manners, and thus put I
know not what ill favored colors upon a good face, to make a man out of love
with an honest business. In a word, good is before me, the glory, the service,
the ways of God: I see it, but I cannot love it, I love it, but I cannot do
it, I do it, but I cannot finish it; I will but yet I rebel, I follow, and
yet I fall, I press forward and yet I faint and flagge, I wrestle and yet I
halt, I pray and yet I sin, I fight and yet I am Captive, I crucify my In
tota anima, and in toto corpore conditorem habeopacis Deum, quis in me
seminavit hoc bellum? Aug lib. 5. contr. Julian. cap. 7.

Odi quod sum, non sum quod amo, infelix ego, qui in me venenatu^ inimi^ae
arbor is gustum (...) c^ucis ligno digessi Aug. ep. 106.

Conflictus licet non sit damnabilis, quia non perficit iniquitat^m,
miserabilis tamen, quia non habet pacem. Aug. de Nupt. and concupis. lib 2.
cap. 2.


lusts, and yet they revile me, I watch my heart, and yet it runs away from
me; God was at first the Author of nothing but peace within me, what envious
man has sowed this war in my bowels? Let the Apostle answer this question
says Saint Austen, By one man sin entered into the world. That which I would
be I am not, and that which I hate I am; O wretched man, in whom the Cross of
Christ has not yet worn out the poisonous and bitter taste of that first tree.
It is the patheticall complaint of Bonifacius in the same Father. How does the
Apostle even break with complaining of this rebellious and captivating power
of original concupiscence, (...), O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me? though he were delivered from the damnation, yet he was not delivered
from the misery of this sin, which must necessarily arise from the
stirrings, and conflicts of it. Though lust in the regenerate be not damnable,
because albeit it bring forth sin, yet it does not finish, and consummate it,
for it is broken off by repentance, and disabled by the power of Christ's
spirit, yet it is still miserable, because it disquieteth the spiritual peace
and tranquillity of the soul. But there is no great danger in the war, if
the enemy be either foolish, or weak, or treatable, that either victory may
be quickly gotten, or some pacifications and compositions concluded. But no
such things here.

Seventhly, therefore consider the wisdom, the policies, Romans 8. 7. Iam. 3.
15. Ier 4. 22. 2 Cor. 10 5.
the unsearchablenesse of this sin. The Scripture calls it The wisdom of the
flesh, earthly, sensual, divellish wisdom, wisdom to do evil,
Reasonings, strong holds, Imaginations, high thoughts; And all this wisdom is
emploi'd to Deceive the Soul, therefore is fleshly wisdom called by Saint
James Divellish* because it has the Iam. 1. 14. 2. Pet. 3. 17. Genesis 3. 13. 1.
Tim. 2. 14. I^r. 17. 9.
Devils end to Draw away men from God, and to entice, and beguile them.
Therefore in Scripture the heart of man is said to be Deceitful and
unsearchable, and lusts are called Deceiveable lusts, and the deceitfulness of
sin: Ephesians. 4. 22. 2. These. 2. 10. H^b. 3. 13. (...). Sola Socordia Innocens.
Tacit. (...). Ephesians. 2. 3. Prove. 25. 3. Hos. 5. 2. Grande profundum est Homo,
^uius capillos tu Domine numeratos habes, and tamen capilli eius magis
numera^iles sunt, qu^m affectus and motus cordis. Aug. Confess. lib. 4. cap. 16.
Saint Paul has a heap of words to express this serpentine quality of sin
by, cogging or cheating, cunning, craftiness, methods, deceit. Ephesians. 4* 14. But
a man may be very wise, and that wisdom look upon none but mischievous and
deceitful ends; and yet for all this no great hurt done by him, because he may
be unwilling to take the pains, like him in the historian that was innocent
not out of good nature, but merely out of lazines: Therefore thirdly, this
Deceit of sin is actuated and set on work with very strong desires, and
universal lustings, the Apostle calls them not lusts only, but wills, or
resolutions of the flesh and of the mind it self. Hence those secret sins
which David himself was so troubled withal, those swarms of lusts which the
soul forgeth in it self as so many Creatures: that which Solomon says of the
Kings heart, is true of that fleshly King in every man's bosom; It is
unsearchable, a Gulf, a Hell of sinful profoundnesse. Policies to keep
from good, policies to poison and pervert good, policies to make good
unseasonable; policies to bring to evil, policies to keep in evil, policies
to maintain, justify, extenuate evil. Policies to make me^ rest in false
principles, policies to gloss and corrupt true principles, policies on the
right hand for superstition and flattering of God with will worship, policies
on the left hand for open profanenes. Infinite are the windings and labyrinths
of the heart of man the counsels and projects of the flesh, to establish the
Kingdom of sin in it self. It is an argument of one of the grandest
consequences in Divinity, this one of the wisdom of the flesh, those wiles and
principles that hold up the throne of the Prince of this world. What man is
there who will not in profession be ready to spit at the name of Satan, and to
defy him and the works of his Kingdom: and yet what man is there in whose
bosom Satan has not a Counsell-table, a troop of statists, by whom he
works effectually the designs of his own Kingdom? The more time any man
will spend to make himself acquainted with himself, the more light of Gods
Law he will set up in his heart, the more he will beg of God to reveal the
secrets of his evil nature unto him, to make him see that abundance of the
heart, That treasure of the heart, that Hell of the heart, that panoplie and
magasin of sin and temptation which is there; the more with the prodigal he
comes unto himself, and views that evil heart, that bitter root which is in
him: Certainly the more confusion and silence, and abhorrencie, and
condemnation will there be of himself, the more adoration of that boundless
mercy, of that bottomless purity, which is able to pierce into every corner of
so unsearchable a thing, able to cleanse every hole and dungeon, and to enlarge
it into a fit receptacle for the Prince of glory. Notable to this purpose is
that place of S. Paul; If all prophecy, and there come in an unbeleever 1.
Cor. 14. 24, 25
or unlearned man, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all, and thus are
the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his face he will
worship God. As soon as a man is convinced and Judged out of the word, and
has the secret filthiness of his heart laid open before him, has his
Conscience cut open, and unridg'd by that sacrificing sword, which is a
discerner of the very intents of Heb. 4. 12. Romans 15. 16.
the heart; he presently falls down upon his face in the acknowledgment of his
own unworthiness, and acknowledges all worship to be due to that most
patient and merciful God, that had all the former days of his ignorance
endured such an unclean vessel, which was from the very womb fitted for
wrath, and now at last revealed his Gospel of salvation, opened the bowels of
Christ for a sanctuary and refuge against all that vengeance that attends,
and against all those spiritual enemies which did hunt his soul. When men
have their own evil ways revealed unto them (which is ever done Ezekiel. 16. 63.
Ezekiel. 36. 31. Luke 18. 13.
by Gods spirit when he will please to be pacified with them) then must they
needs be confounded, and be loathsome in their own sight, and never open their
mouths any more, nor hold up their faces, or stand before God with Ezra 9. 15.
their wonted confidences and presumptions. This was the bottom of David's
repentance, That he was conceived Psalm. 51. 4, 5.
in sin, that was not the first time that he was an adulterer, he had it in
his nature from the very womb. Men testify their pride in their looks and
fashions, in their eyes and tongues, it is the deepest, the closest, and yet one
of the openest sins, as a great Oak that spreads much in sight, and yet is
very deep under ground too; But now if men did truly consider what black feet
they are which do hold up these proud plumes, what a stinking root it is
which bears these gawdie flowers, what a sulphury and poisonous soil it is
that nourishes these painted apples, they would begin a little to new rate
themselves. It is nothing but ignorance that keeps men in pride. If to be wise
to do evil, and foolish to do good, if to take endowments from the hand of
God, and to fight against him with them, if to pervert the light of reason and
Scripture to plead for sin, and the purposes of Satan, as lascivious poets
use the chaste expressions of Virgil, to notify their fordid and obscene
conceits; If to be Tertul. de praescrip. advers. Haeretic. c. 39.
so wise as to make evil good, and good, evil, light darkness, and
darkness light; to distingvish idolatry into religion, superstition into
worship, Belial into Christ, be matters to be proud of, then there is in every
man's nature a crop and harvest of just pride. Else we must all conclude, that
he which glories in any thing which is merely from himself, has chosen
nothing to glory in but his own shame.

Eighthly, consider the strength and power of this sin, to command, to
execute, to bring about what ever it has projected for the advancement of
Satan's kingdom. It has the power of a King, It reigns in our members: Romans
6. 12. Romans 7. 23.
and it has the strength of a Law, it is a Law in our members; and a Law
without strength is no Law: for Laws are made to bind, and hold men fast; and
therefore the Apostle calls lust a Law, because it commands, and holds under all
our members to the obedience of it. Therefore wicked men are called the
Servants of sin, Job. 8. 34.
and the best of us are Captives, that is, unwilling servants. Romans 7. 14.
Which notes such a strength of sin, as cannot ex toto be altogether
withstood. So much flesh and uncircumcisednesse as a man has in him, so much
disabilitie likewise has he to withstand sin.

In the wicked it has an absoluteness, an universal and uncontroled power;
First, they cannot but sin, they can do nothing but sin; Without faith it
is impossible Heb. 11. 6. Tit. 1. 15. 16.
to please God; and to the impure and unclean every thing is unclean. His
mercies cruel, his prayers abomination, his offerings the sacrifice of fools.
Secondly, if they seem to forsake any sin, it is not of hatred to that, as a
sin (for he that said. Thou shall not commit adultery, said Iam. 2. 11.
also, Thou shall not kill) but it is because they prefer others before it. A
man that has many concubines may so dote upon some particulars, as that the
rest happily may go untouched, or but cursorily saluted; and yet that is no
argument of hatred to them, but of preferring the others. So a man's heart may be
so taken up with the pursuit of some Herodias, some darling lust, as that
others may seem utterly neglected, and scorned; when the truth is, The heart
that plays the adulterer with any sin does indeed hate none. Thirdly, if by
the power of the Word they be frighted from the sin they most love, yet lust
will carry them to it again, as a Sow returns to the mire, or a man to his
wife. Fourthly, if they should be so fired and terrified away, that they durst
never actually return again; yet even then lust will make them wallow in
speculatiue uncleanness, their thoughts, their delights, their sighs, their
byas would still hanker the other way. As lust may dog, and pester, and
overtake a holy man that hates it, and yet he hates it still; so the Word may
frightand drive a wicked man from the sin he loves, and yet still he loves
it. Fifthly, this sin as it keeps men in love with all sin, so it keeps
men off from all good duties. It is as a chain upon all our faculties, an iron
gate, that keeps out any good thought, or poisons it when it comes in.

In the faithful themselves likewise it is exceeding strong, by antiperistasis
from the Law, to deceive, captivate, sell as a slave, to make him do that
which he hated and allowed not, and not do that which he would, and loved. It
may seem a paradoxe at the first, but it is a certain truth, Original sin
is stronger in the faithful, then those very Graces which they have received.
Understand it thus. A man gives to a prodigal son a great portion into his
own hands, and then gives over the care of him, and leaves him to himself;
iin this Case, though the money of it self were sufficient to keep him in
good quality; yet his own folly, and the Crows that haunt the carcass, those
sharking companions that cleave to him, will suddenly exhaust a great estate.
So if the Lord should give a man a stock of Grace as much as David or Paul
had, and there stop and furnish him with no further supplies, but give over the
care and protection of him, his lusts are so strong and cunning, as they would
suddenly exhaust it all, and reduce him to nothing. For this is certain, that
to be preserved from the strength of our own lusts, we have not only use of
the good graces which God has given us already ( per modum principij
inhaerentis) but of a continued support and under propping ( per modum
principij adsistentis) of (...). Phil. 1. 19.
those daily succors and supplies of the Spirit of Grace, which may go before
us, and lead into all truth, and teach us the way which we are to walk in,
which may still say to our lusts in our bosom, as he did to Satan at the right
hand of Iehoiada, The Lord rebuke thee; that may Zech. 3. 2.
still whisper in our ears that blessed direction, This is the way, walk in
it. Though a man were able to devour as Esaias 30. 21.
much at one meal as was spent upon Bell the Idol, yet he would quickly perish
without further supplies: so though a man should have a great portion of Grace,
and then be given over to himself, that would not preserve him from falling
again. Grace in us is but like the putting of hot water into cold, it may
warm it for the time, but the water will reduce it self to its wonted temper,
cold is predominant, even when the water scalds with heat, but that which
keeps water hot, is the preserving of fire still about it: so it is not the
Graces which the best of us receive, if God should there stop, and leave us to
them and our selves together, that would overcome sin in us: but that which
preserves us, is his promise of never failing us, of putting under his hand, of
renewing Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 37. 24. Lam. 3. 22, 23. Hos. 14. 4. Psalm. 23. 6. 1.
Pet. 1 5. Jude verse. 24.
his mercies daily to us, of healing our back slidings, of following us with
his goodness and mercy all the days of our life, of keeping us by his power
unto salvation through faith, that same which Fulgentius excellently calls Judge
Auxilium, the daily aid and supply of Grace. For Grace does not only prevent
a wicked man to make him righteous, but follows him, least he become wicked
again, not only (...) Impi^ ut s^at Iusius, subsequitur Ius^m ne fiat Impius.
Pravenit, ut Lumen cons^at, subsequitur ut quod contul^t servet, pravenit
elisum ut surgat, subsequitur elevatum ne cadat, etc. Fulg. de praedest. lib. 1.
prevent him that is fallen, to raise him, but follow him after he is risen
that he fall not again. Consider further what a multitude and swarm of lusts
and members this body of sin has, and how they concur in the unity of one
body too. For this is worth the nothing, that sometimes they are called in the
singular number Ioh. 1. 29. Romans 7. 17. Iam. 1. 14.
sin to note their unity, and conspiration; and sometimes in the plurail
number 1. Pet. 2. 11. Ephesians. 4. 22. Col 3. 5. Eccles. ^. 3.
lusts and members, to note their multitudes and serviceablenesse for several
purposes. And what can be stronger then an Army consisting of multitudes of
men and weapons, reduced all to a wonderful unity of minds, ends and order.
So then both in regard of its regal authority, of its edicts, and laws of
government, of its multitude of members, and unity of body, original sin
must needs be very strong.

Ninthly, consider the madness of this sin. The heart of man, says Solomon,
is full of evil, and madness is in his heart while he lives. Insania is a
general word, and has two kinds or species of madness in it; madness, or
unsoundnesse in passions, which is furor, rage and fiercenes; and madness or
unsoundnesse in the Intellectuals, which is Amentia, folly, or being out of
ones right mind. And both these are in original sin.

First, it is full of fierceness, rage, precipitancy when ever it sets it
self on work; the driving thereof is like 2. King. 9. 20.
the driving of Iehu, very furious. This disposition the holy Ghost takes
notice of often in the nature of wicked men, that they are (...) and (...),
implacable men, Romans 1. 31.
whom no bounds, not limits, nor covenants will restrain, 2. Tim. 3. 3, 4.
or keep in order: and again (...) and (...), fierce, headstrong, violent,
rash, they know not where not when to stop. Therefore the Scripture compares it
to a breaking Hos. 4. 2. Hos. 7. 6. Esaias 57. 20.
forth, or violent eruption, like that of fire out of an Oven, or of mire and
dirt out of a raging Sea. Men flattet themselves in their sins, and think
when they have gone thus or thus far, they will then give over, and stop at
their pleasure. Sed modo and modo non habent modum, as Austen said of his
counterfeite and hypocritical promises, sin can never find a center to rest
in, a fit place to stop at. These are but like the foolish conceits of
children, who not being able to discern the deception of their own senses,
and seeing the Heavens in the Orizon seem to touch the earth, resolve to go
to the place where they conceive them to meet, and there to handle and play
with the Stars; but when they are come thither, they find the distance to be
still the same: so is it with the foolish hearts of men, they conceive, after
so much gain, or honor, or pleasure, I shall have my fill, and will then give
over, but as long as the fountain within is not stopped, the pursuites of lust
will be as violent at last as at first. As he in the Fable -- Expectat dum
defluat amnis, at ille Labitur and labetur: So though men think, that their
lusts will at last grow dry; and they shall easily step over them unto God;
yet the truth is, the cutragious desires of men will grow stronger and
stronger, even as a river, the farther it goes from the fountain, does of ten
times spread it self the wider. The heart is strongly set upon its own sin,
as any Creature is upon its own motion. They set their heart, Hos. 4. 8.
Eccles. 8. 11.
says the Prophet, on their iniquity, the heart of the sons of men, says
Solomon, is fully set in them to do evil. As impossible it is for lust to
stop it self, as for the Sea to give over swelling, or the fire devouring the
matter that is before it. The man possessed with a Legion of Devils is a notable
Emblem of a man's sinful nature (for indeed sin makes a man of the Devils
blood, ye are the children of your Father the Devil, Ioh. 8. 44.) He is
conversant with nothing but death, dead works, dead companions, death the
service, and death the wages. He is full of hideous affections, he cuts and
tears his own soul; the presence of Christ is horrible and affrightfull to
him, and if he worship him* it is out of terror, and not out of love; his name
may well be called Legion, for the swarms, the services, the strength, the
war of lusts in the heart: It Is a torment to lust to come out of a man, and
to a man to be dispossessed of his lusts, there will be pain at the parting of
sin, the unclean spirit will tear when he must come out: but in this
principally was he the picture of our evil nature, in that he was exceeding
fierce and untameable, Matthew. 8. 28. Mark. 5. 3, 4.
no man durst pass by him, no chains were strong enough to hold him: and this
is the character of wicked men, To break bands and cords asunder, and to be
their own Psalm. 2. 3. Psalm. 12. 4.
Lords.

Examples of this fierceness of nature the Scripture does give us abundantly.
The Jews are for this property compared to a swift Drom^dary, or to a wild
Assefull Ier 2. 24. (...). Clem. Alex. Ier. 8. 6.
of desires, that snuffeth up the wind, as the use of Horses is in their lust,
and cannot be turned. To a Horse rushing into the battle; it is a similitude
from the inundation and precipitancy of torrents, that carry down all before
Hos. 4 16.
them. To a backesliding Heiser, whom no bounds can hold, but he will break
forth into a large place, and have room to traverse his ways. To a wild
A^se, that goes Hos. 8. 9.
where his own will and lust carries him, alone by himself, no Rider to gvide
him, no bridle to restrain him, no presence of God to direct him, no Law of
God to overruled him, but alone by himself, as his own Lord. With very
fierceness they did even weary themselves in Esaias 57. 10. Ier 9. 5.
their way. Notably did this rage show it self in the Sodomites; they reject
Lots entreaties, they revile his person, they grow more outrageous, and pressed
in even to Genesis 19. 9.
tear open the house. Like where unto was the rage of the Pharisees and Jews
against Christ, when he had fully convinced them of their sin, and his own
innocence, and they could hold dispute to longer with him, they run from
arguments to stones and raylings, Thou art a Samaritane and have a Devil. And
elsewhere it is said, Ioh. 8 48, 59. Luke 6. 11.
That they were filled with madness at the sight of the Miracles which Christ
wrought. Such was the rage of those which stoned Stephen, they g^ashed their
teeth, they stopped their ears, they shouted with their voice, they ran with
one accord and stoned him: and Saul, who was one of (...) 1
them, is said to have breathed out threatenings like a tired Wolf (unto which
some make the Prophecy of Jacob touching Benjamin, of which Tribe Saul was, to
allude) Genesis 4^. ^7. Act. ^. 3. and 22. 4. and 26. 10, 11. Gal. 1. 13. Act. 17.
5, 6. Act. 19. 28, 29 ^4. Act. 22. 22, 23.
and elsewhere to have wasted the Churches, and to have dragged the Saints into
prison, and to have been exceeding mad against them. And such measure himself
afterward found, combinations, uprores, assaults, draggings, wrath, clamors,
confusions, rushings in, casting off of clothes, throwing of dust into the
air; any thing to express rage and madness.

But you will say, All these were at the time wicked men, what is that to
nature in common? *Have the Saints such fierce and intemperate affections too?
Surely while we carry our flesh about us, we carry the seeds of this rage and
fury. Simeon and Levi were Patriarchs of the Church, and Heads of the
Congregations of Israel; yet see how Jacob aggravateth, and curses their
fierceness* In their anger they slew a man, in their wrath they digge^ Genesis
49. 6, ^.
down a wall: Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it
was cruel. Peter was a holy man, yet when the winds blew, when the sluices
were open, and the water had gotten a little passage, see how it gathers rage;
how fierce and mad it grows, even against the evidences of his own heart,
against the conscience of his own promises, a denial grows into an oath, and
that multiplies into cursings, and damnings of himself; for so (...). Matthew.
26. 74.
the word imports, an imprecating of Gods wrath, and of separation from the
presence and glory of God upon himself, if he knew the man. Jonah was a holy
Prophet, and one whose rebellion and fierceness against God might in reason
have been quite tamed by the Sea and the Whale; yet look upon him when his
nature gets loose, and you shall find more madness and tempest in him, then
in the Sea into which he was thrown: Angry, exceeding angry at Gods mercy to
Ninivie, and (with a strange uniformitie of passion in a contrary occasion) as
angry at Gods severity to the Gourd. That which made Job, though before full of
impaciency in some particular Job 40. 2. 4.
fits, to lay his hand on his mouth, and reply no more, which was Gods
debatement, and expostulation with him, Jonah regarded not, but reproves, and
replies with much madness of heart upon God himself, I do well to Jonah 4. 9.
be angry even unto death. So belluine and contumacious are the minds of men
set upon their own end, that though God himself undertake the cause, they
will outface his arguments, and stand on their own defense. Asa was a holy
King, his heart was perfect with the Lord 1. King. 15. 14.
all his days, yet when the Prophet sent from God told him of his folly in
entertaining leagve with the Syrians, and depending upon their confederacies,
It is said, that 2. Chron. 16. 10
he imprisoned the Prophet, and was in a rage, or in a tempestuousnesse against
him. Theodosius was a holy and excellent Princeps Religiosissimus. Hieron.
Cle^ens animus, misericors, communis, in omnes hono^ificus. Aurel. Victor.
Benesicium se accep^sse putavit, cum rogaretur ignos^ere. Ambros* orat. ^un.
Theodoret. Paulinus.
Prince, and amongst all other graces for none more eminent then for lenity
and compassion: yet so far did his fury kindle, upon occasion of an uproare
at Thessalonica, where one of his servants had been slain, that he commanded
an universal massacre without distinction to pass upon the City, where, in a
very short space of three hours, there were seven thousand men butchered by
the Emperors Edict, and the City filled with the blood of Innocents.

And this should teach us to keep the stricter watch over our own hearts,
since such excellent men as these have fallen, since so many occasions may
throw us into the like distemper, since the sin of our nature is but like a
sleeping Lion, or at best but like a wounded Lion, any thing that awakens and
vexes it begets rage and fury, to be the more circumspect over our selves,
and the more jealous of our own passions, in those particular cases
especially, wherein this fi^e is most apt to kindle.

First, when thou art in disputation, engaged upon a just quarrel to vindicate
the truth of God from heresy and distorsion, look unto thy heart, set a watch
over thy tongue, be ware of wild-fi^e in thy zeal, take heed of this ^. I^e v
9.
madness of thi^e evil nature. Much advantage the Devil may get even by
disputations for the truth. When m^n dispute against those that oppose
themselves, as the Disciples against the Samaritans, with thunder and fire from
heaven, with railing and reviling speeches, such as the Angel durst not give
unto Satan himself, when men shall forget the Apostles rule to instruct those
that oppose 2. Tim. 2* 25. Gal. 6. 1.
themselves with meeknes, and to restore those that are fallen with the spirit
of meeknes. When tongve shall be sharpened against tongue, and pen poisoned
against pen, when pamphlets shall come forth with more teeth to bite, then
arguments to convince, when men shall follow an adversary, as an undisciplined
Dog his game, with barking and bawling more then with skill or cunning, this is
a way to betray the truth, and to do the Devil service under Gods colors. It
is a grave observation which Sulpitius Severus makes of the council at
Ariminum, consisting of four hundred Bishops whereof eighty were Arians,
Exparte nostro^um leguntur Hom^es adolescentes, parum docti, and parum Cau^; ab
Ar^anis autem missi senes, (...), and (...) valen^es, ade^que (...) facile
s^periores Sulp. (...). lib. 2.
and the rest Orthodox; when after much treaty and agitation nothing was
concluded but either party kept immovable to his own tenent, It was at last
resolved that the sides should severally dispatch an embassage to the emperor
of ten men apiece, who should make relation of their faith and opinions. And
here now grew the disadvantage; for says he, the Arians sent Aged men,
cunning, and able to manage their employment to the best; but on our part,
there were young men sent of little learning, and of strong passions who being
vexed and provoked by the adverse party, spoild their own business, though
far the better, with imprudent, and intemperate handling.

Secondly, when thou art upon any civil controversy or debate for matter of
right, look unto thy heart, take heed of that seed of madness which lies
lurking in it, lest upon occasion of lawful controversy, there break out
rage and revenge upon the persons of one another. It is not for nothing that
the Apostle says, There is utterly a fault amongst you because you go to Law
with one another. 1. Cor. 6. 7. Why? The Apostle does plainly allow
Judicature, verse. 1. A man may go to law before the Saints, they may judge
small matters and things that pertain to this life. verse. 2. 3. 4. And for any
man from such a place to infer the unlawfulness of sueing to public justice
for his right, is a piece of Anabaptisme and folly justly punished with the
loss of his right. What then is that (...), that Impotency and defect which
the Apostle blames in them? It consists in two things, first their going to
law before Heathen Judges, thereby exposing the profession of Christianity to
imputations of scisme, divisions, and worldliness amongst the enemies of it:
In which case rather then put a rub unto the progress of the Gospel, by
giving unreasonable men occasion to censure the truth thereof by their
altercations, and making the ministry evil spoken o^ by their scandals, they
were to suffer and to bear wrong. For those words, Why do you not rather take
wrong, and suffer your selves to be defrauded, are not a Positive precept as
Julian the Apostate objected scornefully to the Christians, unless it be in
smaller injuries, which may with more wisdom be borne by patience, then by
contention repaid or overcome; but only a Comparative precept, that a man
should rather choose to leave his name, life, estate, goods, interests, utterly
unvindicated, then by defending them unavoydably to bring a scandal upon the
Cross of Christ. Secondly, which is to my present purpose, Their going to law,
though in itself Just when before competent and fit judges, had yet an
accidental vitiousnesse that by their inadvertencie did break out of their
evil hearts, and cleave unto it, and that was, their litigations ran from
the businesses unto the persons, It brake forth into violence and wrong against
one another, much perturbation of mind, revengefull and circumventing projects
show themselves under the color of legal debatements; Nay says the Apostle,
you do wrong and defraud, and that your brethren. Such a notable frowardness
and rage lies in the natures of men, that without much caution and
watchfulness it will be blown up into a flame even by honest and just
contentions.

Thirdly, In Differences upon private conversation, look to your hearts, give
not the raines too much to anger or displeasure, to suspicions or
misconstructions of your neighbors person or courses: give not the water
passage no not a little. Be Angry, says the Apostle, but Ephesians. 4 26.
sin not, let not the sun go down upon your wrath. It is not a Precept;
for such Anger as is required of us by way Cameron de Ecclesia, page 15.
of duty the Sun may safely go down upon; nor is it a pardon for anger when we
fall into it, to take of the inordinatenes of it; but it is a speech by way of
concession, or unavoidable supposition. It cannot be but that the Saints
themselves upon several occasions and provocations will be overtaken with
anger, but yet though their infirmity break forth into the passion, let not
pride and self love harden that passion into a habit, let them be wary that the
flame grow not upon them to set them on fire, Give no place to the Devil. The
longer a man continues in anger, the more room the Devil has to get in upon
him, and enrage him. Anger is the kernel and seed of malice, if it be let lie
long in the heart, that is so fertile a soil, and Satan so diligent a waterer
of his own plants, that it will quickly grow up into a knottie and stubburne
hatred. We read of hatreds which have run in the blood, and have been
entaild, Hereditarie malice, as the Historian calls it, Hatreds which Odia
Haereditaria (...). -- (...) rebels seditione rogi. Stat. Live.
have survived the parties, and discovered themselves in their very funerals,
Hatreds which men have bound upon their posterity by oaths, as Hasdrubal took a
solemn oath of Hanibal that he should be an irreconcilable enemy to Rome.
And what do all such expressions import, but that there is a boundless frenzy
in the flesh of men, a fierceness which no laws can tame, and that there is
enough of it in the best men, to break out into implacable affections, if
grace, and prayer, and watchfulness do not prevent it.

Fourthly, in Afflictions pains of body, temptations of spirit, abridgement of
estate, trials in reputation and favor or the like, look by all means unto
thy heart, take heed of these seeds of rage and madness which are in thee.
Never more time to look to thy mounds, to repair thy bulwarks, then when a
tempest is upon thy sea. Have you seen a beast break his teeth upon the
chain that binds him, or a Dog pour out his revenge upon the stone that did
hurt him, then have you seen some dark shadows of that fierceness and
fury, that is apt to rise out of the hearts of men when Gods hand lies close
upon them. When thou hear of the strange impatiencie of Jonah at the beating
of the Sun upon his head, unto Jonah 4. 9.
whom yet it was a mercy beyond wonder that he did now see the sun: when thou
hear of those deep expostulations of David with God, Has he forgotten to
be Psalm 77. 9, 10.
gracious? forgotten his promises? forgotten his truth? forgotten his power and
mercy? and shut up all his kindness in displeasure? When thou hear of the
impatiencies of Job, a man yet renowned for his patience, expostulating Iam. 5.
11.
and charging God, Is it good for the^ that thou should Job 10. 3.
oppress? When thou hear of those deep curses of ^eremie against the day
of his birth; of those froward expostulations Ier. 20. 14* 18.
and debates of the people of Israel with Moses, and of Moses with God, Why
have thou evil entreated Exodus 5. 21, 22.
this people, why have thou sent me? O then reflect upon thy self, and be
afraid of thine own evil heart, which is far more likely to break out
against God then any of those were. And for a remedy or prevention hereof
keep in thy sight the history of thy sins, make them as heinous to thine
own view as they are in their own nature; The way not to rage against
afflictions is to know our selves aright, that will make us confess unto God
with Ezra, let our calamities be what they will, That the Lord Ezra. 9. 13.
has punished us less then our iniquities have deserved. The way to bear the
hand of God with patience, and with acceptance, is to confess our sins, and
to be humbled for them. If their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, Levit. 26.
40, 41.
and then they accept of the punishment of their iniquities, says the Lord:
noting thus much, that the sight of our sin, and humiliation for it, makes a
man willing to submit Lam. 3. 39, 40.
to Gods chastisements. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? there are three strong reasons together why we ought
not to murmur in our afflictions. First, We are men, and what an impudence is
it for the clay to swell against the potter that formed it, and complain why
have thou made me thus. Secondly, we are sinners, all the punishments we
suffer are our own, the wages of our iniquities, and what a madness is it to
complain against the justice of our Judge? Thirdly, we are living men and
therefore God has punished us less then our sins deserve, for the wages of
sin is death, and what ingratitude is it to repine at merciful, and
moderated punishments? but yet such is the frowardness of our nature that we
are very apt thus to murmur; what is the cure and remedy of this evil
affection? Let us search and try our ways (says the Church) and turn to the
Lord our God; the more we grow acquainted with our sinful estate, and
marveilous provocations, with the patience and promises of God, the more we
shall justify God, and wait upon him, the more we shall judge our selves
less then the least of Mic. 7 9.
Gods mercies and forbearances. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, says
the Church again in the same case, I will not repine nor murmr at his
dealing with me, I will acknowledge that righteousness belongs unto him, and
confusion unto me, and the ground of this resolution is the sense of sin,
Because I have sinned against him. I have pressed, and wearied, and grieved,
and vexed him with my sins, without any zeal or tenderness of his glory;
but he has visited me in judgment and not in fury, in wrath he has remembered
mercy, and not quite consumed me as he might have done, he has not dealt with
me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to mine iniquities, he has
spared me as a son when I dealt with him as a traitor, and he will plead my
cause, and bring me forth to the light, and revenge my quarrel against those
which helped forward my affliction.

Thus we see the way not to rage against Afflictions is to understand and be
sensible of the foulness of our sins. Otherwise pride and madness will
undoubtedly show themselves in our Afflictions. What desperate and horrible
rage did the heart of Pharaoh swell into, when in the midst of those
fearful Judgments he Exodus 9. 17. 7. 23.
hardened his heart, and exalted himself against the people of God, and
trampled upon them, and did not set his 10. 11.
heart unto the judgment, but threatened and drove out M^ses and Aaron from his
presence, and pursued them with final and obdurate malice, through the midst
of 14. 23.
that wonderful deliverance? The like example we see in that impatient and
fretfull reply of Iehoram king of Israel in the great famine: This evil is of
the Lord, what should I 2. King. 6. 33.
wait for the Lord any longer? If this be all the reward we have for waiting
and calling upon God, to what purpose serve our humiliations and fastings? what
profitablenesse at all is there in his service? Thus we find the hypocrites
challenging God for afflicting them, upbraiding him with their humiliations,
and the fruitlesnesse of his service: Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see
not? wherefore Esai. 58 3.
have we afflicted our soul and thou take no knowledge? ye have said it is
in vain to serve God, and what Mal. 3. 14.
profit i^ it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked
mourn^fully before the Lord of hoasts, etc? And thus Saul, when he found
himself forsaken 1. Sam. 28. 6* 7.
by God, and should have humbled himself, and sought his face, he proceeded in
a further rage to inquire of the witches which himself had commanded to be
destroyed.

These things should teach us all to labor with God in prayer, that what ever
evil he sends upon us, he would not suffer his strength and spirit to
forsake us, nor give us over to the rage and madness of our own nature. O
what hearts should men see in themselves, if they would look upon their own
faces in other men's lives! See ^ulian dye with revenge and rage against Christ;
Judas bursting asunder under the weight of Gods wrath; The cursed persecutors
20 Anno Imperij Dioclesiani exacto amb^ imperatores cons^ntientibus animis
imperio se abdicarunt; public pro^itentes se moli negotiorum (...): sed apud
^os quibus arcana s^i pectoris crede^ant, id ex (...) sacere se ^tebantur. Quia
enim ne^ Christian^s (...), ^ec praeconium Christiani nominis extinguere
possent; se nec Imperio velle f^ui. (...). Tom. 2. De Dio^lesiano and
Maximiniano Herculeo.
putting of their power, retiring to a private life, pining away with vexation,
because the Gospel of Christ was too hard for them; Achitophel dispatching
himself for very madness, because his oracle was not believed; One despair,
another blaspheme, another wrestle with his affliction as a beast in a snare,
till the part swell and rancle, and grow too big for the punishment which is
upon it; How could not this choose but make men out of love with themselves, and
labor to have more holdfast of the Spirit of Christ; that this madness of our
nature may thereby betained, and our equanimity and moderation made known to
all men?

Fifthly, and lastly, In the Ministry of the Word, when thy bosom sin is
met with, and the plague of thine own heart discovered, when thou art pricked
in thy master vein, when the edge of the sword enters to the quick
sacrifices thee, crucifieth thy lusts, cuts off thy earthly members, ransackes
thy conscience, and shows thee the inside of thy foul soul; here by all
means look unto thy heart; never so likely a time for madness and fierce
opposition to set up it self, as when a man is driven into a corner and cannot
fly. Sinners are all cowards, and cannot endure the brightness of Moses face,
are not able to abide the scrutinie of the Word, but Ier. 2. 27. Ioh. 8. 9.
would feign turn their backs upon it; not only out of scorn, but out of
fear too.

Many a sturdy sinner will seem to contemn the plainness and power of the
Word, as an illiterate rude foolish thing, to scorn and undervalue the
persons, companies, discourses of faithful Ministers, as of despicable, or
supercilious, or schismatic fellows: but the truth is (and they in their
own consciences know it too) that though there be indeed much stoutnesse and
contempt, yet there is more cowardice: Scorn is the pretense, but fear is the
reason; they cannot endure to be disquieted and galled: as a diseased or
wounded horse cu^vets, and pranceth, and is very active and impatient; at first
sight a man would think it pride and metal, but the truth is it is pain and
smart that causes it. Well then sinners are all cowards, and would feign fly,
but even cowards themselves, when they are shutin and surrounded, will fight
with more fierceness then other men, even for very fear. The basest vermin
almost that is, when shut out of all his refuges and holes, will try his
strength before he will perish, and leap in the face of his pursuer. And this
now is the property of the word to (...) men in, The Scripture, says the
Apostle, has shut up all under sinn^. Gal. 3. 22. And we shall ever find,
that the deeper the conviction has been, the more likewise has been the
prejudice, and the fiercer the Opposition against the word: see Ier. 5. 5, 12.
6. 10. 43. 1, 2. Nehem. 9. 29, 30. Ioh. 8. 48, 59. Ioh. 11. 47, 53. Act. 5. 33.
Act. 6. 10, 11. 7. 54. 57, 58. Ier. 36. 23. 2. Chron. 36. 15, 16, 17. As in the
meeting of two contrary streams, if one prevail not to carry away and
overruled the other, there must needs arise a mighty noise and rage in the
conflict: so is it in the wrestling and strife between the Spirit of God in
the Word, and the current of a man's own corruptions; the greater strength and
manifestation of the Spirit the Word has in it, and the fewer corners and
chinkes it leaves for sin to escape at, the more fierce must needs the
opposition be, if the word be not prevalent enough to turn the current. Let us
therefore beware whatever we do of snuffing or rebelling against the warnings
which are given us out of the Word. It is hard to kick against the pricks;
there is no overcomming Gods Spirit: a man may fall upon the stone, but he
shall be broken by it; if he be so strong, and lift so hard, as to move the
stone, it shall fall upon him, and grind him to powder. Let us not resolve to
baffle the ministers, and to despise their message; (It is a sin that leaves
no remedy for a man, 2. Chron. 36. 16
to throw away the physic, to trample under foot the plaster that should
heal him) Let us not think to blow away the Words of God as if they were but
so much empty wind; for the Lord says that they shall become Ier. ^. 13, 14.
fire, to devou^e the adversaries; Let us not distinguish Scripture to our own
humors, nor accept or reject Gods Truth as will best*consist with our own
resolutions; but as it is the power of the Word to Captivate Psalm. 68. 18. 2.
Cor. 10. 5. Psalm. 119. 128. Act. 3. 2^.
even rebelliousthoughts to the obedience of Christ; so let us resolve to
accept of every one of Gods righteous Commandments, and to hate every false
way, to hear Christ and his Ministers in all things, to answer to Gods
severest calls, even then when they make us tremble and do astonish us, as
Saint Paul did, Lord what wilt Act. 9. 6.
thou have me to do? Even when the word affrights thee, yet give this honor
to it, not to reject it, nor fly from it, not to smother and suppress it, but
to endure it to search thee, and to submit thy self unto it. This is a notable
way to abate the Original madness which is in thy heart.

Secondly, as there is furor in madness, so there is Amentia too, A distemper
in the Intellectuals, as well as in the passions: Every man that is thoroughly
mad is a fool too: And therefore the same original word is translated in one
place madness, Luke 6. 11. and in another place, folly, 2. Tim. 3. 9. Now
this distemper is Twofold: for either it is an universal privation and defect
of reason; or at least it is an inconsistency, a lubricitie, a slipperinesse of
reason. And these are very deep in the nature of a man, folly is bound up in
the heart of a child, and in spiritual things we are all children.

First, there is an universal ignorance and inconsiderateness of spiritual
things in the nature of man, he takes less notice of his condition then the
very brute beasts. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib,
Esai. 1. 3.
but Israel does not know, my people does not consider. The St^rke in the
heavens knows her appointed time, and the Ier. 8. 6, 7.
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, but my people Esai. 42. 25.
knows not the judgment of the Lord. The very dumb Assereproved the
madness of the Prophet, as Saint Peter 2. Pet. 2. 16.
speaks. And for this reason it is that we shall observe That frequent
Apostrophe of God in the Prophets, when he had wearied himself with crying to
a deaf and re bellious people, he turns his speech, and pleads before dumb
and inanimate Creatures; Hear, O Heavens, and Esai. 1. 2. Deuteronomy. 3^ 1. ^er 2.
12. Ier. 6 19.
give ear, O Earth, nothing so far from the voice of the Prophet as the
heavens, nothing so dull and impenetrable as the earth, and yet the heavens
likelier to hear, the earth likelier to listen and attend, then the obdurate
sinners. Hear O ye mountains the Lords controversy, and ye Mic. 6. 2.
strong foundations of the earth. Nothing in the earth so immovable as the
mountains, nothing in the mountains so impenetrable as the foundations of the
mountains, and yet these are made more sensible of Gods pleadings and
controversies then the people whom it concerned, The Creatures groan (as the
Apostle speaks) under the Romans 8. 21, 22.
burden and vanity of the sins of men; and men themselves, upon whom sin
lies with a far heavier burden, boast, and glory, and rejoice in it. Of our
selves we have no understanding, but are foolish and sottish, as the Prophet
Ier. 4. 22.
speaks, we see nothing but by the light and the understanding which is given
unto us, we cannot have so 1. Ioh. 5. 20. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
much as a right thought of goodness. The Apostle does notably express this
universal blindness which is in our nature, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. Walk not as
other Gentiles in the Vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, or from a godly life, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their Hearts. First
their minds are vain; the mind is the Seat of Principles, of supreme,
primitive, underived Arist. Eth. lib. 6.
truths; but, says he, their minds are destitute of all divine and spiritual
principles. Secondly, their understanding [(...)] is darkened: The
understanding, or Dianoeticall faculty is the seat of Conclusions, and that
is unable to deduce from spiritual principles (if there were any in their
minds) such sound and divine conclusions as they are apt to beget: so though
they know God (which is a Principle) yet this Principle was vain in them, for
they conceived of his glory basely, by the similitude of four footed beasts,
and creeping things, they conceived him an idle God as the Epicures, or a God
subject to fate and necessity as the Stoics, or a sinful impu^e God, that by
his example made uncleanness religious, as Saint Cyprian speaks; one way or
other they became vain in their imaginations of him; but secondly though they
knew him, yet the conclusions which they deduced from that Principle, That he
was to be worshipped, etc. were utterly unworthy his majesty, They worshipped
him ignorantly, Act. 17. 22, 23.
superstitiously, not as became God, they changed Romans 1. 21, 25.
his truth into a lie. Thirdly, suppose their principles to be found, their
Conclusions from those principles to be natural and proper, yet all this is
but speculation, they still are without the end of all this, spiritual
prudence, their hearts were blinded, the heart is the Seat of knowledge
practical, that by the Principles of the mind and the Conclusions of the
understanding does regulate and measure the Conversation, but that was unable,
yea averse from any such knowledge, for they held the truth Romans 1. 18, 28. 24.
26. 29. 32.
of God in unrighteousness, they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, they served the lusts of their own hearts, were given up to vile
affections, were filled with all unrighteousness, and had pleasure in evil
workers, even when they did things which they knew deserved death, and provoked
judgment. This is that universal defect which is in us by nature; and very
much of this remains in the best of us. Here then when we are not able to
conceive the Lords purpose in his word, though of it self it be all light,
when we find with David that it is too excellent for us, let us learn to
bewail that evil concupiscence of our nature, which still fills our
understandings with mists, and puts a veil before our faces. The whole Book
of God is a precious Mine full of unsearchable (...). Basil. in pro. em. lib.
de Spiritu Sancto.
treasures, and of all wisdom; there is no scoria, no refuse in it, nothing
which is not of great moment, and worthy of special and particular
observation, and therefore much are we still to bewail the unfaithfulness of
our memories and understandings, which retain so little, and understand less
then they do retain. If David were constrained to pray Open mine eyes to see
more wonders in thy Law, how much more are we to pray so too? If there were a
dampe of sin in David's heart, that did often make his light dim, that did
make him as abeast in understanding, as himself complains; how much
darkness then and disproportion is there between us and that blessed light?
Look upon Heretics old and new, Marcions two gods, a good and an evil,
Valentinians thirty and odd gods in several lofts and stories; worshippers of
Caine, worshippers of Judas, worshippers of the Serpent, and a world of the
like sottish Scripturas (...) sua diversitate communes. Aug. Ep. 253.
Evangelium pertrabunt ad sententiae suae praecipitium. Justin martyr Epist. ad
Zenam.
impiecies: nay amongst men that pretend more light, to see the same Scriptures
on both sides held, and yet opinions as diametrally contrary as light and
darkness, one gospel in one place, and another gospel in another, to speak
nothing of those (...) and naevi, those blemishes that are in the writings of
the most rare and choicest instruments in Gods Church; All these are notable
evidences of that radical blindness which is in our nature, and is never here
quite removed: for if the light be not seen, it is not for want of evidence,
but for want of (...). Theophil ad Autol. lib. 1.
sight.

Secondly, consider the slipperinesse and inconsistencie of natural reason in
spiritual things, it can never stay upon any holy notion: And this is another
kind of madness. Mad men will make a hundred relations, but their reason
cannot stand still, nor go through with any, but roves from one thing to
another, and joins together notions of several subjects like a rope of sand:
some few lucid intervals they may happily have, but they quickly return to their
frenzies again. This is the condition of our nature, let a man enter upon any
holy thoughts, the flesh will quickly cast in other suggestions, to make him
weary and faint under such unwelcome speculations. Therefore it was that David
prayed, Unite my heart to fear thy name; Keep it always in the thoughts of
the heart of thy servant, etc. This was the business of Paul and Barnabas to
the Saints, to exhort them that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto
God. And hence that phrase Act. 11. 23.
of Scripture to join a man's self to God, and to lay fast Esaias 56. 3. Heb. 6.
18.
bold upon him. And this every man that sets about it will find to be a very
hard work; It will give every man just cause to cry out against the intrusions
of a naughty heart. This is that which makes many men's righteousness like the
morning Dew; now the Grass seems drunken with wetnesse, and an hour after
even gapes for drought; now a vow and resolution, anon a relapse and return
again; now an ^are to Christ, presently another open to sin; now offers and
tender of peace, anon retreates and exceptions; now a skirmish with sin, and
presently a truce; like Penelopes Web, wrought in the day, and untwisted in the
night.

Tenthly, consider the Indefatigablenesse of this sin, how unwearied it is in
all the mischiefs that it is bent upon. It is said of Satan that he goes about
seeking whom he 1. Pet. 5. 8.
may devour, as it was of Christ* That he went about doing good; I think we
shall never in the Scripture find the Devil at a pause, or sitting still like
one that were spent and tired. But yet I find that for a season he has
departed, Luke 4. 13.
when he had such a terrible foil as put him out of all hope of victory; I
find that he may be driven away and put to flight. Resist the Devil and he
Iam. 4. 7.
shall fly from you. But now the fleshly heart of a man will never be made
sound a retreat, but sets on indefatigably upon the spiritual part: It is (as
I said) like the Thief, when it is nailed and crucified it will still revile,
like a wounded woolfe it runs about to do mischief, or as a tired Ox it
treads with more weight upon the Bos lassus fortius figit pedem. Plus Romae
negotyfuit cum semiru^d Carthagine, quam cum integra. Flor.
soul. As the Historian said of Carthage that Rome was more troubled with it
when it was half destroyed, then when it remained whole and entire: so the man
that has in some measure overcome his lusts, will be far more sensible of
their stirrings and strugglings, then another in whom they rule without
disturbance. We may observe in some froward men when their causes are tried
and prove desperate in right, they will yet still create perverse matters to
molest their neighbors, and the more they sink in the maine, the more
clamorous they will be to proceed; as eager gamesters the more they loose, the
deeper game they play, and the harder they set to it; so is it with the lusts
of men, the more they are subdued, the more rebellious and headstrong will they
be so far as their power goes against the spirit of Christ. Lime is kindled
by that which quenches all other fires, and surely Grace which (...) other
temptations, or at least abateth them does occasionally, and by antiperistasis
enrage the flesh, though in regard of exercise and actual power it dye daily.

The reason hereof is, First, that which is natural can (...). Arist. Ethic.
lib. 2. cap. 1. (...) Rhet. lib. 1.
never be changed, neither is any thing ever tired in its natural motion. The
motion of a stone upward grows fainter and fainter because carried by a
violent impression, but downward stronger and stronger because it gathers
strength even by sympathy to the place whereunto it moves. Now original sin
is the corrupt nature of a man, and the motions therefore of it are not violent
but altogether natural, and that natural motion is set on and made the easier
by the impulsions of Satan, as a stone thrown or hurried downward moves the
swifter, because the natural weight thereof is improved by the accessory
impression. Who ever knew the Sea give over raging, or a stream grow weary of
running? Now the motions of corruption are as natural as the estuations of the
sea, or the course of a river. Though there may be difficulty in fullfilling
lusts, there can never be any in the rising and sprouting of lusts: As there
may be pains in drawing water out of a Fountain, but there can be no pains
in the waters swelling or rising out of the Fountain. It is no pains to
conceive seed, though it be to bring it forth in a birth: so in the begetting
of sin, there is no pains required for the heart to lust, for thoughts to
arise, though the finishing of sin may be oftentimes painful as well as
deadly. Original sin is called by the Aposile a Law in the members, which
puts a byas into them, a forwardness, and propension to all evil. Now as a
Bowl moves not with any difficulty when it follows the sway of its own
bias, so neither does the heart in following lusts which are the weights and
bias of the fleshly soul. And therefore the longer any man lives in sin,
the sweeter it is to him. Weariness, and propension are terms inconsistent.
Secondly, Nothing is weary while it works all De Suo, of it self, that which
tyres a faculty is the fetching in of subsidiarie spirits, which being
exhausted and spent the faculty gives over working, and is said to be weary.
The eye is never weary with the act of seeing (which is it own work) but it
is said to be weary, merely because of the deficiency of those animal
spirits which are from without sent in unto it to assist it in its own work,
which if they did in the same measure and strength without decay flow to the
faculty, it could never be tired in its own operation. So the locomotive
faculty, when the hand works, or the foot walks, would never be wearied
in it self, if those spirits which are requisite to strengthen it in its
exercise did not lessen, and fail, and breath out in the motion. But now our
lusts make us flesh all over, in them we work all de nostro of our own; It
is as natural to the heart to lust, as it is to the eye to see, and in this
respect more too; for though the Act of seeing be the eyes alone, yet the eye
stands in need of foreign assistance from the heart (which is the forge and
seminary of spirits) to continue the exercise of this Act: But the Heart is
wholly within it self furnished with all the strength and principles of
lusting, or if it were not, yet those spirits which the temptations of Satan or
the world infuse to assist it, do never fail nor waste away, but as waters
drawn out of a fountain, the faster they are called in, the more plentifully
they come.

Thirdly, Original sin is Indefatigable, never weary of warring, of tempting,
of raging, of intruding, of bringing forth, o^ polluting all we do, because it
is unsatisfied, The Eccles. 1. 8.
eye is not satisfied with seeing nor the ^are with hearing. It is of vast and
infinite desires, and the more it is supplied with that in which it seeks
satisfaction, the more greedy it grows; as natural motions the longer they
continue the swifter they are. A sinner if he should live for ever, would Omnis
peccator peccat in su^ aeterno. Greg.
sin for ever, and never say it is enough. Every imagination, every Creature
that is shaped and formed in the heart, every purpose, desire, motion,
ebullition, is only evil every Day, says the text; no period, no stint,
Evil from the childhood, Genesis 8. 21. Amama Antibarb. biblic. l 2 p. 403.
Ex quo excussus est ex vtero, from the time of breaking forth out of the
womb, as the learned observe from the propriety of the word. Evil comes out
of the heart as sparkles do out of the fire, never cease rising while the fire
continues. Notably is this insatiablenesse of lust expressed by the Prophet in
two excellent similitudes. First, Hab. 2. 5, 6.
from Drunkenness, which makes a man still more greedy, does not extinguish
but inflame the perverse desire; none call in for wine faster, then they which
have had too much before. Secondly, from Hell and the grave, which Esaias 5. 14.
Prove. 30. 15, 16. 1. King. 18. 43.
have no stint nor measure. The Cloud which the Prophet showed his servant, was
no bigger at first then a hand; after, it grew to cover all the Heavens, and
the reason was, it rose out of a Sea: so the sin of man will continually grow
and overflow all his life, and the reason is, it has a Sea of lust continually
to supply it. Therefore in the Scripture it is (...) 1. Pet 4. 4. Jude v. 13.
Esaias 57. 19. (...). Ephesians. 4. 19. Romans 1. 27, 29.
called an effusion, a rushing out, an aestus, like the foaming or boiling of
the Sea, a strange excess of riot, unto which, says the Apostle, wicked men
run: a Greediness, a covetous improvement of uncleanenesse, a burning of
lust, a fullness of all mischief. Now from this insatiablenesse of lust must
needs follow the indefatigablenesse of it too. When a thing is out of the place
of its own rest, it never leaves moving naturally till it have gotten to it;
therefore in as much as lust can never carry the heart to any thing which it may
rest in, needs must it flutter about, and be always in motion. If there were
an infinite space of air, the motion of a stone in that space (if there were
any motion) must needs be infinite, because it would no where have a Center, or
middle place to hold it (for there can be no medium where there are no
extremes.) Desires are the wings upon which the soul moves, if there be still
things found to entice the desires, and none to satisfy them, no marvel if
the soul be still upon the wing, in perpetual agitation, like the wind which
continually whirleth about, or the Rivers Eccles. 1. 6, 7.
which never leave running into the Sea, because they never fill it. But it may
be objected, that the Scripture makes mention of the weariness which sin
brings upon men, of that impotency of sinning which grows upon them. The
Sodomites wearied themselves in their rage against Lot. So the Prophet says of
wicked men, that they weary themselves to commit iniquity. I answer, that these
very Ier. 9. 5.
places prove the indefatigablenesse of lust, in that it never gives over, even
when the instruments thereof are ti^'d. The Israelites were weary of gathering
straw, but were the Taskmasters weary of exacting it? The members may be weary
of serving their law, but is the law of the members weary of quickening or
commanding them? Nay, herein is seen the cruel tyranny of lust against us,
that it never leaves drawing, enticing, heartning, supplying us for sin, even
when we are quite wearied in the service of it. Thou were wearied in thy way,
yet said Esaias 5^. 10.
thou not, There is no hope. Thou never did consider, I have thus long
drudg'd in the service of sin, and have found no fruit, received no such
satisfaction as I promised Romans 6. 21.
my self; and therefore why should I weary my self any longer? Why should I
labor for that which is no Esaias 55. 2.
bread, and which satisfyeth not? Thou never did bethink thy self of
returning to the right way, but wentest on with wonted madness and rage still,
though thou foundedst for certain that there was no profit in thy Ier. 2. 11,
12. and 7. 8. Esaias 30. 5, 6. Hos. 8* 7.
evil way, that thou did sow nothing but wind, and should reap nothing
but a whirlewinde. Baalams lust was too swift for his weary beast; when the
Ass was frighted, and durst go no further, yet the Prophet was as unwearied
as at the first. Lust is like a furious Rider, never weary of the way, though
the poor beast which must serve the Riders turn may quickly be worn out.
Woe to him that lodeth himself with thick clay, says the Hab. 2. 45.
Prophet, How long? He may have enough to load him, he can never have enough
to weary him. He may lod^ his house, his memory, his bags, his wits, his
time, his conscience; but he can never fill his Hell. He may quickly have
enough to sink him, but he can never have enough to satisfy him: As a ship
may be overladen with Gold or Silver even unto sinking, and yet have compass
and sides enough to hold ten times more: so the heart will quickly be loaded
unto sinking, but never filld unto satiety. In one word, we must in sin
distingvish between the Act, and the Concupiscence from whence that Inter
vivacitatem and Libidinem. Aug contr. Iul. lib 4. cap. 14.
Act arises; or in the faculties between the Life and the Lust of them,
between their natural strength and activitie, and their law of corruption.
The liveliness and strength of the faculties may quickly be wasted, and yet
the lust strong still. Sin in Act has a concurrence of the powers of the
soul, and services of the body, which in their motions may quickly langvish.
But yet as the Philosophers say of the soul, though it may seem tired and
spent, and waxen old, because the body in which it resides grows unfit for its
service, yet the soul indeed itself Anima non senescit. Scal. de sub. (...).
Arist. de Anim. l. 1 c. 4.
does not grow old, but if it had equal instruments would be as vigorous in
the oldest man, as in the youngest: so we may say of sin, though the body may
grow weary of adultery, or the mind weary of plodding mischief, or the
thoughts weary of contriving deceit, yet concupisce^is non senescit, Lust it
self grows never old nor weary. Nay, as the water when it is stopped in its
principal course, yet one way or other where it best may it will make a shift
to find a vent, and to discover it self: even so lust in the heart will one
way or other, when the mind and faculties, the body and members are quite
tired out in the principal service, make a shift to break forth into some
easier vent. When the adultery in the heart has worn out the body, and spurred
it so long in this unclean race, that it now sinkes under the burden, and has
no more blood to lose, yet even then it will find a vent, and such a man will
have eyes full of adultery, a tongvefull of adultery, thoughts and speculations
full of adultery, a memory in the review of former lewdness full of adultery.
The thief on the Cross had as good a will to crucify Christ, to nail him,
and pierce him as any others, but he was fast enough for doing this; yet his
malice will find a vent into his tongve to revile and rail upon him. Balaams
tongve could not execute the office to which he was hired, yet it will have a
vent, and show it self in journeying, counselling, and consulting how the
people might draw a curse upon themselves. As a dog may have his Numb. 31.
16. Mic. 6. 5.
stomach crammed usque ad vomitum, and yet his appetite unsatisfied, for he
presently returns to his vomit: so though a man may lode and weary himself in
the acting of sin, yet lust it self is never satisfied, and therefore never
wearied.

What a watch then should we keep over our evil hearts, what pains should
we take by prayer and unweariednesse of spirit to suppress this enemy? If
there were any time wherein the flesh did sit still and sleep, wherein the
water did not run, and seek for vent, we might then happily slacken our care;
but since it is ever stirring in us, we should be ever stirring against it,
and using all means to lessen and abate it: since the heart is unwearied in
evil, we should not faint, nor be weary of well-doing. Since the heart is so
abundant in evil, we should abound likewise in every good work of the Lord,
always considering what advantage this labor will give us against the toil
of sin: in lust a man wearieth himself and has no hope, but here our labor
is not in vain in the Lord, we shall reap if we faint not; and a little
glory in heaven, nay a little comfort in earth (though neither one nor other
may be called little) will be a most plentiful recompense, pressed down and
running over for any the greatest pains that can be taken in this spiritual
watch. Ye have need of patience, says the Apostle, to go through the will of
God, to be in a perpetual combat and defiance with an enemy that will give
no respite nor breathing time. The temptations of Satan, the solicitations of
the world are not so many, nor heavy clogs to men in their race, as that to
which they are fastened, this weight that presses down, this besieging sin
which is ever enticing, clamouring, haling, rebelling, intruding, with love,
with strength, with law, with arguments, with importunities calling a man from
his right way. From this consideration the Apostle immediately inferres this
duty of patience, Lay aside every weight, says the Apostle, and the sin that
does so easily beset us, and run with patience unto the race that is set
before us. And we must not cast our eye always to the clog which we draw,
that may much dis-hearten us; but look unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of
our faith, he that can carry us through all these difficulties, that gives us
weapons, that teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight, that is
our Captain to lead us, and our second, ((...), our fellow-Combatant) that
fights against sin in us by his grace. Look what he did, what
contradiction he endured, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds; Look
what he promises, a victory against our lusts, and a Crown after our victory.
Look when he comes, it is yet but a little while; The coming of the Lord
draws nigh, the Lord is at hand; Call to him, he is within the voice of thy
prayer, he will come to strengthen thee; wait upon him, he is within the eye
of thy Faith, he will come to reward thee. Look upon the Cloud of witnesses,
those that are now the Church of the firstborn, and have their Palms in
their hands; they all went through the same combat, they were all beset with
alike infirmities, they were all men of the same passions with us, let us be
men of the same patience with them.

Now lastly, consider the Propagation of this sin. Which may therefore well
be called an old man, because it dies not, but passes over from one generation
to another; A man's Actual sins are personal, and therefore Intransient,
they begin and end in himself; but original sin is natural, and therefore
with the nature it passes over from a man to his posterity. It is an entaile
that can never be cut of, it has held from Adam and will so continue to the
worlds end holding al men in an unavoidable service and villanage unto Satan
the Prince of this world. In Humane Tenures if a man leave a personal estate
to all his children indefinitely, without singling out and designing this
portion to one and that to another, though it be true to say that there is
nothing in that estate which any one of the children can lay an entire claim
unto as his own, but that the rest have joint interest in it, (for the
children, though many in persons, are yet but one proprietarie in regard of
right in the estate of their father, till there be a severance made) yet
notwithstanding a Partition may be legally procured, and there is a kind of
virtuall or fundamental severance before, which was the ground of that which
is afterward real and legal: But now in this wretched Inheritance of sin
which Adam left to all his posterity, we are to note this mischief in the
first place, that there is no virtuall partition, but it is left whole to every
child of Adam. All have it, and yet every one has it all too. So that as
Philosophers say of the Reasonable soul, That it is whole in the whole, and
that it is whole in every part: so we may say of original concupiscence, It
is Tota in Genere Humano, and Tota in quolibet homine. All in mankind, and all
in every particular man. There is no law of partition for one man to have to
him in peculiar the lusts of the eye, another to him the lusts of the tongue,
another to him the lusts of the ear, etc. but every man has every lust
originally as full as all men together have it.

Secondly, we are to note a great difference further between the Soul and sin
in this regard; though all the soul be in every member as well as in the whole
body, yet it is not in the same manner and excellency in the parts as in the
whole. For it is in the whole to all the purposes of life, sense, and motion,
but in the parts the whole Soul serves but for some special businesses. All
the soul is in the eye, and all in the ear, but not in either to all
purposes, for it sees only in the eye, and it hears only in the ear; But
original sin is all in every man, and it serves in every man to all
purposes: Not in one man only to commit adultery, in another idolatry, in
another murder, or the like, but in every man it serves to commit sin
against all the Law, to break every one of Gods commandments. A whole thing
may belong wholly unto two men in several, by diverse ways of propriety, or
unto sundry purposes; A house belongs wholly to the Landlord for the purpose of
profit and revenew, and wholly to the tenant for the purpose of use and
inhabitation; but it seems in ordinary reason impossible for the same thing to
belong wholly to sundry men in regard of al purposes for which it serves. But
such an ample propriety has every man to original sin, that he holds it
all, and to all purposes for which it serves. For though some sins there are
which cannot by some men be properly committed (properly I say, because by way
of provocation, or occasion, or approbation, or the like, one man may
participate in the sins which another commits) as a King cannot be (...) to
his superiors in government, because he has no superiors; a lay man cannot
commit the sinne^ of a Minister, an unmarried man the sins of a husband, etc.
yet this disability arises out of the exigence of personal conditions, but no
way out of the limitednesse or impotency of original sin, which in every man
serves to all the purposes which can consist with that man's condition; and as
his condition alters, so is it likewise fruitful unto new sins. And these
are two great aggravations of this sinful inheritance That it comes whole
unto every man; and that every man has it unto all the purposes for which it
serves.

Thirdly, it is to be observed that in original sin (as in all other) there
are two things, Deordination or sinfulnes, and Guilt or obligation unto
punishment. And though the former of these be inseparable from nature in this
life yet every man that believes and repents has the damnation thereof
taken away, it shall not prove unto him mortal. But now this is the calamity;
Though a man have the guilt of this sin taken of from his person by the
benefit of his own faith, and the grace of Christ to him: yet still both the
deordination, and the guilt passes over unto his posterity by derivation from
him. For the former the case is most evident, what ever is borne of flesh is
Ioh. 3. 6. Job 14. 4. Iam. 3. 11, 12.
flesh, no man can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, an evil root must
bring forth evil branches, a bitter fountain corrupt streams; leaven will
derive sowernesse into the whole mass, and the Fathers treason will stain the
blood of all his posterity: And it is as certain for the latter, that though
guilt and punishment may be remitted to the Father, yet from him it may be
transmitted to his child. Every parent is the channel of death to his
posterity. Totum gonu^ (...) fecit Adam is damnationis Tertul. de Testimon.
animae. c. 3.
traduce^; Adam did diffuse and propagate damnation unto all mankind. Neither
is (...) any wonder, or injustice that from a cursed root should proceed
branches fit for Nec mirum, nec iniustum quod Radix proserat damnata damnatos.
Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 3. cap. 12. Ex olea semine non fit nisi oleaster. Aug. de
nupt. and concup. lib. 1. c. 19.
nothing but the fire. As a Jew that was circumcised brought forth an
uncircumcised son, as clean crne sowed comes up with chafe and stubble, as
the seed of a good Olive brings forth a wild Olive: so is it with the best
that are, their Graces concur not to natural generation, and therefore from
them is nothing naturally propagated. For first the wiping off of Guilt while
the fault abides is an Act of Grace and pardon; now pardons are ever immediate
from special favor, from direct grant, and therefore cannot run in the
blood, nor come to a man in the virtue of his birth, or by derivation;
especially where the pardon runs not in general terms, but personally by
way of privilege and exemption, and that too upon certain conditions, the
performance and virtue whereof is intransient, and cannot avail any by way of
imputation or redundancie. Secondly, though the personal Guilt be off from the
man, yet the ground of that Guilt, the damnablenesse, or liablenesse to be
imputed unto punishment is inseparable from sin; though sin be not mortal de
facto* So as to bring damnation to the person justified, yet it never cease
to be mortal de merito, that is, to be damnable in it self, in regard of its
own nature and obliquity, though in event and execution the damnable virtue of
sin be prevented by faith which cures it, and by repentance which forsakes
and cuts it off. For we must observe that To merit damnation belongs to the
nature of sin, but to bring forth damnation* belongs to the accomplishment
and finishing of sin, when it is suffered Iam. ^. 15.
to grow to its measure, never interrupted, never prevented; God has patience
toward sinners, and waits for their repentance, and does not presently power
out all his wrath; if in this interim men will be persuaded in the day of
their peace to accept of mercy offered, and to Break of sins before the Epha
be full, then their Dan. 4. 27. Ezekiel. 18. 30.
sins shall not end in Death. But if they neglect all Gods mercy, and go on
still, till there be no remedy, then sin grows to a ripeness, and will
undoubtedly bring forth Death. Since therefore the nature of sin passes to
posterity, even when the guilt thereof is remitted in the pa^ent, needs must
the guilt thereof pass too, till by grace it be done away.

Fourthly, In original sin there is a twofold denomination (...).
or formalitie. It is both a Sin, and a Punishment of sin. For it is an
absurd conceit of some men who make it an impossibility for the same thing to
be both a Remonstrant. in exam. censurae. cap. 7. ^ol. 85.
sin and a punishment. When a prodigal spends all his money upon uncleannes,
is not this man's poverty both his sin and his punishment? When a drunkard
brings diseases on his body, and drownes his reason, is not that man's
impotencie and sottishness both his sin and his punishment? Indeed sin
cannot rightly be called an inflicted -- non est lex aequior ulla -- Quam necis
Artifices Art perire sud. Poenalis vitiositas. Aug depersect. Iustit. c. 4.
punishment, for God does not put it into any man; yet it no way implies
contradiction, but rather abundantly magnifies the justice and wisdom of
Almighty God, to say that he can order sin to be a scourge and punishment to
it self: And so Saint Austen calls it, a penal vitiousnesse or corruption. So
that in the derivation of this ^in we have unto us propagated the very wrath
of God. It is like Aarons rod, on our part a branch that buddeth unto
i^iquitie, and on Gods part a Serpent that stingeth unto Death. So that Adam is
a twofold cause of this sin in his posterity. A meritorious cause, he did
deserve it by prevarication as it was a punishment, and an efficient cause, he
does derive it by contagion as it is a sin. And this is the wretchedness of
this sin, that it is not only a means to bring the wrath of God upon us,
but is also some part and beginning of the wrath of God in us, and so is, as it
were the earnest, and first fruits of damnation. Not as if it were by God
infused into our nature (for we have it put into us no other way but by
seminall contagion Romans 5. 12. Genesis 5. 3.
and propagation from Adam) but God seeing man throw away and wast that
original righteousness which he at the first put into him, and appointing him to
be the head and fountain of all mankind not only in nature but in foro-too,
in regard of legal proceeding, withheld from him and his seed that Gift which
was freely by him in the Creation bestowed, and wilfully by Adam in the fall
rei^cted, and adjudg'd this misery upon him, that he should pass over to all
his posterity the immediate fruit of his first prevarication, which was
original sin, contracted by his own default, and as it were issuing out of
his wilful disobedience upon him, because they all were in him interessed as
in their head and father in that first transgression. Thus have I at large
opened those many great evils which this sin has in it, that life of
concupiscence which the Apostle here speaks of. I cannot say of it as the
Roman Epitomizer of his History, I^ brevit abella totanteius imagi^m amplex^
su^, that in Florus.
a small compass I have comprised the whole Image of old Adam, but rather
clean contrary, In amplatabull non dimidiam eius imaginem amplexus sum. The
half of this sin has not all this while been described unto you.

Now therefore to conclude this Argument (wherein I have been the larger, both
because of the necessarinesse of it, that we may know whither to rise in our
humiliations for sin, and because it is the principal s^ope of the Apostle
in the place, and serves most abundantly to show our own everlasting
insufficiency for happiness in our selves) we see by these things which have
been discovered in this sin, at what defiance we ought to stand with the
doctrine of those men, first, who mince and qualify, and extenuate this sin
as the Papists do, making it the Intensive Maius est peccatum actuale quam
originale. Aquin. p. 3. q. 1. ^rt. 4. c. A theologis nos^ris minimum omnium
peccatorum censetur. Andrad. Orthodox* explic. lib. 3. Omnium peccatorum
levissimum si ipsam per se criminis rationem intuearis. Idem in de^ens* ^id.
Trident. lib. 5. part. 1.
smallest of all sins* Lumbard. did. lib. 2. did. 33. Scot. Ibid. Bonavent.
Ibid. q. 2. Durand. qu. 3. Aquin. part. 3. qu* 1. art. 4. ad 2. Bellar. lib. 6.
c. 4.
not deserving any more of Gods wrath, then only a want of his beatificall
presen^e, and that too without any pain or sorrow of mind, which might be apt
to grow from the apprehension of so great a loss, nay not only denying it
after Baptism to be a sin, but only the seed of sin, an evil disease,
langvor, tyranny, and impotency of nature: but that even in the wicked
themselves (...) non renatis in peccatum imputatur potius quam revera and
proprie peccatum est Stapleton. de Justice. lib. 3. cap. 3. Falsum est
concupiscentiam quae in nobis manet esse peccatum originale. Becan* Opuscul. de
Authore peccat. c. 4. Bellarm. de Amiss. great. and statupeccati. lib. 5. cap.
5. 7. 89. Greg. Val. to. 2. disp. 6 qu. 12. p. 1.. 5. 6. Soto de natura and
gratia, lib. 1. cap. 10. Durandus and privationem Iustitiae and concupiscentiam
peccatum hoc esse negat, and quod sit Reatus seu dignitas contendit. lib. 2.
distinct. 30. qu. 3.
concupiscence is rather imputed for sin, then is really and formally sin,
Quamvis in decalogo prohibeatur, peccatum tamen non est. Staplet. de Iustif.
lib. 3. c. 5. Omnem (...) esse peccatum nonest verum. Bellar. de Stat* peccati.
lib. 5. c. 14.
notwithstanding it be forbidden in the Commandment; and upon these
presumptions Staplet. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 13. Greg. Val. to. 2. disp. 6* q. 12.
p. 1. 4. and qu. 13. p. 1.
reviling the doctrine of the Reformed Divines, for exaggerating this sin, as
that which overspreadeth in its being all our nature, and in its working all
our lives. Secondly, of those who heretofore, and even now deny any sinfulness
either in the privation of the Image of God, or in the concupiscence and
deordination of our nature. It was the doctrine of the Pelagians in the
primitive times, that Aug. opere poster. con. Iul. lib. 2. c. 16.
man's nature was not corrupted by the fall of Adam, that his sin Epist. 106.
was not any ground to his posterity either of death, or of the merit of death,
that De Re^iss. peccat. l. 1. cap. 8. 9. 13. De natura and gratia. c. 9. De
peccat. Orig. c. 14.
sin comes from Adam by imitation, not by propagation. That Cont. Iul. lib.
3. c. 3.
Baptism does not serve in Infants for remission of sin, but only for
adoption and admission into Heaven; that as De Remiss. peccat. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Christ's righteousness does not profit those which believe not, so Adams sin
does not prejudice, nor injure those that actually sin not. De peccat. merit.
and Remiss. lib. 3. cap. 2.
That as a righteous man does not beget a righteous Child, so neither does a
sinner beget a Child guilty of sin. That Cont. Iul. lib. 3. cap. 5.
all sin is voluntary, and therefore not natural. That De peccat. Orig. cap.
33. de Nupt. and Conc. lib. 2. c. 25.
Marriage is Gods ordinance, and therefore no instrument of transmitting sin.
That Cont. Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3.
concupiscence being the punishment of sin cannot be a sin likewise. Vid.
Prosper. advers. collat. Aug. cont. Iul. lib. 2. cap. 1. Gerard. voss. Hist.
Pelag. l. 2. part. 2. Latium de Pelag* lib. 1. part. 4. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4.
These and the like Antitheses unto Orthodox Doctrine did the Pelagians of old
maintain. And (as it is the policy of Satan to keep alive those heresies
which may seem to have most relief from proud and corrupted reason, and do
principally tend to keep men from that due humiliation, and through-conviction
of sin, which should drive them to Christ, and magnify the riches of Christ's
Grace to them) there are not wanting at this day a Sociniani. vid. Jacob. ad
Portum. cont. Christoph. Ostorod. cap. 27. Anabaptist^ in a Dialogue of
Predestinat. Remenstrantes in nupera illa and sane pessima pro fidei su^
confessione apologia, delirijs Anabaptisticis and socinianis refertissima. cap.
3. and 7. Inter pontificios Pighius peccatum originale inh^rens and connatum
negavit: Imputativum tamen agnoscit and probat.
brood of sinful men, who notwithstanding the evidence of Scripture, and the
consent of all Antiquity, do in this Point concur with those wicked
Heretics, and deny the original corruption of our nature to be any sin at
all, but to be the work of Gods own hands in Paradise; nay deny further the
very imputation of Adams sin to any of his posterity for sin. And now
because in this point they do expressly contradict not only the Job 14. 4
Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Ioh. 3. 6 Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 5. 12, Ephesians. 2. 3 Romans 3.
23. Gal. 3. 2^. 1. Cor. 15. 18. 19. 49. Vid. Gerard. Voss. Hist. Pelag. l. 2
part. 1. These. 2 and Bellar* de stat^ peccati. l. 5. c. 4.
Doctrine of holy Scriptures, the Qui negat omnes homines primorum hominum
peccato nasci obnoxios, ipsa Christianae fidei subvertere firmamenta conatur.
Aug. cont. Julian. lib. 1. c. 2.
foundation of Orthodox Faith, the Uid. Uoss. Histor Pelag. lib. 2. part. 1.
Thesi. 6. Aug. cont. Iul. l. 1 c 23.
consent of Ancient Doctors, and the Infantes Baptizari^ remissionem peccatorum
secundum regulam universalis ecclesiae con^itemur. C^lestius Pelag. apud Aug.
de peccat* original. lib. 2. c. 5.
Rule of the Catholic Church, but in no less then four or five particulars
do manifestly oppose the doctrine of the Church of England in this Point most
evidently delivered in Artic. 9.
one article; for the Article says, Man is Gone from original righteousness;
they say, Man did not go away from it, but God snatched it away from man: the
Article says, that by Original sin Man is inclined unto evil, and calls
it by the name of concupiscence and lust, they say, that Original sin is
only the privation of righteousness, and that concupiscence is a concreated and
original condition of nature: the Article says, that the flesh lusts
always contrary to the spirit, they say in express terms, that this is
false, and that the flesh when it lusts indeed does lust against nothing but
the spirit, and that the Apostle in that place meant only the Galatians, and
not all spiritual or regenerate men: the Article says, that this lust
deserves Gods wrath and condemnation; they say, that it does not deserve the
hatred of God: and lastly, the Article says, that the Apostle does confess
that concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin; they say,
that it is not properly either a sin, or a punishment of sin, but only the
condition of nature: in all these respects it will be needful to lay down the
truth of this great Point, and to vindicate it from the proud disputes of such
bold Innovators.

And first let us see by what steps and gradations the Adversaries of this so
fundamental a doctrine (which as Contr. Iul. li. 1.
Saint Austin says is none of those in quibus optimi fidei Catholicae
defensores salva fidei compage inter se aliquando (...) consonant, wherein
Orthodox Doctors may differ and abound in their own sense) do proceed to
deny the sinfulness of that which all Ages of the Church have called Sin.

First they say, That the Anabaptists in their Dialogue of Predestination. Nec
Scriptura, nec veracitas, nec sapientia, nec bonitas Divina, nec peccati
natura, nec ratio iustitiae atque aequitatis permittunt, ut dicamus, Deum
posteros Adami revera censuisse eiusdem cum Adamo peccatireos. Remonstr. Apol.
seu Exam. Cens. ca. 7 sect. 4. fol. 84.
Sin of Adam is not any way the sin of his posterity, that it is against
the nature of sin, against the goodness, wisdom, and truth of God, against
the rule of Equity and Justice, that Infants who are Innocent in themselves,
should be accounted Nocent iu another; therein taking away Baptism for
remission of sins from Infants, who being not borne with guilt of Adams sin
stand yet in no need of any purgation.

Secondly, they say that though Cum Rem^nstrantes Adamum morti aeteraae [Sive
ut supra dicunt Aeternae poenae damni] obnoxium factum fuisse dicunt cum poster
is omnibus, non volunt mortem istam eodem prorsus modo inflictam fuisse
utrisque tum Adamo ^tum posteris, sed volunt eam inflictam fuisse Adamo ut
transgressori-In posteros vero ejus propagatam propter conditionem nature
ejusdem quam ex Adamo peccatore trahunt. Ibid. cap 4. fol. 57.
Adams sin may be thus far said to be unto posterity imputed; as that by
reason of it they become obnoxious unto Death, (namely to an eternal
dissolution of body and soul without any reunion, and an eternal loss of the
divine vision, without any pain of sense) yet that death which to Adam in his
person was a punishment, is not so to his posterity, but only the condition
of their nature.

Thirdly, they say that Iidem in Confessi. seu declaratione sententiae circa
articulos fidei. cap. 7.. 4. Corvin. contr Molin* cap. 10. ad. 4. and
expressius cap. 8. ad. 1, 2, 3. Pigh. contr.
that which is called original sin is nothing else at all, but only the
privation of original righteousness; and that concupiscence was (...)
contracted, and brought upon nature by sin, but was originally in our nature,
suspended indeed by the presence, but actuated by the loss of that
righteousness.

Fourthly, they say, Respons. ad Epistolam Walachr. page 88. In Apolog. seu
Exam. Censur. ca. 7.. 4. fol. 85. poenae non peccati respectum habetista
car^tia, Corv. cont. Molin. cap. 8. page 122.
That that Privation was not by man contracted, but by God inflicted as a
punishment upon Adam from whom it comes, but only as a condition of nature
unto us; that man in his fall and prevarication did not Throw away or actually
shake off the Image of God, but God pulled it away from him; which if God had
not done, it would have remained with him, notwithstanding the sin of the
first fall.

Fifthly, they say, Corv. ibid. page 122. 126, 127, 128. Malum culpae non est
quia nasci plane est involuntarium: Et si malum culpae non est, nec potest ^sse
malum poenae, etc. Apol. ca. 7. fol. 84. 8. David did not sin in being
conceived and borne, ergo thereby he had no sin. Anabaptists in their
Dialogue. atque hoc erat Pelagi^rum argumentum. Argui non debent quae vitari
non possunt. Aug De natura and gra^. cap. 12. Infans aliud nisi quod natus est
esse non potest, adeoque nec reus est dum Hoc est quod nascitur. Aug. cont.
Iul* lib. 3. cap. 12. Our Divines unanimously withstand the doctrine of the
Papists in this Point, that Concupiscence is natural and not sinful. Whitak.
De peccat. orig. lib. 3. Field of the Chapter lib. 3. cap. 26. Bishop Whites desp.
24.
That in as much as the privation of original righteousness was a punishment
by God upon Adam justly inflicted, and by Adam unto us naturally and
unavoidably propagated, It is not therefore to be esteemed any sin at all,
neither for it can God justly condemn any man; nor is it to be esteemed a
punishment of sin in us, though it were in Adam, because in us there is no
sin going before it of which it may be accounted the punishment, as there
was in Adam, but only the condition of our present nature.

Lastly, they say that Adam being by God deprived of original righteousness,
(which is the faculty and fountain of all obedience) and being now
constituted under the deserved curse, Lex prima cessabat primosoedere per
inobedientiam primi hominis rupto, cessabat etiam obligatio ad obedientiam ed
lege praescriptam. Lex aut ad obedientiam obligat, aut ad poenam; cum itaque
homo jaceret sub maledictione ad obedientiam ampl^s non obligabatur, quia ab eo
coli amplius Deus non vol^bat. Corv. contra Molin. cap. 8. ad. 8. page 122.
Remonstrantes negant actus illos qui sequuntur privationem divinam esse
formaliter peccata, non negant quidem mate^aliter peccata dici posse, qua^nus
Actus sunt difformes voluntati divinae, at negant cosformaliter esse peccata
quaescil. ad p^nam valide obligent eos a quibus fiunt, etc. In Apolog. seu Exam
Censur. cap. 7. fol. 86. ^ Ibid. fol. 83. b. Si Deus mortem temporalem
comminatus fuisset Adamo, eiusque posteris, necesse fuisset Adamum eiusque
posteros ex morte ista iterum resurgere, and postea in (...) cruciatus
praecipitari: De quo sane Scriptura ne (...) quidem meminit. De ijs qui
Evangelium and apertam vitae aeternae promissionem respuunt ac reijciu^t ita
loquitur Scriptura, de Adamo eiusque poster is nec volam habet nec vestigium.
Deus non omnibus peccatis, id est, peccatoribus, adsignavit ^ternam poenam
sensus and damni. Ibid. cap. 7. (...). 90.
all the debt of legal obedience, wherein he and his posterity in him were
unto God obliged, did immediately cease; so that whatsoever outrages should
after that have been by Adam or any of his children committed they would not
have been sins, or transgressions, nor involved the Authors of them in the
guilt of just damnation. That which unto us reviveth sin, is the new covenant;
because therein is given unto the law new strength to command, and unto us new
strength to obey, both which were evacuated in the fall of Adam. Upon which
premises it does most evidently follow; that unless God in Christ had made a
covenant of grace with us anew, no man should ever have been properly and
penally damned but only Adam; and he too, with no other then the loss of Gods
presence: (For ^ Hell and torments are not the revenge of Legal, but of
Evangelicall disobedience) not for any actual sins, for there would have
been none, because the exaction of the Law would have ceased; and where there
is no Law, there is no transgression; not for the want of righteousness,
because that was in Adam himself but a punishment, and in his posterity
neither a sin, nor a punishment, but only a condition of nature; not for
habitual concupiscence, because though it be a Uitium illud defectus est non
peccatum. Corv. contr. Moli. ^ 8. ad. 14. p. 128.
disease and an infirmity, yet it is no sin, both because the being of it is
connaturall and necessary, and the operations of it inevitable and
unpreventable for want of that bridle of supernatural righteousness which was
appointed to keep it in. Lastly, not for Adams sin imputed, because being
committed by another man's will, it could be no man's sin but his that
committed it.

So that now upon these premises we are to invert the Apostles words, By one
man, namely by Adam, sin entered into the world, upon all his posterity, and
death by sin; By one man, namely by Christ ( tanquam per causam sine qua non)
sin returned into the world upon all Adams posterity, and with sin, the
worst of all deaths, namely hellish torments, which without him should not have
been at all. O how are we bound to praise God, and recount with all honor
the memory of those Worthies who compiled Our Articles, which serve as a hedge
to keep out this impious and mortiferous doctrine (as De Gratia Christ. c. 14.
Fulgentius calls it) from the Church of England, and suffers not Pelagius to
return into his own country.

There are but three maine arguments that I can meet with to color this
heresy, and two of them were the Pelagians of old. First, Exam. Censur. c. 7.
fol. 86 p. 8 and Pelag. apud Aug. De natura and gratia. cap. 12.
that which is natural and by consequence necessary and unavoidable cannot be
sin; Exam. Censur. cap. 5. fol. 57. 8.
Original sin is natural, necessary, and unavoidable; therefore it is no
sin. Secondly, that Ibid cap. 7. fol. 84. 8 and Pelag. apud Aug. cont. Iul.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
which is not voluntary cannot be sinful; Ibid. in Exam.
Original sin is not voluntary; therefore not sinful. Thirdly, no Exam.
cap. 7. fol. 85. 86.
sin is immediately caused by God; but original sin, being the privation of
original righteousness is from God immediately, who pulled away Adams
righteousness from him; Therefore it is no sin.

For the more distinct understanding the whole truth, and answering these
supposed strong reasons, give me leave to premise these observations by way of
Hypothesis.

First, there are Two things in original sin, The privation of
righteousness and the corruption of nature; for since original sin is the
root of actual, and in actual sins there are both the omission of the good
which we ought to exercise, and positive contuma^ies against the Law of God,
therefore a vis formatrix, something answerable to both these must needs be
found in original sin. This positive corruption (for in the other all agree
that it is original sin) is that which the Ioh. 3 6. Romans 6. 6, 7, 24. Gal.
5. 17. Col. 3. 5. Romans 7. 23.
Scripture calls flesh, and members, and law, and lusts, and body, and Saint
Poenalis vitiositas, de perfect. Iustit. cap. 4. Inobedientia, de Civit. Dei.
lib. 14. cap. 15. Libido, contra Julian li. 4. c. 14. Morbidus affectus, de
Nupt. and Concupis. lib. 2. cap 31. Retract* li. 1. ca. 15 (...). Just. Martyr.
Ep. ad Zenam.
Austin, vitiousnesse, inobedience or inordinatenesse, and a morbid affection:
Consonant whereunto is the Articul. 9.
Article of our Church, affirming, that man by original sin is far gone
from righteousness, which is the privation; secondly that thereby he is of his
own nature inclined unto evil, which is the pravitie or corruption: and this
is the doctrine of Magist. Sensent. lib. 2. distinct 30. Aquin. 1^. qu. 82.
art. 1. Driedo de Gratia and lib. Arbit. lib. 1. Tract. 3. part. 4. memb. 2.
page 154, 156. Greg. Arim. lib. 2. did. 30. qu. 1. Bonavent. li. 2. Distinct.
30. par. 2. quest. 1. Andrad. Defens. Council. Trident. lib. 5. and quamplures
alij.
many learned papists.

Secondly, the Law being Psalm 19. 7. Romans 7. 14.
perfect and spiritual searches the most intimate corners of the soul, and
reduces under a law the very roots and principles of all humane operations:
And therefore in a^ much as Math. 7. 18 Absit ut sit in aliquo vera virtus qui
ipse Iustus non est. Aug. contr. Iul. l. 4. c. 3.
well being is the ground of well working, and that the Tree must be good
before the fruit, therefore we conclude, that the Law is not only the Rule
of our works, but of our strength, not of our life only but of our nature,
which being at first delivered into our hands entire and pure, cannot become
degenerate, without the offense of those who did first betray so great a trust
committed unto them. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27. Lex etiam origines delictorum, id
est, concupiscc^tias and voluntates non minus qu^mfacta conde^nat. Tertul de
pud^cit. c. ^.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Ex^ni vald^ tuo, with all thy might, says
the Law; it does not only require us to love, but to have minds furnished with
all strength to love God, so that there may be life and vigo^ in our obedience
and love of him. The Law requires no more love then strength, therefore if it
did not of us require strength to love, but only suppose it, it could require
no love neither, for the Romans 5. 6.
Apostle tells us that by nature we are without strength. So that if the meaning
of the Law be only this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all the
strength which thou have; and not this, Thou shall love him with all the
strength that I require thee (...) have, and that I at first gave thee (so that
the strength and faculty, as well as the love and duty may c^dere sub pr^cepto,
fall under the command) the meaning of the Law would amount but to this, Thou
shall not, or need not to love the Lord thy God at all, because thou have no
strength so to do, and art not to be blamed for having none.

Thirdly, it is not the being voluntary or involunt^ that does make a thing
sinful or not sinful, but being opposite to the Rule, which requires complete
strength to serve God withal; Now all a man's strength is not in his will, the
understanding, affections, and body have their strength, which failing, though
the will be never so prompt, yet the work is not done with that perfection
which the Law requires: yet withal we are to note in this point two things.
First, That Ex prima bomi^s mala voluntate contractu^, factum est quodammodo
Haereditarium. Aug. Retract. lib. 1 cap. 13.
original sin is, ^do, voluntary too, because brought in by that will which
was originally ours, for this is a true rule in divinity, Voluntas Adae
reputatur nostra Aquin p. 3. q. 84. ar^. 2. ad 3. and 12. q. 81. art. ^. in
corp. Andrad. Orthodox. explicat. lib. 3. Eodem modo omnium voluntates in illo
conclusae censentur quo and naturae.
Voluntas capitis totius naturae voluntas reputatur, that Adams will was the
will of all mankind, and therefore this sin being voluntary in him, and
hereditarie unto us, is esteemed in some sort voluntary unto us too. Secondly,
that a thing may be voluntary two ways, First, efficienter, when the will
does positively concur to the thing which is done; Vid. Aquin. ^2 qu. 79 art.
1 in C. and q. 74 art. 3. C. and Aristot. Eth lib. 3. c. 5.
Secondly, Deficienter, when the will is in fault for the thing which is done,
though it were not done by it self. For we must note, that all other Arist.
Ethic. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
faculties were at first appointed to be subject to the will, and were not to
move but upon her allowance, and conduct, and therefore when lust does prevent
the consent and command of the will, it is then manifest that the will is
wanting to her office; for to her it belongs to suppress all contumacie, and
to forbid the doing of any illegal thing. And in this sense I understand that
frequent speech of Saint De lib. Arbit. lib. 3 c. 22. Retract. l. 1. c. 13 de
vera Relig. c. 14.
Austen, That sin is not sin except it be voluntary, that is, sin might
altogether be prevented, if the will it self had its primitive strength, and
were able to exercise uprightly that office of government and moderation over
the whole man which at first it was appointed unto. Which thing the same Non ex
toto vult, non ergo ex toto imperat. Et iterum, non u^tque plena imperat. Et
ideo sunt duae voluntates, quia una earum t^ta non est and hoc a^est (...)*
quod al^eri dee^ Confess. lib. 8. c 8 9.
Father divinely has expressed in his confessions; What a monstrous thing is
this, says he, that the mind should command the body and be obeyed, and that
it should command it self, and be resisted? His answer is, The will is not a
total will, and therefore the command is not a total command, Si voluntas
renatorum omni ex part inimica esset concupiscenti^, eam e suo regno omnem
exterminaret. Whicak. cont. Staplet. de Iustif. lib. 3. cap. 3.
for if the will were so thoroughly an enemy to lust as it ought to be, it
would not be quiet till it had dis-throned it.

These things being premised, we conclude That as our nature is universally
vitiated and defiled by Adam, so that pollution which from him we derive is
not only the languor of nature, the condition and calamity of mankind, the
womb, seed, fomenter, formative virtue of other sins, but is it self truly and
properly sin, or to speak in Peccatum car^s and vere peccatum. Fulg. de great.
Christ c. 15. Vid. Aug. de peccat. mer. and remiss. lib. 2. c. 4. de nupt. and
concupis. lib. 2. cap. 24. contr. Iul. lib. 2. c. 3. 4. 5. and lib. 4 c. 2.
lib. 5. c. 3. 7. lib. 6. c. 15. 19. Vide Staplet. de Justice l. 2. c 14. 1. Ioh.
3. 4. Romans 7 23. Gal. 5. 17. Romans 6. 23. Ephesians. 2. 3. Romans 7. 13. Eccles. Genesis
1. 3^. Rom 7* 15. Prove 7. 11-21. Romans 7 18-21. Matthew. 15. 19. Iam. 1. 14. Iam.
3. 15. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. Iam. 3. 6. Ioh. 8. 44. Aug. Tract. 49. in Johan. Quando
libido vincit, vincit and diabolus. Id. contr. Iul. lib. 5. cap. 7. 1. Pet. 2.
24* Gal 5 24. Romans 6 5. 6. Act. 2. 38. Col. 2. 11, 12.
the phrase of the Church of England, has of it self the nature of sin*
First, where there is (...), transgression there is sin; in this sin there is
more, for there is (...)* rebellion, and antipathie against the whole Law;
therefore concupiscence is sin. Secondly, That which inferres death, and makes
men naturally children of wrath, is sin; but lust, and fleshly concupiscence
reviving, brings death, and wrath; therefore it is sin. Thirdly, where
there is an excess of sin that thing must needs be sinful; but
concupiscence by the commandment is exceeding sinful, ergo. Fourthly, that
which is hateful is evil and sinful (for God made all things beautiful and
good, and therefore very lovely) but concupiscence is hateful, what I hate,
that I do. Fifthly, that which quickneth to all mischief, and indisposeth to
all good must needs be sinful, as she that tempts and solliciteth to
adultery may justly be esteemed a harlot; but concupiscence tempts draws,
enticeth, begets, conceives, indisposeth to good, and provokes to evil;
therefore it is sin. Sixthly, that which is hellish and divelish must needs
be sinful, for that is an argument in the Scripture to prove a thing to be
exceeding evil; but concupiscence is even the Hell of our nature, and lusts are
divelish; Therefore they are sinful too. Nemo se palpet, says Saint Austen,
desus Satanas est, de Deo beatus, Let no man sooth or flatter himself, his
happiness is from God, for of himself he is altogether devilish. Seventhly,
that which was with Christ crucified is sin, for he bore our sin is his
body upon the tree; but our flesh and concupiscence was with Christ crucified,
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts;
Therefore it is sin. Lastly, that which is washed away in Baptism is sin,
for Baptism is for remission of sins; but concupiscence and the body of
sin is done away in Baptism; Therefore it is sin. And this is the frequent
argument of the ancient Doctors against the Pelagians to prove that infants Aug
d. peccat. merit and remiss. lib. 1. cap. 16. 17. 24. 26. 28 34 39. lib. 2.
cap. 26. 27. 28. l. 3. c. 4. de nupt. and concupiscent. lib. 1. cap. 20. lib.
2. cap. 33. contr. Iul. Pelag. l. 3. cap. 2. 3. lib. 6. c. 16. and locis alijs
infinitis. Fulgent de Incarnat. et gratia Christi. cap. 15. Prosper. contr.
Coll. cap. 18.
had sin in their nature, because they were baptized unto the remission of
sins.

To give some answer then to those pretended reasons. To the first we confess
that nothing can be toto genere Necessary, and yet sinful: neither is
original sin in that sort necessary to the nature in it self, though to the
nature in persons proceeding from Adam it be necessary. For Adam had free
will, and we in him, to have kept that original righteousness in which we
were created, and what was to him sinful, was to us likewise, because we all
were one in him. We are then to distingvish of natural and necessary, for it
is either primitive and created, or consequent, and contracted necessity; the
former would indeed void sin because God does never first make things
impossible, and then command them; but the latter growing out of man's own will
originally, must not therefore nullify the Law of God, because it disableth
the power of man, for that were to make man the Lord of the Law.

To the second three things are to be answered. First, The sinfulness of a
thing is grounded on its disproportion to the Law of God, not to the will of
man. Now Gods Law sets bounds, and moderates the operations of all other powers
and parts, as well as of the will. And therefore the Apostle complains of his
sinful concupiscence, even when his will was in a readiness to desire the good,
and refuse the evil. To. 7. 18. Secondly, no evil lust rises or stirs,
Voluntarium aliquid dicitur quid est d^ voluntate. Ab aliquo autem dicitur esse
aliquid dupliciter. Direct, quod scil. procedit ab aliquo in quantum est
Agens, indirecte, ex (...) ipso quod non agit sicut subr^e* (...) navis dicitur
esse a Gubernatore, in quantum (...)gubernando, etc. Aquin. 1. 2* qu. 6. ar. 3.
Peccatum originale est voluntarium(...) voluntate primi parentis -- quod
sufficit ad peccatum original, quia non est personae, s^d naturae peccatum.
Al^aret. de Auxil. Great. lib. 6. d. sp. 44. number. 15.
though it prevent the consent of the will, but the will may be esteemed
faulty, not in this that it consented unto it, but in this, that it did not,
as it ought to have done, hinder and suppress it. For the stirrings of lust
before the will, is their usurpation, and inordinatenesse, not their nature,
which therefore the will according to that primitive sovereignty which in man's
nature she had ought to rectify, and order again. Thirdly, original sin,
though to persons it be not, yet to the nature it was voluntary, and to the
persons in Adam as in their common Father, for with them otherwise then in him
no covenant could be made, and even in humane laws the Acts of parents can
circumscribe their children.

To the third, we utterly deny that God did take away original righteousness
from man, but he Pontificij ex hac part sunt novatoribus modestiores, qui
Adamum seipsum privasse docent and probant. Andrad. Orthodox. explicat. li. 3.
and apud ipsum Ferrariens. in Tho. contr. gent. lib. 4. c. 32.
Threw it away himself; God indeed withholds it, and does not obtrude again
that upon us which we rejected before, but he did not snatch it away, but man
in sinning did nullify it to himself. For what was righteousness in Adam but
Fit in Homine Iustus ordo naturae, ut anima subdatur Deo, and Animae Caro. Aug.
de Civ. Dei lib. 19. c. 4. (...). Clem. Alex. strom. l. 6. and paedagog. lib.
1. c. 13.
perfect and universal rectitude, whereby the whole man was sweetly ordered by
Gods law, and within himself; now Adams sin having so many evils in it as it
had, pride, ambition, ingratitude, robbery, luxury, idolatry, murder, and
the like, needs must that sin spoil that original righteousness which was
and ought to be universal. Secondly, we grant that original sin is not
only a fault, but a punishment too; but that the one of these should destroy
the other Sicut caecitas cordis -- and peccatum est quo in Deum non creditur,
and poena peccati qua cor superbum digna animadversione punitur, and causa
peccati, cum mali aliquid caeci* cordis errore committitur, ita concupiscentia
carnis, and peccatum est, quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis,
and poena peccati quia reddita est merit is inobedientis, and causa peccati,
defectione consentientis, and contagione nascentis. Aug. cont. full. lib. 5.
cap. 3.
we utterly deny; for which purpose we may note, that a punishment may be
either by God inflicted in its whole being, or by man in the substance of the
thing contracted, and by God in the penal relation which it carries ordered.
It is true, no punishment from God inflicted upon man can be in the substance
of the thing sinful, but that which man brings upon himself as a sin Gods
wisdom may order to be a punishment too. When a prodigal spends his whole
estate upon uncleanness, is not his poverty both a sin and a punishment?
when a drunkard or adulterer brings diseases upon his body, and drownes his
reason, is not that impotencie and sottishness *both sin and punishment? did
not God punish Pharaoh with hardness of heart, and the gentiles with vile
affections? and yet these were sins as well as punishments. To expedite this
point in one word as I conceive of it. Two things are in this sin, Privation
of Gods Image, and lust or habitual concupiscence. The privation is, in regard
of the first loss of righteousness, from Adam alone, by his voluntary
depraving of the humane nature, and excussion of the image of God; but in
regard of the Continuance of it, so deficienter, Gods justice and wisdom has
a hand in it, who as he is the most just avenger of his own wrongs and the
most free disposer of his own gifts, so has he in both respects been pleased
to whith-hold his image formerly rejected, and not to obtrude upon ungrateful
and unworthy men so precious an endowment, of which the former contempt and
indignity had justly made them ever after destitute. Concupiscence we may
conceive both as a disorder, and as a penalty. Consider it as a punishment,
and so though it be not by God effected in nature, (for he tempts no man,
much less does he corrupt any) yet is it subject to his wisdom and
ordination, who after he had been by Adam forsaken, did then forsake him
likewise, and give him up into the hand of his own counsel, leaving him to
transmit upon others that seminary of uncleanness, which himself had
contracted. Consider it as a vice, and so we say that lust, or flesh does not
belong to the parts as such or such parts, but is the disease of the whole
nature, either part whereof though it do not equally descend from Adam, yet
may he justly be esteemed the Father and Fountain of the whole nature,
because though generation do not make all the materials and parts of nature,
yet does it work to the uniting of them, and constituting of the whole by
them. So then natural corruption is from Ad^m alone meritoriously by reason of
his first prevarication; from Adam by our parents seminally, and by generation
and contagion; but under favor I conceive that it is not from the body in the
soul, but equally and universally from the whole nature as a guilty, forsaken,
and accursed nature, by some secret and ineffable resultancie therefrom, under
those relations of Guilt and cursednesse. This with submission to the learned I
conceive in that great question touching the penalenesse, and traduction of
original concupiscence, reserving to others their liberty in such things,
wherein a latitude of opinions may consist with the unity of faith and love.

But to return to those things which are more for practice. This doctrine of
original sin does direct us in our (...) -- (...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioc.
Hom. 2. Iam. 1. 13.
humiliations for sin, shows us whither we should rise in judging and
condemning our selves, even as high as our fleshly lusts, and corrupt nature.
Let not any man say, says S. James, that he was tempted of God; I shall go
further, Let not any man say of himself by way of excuse, extenuation, or
exoneration of himself, I was tempted of Satan, or of the World; and who can
be too hard for such enemies, who can withstand such strong solicitations;
(...). Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioc. Hom. 4.
Let not any man resolve his sins into any other original then his own
lusts. Our perdition is totally of our selves, we are assaulted by many
enemies, but it is one only that over comes us, even our own flesh. Saint
Paul could truly say, Rom 7. 20. 1. Chro. 21. 1. 2. Sam. 24. 10.
It was no more I that sinned; but did he charge his sins therefore upon
Satan, or upon the World? No, though it was not he, yet it was something that
did belong unto him, an inmate, a bosom enemy, even sin that dwelt within
him. It is said, that Satan provoked David to number the people, and yet David's
heart smote himself, and did not charge Satan with the sin, because it was
the lust of his own heart that let in and gave way to Satan's temptation. If
there were the same mind in us as in Christ, that Satan could find no more in
us to mingle his temptations with all, then he did in him, they would be
equally successeles^e; but this is his greatest advantage, that he has our
evil nature to help him, and hold intelligence with him. And therefore we
must rise as high as that in our humiliations for sin: For that will keep us
ever humble, because concupiscence will be ever sti^ring in (...): and it will
make us thoroughly humble, because thereby sin is made altogether our own,
when we attribute it not to casualties, or accidental miscarriages, but to
our nature; as David did, In sin was I shaped, and in iniquity did Psalm. 51.
7.
my mother conceive me. It was not any accident, or external temptation which
was the root and ground of these my sins, but I was a transgressour from the
womb, Esaias 48. 8.
I had the seeds of adultery and murder sown in my very nature, and from
thence did they break forth in my life. When men shall consider, that in their
whole frame there is an universal ineptitude and indisposition to any good,
and as large a forwardness unto all evil, that all their principles are
vitiated, and their faculties out of joint, that they are in the womb as
Cockatrice eggs, and in the conception a seed of ^pers* more odious in the
pure eyes of God, then Toads or Serpents are in ours, this will keep men in
more caution against sin, and in more humiliation for it.

Lastly, from the consideration of this sin we should be exhorted unto these
needful duties: First, to much i^alousie against our selves, not to trust any
of our faculties alone, nor to be too confident upon presumptions, or
experiences of our own strength. ^ob would not trust his eyes Job 31. 1. Psalm.
39. 1.
without a covenant, nor David his mouth without a bridle; so strangely and
unexpectedly will nature break out if it feel it self a little loose, as may
cost a man many a cry and tear to set himself right again. Though a Lion
seem never so tame, though the Sea seem never so calm, give them no passage,
keep on the chain, look still to the Bulwarks, for there is a rage in them
which cannot be tamed. Venture not on any temptation, be not confident of any
grace received so as to slacken your wonted zeal, count not your selves to
have apprehended any thing, forget that which is behind, press forward to the
price that is before you; and ever suspect the treachery and tergiversation of
your own hearts. Joseph flung out, and would not trust himself in the company
of his mistress, He hearkened not to her to lie by her, or to be Genesis 39. 10,
12.
with her, company might easily have kindled concupiscence, a little of Satan's
blowing might have carried the fire from one stick unto another. David would
have no wicked thing in his house, nor in his sight; sin is a Psalm. 101. 3,
4, 7.
plague, he knew how full of ill humors, and seeds of alike evil, his heart
was; how apt to catch every infection that came near it, and therefore he
took care to decline the very objects and examples of sin. God would not
suffer any people, or monuments of Idolaters to be Exo 34. 12-16.
spared, lest they should prove temptations and snares to his own people; and
their hearts should run after the like sins. Keep thine heart, says
Solomon, with al^ Prove. 4. 23.
diligence, never let thine eye be off from it, hide the word, and the spirit
always in it, to watch it, for there is an adulterer ever at hand to steal it
away. Therefore the Lord would have the Israelites bind Ribbands upon Number. 15.
38. Deuteronomy. 11. 20.
their Fringes, and the Law on the Posts of their doors, that by those visible
remembrancers their minds might be taken off from other vanities, and the
obedience of the Law more revived within them. And Solomon alluding to that
custom shows the use and the fruits of it* Bind them, says he, continually
upon thine heart, and tie them Prove. 6. 20, 2^.
about thy neck, make the Law of God thy continual ornament; when thou go
it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, when thou awakest
it shall talk with thee; in all thy ways and conditions it shall be thy
safeguard, thy companion, and thy comfort.

Secondly, To war and contention against so strong and so close an enemy.
Our flesh is our Esau, our elder brother, and we must ever be wrestling with
it. The flesh and the spirit are contraries, one will ever be on the prevailing
side: and the flesh is never weary nor out of work to improve its own part,
therefore the spirit must be as studious and importunate for the Kingdom of
Christ. But you will say* To what end serves any such combat? it is impossible
to vanquish, or to overcome lust. The Devil may be put to flight, there is
hope in a conflict with him, but lust may be exasperated by contention, it
cannot be shaken of.

To this I answer in the general first, that it is our duty to fight with
sin, and it is Christ's office and promise to overcome it, We must perform
that which he requires of us, and trust him with that which he promises
unto us. Besides, by this means the body of sin is first weakened, though
not quite destroi'd. For as in the Lev. 14. 41-45.
Leviticall Law when a spreading leprosy was in a house, the walls were first
scraped round about, the dust thrown out, new stones and new mortar put to the
old materials, and then last of all the house upon the uncureablenesse of it
was broken quite down, and dissolved: so in our present leprous and corrupted
condition, we are to deface, to weaken, to scrape of what we can of the body
of sin, and leave the rest for God to do when he shall be pleased to
dissolve us.

Secondly, It is by this means captivated likewise, Josh 9. 21. Number. 31. 18.
Josh. 17. 13.
though like the Gibeonites, and the Moabitish maids it be not slain, yet it
is kept under and subdued.

Thirdly, however, by this means it is discovered and it is a good part of
war to know the latitude of an enemies strength, to pry into his stratagems
and contrivances. For the knowledge of sin will make us more earnest in
mourning for it, more importunate in our prayers against it, more humble in our
consessions of it, more unquiet till we be acquitted by the blood of Christ
and his spirit from it, more urgent to lay hold upon the victories and promises
of Christ against it. This is the sum of all, and a most sufficient
encouragement. The grace of I^ renascentibus (...), in pro^cientibus minu^tur,
in resurgenti^us ^ollitur. Aug. con^r. Julian. lib. 6. cap. 16.
Christ in us will weaken much, the grace and favor of Christ unto us will
forgive the rest, and the power of Christ at the last will annihilate all.

Thirdly, To patience and constancy in this spiritual combat. We are beset,
and compassed about with our corruptions, the sin hangs on with much
pertinacy, and will not be shaken of, therefore there is need of patience Heb.
12. 1. Heb. 10. 36.
to run the race that is set before us, to do the whole will of God, to hale
perpetually our clog after us, to pull on and drive forward a backsliding and a
revolting heart, to thrust still before us a swarm of thoughts and affections
through so many turnings and temptations as they shall meet withal. When the
spies returned from the holy Land, they disheartened the people, because they
had seen giants the sons of A^ak: so when the Number. 13. 29, 33.
spirit of man considers, I am to enter upon a combat that admits no treaty
of peace, or respite, with an old man* full of wisdom, furnished with a whole
Armorie of weapons, and with all the succors and contributions which
principalities, and powers, and spiritual wickednesses can bring in, an enemy
full of desperate rebellion and unwearied rage against the Kingdom of Christ
in ^e: and I find by daily experience what foiles he gives me, what captivity
he holds me under, how unable I am to hold conflict with but some one of his
Lusts, how unfurnished with such general strength as is requisite to meet so
potent an adversary; in this case a man will be very apt to faint and be
wearied in his striving against sin. And therefore to encourage and quicken
us unto patience we must not seek our selves in our selves, nor fix upon the
measure and proportion of our former graces, but run to our faith and hold
fast our confidence, which will make us hope above hope, and be strong when
we are weak: We must look unto Jesus, and consider first, his grace which
is sufficient for us, Secondly, his power, which has already begun faith and
a good work in us, Thirdly, his promise which is to finish* it for us,
Fourthly, his compassion and assistance, he is our second, ready to come in in
any danger and undertake the quarrel, Fifthly, his example, he passed through
alike contradiction of sinners, as we do of lusts, Sixthly, his neerenesse,
he is at the door, it is yet but a little while, and he that shall come will
come and will not tarry. Seventhly, his Glory which is in our quarrel engaged,
and in our weakness perfected. Eighthly, his reward which he brings with
him, it is for an eternal weight of glory, that we wrestle, Ninthly* his
faithfulness to all that Clowd of witnesses, those armies of Saints* whom he
has carried through the same way of combats and temptations before us, and
whose warfare is now accomplished. Lastly, his performances already. First, he
makes the combat Quicquidinde minuitur* hinc cres^it. Hieron. ^p. 21.
every day easier then before, our Inner man grows day by day, the house of
David is stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul weaker and weaker. And
Secondly, as in all other afflictions, so in this especially he gives unto us
a peaceable fruit of righteousness after we have been exercised in it.

But you will say these are good encouragements to him that knows How to do
this work; but how shall I that am Ignorant, and impotent know how to
suppress and keep down so strong an enemy with any patience or constancy
that all this works in me? To this I answer, first consider wherein mainely
the strength of lust lies, and then apply your preventions and oppositions
accordingly.

The strength of lust is in these particulars. First, it is wisdom and cunning
craftiness, whereby it lies in wait, Ephesians. 4. 14.
and is upon the catch of every advantage to set forward its own ends.
Secondly, it is suggestions, persuasions, titillations, treaties, flatteries,
dalliances with the soul, which like the smiles of a harlot entice, and allure
the heart to condescend to some experience and practice Iam. 1. 14. 1. Tim. 3.
14.
with it: Thus Evah being deceived fell into the transgression. For the
suggestion quickly begets delight, and delight as easily grows into consent,
and when the Will like the Master-Fort is taken, the inferior members (...) no
longer stand out. Thirdly, its promises and presumptions, its threatenings and
affrightments: for Hopes and fear as are the edges of temptation. Lust seldom
or never prevails, till it have begotten some expectation of fruit in it, till
it can propose some wages and pleasures of iniquity, 1. Pet. 2. 15. ^ude v.
11. Heb. 11. 25. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
some peace and immunitie against dangers or judgments denounced, wherewith
men may flatter themselves: some unprofitablenesse, toil, and inconvenience in
a contrary strictness. Lust deals with the soul, as Iael with Sisera, first,
it calls a man in, gives him milk Judge. 4. 18-21.
and butter, cove^s him with a mantle, and casts him into a quiet and secure
sleep, and then after brings out the nail and hammer to fasten him unto
death; and yet all this while a man says not within himself, What have I
done, there is no hope, after all this my weariness, in the Esaias 57. 10.
tent of Iael, in the promises of lust, but like the Mother of Sisera
cherishes vast expectations, and returns answers of spoils and purchases to
himself. We will (...) Ier. 44. 17.
Incense to the Queen of Heaven, say the people to ^my; we have not only
great and public examples, (...) Fathers, our Kings, our Princes, our Cities,
but great Rewards to encourage us thereunto, for then had we ple^y Hos. 2. 5.
of victuals, and were well and saw no evil. I will go after my Lovers that
give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink;
neither did she ever return to her first husband, till she found by evident
experience that it was then better with her then amongst Mal. 1. 13. 3. 14.
her idols. So that which made that hypocritical people weary of the ways
and worship of God, was the unprofitablenesse which they conceived to be in his
service, and the unequalnesse of his ways: whereas indeed the fault Esaias 58. 3.
was in their own unsincerity and evil ends. For the Mic. 2. 7.
Word of the Lord does good to those that walk uprightly, as the Prophet
speaks. Fourthly, its Laws and Edicts, whereby it sets the members aworke,
and publishes its own will; and that either under the show of reason (for
sin has certain Maxims, and principles of corrupted reason, which it takes
for indubitable and secure, wherewith to countenance its tyrannical commands)
or else under the shape of Emoluments and Exigences, and Inevitableness, which
may serve to warrant those commands that are otherwise destitute even of the
color of reason. Like that device of Caiaphas, when they knew not how to
accuse Christ, or Ioh. 11. 47-50.
charge him with any face of capital crimes, yet he had found out a way that
though there were no personal reasons, nor just grounds to proceed upon, yet
admitting and confessing the innocence of the person of Christ, the Expedience
notwithstanding and Exigencie of state so requiring it, fitter it was for one
innocent person to perish, and thereby the safety of the common wealth, which
Percrebuerat Orient tote vetus and constans opini^, esse in fatis, ut eo
tempore Iudaed profecti rerum p^tirentur. Sueton. in Uesp^si. cap. 4.
depended upon their homage to the Romans, to be secured, then by the
preservation of one man to have the welfare of the whole people lie at hazard,
and exposed to the fea^es, and jealousies, and displeasures of the Romans, who
by public fame were very suspicious of an universal prince which was to arise
out of Judea, and none so likely to be the man, as he who could raise dead men
out of their graves, and so be never destitute of armies to help him: so
though there was no ^quum est, yet there was an exp^dit, though no reason or
justice, yet Pluribus persuasi^ ine^at, a^iquis sacerdo^um literis contineri,
eo ipso tempo^sore vt v^l sceretoriens, (...). Iud^ (...) po^irentur; quae
^mbages (...) and Titum (...)* ^acit. Histor* live 5. (...) non dissimili crrore
notaver^t (...). d. Bello Iud^co. lib. 5. cap. 12.
there was Exigence and Expediencie why he ought to die, though not as a
malefactor to satisfy for his own offense* yet as a sacrifice to expiate, and
to prevent those evils of state which the fame of his mighty works might have
occasioned. And thus does sin deal with men, sometimes by the help of
corrupt reason, and counterfeite maxi ne^ it makes the sins which are
commanded seem warrantable and equal; sometimes, where the things are
apparently evil, and cannot be justified, yet by pretense of some present
exigencies it makes them seem necessary and ^avoydable. Fifthly Its violence
and importuni^e, for sin is so wilful that as he once answered the Persian
king, when it cannot find a law to warrant that which it requires, yet it will
make a law to command what it will: and it will beset and pursue, and importune
the soul, and take no answer. Balaams ambition was sufficiently nonplusd by
the several answers Numb. 31. 16.
and parables which God put into his mouth, and yet still it pursues him, and
will put him upon all experiments, Mic. 6. 5.
make him try the utmost of his divelish wit to curse Gods people, and promote
himself. Io^h his fretfulnesse Iona. 4. 4. 8.
had been once put to silence, and could reply nothing when God charged him,
yet upon a second occasion it gathers strength, and becomes more headstrong,
even to dispute with God, and to charge him foolishly. Dalilah we know was an
Allegory or type of lust, and we Judge 16 16.
know how violent and urgent she was with Sampson* till she grieved and vexed
his soul with her daily importunities. Sixthly, its provisions. those
subsidiary a^des and materials of lust which it fetches from abroad, those
Romans 13. 14. 1. Ioh. 2. 15, 16. ^am. 4 4. Ro^. 6. 19.
things of the world, with which the heart commits adultery; for the World
is the Armorie and storehouse of lust. Lastly its instruments, which willingly
execute the will of sin, and yield themselves up as weapons in the war: In
these things principally does the strength of lust consist.

Having thus discovered wherein the strength of lust lies, set your selves
against it in these particulars thereof. First, for the wisdom and deceit of
lust: First set up a spiritual wisdom, which may discover and defeat the
projects of the flesh; Christ's teaching is the only way to put off the old
man, and to be renewed in the Ephe. 4. 20, 21.
spirit of the mind. Secondly, mutual exhortation is a great help against
the deceitfulness of sin, Exho^t Heb. 3. 13.
one another while it is called to day, l^st any of you be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin. Silence is the best advantage an Enemy can have, when
one does not warn nor give notice to another. If a Cheat or cunning Spy
should come to a place, and apply himself with several ins^nuations unto
several persons, for the better managing his purposes, and sifting out those
discoveries which he is to make, the best way to disclose the plots and
mischiefs of such an Enemy would be to confer, and compare his several
passages and discourses together; so Christians mutual communicating of the
experiments, temptations, conflicts, victories which they have had in
themselves to one another, is a sure way to discover and prevent the deceit of
lust. Rahabs hiding and concealing the spies did much advance their project
against Jericho; and so the keeping of the devils counsel, and stifling his
temptations, and the deceits of lust, is one of the greatest advantages they
can have. Thirdly, receive the Truth with love, for lies and delusions are the
doom of those 2. These. 2. 10, 11
men who receive not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.

Secondly, for the persuasions and suggestions of lust, entertain no Treaty,
have no commerce with it, be not Psalm. 1. 1.
in its company alone, let it not draw thee away, sit not in counsel with it.
Qui deliberant desciverunt, if it prevail Tacit.
to get our ear* and make us listen unto it, it will easily proceed further.
As soon as ever Saint Paul was Gal. 1. 16.
called, he immediately refused to confer with flesh and blood, which
relation elsewhere making, he uses another expression, Whereupon O King
Agrippa I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision; intimating thus much,
that Act. 16. 19.
but to hold a conference with the flesh is a beginning of disobedience. If our
first mother Evah had observed this rule, not to deliberate, or admit any
dispute with the Serpent, but had at first offer rejected his motion, with this
peremptory answer, We have a Law given us, and servants must be ruled by
their master and not by their fellows, It is fitter to obey God then to
dispute against him, to execute his commands then to interpret them, she might
have prevented that deluge of sin and calamity which by this one oversight
did invade the world. Therefore the Lord strictly commands his people, that
when they were to succeed the nations whom God would cast out before them, and
should dwell in their land, they should take heed that they were not snared by
following them, neither should they enquire after their Gods saying. How did
these nations serve their Gods* Deuteronomy. 12. 30.
The very acquanting themselves with the forms of other men's idolatries might
ensnare them. Therefore as soon as lust stirs and offers to persuade thee,
start away from it as Joseph did, Come not nigh the door of a Prove. 5. 8.
strange woman's house, though the first allurements seem modest and moderate,
yet if the Serpent get in but his head, he will easily draw in the rest of his
body, and if he should not, yet his sting is in his head.

Thirdly, for the promises and threats of lust, first, believe them not, for
lust is a Tempter, and it is given to all Tempters, to be liers too. When God
has said one thing, let no arguments make thee believe the contrary. As we
are to believe above hope, so above reason too; for though sophistry may
allege reasons for a false conclusion which every understanding is not able to
answer or evade, yet there is a voice of Christ in all saving truth, which his
sheep are apt to hear and subscribe unto, in Ioh. 10. 4, 5.
which there is an evidence to make it self known, and to difference
delusions from it, though happily a man have not artificial logic enough to
distinguish it from every captious and sophistical argument. If an Angel from
Gal. 1. 8.
heaven, says the Apostle, preach any other Gospel let him be accursed; we
know what it cost the man of God, when he gave credit to the old Prophet of
Bethel, though 1. King. 13. 18. 24.
pretending an Angels warrant, to go back and eat with him, contrary to the
commandment which he had received before. Secondly, get security of better
promises (for all the promises of the flesh if they should be performed will
perish with a man) learn to rest upon Gods All-sufficiencie, see thy self
rich enough in his Heb. 11. 25.
ways, there are more riches in the persecutions, much more in the promises
and performances of God, then in all the treasures of Egypt. Lust can promise
nothing but either thou have it already (and the same water is far sweeter
out of a fountain, then when it has passed through a sink; the same money
far better when it is a Blessing from God, then when a bribe from Lust; when
it is the reward of a service, then when it is the price of sin; when it is
given by the Owner, then when deposited by a thief) or else thou art far
better without it, thou walk amongst fewer snares, have an overplus of
spiritual goods for thy earthly defect, have thy poverty sweetened and
sanctified by better promises; and therefore respect none of the wages of Lust,
consider that God is the Fountain of life, that thou have more and better of
it in him then in the Creatures, that when thou want the things of this
life, yet thou have the promises still, and that all the offers of lust are not
for comforts, but for snares, not for the use of life, but for the provisions
of sin: and there is more content in a little received from God, then in whole
treasures stolen from him, and all sinful gain is the robbing of God.

Fourthly, for the law of lust, setup the law of the spirit of life in thy
heart. It is a royal Law, and a Law of liberty. whereas lust is a law of death
and bondage; and where the spirit comes, a man shall be set free from the law
of sin and of death. Keep thy self always at Romans 8. 2.
home, in the presence of Christ, under the eye and government of thy husband,
and that will dash all intruders and adulterers out of countenance. Take heed
of quenching, grieving, stifling the Spirit, cherish the motions thereof,
stir up and kindle the gifts of God in thee, labor by them to grow more in
grace, and to have nearer communion with God; the riper the Corn grows, the
looser will the chafe be, and the more a man grows in grace, with the more
ease will his corruptions be severed and shaken off.

Fifthly, when lust is violent and importunate: First, be thou importunate and
urgent with God against it too, when the Messenger of Satan, the Thorn in the
flesh, 2. Cor. 12. 7, 8.
did buffet, and stick fast unto S. Paul, he reiterated his prayers unto God
against it, and proportioned the vehemence of his requests to the violence and
urgency of the enemy that troubled him; and he had a comfortable answer, My
Grace is sufficient for thee, sufficient in due time to cure, and sufficient at
all times to forgive thy weakness. In the Law, if a ravished woman had cried
out, she Deuteronomy. 22. 25-27
was esteemed innocent, because the pollution was not voluntary, but violent.
And so in the assaults of lust, when it uses violence, and pursues the soul
that is willing to escape and fly from it, if a man withold the embraces of
his own will, and cry out against it, if he can say with Saint Paul, It is no
more I that do it, but sin Romans 7* 20.
that dwells in me, though in regard that the flesh is something within
himself, he cannot therefore be esteemed altogether innocent, yet the Grace of
God shall be sufficient for him. Secondly, when thou art pursued, keep not
Lusts counsel, but seek remedy from some wise and Christian friend by
communicating with him, and disclosing thy case unto him; sin loves not to
be betrayde or complained on, mutual confession of sin, Iam. 5. 16.
to those who will pray for a sinner, and not deride him, or rejoice against
him, is a means to heal it. Thirdly, when thou art in a more violent manner
then usual assaulted by sin, Humble thy self in some more peculiar manner
before God, and the more sin cries for satisfaction, deny it and thy self
the more: as Solomon says of children, so may I say of lusts, Chastise and
subdue thy lusts, and regard not their crying.

Sixthly, cut off the materials and provisions for lust, weane thy self from
earthly affections; love not the World, nor the things of the World, desire not
anything 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Iam. 4* 3, 4. Prove. 30. 8, 9.
to consume upon thy lusts, pray for those things which are convenient for
thee, turn thy heart from those things which are most likely to seduce thee,
possess thy heart with a more spiritual and abiding treasure; he who looks
steadfastly upon the light of the Sun, will be able to see nothing below when
he looks down again; and surely the more a man is affected with heaven, the
less will he desire or delight in the world. Besides, the provisions of sin
are but like full pastures, that do but fatten, Hos. 13. 6, 7.
and prepare for slaughter. Balaam was in very good plight before, able to ride
with his two servants to attend Number. 22. 22.
him, but greediness to rise higher, and make provision for his ambitious
heart, carried him upon a wicked business, made him give cursed counsel
against Israel, which at length cost him his own life. Number. 31. 8.


Lastly, for the instruments of lusts, make a covenant with thy members, keep a
government over them, bring them into subjection, above all keep thy heart,
establish 1. Cor. 9. 27.
the inward government; for nothing can be in the body which is not first in
the heart; keep the first mover uniforme and right; all other things which
have their motions depending there, must needs be right too.

Having thus opened at large the life and state of original sin, it remains
in the last place to show, how the spirit by the commandment does convince and
discover the life of actual sin: in omitting so much good, in committing so
much evil, in swarving and deviating from the rule in the manner and measure
of all our services. And this it does, by making us see that great spiritualnes
and perfection, that precise, universal, and constant conformity which the
Law requires in all we do. Cursed is every one that abides not in all things
that are written Gal. 3. 10.
in the book of the Law to do them. Perfection and perpetuity of obedience
are the two things which the Law requires. Suppose we it possible for a man to
fulfill every tittle of the Law in the whole compass of it, and that for his
whole life together, one only particular, and that the smallest and most
imperceptible deviation from it being for one only time excepted, yet so
rigorous and inexorable is the Law, that it seals that man under the wrath and
curse of God. The heart cannot turn, the thoughts cannot rise, the affections
cannot stir, the will cannot bend; but the Law meets with it, either as a
Rule to measure, or as a Judge to censure it. It penetrates the inmost
thoughts, searches the bottom of all our actions, has a wideness in it
which the heart of man cannot endure. They were not able to endure, says the
Apostle, the things Heb. 12. 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 25. Exodus 34. 30.
which were commanded; and Why tempt you God, says Saint' Peter to those that
preached Circumcision, and put a yoke upon the brethren, which neither we nor
our fathers Act. 15. 10.
were able to bear? Circumcision it self they were able to bear, but that
yoke which came with it, namely, the Debt of the whole Law was by them and
their fathers utterly Gal. 5. 3.
unsupportable. For this very cause was the Law published, that sin might
thereby become exceeding sinful, that so Gods grace might be the more
magnified, and his Gospel the more accepted. Let us in a few words consider
some particular aggravations of the life and state of actual sin, which the
spirit by the Word will present unto us.

First, in the least sin that can be named, there is so much life and
venom, as not all the concurrent strength of those millions of Angels, one of
whom was in one night able to stay so many thousand men, had been able to
remove. More violence and injustice against God in a wandering thought, in an
idle word, in an impertinent and unprofitable action, then the worth of the
whole Creation, though all the Heavens were turned into one Sun, and all the
earth into one Paradise, were able to expiate. Think we as meanly and
slightly of it as we will, swallow it without fear, live in it without sense,
commit it without remorse, yet be we assured, that but the guilt of every one
of our least sins being upon Christ, who felt nor knew in himself nothing of
the pollution of them, did wring out those prodigious drops of sweat, did
express those strong cries, did pour in those woeful ingredients into the Cup
which he drank, as made him, who had more strength then all the Angels of
Heaven, to shrink and draw back, and pray against the work of his own
mercy, and decline the business of his own coming.

Secondly, if the least of my sins could do thus, O what a guilt and
filthiness is there then in the greatest sin which my life has been defiled
withal? If my Atoms be Mountains, O what heart is able to comprehend the
vastness of my mountainous sins? if there be so much life in my impertinent
thoughts, how much rage and fury is there in my rebellious thoughts? In my
thoughts of gall and bitterness, in my contrived murders, in my speculative
adulteries, in my impatient murmurings, in my ambitious projections, in my
coverous, worldly, froward, haughty, hateful imaginations, in my contempt of
God, reproching of his Word, smothering of his motions, quenching of his
spirit, rebelling against his grace? If every vain word be a flame that can
kindle the fire of Hell about mine ears, O what vollies of brimstone, what
mountains of wrath will be darted upon my wretched soul, for tearing the
glorious and terrible name of the great God with my cursed oaths, my crimson
and fiery execrations? What will become of sti^king, dirty, carrion
communication, of lies and scorns, and railings and bitterness, the
persecutions, adulteries, and murders of the tongue, when but the idleness
and unprofitablenesse of the tongue is not able to endure this consuming fire?

3. If one great sin, nay one small sin be so full of life, as not all the
strength, nay not all the deaths or annihilations of all the Angels in heaven
could have expiated, O how shall I stand before an army of sins? So many,
which I know of my self, swarms of thoughts, steames of lusts, throngs of
sinful words, sands of evil actions, every one as heavy and as great as a
mountain, able to take up if they were put into bodies all the vast chasm^
between earth and heaven, and fill all the spaces of nature with darkness
and confusion? and how infinite more secret ones are there, which I know not by
my self? How many Atoms and streams of dust does a beam of the Sun
shining into a room discover, which by any other light was before
imperceptible? How many sinful secrers are there in my heart, which though the
light of mine own conscience cannot discover, are yet written in Gods account,
and sealed amongst his treasures, and shall at the day of the revelation of all
things be produced and mustered up against me, like so many Lions and Devils
to fly upon me?

Fourthly, if the number of them can thus amaze, O what shall the root of them
do? Committed out of ignorance in the midst of light; out of knowledge against
the evidence of conscience; out of presumption and forestalling of pardon,
abusing and subordinating the mercies of God to the purposes of Satan, not
knowing that his goodness should have led me to repentance; out of
stubbornness against the discipline, out of enmity against the goodness, out
of gall and bitterness of spirit against the power and purity of Gods holy Law?

Fifthly, not the root only, but the circumstances too Volui and seci: Non
pen^ria, sed fastidio iustitiae. Nec ear volebam frui quam furto appetebam,
sed ipso furto, and peccato. Non erant forma necsapore illecebrosa. Nequissimi
adolescentes* Confrictione sociorum animorum accendebam prurisu^ cupiditatis
(...). Nocteintempestiva. Ingentia onera. Non ad nostras epulas, sed
proiscienda porcis, sola nos iniquitate epulari. Risus erat quasi titillat^
cord quod fallebamus eos qui haec a nobis fieri non putabant. Ex lud^ and
(...) nocend^ (...).
add much to the life that is in sin. See how notably Saint Austen
aggravates his sin of robbing an Orchard when he was a Boy, that which others
less acquainted with the foulness of sin might be apt enough but to laugh
over. First, it began in the will, and the members followed, I had a mind, and
therefore I did it. Secondly, I did not do it for want of the things, but out
of the naughtiness of my heart, and my inward enmity to righteousness.
Thirdly, I did it not with any aim at fruition of the fruit, but only of the
sin; it was not my palate, but my lust which I studied to satisfy. Fourthly,
the apples I stole were very unapt to tempt, no relish, no form in them to
catch the eye, or allure the hand, but the whole temptation and rise of the
sin was from within. Fifthly, I did it not alone, there were a troop of
naughty companions with me, and we did mutually cherish and provoke the itch
of each others lust. Sixthly, it was at a very unseasonable time of night, when
at least for that day we should have put a period and given a respite unto our
lusts. Seventhly, it was after we had spent much time before (and should now
at least have been tired out) in pestilent and foolish sports. Eighthly, we
were immodest in our theft, we carried away great loades and burdens of them.
Ninthly, when we had done, we feasted the Hogs with them, and our selves ^ed
upon the review and carriage of our own lewdness. Lastly, the chief sport
and laughter which we had was this, that we had not only robbed, but deceived
the honest ^en, who had never so bad an opinion of us, as that we should do
it; and thus another man's loss was our jest. And after all this, his
meditations upon it are excellent; with David he goes to the root, Ecce cor
meum Deus meus, ecce cor meum. O Lord, what a nature and heart had I, that
could commit sin without any (...), without any incentive but from my self?
and again, What shall I return unto the Lord, that I can review these my
sins, and not be afraid of them? Lord, I will love thee, I will praise thee,
I will confess to thy Name, it is thy Grace which pardons the sins which I
have committed, and it is thy Grace which prevented the sins which I have not
committed: Thou have saved me from all sins, those which by mine own will I
have done, and those which by thy Grace I have been kept from doing. If every
man would single out some notable sins of his life, and in this manner
anatomize them, and see how many sins one sin contains, even as one
flower many leaves, and one Pomegranate many kernels, it could not but be a
notable means of humbling us for sin.

Sixthly, not evil circumstances only, but unpro^ble ends add much to the
life of sin: when men sp^d Esai. 55. 2.
money for that which is not bread, and labor for that which satisfies not;
when men change their glory for that which does not profit, forsake the
Fountain, and h^w outbroken Ier. 2. 11, 13. Hos. 8. 7. Esai 30. 5. Romans 6. 11.
Cisternes which will hold no water; ^owe nothing but wind, and reap nothing
but shame and reproach. Our Savior assures us, that it is no valuable price to
get the whole World by sione: and Saint Austen has assured Aug. demenda. ad
Consenti^.
us, that the salvation of the World, if possible, ought^ot to be procurd by
but an officious lie. But now how many times do we sin even for base and
dishonorable end^* lie for a farthing, swear for a complement, swagger for a
fashion, flatter for a preferment, murder for a rev^ge, pawn our souls which
are more worth then the whole frame of nature for a very trifle?

Seventhly, all this evil hitherto stays at home, but the great scandal that
comes of sin adds much to the life of it, the perniciousnesse and offense of
the example to others. Scandal to the weak, and that twofold; an active
scandal to mis-guide them, Gal. 2. 14. 1. Cor. 8. 10. or a passive scandal to
grieve them, Romans 14. 15. and beget in them jealousies and suspicions against
our persons and professions. Scandal to the wicked, and that twofold also; the
one giving them occasion to blaspheme that holy Name and profession which we
bear, 2. Sam. 12. 14. 2. Cor. 6. 3. 4. 1. Pet. 2. 13. The other hardening and
encouraging, comforting and justifying them by our evil example, Ezekiel. 16. 51,
54.

Eighthly, the evil does not reach to men only, but the scandal and
indignity over-spreads the Gospel; a great part of the life of sin is drawn
from the several respects it has to Gods will acknowledged. When we s^e not
only against the Law of Nature in our hearts, but against the written Law, nor
only against the truth, but against the mercy and Spirit of God too; this must
be a heavy aggravation. O what a hell must it be to a soul in hell to
recount, so many Sabbaths God reached f^rth his Word unto me, so many Sermons
he knocked at my door, and beseeched me to be reconciled; he wo^d me in his
Word, allured me by his promises, expected me in much patience, enriched me
with the liberty of his own p^etious Oracles, reached forth his blood to wash
me, poured forth his tears over me, but against all this I have stopped the
^are, and pulled away the shoulder, and hardened the heart, and received all
this grace in ^ine, and not withstanding all the rain which fell upon me,
continued barren still. God might have cut me off in the womb, and made me
there a brand of hell, as I was by nature a Child of wrath, he might have
brought me forth into the world out of the pale of his visible Church, (...)
into a corrupted Synagogue, or into a place full of ignorance, atheism, and
profaneness, but he has cast my lot in a beautiful place, and given me a
goodly heritage, and now he requires nothing of me but to do justly, and
work righteousness, and walk humbly before God, and I requite evil for good
to the hurt of mine own soul.

Ninthly, the manner of committing these sinnesis is full of life too.
Peradventure they are Kings, have a court and regiment in my heart, at best
they will be Tyrants in me, they have been committed with much strength,
power, service, attendance, with obstinacy, frowardness, perseverance, without
such sense, sorrow, or apprehension, as things of so great a guiltiness did
require.

Lastly, in good duties whereas grace should be ever quick and operative, make
us conformable to our head, walk worthy of our high calling, and as becomes
godliness, as men that have learned and received Christ, how much
unprofitablenesse, unspiritualnesse, distractions, formality, want of relish,
failings, intermissions, deadness, uncomfortablenesse do show themselves? How
much flesh with spirit, how much wantonness with grace, how much of the world
with the word, how much of the week in the Sabbath, how much of the bag or
barn in the Temple? how much superstition with the worship? how wuch security
with the fear? how much vainglory in the honor of God? in one word, How
much of my self, and therefore how much of my sin, in all my services and
duties which I perform? These and a world the like aggravations serve to lay
open the life of actual sins.

Thus have I at large opened the first of the three things proposed, namely,
that the spirit by opening the Rule does convince men that they are in the
state of sin, both original and actual.

The next thing proposed was to show what kind of condition or estate the
state of sin is. And here are two things principally remarkable: first it is
an estate of most extreme impotency and disability unto any good: Secondly, of
most extreme enmity against the holiness and ways of God.

First it is an estate of impotency and Disability to any good, Paul in his
pharisaicall condition thought himself able to live without blame, Phil. 3. 6.
But when the commandment came he found all his former moralities to have been
but dung. Our natural estate is without any strength, Romans 5. 6. so weak that
it makes the Law it self weak, Romans 8. 3. as unable to do the works of a
spiritual, as a dead man of a natural life, for we are by nature Dead in
sin. Ephesians. 2. 1. and held under by it, Romans 7. 6. And this is a woeful
aggravation of the state of sin, that a man lies in mischief (1. Ioh. 5.
19.) as a carcass in rottenness and dishonor, without any power to deliver
himself. He that raised up Lazarus out of his grave, must by his own voice
raise up us from sin, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and
they that hear shall live. Ioh. 5. 25. All men are by nature strangers to the
life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. and sorreiners from his household, Ephesians. 2. 19. Able
without him to do Nothing, no more then a branch is to bear any fruit, when
it is cut of from the fellowship of the root which should quicken it, Ioh. 15.
4. 5. In me, says the Apostle, that is, in my flesh there dwells no good
thing. Romans 7. 18. a man is as unable to break through the debt of the Law, or
his subjection to death and bondage, as a beast to shake of his yoke. Act. 15.
10. or a dead man his funeral clothes. Ioh. 11. 44. In one word, so great is
this impotencie which is in us by sin, that we are not sufficient to think a
good thing. 2. Cor. 3. 5. not able to understand a good thing, nor to
comprehend the light when it shines upon us. 1. Cor. 2. 14. Ioh. 1. 5. Our
tongues unable to speak a good word, How can ye being evil speak good
things. Matthew. 12. 34. Our ears unable to hear a good word, To whom shall I
speak and give warning that they may hear, behold their ear is uncircumcised
and they cannot hearken. Ier. 6. 10. our whole man unable to obey, the carnal
mind is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans 8. 7.

The Reasons hereof are these. First, Our universal both natural and
personal (...), we are by nature all flesh, children of the old Adam, Ioh. 3.
6. Children of Gods wrath. Ephesians. 2. 3. and so long it is impossible we should
do any thing to please God, for they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
Romans 8. 8. a man must first be renewed in his mind, before he can so much as
make proof of what will be acceptable unto God. Romans 12. 2. This natural
Impurity in our persons is the ground of all impurity in our works, for unto
the (...) every thing is unclean, Tit. 1. 15. and all the fruit of an evil
Tree is evil fruit. Math. 7. 18. And Saint Paul gives the reason of it,
Because our fruit should be fr^itunto God, Romans 7. 4. and fruit unto holiness.
Rom 6. 22. Whereas these works of natural men do neither begin in God, nor
look toward him, nor tend unto him, God is neither the principle, nor the
object, nor the end of them.

Secondly, Our natural (...) ie, the best performance of wicked men is but
(...), the Gift of an enemy, and the sacrifice of fools. It proceeds not
from love which is the Bond of perfection, that which keeps all other
requisite ingredients of a good work together, Col. 3. 14. which is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 8. and the principle of obedience, and all
willing service and conformity to God, Gal. 5. 6. Ioh. 14. 15. and ever
proceeds from the spirit of Christ, Gal. 5. 22. for by nature we are enemies,
Romans 5. 10.

Thirdly, Our natural infidelity, for the state of sin is an estate of
unbelief, The spirit shall convince the world of sin, because they believe
not. Ioh. 16. 9. Now infidelity does utterly disable men to please God, without
faith it is impossible to please him. Heb. 11. 6. There can no good work be
done but in Christ; we are sanctified in Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 2. we are created
in Christ unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. we must be one with him before we can
be sanctified, Heb. 2. 11. and this is the reason why faith sanctifies and
purifies the heart, Act. 15. 9. and by consequence the whole man (for when the
fountain was cleansed all the waters were sweet. 2. Reg. 2. 21.) because faith
is the bond which fastens us unto Christ. Ephesians. 3. 17.

Fourthly, Our natural ignorance and folly. For the state of sin is ever an
ignorant estate. Evil men understand not judgment. Prove. 28. 5. The usual
style that the Scripture gives sinners, even the best of sinners, those who
keep themselves Virgins, and escape many of the pollutions of the world, as
Saint Peter speaks, 2. Pet. 2. 20. is fools Math. 25. 2. though they know
many things, yet they know nothing as they ought to know. 1. Cor. 8. 2. Now the
root of our well pleasing is wisdom and spiritual knowledge, Col. 1. 9. 10.
that is it which makes us walk worthy of the Lord, and fruitful in good
works. Whereas want of understanding is that which makes us altogether
unprofitable, that we do no good. Romans 3. 11. 12.

And now what a cutting consideration should this be to a man to consider, God
made me for his use, that I should be his servant to do his will, and I am
utterly unfit for any services save those which dishonor him, like the wood of
the vine, utterly unusefull and unmeete for any work? Ezekiel. 15. 4. what then
should I expect but to be cast out, as a vessel in which is no pleasure? If I
am altogether barr^n, and of no use, what a wonderful patience of God is it
that suffers me to cumber the ground, and does not presently cast me into the
fire? that (...) me like a noisome weed to poison the air, and choke the
growth of better things? If I drink in the rain, and bring forth nothing but
thorns, how near must I needs be unto cursing? And this conviction should
make men labor to have place in Christ, because thereby they shall be enabled
to please God, and in some measure to bring that glory to him for which they
were made. For this is a thing which God much delights in, when a creature does
glorify him actively, by living unto him. He will not loose his glory by any
Creature, but fetch it out at the last, but when the Creature operates out of
it self to Gods end, and carries Gods intention through its own work, then
is he most honored and delighted. Herein, says Christ, is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, Ioh. 15. 8. and herein did Christ glorify
his father in finishing the work which he gave him to do. Ioh. 17 4. What an
encouragement should this be for those who have hitherto lived in the lusts of
the flesh, to come over to Christ and his righteousness; and for others to go
on with patience through all difficulties, because in so doing they work to
that end for which they were made, they live to God, and bring forth fruit unto
him, who has in much patience spared and in infinite love called them to
himself? How should we praise God that has given us any strength in any way
to do him service? that is pleased to account himself honored when he is
obeyed by us, who spoil all the works we do with our own corruptions? And how
should we husband all the precious moments of our life to the advantage of our
master, whose very acceptance of such unworthy services should alone be both
encouragement and reward enough unto us? The more profitably any man lives, the
more comfortably he shall die.

Now to consider more particularly this disabilitie which comes along with
sin, we may note, that it is either total, when a man is all flesh, as by
nature we are; or at best partial, in proportion to the vigor of concupifence,
and life of sin in the best of us. To touch a little upon both of these.

First, in a wicked man, who is totally in the state of sin, there is a
Total and absolute impossibility and impotency to do any thing that is good.
Every figment and motion of the heart of man is only and continually evil.
Genesis 6. 5. But though his heart be evil, may not his actions or his words be
good? No, for that is the fountain whence all they issue, and impossible it is
that sweet water should proceed from a bitter and corrupted fountain, Matthew.
12. 34. Iam. 3. 11. Look on the best actions of wicked men. If they pray to
God, their prayer is an abomination, Prove. 28. 9. If they sacrifice, God will
not accept nor smell, nor regard any of their offerings he will esteem them
all abominable and unclean, as a dogs head, or swines blood, Amos 5. 21. Esai.
66. 3. Seem things never so specious in the sight of men that do them, yet in
his sight they may be unclean, Hag. 2. 13, 14. If they turn, and enquire and
seek early after God, all this is not fidelity but only flattery, Psalm. 78.
34. 37. Like the spicing and embalming of a carcass, which can never put so
much beauty or value into it, as to make it a welcome present unto a Prince.

But what then? Can a wicked man do nothing but sin? when he gives Alms,
builds Churches, reads the Scripture, hears the Word, worships God, are these
all sins? if so, then he ought to forbear them, and leave them utterly
undone. Here are Two Points in this case, First, to consider How all the works
of natural men may be esteemed sinful; and secondly, this being granted that
they are sinful, How they ought to carry themselves in regard of doing or
omitting of them.

For the former of these, we are first to premise these notes. First, a work
done may be Sub duplici genere Boni, it may be measured by Two sorts of
Goodness; first there is Goodness ethicall or moral, in relation unto
manners, and in order unto men; and secondly, there is Goodness theological
or divine, in relation to Religion, and in order unto God. A thing is morally
Good, when it is Good in the sight of men, good unto humane purposes, good by
way of Example, or by way of Edification Quamvis viden^ (...) cor^ and r^tio
vi^ (...) ^ ^ ^ servit, nullo ^ ^ (...) -- (...) virtu^es quas si^ videtur --
Nisi ad Deum (...), etiam ipsae (...) su^t potius quam virtutes. ^ lib. 19.
cap. 25. Non (...) qui ^ ^ (...) pauperi (...) Deosae^, (...) sunt vitia virt^
thu^; (...) est (...) ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ operib. To. 4. c. 7.
to others, who judge as they see. But a thing is then done divinely when it is
done with the spirit of holiness and of truth (for the Father seeks such to
worship him) when it is done in obedience to the word; for we are to note that
a thing may be done by a man rationally out of the sway and rule of right
reason, and a certain generousnesse and ingenuitie of spirit, which loves not
to condemn it self in the thing which it allows, and to walk cross to the
evidence of its own rules, and yet that thing is all this while done but unto
himself, and his own reason is set up as an idol in Gods place, to which all
the actions of his life do homage: or a thing may be done obedientially, with
an eye unto Gods will that requires it, not only in a common conviction, but
in a filial and submissiue affection, as unto him; when you fasted and
mourned, says the Lord, did you at all fast unto me, even to me? If you will
return o Israel, return unto me says the Lord, Zach. 7. 5. Ier. 4. 1. A
notorious finner walks contrary to the principles of his own reason and
nature To. 1. 32. 1. Cor. 11. 14. contrary to the prosperity and security of
his present life, Levit. 26. 14. 1. Cor. 11, 30. and contrary to the will and
Law of God. Now when a man breaks of a sinful course, with aim only at his
own reason, or prosperity, though this be to return, yet it is to turn to
our selv^s, and not unto God. They assemble themselves for corn and wine,
says the proph^t, and so seem to return, but though they return, it is not
to the most high: but like a deceitful bow, though it seem to direct the
arrow to the mark, yet indeed it sends it out another way, Hos 7. 14 16. and
in this regard though the substance of a work seem very specious unto men,
who judge according to the sight of their eyes, and measure the a^me and
intention by the work which they see, not the work by the intention which
they cannot see; yet to God that sees not as man sees, it may be an
abomination, Luke 16. 15.

Secondly, we are to note, That amongst Christians divine works may be done
morally and merely (...), according to the course of the places and times
which a man lives in. Such were Saint Paul's services before his Conversion,
which therefore he esteemed but dung, and suffered the loss of them, for a man
may do good things, and yet when he has done lose them all, 2. Ioh. verse. 8.
Nay they may be done profanely, as Balaams blessing of Israel, and the false
brethrens preaching, out of envy and ill will. Phil. 1. 15. 16. And moral
things may be done spiritually and divinely; such were the Alms of the
Churches 2. Cor. 8. 5.
of Macedonia to the Saints, that which they did they did as unto God, which
made them ready to consecrate not only their substance, but themselves to the
service of the Saints. Such was the contribution of the Philippians toward the
necessities of Saint Paul, it was Phil. 4 18.
done with an eye to God, in which respect the Apostle calls it a sacrifice of a
sweet savor, well pleasing unto God. The Good was intended unto Paul, but the
service was directed unto God.

Thirdly, we are to note That some things are so essentially Good in
themselves, as that they cannot be done, but they must be well and spiritually
done; such are those things which take in God into their very performance, and
do intrinsecally and in the substance of the work respect him. Such are to
love, fear, believe, trust, depend upon God; which things, though in regard of
the unperfect manner of doing them they may have sin mi^gled with them,
because not done with all that strength as the Law requires, can yet never be
totally (...), and so unacceptable unto God. Other things may be Good
materially, and in common acception, because they are the things which God
commands to be done; but yet, because the doing of them does not necessarily
and (...) take in an aim and respect to God, but is only (...) unto him, and
that so as that the same thing may be done with other respects, therefore the
Goodness is not in the things themselves barely considered, but in the right
manner of performing them. Such were Iehu his zeal, the Pharisees praying, the
hypocrites fasting, and the like. In one word, somethings are so inherently
Good, that though they may be done imperfectly, yet they cannot be do^e
profanely; others so good with relation to God, that because they may be done
without that relation, and such other conformities as are required in them,
therefore they may cease at all to be good; as to preach out of envy, to pray
out of hypocrisy, to fast out of opinion of merit, etc.

Now as indifferent things may be made good by circumstances: as to eat or not
to eat is indifferent, yet not to eat for fear of scandal is charity, and
to eat, for fear of superstition, is Christian liberty. To observe things
indifferent as indifferent, without any conscience of the thing it self, only
in Eadem opera hominum, sicut causas habuerint bonas vel malas, nunc sunt bona,
nunc mala, que non sunt per se ipsa peccata, etc. Aug. contr mendacium ad
Consent. li. 2. c. 7.
due submission to the commands of just authority, is obedience; to observe
the same things without such authority, and that upon superstitious reasons,
directed to bind the conscience, and leading to the thing as such a thing, is
in regard of others great scandal, and in regard of a man's self bondage and
idolatry: Thus I say as indifferent things may be made good or bad by
circumstances: so other things, the matter of which is commanded, may yet be
made in the doing of them evil, when that due respect and conformity which
the Law wherein it is commanded requires is not observed. If a man build a
wall, with p^etence to keep out the Sea or an enemy, and yet leave a wide gap
and entrance open to admit them, though he who sees nothing but firm wall may
admire the work, yet he who viewes the whole will but deride it: so though a
man do very much, though he proceed so far as to offer up the children of
his body, and bestow mountains of cattle Mic. 6. 6, 7, 8.
upon God and his service; yet omitting righteousness, and justice, and
humiliation before God, though to men it may seem very specious, yet unto God
it is both abominable and ridiculous. As a piece of silver or gold may be
shaped into a vessel of dishonor, which shall be destined unto ^ordid and
unclean uses: so may a work be compounded of choice ingredients, the
materials of it may be the things which God himself requires, and yet serving
to base purposes, and directed to our own ends, it may stink in the nostrils
of God, and be by him rejected as a vessel in which there is no pleasure. A
cup of cold water to a prophet as a prophet shall be rewarded, when a
magnificent alms with a pharisees trumpet shall be rejected: As a small thing
which the righteous See Dr. Ushers Answer. cap. 11. page 466-472. Mr Boltons
Directions. page 149-154. Down^. Wa^s. part. ^. li. 1. ca. 7. (...). Clem.
Alex. strom l. 5. (...). Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 4. Vid. Aug. De natura and
great* cap. 57. and 69. De Gratia Christ. contr: Pelag. and (...). l. 1. ^. 13.
and 26. cont. 2. epist. (...). lib. 3. cap. 5.
has, so a small thing which the righteous gives, is better then great riches
of the ungodly.

Fourthly, we are to note what things are requisite unto the doing of a thing
so as that it may be an Act of obedience, and thereupon acceptable unto God.

First, then it must have a new principle, the Spirit of Christ, and the Law of
the Spirit of Life, and Faith purifying the Conscience from dead works.

Secondly, in regard of the manner, it must be done with the affection of a
child, not out of bondage, but in love, 2. Tim. 1. 7. In voluntary service and
resignation of all the members unto righteousness. Romans 6. 19. In universal
respect to all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. 128. In obedience to God the
Lawgiver, for he never obeyes the Law even when he does the works therein
contained, but when he does it with all submissiue and loyal affections
toward him that commands it. Iam. 2. 10, 11. this only is to live unto God,
and to bring forth fruit unto him.

Thirdly, it must be directed unto holy ends; and those are principally four,
to which others are to be subordinate, Aug. de morib. Man^ch. lib. 2. ca. 13.
and ep. 120.
but not repugnant. First, the glory of God, we must bring forth fruit, and
finish our works, and do all that we have to do with respect unto his glory,
Ioh. 15. 8. Ioh 17. 4. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Secondly, the Edification, Service,
comfort of the Church, that nothing redound to their offense, but to their
profit and salvation, 1. Cor. 10. 3^, 33. Col. 1. 24. 2. Tim. 2. 10. 2. Cor. 1.
6. Thirdly, the Credit, honor, and passage of the Gospel, that it may be
furthered, and not evil spoken of, 2. Cor. 6. 3, 4. 1. Cor. 9. 19. 23. Phil.
1. 12. Fourthly, a man's own salvation, that he be not after all his pains a
castaway, but that he may save himself. 1. Cor. 9. 27. 1. Tim. 4. 16. 1. Pet.
1. 9.

Fourthly, all the means unto that end must be regular and suitable, Evil must
not be done to bring good about, Romans 3. 8. and all the circumstances which
accompany the action must be right too. For as in the body there is not only
required beauty, but order and proportion; Let the face be of never so delicate
and choice complexion, yet if any part be mis-plac'd it will cause a notable
deformity and uncomelinesse to it: so in duties, an excellent work may be so
mis-plac'd, or mis-tim'd, or attended with such incongruous and unsuitable
circumstances, as that it may prove rather a snare of Satan, then a fruit of
the Spirit.

Lastly, to make it completely acceptable, It must pass through the Incense
and Intercession of Christ, who as he does by his Merits take away the Guilt of
sin from our persons; so by his Intercession he hides the pollution and
adherencie of sin that is in our services, and so gives us access, and
makes all our duties acceptable by him to God. Ephesians. 2. 18. 1. Pet. 2. 5. He
has made us Revel. 1. 6.
to be priests unto God, and our Prayers, and good works, as spiritual
sacrifices come up before God. But it is not sufficient that there be a Priest,
and an offering, except there be an Altar too upon which to offer it (for it is
the Altar which sanctifies the offering) Now Christ is the Altar Matthew. 23 19.
which sanctifies all our spiritual sacrifices, Their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine Altar, and they shall come up with acceptance on mine Altar,
Esai. 56. 7. 60. 7.

These things being thus premised, we conclude, first, A wicked man cannot do
those things at all which are so essentially and inherently good, as that the
very op^ operatum or doing of them is from the spirit of Christ, as to love
God, to trust him, and depend upon him: for as there are some things in nature
which cannot be counterfeited or resembled; the shape of a man may be
pictured, but the life cannot, nor the reason, nor any thing that does
immediately pertain to the Essence of man: so there are some things in grace
which cannot by hypocrisy be done neither in the thing it self, nor in the
manner of doing it, because sincerity, spiritualnesse, and filial respects
belong to the very substance and matter of the duty.

Secondly, other works, whose Goodness does not Vid. Aug. epi. 48. and cont.
Julian. Pelag. lib. 4. ca. 3. De Nupt. and Conc. lib. 1. ca. 3. Retract. li. 1.
c. 3.
cleave necessarily to the doing of them but to the manner of doing them,
wicked men may perform: but then they do them only ethically and in
conspectu hominum, with relation to men and manners: not spiritually as unto
God, nor in obedience or respect to him. For first the Spirit of Grace is
Christ's spirit, Romans 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6. and our flesh is quite contrary unto it,
Gal. 5. 17. and none have this spirit, but they who have fellowship with the
father and the son, and are united unto him, 1. Ioh. 4. 13. none of which
dignities belong to wicked men. Secondly, every thing that is spiritual is
vital, for the spirit quickneth; the spirit of Holiness never comes but with
a Resurrection, Romans 1. 4. To. 8. 10, 11. 2. Cor. 3. 6. and therefore he is
called the spirit of life, Romans 8. 2. but now as the persons of wicked men, so
their works are all dead, Heb. 9 14. and therefore not being done spiritually
and obedientially, impossible it is that they should in any sense please God,
Romans 8. 8. whose pure eyes can endure nothing which bears not, in some,
though most remote degree, proportion to his most holy nature, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
But it may be objected, does God use to do good to those that hate him, and
that even for the things which himself hates in them? does not that work
please him, which he is pleased to reward? and we find the works of wicked
men in the Scripture rewarded. Ahab humbled himself before 1. King. 21. 19.
God, and therefore God brought not the evil denounced upon him in his own
days. Iehu executed the 2. King. 10. 3^.
command of God upon the house of Ahab, and God established the throne of
Israel upon him for four generations. Nebuchadnezzar caused his army to serve
a Ezekiel. ^9. 18, 19, 20.
great service against Tyrus, and the land of Egypt was given him for wages,
and for the labor wherewith he served against it.

To this I answer, that this God does not to justify or allow wicked men's
actions, when they are in show conformable to his Will; but first to show that
his mercy is over all his works, when he is pleased to recompense the actions
which he might justly punish: Secondly, to show that God will never be
upbraided, for Esai. 58. 3. Mal. 3. 14, 15. Job 21. 14, 15. Ezekiel. 3^. 20.
being any way behind with men. Wicked men are apt to twit God with the
unprofitablenesse of his service, and the unequalnesse of his ways, to boast
that their work has been more then their wages; and therefore utterly to
stop their mouths, when he shall proceed in judgment with them, he gives
them such rewards as are most suitable to their own desires (the hypocrites
pray Matthew. 6. 2. 5.
and give alms to be seen of men, and that reward which they desired they
have) and such as are most suitable to their services: As they bring him
unclean services, so he rendereth unto them unsanctified rewards; as the give
him services full of hypocrisy which do not please him, so he gives them
benefits full of bitterness which shall not profit them. Thirdly, to preserve
humane Illud constat inter omnes veraciter pios neminem sine vera pietate, id
est, very Dei vero cultu, veram posse habere virtutem: nec eam veram esse
quando gloriae servit humanae: eos tum qui Cives non sunt civitatis aeternae --
Vtiliores esse terrenae civitati, quando habent virtutem vel ipsam, quam si nec
ipsam, etc. Aug. De Civ. Dei. li. 5. cap. 19.
society from violence and outrage, for when wicked courses are from Heaven
plagued, and moderate prospered, this keeps order and calmness upon the face
of mankind, which might otherwise be likely to degenerate into brutishness.
Fourthly, to entice and encourage wicked men unto sincere obedience; for thus
may they recount with themselves: If God thus reward my unclean, how
abundantly would he recompense my spiritual services? If he let fall such
crumbs unto dogs, how abundantly would he provide for me if I were his
Child? If the blessings of his left hand riches and glory be so excellent
even to the Goats, how precious would the blessings of his right hand, length
of days, and eternal happiness be if I were one of his sheep? So then it is
not Ex pretio operis, but only Ex largitate donantis; The reward is not out of
the value or price of the work, but out of the bounty of God, who will not
leave himself without a witness, but as a master for encouragement and
allurements sake will reward the industry of an ignorant scholar, though he
blot and deface all that he puts his hand unto; so God to overcome men by his
goodness and bounty, and to draw them to repentance, is pleased to reward the
works which he might justly punish.

But have not the wicked some measures and proportions of the Spirit given
them, by which they are enabled to do those works they do? Heb. 6. 4. 1. Cor.
12 6. 7. And is not that a good work which proceeds from the supplies of the
Spirit of God? To this we answer, First, as it is the influence of the same
Sun, which ripeneth both the Grape, and the Crabbe, and yet though the Grape
have sweetness from the Sun, the Crabbe still retains the sowrenesse which
it has from its self: so it is the same spirit which helps the faithful in
their holy, and the wicked in their moral works, which yet still retain the
quality and sowrnesse of the stock from whence they come. Secondly, we deny
them not to be good in Suo genere, that is, morally, and in the sight of men;
but yet they are not good in Gods sight, so as to procure acceptance with him;
for which purpose we must note, That God gives several proportions of his
Spirit, and for several purposes. To some the Spirit to sanctify and renew,
Romans 1. 4. Tit. 3. 5. To others the spirit to edify and profit withal, 1.
Cor. 12. 7. To some charity, and to others gifts, 1. Cor. 14. 1. To some as
Instruments, that they may walk profitably before men, as Cirus was anointed
for Jacobs sake, Esai. 45. 1, 4. To others as Sons and Members, that they may
walk acceptablie before him, 1. Pet. 2. 5.

But then comes the second Case proposed, if a wicked man can do nothing but
evil, then it seems he ought to leave undone all his Alms, Prayers,
Fastings, and Religions services, because we are to abstain from every thing
which is polluted with sin; and that which God will not see, man must not
do. To this I answer No, by no means. The poor man at the poole of
Bethesda, Ioh. 5. 7.
though utterly impotent and unable to crawle in when the Angel came to stir
the waters, did not yet neglect what lay in his power to wait at the place,
and to endeavor his own cure; Natural impotency can give no excuse to
wilful neglect. When Simon Magus was in the gall of bitterness, yet Saint
Peter directed him then Act. 8. 22, 23.
to pray. Here then these two Rules must regulate this Case. First, a wicked
man's necessity of sinning must not nullify the Law of God, which requires the
doing of those things, though not with such an unclean heart as he does them.
The impotency of man must not either prejudice Gods Authority, or diminish his
own duty. As, though where sin abounds Grace does more abound, yet a man
must not sin that grace may abound; so, though when a wicked man does the
things of the Law, he finneth, yet he must not omit the duty, upon pretense to
escape the sin. Secondly, when a thing is evil Propter fieri, because it is
done, the doing of that thing is unlawful, and inti insecally sinful, and
therefore to be avoided; but when a thing done is evil, not because it is
done, but because something which should make the doing of it good and
acceptable is omitted, and so it is evil not in the substance of thing, but by
reason of the defects which cleave unto it, here this ought stiil to be done,
but the other ought not to be left undone. Iehu was commanded 2. King 10. 30.
to destroy the house of Ahab, he did so, and thus far he did well; but his
ends and Gods divide the same Action, God out of Justice, he out of policy,
and therefore though he esteemed it zeal, yet God accounted it murder and
shedding of blood, and though as it was in substance the thing which God
commanded, he did reward it, yet as the execution thereof was otherwise then he
required, so he threatens to revenge it: I will avenge Hos. 1. 4.
the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. What then, is Iehu to commit
murder? God forbid: and yet is he to do that, in doing whereof he did commit
murder? yes, for God required it. So then he was to perform Gods Command, but
he was not thereby to work out his own projects, God commanded him to execute
his justice, but not his own revenge. When the Prophet Jeremy foretold the
captivity of the Jews, if he had preached judgment with such an affection as
Iehu did execute it, with aims at his own credit in the truth of his message,
with delight in the ruin and desolation of the Church, with expectation and
desire to see the lamentable accomplishment of his own preaching (as ^ona 4.
1, 5.
Jonah did at Ninive) though he had done that which God required, yet had he
greatly finned in corrupting his message with his own lust: but herein was the
faithfulness of that holy man seen, that though he did proclayme the woeful
day, yet he did not desire it, but said Amen to the words of those false
prophets, that Ier. 17. 16. 28. 6.
preached peace and restitution again. So then to conclude this Case, when an
Action has evil in its own substance, it is to be omitted, but when the
Action is of it self the matter of a precept, and so has evil only
externally cast upon it by the Agent that does it, here the Action is not to be
omitted, but the Agent is to be reformed.

But you will say, If I may not do evil that good may come of it, then I may
not do good when evil will come of it, upon the same reason, because evil is
altogether to be prevented and avoided. To this I answer, that the Argument
follows clean contrary, I may not do evil though good would come of it, I
must do good though evil should come of it. For when a command is absolute
and peremptory, we must not observe it with respect to consequences, nor foist
in conditions or relations of our own to overruled the duty, lest we make
our selves Lords of the Law. Now the Commandment for doing Good,
notwithstanding any consequences which may attend it, is as absolute and
peremptory, as the command for not doing evil, and therefore we must not
observe or forbear it with respect unto any consequences. For God will have us
to measure our duty by his command, which requires to abstain from evil, and
to do good, not by the Events that are incidentall and external to the duty
done. So then that which is good materially of it self is to be done though
evil follow, first, because God requires it, and his will must stand against
all consequences. Secondly, because the evil that comes along in the doing of
it is not any way belonging or naturally appendant upon the duty, but is
foisted into it by our wicked nature, and the wickedness of man must not
either annihilate the commands of God, or void and evacuate his own duty, or
lastly justify or privilege his presumptions. Thirdly, because so to do is
not to prevent evil, but to multiply it, not to escape sin, but to double it.
We must observe Gods way of breaking of sin, and not our own; It was never
known that one sin was the way to prevent or to cure another. Besides there
is less sinfulness in a defect which attends a duty done, then in a total
omission of it; for that comes in by way of consequence, the other is against
the very substance and whole body of the command; that proceeds from
natural and unavoidable impotency, this from a wilfulness which might have
been prevented.

Now since the wicked have such a total disabilitie, as that what ever they
do is altogether sinful, has not a dram of holiness in it, the
principles, the ends, the ways all Carnal; Here then we might observe the
foulness of those relics of Pelagianisme, in doctrine of the Papists, who
flatter and complie with nature against the grace of Christ, in their doctrines
of merit of congruitie and preparations for grace, the acceptablenesse of
heathen virtues in the sight of God, the infallible attendance of Grace upon
natural endeauours, as if things totally evil, and deserving wrath, could
prepare for Grace. But I rather choose to speak to the Conscience, It should
serve therefore to amaze natural men in the sight of this state of sin, and to
throw them down under Gods mighty hand, when they shall consider that their
best works are totally evil, that do what they will it is altogether
abominable in Gods sight. What a woeful thing is it for a man to be debtor to
the whole Law, one jot or title whereof shall not pass away, and to be
utterly unable to do any thing which bears proportion to the least title of
that Law, because the Law is all over spiritual, and he all over Carnal. It
would be an Insupportable burden to perish everlastingly for but one sin: how
infinitely more to be answerable for all those infinite trespasses, not one
whereof can be remitted without: all. This one point of the Disabilitie of
Nature to please God in any thing, if it were duly considered, would compel
men to go unto Christ, by whom they may have access, and for whom their
services shall have acceptance before God, till which time they are all but
dung* and God will throw them in the faces of men again: And the reason is,
till a man takes Christ by faith along with him, these sacrifices have no
golden Censer Amos 5. 21, 22.
to perfume them, no Altar to sanctify them, nothing but a man's own evil
heart to Consecrate them upon; which makes them to be our own, and not Gods
offerings. When the Prodigal came unto himself, and considered, I have
nothing, I can do nothing, all that I eat is dirt and filth, I am an
unprofitable creature in this state; these thoughts made him resolve to go
unto his father. When Saint Paul considered that what 1. Tim. 1. 13. Phil. 3.
6, 7, 8.
ever before his conversion he thought of himself, yet indeed all his zeal
was but blasphemy and persecution, all his morality but dung and dogs meat,
all his unblameablenesse and presumptions but loss unto him, then he began to
set an infinite value upon the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and to
suffer the loss of all, that he might be found in him. Sin must be very
sinful, that Grace may be very welcome.

Secondly, this Impotencie and Disabilitie is Partial, even in the most
Regenerate; so much flesh as they have in them, so much deadness and
unserviceablenesse still; and this may be seen in two points. First, there is
a great disabilitie in the best to work and go on with patience and comfort
in Gods service. How apt are we still to quench and grieve the Spirit? How does
every man's experience constrain him to cry out, In me dwells no good
thing, to will is present with me, but I cannot perform the things which I
would, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbeleefe? How do we faint and wax
weary of well-doing? How are we led captive to the law of sin which is in
our members, so that we cannot do Gal. 5. 17. 1. Cor. 2. 6.
the things which we would? for though the Scripture call the Saints perfect,
and testify of some that they served God with their whole heart, yet that is
only in opposition to Cord duplici, a double heart, denoting such an
integrity only as does not admit a purposed division of the heart between God
and sin. Therefore we meet still with exhortations to grow, and abound, and
with promises of bringing forth more fruit, and mention of proceeding from
faith to faith, and from glory to glory, and of supplies of the spirit, and
growing to the measure of the stature of Christ, and the like expressions, all
which denote the admixture of Impotencie in the best. And this Impotencie is so
great, that of themselves they can never do any thing, but return to their
wonted coldness and dullness again: for it is nor their having of Grace in
them barely which makes them strong, but their Communion and fellowship with
Christ's fullness, I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. The branch can bear no fruit, nor preserve or ripen that which it has,
but by its unity with the root; light continues not in the house but by its
dependence on the Sun, shut out that, all the light is presently gone. Take
water away from the fire and its nature will be presently stronger then the
heat it borrowed, and suddenly reduce it to its wonted coldness: So we can
do nothing but by the constant supplies of the Spirit of Christ; he that
begins must finish every good work in us, Phil. 1. 6. He that is the Author
must be the finisher of our faith too, Heb. 12. 2. Without him we cannot will
nor do any good, Phil. 2. 13. Without him, when we have done both, we cannot
continue, but shall faint in the way, His Spirit must lead us, Romans 8. 14.
Esai. 40. 11. His arm must heal and strengthen us, Hos. 11. 3. Ezekiel. 34. 16.
A^ we have received him, so we must walks in him, without him we cannot walk,
Col. 2. 6. God is the God of All Grace, to him it bolongeth not only to call,
but to perfect, not only to perfect, but to strengthen, stablish, settle us,
1. Pet. 5. 10.

Secondly, this Impotencie is seen in this, that the good things they do
cannot fully please God by themselves, but stand in need of further
purification from Christ, and pardon from God; Even when we are Children we
must be spared, and borne withal, Mal. 3. 17. Deuteronomy. 1. 31.

The use which we should make of this point is first to keep us Humble, in
regard of this thorn in our flesh, which disables us to do any good, and when
we have done our uttermost, yet still makes us unprofitable servants. Lay
together these considerations.

First, remember the long time that thou were utterly barren, and did live
nothing but a life of sin, how much of the flower of thine age has bin
dedicated unto Satan, and thine own lusts; how thy childhood and youth has
been all vanity; and why think we did God require the first fruits in the
Law, but to show that we were all his, and therefore that he ought to have the
first and best of our life devoted unto him, and submitted unto his yoke.

Secondly, consider even now when thou art at best that thou art not sufficient
of thy self to think a good thought, that in thee, that is in thy flesh, in
thee from thy self dwells no good thing, the original of all the good thou
do is without thee, By the Grace of God thou art what thou art, and all thy
sufficiency is in his Grace.

Thirdly, when this Grace does call, knock, quicken, put thee onto any good,
how averse and froward, how dull, indirigible, undocile is thy evil heart,
like a filly Lamb, never finds the way it self; and when it is led, is every
step ready to stop and to start aside.

Fourthly, when it prevails to set thee indeed a work, how exceedingly do
thou fail in the measure of thy duties? How little growth in strength? How
little improvement in spiritual knowledge or experience? How much weariness
and revolting of heart? How evil and unprofitable has thy life been in
comparison of those worthies whom thou should have followed, and in
proportion to those means of grace which thou have had?

Fifthly, in thy progress, How often have thou stumbled? How many notorious
and visible sins, even in great Characters, have oftentimes stained if not
thy profession by a public scandal, yet thy soul in private by a
consciousnesse unto them? And how think we did David's murder and adultery
pull down the pride of his heart when ever it offered to rise in any Heavenly
action?

Secondly, in this point it will be needful to give direction in a case of
daily occurrence, what a man should do when he finds his natural impotencie
dead him in Spiritual works? when he finds stupiditie, benumbdnesse of
spirit, and many defects, which he cannot overrule nor subdue in Gods service;
whether it were not better to for bear the very duty, then to grieve the
spirit with undue performances? To this I answer. First, omit not the duty
though thou art never so ill affected, for that is to give place to the Devil,
and to yield to the flesh, and the Devil is pleased either way; when by his
allurements he can persuade us to evil, and when by discomforts he can
discourage us from good. Besides by doing spiritual things a man grows more
spiritual, and gathers strength even in the action; as water which comes hard
at first flows very plentifully after it has been a little drawn. They that
begin in tears may end in joy: David began to pray with no comfort, much
sore vexation and weakness of spirit under the sense of Gods heavy
displeasure, and yet he ends with much faith, peace, and triumph. The Lord
has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer; Let all mine
enemies be ashamed, etc. Psalm. 6. 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10. Secondly, take Saint Paul's
advice to stir up the gift that is in thee, awaken and revive thine own
spirit, by communing and debating with thine own heart, by consulting with God
in his Word, diligent acquaintance and right knowledge of his Will, by
fruitful, and seasonable conference, borrowing light from thy brothers
candle, rebuking or rectifying thy self by his example, this is that which the
Scripture calls whetting the Law upon one another. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. By renewing thy
Covenant, coming afresh to the Fountain of Grace, which is in Christ: As iron
is quickened by the Loadstone, and the Earth moves swiftest when it is nearest
to its place; so the Soul approaching nearer to Christ, renewing repentance,
recounting errors, reviving covenants, dedicating it self afresh to his
service, must needs be much sharpened and encouraged anew. Thirdly, when thou
can not do a thing with life, yet do it with obedience; when not in
Comfort, yet with fear and trembling; when not as thou were wont, yet as thou
art able. God loves to be sought when he hides. Tell me, O thou whom my Soul
loves, where thou lodgest at noone? When Ezekiah could not pray he chatter'd
and peeped, and when thou art not able to speak thy desires, the Spirit can
form thy sighs into prayers? Lastly, when still thou art heavy and in
darkness, fly to thy Faith, take Jobs resolution, though he slay me with
discomforts, yet I will trust in him; angry though he may be, yet he cannot be
unfaithful; though he may like Joseph conceal his affection for a time, yet
impossible it is that he should shut up his compassions, and renounce the
protection of such as in truth depend upon him. Who is there amongst you that
fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in
darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God, Esaias, 50. 10. God will ever have us so much Conscious of our own
defects, and sensible of our own disabilities, as that we may still run to
the Sanctuary of our Faith, and rest on him, not glory or rely upon our selves.
And now if our Impotencie drive us to the grace of Christ, make us more v^e in
our own eyes, and cry out with the Apostle of our own wretchedness, there
may be as much life and obedience All over, as when this or that particular
duty was performed with more vigor; for that which was wanting in our strength
may be made up in our humility; and this is a sure rule, God is more praised
and delighted in those graces unto which humility does more essentially
belong, as Faith and Spiritual sense of our own disabilities, and the like,
then in any others. And thus as a small heap of gold may be equal in value to
a greater of silver; so though in other regards we should be many times weak,
yet if the sense of that make us more humble, and the less holdfast we have
of any thing in our selves, make us take the faster hold of the hope that is
set before us, we may be equally acceptable in the sight of God, who does not
Judge of us according to our sense of our selves, but has respect to the
lowliness of his Servants, and of their Graces.

The second thing I will but name (having largely insisted upon it from another
Text) and that is, that the estate of sin is an estate of enmity against God
and his ways: this is amongst other characters of wicked men by nature, that
they are (...), haters of God, Romans 1. 30. and Enemies of the cross of Christ,
by minding earthly things, Phil. 3. 18. 19. and this by nature is universal;
the Apostle uses three expressions for the same thing, when we were sinners,
when we were without strength, and when we were enemies, Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. to
note that Impotencie and E^itie is as wide as sin; and therefore else where
he says, that we were enemies by wicked works, Col 1. 21. And our Savior
makes it all one not to love him, and not to keep his sayings. Ioh. 14. 24.
and to refuse subjection unto him, and to be his enemy, Luke 19. 27. The very
minds of men, and their wisdom, their purest faculties, their noblest
operations, that wherein they retain most of the Image of God still, is yet
sensual, earthly, fleshly, divellish, enmity against him, Iam. 3. 15. Romans 8.
7. In a word, We are by Nature enemies to the Will of God by rejecting his
Word, Ier. 6. 10, 8, 9, 1, 19, 44, 16. 2. Chron. 36, 16. Zech. 7. 11. Matthew.
23. 37. Act. 13. 45. 46. Enemies to the Spirit of God, by withstanding his
Operations, Act. 7. 51. Gal. 5. 17. Act. 6. 9. 10. Enemies to the Notions of
God, by disliking and suppressing the thoughts and knowledge of him, Romans 1.
18, 21, 28. Romans 3. 11. Enemies to the righteousness of God, by setting up our
own works and merits, Rom, 9. 32. 1. Cor. 1. 23. Enemies to the ways of God,
by fulfilling our own lusts and wicked works, Col. 1. 21. Job. 21. 14, 15.
Enemies to the Servants of God, in persecutions and cruel workings, etc. Ioh.
15. 19. 2. Tim. 3. 3. Esai. 8. 18. Zech. 3. 8. Gal. 4. 29. Heb. 11. 36.

And how should the consideration of this fetch us in to the righteousness of
Christ, make us fall down and adore that mercy which spared and pitied us
when we were his enemies. Consider but two things; First, what an ungrateful
thing? Secondly, what a foolish thing it is to be Gods enemies, as every man is
that continues in sin without returning unto him? First, how ungrateful? He
is our Father, ( Adam the Son of God, Luke 3. 38.) and therefore there is due
unto him Honor: He is our Master, and therefore there is due unto him fear and
service: He is our Benefactor, He left not himself Mal. 1. 6. Act. 14. 17.
without a witness; All we are, All we enjoy, is from him: He is the Fountain
of our life; It is his mercy that we are Psalm. 36. 9. Act. 17. 25. 28. Lam. 3.
21. 1. Cor. 6. 20.
not consumed, his compassions fail not: Therefore there is due unto him Love
and Reverence: He is our Purchaser, He bought us out of bondage, when we had
sold away our selves; therefore there is due unto him Fealty and Homage, nay,
he humbled himself in Christ to be Heb. 2. 12. Ephesians. 5. 32.
our Brother, to be our Husband; He took our rags, our sores, our diseases,
and pains upon him, and therefore there is due unto him all Fidelity and
Obedience.

O what an aggravation will this be against the sins of men at the Last day!
that they have been committed against the Mercy and Patience, against the
Bounty and Purchase, nay, against the very Consanguinitie of God himself! He
died for us when we were Enemies, and we will continue Enemies against him that
died for us! And yet the folly is as great as the impiety. Consider what God
is? The Judge of all the World, All Eye to Genesis 18. 25.
see, All Ear to hear, All Hand to find out and punish the sins and
provocations that are done unto him! A Jealous God, and jealousy is most
impatient of disaffection! A consuming fire! and who amongst us can dwell with
Heb. 12. 2^. Esal. 33. 14.
devouring fire, who amongst us can dwell with everlasting burnings? Do we
provoke the Lord to Jealousy, are we stronger then he? Saint Paul has
resolved his own question before, as long as we are Enemies we are without
strength. And now for the Clay to contend with the Potter, for the Postheard to
smite the Rock, for impotencie to stand up against Omnipotency, what a
madness is it? Let us learn wisdom from our Saviors parable, Consider
whether we with our ten thousand Luke 14. 31.
are able to go out against him that meets us with twenty thousand? whether
we with our ten thousand flies and lusts are able to meet him with twenty
thousand Angels and Judgments? And when we are indeed convinced, that in his
presence no flesh living shall be justified; that it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the Living God; that our hands will not be strong, nor
our hearts endure in the day when he will have to do with us; How can we
choose but send forth an Embassage, especially since he is not a great way off
(as it is in the Parable) but stands before the door, and is nigh at hand,
and will not carry; an embassage of repentance, to give up our armor, to strip
and judge our selves, to meet him in the way of his judgments, to make our
selves vile before him, and be humbled under his mighty hand, and sue forth
conditions of peace, to meet him as the Gibeonites did Joshua, and resolve
rather to be his servants, then to stand out against him. This is certain, God
is coming against his Enemies, his attendants Angels, and his weapons fire:
And if his patience and forbearance make him yet keep a great way off, that
he may give us time to make our peace; O let the long suffering of God draw us
to Repentance, least we treasure up more wrath against our selves! Consider
the great aggravation of that spiritual Iezabels sin, I gave her space Revel
2. ^1. 2. Pet. 3. (...)
to repent of her fornications, and she repented not. Consider that the long
suffering of God is Salvation, and therefore let us make this use of it; Labor
to be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

The last thing in this first point proposed was, How the spirit by the
Commandment does thus convince men to be in the state of sin. To this I
answer briefly. First, by quickening and putting an edge upon the Isntrumental
cause, the sword of the Spirit. For the word of it self is a dead letter, and
profits nothing, it is the spirit that puts life and power into it. I am full
of power by the Romans ^. 2.
Spirit of the Lord to declare unto Jacob his transgressions, says the
Prophet, Mic. 3. 8. As the Spirit is a Spirit of life, so has he given to the
Word to be a Word of life, quick and powerful, Phil. 2. 16. Heb. 4. 12.
Secondly, by writing it in the heart, casting the heart into the mould of the
Word, and transforming the spirit of man into the image of the Word, and making
it as it were the Epistle 2. Cor. ^. ^. le^. 31 33. 31. ^0.
of Christ, bending and framing the heart to stand in awe of Gods Word; for
writing his Law, and putting his fear into the heart is the same thing with
God. In which respect (amongst others) men are said to be Sealed by Ephesians. 4. 30.
the Spirit, because that Spiritual Holiness which is in the Word, is
fashioned in the hearts of the Saints, as the image of the seal is in the
wax. As the light of the Sun does by reflection from the Moon illighten
that part of the earth, or from a glass that part of a room from which it
self is absent: So though the Church be here absent from the Lord, yet his
Spirit by the Word does illighten and govern it: It is not the Moon alone,
nor the glass alone, nor yet the Sun without the Moon or the glass that
illightneth those places upon which it self does not immediately shine, but
that as the principal, by them as the instruments; so the Spirit does not, and
the Word cannot alone by it self convince or convert, but the Spirit by the
Word as its sword and instrument. So then when the Spirit turns a man's eyes
inward to see the truth of the Word written in his own heart, makes him put
his Seal unto it, frames the will to search, acknowledge and judge the worst
of its self, to subscribe unto the righteousness of God in condemning sin,
and him for it, to take the office of the Word, and pass that sentence upon it
self which the Word does, then does the Word spiritually Convince of sin.

Which should teach us what to look for in the ministry of the word, namely
that which will Convince us, that which puts an edge upon the Word, and opens
the heart and makes it burn, namely the spirit of Christ* for by that only we
can be brought unto the righteousness of Christ, we are not to despise the
ordinances in our esteem, when we find them destitute of such humane
contributions and attemperations which we happily expected, as Naaman did the
waters of Jordan, for though there be excellent use of Humane learning* when
it is sanctified for opening the Word, as a baser color is a good ground for a
better; yet it is the Word alone which the Spirit works by* the flesh, and
fleshly accessions of themselves profit no more, nor add no more real virtue
or luster to the Word, then the weeds in a field do unto the Corn, or then
the ground color does unto the beauty of that which is put upon it. We should
therefore pray for the Spirit to come along with his Word; It is not enough to
be at Bethesda, this house of mercy and grace, unless the Angel stir, and
the Spirit move upon these waters; It is He that must incline and put the
heart into the Word, or else it will remain as impotent, as before. But of
this point also I have spoken at large upon another scripture.

Having then thus showed at large that the Spirit by the Commandment convinces
men to be in the state of sin both Actual and Original, imputed and inherent;
what kind of state that is, A state of Impotencie and Enmity; How it does it,
by quickening the Word, and opening the heart: Now we are very briefly to open
the second point, That the Spirit by the Commandment convinces a man to be
under the guilt of sin, or in the state of death because of sin. I died, for
which we must note, First, that there is a two fold Guilt, First Reatus
Concupiscentia, which is the meritoriousnesse of punishment, or liablenesse
unto punishment, which sin brings with it: and Reatus personae, which is the
actual Obligation, and obnoxiousnesse of a person unto punishment because of
sin. Now in as much as nature is not able to discover without the Spirit the
whole malignity and obliquity that is in sin, therefore it cannot
sufficiently convince of the Guilt of sin, which is a Resultancie therefrom,
and is ever proportionable thereunto. In which respect the Judgments of God
are said to be unsearchable, Romans 11* 33. And the wicked know not whither they
go, 1. Ioh. 2. 11. cannot have any full and proportionable notions of that
wrath to come which their sins carry them unto.

Secondly, we may note that there is a Twofold Conviction of this Guilt of
sin; A natural Conviction, such as was in Cain, Judas, Spira, and other
despairing men; which arises from two grounds. First, the Present sense of
Gods wrath in the first fruits thereof upon their consciences which must
perforce bear witness to Gods justice therein; and this is that which the
Apostle calls Torment, 1. Ioh. 4. 18. which though it may arise from natural
principles (for we know even heathens have had their Laniatus and Ictus as the
Historian speaks, their scourges and rendings of Conscience) yet is it much
set forward by the Word, because therein is made more apparent to the Soul the
Glory and the Revel. 11. 10. Romans 3 19. Deuteronomy. 5. 25. 2. Cor. 3. 7. 2. These. 2.
8. Esai. 11. 4. Hos. 6. 5. Esai. 33. 14. Heb. 2. 15. 10. 27 Genesis 3. 10. Romans 8.
15. 2. Tim. 1. 7.
Power of God; therefore the Two Prophets are said to Torment the inhabitants
of the Earth, and the Law is said to make men guilty, and to kill, to hew,
smite, and destroy those whom it deals with all. Secondly, such a faith as the
Devils have, begotten by the Word, and assented unto by the secret suggestions
of the heart, witnessing to it self that it has deserved more then yet it
feels; and this begets a fearful expectation of being devoured, surpriseth
the heart with horrid tremblings and presumptions of the vengeance to come,
which the Apostle calls the Spirit of bondage and fear. But all this being an
Assent perforce extorted (for wicked men confess their sins as the Devils
confessed Christ, more out of Matthew. 8. 29.
Torment, then out of Love to God, or humiliation under his mighty hand)
amounts to no more then a Natural Conviction.

Secondly* there is a Spiritual and Evangelicall Conviction of the Guilt of
sin and the damnation due thereunto, arising from the Law written in the
heart, and tempered with the apprehension of mercy in the new Covenant, which
begets such a pain under the Guilt of sin, as a plaster does to the
impostumation which withal it cures; such a Conviction as is a manuduction
unto righteousness: And that is, when the Conscience does not only perforce
feel it self dead, but has wrought in it by the Spirit the same affection
toward it self for sin, which the word has, is willing to charge it self,
Lam. 3. 40, 43. Mic. 7. 9. Psalm. 51. 4. Ezra. 9. 13, 15. Dan. 9 7, 8. 1. Cor.
11. 32. Amos 4. 12. Esa. 16. 8.
and acquit God; to endite, accuse, arraigne, testify, condemn it self,
meet the Lord in the way of his Judgments, and cast down it self under his
mighty hand. That man who can in secret and truth of heart, willingly, and
uncompulsorily thus stand on Gods side against sin, and against himself for
it, giving God the Glo^ie of his righteousness if he should condemn him, and
of his u^searchable and rich mercy, that he does offer to forgive him, I dare
pronounce that man to have the Spirit of Christ. For no man by nature can
willingly and uprightly Own damnation, and charge himself with it as his due
portion and most just inheritance. This can never arise but from a deep sense
and hate of sin, from a most ardent zeal for the Glory and Righteousness of
God.

Now then since the Conviction of sin, and of the death and Guilt thereof are
not to drive men to despair or blasphemy, but that they may believe and lay
hold on the righteousness of Christ, which they are then most likely to do,
when sin is made exceeding sinful, and by consequence death exceeding
deadly; give me leave to set forth in two words what this Guilt of sin is,
that the necessity of righteousness from Christ may appear the greater, and
his mercy therein be the more glorified.

Guilt is the Demerit of sin, binding and subjecting the person in whom it is
to undergo all the punishments legally due the reunto. This Demerit is founded
not only in the Constitution, Will, and Power of God over his own Creatures,
of whom he may justly require whatsoever obedience he gives power to
perform, but in the nature of his own Holiness and Justice, which in sin
is violated and turned from: and this Guilt is after a sort Infinite, because
it springs out of the aversion from an Infinite Good, the violation of an
infinite Holiness and Justice, and the Conversion to the Creatures infinitely,
if men could live ever to commit adultery with them. And as the Consequence and
reward of obedience was the favor of God, conferring life and blessedness to
the Creature, so the wages of sin, which this Ephe. 2. 3. Ioh. 3. 36. Gal. 3.
13.
Guilt assures a sinner of, is the wrath of God, which the Scripture calls
Death and the Curse.

This Guilt being an Obligation unto punishment, leads us to consider what
the nature of that curse and death is unto which it binds us over. Punishment
bearing necessary relation to a command, the trangression whereof is therein
recompensed, takes in these considerations. First, on the part of the
Commander, a will to which the Actions of the subject must conform, revealed
and signified under the nature of a Law. Secondly, a justice which will, and
thirdly, a power which can punish the transgressors of that Law. Secondly, on
the part of the subject commanded there is required, first, Reason and
free will originally, without which there can be no sin; for though man by
his brutishness and impotency which he does contract cannot make void the
commands of God, but that they now bind men who have put out their light, and
lost their liberty; yet originally God made no law to bind under pain of
sin, but that unto the obedience whereof he gave reason and free will
Secondly, a debt and obligation, either by voluntary subjection, as man to
man; or natural, as the creature to God, or both, sealed and acknowledged in
the covenants between God and man, whereby man is bound to fulfill that law
which it was originally enabled to observe. Thirdly, a forfeiture, guilt, and
demerit upon the violation of that Law. Thirdly and lastly, the evil it self
inflicted, wherein we consider, first, the nature and quality of it, which is
to have a destructive power, to oppress and dis quiet the offender, and to
violate the integrity of his well being. For as sin is a violation offered
by man to the Law, so punishment is a violation retorted from the Law to man.
Secondly, the Proportion of it to the offense, the greatness whereof is
manifested in the majesty of God offended, and those several relations of
goodness, patience, creation, redemption which he has to man: in the quality
of the creature offending, being the chief, and lord of all the rest below
him: in the easiness of the primitive obedience, in the unprofitablenesse of
the ways of sin, and a world of the like aggravations. Thirdly, the end of
it, which is not the destruction of the creature, whom as a creature God
loves, but the satisfaction of justice, the declaration of divine displeasure
against sin, and the manifestation of the glory of his power and terror. So
then Punishment is an evil or pressure of the Creature, proceeding from a Law
giver just and powerful, inflicted on a reasonable Creature for and
proportionable unto the breach of such a Law, unto the performance and
obedience whereof the Creature was originally enabled, wherein is intended the
glory of Gods just displeasure and great power against sin, which he
naturally hates. Now these punishments are Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal. Temporal, and those first without a man, The vanity of the
Creatures, which were at Romans 8. 20. Genesis 3^ 7. Ier. 12. 4.
first made full of goodness and beauty, but do now mourn and groan under
the bondage of our sins. The wrath of God revealing it self from heaven, and
the curse of God over-growing the earth. Secondly, within him, Illodie mori
cepernn^ quo Mortis Legem qua i^ seniu^ veterascerent ceperunt. Aug.
All the Harbingers and Forerunners of death, sickness, pain, poverty,
reproach, fear, and after all death it self. For though these things may be
where there is no guilt imputed, and so properly no punishment inflicted (
neither the blind man nor his parents had sinned, that he was borne blind) as
in the same ship there may be a malefactor and a Merchant, and to the one the
voyage is a traffic, to the other a banishment; yet to the wicked where they
are not sanctified, they are truly punishments, and fruits of Gods
vindicative justice, because they have their sting still in them. For the sting
of death is sin.

Secondly, Spiritual, and those threefold. First, Purishment Ephesians. 2. 17, 19 4.
18.
of loss; separation from the favor and fellowship with God, expulsion from
Paradise the seat of Gods presence and love, Aliens, forreiners, far from
God. Secondly, Of sense, the immediate strokes of Gods wrath on the soul,
wounds of Conscience, scourges of heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 65.
taste of vengeance, implanting in the soul tremblings, fears, amazements,
distracted thoughts, on a clear view of the demerit of sin, evidences of
immortality, and presumptions of irreconciliation with God. This made Cain a
runnagate, and Judas a murderer of himself, yea some touches of it made David
cry out that his bones were broken, and marrow dried up, and his flesh
scortched like a potsheard; It is able to shake the strongest Cedars, and make
the mountains tremble like a leaf. The son of God himself did sweat, and
shrink, and pray against it, and with strong cries decline it, though the
suffering of so much of it, as could consist with the holiness of his person,
were the work of his office and voluntary mercy. Thirdly, of sin, when God
in anger does forsake the soul, and give it over to the Romans 1. 24. 26. Hos. 4
3. Matthew. 13. 13, 14 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
frenzy and fury of lust, to the rage and revenge of Satan, letting men alone
to join themselves unto idols, and to believe lies. Now as the operation of
the sun is strongest there where it is not at all seen, in the bowels of the
earth, or as lightning does often blast and consume the Peccatum quod i^ultum
videtur habet poenam p^dissequam, ut nemo de ad^isso nisi amaritudine doleat,
aut caecitate non doleat. Aug.
inward parts, when there is no sensible operation without: so the Judgments
of God do often lie heaviest there, where they are least perceived. Hardness
of heart, a spirit of slumber, blindness of mind, a reprobate sense,
tradition unto Satan, giving over unto vile affections, recompencing the errors
of men with following sins, are most fearful and desperate judgments.

But do we then make God the Author of sin? God for bid. In sin we may
consider the execution and committing of it as it is sin, and this is only
from man, for every man is drawn away and enticed by his own lust: and the
Ordination of it as it is a Punishment; and this may be from God, whose hand in
the just punishment of sin by sin in obstinate, contemptuous, impenitent
sinners may thus far be observed.

First, Deserendo, by forsaking them, that is, taking Job. 12. 20. Esaias 29. 13.
14. Revel. 2. 5. Ezekiel. 3 26. Amos 5. 13. Math. 13. 12. 13. Romans 11. 8.
away his abused gifts, subtracting his despised Graces; calling in and making
to retire his quenched and grieved spirit, removing his candlestick, and
silencing his Prophets, and giving a bill of divorce that either they may not
see, nor hear at all, or hearing they may not understand, and seeing they may
not perceive, because they did not see nor hear when they might.

Secondly, Permittendo, when he has taken away his Act. 14. 16. Act. 17. 30.
Romans 1. 28.
own Grace which was abused unto wantonness, he suffers wicked men to walk in
their own ways, and because they like not to retain him in their knowledge,
nor to live by his prescript, therefore he leaves them to themselves, and their
own will.

Thirdly, Media disponendo, ordering objects, and proposing means, not only
to Try but to punish the wickedness Act. 4. 27, 28. Genesis 50. 20. Deuteronomy. 2. 30.
1. Sam. 2. 15. 1. King 12. 25. Esai. 19. 14.
of men, and to bring about whatever other fixed purposes of his he has
resolved for the declaration of his wonderful wisdom to execute, and as it
were to fetch out of the sins of men; as the conspiracy of Pilat, Herod, and
the Jews, which their former wickedness had justly deserved to have them
given over unto, was by God ordered to accomplish his determined and
unchangeable counsel touching the death of Christ. Excellent is the speech of
Holy Austin to this purpose, The Deus inclinat voluntates quecunque voluerit,
^ve ad bona pro misericordia, sive ad mala pro meritis, Iudicio utique suo,
aliquando aperto, aliquando occulio, semper Iusto. Cont. Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3.
Non per patientiam tantum, sed per potentiam. Ioh. 13. 2. Luke 22. 6. Math. 26.
25.
Lord enclineth the wills of men whither soever pleases himself, whether unto
Good out of his mercy, or unto evil out of their merit, sometimes by his
manifest, sometimes secret, but always by his righteous judgment, and this
not by his patience only, but by his power.

Fourthly, Perversas voluntates, non invitas flectendo, sed spontaneas and suo
impetu faciles ulterius Satanae praecipitandas tradendo. By giving over
perverse, wilful, rebellious sinners to the rage and will of Satan to hurry
and enrage them at his pleasure unto further sinfulness. When Judas had
listued to the Temptation of Satan to betray Christ, had set himself to watch
the most private opportunity, had been warned of it by Christ, and that upon a
question of the most bold and impudent hypocrisy that was ever made, Master,
Is it I? (though it is not an improbable conjecture that Judas at that very
time upon the curse that was pronounced might secretly and for that time
seriously resolve to give over his plot, and upon that resolution to ask the
question) then at last, Christ by a sop did give Satan as it were a further
Ioh. 13. 27. 28.
seisin of him, and the purpose of Christ was that that which he was to do,
he might do quickly. He was now wholly given up to the will of Satan, whose
temptation happily before, though very welcome in regard of the purchase and
project of gain which was in it, had not fully silenced nor broken through all
those reluctancies of Conscience, which were very likely to arise upon the
first presentment of so hideous a suggestion; but now I say whether out of a
sinister Construction of our Saviors words, That thou do do quickly, as if
they had been, not as indeed they were, a giving him over to the greediness of
his own lust, and to the rage of Satan, but rather an allowance of his
intention, as knowing that he was able to deliver himself out of their hands
unto whom he should be betraide, and so his treason should only make way to
Christ's miracle and not to his cross; or whether it were out of a secret
presumption, that, notwithstanding Christ had made him know how his conspiracy
was not hid from him, yet since he was of all the company singled out whom
Christ would Carve unto; therefore his conspiracy was not so vile, but that
Christ would red^re in gratiam, countenance and respect him after all that, and
that as by the plot he had not so lost him, but that he had gained him
again, so also he might do after the execution too. Now I say after that
soppe, and those words, without further respect to the strugglings and
staggerings of his Conscience, he goes resolvedly about that damned business,
for he was now delivered unto the will of Satan. The like liberty and
commission was that which God gave to the evil spirit against Ahab and his
Prophets, that he should go 1. King. 22. 22.
forth with lying persuasions, and should be believed, and prevail according
to that of the Apostle, that God 2. These. 2. 11. 12.
gives over those that believe not the Truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, to strong delusions that they may believe a lie, and that the
God of this world does blind 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the eyes of those which believe not.

Lastly, the Punishment of sin is Eternal, That wrath which in the day of
the Revelation of Gods righteous Judgment shall be powered forth upon ungodly
men. 1. Cor. 1. 30. 1. Pet. 1. 18. Esai 35. 10. Ioh. 3. 36. 1. Cor. 1. 18. Ephesians.
4. 30. Romans 8 23. Col. 3. 3, 4. 1. Ioh. 3 2. Romans 1. 18.
The Saints are redeemed already in this life, and are said to have Eternal
Life; but yet that great day is by an excellency called the day of Redemption,
because then that life which is here hid, shall be then fully discovered. So on
the other side, though the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven already against
all unrighteonsnesse, and Abides upon those that believe not, yet after an
especial manner is the last day called a day of wrath, because then the
heaps, treasures, storms and tempests, blackenesse and darkness of Gods
displeasure shall in full force seize upon ungodly men.

And this wrath of God is of all other most unsupportable. First, In regard of
the Author, It comes from God; Now we know a little stone if it fall from a
high place, or a small dart shot out of a strong bow will do more hurt, then a
far greater that is but gently laid on. How wefull then must the case of
those be who shall have mountains and milstones thrown with Gods own arm
from Heaven upon them: for though God in this life suffer himself to be
wrestled with, and even pressed down, yet at last he shall come to show forth
the glory of his Power in the just condemnation of wicked men.

Secondly, in its own nature, because it is most heavy, and invincible. All
conquest over an evil must proceed either from Power, which is able to expel
it, or from Faith and Hope that a man shall be delivered from it by those that
have more power then himself; what ever evil it is which does either keep
down Nature that it connot rise, or hedge it in that it cannot escape, is very
intolerable. Now Gods wrath has both these in it. First, it is so great that
it exceedes all the power of the Creature to overcome it, heavier then
mountains, hotter then fire, no chafe nor stubble shall stand before it: and
it shall be All within a man, folded up in his very substance, like the worm
in the wood on which it feeds: And secondly as it is heavy and so excludes
the strength of nature to overcome it, so is it infinite too, and thus it
excludes the hope of nature to escape it. The ground of which infiniteness in
punishment is the infinite disproportion between the Justice of God which will
punish, and the nature of man which must suffer. Gods Justice being Infinite,
the violation thereof in sin must needs contract an infinite demerit, and
debt (because in sinning we rob God of his Glory, which we must repay him
again.) Now the satisfaction of an Infinite debt must needs be Infinite,
either in degrees (which is impossible, For, first nothing can be Infinite in
Being, though it may in duration, but only God. And, secondly if it could, yet
a finite vessel were not able to hold an infinite wrath) or else in some other
infiniteness, which is either infiniteness of worth in the person satisfying,
or for defect of that infiniteness of time, to suffer that whith cannot be
suffered in an infinite measure: And this is the reason why Christ did not
suffer infinitely in time, because there was in him a more excellent
i^finitenesse of person, which raised a finite suffering into the value of an
infinite satisfaction (though ^.
Scotus and from him some learned men have rendered another reason hereof,
because he suffered only for those who were to break off their sins by
Repentance.

Now then to conclude all; In as much as sin is by the Law made exceeding
sinful, and death exceeding deadly, not to legal but evangelicall purposes;
not to drive men to blaspheme or despair, but to believe; not to frighten them
from God, but to drive them unto him in his Son; (for the Law comes not but
in the hand of a mediator*) And in as much as this is the accepted time, and
the day of Salvation, that now he commands All Men every where to repent,
because he has appointed a Day, in the which he will Judge the World in
righteousness, whom he does now invite, and beseech in mercy: We should
therefore be wise for our selves, and being thus pursued and cast in the Court
of Law, fly to that Heavenly Chancery, that Office of Mercy and mi^gation
which is set up in the Gospel, and that while it is yet called to Day, before
the Percullis be shut down, before the black flagge be hung out, before the
Talent of Lead seal up the measure of our wickedness, and the Irreversible
decree of wrath be gone forth; for we must know that God will not always be
despised, nor suffer his Gospel to wait ever upon obdurate ^ners, or his
Son to stand ever at our doors, as if he stood in need of our admittance. But
when there is no remedy, but that we judge our selves unworthy of Eternal
Life, and stand in contempt and rebellion against his Court of Mercy, he will
dismiss us to the Law again. O Consider, what will thou do if thou should
be dragged naked to the Tribunal of Christ, and not be able with all thy
cries to obtain so much mercy from any Mountain, as to live for ever under
the weight and pressure of it! When thou shall peep out of thy Grave, and see
Heaven and Earth on fire about thine ears, and Christ coming in the flames of
that fire to revenge on thee the quarrel of his Covenant! Whither then will thou fly from the presence of him that sits on the Throne? Let us therefore
learn to Judge our selves that we may not be condemned of the Lord, to fly to
his Sanctuary, before we be haled to his tribunal; He requires no great
thing of us, but only to relinquish our selves, and in humility and sincerity
to accept of him and receive that redemption by believing in him, which he
has wrought by suffering for us; this if in truth and spirit we do, all the
rest will undoubtedly follow, namely the life of our Faith here, in an
universal obedience, and the end of our faith hereafter, even the falvation of
our Souls.

THE REIGN OF SIN.
ROMANS 6. 12. Let not sin therefore Reign in your mortal bodi^s, that you
should obey it in the lusts thereof.
AFter the doctrine of the state and guilt of sin, It will be needful for
the further Conviction thereof (that sin may appear exceeding sinful) to
show in the next place the Power and the Reign of sin; from which the
Apostle in this place dehorteth us.

Having in the former Chapter set forth the doctrine of Justification, with
those many comfortable fruits and effects that flow from it, he here passes
over to another head of Christian Doctrine, namely Sanctification, and
Conformity to the holiness of Christ, the ground whereof he makes to be our
Fellowship with him in his death and Resurrection: for Christ carried our
sins upon the Tree with him, and therefore we ought with him to die daily
unto sin, and to live unto God. This is the whole argument of the precedent
parts of the Chapter, and frequently elsewhere used by the Apostle, and others,
2. Cor. 5. 14, 15. Gal. 2. 20. 3. 27. 5. 24. Ephesians. 2. 6. Phil. 3. 10. Col. 2.
12. 13. 26. 3. 1. 4. Heb. 9. 14 1. Pet. 4. 1. 2. Now the words of the Text are
as I conceive a Prolepsis, or answer to a tacit objection which might be made.
A weak Christian might thus allege, If our fellowship in the death of Christ
do bring along with it a death of sin in us, then surely I have little to
do with his death; For alas sin is still alive in me, and daily brings
forth the works of life. To this the Apostle answers, Though sin dwell in
you, yet let it not reign in you, nor have its wonted hold and power over you.
Aliud est non habere peccatu^, aliud no^ obedire desiderijs ^ius: Aliud est,
Implerequod praec^ptum est, non concupis^es, aliud est per quendam abstinentiae
^natum salte^ id agere quod item scriptum est, post concupiscentias tuas non
eas, etc: Aug* de natura and gra. cap. 62. Non sic manet peccatum ut eius non
sit ^acta remissio, sed manet in vet ^state carnis tanquam superatum and
peremptum, si non illicitis consensionibus, quodammmodo reviv^scat. Id. depec.
mer. and Remiss. l. 2. c. 28.
Impossible it is while you carry about these tabernacles of flesh, these
mortal bodies, that sin should not lodge within you, yet your care must be
to give the kingdom unto Christ, to let him have the honor in you which his
father has given him in the Church, to Rule in the midst of his enemies, those
fleshly lusts which fight against him. By Mortale corpus dicens totu^ hominem
significat. Ambrose in loc.
Mortal body, we here understand the whole man in this present estate,
wherein he is obnoxious to death, which is an usual figure to take the part
for the whole, especially since the body is a weapon and instrument to reduce
into act, and to execute the will of sin.

Before I speak of the power of sin, here are Two points offer themselves
from the connection of the words to those preceding, which I will but only name.

First, Sin will abide for the time of this mortal life in the most
regenerate, who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am free from my sin?
David had his secret sins, which made him pray; and Paul his thorn in his
flesh, which made him cry out against it. To the reasons of this point before
produced we may add, that God suffers our sins to dwell in us, first to
magnify the glory of his mercy, that notwithstanding he be provoked every day,
yet he does still spare us. It is said in one place, that when God saw that
every Imagination of the Genesis 6. 5, 6.
thoughts of man's heart was continually evil, he said, I will destroy man whom
I have created from off the face of the earth; yet afterward God said, I will
not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for the imagination Genesis 8.
^1.
of man's heart is evil from his youth. The places seem at first view to be
contradictory to one another. But we are thus to reconcile them, After there
had been a propitiatory offering made by Noah unto God upon an Altar, which was
the type of Christ, it is said that God smelt a sweet savor, and resolved, I
will no more curse the earth, not Because, but Although the imagination of man's
heart be evil from his youth; that is, though men are so wicked that if I
would Iure meo uti, take advantage to power out again my displeasure upon
them, I might do it every day, yet I will spare them notwithstanding their
lusts continue in them. For we are not to understand the place as if it tended
to the extenuation of original sin (as Carthusian. Cornel. a lapide.
Pighius. Greg. de val. To. 2. Disp 6. qu. 12. punct. 1. sect. 6.
some do) I will take pity upon them, Because of their natural infirmities;
but only as tending to the magnifying of Gods mercy and patience, I will take
pity upon them, Tarnou. Exerc. biblic. Ios. 17. 18.
though I might destroy them. For so the original word is elsewhere taken.
Thou shall drive out the Cananites, Though they have iron chariots, etc.

Secondly, to magnify the Glory of his powerful patience, that being daily
provoked yet he has power to be patient still. In ordinary esteem when an
enemy is daily irritated, and yet comes not to revenge his quarrel, we
account it impotency and unprovision, but in God his patience is his power.
When the people of Israel murmured upon the report of giants in the land, and
would have made a Captain to return into Egypt, and have stoned Joshua and
Caleb, so that Gods wrath was ready to break out upon them, and to disinherite
them, this was the argument that Moses used to mediate for them, Let the Power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, ^ Numb. 14. 17. 18. 19.
The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy. Thou have showed the Power of
thy mercy from Egypt until now, even so pardon them still. If we could
conceive God to have his own justice joined with the impotency and impatiency
of man, we could not conceive how the world should all this while have
subsisted in the midst of such mighty provocations. This is the only reason why
he does not execute the fierceness of his wrath, and consume men, because he
is God and not man, not subject to Hos. 11. 9. Mal. 3. 6.
the same passions, changes, impotencies as men are. If a house be very weak
and ruinous, and clogged with a sore weight of heavy materials which press it
down too, there must be strength in the props that do hold it up; Heb. 12. 1.
An^os 2. 13.
even so that patience of God which upholds these ruinous tabernacles of ours,
that are pressed down with such a weight of sin, a weight that lies heavy
even upon Gods mercy it self, must needs have much strength and power in it.

The second point from the Connection is, That our Death with Christ unto sin
is a strong argument against the reign and power of sin in us. Else we make
the death of Christ in vain, for in his death he came with water and blood,
not only with blood to justify our 1. Ioh. 5. 6.
persons, but with water to wash away our sins.

The Reasons hereof are, first, Deadness argues disability to any such works
as did pertain to that life unto which a man is dead. Such then as is the
measure of our death to sin, such is our disability to fulfill the lusts of
it. Now though sin be not quite expired, yet it is with Christ nailed upon a
cross, They that are Christ's have Gal. 5. 24.
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts: so that in a regenerate man
it is no more able to do all its own will, then a crucified man is to walk
up and down, and to do those businesses which he was wont to delight in. He
that 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
is borne of God sins not neither can sin, because he is borne of God, and
his seed abides in him.

Secondly, Deadness argues disaffection. A condemned man cares not for the
things of this World, because he is in Law dead, and so reserved to an
execution, and utterly divested of any right in the things he was wont to
delight in: the sight or remembrance of them does but afflict him the more. A
divorced man cares not for the things of his wife, because in law she is dead
unto him, and he unto her. So should it be with us and sin, because we are
dead with Christ, therefore we should show it no affection.

Thirdly, Deadness argues liberty, unsubjection, justification, Romans 6. 7. 7.
1, 4.
He that is dead is freed from sin, as the woman is from the husband after
death. And therefore being freed thus from sin we should not bring our selves
into Gal. 5. 1.
bondage again, but stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has set us
free, and sin should appear in Ephesians. 2. 1. Heb. 9. 14.
our eyes, as it is in it self a dead thing, full of noisomenesse, horror,
and hideous qualities.

We therefore should labor to show forth the power of the death of Christ in
our dying to sin; for this is certain we have no benefit by his sufferings,
except we Phil. 3. 10.
have fellowship in them, and we have no more fellowship in them, then we can
give proof of by our dying daily to sin; For his blood cleanses from all
sin. Let us not 1. Ioh 1. 7.
by reigning sin Crucify Christ again, for he dies no more: In that he
died, he died once unto sin; Death Heb. 6. 6.
has no more power ov^r him, to show that sin must Romans 6. 9, 10. Romans 7. 4.
2. Cor. 5. 15.
have no more power over us, but that being once dead to sin, we should
thenceforth live unto him that died for us. There is a speech in Tertullian,
which though proceeding from Novatianisme in him, does yet in a moderated and
qualified sense carry the strength of the Apostles argument in it, Si possit
fornicatio and moechia denno Tertul. de pudicit. cap. 17.
admitti, poterit and Christus denno mori, If fornication and adultery may be
again committed by a man dead to sin in that raging and complete manner as
before, if reigning sin after it has been ejected out of the Throne, and
nailed to a Cross, can return to its total and absolute soveraigntie as
before, Christ may dye again, for the sins of a Justified and regenerate man
are Crucified upon his Cross, and in his body.

Now I proceed to the maine thing in the Text, namely the Regal power of
sin. It is an observation of Chrysostom and Theodoret on the Text, which
though by some rejected as too nice, I shall yet make bold to commend Non dicit
ne Tyrannidem exerceat, sed ne regnet. Illud enim est illius proprium, hoc vero
nostrae mentis. Theodoret. Romans 7. 20. (...). Chrysostom.
for very pertinent and rational. The Apostle did not say (say they) Let not
sin Tyrannize, for that is sius own work and not ours, as the Apostle
says, Now then is it no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me,
all the service which is done to a tyrant is out of violence, and not out of
obedience: But he says, Let it not reign in you, for to the reign of a King
the obedience of the Subjects does as it were Actively concur (whereas the
subjects are rather patients then agents in a tyranny.) So then in a Reigning
King there is a more Sovereign power then in a Tyrant; for a Tyrant has only
a Coactive power over the persons, but a King has a sweet power over the
wills and affections of his Subjects, they freely and heartily love his person,
and rejoice in his service; which rule though it be not perpetual in the
letter and in civil governements; (for the unwillingnesse of a people to serve
a Prince may not only arise from his tyranny, but even when he is just and
moderate, from their own rebellion) yet it is most general and certain in
the state of sin which is never a King over rebellious subjects, who of
themselves reject its yoke and government.

For the better discovery then of the power of sin we must note first that
there are but three ways after which sin may be in a man. First, as an
usurping Tyrant, and seditious commotioner, either by surprizall invading, or
by violence holding under, or by projects circumventing a man against his will,
taking advantage of some present distemper of mind, or difficulty of estate;
as in David of idleness, in Peter of tear and danger, or the like. And thus
sin does often incroach upon the Saints of God, and play the Tyrant, use them
like Captives that are sold under the power of sin. It was thus a Tyrant in
Saint Paul; we read of him that he was sold under sin, and we read of
Ahab, that he was sold to (...). 7. 14. ^5. 1. King 21. 10.
sin; but with great difference, the one sold himself, and so became
willingly the servant of sin, the other was sold by Alam, from which bondage
he could not Adam ve^didit (...), ac per hoc omne sem^ subjectum est peccato.
Ambros. in Romans 7. Romans 8. 20. Ven^ndatus in (...) transgressione Aug* con. 2.
Ep. Pel. l. 1. c. 10. Ios. 9. 23. Ios. 17. 13. Luke 1^. 22. Romans 6. 6. Col 3. 5.
utterly extricate himself, though he were in bondage to sin, as the
Creatures are to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of his act that had
subjected him long before. Secondly, As a st^ve, a Gibeonite* or Tributarie
Cananite, as a spoiled, mortified, crucified, dying, decaying sin, like the
house of Saul growing weaker and weaker; and thus sin is constantly in all
the faithful; while they are i^ the field the chaste is about them. Thirdly,
As a raging and commanding King, having a throne the heart, servants the
members, a counsel the world, flesh and Devil, a complete armorie of lusts
and temptations, fortifications of ignorance, malice, rebellion, fleshly
reasonings, laws and edicts, lastly a strict judicature, a wise and powerful
rule over men, which the Scriptures call the gates of Hell. And of the Power of
Matthew. 16. 18.
this King we are to speak.

In a King there is a Two fold Power. A Power to command, and a Power to make
his commands be obeyed. Sin properly has no power to command, because the
kingdom of it is no way subordinated to Gods Kingdom over us, but stands up
against it. And even in just and anointed kings there is no power to command
any thing contrary to that Kingdom of Christ to which they are equally with
other subject. But though sin have not a just power to command the soul, yet
it has that upon which that power, where it is, is grounded, namely a kind of
Title and right over the soul.

Sin is a spiritual Death, and man by his first fall did incur a
subjection to every thing which may be called Death, so that then a man did
pass into the possession of sin; whence that phrase spoken of before, Thou
have Esai. 28. 15.
sold thy self to work evil. Now Quod venditur transit in potestatem
ementis, when a thing is sold it passes into the possession of that to which
it is sold. This is the covenant or bargain between a Sinner and Hell, Man
purchases the pleasures and wages of sin, and sin takes the possession of
man; possession of his nature in Original sin, and possession of his life in
Actual sin.

The trial of this title of sin, that we may discern whether we are under
it or no, must be as other Titles are; we must first inquire who they are, unto
whose right and possession a man may belong, and then examine the Evidences
which either can make for himself. To sin we know does appertain the
primitive right of every 1. Cor 6. 20. 1. Pet 1. 18, 19.
natural and lapsed man (for we are by nature the Children of wrath.) A
purchase then there must come between, before a man can pass over into
another right; this purchase was made by Christ, who bought us with his blood:
And the treaty in this purchase was not between Christ and sin, but between
him and his Father; Thine Ioh. 17. 6.
they were and thou gave them me, for the fall of Man could not nullify Gods
Dominion nor right unto him* for when man ceased to be Gods Servant, he then
began to be his Prisoner; and though Sin and Satan we^ in regard of man
Lords, yet they were in regard of God, but Iaylors, to keep or part from his
Prisoners at his pleasure. Besides though Christ got man by purchase yet Sin
and Satan lost him by forfeiture; for the prince of this world seizing upon
Christ in whom he had Ioh. 14. 30. (...) ti (...) ^at qui (...) nigat. Luc.
^o right, ( for he found nothing of his own in him) did by that means
forteite his former right which he had in men of the same nature. We see
then, all the claim that can be made is either by Christ, or Sin; by that
strong man, or him that is stronger; A man must have evidences for Christ, or
else he belongs unto the power of Sin. The evidences of Christ are his Name,
his Seal, and his Witnesses. His Name, a new Name, a name better Revel. 2. 17.
Esai. 56 5. Gal. 4. 19.
then of sons and daughters, even Christ formed in the heart, and his Law
engraven in the inner man. As it is fabled of Ignatius, that there was found
the Name of Jesus written in his heart; so must every one of Gods House be
named by him with this new name, Of Him Ephesians. 3. 15.
are all the Families in Heaven and in Earth named. The Seal of Christ is his
Spirit, witnessing unto and securing Ephesians. 1. 14. 4. 30. Romans 8. 16.
our spirits that we belong unto him: For he that has not the Spirit of
Christ the same is none of his, and by this 1. Ioh. 3. 24.
we know that he dwells in us, and we in him, because he has given us of
his Spirit. The witnesses of Christ are 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
three, The Spirit, the Water, and Blood. The Testimony of Adoption, Sealing
the Fatherly care of God to our 1. Ioh 5. 8.
Souls, saying to our Souls that he is our Salvation and Inheritance. The
Testimony of Justification, our Faith in the blood and price of Christ, and
the Testimony of Sanctification in our being cleansed from dead works, for he
came to destroy the works of the Devil, he came 1. Ioh. 3. 8. Mal. 3. 2, 3.
Mal. 4. 2. 2. Cor. 2. 14. Ephesians. 2. 17. 1. Pet. 3. 19. Tit. 2. 14. 1. Cor. 1.
30.
with Refiners fire and with Fullers soap, and with healing under his wings,
that is (as I conceive) under the preaching of his Gospel, which, as the
beams of the Sun, make manifest the savor of Him in every place, and by
which he comes and goes abroad to those that are a far off, and to those
that are near. It was the Office of Christ as well to Purify as to Redeem,
as well to Sanctify as to Justify us; so that if a man say he belongs to
Christ, and yet brings not forth fruit unto God, but lives still married to
his former lusts and is not cleansed from his filthiness, he makes God a
liar, because he believes 1. Ioh. 5. 10.
not the Record which he gives of his Son; (for He will not have either a
barren or an adulterous spouse) Esai. 54. 1. Romans 7. 4^. Ephesians. 5. 27. Heb. 6.
6. Luke 2. 32. Ioh. 1. 9. Numb. 24. 17. Mal. 4. 2. Non sumus certi Testimonium
illud non esse a Diabolo. Cornel. a Lapide in Romans 8. 16.
yea he puts Christ to shame, as if he had undertaken more then he were able
to perform: Besides, Christ being a Light, a Star, a Sun, never comes to
the heart without selfe-manifestation, such evidence as cannot be gainesaid;
unto him belongs this royal prerogative to be himself the witness to his
own Grace. And when the Papists demand of us How we can be sure that this
Testimnoy of Christ's Grace and Spirit is not a false witness and delusion of
Satan; we demand of them again, If the flesh can have this advantage to
make such Objections against the unvalueable Comforts of Christ's Grace, and the
heart have nothing to reply; If Christ witness, and no man can understand it;
If the Spirit of Christ be a Comforter, and the Devil can comfort every jot as
well, and counterfeit his comforts to the quick, and so cozen and delude a
man; what is any man the better for any such assertions of Scripture, where the
Spirit is called the Spirit of Comfort, the strengthner Ioh. 14. 26. Ephesians. 3.
16. Heb. 13. 9.
of the inner man, and the heart said to be established by Grace? Certainly
the Comforts of the Spirit must fall to the ground, if they bring not along a
proper and distinct luster into the Soul with them. And this Ambrosiu^
Catharinus himself a learned Papist, and as great a scholar in the Trent
Council as any other, was bold to maintain against the contrary opinion of
Dominicus Soto in a public declaration, unto whom Bellarmine dares not adhere,
though it be his custom to boast of their unanimitie in point of Doctrine.
Besides sin is of a quarrelling and litigious disposition, it will not easily
part from that which was once its own, but will be ever raising suits,
disputing, arguing, wrangling with the Conscience for its old right; Christ
came not to send peace, but a sword, perpetual and unreconcileable combats and
debates with the flesh of man. If a man hold peace with his lusts, and set not
his strength and his heart against them, If they be not in a state of
rebellion, they are certainly in the throne. It is impossible for a King to
rebel, because he has none above him; and so as long as lust is a king it is
in peace, but when Christ subdues Luke 11. 21. Romans 7. 23.
it and takes possession of the heart, it will presently rise and rebel
against his kingdom. Here then is the trial of the Title. If a man cannot
show the evidences of a new purchase, the Spirit, the Blood, the Water, the
Sonneship, the Righteousness, the Holiness, Conversation, and Grace of
Christ; If he be not in arms against the remnants of lust in himself, but
live in peace and good contentment under the vigor and life of them, that man
belongs yet unto the right of sin. For if a man be Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27
Christ's, there will be Nova regalia extremely opposite Col. 3 5. 12. Romans 6.
13. Psalm 119 24. Ephesians. 6. ^3. Romans 7. 23. Ier. 31. 33. Ioh. ^6. ^1.
to those of sin. A new heart for the Throne of the Spirit; New members to
be the servants of Righteousness; New Counselors, namely the Laws of God; A
new Panoplie, The whole armor of God; New laws, The law of the mind, and of
the heart; A new Judicature, even the government of the Spirit: Thoughts,
Words* Actions, Conversations, All things new as the Apostle speaks. 2. Cor.
5. 17.


Now let us in the next place consider the power whereby sin makes its
commands to be obeyed, wherein it is more strong and sure then a Tyrant, who
rules against the will of his Subjects. The particulars of this strength may
be thus digested.

First sin has much strength from it self, and that in these regards.
First, it is very wilful, it is as it were all will. Therefore it is called in
the Scripture, The will Ephesians. 2. 3. 1. Pet. 4. 3. Ioh 1. 13.
of the flesh, and the will of the Gentiles, and the will of men. And the will
is the seat of strength, especially seeing the will of man, and the will of
sin or the flesh are in the Scripture phrase all one. If a man had one will
and sin another, man's will drew one way and sins another, peradventure his
power to resist might be stronger then sins power to command: but when the
will of sin is in the will of man as a bias in a bowl, as a flame in smoke,
as a weight or spring to an engine, as spirits in the body, to actuate and
determine it to its own way, how can a man resist the will of sin, who has
no other then a sinful will to resist by?

Secondly, as sin is wilful, so it is very passionate and lustful, which
adds wings as it were to the commands of sin. The Apostle calls them
passions, and those working passions; when we were in the flesh, The motions of
Romans 7. 5.
sin did work in our members. There is (...), and there are (...), Lust and
passions of lust, which 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Rom 1. 26, 27. Gal 5. 24.
the Apostle calls vile lusts, and burning lusts, and affections and lusts, that
is, very lustful lusts. Lust is in the best, but these violent passions and
ardencies of lust are shrewd symptoms of the reign of sin. To be fierce,
implacable, headstrong, like the horse in the battle, and that not upon
extraordinary distemper or surprizall (as Jonah and Asa were) but habitually,
so as on any Iona. 4. 9. 2. Chro. 16. 10.
occasion to discover it, is by the Apostle put in amongst the Characters of
those that deny the Power of Godliness. 2. Tim. 3. 3, 4, 5.
For sin must not hold its power where* Godliness has any.

Thirdly, it has Laws and Edicts, full of wisdom and cunning, edged and
tempered with many encouragements and provocations to those that obey, which
(as I Heb. 11. 25. 2. Pet. 2. 15.
said before) the Scripture calls the Wages of sin, and pleasures of sin, by
which Balaam was enticed to curse Gods people. A Law is nothing else but a Rule
or Principle of working which orders and moderates the course of a man's life;
And so sin has a way to carry men in, and Principles to govern men by,
which Saint Paul calls Seculum the course of the world. Such as are Rules Ephe.
2. 2.
of Example, Custom, good intentions, Gods mercy taken by halses, without
respect to any conditions which it brings with it, the common frail^e of our
nature, that we are All men, and that the best have their infirmities,
distinctions, evasions, justifications, extenuations, partial strictness in
some particulars, the opus operatum, or mere doing of duties requit'd, and
many like, most of which things I have spoken of more largely heretofore upon
another Scripture.

Fourthly, it is full of flattery to entice and woe a man, cunning to observe
all the best seasons to surprise the soul. And though enticements be base, yet
they are very strong, like a gentle shower or a soft fire they sink, and get
in closer then if they should be more violent. That which is as soft as oil in
the touch, may be as sharp as swords in the operation. And therefore as a man
is said in one place to be enticed by lust, so elsewhere he is said Iam. 1. 14.
to be driven and thrust on by lust. Take heed to your Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
selves lest you corrupt your selves, lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven,
and when thou see the sun, and the moon, and the stars, should be
driven to worship them and serve them. The Objects themselves have no coactive
or compulsory power in them (for they work but as Objects, which is the
weakest way of working that is, for Objects* a^e never total Agents, but only
partial, they do never any more then cooperate with some faculty and power
unto which they are suitable) yet such is the strength of those lusts which are
apt to kindle by those Objects, that a man is said to be driven to idolatry by
them. All which false prophets can do is but moral and by way of cunning and
seducement, yet such is the strength of those lusts which they flatter and
work upon by their impostures, that they are said to Thrust a Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
man out of the way which the Lord commanded him to walk in. For as we use to
say of the requests of a King, so we may of the flatteries and allurements of
sin, That they do amount unto commands.

In one word, sin is thoroughly furnished with all sorts Luke 11. 22. 2. Cor.
10. 4, 5.
of Armor, both for defense and opposition, all strong holds, all reasonings
and imaginations, and thoughts which can be contrived to secure it self; and
therefore no marvel if it have much strength from itself.

Secondly, it has much strength from Satan and the world, which are the
counselors and aides of sin, which bring in constant supplies and provisions
unto it. 1. Ioh. 2. 16.
Therefore lusts are said to be of the World, and to be earthly and divellish,
because the world and the devil supply them with constant fuel.

But lastly and principally lust has much strength in and from us. First,
because they are natural unto us. A man's sin is himself, it is called by
the name of our Romans 6. 6. Ephesians. 4. 22. Col. 5. 9.
Old man. And therefore to be 1. Cor. 3. 3. Ioh. 1. 13. 1. Pet. 4. 2.
carnal, and to walk as man, to live after the lusts of the flesh, and after
the lusts of men are all one. To Romans 6. 2.
live to sin in one place is to 2. Cor. 5. 15.
live to our selves in another. To Gal. 5. 24.
crucify fleshly affections in one place, is Col. 3. 5.
to mortify our earthly members in another. To Tit. 2. 12.
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts in one place, is to Math. 16. 24.
deny our selves in another. To Heb. 12. 1.
lay aside the sin that does so easily beset us in one place, is to Math. 5.
29. 30
cast away our right eye and our right hand in another. And therefore the ways
of sin are called Act. 14. 16.
our own ways, and the lusts of the flesh Iam. 1. 14.
our own lusts, and being our own, we love and cherish them. Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.
No man ever hated his own flesh, neither can any man by nature hate his own
lusts, unto which he is as truly said to be Romans 7. 4, 9.
married as the Church is to Christ. And this serves much to set forth the
power of sin. For the love of the subject is the strength of the Sovereign; a
king shall then certainly be obeyed, when he commands such things as it were
difficult for him to prohibit. Secondly, lust has from us weapons to set
forward its strength, The heart a forge to contrive, and members instruments to
execute, the heart a womb to conceive, and the members midwives to bring forth
lusts into act. Lastly, sin must be very strong in us because we are by
nature full of it. So the Apostle says of natural men that they were filled
with all unrighteousuesse, and full of envy, debate, deceit, etc. and S.
Peter, Romans 1. 29. 2. Pet. 2. 14.
that they have Eyes full of Adultery, that cannot cease from sin. Now where
there is All of a strong thing that must needs be exceeding strong. If all the
four winds should meet together in their full strength, what mountains
would they not root up by the foundation? What a mighty rage and strength is
there in the sea, only because it is full of waters, and All water belongs
unto it? Who is able to look upon the sun, or endure the brightness of that
glorious Creature, only because it is Full of light? the same reason is in
fleshly lusts, they are very strong in us, because our nature is full of them,
and because all their fullness is in our nature.

Now this strength which is thus made up of so many ingredients, does further
appear in the Effects of it, which are these Three, all comprised in the
general word of Obeying it in the Lusts thereof, which denotes a full and
uncontroled Power in sin. First, the somenting* entertaining, Hos. 9* 7. Zeph.
1. 12. Psalm. 66. 18. Hos. 4. 8. Mic. ^. 1. Ezekiel. 33. 31. Romans 6. 19, 20. Esai.
5. 18.
cherishing of lust, shaping of it, delighting in it, consenting unto it; when
a man does join himself to sin, and setle himself upon it, and set his heart
to it, and respect it in his heart, and study and consult it, and resolve upon
it. Secondly, Executing of it, and bringing into act the suggestions of the
flesh thus conceived, yielding to the commands, drudging in the service,
drawing iniquity with cords and cartropes, resigning both heart and hand to
the obedience of sin. Thirdly, Finishing it, going on without weariness or
murmuring, without repenting or repining in the ways of Lust, running in one
constant channel, till like the waters of Jordan the soul drop into the dead
lake. All these three Saint James has put together to show the gradations, and
the danger of fleshly Lusts. Every man is Tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own Lusts and enticed; Lust when it has Conceived brings forth sin,
and sin when it is Finished brings forth Death. First, there is the
Suggestion, Lust draws away and enticeth. Secondly, the Conception and
formation, in the delight and consent of the will. Thirdly, the Execution, and
bringing into act. Fourthly, the Consummation and accomplishment of Lust,
filling up the measure, going on vnweariedly to the last, till there is no
hope, and so abusing the patience and long suffering of God unto destruction.
Sin grows till it be ripe for the slaughter; now if men in the interim cut
off their sins, and turn to God before the decree be sealed, before he
stir up all his wrath, and will suffer his Spirit no longer to strive, if
they consecrate that little time and strength they have left to Gods Service,
then the kingdom of sin is pulled down in them. To this purpose is the
Counsel Dan. 4. 27.
of Daniel to Nebuchadnezar; That he should break off his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, that is, he
should relinquish those sins which were most predominant in him; his unjustice,
and oppression, and tyranny against poor men (thus Paul preached of
righteousness, and temperance, and judgment to come, to Felix a corrupt and
lascivious Governor) and by that means his tranquillity should be lengthened,
not by way of merit (for a thief deserves no pardon, because he gives over
stealing) but by way of mercy and favor.

Hitherto I have but showed that sin is a strong king. But this is not enough
to d^ive men to Christ, (which is my principal scope.) It is further required
that men be Convinced of being under this power of sin. The first use then
which I shall show you may be made of this Doctrine is for Conviction and
trial of the reign of sin in our selves; for the more distinct expediting
whereof I shall propose these three cases to be resolved. First whether sin may
reign in a Regenerate man so, as that this power and kingdom of sin shall
consist with the righteousness of Christ? Secondly, How wicked men may be
Convinced that sin reigns in them, and what difference there is between the
power of sin in them, and in the regenerate? Thirdly, why every sin does
not reign in every unregenerate man?

For the first of these, we must remember in the general, that sin does then
reign when a man does obey it in the lusts thereof, when he does yield up
himself to Act. 26. 18. Col. 1. 13.
execute all the commands of sin, when he is held under the power of Satan,
and of darkness. And for the regenerate we must likewise note what Saint
Paul, and Saint John have spoken in general of this point. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for you are not under the Romans 6. 14.
Law, but under Grace, says Saint Paul, when a man is delivered from the
Obligations of the Law, he is then delivered from the strength of sin; (for
the strength of sin is the Law) And he that is borne of God sins not, 1.
Cor. 15. 56. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
neither can sin, says Saint John, that is, cannot obey sin in all the
lusts and commands thereof, as a servant to sin, from which service he has
ceased by being borne of God (for no man can be Gods Son and sins
servant:) for we are to distinguish between doing the work of sin, and
obeying sin in the lusts thereof. As a man may do divine works, and yet not
ever in obedience to God, so a man may be subject as a Captive in this or that
particular tyranny of sin, who is not obedient as a servant to all the
government of sin, for that takes in the whole will, and an Adequate
submission thereof to the peaceable and uncontrolled power of sin. Let us
then inquire how far the power of sin may discover itself in the most
regenerate. First, the best have flesh about them, and that flesh where ever it
is works, and rebelleth against the Spirit of Christ, so that they cannot do
the things which they would. Secondly, this flesh is of itself indifferent to
great sins as well as to small, and therefore by some strong temptation it
may prevail to carry the Saints unto great sins, as it did David, Peter, and
others. Thirdly, this fleshis as much in the will as in any other part of
regenerate men, and therefore when they commit great sins, they may commit
them with consent, delight, and willingness of heart* Fourthly, this flesh is
in their members as well as in their wills, and therefote they may actuate, and
execute those wills of sin which they have consented unto. Fifthly, we
confess that by these sins thus committed, the Conscience of a regenerat man
is wasted and wounded, and overcome by the power of sin, and such a
particular grievous Guilt contracted, as must first be washed away by some
particular repentance, before that man can be again qualified to take actual
possession of his inheritance, or to be admitted unto glory. In which case that
of the apostle is most certain, that the very righteous 1. Pet. 4. 18.
shall scarsely be saved. For we are to note that as some things may indispose
a man for the present use, or dispossess him of the Comforts and Emoluments,
which yet are not valid enough to divest him of the whole right and state in a
living: so some sins may be of so heavy a nature as may unqualifie a man
for an actual admittance into Heaven, or possession of glory, which yet do
not nullify his Faith, nor extinguish his Title and interest unto it. Thus we
see that sin may in the most holy have great power; the examples whereof are
all written for our learning, to teach us what is indeed within us, how
circumspectly we should walk, how watchful over our hearts, how steadfast in
our Covenant, lest we fall after the example of those men, and so break our
bones as David did. For one great sin presumptuously committed, will bring
either such a hardness of heart, as will make thee live in a wretched
security and neglect of thy service, and peace with God; Or such a woeful
experience of his wrath and heavy displeasure against sin, as will even
bruise thy Conscience, and burn up thy bowels, and make thee go drooping and
disconsolate it may be all thy days.

But yet, though sin may thus far proceed against a regenerate man, all
this does not amount to a complete reign. Though sin may have a victory in
the faithful and that even over their wills, yet it has not a kingdom, which
imports a complete and universal resignation of Admodum pie and ^re suo
^octissime controversi (...) hanc exp^divit sua^ memoriae (...) Abbot Epis^us
(...). (...). (...) diatrib. cap. 21.
the whole will and man to the obedience of it. It is one thing to have the
whole consent of the will unto some one sin stolen away by some particular
temptation; and another, to be wholly addicted and devoted to the ways of
sin, to have the whole heart universally married to Lust, and filled with
Satan, whereby it brings forth fruit unto death. Into the former of these
we grant the faithful may fall, (and yet even in that case, the seed of God
which abides in them, though it did not operate to prevent ^inne, will yet
undoubtedly serve to supply repentance in due time; and though Consent went
before to conceive sin, yet it shall not follow after to allow it being
committed; but they review their sin with much hatred, and selfe-displicencie,
with affliction of spirit, humiliation of heart, admiration of Gods patience
and forbearance, with renewing their Covenant, with Complaints and heavy
bewailings of their own frowardness, with a filial mourning for their
^ngratitude and undutifulnesse unto God.) But that a regenerate man should
totally addict himself to the ways of sin, is repugnant to the Scripture, and
extremely contrary to that Throne which Christ has in the heart of such a man.

For the second Case, how unregenerate men may be convinced that sin does
reign in them, we must observe that the complete reign of sin, denotes two
things. First that strength, power, soveraigntie, and dominion of sin, which
has been already opened. Secondly, A peaceable, uncontroled, willing,
universal subjection of all the members unto the obedience of that King.

Now to measure the unregenerate by this Adequate Rule, we must know, that
they first are of several sorts and stampes. Some are apparently and in
conspectu hominum outrageous sinners, upon whom every man that sees them, and
is well acquainted with the trade and course of sin which they live in, may
without breach of Charity pass this sentence, there goes a man who declares
himself in the eyes of the World to be a servant of sin; (I speak not this
for liberty of censuring, but for evidence and easiness of discerning only.)
Every man that thinks it baseness and below the strain of his spirit to
tremble at Gods Word, to fear judgments against sin denounced, who with a
presumptuous and high hand rejects the warnings which God sends him, who in his
practice and sinful conformities makes more account of the course of the
World, then of the curse of God; of the fashions of men, then of the will of
the Spirit; of the estimation of men, then of the opinion of Christ: and such
is every one that allows himself in the same excess of rage and riot, of
swearing, swaggering, and uncleanness with his divelish associates, in the
name and autho^itie of the Lord Jesus. I pronounce that man to be a servant of
sin: and if he continue sins servant, he shall undoubtedly have sins
wages; The wages of sin is Death, even the everlasting vengeance and wrath to
come; and if he despise that warning, the word which I have spoken shall rise
against him at the last day.

Others there are of a more calm, civil, composed course, men much wiser but
not a dram holyer then those before. And here mainely sticks the inquiry,
and that upon Three exceptions, with which they may seem to evade, and shift
off this power of sin.

First, in those men there appears not so sovereign and absolute a dominion
of sin as has been spoken of, in as much as they seem to live in fair
external conformity to the truths which they have learned. To which I
answer first in general, that there may be a reign of sin where it is not
perceived, and that Insensibility is a maine argument of it. For this is a
certain rule, the more tenderly and seriously any man is affected with sense
and sorrow for the power of sin, the more he is delivered from it. The young
man in the Gospel was fully persuaded that he had kept the whole Law, and
little thought that his own possessions were his king, and that he was a
vassal to his own wealth, till Christ convinced him of a mighty reign of
covetousness in his heart. A ship may in the midst of a calm by reason of a
great mist, and the negligence of the Mariners to sound and discover their
distances from land, split it self against a rock, as well as be cast upon it
by some irresistible storm: and so that man who never fathams his heart, nor
searches how near he may be to ruin, but goes leisurely and uniformly on in
his wonted formal and pharisaicall securities, may, when he thinks nothing of
it, as likely perish under the power of sin, as he in whom the rage thereof is
most apparent. As there is a great strength in a River when it runs smoothest
and without noise, which immediately discovers it self when any bridge or
obstacle is set up against it: so when sin passes with most stillness, and
undisturbance through the heart, then is the reign of it as strong as ever,
and upon any spiritual and searching opposition will declare it self. The
Pharisees were rigid, demure, saint-like men, while their hypocrisy was let
alone to run calmely and without noise; but when Christ by his spiritual
expositions of the Law, his Heavenly conversation, his penetrating and
convincing Sermons, had stopped the current, and disquieted them in their course,
we find their malice swell into the very sin against the holy Ghost. It is
the light of the Sun which makes day when it self lies shut under a cloud
and is not seen; so in every natural man there is a power and prevalencie of
sin, which yet may lie undiscovered under some general moralities. Thus as
the Serpent in the fable had a true sting while it lay in the snow, though it
showed not it self but at the fire: so there may be a regal power in sin,
when upon external reasons it may for a time dissemble it self. Ahab and
Ieroboams wife were as truly Princes in their disguise, as in their robes; and
a Sow as truly a Swine when washed in a spring of water, as when wallowing in
a sink of dirt. The heart of man is like a beast, that has much filth and
garbage shut up under a fair skin, till the Word like a sacrificing sword
slit open, and as it were unridge the Heb. 4. 12. 13.
Conscience to discover it. All the ways of man, says Solomon, are clean in
his own eyes, but the Lord weighs Prove. 16. 2.
the spirits: He is a discoverer of the secrets, and in^rals of every action.

For the more pa^ticular opening of this point it will be needful to answer
some few questions touching the reign of some particular sins which happily
are seldom so thought of. And the first is Touching smallsinnes whether they
may be said to be reigning sins? unto which I answer, That it is not the
greatness but the power of sin which makes it a king. We know there are reguli
as well as reges, kings of Cities and narrow territories, as well as Emperors
over vast provinces. Nay many times a sin may be great in Abstracto, as the
fact is measured by the Law, and yet in Concreto, by Circumstances, it may not
be a reigning sin in the person committing it: and on the contrary a small
sin in the nature of the fact, may be a reigning sin in the commission; as
in a Corporation a man not half as rich as another may be the chief
magistrate, and another of a far greater estate may be an underling in
regard of Government. As a small stone thrown with a strong arm will do
more hurt then another far greater if but gently laid on, or sent forth with
a fainter impression: so a small sin, committed with a high hand, with more
security, presumption, and customarinesse, then others, will more waste the
conscience then far greater out of infirmity or sudden surprizall. As we
see drops frequently falling will ear into a stone, and make it hollower then
some few far heavier strokes could have done, or as water powered into a Sieve
with many small holes, or into a bottomless vessel, is equally cast away; A
Ship may as well perish upon sands as rocks. (...). A^ist. Polit. li. 5. cap.
8. Qui modi^a spernit, paulatim decidit. Aug Consess l. 9. ca. 8.
Daily small expenses upon lesser vanities, may in time eat out a good estate,
if there be never any accounts taken, nor proportion observed, nor provision
made to bring in as well as to expend: so a man, otherwise very specious, may
by a course of more civil and moderate sins run into ruin.

The second Question is, Whether privy and secret sins which never break forth
into light may reign. To which I answer, That of all other sins, those
which are secret have the chiefest rule, such as are privy pride, hypocrisy,
selfe-justification, rebellion, malicious projects against the Word and worship
of God, etc. The Prophet compares wicked men's hearts to an Oven, Hos. 7. 6, 7.
As an Oven is hottest when it is stopped that no blast may break forth: so the
heart is oftentimes most sinful, when most reserved. Apud Persas persona regis
sub specie ma^estatis ^culitur. Just. lib. ^. (...). A^st. de mundo.
It was a great part of the state and pride of the Persian kings, that they
were seldom seen by their subjects in public; and the kingdom of China at
this day is very vast and potent, though it communicate but little with other
people: so those lodging thoughts, as the Prophet calls them, which lie stifled
within, may be most powerful, when they are least discovered. First, Because
they are ever in the throne (for the heart is the throne of sin) and every
thing has most of it self, and is least mi^ed and altered where it first
rises. Secondly, because they are in the heart as a stone in the Center,
freest from opposition and disturbance, which, breaking forth into act, they
might be likely to meet withal. And this may be one of the depths and
projects of Satan against the soul of a man, to let him live in some fair
and plausible conformity for the outward conversation, that so his rule in the
heart may be the more quiet both from clamours of conscience, and from cure of
the Word.

The third Question is, Whether sins of ignorance may be reigning sins? To
which I answer, That it is not men's knowledge of a king which makes him a
king, but his own power. Saul was a king when the witch knew 1. Sam. 28.
not of it. For as those multitudes of imperceptible stars Arist. (...). lib.
1. cap. 8.
in the milkie way do yet all contribute to that general confused light which
we there see: so the undiscern^d power of unknown sins do add much to the
great kingdom which sin has in the hearts of men. A letter written in an
unknown language, or in dark and invisible Characters, is yet as truly a
letter as that which is most intelligible and distinct; so though men make a
shift to fill their consciences with dark and unlegible sins, yet there they
are as truly as if they were written in capital Characters. Saint Paul's
persecution was a sin of Ignorance, that was the only thing which left room
for the mercy of God, so he faith of himself, I obtained mercy because I did
it ignorantly, through unbelief. 1. Tim. 1. 13.
Which words we are not to understand causally, or by way of external motive
to Gods mercy, as if Saint Paul's ignorance and unbelief had been any positive
and objective reason why God showed him mercy, but only thus, I was so grievous
a persecutor of the Church of Christ, that had it not been for my ignorance
only, I had been a subject incapable of mercy. If I had known Christ's
spirit, and been so conuinc'd as the Scribes (...). Chrysostom.
and Pharisees, to whom he used to preach, were, and should notwithstanding
that conviction have set my self with that cruelty and rage against him as I
did, there would have been no room for mercy left, my sin would have been
not only against the members, but against the Spirit of Christ, and so an
unpardonable sin. His persecution then was a sin of ignorance, and yet we
may know what a reigning sin it was by the description of it, That he made
havocke of the Church, (...).
and haled men and women into prison. And indeed Ignorance does promote the
kingdom of sin, as a thiese with a vizard or disguise will be more bold in
his outrages, then with open face. For sin cannot be reproved, (...)*
nor repented of, till some way or other it be made known. All things that are
reproved are made manifest (...). 5 (...). (...). (...). ^5.
by the light.

The fourth Question is, Whether natural concupiscence may be esteemed a
reigning sin? To which I answer, That as a child may be borne a king, and
be crowned in his cradle; so sin in the womb may reign. And indeed
Concupiscence is of all other the sinning sin, and Ro^* 7 1^.
most exceeding sinful. So that as there is virtually and radically more water
in a fountain though it seem very narrow, then in the streams which flow
from it, though far wider, because though the streams should all dry up, yet
there is enough in the fountain to supply all again: so the sin of nature
has indeed more fundamental foul^nesse in it, then the actual sins which
arise from it, as being the adulterous womb which is ever of it self
prostituted to the injections of any diabolical or worldly temptations, and
greedy to claspe, cherish and organize the seeds of any sin. So that properly
the reign of sin is founded in Lust; for they are ou^ lusts which are to be
satisfied in any sinful obedience; Romans 1^. 14. ^am 4 3.
All the subsidies, succors, contributions which are brought in are spent upon
Lust; and therefore not to mourn for and bewail this natural concupiscence,
as David and Paul did, is a manifest sign of the reign of Psalm 51 5. Romans 7.
23. 2. Cor. 12. 8.
lust. For there is no medium, if sin, which cannot be avoided* be not lamented
neither, it is undoubtedly obeyed.

The last Question is, Whether sins of omission may be esteemed reigning
sins? To which I answer, That the wicked in Scripture are Charactered by
such kind of sins, Power out thy vengeance upon the heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not upon thy Ier. 10. 25. Psalm. 10. 4.
name. The wicked through the pride of his heart will not seek after God, God
is not in all his thoughts. There is no Hos. 4. 1. Matthew. 25. 42. Mal 3. 18.
Eccles. 9. 2.
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. I was an hungered, and you
gave me no meat; thirsty, and you gave me no drink; a stranger, and you took
me not in, etc. As in matters of government, a Princes negative voice whereby
he hinders the doing of a thing, is oftentimes as great an argument of his
royalty, as his positive commands to have a thing done (nay a Prince has power
to command that to be done, which he has no power to prohibit; as Josias
commanded the people to serve the Lord:) So in sin, the power which it has
to dead and take off the heart from Christian duties, from Communion with God,
from knowledge of his will, from delight in his word, from mutual Edification,
from a constant and spiritual watch over our thoughts and ways, and the like,
is a notorious fruit of the reign of sin. So then as he said of the Roman
Senate, that it was an assembly of kings, so we may say of sinful lusts in the
heart, That they are indeed a Throng and a people of kings.

The second Exception where with the more moderate sort of unregenerate men
seem to shift off from themselves the charge of being subject to the reign of
sin, is, that sin has not over them an universal dominion, in as much as
they abhor many sins, and do many things which the rule requires. All
these things, says Mark. 10. ^0.
the young man in the Gospel, have I done from my youth. And Hazael to the
Prophet, Is thy servant a dog, to rip 2. King. 8. 13.
up women and dash infants to pi^ces? He seemed at that time to abhor so
dete^able facts as the Prophet foretold. 2. King. 10 16 ^ing 21. 27. Ma^k. 6.
20.
Come, says I^hu, and see my zeal for the Lord of hoasts. Ahab humbled
himself, Herod heard John gladly, and did many things, the foolish virgins,
and apostate; Ioh. 5. 35. 2. Pet. 2. 20.
abstained from many pollutions of the world; and from such abstinencies and
performances as these men seem invincibly to conclude that they are not under
an universal reign of sin.

For clearing this Exception we must know that there Genesis 20. 6. 2. Co^. 12. 7.
10.
are other causes besides the power and kingdom of the spirit of Christ, which
may work a partial abstinence in some sins, and conformity in some duties.

First, the Power of a general restraining Grace, which I suppose is meant in
Gods withholding Abimelech from touching Sarah. As there are general Gifts of
the Spirit in regard of illumination, so likewise in order to conversation and
practice. It is said that Christ beholding the young man, Loved him, and that
even when he Math. 10. 21.
was under the reign of Covetousness. He had nothing from himself worthy of
love, therefore something, though more general, it was which the spirit had
wrought in him. Suppose we his ingenuitie, morality, Habent nonnulla munera
fi^ (...), sed non perveniuat ad regnum promis^um. Aug. De Civ. Dei. lib. 16. ^
p. 34.
care of Salvation, or the like. As Abraham gave portions to Ishmael, but the
inheritance to Isaac: so does the Lord on the children of the flesh and of the
bond woman bestow common gifts, but the Inheritance and Adoption is for the
Saints, his choicest Jewels are for the Kings Daughter. There is great
difference betwixt Restraining and Renewing Grace; the one only charms and
chains up sin, the other crucifies and weakens it, whereby the vigor of it
is not withheld only, but abated: the one turns the motions and stream of
the heart to another channel, the other keeps it in bounds only, though
still it run its natural course; the one is contrary to the Reign, the
other only to the Rage of sin. And now these graces being so differing,
needs must the abstaining from sins, or amendment of life according as it
rises from one or other, be likewise exceeding different. First, that which
rises from Renewing Grace is Internal in the disposition and frame of the
heart, the law and the spirit are put in there to purify the Fountain;
whereas the other is but external in the course of the life, without any
inward and secret care to govern the thoughts, to moderate the passions, to
suppress the motions and risings of lust, to cleanse the conscience from dead
works, to banish privy pride, speculative uncleanness, vain, empty,
impertinent, unprofitable desires out of the heart. The Law is Spiritual, and
therefore it is not a conformity to the letter barely, but to the
Spiritualnesse of the Law, which makes our actions to be right before God. Thy
Law is pure, says Psalm. 119. 140.
David, therefore thy Servant loves it. And this spiritualnesse of obedience
is discerned by the Inwardnesse of it, when all other respects being removed, a
man can be Holy there where there is no eye to see, no object to move him, none
but only he and the Law together. When a man can be as much grieved with the
sinfulness of his thoughts, with the disproportion which he finds between
the Law and his innerman, as with those evils which being more exposed to the
view of the World, have an accidental restraint from men, whose ill opinious
we are loath to provoke; when from the Spiritual and sincere obedience of the
heart does issue forth an universal Holiness like lines from a center unto the
whole circumference of our lives, without any mercenary or reserved respects
wherein men oftentimes in stead of the Lord, make their own passions and
affections, their ends or their fears their God.

Secondly, that which rises from Renewing grace is equal and Psalm. 119. 128.
a (...), etc. Clem. Alex. strom lib 4.
uniforme to all the Law, It esteems all Gods precepts concerning al things
to be right, and it hates every false way. Whereas the other is only in some
In he^ major (...), quod (...)* od^rum (...), ^tem pro Dei (...). 3.
particulars, reserving some exceptions from the general rule, and framing to
it self a latitude of holiness, beyond which in their conceits is nothing of
realitie, but only the fictions and chimaeraes, the more abstract notions and
singularities of a few men whose end is not to serve God, but to be unlike
their neighbors. I deny not but that as oftentimes it falls out in ill
affected bodies, that some one part may be more disordered and disabled for
service then others, because ill humors being by the rest rejected do at last
settle in that which (...) ^aturally weakest: so in Christians likewise, partly
by the temper of their persons, partly by the condition of their lives and
callings, partly by the pertinacious and more intimate adherence of some close
corruption, partly by the company and examples of men amongst whom they live,
partly by the different administration of the spirit of grace, who in the same
men blows how and where he lists, it may come to pass that this
uniformitie may be blemished, and some actions be more corrupt, and some
sins more predominant and untamed in them then others. Yet still I say
Renewing Grace does in some measure subdue all, and, at least, frame the heart
to a vigilancie over those gaps which lie most naked, and to a tenderness to
bewail the incursions of sin which are by them occasioned.

Thirdly, that which rises from Renewing Grace is constant, grows more in old
age, has life in more abundance, proceeds from a heart purged and prepared
to bring forth more fruit, where as the other grows faint, and withers; an
hypocrite will not pray always, a torrent will one time or other dry up and
putrify. Water will move upward by art till it be gotten level to the spring
where it first did rise, and then it will return to its nature again. So the
corrupt hearts of natural men, how ever they may fashion them to a show of
holiness so far forth as will (...) even to those ends and designs for
which they assumed it, yet let them once go past that, and their falling down
will make it appear, that what ever motions they had screwed up themselves
unto, yet still in their hearts they did bend another way, and did indeed
resist the power of that grace, whose countenance they affected. Even as Scipio
and Annibal at Scyphax his table did complement, and discourse, and entertain
one another with much semblance of affection, whereas other occasions in the
field occurring made it appear that even at that time their hearts were full
of revenge and hostility.

Lastly, that which rises from Renewing Grace is with (...). Arist. Rhet. li.
1. Ut perfectae fidei and obsequelae est obedientiam diligere and id quod quis
agit affectu charitatis implere, and necessita^em agendi amantis voluntate
praecurrere: ita and magnae innocentiae est iniquitates non modo non agere, sed
od^sse, quia interdum non [legendum nos] ab his metus and terro^ aver. tit.
Hilar. in Psalm. 119. mem.
delight* and much complacencie, because it is natural to a right spirit; it
desires nothing more then to have the law of the flesh quite consumed, whereas
the other has pain and disquietnesse at the bridle which holds it in; and
therefore takes all advantages it can to break loose again. For while
natural men are tampering about spiritual things, they are out of their
element, it is as offensive to them as air is to a fish, or water to a man.
Men may peradventure to cool and cleanse themselves, step a while into the
water, but no man can make it his habitation; a fish may friske into the aite
to refresh himself, but he returns to his own element: wicked men may for
variety sake, or to pacify the grumblings of an unquiet conscience look
sometimes into Gods law; but they can never suffer the word to dwell in them,
they are doing a work against nature, and therefore no marvel if they find
no pleasure in it: nay they Quis coram Deo innocens invenitur qui vult ^ieri
quod vetatur, sisubtrahas q^od timetur? quantum in (...) ^allet non^sse (...)
peccata prohibentem atque punieutem. Qui. ge^nas me^it, non peccare (...) sed
ar dear; ille autem peccare ^tuit, qui peccat^m ipsu^ sic ut g^bennas odit.
August. Epist. 144. Mallet si fieri posset nun esse quod ^eat, ut libere (...),
quod occulie deside^at. Id. de ^at. and great. c. 57 non fit in cord quod fier^
videtur in op^re, qu^ndo mallet homo non fa^ere, si posset impune. Id. cont. 2.
ep^. Pel^g. l. 2. c. 9. and lib. 1. ^. 9. and li. ^* cap. 4.
do in their hearts wish that there were no such law at all to restrain their
corrupt desires, that there were no such records extant to be produced against
them at the last; and as soon as any occasions call them unto sensual and
sinful delights, they (...). Cle^n. Alex.
steal^ away the law from their own consciences, they suppress and imprison
the truth in unrighteousness, they shut their eyes by a Tanta est vis
voluptatum ut ignorantiam pro^elet in occasi^em, etc. Tert. D^ spe^tac. ca. 1.
Malunt nes^ire, quia (...) oderunt. A^ol. ca. 1. (...) intelligere sensum
Domini, etc De fugain persecat. cap. 6. (...). Justin Martyr. Quaest and Resp.
qu. 140. (...). Arist. Ethic. (...). Cle. Alex. strom. li. 4.
voluntary and affected ignorance, that they may more securely, and without
check or perturbation resign themselves to their own ways.

Secondly, a deep, desperate, hypocritical affectation of the credit of
Christianity, and of the repute and name of holiness, like that of Iehu, Come
^ce my zeal for the Lord of Hoasts. And this is so far from pulling down
the reign of sin, that it mightily strengthens it, and is a sore provocation
of Gods jealousy and revenge. The Prophet compares hypocrites to a Hos 7. 16.
dece^tfull Bow, which though it seem to direct the arrow in an even line upon
the mark, yet the unfaithfulness thereof carries it at last into a crooked
and contrary way. And a little after, we find the similitude verified: Hos.
8. 2, 3.
Israel shall cry unto me, my God we know thee. Here seems a direct aim at
God, a true profession of faith and interest in the covenant; but observe
presently the deceitfulness of the Bow, Israel has cast off the thing that is
good, though he be well contented to bear my name, yet he cannot endure to
bear my yoke; though he be well pleased with the privileges of my people, yet
he cannot away with the tribute and obedience of my people, and therefore God
rejects both him and his half services, The enemy shall pursue him. They have
sowed the wind, and they shall reap the whirle wind, says the Lord in the
same Prophet. My people are like a husbandman going over plowed lands, and
casting abroad his hands as if he were sowing seed, but the truth is there is
nothing in his hand at all but wind, nothing but vain semblances and
pretenses, the profession of a leedsman, but the hand of a sluggard; and now
mark what an Harvest this man shall have: That which a man sows, that also
shall he reap, he sowed the wi^de, and he shall imh^rit the wind^ as Solomon
speaks. Yet you may observe that there is some diff^rence; As in Harvest
ordinarily there is an increase, he that sowes a Pecke, may happily reap a
Qua^ter; so the hypocrite here sowes wind, but he reapes a whirle wind; he
sowed vanity, but he shall reap fury (for the fury of the Lord is compared
to a whirle wind.) God will not be honored with a lie: shall a man lie for
God? This argument the Apostle uses to prove the Resurrection, because, else,
says he, we are found false witnesses of God, and God does not 1. Cor. 15.
stand in need of false witnesses to justify his power or glory. Why take
t^ou my Word into thy mouth, seeing Psalm. 50. 16. 17. A. Gellius. noct. Attic.
lib. 18. cap. 3.
thou hate to be reformed? We read, that in one of the States of Greece, if
a scandalous man had lighted upon any wholesome counsel for the honor and
advantage of the country, yet the Commonweal rejected it as from him, and
would not be beholden to an infamous and branded person: And surely Almighty
God can as little endure to be honored by wicked men, or to have his Name and
Truth by them usurped in a false profession. When the Devil, who uses to* be
the father of lies, would needs confess the Truth of Christ, I know who thou
art, even Jesus the Son of the Living God; we find our Savior as well
rebuking him for his confession, as at other times for his Temptations. Because
when the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks De suo, he does that which becomes
him; but when he speaks the Truth and Glorifies God, he does that which is
improper for his place Psalm. 88. 11.
and station ( for who shall praise thee in the pit?) He speaks then De
alieno, of that which is none of his own, and then he is not a liar only by
professing that which he hates, but a thief too. And surely when men take upon
them the Name of Christ, and a show of religion, and yet deny the power thereof
they are not only liers in professing a false love, but thieves too, in
usurping an interest in Christ which indeed they have not; and are like to
have no happier success with God (who cannot be mocked) then false pretenders
have with men; who under assumed titles of princes deceased, have laid claim
to kingdoms. God will deal with such men as we teade that Tiberius dealt with
a base pretender to a Crown, when after long examination he could not (...).
Joseph de B^llo Iudaico. lib. 2. ca. 5*
catch the impostor tripping in his tale, at last he consulted with the habit
and shape of his body, and finding there not the delicacie and softness of a
Prince, but the brawinnesse and servile fashion of a Mechanic, he startled the
man with so unexpected a trial, and so wrung from him a confession of the
Truth. And surely just so Christi nomen indu^re, and non ^er ^hristi via*
pergere, quid aliud est qudm praevaricatio divini nomints? Cyp. de zelo and
livore.
will God deal with such men as usurp a claim unto his Kingdom, and
prevaricate with his Name; he will not take them on their own words, or empty
professions, but examine their hands; If he find them hardened in the service
of sin, he will then stop their mouth with their own hand, and make
themselves the argument of their own conviction.

Thirdly, the Power of pious and virtuous education; for many men have their
manners as the Colliar had his faith, merely by tradition, and upon credit
from their forefathers. So saint Paul before his Conversion lived as touching
the Law unblameably in his own esteem, because he had been a Pharisce of the
Pharisees. Many times we may observe amongst men* that contrarieti^ of
affections proceed from causes homogeneall and uniforme, and that the same
temper and disposition of mind will serve to produce effects in appearance
contrary. When two men contend with much violence to maintain two different
opinions, it may easily be discerned by a judicious stander by, that it is the
same love of victory, the same contentious constitution of Spirit which did
foster those extreme discourses, and many times men would not be at such
distance in tenants, if they did not too much concur in the pride and vain
glory of an opinionative mind. And surely so is it in matters of religion and
practice, many times courses extremely opposite are embraced out of the self
same uniforme frame and temper of spirit; a humor pertinaciously to adhere to
the ways which a man has been bred in, may upon contrary educations produce
contrary effects, and yet the principal reason be the same, as it is the same
vigor and virtue of the earth which from different seeds put into it produces
different fruits. So then a man may abstain from many evils, and do many
good things merely out of respect to their breeding, out of a native
ingenuitie, and fair opinion of their fathers piety, without any such
experimental and convincing evidence of the truth, or Spiritual and Holy love
of the goodness, by which the true members of Christ are moved unto the same
observances.

Fourthly, the Legal and Affrighting Power which is in the Word, when it is
set on by a skillful master of the assemblies. For though nothing but the
Evangelicall virtue of the Word begets true and spiritual obedience, yet
outward conformity may be fashioned by the terror of it. As nothing but
vital, seminall, and fleshly principles can organize a living and true man;
yet the strokes and violence of hammers, and other instruments being moderated
by the hand of a cunning worker can fashion the shape of a man in a dead stone.
As Ahab was humbled by the Word in some degree, when yet he was not converted
by it.

Fifthly, the power of a natural illightned Conscience, either a wakened by
some heavy affliction, or affrighted with the fear of Judgment, or, at best,
assisted with a temper of generousnesse and ingenuitie, a certain nobleness
of disposition which can by no means endure to be condemned by its own
witness, nor to adventure on courses which do directly the wart the
practical principles to which they subscribe. For (as I observed before) many
men who will not do good Obedientially, (...) in quibus (...) obsequuntur.
Salvian. lib. 3.
with faith in the Power, with submission to the Will, with aim at the Glory
of him that commands it, will yet do it Rationally out of the conviction and
evidence of their own principles. And this the Apostle calls a doing by Nature
the things contained in the Law, and a Romans 2. 14.
being a Law to a man's self. Now though this may carry a man far, yet it
cannot pull down the kingdom of sin in him, for these reasons. First, it
does not subdue All sin, All filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and so
perfect 2. Co^. 7 1.
^olynesse in the fear of God. Drive a swine out of one dirty way, and he will
presently into another, because it was not his disposition but his fear which
turned him aside. Where there are many of a royal race, though hundreds be
destroyed, yet if any one that can prove his descent do remain alive, the
title and soveraigntie runs into him (as we see in the slaughter which
Athaliah 2. Chro. 22. 23.
made) so in sin, if any one be left to exercise power over the Conscience
without control, the kingdom over a man's soul belongs unto that sin.
Secondly, though it were possible (which yet cannot be supposed) for a Natural
conscience to restrain and kill all the children of sin, yet it cannot rippe
up nor make barren the womb of sin, that is, Lust and Concupiscence, in
which the reign of sin is sounded: Nature cannot discover, much less can it
bewail or subdue it. As long as there is a Devil to cast in the seeds of
temptations, and lusts to cherish, form, quicken, ripen them, impossible it is
but sin must have an offspring to reign over the soul of man. Thirdly, all
the Proficiencies of Nature cannot make a man's endeavors good before God;
though they may serve to excuse a man to himself, yet not unto God. If one
bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt does touch
flesh shall it be unclean, says the Lord Hag. 2. 11. 14.
in the Prophet? and the Priest answered no. But if one who is unclean by a
dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? and the Priest answered, it
shall be unclean. So is this people, and so is this nation before me, says
the Lord, and so are all the works of their hands before me, they are
unclean. They think because they are the seed of Abraham, and dwell in the
land of promise, and have my worship, and oracles, and sacrifices, not in their
hearts, but only in their lips and hands, which are but the skirts of the
soul, that therefore doubtless they are clean; but whatever they are before
themselves, in their own eyes and estimation, yet before me neither the
privilege of their persons, Abraham's seed, nor the privilege of their
nation, the land of promise, nor the privilege of their mere outward
obedience, the works of their hands, nor the privilege of their ceremonies
and worship, that which they offer before me, can do them any good, but they,
and all they do is unclean in my sight. Offerings and sacrifices in
themselves were holy things, but yet unto them says the Lord, to a revolting
and disobedient Hos 9 4.
people, they shall be as the bread of mourners, that is unclean, and the
Prophet* elsewhere intimate the Amos 5. 21, 22.
reason, I hate, I despise your feast dayis, I will not smell in your solemn
assemblies, though ye offer me your meat offerings I will not accept them,
neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. Your burnt
offerings arae Ier 6 20. Vestra dicit quae secundum libid^nem suam, non
secundum religionem Dei celebrando, sua iam non dei^cerant. Tert. cont. Mar^.
lib. ^. cap 22.
not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. Though the things done be
by institution Gods* yet the evil performance of them makes them Ours, that
is* sinful and unclean. Mercy it self without Faith, which ought to be the
root of all obedience, is a sinful mercy; mercy in the thing, but sin to
the man.

Sixthly, the sway and bias of self-love, and particular ends. When a man's
disposition looks one way, and his ends carry him another, that motion is ever
a sinful motion, because though it be suitable in outward conformity to the
Rule, yet it is a Dead motion like that of puppets or manimate bodies, which
have no principle of motion in themselves, but are carried about by the spring
or weight which hangs unto them (for a man's ends are but Vitium est infideliter
misereri. Ang. Heb. 9. 14. lam. 2 17. 2. King 9. 6, 7.
his weights) and so the Obedience which comes from them is but a Dead
obedience, which the Apostle makes the attribute of sinful works, and Saint
James of a diabolical says. The act of Iehu in rooting out the house of Ahab,
and the Priests of Baal was a right zealous action in it self, and by God
commanded, but it was a mere murder as it was by Iehu executed, because he
intended not the extirpation of idolatry, but only the erecting and
establishing of his own throne. To preach the Word is in it self a most
excellent work, yet to some there is a Reward for it, to others only a
Dispensation, as 2. Cor. 9. 17.
the Apostle distinguishes, and he gives us as there, so else where, the
reasons of it, drawn from the several ends of men, some preach Christ out of
envy, and others out of Phil. 1. 15.
good will. To give good counsel, for the prevention of 1. Sam. 19. 2. 20. 37.
42.
approaching danger is a work of a noble and charitable disposition as we see
in Jonathan toward David; but in Amaziah the priest of Bethel, who dissuaded
Amos from preaching at the Court, because of the kings displeasure, and the
evil consequences which might thereupon ensue Amos 7. 10. 13.
(of all which himself was the principal if not sole author) this was but a
poor courtesy, for it was not out of love to the Prophet, but only to be
rid of his preaching. To seek God, to return, to enquire early after him,
to remember him as a Rock and Redeemer are in themselves choice and excellent
services; but not Psalm. 78. 34. 37.
to do all this out of a straight and steadfast heart, but out of fear only
of Gods sword, not to do it because God commands them, but because he slayes
them; this end makes all but lying and flattery, like the promises of a boy
under the rod. To fear God is the conclusion of that matter, and the whole
duty of man; but not to Eccles. 12. 13. Hos. 3. 5. P^l 130 4. 2 King. (...)
33, 34.
fear the Lord and his Goodness, but to fear the Lord and his Lions (as the
Samaritans did) this is indeed not to fear the Lord at all.

Lastly the very Antipathie of sins must necessarily keep a man from many.
For there are some sins so Scelera dissident. Senec.
dissident and various, that they cannot consist together in the practice of
them. Though the same Root of original corruption will serve for both, yet
the exercises of them are incompatible: As the same root will convey sap to
several boughs, which shall bear fruits so different as could not grow out of
the same branch. The 2. Cor. 7. 1.
Apostle gives a distinction of spiritual and fleshly filthiness between
many of which there is as great an Cumfaciunt haec humines sine fide, non
peccata coercentur, sed alys peccatis al^ peccata vincun* tur. Aug. de Nupl.
and Cunc. lib. 1. cap. 3. Act. 23. 6* 7.
opposition as between flesh and spirit. Ambition, pride, hypocrisy,
formality, are spiritual sins; drunkenness, uncleanness, public, sordid,
notorious intemperance are fleshly sins; and these two sorts cannot
ordinarily stand together, for the latter will speedily blast the projects,
disappoint the expectations, wash of the dawbe and varnish which a man with
much cunning and pains had put on. Pilat and Herod did hate one another, and
this one would have thought should have advantaged Christ against the
particular malice of either of them against him (as in a case something
parallel it did Saint ' Paul when the Pharisees and Sadduces were divided) but
their malice against Christ being not so well Act. 4. 27. Luke 23. 12.
able to wreake it self on him during their own distances, was a means to
procure a reconciliation more mischievous Esai. 9. ^1.
then their malice. Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, but
both against Judah, one sin was put out to make the more room for another.
Many men have some master sin, which checks and abates the rest. Caeteras
cupid^ates h^ius u^ius ing^nti cup^e presserunt. Aug. De Civ. l 5. c. 12. v^.
plu.
The ancient Romans were restrained from Intemperance, Injustice, violence by
an extreme affection of glory and an universal soveraigntie. As Calores
caloribus onerando deprimimus, and sanguinis fluxum defasa ^nsuper v^uld (...).
Tertu* and Aug. de not. and great. c^p. 28. c Math. ^7. 46. Ioh 7. 3.
many times men cure heates with heates, and one flux of blood with another; so
some sins though not cured are yet forborne upon the predominancy of others.
The Pharisees hated Christ, and feared the people, and many times this fear
restrained the manifestatio^ and execution of the other.

The Third and last Exception is this. Vnregenetate men of a more calm and
civil temper may conceive themselves delivered from the reign of sin,
because they have many conflictes with it, and reluctancies against it, and so
afford not such a plenarie and resolved Obedience to it as so absolute a power
requires. To this I answer, That this is no more sufficient to conclude an
overthrow of the reign of sin, then Quirites.
the sudden mutiny of Cesars soldiers, which he easily queiled with one
brave word, could conclude the nullifying of his government. For when we
mention uncontrolednesse as an argument of sins Reign, we mean Romans 2. ^5*
not that a bare natural Conviction (which the Apostle calls an Accusation)
which imports a former yielding to the lust, and no more; but that a spiritual
expostulation with a man's own heart, joined with true repentance, Ier. 8. 6.
Gal. 5. 17.
and a sound and serious Lusting against the desires and commands of the flesh,
are the things which subdue the reign of sin. The whole state then of this
point touching the Roialtie of si^ne will be fully opened, when we shall have
distinctly unfolded the Differences between these Two Conflicts with sin,
the Conflict of a natural Accusing Conscience, and the Conflict of a
spiritual, Mourning and Repenting Conscience.

First they Differ in the Principles whence they proceed. The one proceeds
from a spirit of fear and bondage, the other from a spirit of love and
delight. An unregenerate man considers the state of sin as a kingdom, and so
he loves the services of it* and yet he Considers it as Regnum sub graviore
regno. as a kingdom subject to the scrutinies and enquiries of a higher
kingdom, and so he fears it, because the Guilt thereof, and day of accounts
affrights him so that this Natural Conflict ^iseth out of the Compulsion of
his Judgment, not out of the propension of his will; not from a desire to be
Holy, but only to be safe and quiet; he abhors the thoughts of God and his
Justice; whereas the faithful hate sin with relation to the purity and
righteousness of God, desire to walk in all well pleasing toward him, hunger
after his grace, are affected with indignation, selfe-displicencie, and revenge
against themselves for sin, mourn under their corruptions, bewail the
frowardness of their slipperie and revolting hearrs, set a watch and
spiritual judicature over them, cry out for strength to resist their lusts,
and praise God for any grace, power, discipline, severitie which he shows
against them. In one word, a natural conscience does only show the danger of
sin, and so makes a man fear it; but a Spiritual conscience shows the
Pollution of sin, the extreme contrarietic which it bears to the love of our
heart, the rule of our life, the Law of God, and so makes a man hate it, as a
thing contrary not only to his happiness, but 2. Pet. 1. 4.
to his nature, of which he has newly been made partaker. A dog will be
brought by discipline to for bear those things which his nature most delights
in, not because his ravine is changed into a better temper, but the following
pains makes him abstain from the present bait: so the conflict of the
faithful is with the unholynesse of sin, but the conflict of other men is
only with the Guilt and other sensual incommodities of sin. And though that
may make a man forbear and return, yet not unto the Lord: They have not cried
unto me, says the Hos. 7. 14.
Lord, with their heart, when they howled upon their beds. Their prayers were
not cries, but howlings, brutish and mere sensual complaints, because they
proceeded not from their hearts, from any inward and sincere affection, but
only from fear of that hand whith was able to cast them upon their beds. As a
sick man eats meat, not for love of it, which he takes with much reluctancie
and disrellish, but for fear of death which makes him force himself (a. Saul
said to Samuel) against his will, whereas 1. Sam. 13. 12.
a heal^y man eats the same meat with hunger and delight: so a natural*
conscience constraines a man to do some things which his heart never goes
along with, only to avoid the pain which the contrary guilt infers. In a
Tempest the mariners will cast out all their wares, not out of any hatred to
the things (for they throw over their very hearts into the Sea with them) but
because the safety of their lives, and preservation of their goods will not
stand together; not sub intuitu mali, sed min^ris boni, not under the
apprehension of any evil in the things, but only as a lesser good which will
not consist with the greater; and therefore they never throw them over but in a
Tempest: whereas at all other times they labor at the pumpe to exonerate the
ship of the water which settles at the bottom, not only for the danger, but
stinch and noysomnesse of it too. Thus a Natural conscience throws away sin
as wares, and therefore never forbeares it but in a Tempest of wrath, and sense
of the curse and quickly returns to it again; but a spiritual conscience
throws out sin as corrupt and stinking water, and therefore is uniformely
disaffected to it, and always labors to be delivered from it. A scullion or
colliar will not dare handle a coal when it is full of fire, which yet at
other times is their common use; whereas a man of a more cleanly education, as
he will not then, because of the fire, so not at any time, because of the
foulness: so here a Natural conscience for forbeares sin sometimes, when the
guilt and curse of it does more appear, which yet at other times it makes no
seruple of; but a Spiritual conscience abstaines always, because of the
baseness and pollution of it. The one fears sin, because it has fite in it
to burn; the other hates sin, because it has filth in it to pollute the
Soul.

Secondly, these conflicts differ in their seats and stations. The natural
Conflict is in several faculties, as between the understanding and the will,
or the will and the affections, and so does not argue any universal
renovation, but rather a rupture and schism, a confusion and disorder in the
soul: But a spiritual conflict is in the same faculty, will against will,
affection against affection, heart against heart, because sin dwells still in
our mortal body; Neither do the spirit and the flesh enter into covenant to
share and divide the man, and so to reside asunder in several faculties, and
not molest one another government; there can be no agreement between the
strong man and him that is stronger, Christ will hold no treaty with Beliall;
he is able to save to the uttermost, and therefore is never put to make
compositions with his enemy; he will not disparage the power of his own Grace
so much as to entertain a parlie with the flesh. So then they fight not from
several forts only, but are ^ver struggling like Esau and Jacob in the same
womb. They are contrary to one another, says the Apostle, and contraries
meet in the same subject before they exercise hostility against one another.
Flesh and spirit are in a man as light and darkness in the dawning of the
day, as heat and cold in warm water, not severed in distinct parts, but
universally interweav'd and coexistent in all. There is the same proportion in
the natural and spiritual conflict with sin, as in the change of motion in
a bowl. A Bowl may be two ways altered from that motion which the impressed
violence from the ar^e did direct it to* sometimes by an external cause, a
b^ke meeting and turning the course* ever by an internal, the sway and
corrective of the Bias, which accompanies and slackens the impressed violence
throughout all the motion. So is it in the turning of a man from sin; A
natural man goes on with a full consent of heart, no bias in the will or
affections to moderate or abate the violence; only sometimes by chance he
meets with a convicted judgment, or with a natural conscience, which like a
bank turns the motion, or disappoints the heart in the whole pleasure of that
sin; but in another, where happily he meets with no such obstacle, he runs
his full and direct course. But now a spiritual man has a Bias and Corrective
of Grace in the same faculty where sin is, which does much remit the violence,
and at length turn the course of it. And this holds in every sin, because the
Corrective is not casual, or with respect only to this or that particular,
but is firmly fixed in the parts themselves on which the impressions of sin
are made.

Thirdly, they differ in the manner or qualities of the conflict. For first, a
natural conflict has ever Treachery mixed with it, but a Spiritual conflict
is faithful and sound throughout; and that appears thus. A Spiritual heart
does ever ground its fight out of the Word, labors much to acquaint it self
with that, because there it shall have a more distinct view of the enemy, of
his armies, holds, supplies, trains, weapons, strategems. For a spiritual
heart sets it self seriously to fight against every method, deceit, armor of
lust, as well against the pleasures, as the guilt of sin. But a natural
heart has a secret Praeterita, In^antia f^tura part obl^vione (...), p. (...)
pe^ (...) ser (...) -- (...) q^dqua (...) and (...). (...). His^. l. ^ 3.
treachery and intelligence with the enemy, and therefore hates the light, and
is willingly ignorant of the forces of sin, that it may have that to allege
for not making opposition. There is in every natural man in sinning a
disposition very suitable to that of Vitellius, who used no other defenses
against the ruin which approached him, but only to keep out the memory and
report of it with fortifications of mirth and sottishness, that so he might be
delivered from the pains of preserving himself. Thus the natural conscience
finding the war against sin to be irksome, that it may be delivered from
so troublesome a business, labors rather to stifle the notions, to suppress
and hold under the truth in unrighteousness, to strive, resist, dispute with
the spirit, to be gladly gulled and darkened with the deceites of sin, then
to live all its time in unpreventable and unfinishable contentions. Secondly, a
natural conflict is ever particular, and a spiritual universal against All
sin, because it proceeds from hatred which is ever (...), Arist. Rhetoric.
lib. 2. cap. 4.
as the Philosopher speaks, against the whole kind of a thing. A natural man
may be angry with sin, as a man with his wife or friend, for some present
vexation and disquietnesse which it brings, and yet not hate it, for that
reaches to the very not being of a thing. And for a natural man to have his
lusts so overcome as not at all to be, would doubtless be unto him as
painful, as mutilation or dismembring to the natural body; and therefore if
it were put to his choice in such terms as might distinctly set forth the
painfulness and contrariety of it to his present nature, he would
undoubtedly refuse it, because he should be destitute of a principle to live
and move by: and every thing naturally desires rather to move by a principle of
its own, then by violent and foreign impressions, such as are those by which
natural men are moved to the ways of God. And therefore the natural
conscience does ever bear with some sins, if they be small, unknown,
secret, or the like, and hearkens not after them. But the spirit holds peace
with no sin, fights against the least, the remotest, those which are out of
sight. Paul against the sproutings and rebellions Romans 7. 23. ^. Cor. 12. 8.
Psalm. 19. 12. Ios. 6. 19. 21. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Exodus 24. 12.
of natural Concupiscence, David against his secret sins, as Israel against
Jericho and Ai and those other cities of Canaan; it suffers no Accursed thing
to be refer^ed, it slayes as well women and children as men of war, lest that
which remains should be a snare to deceive, and an engine to induce more. The
natural conscience shootes only by aim, and level against some sins, and
spares the rest, as Saul in the slaughter of the Amalekites. 1. Sam. 15.
But the spiritual shootes not only by level against particular notorious
sins, but at random too against the whole army of sin, and by that means
does peradventure wound and weaken lusts which it did not distinctly observe in
it self, by complaining unto God against the body of sin, by watching over
the course and frame of the heart, by acquainting it self out of the Word with
the armor and devices o^ Satan, etc. The opposition then between the natural
conscience and sin is like the opposition between fire and hardness in some
subjects; the conflict between the spiritual conscience and sin is like the
opposition between fire and coldness. Put metal into the fire, and the heat
will dissolve and melt it, but put a brick into the fire, and that will not
melt nor soften (because the consistencie of it does not arise Ex causa
frigida, but sicca) but Vid. Arist. de Meteor. l. 4. c. 7.
put either one or other into the fire and the coldness of it will be removed;
and the reason is because between fire and hardness there is but a particular
opposition in some cases, namely where a thing is hard out of a dominion of
cold as in metals, not out of a dominion of dry qualities as in brick and
stones; but between fire and coldness there is an universal opposition. So a
natural conscience may peradventure serve to dissolve or weaken, in regard of
outward practice some sins, but never All; whereas a spiritual reaches to
the remitting and abating every lust* because the one is only a particular the
other an universal opposition Thirdly, the natural conscience fights against
sin with fleshly weapons, and therefore is more easily overcome by the
subtlety of Satan, such as are servile fear, secular ends, carnal
disadvantages, general reason, and the like; but the spiritual conscience
ever fights with spiritual weapons out of the Word, Faith, Prayer, Hope,
Experience Watchfulness, Love, godly Sorrow, Truth of heart etc.

Fourthly, they differ in their Effects. First, a natural conflict consists
with the practice of many sins unquestioned, unresisted; but a spiritual
changes the course and tenor of a man's life, that as by the remainders of the
flesh the best may say, We cannot do the things which we Gal. 5. 17.
would: So by the first fruits of the spirit, and the seed of God, it may be
truly said, They cannot sin. For 1. Ioh 3. 9, 10.
though they do not attain a perfection in the manner, yet for the general
current and course of their living it is without eminent, visible, and
scandalous blame. Secondly, the natural is only a combat, there is no
victory follows it, sin is committed with delight and persisted in still;
but the spiritual diminishes the power and strength of sin. Thirdly, the
natural if it do overcome, yet it does only repress or repel sin for the
time; like the victory of Saul over Agag* it is kept alive, and has no hurt
done it, but the spiritual does mortify, crucify, subdue sin. Some
plasters skin, but they do not cure, give present ease, but no abiding
remedy against the root of the disease: so some attempts against sin may
only for the present pacify, but not truly cleanse the conscience from dead
works. Fourthly, the natural makes a man never a whit the stronger against
the next assault of Temptation, whereas the spiritual begets usually more
circumspection, prayer, faith, humiliation, growth, acquaintance with the depth
and mysteries of sin, skill to manage the spiritual armor, experience of
the truth, power, and promises of God, etc.

Lastly, they differ in their end. The natural is only to pacify the clamors
of an unquiet conscience, which ever takes Gods part, and pleads for his
service against the sins of men. The spiritual is with an intent to please
and obey God, and to magnify his Grace which is made perfect in our weakness.

Now for a word of the third Case, Why every sin does not reign in every
wicked man? for answer whereunto we must, First, know that Properly it is
original sin which reigns, and this king is very wise, and therefore sends
forth into a man members and life, as into several provinces, such vicero^es,
such actual sins, as may best keep the person in peace and encouragement,
as may least disquiet his estate, and provoke rebellion. Secondly, we are to
distinguish between the Reign of sin, actual, and vi^tuall, or in
praeparatione animi; for if the state of the king requires it, a man will be
apt to obey those commands of ^ust, which now happily his heart rises against,
as savage and belluine practices, as we see in Hazael. Thirdly, though
Original sin be equal in All and to all purposes, yet Actual sin for the
most p^t follows the temper of a man's mind, body, place, calling, abilities,
estate, conversings, relations, and a world of the like variable particulars.
Now as a river would of it self, caeteris paribus, go the nearest way unto
the sea, but yet according to the qualities and exigencies of the earth through
which it passes, or by the arts of men, it is crooked and wried into many
turnings: So Original si^e would of it self carry a man the nearest way to
hell, through the midst of the most divellish and hideous abominations; but yet
meeting with several tempers and conditions in men, it rather chooses in many
men the safest then the speediest way, carries them in a compass, by a gentler
and a blinder path, then through such notorious and horrid courses, as wherein
having hell still in their view, they might happily be brought some time or other
to start back and bethink themselves. But lastly and principally the
different administration of Gods general restraining Grace (which upon
unsearchable and most wise and just reasons he is pleased in several measures
to distribute unto several men) may be conceived a full reason, why some men
are not given over to the rage and frenzy of many lusts, who yet live in a
voluntary and plenary obedience unto many others.

To conclude, By all this which has been spoken we should be exhorted to go
over unto Christ, that we may be translated from the power of Satan; for he
only is able to strike through these our kings in the day of his wrath.
Consider the issue of the reign of sin, (wherein it differs from a true
King, and sympathizeth with Tyrants, for it intends mischief and misery to
those that obey it.) First, sin reigns unto Death, that which is here called
the reign of sin, ^s before called the reign of Death, and the reign of
sin unto Death. Romans 5. 17. 21. Romans 6. 16. Secondly, Sin reigns unto
fear and bondage, by reason of the death which it brings, Heb. 2. 15. Thirdly,
Sin reigns unto shame, even in those who escape both the death and bondage
of it. Fourthly, It reigns without any fruit, hope, or benefit, What fruit
had you then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. Lastly the
reign of sin is but momentary, at the length both it self and all its
subjects shall be subdued. The World passes away, and the lusts thereof, but
he that does the Will of God abides for ever. 1. Ioh. 2. 17. Of Christ's
Kingdom there is no end. We shall reap if we faint not. Our combat is short,
our victory is sure, our Crown is safe, our triumph is eternal, his Grace is
All-sufficient here to help us, and his Glory is All-sufficient hereafter to
reward us.

THE POLLVTION OF SIN, AND USE OF THE PROMISES.
2. COR. 7. 1. Having therefore these Promises (dearly beloved) Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, Perfecting holiness
in the fear of God.
HAving set forth the State, Guilt, and Power of Sin, I shall now in the last
place for the further opening the exceeding sinfulness thereof, discover the
pollution and filthiness which therefrom both the flesh and spirit* the Body
and Soul do contract.

The Apostle in the former chapter had exhorted the Corinthians to abstain
from all communion with Idolaters, and from all fellowship in their evil
courses. Several arguments he uses to enforce his exhortation. First from the
Inequality of Christians and unbeleevers, Be not ye unequally yoked with
unbeleevers, v. 14. It has a relation to the Law of Moses, which prohibited to
plow with an Ox and an^ Ass, or to put into one yoke things
disproportionable. Secondly, from their contrarietse, and by consequence
uncommunicablenesse to each other, there is as everlasting and unreconciliable
an hatred between Christ and Be^al, righteousness and unrighteousness, as
between light and darkness, ver. 14. 15. Thirdly, from those precious and
excellent Promises which are made to Christians, they are the Temples of God,
his people, and peculiar inheritance, h^ is their Father, and they his Sons
and daughters, ver. 16, 17, 18. And there are many reasons in this one argument
drawn from the Promises to infer the Apostles conclusion. First, by that
unction and consecration whereby they are made Temples unto God* they are
separated from profane Discamus ex h^c p^rte sanctam superb^am, ^ctamus nos
esse (...) m^liores. H^erom* Ep. Psalm 4. 3.
uses* designed to Divine and more noble employments, sealed and set apart for
God himself, and therefore they must not be profaned by the unclean touch of
evil society. Secondly by being Gods Temples, they are l^fted to a new
station, the eyes of men and Angels are upon them, they offend the weak, they
blemish and deface their Christian reputation, they justify, comfort,
encourage, settle the wicked in their sinful courses, by a deep policy of
the deceitful heart of man, apt to build u^grounded presumptions of safety to
it self, by the fellowship of such whom it conceives to be in a good
condition. Thirdly, they involve themselves in the common calamities with those
with whom they communicate. It Israel had not separated themselves from* Egypt
by the blood of the Paschall Lamb, but h^d communicated with them in their
idolat^y, they should have felt the sword of the destroying*Angell in their
houses, as well as the Egyptians. If upon hostility between nations, warning
Gr^g. Tho^s. de Rep^b. lib. ^ 1.
be given by an adversary to all strangers to void the place which he comes
against, and they take not the summons; though of themselves they be no way
engaged upon the quarrel, yet being promiscuously mingled with the conquered
people, they also shall share in the common calamity, and become captives with
the rest: so good men by communion with the wicked, are involved in the
general miseries of those with whom they communicate. Fourthly, they betray
the safety and tranquillity of the Church and state wherein they live; for
they under Christ are the foundations of the common wealth, their prayers
establish the Princes throne, their cries hold God fast and will not let him
alone, to destroy a people. If the Salt be infatuated, every thing must be
unsavory, if the foundations fail, what can the people do?

Now lastly, in the words of the Text the Apostle shows the aptness of the
promises to cleanse and purify, and that therefore they to whom they are made
do misimploy and neglect them, if they purify not themselves from all that
filthynesse of flesh and spirit which by communion with the wicked they were
apt easily to contract.

I shall not trouble you with any division of the words, but observe out of
them the point I have proposed, Touching the pollution and filthiness of
sin,* and infer other things in the Text by way of corolarie and
application unto that.

The wise man says That God made all things beautiful in their time, and then
much more man, whom he created after his own Image in righteousness and
holiness with an universal harmony and rectitude in soul and body. He never
said of any of the Crea^ures, Let u^ make it after our o^ne Image as he did of
Man, and yet the Creatures have no more beauty in them, then they have
footesteps of the power, wisdom, and goodness of him that made them. How
much more beautiful then was the soul of man, for whose service this whole
glorious frame was erected, and who was filled with the knowledge and love of
all Gods revealed Will? Now sin brought confusion, disorder, vanity, both
upon the whole Creation, and upon the Image of God in Men and Angels. What
thing more glorious then an Angel, what more hideous then a Devil, and it was
nothing but sin which made an Angel a Devil. What thing more beautiful and
benign then Heaven, what more horrid and merciless then Hell, and yet it was
sin which drew a G^henna de coelo. Salvian. (...). Chrys^in Romans 1. Ho^. 4.
Hell out of Heaven, even fire and brimstone upon Gods enemies. What more
excellent and befitting the hands of such a workman then an universal fullness
and goodness in the whole frame of nature? What more base and unserviceable
then emptiness and disorder? And it is sin which has put chinkes into all
the Creatures to let out their virtue, and has brought vanity and vexation of
Spirit upon all things under the Sun. In one word what more honorable then
to obtain the end for which a thing is made? What more abhorrid then to
subsist in a condition infinitely more woeful then not to be? and it is sin
only which shall one time or other make all impenitent sinners wish rather to
be hurried into that fearful gulf of annihilation, and to be swallowed up
in everlasting forgetfulness, then live with those marks of vengeance, under
those mountainous and unsupportable pressures, which their sins will bring
upon them.

When we look into the Scriptures to find out there the resemblances of
sin, we find it compared to the most loath some of things. To the blood and
pollution of a newborn child, before it be cut, washed, salted, or swadled*
Ezekiel. 16. 6. To the rottenness of a man in his Grave, The whole world lies in
mischief and sin, 1. Ioh. 5. 19. even as a dead man in the slime, and
rottenness of his Grave. To that noisome steame and poisonous exhalation which
breath*s from the mouth of an open sepulcher, their throat is an open
sepulcher* Ro^. 3. 13. that is, out of their throat proceeds nothing but
stinking and rotten communication, as the Apostle calls it. Ephesians. 4. 29. To the
nature of Vipers, Swine, and Dogs, Luke 3. 7. Phil* 3. 8. Rom ^. ^4. Iam. 3.
8. 1. Cor. 15. 65. Iam. 1. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 20*
2. Pet. 2. 20. To the dung or garbage, the poison, sting, excrements, vomit of
these filthy creatures; to a root of bitterness which defiloth many, Heb. 12*
15. to thorns and briers, which bring forth no other fruits but cu^ses, Heb.
6. 8. To the excrements of metals, dross, and reprobate silver, Ier. 6. 28.
Ezekiel. 22 18. To the excrements of a boiling pot, a great scumme, Ezekiel. 24. 11.
12. To the worst of all diseases, sores, Esai. 1. 6. Rottenness, 2. Tim. 3. 8.
Gangrenes or leaprosies, 2. Tim. 2. 17. Plague and pestil^nee, 1. King. 8. 38.
The menstruousnesse of a removed woman* Ezekiel. 36. 17. To a vessel in which
there is no pleasure, which is but the modest expression of that draught into
which nature emptieth it self, Hos. 8. 8. And which is the sum of all
uncleanness, sin in the heart is compared to the fire of hell, Iam. 3. 6. So
that the pure eyes of God do loath to see, and his nostrils to smell it, Zach.
11. 8. Amos. 5. 21. It makes all those that have eyes open, and judgments
rectified to abho^re it in ot^ers. The wicked is an abomination to the
righteous, Prove. 29. 27. When desperate wretches pour out their o^thes and
execr^tions against Heaven, scorn and persecute the Word of Grace. count it
baseness and cowardice not to dare to be desperately wicked, then every true
heart mournes for their pride, compassionates their misery, defies their
solicitations, declines their companies and courses, even as most infectious,
serpentine, and hellish exhalations which poison the ay^e, and putrify the
earth upon which they ^reade. And when God gives a man eyes to look inward,
unridgeth the Conscience, unbo* welleth the heart, stirs up by his Word the
sink which is in every man's bosom, makes him smell the carrion of his own
dead works, the uncleanness of his evil Conscience, the filthiness of his
Nature, every man is then constrained to abhor himself, to be loathsome in
his own sight, and to stop his nose at the poison of his own sores, Ezekiel.
36. 31.

For the more particular discovery of this Truth, let us first look upon the
best works of the best men. Though we say not that they are sins, and in
naturarei culpable, as our adversaries charge us; yet so much evil does adhere
unto them by the mixture of our corruptions, by passing through our hands, as
when sweet water passes through a sink, as that God might justly turn away
his eyes from his own Graces in us, not as his Graces, but as in us. It is
true, the Spiritual off^rings and Mal. 1* 10. Phil. 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16. Prove.
15. 8.
sacrifices of the Saints, as they come from Gods Grace, are clean and pure, a
sweet savor, acceptable, well pleasing, and delightful unto God. But yet as
they come from us they have iniquity in them, as not being done with that
through and most exact conformity to Gods Will, as his Justice requires, and
therefore if he should enter into judgment, and mark what is done amiss, he
might reject our Prayers, and throw back the dung of our sacrifices into our
faces, for abusing and defiling his Grace; For cursedis every one that
continues not in everything written in the Law to do it. Clean then and
acceptable they are. First, comparatively in regard of wicked men's offerings,
which are altogether unclean. Secondly, by favor and acceptance, because God
spares us as a father his son that desires to please him. Thirdly, (which is
the ground of all) by participation with Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6.
being perfumed with his incense, being strained through his blood, being
sanctified upon his Altar; When he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of gold,
to purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, then shall
they Mal. 3. 3, 4.
off^r unto the Lord an off^ring in righteousness, then shall the offerings of
Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord. But in it self ou^ best
righteousness is as a m^nstruous ragge. If God should lay righteousness to
the Esai. 64* 6.
line and judgment to the plummet, should take such exceptions as he justly
might at the most holy action that any Saint can offer to him; If he should
show the conscience how short it falls of that total perfection which his pure
eye requires, how many loose thoughts, how much deadness, weariness,
irreverence, diffidence, vitiat^th o^r purest prayers; how many by ends,
corrupt respects, ignorances, oversights, forgetfulness, worldly intermixtures
deface and blemish our brightest actions; how much unbelief consists with the
strongest faith; how many thorns, stones, birds, do haunt and cover the best
ground, the most honest and good heart to stifle and steal away the word from
it; how many weeds do mingle with the purest corn; how much ignorance in the
sublimest judgments; how much vanity in the severest and exactest minds; how
much looseness and digressions in the most sad and composed thoughts; how
many impertinencies and irregularities in the most bridled and restrained
tongue; how much mispence of the seasons and opportunities of Grace in the most
thrifty redemption of our time; how much want of Compassion and melting
affections in our greatest alms; of love to the truth, and right acceptance
of the beautiful (...) of peace in our largest contributions; how much
selfeallowance and dispens^tion to iterate, and re^erate ou^ smaller errors; if
in these and a world of the like advantages God should be exact to mark what
is done (...), who were able to stand in his presence, or abide his coming?
Say the papists what they will of merit of con^ignitie, commensurate to
eternal life* and proportionable to the Justice and ^everest scrutinie of the
most pure and jealous God* yet let the Conscience of the Holies^ of them all
be summoned to single out the most pure and merito^ious work which he ever
did, and with that to join issue with Gods Justice to perish or be saved
according as that most perfect of all his works shall appear ^ighteous or
impure; and I dare presume none of them would let their salvation run a
hazard upon that trial. So then there is pollution by way of adherencie and
contact in the h^st works of the best men.

How much more then in the best works of unregenerate men? Their sacrifices
unclean and abominable before God, being offered upon the Altar of a defiled
conscience, Prove. 15. 8. Tit. 1. 15. Their prayers and solemn meeting
^hatefull, loathsome* impious, Esai. 1* 13, 14, 15. For either they are but the
howlings of ^flicted men, that cry out for pain, but not out of love, Hos. 7.
14. or the babbling of careless and secure men, that cry Lord, Lord, and mumble
a few words without further notice, like Balaams As^e, Math. 7* 21. or the
wishings and wouldings of inordinate men, that pray for their lusts and not for
their souls, Iam 4. 3. Or lastly the bold and unwarranted intrusions of
presumptuous men, who without respect to the Word, Promises, or Conditions of
God* would have mercy from him without grace, and forgiveness of sin
without for saking of sin. Their mercies are cruel mercies; their profession
of religion but a form of godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 5. All as I said before but
the embalming of a carcass, which abates nothing of the hideousness of it in
the sight of God.

And now if the best works of wicked men are so unclean and full of
filthiness in Gods eyes, where then shall appear their confessed sins? If
their prayers and devotions stink, how much more their oaths and execrations?
If their sacrifices and that which they offer to God is unclean, how unclean
is their sacrilege and that which they steal from him? If their mercies be
cruel, how cruel their malice, murders, br^beries, oppressions* If there be
so much filthiness in their profession, how much more in their persecution, in
their reviling and scorning of the ways of God? If their fastings and
maceration be sinful and not unto the Lord, Zach. 7. 5. What is their
drunkenness, their spuing and staggering, their clamors and uncleanness, all
their cursed complements and ceremonies of damnation?

O consider this all ye that have hitherto forgotten God! Remember that his
eyes are purer then always to behold iniquity; Remember that his spirit will
not always strive with flesh! Admire his bottomless patience, which has thus
long suffered thee an unclean vessel to pollute thy self and others, and
forborne thee with more patience then thou could have done a Toade, or
Serpent, then which notwithstanding in his sight thou art far more unclean:
And Remember that his Patience is Salvation, and should lead thee to
repentance! Consider, that the Law of the Lord is pure, and his fear clean,
and his holiness beautiful, the garments with which he clotheth his Priests,
garments of comeliness and praise, made for glory and beauty; he comes with
fire and soap, with water and blood to heal our sores, to purge our
uncleanness. But now if there be lewdness in our filthiness, obstinacy in
our evil ways; if it suffice us not to have thus long wrought the will of the
Gentiles, let us with fear consider those woeful denunciations: Let him Revel.
22. 11. Hos. 4 13. Ezekiel. 24. 13.
that is filthy be filthy still: Ephraim is joined to Idols let him alone:
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy sins any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

We have considered the Quod s^, that sin is full of filthiness and
pollution. I will but name the Quid ^it, What this filthiness is. It has Two
things belonging to the nature of it. First, a privation of the nitor or beauty
Aquin* 1. 2. qu. ^6. artic. 1.
which the image of God brought into the soul with it. A difformity to the
holiness and brightness of the Law. The Law was both Holy and Good, not only
the Rule but the beauty of our life and nature. So that as evil is a
declination and swarving from the Law as a Rule, so it is sin, and as it is a
swarving from the Law as our beauty, so it is the stain and pollution of the
soul. Secondly, it notes a positive foulness, an habitual (both natural
and contracted) defilednesse of mind and conscience, an introducing of the
image of Satan, hideous marks of hellishnesse and deformity in the soul, body
and conversation. Every desire, motion, and figment of the heart being nothing
but the exhalations of an open sepulcher, the dampe and steame of a rotten
soul.

Now in the last place let us see the Quale sit, those Evil Properties which
accompany this pollution. Four woeful qualities belong unto it. First, it is
a deep pollution of a Crimson dye, of a skarlet tincture that will not wear
out. Esai. 1. 18. Like the spots of a Leopard, or the blicknesse of an
Ethiopian, which is not by way of accidental or external adherencie, but
innate and contemper'd, belonging to the constitution. Ier. 13. 23. It is
engraven upon their heart, written with an iron pen, and the claw of a diamond,
and so fashioned even in the very substance of the soul. Ier. 17. 1. It is an
iniquity marked, which cannot be washed away with niter and much soap, no
more then marks imprinted and incorporated in the substance of a vessel. Ier.
2. 22. The whole inundation and deluge of Noah could not wash it of from the
earth, but it returned again. A shower of fire and brimstone from heaven has
not so cleansed it out of the country of Sodom, but that the venom and plague
of it does still there appear in a poisonous and stinking l^ke. The plague
which came amongst the Israelites for the abominations of Baal Peor had not
cleansed the filthiness all away, but many years after the stain remained,
Ios. 22. 17. Nay, the very flames of Hell shall not in all eternity be able to
eat out the prints, or to fetch away the stains of the smallest sins from
the nature of man. Nay, which is yet stronger then all this, though Grace be of
it self apt to wipe out, and conquer sin, yet that measure and portion of
Grace which here the best receive, though it may shorten, weaken, abate, yet it
does not utterly root ^t out. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am
free from my sins? The best of us have yet our sores running upon us, and
stand i^ need of a garment to cover our pollutions.

Secondly, It is an universal pollution. I said unto thee when thou wast In
thy blood, live. We are by nature all overdrown'd and plunged in the
filthiness of sin. The Apostle here calls it filthiness of flesh and spirit,
to note the compass of the stain of sin. For notwithstanding some sins
belong principally to the spirit, as pride, heresy, idolatry, superstition,
etc. and others to the flesh, as drunkenness, gluttony, uncleanness, etc.
yet certain it is that every sin defiles both flesh and spirit, by the Adeo
non sol^ anima transigit v^tam, ut nec cog^atus, licet solos, licet no^ ad
effectum per (...) deductos, (...) a (...). -- ^ine opere, and sine effect^,
cog^atus, (...) Aclus. T^t ^e (...). carn^s cap. 14.
reason of their mutual dependencie in being and working, and of the
contagious quality of sin. Sins of the flesh soake and sink and eat in to
the bottom of the spirit, to drown that with hardness, insensibility,
error, security, inconsiderateness, contempt of God, etc. and the sins of
the spirit break out like plague sores into the flesh, pride into the eye,
malice into the hand, heresie^ to the tongue, superstition and idolatry into
the knee, etc. the soul and body have so near communion, that one can no more
sin al^e without the contagion of the other, then one wheel in an Engine
move without the motion of the other.

Thirdly, it is a spreading pollution. A leprosy, a gangrene, a plague, that
diffuseth poison and infection upon others. First, it spreades in a man's self.
An evil lust will infect the thoughts, and they the desires, and they the
words and actions, and they grow into habits and reflect back again upon the
heart and conscience to harden and defile them. Secondly, this infection stays
not in a man's self only, but runs forth upon others, to lead and misguide
them; we will certainly do as we have done, We and our kings, our princes,
and our fathers, in the Ier. 44. 17.
cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem. To drive and compel them;
why compellest thou the Gentiles to live Gal 2. 14. Ezekiel. 16. 52. 54 2 Samuel 12.
14.
as doethe Jews? To comfort and hearten them; Thou have justified, and art a
comfort to thy sisters Sodom and Samaria. To exasperate and enrage them; Thou
have given 1. King. 13. 18.
occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. To deceive and seduce them,
as the old Prophet of Bethel did the Ier 9. 14.
Prophet of the Lord by his lie. To teach and instruct them; the Israelites by
their idolatry taught their children to walk after Baalim. And by how much the
more authority over the persons of men, or emmencie of place, or reputation of
piety any man has, by so much the more spreading and infectious are his
sins, being taken with the more trust and assurance. If a minister be loose
and scandalous, a magistrate careless and rustie, a gentleman rude and
unclean, a man that professes the power of godliness, unjust and worldly,
strange it is how the lower and more ignorant rank of men, who believe that
surely such men as these are not by their places so far from, or by their
learning and studies so unacquainted with God as they, will be hereby
strengthened in their deadly and formal courses. Thirdly (which is yet worse)
the vory godly are apt to be infected by the sins of the wicked. It is not so
strange to see a godly man misguided and seduced by the errors of others like
himself, the estimation of whose persons may overruled the opinion of their
actions, and so make a man take them upon trust from them. But that a Holy man
should carch infection from the example of another who is in the gall of
b^ternesse, is a thing that wonderfully sets f^th the corruption of our nature,
and the contagion of sin^e. The sons of God saw the daughters of men, and
were polluted, the people of Israel saw the Midianitish women and were
ensnared. A Holy man's conversing with loose, carnal and formal men, diswonts
him from the ways of God, brings a deadness of spirit, and insensible decay
of grace upon him secretly, and therefore the more dangerously conveyes a
mediocritie and compliancie of Spirit with forms only of godliness and
pharisaicall outsides, begets much dispensation and allowance in many errors,
that he may keep pace, and not seem too austere, censorious, and ill
conceited of the men whom he walks with. Therefore David would not suffer a
wicked man to be in his presence, nor any wicked thing to be before his Psalm.
101. 3.
eyes, lest it should cleave unto him. Take heed, says the Apostle, lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble Heb. 12. 15.
you, and thereby many be defiled. Fourthly, it spreads not only upon men, but
defiles and curses the good Creatures of God about us; It puts a leprosy into
the stone in the Zach. 5. 4.
wall, and the beam in the house, barrenness into the Ier. 12. 4.
earth, mourning into the Elements, consumption into the Rom 8. 20, 21. 2. Pet.
3. 10, 11.
Beasts and Birds, bondage, vanity, grief, and at last combustion and
dissolution upon the whole frame of nature.

Fourthly, it is a mortal and apoysonous pollution, the pollution of deadly
sores, and putrifactions. I said unto thee in Ezekiel. 16. 6.
thy blood live, yea I said unto thee in thy blood live. It notes that that
estate wherein they were in their sins, was so deadly, that the cure of them
was very difficult, it required the repetition of Gods power and mercy. If a
child newborn should lie exposed in its blood to the injury of a cold air,
not have the Navell cut, nor the body wrapped, or washed, or tended at all, how
quickly would it be that from the womb of the mother it would drop into the
womb of the Earth? The state of sin is an estate of nakedness, blood,
impotencie, obnoxiousnesse to all the temptations and snares of Satan, to all
the darts of death and hell. The ancients compare it to falling into a pit full
of dirt and stones, a man is not only polluted, but he is bruized and wounded
by it. To conclude, there is no deformity nor filthiness extant which did not
rise from sin. It is sin which puts bondage into the Creature, which brings
discords and deformities upon the face of Nature. It is sin which put
devilishnesse into Angels of Heaven, and hurried them down from their first
habitation. It is sin which put a sting into death, without which though it kill
yet it cannot curse. It is sin which puts fire into Hell, and supplies unto all
eternity the fuel and materials for those unextinguishable slames. It is sin
which puts hell into the Conscience and arms a man with terrors and
amazements against himself. It is sin which puts rottennes and dishonor into
the grave; he that died without sin rose up without corruption. It is sin
which wrings out those clamors and groans of bruit creatures, which wrestle
under the curse of Adams fall. It is sin which enrageth and maddeth one beast
against another, and one man against another, and one nation against another.
It is sin which brought shame and dishonor upon that nakedness unto which all
the Creatures in Paradise did owe awe and reverence. It is sin which turned
Sodom into a stinking lake, and Jerusalem the glory of the Earth, into a
desolation and haunt for Owls and Bitterns. It is sin which so often
staineth Heaven and Earth with the marks of Gods vengeance, and which will one
day roll up in darkness, and devoute with fire, and reduce to its primitive
confusion the whole frame of nature. It is sin which puts horror into the
Law, makes that which was at first a Law of life and liberty to be a Law of
bondage and death, full of weakness, unprofitablenesse, hideousness, and
curses. It is sin which puts malignity and venom into the very Gospel,
making it a savor of Death unto Death, that is, of another deeper death and
sorer condemnation, which by trampling upon the blood of Christ we draw upon
our selves, unto that death under which we lay before by the malediction of
the Law. And lastly (which is the highest that can be spoken of the ve^ome of
(...). It is sin which, in a sort, and to speak after the manner of men,
has put hatred into God himself, has moved the most merciful, gracious and
compassionate Creator, to hate the things which he made, and not to take pity
upon the works of his hands. If God had looked round about his own works,
he could have found nothing but Goodness in them, and theresore nothing but
Love in himself. But when sin came into the World, it made the Lord repent,
and grieve, and hate, and destroy his own workmanship.

And the consideration hereof should drive us all like Lepers and polluted
wretches to that Fountain in Israel which is opened for sin and for
uncleanness, to buy of him white raiment that we may be clothed, and the
shame of our nakedness may not appear. For which purpose we must first find
out the pollution of sin in our selves, and that is by using the Glass of
the Law, which was published of purpose to make sin appear exceeding
sinful. For as rectum is sui index and obliqui so purum is sui index and
impuri, That which is right and pure is the measure and discovery of that which
is crooked and impure. Now the Law is Right, Pure, Holy, l^st, Good, Lovely,
Honorable, Clean; and therefore very apt to discover the contrary affections
and properties in sin. And having gotten by the Law acquaintance with our
selves, there is then fit place for the Apostles precept, To cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. First the Lord discovered the
preposterousnesse of Isreal's services unto him, when they came before him in
Esai. 1. 15. 18.
their uncleanness, and lifted up hands full of blood, and then comes the like
precepts to the Apostles here, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doings from before mine eyes, etc.

But can an unclean thing cleanse it self? Can that which is intrinsecally,
naturally, inherently uncleare purify it self? It may pollute any thing which
touches it, but how can it cease from that which belongs to its nature, or
wipe out that which has eaten in, and is marked in its very substance? It is
true of our selves we cannot cleanse our selves, It is Christ's Office to
Sanctify Ezekiel. 16. 14.
his Church, and it is His comlynesse with which we are adorned, without him
we can do nothing; but yet having Aug. De peccat. merit. and Remis. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
him we must wash our selves. For God works not upon men as a carver upon a
stone when he would induce the shape and proportions of a man, but yet leaves
it a stone still and no more; but as himself did work upon Earth in Paradise
when he breathed into it the Soul of man, and so made it a Living Creature.
It is true a natural man is as dead to grace as a stone is to natural life,
and therefore if only man should work upon him he would continue as dead
still; but he who of dead Earth made a living man, is able of stones to raise
up children unto Abraham, and the work of conversion is a work of
vivification. Now then being quickened, we must walk Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20.
and work our selves. I will take away, says the Lord, the sto^ie heart out
of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in
my statutes, etc. So then God commands us to cleanse our selves when yet it is
his own work. First, to teach us that what he does is not out of duty or
debt, but of Grace and Favor for when he does that which he commands, it is
manifest that ours was the duty, and therefore his the great^r mercy, to give
us money wherewith to pay him the debt we owed. Thou workest allour works for
us, says the Prophet. The Esai. 26. 12.
work as it is a duty is ours, but as it is a performance it is thine.
Secondly, He does it to show that though he be the Author and finisher of our
Faith, though he who Heb 12. 1. Phil. 1. 6.
begins our good works does also perform them until the day of Christ,
yet he will not have us abide always under his hand as dead stones, but, being
quickened, and healed by his Spirit, and having our impotencies remooved, we
likewise must cooperate and move to the same end with him; for he does not so
work for us, but he withal gives us a will and a deed to concur with him
to the same actions, As we have received Christ, so we must walk in him.
Thirdly, to show us Phil. 2. 13.
where we must fetch our cure, to teach us that he will be sought unto by
us, and that we must rely upon his Power and Promises. Therefore He
commands us the things which we cannot do, that we might know of whom Ideo
jubet quae non po^sumus, ut nove^imus quid ab illo petere debeamus. Ipsa enim
est sides quae (...) im petrat quod l x impera^ Aug. de Gra. and lib. (...). c.
^5. Ezekiel. 18. 30.
to beg them, for it is Faith alone which obtains by Prayer that which the
Law requires only but cannot effect, by reason of the weakness of it. In one
place the Lord commands, cast away from you all your transgressions, and make
you a new heart and a new spirit. In another place he promises, I will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you; A new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh. and will give you an heart of flesh. How can
these things consist together, He commands us to do that which he promises
to do himself? but only to show that God gives what he requires. The things
which he bids us do, (as if they were to be the works of our own will, and
being indeed the duties which we owe) yet he promises to do Nos non faci^ ut
(...) ^aciat quae pro^sit; sed ill^ (...) ut nos (...) praecepit. Aug.
in us, to show that they are the works of his grace, and that his promises
are the foundation of all our performances. For we by working do not cause
him to fulfill his promises, but he by promising does enable us to perform
our works. So then we cleanse our selves by the strength of his promises,
they are the principles of our Purification. This the Apostle expresses in the
text. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) Let us cleanse our
selves.

This then is the next thing we must inquire into, wherein the strength of
this argument lies, and how a man ought to make use of the promises to infer
and press upon his conscience this duty of clansing himself. Here then first
we must note, that promises do contain the matter of rewards, and are for the
most part so proposed unto us. Abating only the first promise of ca^ing unto
the obedience of Faith, which I conceive is rather made unto Christ in our
behalf ( Ask of me and I will give thee the heath^n for thine inheritance and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession) then unto us formally,
because the seed of Abraham are the subject of the promises, I say excepting
only that, I conceive all other promises to bear in them the nature of a
reward, and so to carry relation to presupposed Services. For benefits have
usually burdens and engagements with them, so that promises being the
representation of rewards, and rewards the consequents of service, and all
services being generally comprehended in this of cleansing our selves from all
^ilthinesse, and of finishing holiness in Gods fear, manifest it is that the
promises are in this regard fit arguments to induce our duty. The Gospel
which is the Word of Promise has an obedience annexed 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
unto it, which the Apostle calls the Obedience of the Gospel: And Faith being
the hand to receive the promises has an obedience annexed unto it likewise,
which Romans 1. 5. 16. 23.
the same Apostle calls the obedience of Faith, for it is not only a hand to
receive, but a hand to work. To live to our selves, and yet lay claim to the
promis^s, is to make God a liar, not to believe the record which he gives of
himself, that he will not cast away precious things upon swine. His promises
are free in fier^, made only out of Grace, but conditional in facto esse,
performed and accomplished with dependence upon duties in us. God is 2 Thessalonians.
3. 3^.
Faithful, says the Apostle, who shall stablish you and keep you from evil,
there is the promise, and we are confident that you will do the things which
we command you there is the duty which that promise cales for. When we pray,
Give us our daily bread, by saying, Give us, we acknowledge that it is from
God, but when we call i^ ours, we show how God gives it, namely in the use of
means. For Bread is Ours, not only in the right of the promise, I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee, but by service and 2. The. 3. 11. 12.
quiet working in an orderly calling.

Secondly, Promises are apt to purify not only as arguments to induce it, but
likewise as efficiens causes and principles, being by Faith apprehended, of our
Holiness. And so the force of the reason is the fame, as if a rich man having
given a great estate unto his son, should add this exhortation, having
received such gifts as these, and having now where withal to live in quality
and worth, keep your self in fashion like the Son of such a father.

Efficients they are. First, as tokens and expressions of Gods Love, for all
Gods promises are grounded in his Love. His Justice, Truth, ahd Fidelity are
the reasons of fulfilling Promittendo se fecit debitorem. Aug.
promises, because in them he makes himself our debtor (Therefore says the
Apostle, There is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness which God the
righteous Judge shall give unto me^; and again, God is faithful, 2. Tim. 4.
8. 1. Cor. 10. 13. Heb. 10. 23.
who will not suffer you to be tempted, and faithful is he that has
promised, who also will do it; and Saint John, If we confess our sins, he
is faithful and lust to forgive 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. One would think a
man should rather fear the revenge then expect the forgiveness of sins by
Gods justice, but God is as Just in performing the mercy which He promises,
as in executing the vengeance which he threatens. So then Justice and Fidelity
are the reasons of fulfilling promises, but Gods Love and Mercy is the only
reason Deuteronomy 7. 7, 8.
of making promises. The Lord did not set his Love upon you nor choose you
(says Moses to Israel) because ye were more in number then any people, but
because the Lord Loved you, that is the ground of making the promise, and
because he would keep the oath which he had sworn to your fathers, that was
the ground of performing his promise. For thy Words sake, and according to
thine own heart, says 2. Sam. 7. 18. 21.
David, have thou done all these great things. According to thine own heart,
that is, ex mero mot^, out of pure and unexcited love, thou did give thy Word
and Promise, and for thy Word sake thou have performed it, not for any thing
that was in me (for wh^ am ^ O Lord, or what is my house?) have thou brought
me hitherto. Thou will perform, says the Prophet, the Truth to Jacob, and the
Mic. 7. 20.
mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our fathers from the days of
old; Why Truth to Jacob, and Mercy to Abraham? We must note, the promise after
a sort began in Abraham (therefore he is called the Father of the Faithful)
and when God makes a promise, it is only out of Mercy; but the Promise was
continued unto ^a cob, who being Abraham's seed was an hei^e of the Promise,
and so the inheritance which was out of mercy given unto Abraham, did out of
Truth and fidelity descend unto Jacob, the seed of Abraham; and therefore we
shall find Covenant, Mercy, and Oath joined together in the Scripture, to note
unto us both the ground of making the Covenant, Mercy* and the ground of
performing the Covenant made, the Truth and Fidelity of God. Thy God shall
keep unto thee the Covenant and the Deuteronomy. 7. 12.
Mercy which he swear unto thy fathers, says Moses. To perform the Mercy
promised to our fathers, and to re Luke ^. 72, 73.
member his holy Covenant, The oath which he swear to ou^ father Abraham, etc.
says Zachary in his song. The we see that the Promises are the tokens and
fruits o^ Gods mere Love* And in that regard they are apt to cleanse, or to
move us to any dut^e which God requires of us. For Love and mercy, being by
faith apprehended* are strong arguments to love and fear God again. is love
him because he loved us, and they shall fear the 1 Io^* 4. 19. (...). 3. 5.
Lord and his goodness; the goodness of the Lord begets fear, and that is
all one as to cleanse and purify for the fear of the Lord is clean and pure.
There is an Psalm. 19. 9. Illa (...) Tim^ viru^ neveniat; illa T^men virum ne
discedat. Illa, timeone damne^; illa, Timeone descrat Aug in ^p. Johan.
unclean fear, like that of the Adulteress, who fears her husband, lest
he should return and deprehend her in her falsenesse to him; but the true
fear of the Lord is clean, like that of a chaste spouse who fears the
departure of her Love. There are none so destitute of humanity as not to
answer Love for Love.

Secondly, Promises are the Efficient causes of our Purification, as they are
The grounds of our Hope and expectations. We have no reason to Hope for any
thing which is not promised, or upon any other conditions then as promised.
Hope is for this reason in Scripture compared Heb. 6. 19.
to an Anchor both sure and steadfast, because it must have something of
firmness and stabilitie to fasten upon before it can secure the Soul in any
tempest. To hope without a promise, or upon any promise otherwise then it
stands, is but to let an Anchor hang in the water, or catch in a Wave, and
thereby to expect safety to the Vessel. This argument the Apostle uses why
we should not cast away our confidence, or slacken our hope, because Heb. 10.
35, 36.
there is a Promise, which by patience and doing the Will of God we may in due
time receive, and which is a firm foundation for our Confidence to ^est upon.
So Abraham is said to have believed against hope in hope that Romans 4. 18.
he should be the father of many nations and the ground of that hope is added,
According to that which was spoken, to that word of Promise, ^o shall thy se^de
be. And else where he is said to have looked for a City which had Heb. 11. 10.
foundations; that is a City which was built upon the Immutable stabilitie of
Gods ^ath and Promise. Thus we see Promises are the grounds of our Hop^, and
Hop^ is of Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.
a cleansing nature. The Grace of God, says the Apostle, teaches as to deny
(...) and worldly lusts, and to live ^oberly, righteously* and Godly in this
present World; the reason whereof is presently enforced, Looking for that
blessed Hope, and the Glorious appearing of the great God. And again, He that
has this hope in him, says S. 1. Ioh. 3 3.
John, namely to be like him at his coming, Purifieth himself even as He is
Pure. He that hops to be fully like Christ hereafter, and to come to the
measure of the stature of his fullness, will labor to his uttermost to be as
he was in this World. For a man hopes for nothing de futuro, which he would not
presently compass, if it were in his power. No man is to be presumed to Hope
for the whole who hates any part, or to expect the fullness, who rejects the
first fruits of the Spirit. He that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, how can he love God 1. Ioh. 4. (...).
whom he has not seen? That is, He that cannot endure nor look on that
little glimpse and ray of Holiness which is in his brother, in one of the same
passions, infirmities and corruptions with himself, will much less be able to
abide the light of the Son of righteousness, and that most orient,
spotless, and vast Holiness which is in him. The same reason holds here, he
that cannot endeavor to purify himself here, does never truly hope to be
like Christ hereafter. He that directs his course toward York can never be
presumed to hope that he shall by that journey get to London, when he knows,
or might easily be informed that it is quite the other way. And the truth is,
no wicked man has any true or a^ saint 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Peter cal^ it lively Hope to come to Heaven. Blind presumptions, ignorant
wishings and wouldings he may have, but no true Hope at all. For that ever
supposes some knowledge and preapprehension of the Goodness of that which is
Hoped for; and there is nothing in Heaven which wickedmen do not hate as very
evil to them; the Presence of the most Holy God, the purity and brightness of
his Glory, the Company of Christ Jesus and his Saints, etc. If they might be
suffered first to have a view of it, and see what is there doing, what Divine
and Holy employments take up all the thoughts, desires, and powers of the
blessed company there, they would abhor no place more. Hope begets Love (whom
1. Pet. 1. 8.
having not seen, ye love, says the Apostle) Hope to be like Christ
hereafter will work a love and desire to express so much as we can of his
Image here. He that longs for a thing will take any present occasion to get as
much of it as he may together. Notably does Saint Paul set forth this purifying
property of hope in the promises. Phil 3. 13 20.
I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended
of Christ Jesus. I am already apprehended of Christ, he has in his body
carried me in hope unto Heaven with him, and made me sit together in Heavenly
places, and this hope to come to him at last, to attain to that price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus, makes me press, and pull, and strive by
all means to attain to perfection, to express a Heavenly conversation in
earth, because from thence I look for a Savior the Lord Jesus Christ: Hope
(as we said) is an Anchor, Our Anchor is fixed in heaven, our vessel is upon
earth, now as by the Cable a man may draw his vessel to the Anchor, so the
Soul being fixed by hope unto Christ, does hale and draw it self nearer and
nearer unto him.

Thirdly, Promises are the efficient causes of our purification, as they are
the objects of our Faith: For we dare not believe without Promises. Therefore
Abraham Romans 4. 19. 21.
staggered not through unbelief, but gave glory to God, because he was fully
persuaded, that what he had promised he was able to perform. It is not Gods
power simply, but with relation to his Promise which secures our faith. So
Sarah is said through faith to be delivered Heb. 11. 11.
of a child being past age, because she judged him faithful that had promised.
Now by being Objects of faith, the Promises must needs cleanse from
filthiness; for faith Act. 15. 19.
also has a cleansing property, It purifieth the heart, and works by love,
and looks upon the things promised as desirable things, rejoices in them,
and works homogeneall and suitable affections unto them. Again, we must note,
That sin comes seldom without Promises to pollute us, begets vast
expectations and hopes of Good from it. Balaam was whet and enlivened by
promises to curse Gods people; The Strumpet in the Proverbes, that said to the
young man, Come let us take our fill of loves, conceived most adequate
satisfaction to Prove 7 18.
her adulterous lusts by that way. This was the delusion of the rich fool in
his Epicurisme, Soul take thine ^ase, Luke 1^. 19.
eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have much laid up for many years: Of the
Jews in their Idolatries to the Ier. 44. 17. Hos. 2. 5.
Queen of heaven, because that would afford them plenty of victuals, and make
them see no evil: Of Gehazies foolish heart, who promised to himself
Oliveyards 2. King. 5. 26.
and Vineyards, and sheep and Oxen, and menservants and maid servants by his
officious lie. And this was one of the devils master pieces when he tempted
Christ, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.
Thus we see sin seldom comes without promises to seduce and pollute the
soul. And yet the Truth is these promises cannot hold up the hope of any man.
When a man has wearied himself in the pursuit Esai. 57. 10. Romans 6. 21. Act.
13. 34. Gal. 3. 15. 16. Heb. 6. 17. 18. Psalm. 110. 4.
of them, yet still there is less hope at last then at first. But now faith
fixing upon sure mercies, upon promises which cannot be abrogated or
disannulled (being made i^eversible by the oath of God, who after he has
sworn cannot repent) and seeing not only stabilitie, but pretiousnesse in the
promises, and through them looking upon the great goodness of the things
contained 1. Ioh 5 4.
in them as already subsisting and present to the soul, and by this means
overcomming the world (whose only prejudice and advantage against Christ is
this, that the things which he promises are long hence to come, whereas that
which it promises it likewise presents to the view of sense; which
difference faith destroieth, by giving a subsistence and spiritual presence of
things hoped for to the soul) by this means, I say, faith does mightily
prevail to draw a man unto such holiness, as becomes the sons and heirs
of so certain and precious promises. Till a man by faith apprehends some
interest in the promises, he will never out of true Love endeavor a
conformity unto God in Christ. By them, says Saint Peter, we are made
partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet 1. 4.
and do escape the corruption that is in the world through lust. What is it to
be made partaker of the divine nature? It notes two things: first, a fellowship
with God in his holiness; that purity which is eminenter and infinitely in
Gods most holy nature is formaliter, or secundum modum creaturae, so far as
the image of his infinite holiness is expressible in a narrow creature,
fashioned in and communicated unto us by our union with Christ. Secondly, a
fellowship with God in his blessedness, namely in that beatificall vision, and
brightness of glory which from the face and fullness of Jesus Christ (who as
^. Cor. 15. 48, 49
a second Adam is made unto us the Author and Fountain of all heavenly
things) shall at last in fullness, and does even now in flashes and glimmerings
shine forth upon his members. And all this we have from those great and
precious promises which are made unto us of Holiness and of Blessedness. For
as we say of the Word in general, so more especially of the Promises, they are
operative words, and do produce some real effects, being received by faith.
As a man when he receives a deed signed, sealed, witnessed, and delivered,
does not only take parchment or wax, or empty words, but has thereby some
fundamental right created unto the things in the deed mentioned to be
conveyed, so that the deed is declaratorie and operative of some Real effects:
so in the word and promises of God sealed by the blood of Christ, ratified by
the oath of the Covenant, testified by the Spirit of Truth, delivered by the
hand of Mercy, and received by the hand of Faith, there does not only pass
empty breath and naked words, but also some Real effects by the intendment of
God are thereby produced; namely, the cleansing of our sinful nature from the
pollutions of the world, and the transforming thereof into the image and purity
of the divine nature.

Fourthly, Promises are the efficient causes of our purification, as they are
the Rays and Beams of Christ the Sun of Righteousness, in whom they are
all founded and established. They are All in him Yea, and in him 2. Cor. 1 20.
Amen. Every promise by faith apprehended carries a man to Christ, and to the
consideration of our unity with him, in the right whereof we have claim to the
Promises; even as every line in a circumference, though there never so distant
from other, does, being pursued, carry a man at last to one and the same
Center, common unto them all. For the Promises are not made for any thing in
us, nor have their stability in us, but they are made in and for Christ unto
us, unto Christ in our behalf, and unto us only so far forth as we are
members of Christ. For they were not made to seeds as many, but to seed, namely
Gal 3. 16. Caput and corpus unus est Christus. Aug.
to Christ, in aggregato, as comprehending the head and the members in the
unity of one body. So then every Promise carrying us to that Unity which we
have with Christ by his spirit (who is therefore called a spirit of Adoption,
because he vesteth us with the sonneship of Christ, and a spirit of holiness
and renovation, because he sanctifies us by the resurrection of Christ) does
thereby purify us from dead works, and conform the members Ephesians. 2. 21.
to the Head, building them up in an holy Temple and into an habitation of God
through that spirit by whom we are in Christ. In one word, Our interest in the
Promises is grounded upon our being in Christ, and being one with him; and our
being in him is the ground of our purification. Every branch in me that
brings forth fruit, my father purges, that it may bring forth more fruit.
And Ioh 15. 2.
in this respect the promises may be said to purify, as still carrying us to
our interest in Christ, in whom they are founded.

Fifthly and lastly, the Promises are causes of our purification, as Exemplars,
patterns, and seeds of purity unto us. For the Promises are in themselves
Exceeding great 2. Pet. 1. 4.
and precious, Every Word of God is pure and tried like Prove. 30. 5. Psalm 12.
6. 19 89. 119 140.
gold seven times in the fire, it is right, and clean, and true, and
altogether righteous, and therefore very lovely and attractive, apt to
sanctify and cleanse the soul. Sanctify them by thy truth (says Christ) thy
Word is truth, Ioh. 17. 17. Ioh 15. 3.
and again, Now ye are clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you.
For the Word is Seed, and seed a similates earth and dirt into its own pure
and clean nature. So by the Word there is a trans-elementation, as it were,
and conforming of our foul and earthie nature (...). Isis. (...). 1. Ioh 3 9.
to the spiritualnesse of it self. Therefore the Apostle uses this for an
argument, why the regenerate cannot si^ (namely in that universal and complete
manner as others do) because they have the seed of God abiding in them, that
is, his Word, Spirit, and Promises abating the strength of lust, and swaying
them to a contrary point. For thus the Word of promise makes a man's heart to
argue. Has God of mere Grace made assurance of so precious things to me who
by nature am a filthy and unclean Creature, obnoxious to all the curses and
vengeance in his book? Has he wrought so great deliverance, Ezra 9 13. 14.
and laid up such unsearchable riches for my soul? and should I again break
his Commandments, and join in the abominations of other men? Would he not be
angry till he had consumed me; so that there should be no escaping? Should I
not rather labor to feel the comforts and power of these Promises,
encouraging me to walk worthy of so great meroy, and so high a calling? to
walk meet for the participation of the Inheritance of the Saints in light?
Shall I that am reserved to such honor, live in the mean time after the lusts
of the Gentiles, who have no hope? Quid nos pro Domino (...) bono facere
convenit, cum ille pro mal^s servis tanta fecerit. Salvian. li. 4.
Has God distinguished me by his Spirit and Promises from the world, and shall
I confound my self again? Shall I requite evil for good to the hurt of mine
own soul? These and the like are the reasonings of the heart from the beauty
and purity of the Promises.

Thirdly and lastly, Promises are Arguments to infer our Purification,
because in many of them that is the very Matter of which they consist, and so
the power and fidelity of God is engaged for our Purification. I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity whereby they have sinned Ier. 33. 8.
against me, says the Lord. And again, I will sprinkle Ezekiel. 36. 25.
clean water upon you and you shall be clean: from all your filthiness and
from all your idols will I cleanse you, etc. And again, They shall not defile
themselves any more Ezekiel 37. 23.
with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions, but I will save them, and I will cleanse them. And again, I
will heal their backeslidings, Hos 14. 4.
I will Love them freely. The Lord will wash away the filth of Psalm 4 4.
the daughters of Sion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof
by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the spirit of burning. Which Promises,
bringing along the fidelity and power of God to our faith, do settle our
hearts amidst all the corruptions and impotencies of our nature. When the
conscience is once thoroughly acquainted with the sight of its own foulness,
with the sense of that life and power which is in concupiscence, it finds it
then a great difficulty to rest in any hope of having lusts either subdued or
forgiven. The Psalmist, when his sore ran, and ceased not, refused to be
comforted, thought himself cast out of Gods favor, as if his mercies were
exhausted, and his promises come to an end, and his compassions were shut up,
and would show themselves no more. Therefore in this case the Lord carries our
Faith to the consideration of his Power, Grace, and Fidelity, which surpasses
not only the knowledge but the very conjectures and contrivances of the hearts
of men. The Apostle says, That Christ was declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead*
That Spirit which raised Him Romans 1. 4. Romans 6. 4. Ephesians. 1. 19 20. Col. 2. 12.
from the dead is therefore called a spirit of Holiness, because the
sanctifying of a sinner is a resurrection, and requires the same power to
effect it, which raised Christ from the dead. When Saint Paul had such a bitter
conflict with the thorn in his flesh, the vigor and stirrings of concupiscence
within him, he had no refuge nor comfort 2. Cor. 12. 9. Mi^. 7. 18. 19. Esa^.
43. 25.
but only in the sufficiency of Gods grace, which was able in due time to
work away and purge out his lusts. And the prophet makes this an argument of
Gods great power above all other Gods, that he subdueth iniquities, and
blotteth out transgressions. Though we know not how this can be done, that
such dead bones, souls that Ezekiel. 37. 3.
are even rotten in their sins, should be cleansed from their filthiness,
and live again: yet he knows; and therefore when we are at a stand, and know
not what to 2. Chro. 20. 12.
do to Cure our lusts, then we may by faith fix our Eyes upon him, whose
grace, power, wisdom, fidelity is all in these his promises put to gage for
our purification.

Thus we see how promises in general do work to the Cleansing of us from
filthiness of flesh and spirit. The same might at large be showed in many
particulars. I will but name those in the words before the Text (to which it
referres.) The Lord promises to Dwell in us as in spiritual Temples, and this
proves that we ought to keep our selves Clean, that we may be fit
habitations for so Dovelike and pure a spirit. Flee for^ication (says the
Apostle) why? know you not that your body is the Temple ^. Cor 6. 18. 19. 20.
of the holy Ghost which is in you -- therefore glorify God in your bodies and
spirits for they are Gods. And again. If any man defile the Temple of God, him
shall God destro^* 1. Cor. 3. 16, 17.
for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. He promises to be Our
Father, and make us his people, and this also is a strong argument why we
should purify our selves, and as obedient children not fashion our selves
according 1. Pet 1. 14. 17.
to the former lusts in ignorance, but as he who has called us is holy* so
should we be holy in all manner of conversation. And if we call him father, who
without respect of persons judges according to every man's works, we should
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. Ye are a chosen generation
(says Saint Peter) a royal priesthood, 1. Pet. 2* 9. 11.
a holy nation, a peculiar people, that you should show forth the virtues of
him, who has called you out of darkness Ephesians. 2. 12, 19.
into his mavelous light. When ye were of the world, ye were then strangers
to the Covenant, and aliens from the house and Israel of God, but now being
become Gods household, ye are strangers and pilgrims in the present world, and
should therefore abstain from the lusts of the flesh, which are sensual and
worldly things. Those that are a peculiar people, are a purged 1. Ioh. 2. 16.
people ^oo. He will purify to himself a peculiar people, that they may be
zealous of good work^s. Tit. 2. 14.


The consideration of which things should make us labor to settle our hearts
to believe, love, and prize the promises, to store up and hide the word in our
hearts, to have it Dwell richly in us, that in evil times and days of
temptation we may have some holdfast to rely upon. In times of plenty,
security, and peace, men go calmely on without fear or suspicion; but when
stonnes arise, when God either hides his face, or lets out his displeasure, or
throws men upon any extremities, then there is no hope Psa. 119. 89-91.
but in our a^ker, no stay nor relief but in Gods promises, which are settled
and sure, established in heaven, and therefore never reversed or cancelled in
the earth: And if this faithful and sure word had not bin Da^ids delight and
comfort, if he had not in all the changes and chances of his own ^ife
remembered, that al Gods promises are made in heaven, where there is no
inconstancy, nor repentance, he had perished in his affliction. Though David
by a prophetical 2. Sam. 23. 5.
spirit foresaw that God would not make his house to grow, but to become a dry
and withered stock of ^esse, Esai. 11. 1.
yet herein was the ground of all his salvation and of all his desire, that the
Lord had made with him an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and
(...), that he had (...) Psalm. 89. 35* 36.
by his hol^nesse that he would not fail David; so that it was as possible for
God to be unholy, as for the Word of promise made unto David to fall to the
ground, and be untrue.

Now that we may the better apply the Promises to our selves, and establish
our hearts in the truth and fidelity of God by them, we may make use of these
few Rules, amongst diverse others which might be given.

First, Promis^s generally made, and so in medio for all, or particularly to
some, are by the ground of them equally appliable to any in any condition unto
which the promises are ^utable. All the promises are but as one in Christ, as
lines though several in the circumference do meet as one in the center. Take
any promise and follow it to its original, and it will undoubtedly carry to
Christ, in whom alone it is Yea and Amen, that is has its truth, certainety,
and stability all from him. Now the Promises meeting in Christ* cannot be
severed or have a partition made o^ them to several men (for every believer
has All Christ, Christ is not divided) any other wise then the exigence of
men's present estates does diversifie them, and so fit them for such promises as
now to others, or at other times to themselves would be unseasonable and
unapp^able. The Lord in aslenting to Salomons prayer, made a 1. King 8. 37. 4^
general promise to any man, or to all the people* that what prayer or
supplication soever should be made toward his temple, he would hear in heaven
and forgive, etc. (...) being after in distress, applied this general to 2
Chr. 20. 8. (...).
hi^ (...) present (...), when the children of Ammon, (...)* and Mount Seir
came to turn Israel out of their possessions. The Lord made a particular
promise (...) Joshua, that he would be with him to bless his enterprises Ios*
1. 5. 6.
against the Cananites, and to carry him through all the difficulties and
hazards of that holy war; and Saint Paul applies the promise to all the
faithful in any Heb. 13. 5.
straites or distresses of life, as the Lord himself had before applied it
from Moses to Joshua, Let your conversation be without covetousness -- for as
God was with Joshua, so will he be with thee, He will not fail thee nor
forsake thee. Christ made a particular promise unto Peter, I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not. And Luk 22. ^2. Ioh. 7. 15.
the same in effect he applies to All his, I pray that thou would keep them
from the ev^ll. And the consequent words to Saint Peter make it good; When thou
art con verted strengthen thy brethren, that is, comfort and revive them by
thine own experience, that when they are brought unto the like case with thee
they may have the benefit of the same intercessor and the sympathy and
compassion of the same Savior who delivered thee. As our Savior says in
matter of duty. What ^ (...) unto you, I say unto All, so we may say of him in
matter of mercy, What he promises unto any, he promises unto al^ in an equal
estate. It is good therefore to observe the truth of God in his Promises to
others, and when we find our selves reduced unto their condition, to apply it
unto our Romans 15. 4.
selves, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope.
This is the counsel of Saint ^awes, Take my brethren the Prophets for an
exam^le of suffering Iam. 5. 10, 11.
affliction and of patience -- ye have heard of the patience of ^ob, and ye
have seen the end of the Lord that the Lord is very pitiful and (...). And
saint 2. Cor. (...)*
Paul assures us that for this cause God comforted him in his tribulation, that
he might be able to comfort them who might be in any trouble with the comfort
wherewith ^ee himself had been comforted by God. A poor Christian might
object, A^as If I were an Apostle* if I had such graces, such services, such
ways of glorifying God as Paul had, I might hope for the same power and
providence of God in my afflictions as he finds. But I am a poor ignorant,
unfruitful, and unserviceable creature, who do more blemish then adorn my
profession of the Gospel of Christ, and shall I look for such care from God
as saint Paul? Beloved, the members in the body would not so argue; If I were
an eye, or a tongue, one of the noblest parts of the body, happily some
compassion and remedy might be showed me in my distempers; but I am but a joint
of the foot, or a mean, dishonorable, and less serviceable member,
therefore though I am tormented with a gout or stone, the tongue will not
speak, the head will not work, the hand will not distribute any thing for me.
The Children in a family would not so argue; my father is careful to provide
physic, and cure the diseases of my brother, because he is grown up to do
him credit, and his country service, but I am but a child, that lie upon him,
and do no work, I am unable for any employments, and therefore I shall perish
in my disease without care or regard. Surely if the members of a body, or the
children of men, who are evil, would not thus argue, how much less reason
have any of Christ's, who have a head entrusted with the care of his meanest
members, and a father tender of the false and failings of his weakest children?
Thus rather should the soul resolve. Though Paul had more grace then I, yet he
had no more me^t then I. All the compassion which was showed unto him was out
of favor and mercy, not out of debt or duty; and my wants and miseries make
me as fit for mercy as he was; and the compassion of a father is
most*commended toward the unworthiest and most unprofitable child.

Secondly, ' Promises in themselves are certain, but the ways of performance
are often undiscernable and hidden; therefore we must live by Faith, and not
by reason, and measure the Truth of Gods Words by the strength of his Power,
and not by our own conceits or apprehensions. When we look upon God in his
Promises, we must conceive of him as a God infinite in wisdom to contrive,
and in Power to bring about the execution of his own will. There is a Promise
made of calling the Jews unto Christ, and causing them to turn from their
transgressions. The Redeemer shall come unto Sion, and unto them that return
from transgression in Jacob, Esai. 59* 20. But he who should consider the
extreme obstinacy and stubbornness of that people against the Gospel, would
think it impossible, that they should ever be pulled out of the s^are of the
Devil; therefore the Apostle makes Gods Power the ground of certainty in this
promise, They also shall be grafted in again, for God is able to graffe them
in -- As it is written, There shall come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodlynesse from Jacob, Romans 11. 23. 26. The Sadduces and Gentiles
derided the Doctrine and Promise of the Resurrection from the dead; and our
Savior carries the one from their own prejudice unto Gods Power; ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, Math. 22. 29. And Saint Paul
the other, from their reason unto Faith in God, Why should it be thought a
thing incredible with you, that God should raise the Dead? Act. 26. 8.
Therefore we shall find men's unbelief in Scripture has risen partly from
apprehension of power in those whom they fear, and partly from apprehension of
impotencie in those whom they should trust. When the Israelites heard of Giants
and sons of An^k in the promised la^d, presently they murm^ed against the
Lord and his Servants, and provoked him by their unbeleefe of his mighty power
which they had had so frequent experience of* How long will this people provoke
me? How long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have
showed amongst them? Numb. 14. 1, 11. They provoked him again by infidelity
in the wilderness, when they asked meat for their Just, and that was by
calling the Power of God in question; They spoke against God, they said, can
God furnish a table in the Wilderness? Behold he smote the Rock that the
Waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; but can he give bread also,
can he provide flesh for his people? Psalm. 78. 19. 20. They measured God by
their own reason, and charged God with that impotencie which they found in
themselves. This was the sin of that noble man who attended upon the king of
Israel in the great famine at Samaria; when the Prophet foretold a mavelous
plenty which should suddenly come to the place, he measured Gods Power by his
own conceits of possibility in the thing, If the Lord would make windows in
heaven, this thing could not be, 2. King. 7. 2. There was a Promise made unto
Israel to restore them out of that great captivity of Babylon, and this seemed
to them as incredible as for men to be raised out of their Graves after so
many years consumption, therefore they said* our bones are dried up, and our
hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts. We have no more reason to
believe any promise, or to rest upon any expectations of deliverance, then dead
bones have to revive again. Therefore the Lord acquainteth them with his Power
together with his Promises. O my people ye sha^^ know that I am the Lord! that
is, that my ways and thoughts are infinitely above your shallow apprehensions,
when I shall have brought you out of your Graves, Ezekiel. 37. 11. 13. Though
there should be famine, and mountains between Gods people and his promises,
famine to weaken their feet that they could not crawle away, and mountains to
stop their passage which they could not climb nor overpasse, yet when there
was no might nor power left in them, the Spirit of the Lord should be their
strength, their feet should be like Hindes feet to skippe over the
mountains, and the mountains should be as a plain before them, Hab. 3. 17.
18. 19. Zach. 4. 6, 7. All doubts and distrusts arise from this that men make
their own thoughts the measure of Gods strength, and have low and unworthy
conceits of his Power. This therefore in all difficulties we must frame our
hearts unto to look of from second causes, from the probabilities or
possibilities which are obvious to our reason, and admire the unsearchablenesse
of Gods Power and wisdom, which is above all the thoughts of man. If a rich
man should promise a beggar a great sum of money, and he should discomfort
himself with such plodding scruples as these: Alas these are but the words of
a man who means well, and takes compassion on my poverty; but how can he
possibly make good this promise? If I should engage my self thus to another
poor man, I should be sure to fail his expectations and ^latter him with
wind, what quiet or comfort could he have? but he would have more wisdom
then to measure rich men by his own poverty and baseness. So should we do
in any difficulties and distresses either from sins, afflictions, or
temptations. As Abraham did (...) not at the Promise of God through unbelief
but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what
he had promised he was able to perform, Romans 4. 19 20. And after, he offered
up his Son in faith, because he knew that God was able to raise him even from
the dead from whence he had before in a figure received him namely from a dead
and barren womb, Heb. 11. 29. Th^s was Jobs only comfort upon the dunghill,
That that God who would after worms had consumed his flesh* raise him up at
the last day, and make him with those very eyes to see his (...), had power
enough in his due time to deliver from that woeful (...) into which he had ^st
him, and to revive his strength and estate again, Job. 19. 25. 26. 27. A man
happily is haunted and pursued with such or such an unclean affection, is
wearied in wrestling with it, and cannot prevail (as indeed there is nothing
that cleaves more pertinaciously, or is more inexpugnable, then a strong and
importunate lust. What must he now do? sink under the weight? is there no
remedy, nor way of escape? God forbid. When his own strength and wisdom
fails him, let him look off from himself unto the power and promises of that
God, who is All-sufficient to save to the uttermost those that come unto him by
Christ. He is a Refiner, a Sun of Righteousness that can cure the
barrenness of our hearts by the healing virtue of his wings, and purgeaway our
dross and corruptions from us. That Promise which God made to Paul in the
stirrings and conflicts of his concupiscence is made unto all of his temper, My
Grace is sufficient for thee; and there are two things in that promise, Grace
to make it, and Sufficiency to fulfill it. Lay aside says the Apostle, every
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset you. Alas, may the Soul
answer, if it be a weight, how shall I moove it? If it be a be^ieging and
encompassing sin, that does so easily occupate and invade all my faculties,
how shall I repel or drive it of well, says the Apostle, if you cannot quit
your selves of your clog and burden, yet run with patience the race which is
set before you, be content to draw your chain, and to lugge your lusts after
you. But how can the soul be patient under such heavy and such close
corruptions? under the motions, importunities, and immodest solicitations of so
many and so adulterous lusts? Look, faith he, unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of your faith; consider him -- lest ye be wearied and faint in your
minds. He does not any of his works by halfes; he is a Perfect Savior, He
finisheth all the works which are given him to do; If he have begun a good
work in you, he is able to perfect it; if he be now the Author, he will in
due time be the Accomplisher of your Faith.

We must note, All the promises are made in Christ; being purchased by his
merits, and they are all performed in Christ, being administered by his power
and office. And in Christ, we must note, there is, first, a will that we
should be holy, expressed in his prayer to his father, sanctify them by thy
truth. Ioh: 17. 17. Secondly, a power Heb. 7. 25. Ioh. 5. 21. Ioh 10. 36. Ioh.
6. 27.
to execute that will, he is able to save those that come unto God by him; and
he quickneth whom he will. Thirdly, both his will and power are backed and
strengthened with authority and an office so to do, for he was sanctified and
sealed by his father unto this purpose. Fourthly, he is furnished with
Abundance of wisdom to contrive, and of fidelity to employ both his will,
power, and office, for fulfilling all Gods promises of grace and mercy. In him
there were treasures of wisdom, and he is a merciful and Col. 2. 3. Heb 2.
17. Heb. 2. 11. Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 12. 3. Heb. 3. 6.
faithful high priest. Fifthly, to all this he is further engaged by his
consanguinitie with us; he is our brother by his sympathy and compassion
toward us; he has felt the weight of sin in the punishment thereof, and the
Contradiction of sinners, and lastly by his propriety unto us; he should
defraud himself, if he should not fulfill all his promises to the church; for
the church is His own house. All the promises are made to Him, in aggregato,
with his Church, To the seed of Abraham, that is To Christ, namely to the head
and members together. As when any evil befalls the church he is Afflicted; so
in all the Advancements of the Esai. 63. 9.
church he is honored, and, in a sort, further filled; for the church is His
fulness. Though as God, as man, as mediator, Ephesians. 1. 23.
he be full by himself; yet as Head he accounts himself maimed and
incomplete without his members. So that when Christ pleads and prays for the
Church he is an Advocate and Intercessor in his own business; for the
Affairs of the Church are His.

Thirdly, promises are many times subordinate to one another, and are performed
in an order, succession, and depeudencie. Therefore we must not anticipate, nor
perturbe the order which God has put in his Promises, but wait upon him in
his own way. Grace and Glory will he give, but first Grace before Glory, no
man must snatch Psalm. 84. 11.
at this promise till he have interest in that. Godliness has the promises
of this life, and of that to come; but we must note the order which our
Savior puts, first seek the Kingdom and Righteousness of Goa, and then all
these things shall be added unto you. The Lord Promises to call men unto
Christ, Nations that knew thee not shall Esai. ^5. 5. 1. The. 4. 7.
run unto thee. The Apostle telsus whereunto he calls, God has not called
us unto uncleanness, but unto Holiness. Therefore in the next place he
promises to sanctify and cleanse his Church; I will put my Law in their Ie^.
31. 33*
hearts, and in their inward parts. The qualification of this Holiness is,
that it be whole and constant. The very 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
God of Peace Sanctify you, and preserve you blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Is the Apostles prayer for the Thessalonians. Therefore
in the next place, God promises Perseverance, I will not turn away from Ie^.
32. 40.
them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. But this Perseverance is not so certain, but that it
admits of falls, slippes, and miscarriages; therefore in that case, He promises
healing and restoring. I will heal their backes^idings, Hos. 11. 3. Hos. 14.
4. Ezekiel. 34. 16.
I will love them freely. I will bind up that which is broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick. And after all this comes the promise of Glory,
and Salvation. Now then we must wait upon the promises in their own order.
When God has called us to the knowledge of Christ, we must not skip over all
the intermediate linkes, and look presently for the accomplishment of Gods
promise of Salvation, or perseverance by Gods sole Power, and in the mean time
omit all care of Holiness in our conversation. When we are sanctified, we
must not resolve then to sit still, as if all our work were at an end, and
expect salvation to drop into our lappes. But we must make it our care, and
esteem it our own duty to continue faithful unto the end, that so we may
receive a Crown of Life. For God does not fulfill his promises in us only,
but by us too; and those things which in regard of his Word are his promises,
are also in regard of his command our Duties. And therefore we must take the
promises in that Connection, and dependencie which they have amongst themselves.

Fourthly, promises, though always necessary, are yet most useful in
Extremities, and therefore it is best for us to store up of all sorts; though
we see no present use of some particulars, yet we know not what time may bring
forth, what ways God my please to try us by. Secondly, It is best to acquaint
our hearts with those which are most general, pretions, fundamental, wherein
Gods Power and Goodness is principally seen, and from them it will be easy
to infer the rest. As Job argues from the Job 19. 25. 27.
final resurrection to a deliverance from the dunghill. And Psa. 56. 13.
David from the deliverance of his Soul from Hell, to the deliverance of his
feet from falling. And Habakuk, Hab. 3. 3. 16. 17.
from the deliverance out of Egypt and the wilderness, to the deliverance out
of Babylon. And Abraham from Heb. 11. 19.
a miraculous generation in a dead womb to a miraculous restitution of Isaak
from the dead again. And Paul from a deliverance out of the mouth of the Lion,
to a deliverance from every evil work. Some notable act of 2. Tim. 4. 17. 18.
Gods mercy and providence may be applyable to several more particulars;
because experience works hope. Romans 5. 4.
Thirdly, It is good to bring a man's self to a view of extremities in
himself, to keep fresh in his eye the nakedness, poverty, and utter
disability that is in him to further his own happiness; and that will fit
him to go with Patience and Faith through any other exigencies which he may
be brought to. There is as little ground why a sinner should believe and trust
God for the forgiveness of his sins; as Hope fo^r any comfort and support in
his distresses. If a man can therefore now keep before him a distinct view of
the filthynesse of his sins, and that anguish and extremities which it
brings, and live by Faith in the remission of them, he will be much the more
fitted to trust and lean on God in the midst of any other distresses. There
is not so much evil, so much unremoveablenesse, and unmitigablenesse in any
(...) or misery, as there is in sin; and therefore if we can trust God for
pardon, purging, and extinguishing of sin, we may much more trust him for the
supporting of us under, or del^vering us from any other evil.

Fifthly, experience of Gods Wisdom, Truth, and Power in some promises will
settle and establish the heart in dependence, and expectation of the like in
others. Sense does corroborate and confirm Faith. And this we shall observe
to be a very frequent argument in Holy Scriptures to conclude Gods favor for
the present or future, by his proceedings past. When the Israelites were afraid
of the Anakims and Giants of the Land, this was Moses his argument, Dread not,
neither be afraid of them; Deuteronomy. 1. 29. 31.
the Lord your God which goes before you, he shall fight for you, according
to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes, and in the wilderness,
etc. And again, I commanded Joshua, says he, at that time saying. Thine eyes
Deuteronomy. 3. 21.
have seen all that the Lord your God has done unto these two Kings: So shall
the Lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest. So David argued
against G^liah, The Lord did deliver me from a Lion and a Bear, 1. Sam. 17.
35* 37
therefore he will deliver me from this Philistime. And S. Paul, The Lord has
delivered from a sentence of Death, 2. Cor. 1. 9, 10.
and does deliver, therefore I trust that he will deliver. So the faithful
argue in the Prophet. Art not thou Esai. 51. 9, 11.
he that did cut Rahab, and wound the Dragon; that did dry the Sea, the
waters of the d^pe and mad^st a passage through the d^pths of the Sea for the
ransomed to pass over. Therefore the Redeemed of the Lord shall return and
come with singing unto Sion, etc. These and sundry the like examples were
written for our learning that we also through comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope; that we might learn to store up the passages of Gods providence in
our lives, that they may be for presidents and rules in after times. Men are
apt to sink under the present sense of any evil that presses them, because
they do not look ba^kward to Gods former ways of mercy toward them; whereas
if men could thus argue, I have known a famine, and felt a pinching season so
long agone, and I did then outlive it, and Gods providence cared for me and
^arried me through that plunge and distress: I have felt a sore disease, and
been in the mouth of the Grave and yet I live to praise Gods power: The
buffets of Satan have heretofore bruized my soul, and I have been even
drencht in mine own sorrows, and swallowed up of despairing and uncomfortable
thoughts, and yet out of them all the Lord has delivered me, and let his
countenance shine upon me again: And he is the same God still, as full of
compassion to com^iserate my calamities, as full of power to effect, as full of
wisdom to contrive, as full of fidelity to perform his own Promises, as he
was before: And therefore I will wait upon him in the ways of his own mercy,
and rest in the constancy, immutability, indeficiencie of that God with whom
there is no variableness, neither shadow of changing: I say if men could thus
learn to comfort their hearts by their experiences and review of Gods former
proceedings, they might with the more quietness and silent affections expect
the salvation of the Lord again.

Sixthly* The same thing in temporal and inferior blessings may belong to one
man, only ex largitate, out of that general providence which causes the S^nne
to shine on the good and the bad alike; and to another ex promisso, out of Gods
promise; because god^ynesse has the promises of this life as w^ll as of that
to come. Now there is a vast difference between these two, to have a thing
only out of patience and forbearance, and to have it out of engagement and
promise. For by the promise there is a discharge of all the forfeitures,
encumbrances, vexations, perplexities which attended the same thing. As in
temporal, so in spiritual and theological respects, there is a great
difference in Tenures touching the same things. The wicked in the earthly
things they enjoy are wholly Tenants at will, they have no engagement at all
from God, they may be thrust out every hour; for all their right was forfeited
in Adam, and restored unto them only by a General providence during Gods good
pleasure: as a condemned malefactor till the time of his execution has some
thing allowed him out of favor, but may at pleasure be cut off from it. But
the faithful have all things by inheritance, by the Right of Christ's purchase,
and by Covenant in him. Not only things present, but things to come are
theirs; they have the Truth of God pawned for their preservation and supplies
so long as they continue in his way; A way of Piety, industry, and honesty.
And they have them for themselves and their seed. The promises were to Abraham
and his seed. I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their
bread. The wicked have earthly things only as d^ensations and employments, nay
as vexations, and toils of life; as idols, snares, and thorns, things that
e^tangle their hearts, and take them of from God. As a cloud exhaled by the
Sun hides the light of the Sun which drew it up; (...). (...). ad pop. A^.
Homil. Deuteronomy 8. 12. 14. Ho^. 13. 5, 6.
as a Worm eats out the wood, and rust consumes the Iron which breeds it; as
water in a vessel raised by the fire, puts out the fire which raised it: so
the great estates and temporal blessings of God unto evil men, serve but to
intercept the thoughts, and to blot out the notions and remembrance of him that
gave them I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou sata'st I will not
hear. And this has been thy manner from thy youth, says the Lord, Ier. 22.
21. But the faithful have earthly things as rewards of their righteousness,
as an accession, advantage, and overplus unto the Kingdom of God; as
testimonies of Gods Love, and care of them; as exercises of their
thankfulness, charity, mercy, etc.

But it may be objected, why then have not the faithful more abundance of
these things then worldly men? I answer, first, A little that the righteous
has is better then great poss^ssions of the ungodly. For first they have the
maine substance of these things as well as the other, they live, and eat, and
are clothed as well as they; and secondly they have the comforts more, less
anguish of heart, vexation and contention of mind then the others have. And to
them it is all one whether they go into heaven through the gate or through the
wicket. As a Bird with a little eye and the advantage of a wing to soar up
withal may see far wider then an Ox with a greater: so the righteous with a
little estate, joined with faith, tranquillity and devotion, may have more
pleasure, feel more comfort, see more of Gods bounty and mercy, then a man of
vast possessions, whose heart cannot lift it self above the earth. Secondly,
As nature when she intends a farther and more noble perfection, is less
curious and elaborate in inferior faculties: (As man is exceeded by the Eagle
for sight, and the Hound for sent, and the hare for swiftness, because nature
intending in him a more spiritual and divine Soul, chose to be less delicate
and exact in the senses) so God intending to bestow upon the faithful a far
more exceeding and abundant weight of heavenly glory, does not always so fully
enlarge his hand toward them in these earthly things, as to those who have no
other portion but in this life. We see then how much it concerns us to look
unto the ground of our Tenure, to observe in what service we hold our estate,
whether as appurtenances to Gods kingdom; or as merely the pastures of a
beast, which do only fatten against the day of slaughter.

Seventhly and lastly, Gods Promises to us must be the grounds of our prayers
to him. When ever God makes a promise, we must make a prayer. And there are
two things in this Rule to be observed. First, that we can make no prayer in
boldness, faith, or comfort, but for things promised. For if we will have God
hear us, we 1. Ioh 5. 14. Iam. 1. 6.
must pray according to his will: we must ask in faith, we must see the things
we ask made Ours in some promise and engagement before we must presume to ask
them. This (as we have before observed) encouraged David, 2. Sam. 7. 27. 28. 29
2. Chro. 20. 8. 12. Dan. 9. 2, 3 Nehem. 1. 8. 11. Psalm. 132. 10. 11. Psalm 89.
19. 49.
Iehoshaphat, and Daniel to pray unto God, because he had made promises of the
things they desired, and therefore they were certain that they prayed
according to his will. This was Nehemiahs ground in his prayer for the
reparation of Jerusalem. Remember, I beseech thee, the word which thou
commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, if ye trangresse, I will scatter you
abroad: But (...) you turn unto me and keep my commandments and do them,
though there were of you c^st out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet
will I gather them from thence, etc. Now these are thy servants and thy people
whom thou have redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong band. O Lord, I
beseech thee, let now thine ^are be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and
to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name, etc.

Secondly, that God will not perform promises, till by prayer they be sought
for from him; till in our humble desires we declare that we account his
promises exceeding great and pre^ous things. The Lord had promised Ezekiel. 36. 37.
deliverance unto Israel, yet says the Lord, For this I will be enquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them. Thus says the Lord, After seventie
years be accomplish^d at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward Ier. 29. 10. 13.
you, in causing you to return to the ^lace. For I know the thoughts that I
think toward you* thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you an expected
end. But how shall this excellent promise of God be effected; It follows*
(...) upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto m^, and I will hearken unto you,
etc. So again, The Lord makes a promise of forgiveness of sins, (...)
blotteth out thy transgression for mine Esai. 43. 25. 26.
own (...), and will not remember the sins. But for the execution of this
promise, God will be sought unto. Put mem remembrance, says he, and let us
plead together: for when we pray unto God to fulfill his promises, we testify
first, that they are promises of Mercy, and not of duty or debt; because God
is not bound to tender them unto us, but we to beg them of him. Secondly, we
declare our need, and by consequence estimation of them, and dependence upon
them. And lastly, we subscribe to the truth, and acknowledge the wisdom
power, fidelity, and ways that God has to make good all his own words unto
us. We have no reason therefore to esteem any thing a blessing, or fruit of
Gods Promise, which we do not receive from him upon our knees, and by the hand
of prayer. As promises are the Rule of what we may pray for in faith; so
prayer is the ground of what we may expect with comfort.

Th^s we see what use we are to make of the promises to (...) from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit: and the (...) we may make of them likewise to
perfect our 2. Pet. 1. 4* 8.
(...) the ^eare of God. For as the exceeding great ^d precious promises of God
do cleanse our natures, and make us ^scape the corruption^ or filthiness
which is i^ the world through lust; so do they serve to ad one 2. Pet. 3. 18.
grace to another, and to make them abound in us, till we come to cha^ity,
which is the bond of perfection, as Saint Peter shows. And again, Grow, says
he, in grace, and in the (...) of our Lord (...) Christ. The more a 2 Cor. 1.
20.
(...) does abound in the knowledge of Christ, who is the s^mme, fountain,
^le* treasury of all the promises, the more will he grow in grace and unto
perfection. For as some promises are in our hand, and performed already, as
Rewards for our service past: so others are still before our eyes, to call and
allure us, as the price unto which we Phil. 3. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 58.
p^este. Be ye steadfast and unmovable and abound always in the work of the
Lord, says the Apostle, for as much as you know that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Revel. 3. 10. 11. Heb. 10. 23. Romans 13. 11.
Holding fast, and going on has a Crown attending it. The more we proceed in
holiness, our salvation is still the Nearer unto us. If we lose not the things
which we 2. Ioh. ver. 8.
have wrought, we shall receive a full reward.

THE USE OF THE LAW.
ROMANS 7. 13. Was that then which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But
sin [namely was made death unto me] that it might appear sin, working
death in me by that which is good: That sin by the Commandment might become
exceeding sinful.
HEre we find the Original discovery of all that Sinfulness of sin which
we have hitherto insisted upon, namely the manifesting, and working property
which is in the Law of God. It will be therefore very requisite by way of
Appendixe to the preceding Treatise, and of manuduction to the consequent, to
unfeld out of these words The u^e of the Law; by which we shall more distinctly
understand the scope and purpose of the Holy Ghost, in loading the spirit of
man with the vanity of the Creature, and in shutting up the conscience under
the sinfulness of sin; both which have respect unto the Law, that as an
effect of the cursing, and this of the Convincing power thereof: and yet in
both nothing intended by God but Peace and Mercy.

The Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter shows that we are by nature
subject to the Law, and death, which is an unavoidable consequent of the breach
thereof, even as the wife is to her husband as long as he lives. And that by
Christ we are delivered from that subjection, who has shine our former
husband, and taken him out of the way, as the Apostle elsewhere speaks. Now
Col. 2. 14.
because this doctrine of justification by faith in Christ, and deliverance
from the Law by him, was mainely opposed by the Jews, and was indeed that
chief stumbling block which kept them from Christianity (which 1. Cor. 1 23.
Romans 9 32.
I take it was the reason why the false brethren, under pretense the better to
work on that people, to pacify affections Act. 15. 1 5. Gal. 2. 3. 4.
and reconcile parties, and ferruminate the Churches together would have
mingled the Law with Christ in the purpose of Justification, as the papids now
upon other reasons do:) Therefore the Apostle (who was very zealous for the
Salvation of his brethren and ki^sfolke according to the flesh) labors to
deer^ th^s doctrine from two maine objections in this Chapter, which it seems
the Jews did use against it.

The ground of both is tacitly implied, and it is the same general
hypothesis, or supposition that all deliverance is from evil, and carries
necessary relation to some mischief which it presupposes. Therefore if that
doctrine be true which teaches deliverance from the Law, then it must be
granted that the Law is evil; for to be unsubjected to that which is good is
no deliverance, but a wild and b^utish looseness. Now evil is but two fold,
either sin or death. So then if the Law be evil, it must be either sin or
death.

The former objection is made, verse. 7. What shall we say then, is the Law
sin, that we should now hear of a deliverance from it? Does not the
Scripture account the Law a privilege, an honor, an ornament to a people? and
from the Justness and Holiness of the Law conclude the dignity and greatness
of a nation? What nation Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
is so great, says Moses, which has statutes and judgments so righteous as I
set before you this day? He sh^weth Psalm. 147. 19. 20
his word unto Jacob, his statutes an^ judgments unto Israel; He has not
dealt so with every nation, says David. I sent unto them Honorabilta. Legis,
says the Lord, Hos. 8. 12.
the honorable and great things of my Law. but they were counted as a strange
thing. And is that which Moses and the Prophets esteemed a privilege and
honor become now a yoke and burden? Shall we admit a doctrine which
over-throwes the Law and the Prophets? To this the Apostle answers, God for
bid. The Law is not sin, for I had not known sin but by the Law. It is
true, sin took occasion by the Law to become more sinful, verse. 8. but this
was not occasio data but arrepta. no occasion naturally offered by the law, but
perversely taken by sin, whose venomous property it is to suck poison out of
that which is holy. So then the Law is not sin, though by accident it enrage
sin. For of itself it serves only to discover and reveal it, ver. 9. But
as the Gospel, as well when by men's perverseness it is a savor of death, as
when by its own gracious efficacy it is a savor of life is both ways a
sweet savor: So the Law either way, when by it self it discovers, and when
by accident it enrageth sin, is still Holy, lust and Good ver. 11

Upon this follows the second Objection in the words of the Text. Is that
which is good made death unto me? If a deliverance presuppose an evil in that
from which we are delivered, and no evil but belongs either to sin or death,
then admitting a deliverance from the Law, if it be good in respect of
holiness, it must needs be evil in the other respect; and then that which is
good is made death unto me. And this casts a more heavy aspersion and
dishonor upon God then the former, that he should give a Law merely to kill
men, and make that which in its nature is good, to be mortal in its use and
operation. Wine, strong waters, hard meats are of themselves very good to
those purposes unto which they are proper: yet under pretense of their
goodness to cra^me the stomicke of a sucking infant with them, would not be
kindness but cruelty, because they would not in that case comfort or nourish,
but kill. Gold is good of it self, but to fetter a man with a chain of gold
would be no bounty, but a mockery. So to conceive God to publish a Law good
indeed in it self, but deadly to the subjects, and to order that which is holy
in its nature, to be harmefull and damnable to the Creature in its use, is so
odious an aspersion upon so just and gracious a God, as may safely bring into
suspicion and disgrace any doctrine which admits of so just an exception. Now
to this likewise the Apostle answers, God forbid. The Law is not given to
condemn or clogge men, not to bring sin or death into the world; It was not
promulgated with any intention to kill or destroy the Creature. It is not sin
in it self; It is not death unto us, in that sense as we preach it (namely as
subordinated to Christ and his Gospel.) Tnough as the rule of righ^eousnesse
we preach deliverance from it, because unto that purpose it is made impotent
and invalid by the sin of man, which now it cannot prevent, or remove, but
only discover and condemn.

Both these Conclusions that the Law is neither sin nor death, I find the
Apostle before in this Epistle excellently provi^g. Until the Law sin was in
the world; but sin is not imputed where there is no Law: nevertheless, Romans
5. 13. (...).
death ^atgned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression. That is, as I conceive, over those who did
not sin^e against. so notable and evident Characters of the Law of nature,
written in their hearts, as Adam in Paradise did (for sin had between Adam
and Moses so obliterated and defaced the impressions of the moral Law, that
man stood in need of a new edition and publication of it by the hand of Moses.)
That place serves thus to make good the purpose of the Apostle in this. Sin
was in the world before the publication of the Law, therefore the Law is not
sin. But sin was not imputed where there is no Law; men were secure and did
flatter themselves in their way, were not apt to charge or condemn themselves
for sin, without a Law to force them unto it. And therefore the Law did not
come a new to beget sin, but to reveal and discover sin. Death likewise
not only was in the world, but reigned even over all men therein, before the
publication of the Law. Therefore the Law is not death neither. There was Death
enough in the world before the Law, there was wickedness enough to make
condemnation reign over all men; therefore neither one nor other are natural
or essential consequences of the Law. It came not to beget more sin; it came
not to multiply and double condemnation; there was enough of both in the world
before. Sin enough to displease and provoke God, death enough to devour and
torment men. Therefore if the Law had been useful to no other purposes, then
to enrage sin, and condemn men; if Gods wisdom and power had not made it
appliable to more wholesome and saving ends, he would never have new published
it by the hand of Moses.

Here then the observation which from these words we are to make, (and it is a
point of singular and special consequence to understand the use of the Law) is
this. That the Law was revived, and promulgated a new on Mount Sina, by the
ministry of Moses, with no other then Evangelicall and merciful purposes. It
is said in one place, That the Lord has no pleasure in the death of him that
Ezekiel. 18. 32. Mic 7. 18.
dies: but it is said in another place, That the Lord delights in mercy.
Which notes, that God will do more for the Salvation, then he will for the
damnation of men; He will do more for the magnifying of his mercy, then for
the multiplying of his wrath: for if that require it, he will revive and new
publish the Law, which to have aggravated the sins, and so doubled the
condemnation of men, He would never have done.

Before I further evidence the truth of this doctrine, It will be needful to
remove one Objection which does at first proposal thereof offer it self. If
God will do more for his mercy, then for his wrath and vengeance, why then
are not more men saved, then condemned? If Hell shall be more filled then
Heaven, is it not more then probable that wrath prevails against Grace, and
that there is more done for fury, then there is for favor. To wave the
solution given by Massilienses in Epist. Prospe^ ad Aug. and in Epist. Petri
Diaco^ad (...). cap. 7.

Aug. (...) ^eccat, Merit. and Re^s. li^ 1. cap. 28. D^ Nupt. and Concupiscent.
l^b. 2 cap. 27.

Contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 4. c. 8. and lib. 6. c^p. 24. De praed^tinat.
Sancto^um ad Prosper. and Hilar. lib. 1. cap. 8. De Corrept. and Great. cap. 14.
Epist. 107. ad Vi^alem.

Euchi^id. cap. 9^. and cap. 103. Prosper de vocat. Gent lib. 1. cap. 3 4, 5.
lib. 2. cap. 1. 10.

Idem E^ist, ad R^ffin. and ad Capitul. Gallor. ^p. 8.

Fulgent. de Incarnat. and G^t. Christ^, cap. 29. ^0* 31.

^thor Hypo^. l. 6. c. ^.


some, That God will intentionally and effectually have every man to be saved,
but few of that every will have themselves to be saved. -- (An explication
purpos^ly contradicted by Saint Austin, and his followers, whose most profound
and inestimable Judgment the Orthodoxe Churches have with much admiration and
assent followed in these points) I rather choose thus to resolve that case. It
will appear at the last great day that the saving of a few is a more admirable
and glorious work, then the condemning of all the rest. The Apostle says 2.
Th^s. 1. 10.
That God shall be gloryfied in his Saints, and admired in those that believe.
For first, God shows more mercy in saving some when He might have judged
all, then Justice in Judging many when he might have saved none. For there is
not all the Justice which there might have been, when any are saved; and there
is more mercy then was necessary to have been, when all are not condemned.
Secondly, the Mercy and Grace of God in saving any is absolute, and all from
within himself, out of the unsearchable riches of his own will: But the
Justice of God, though not as essential in him, yet as operati^e toward us,
is not Absolute but Conditional, and grounded upon the supposition of man's
sin. Thirdly, his Mercy is unsearchable in the price which procured it; He
himself wa^ to humble and empty himself, that he might show mercy. His
mercy was to be purchased by his own merit; but his Justice was provoked by
the merit of sin only. Fourthly, Glory which is the fruit of Mercy is more
excellent in a few, then wrath and vengeance is in many; as one bag full of
gold may be more valuable then ten of silver. If a man should suppose that
Gods mercy and Justice, being equally infinite and glorious in himself, should
therefore have the same equal proportion observed in the dispensation and
revealing of them to the world; we might not therehence conclude, that that
proportion should be Arithmeticall, that mercy should be extended to as many,
as severitie. But rather as in the payment of a sum of money in two equal
portions, whereof one is in gol^, the other in silver, though there be an
equality in the sums, yet not in the pieces by which they are paid: so, in
as much as Glory being the communicating of Gods own blessed Vision, Presence,
Love, and everlasting Society, is far more honorable and excellent then
wrath, therefore the dispensation of his Mercy in that amongst a few may be
exactly proportionable to the revelation of his Justice amongst very many more
in the other. Suppose we a Prince, upon the just condemnation of a hundred
malefactors, should profess, that as in his own royal breast mercy and
Justice were equally poised and tempered, so he would observe an equal
proportion of them both toward that number of malefactors, suffering his
justice to condemn, and his mercy to spare just so many as might preserve his
Attributes i^aequilibrio, that the one might not overweigh the other:
Certainly in this case there would be more mercy in saving ten out of
favor, then in punishing and condemning all the rest for their Just demerit.
Fifthly, and lastly, let me problematically and by way of (...) only propose
this question. Why may it not be justly said that there shall be in Heaven as
much Glory distributed amongst those few which shall be saved, as wrath in
Hell amongst those many which perish? I dare not speak where the Scripture is
silent; yet this by way of argument may be said. The proportion of wrath is
measured by the finite sins of men, the proportion of Glory from the infinite
merits of Christ. There is more excellency and virtue in the merit of Christ
to procure life for his few, then vileness or demerit in sin to procure
death for many. As there may be as much liquor in ten great vessels, as in a
thousand smaller: so there may be as much Glory by the merit of Christ in a
few that are saved, as wrath, from the merit of sin in multitudes that perish.

But to return to that from whence I have digressed. Manifest it is that God
will do more for the magnifying of his mercy, then ^or the multiplying of his
wrath, because to be merciful he will new publish the Law, which for enlarging
his judgments he would not have done; but would have left men unto that
reign of sin and death which was in the world between Adam and Moses. Notabl^
to this purpose is that place which I have before (...) touched, and shall now
(...) again more particularly to unfold, with submission of my judgment
therein unto the better learned. It i^ Gal. 3. beginning at the 15. verse.*
Brethren I speak-after the mann^r of men: though it be but a man's covenant, yet
if it b^ c^firmed, no man dis^ulleth or adds thereto.* The Apostle before
mentioned the covenant of Promise and Grace made to Abraham, and in him as well
to the Gentil^s as to the ^ewes; unto which the consideration of the Laws
insufficiency to justify, and by consequence to Bless, had led him. In these
words he does by an Allusion unto humane contracts prove the fixednesse and
stability of the Covenant of mercy even from the courses of mutable men. If one
man make a grant, and covenant to another, do ^grosse, sign, seal, take
witnesses, and deliver it to the other for his benefit and behoof^, it becomes
altogether irreversible and uncancellable by the man which did it. If a man
make a Testament, and then die, even amongst weak and mutable men it is
counted sacred; and impiety it is for any man to add, diminish, or alter it.
But now, says the Apostle, God is infinite in wisdom to foresee all
inconveniences, and evil consequences which would follow upon any covenant of
his, and so if need be to prevent the making of it. Things future in their
execution and issuing out of second causes, are yet all present to the
intuition of God; and so any thing which might after happen to disa^ull, or
void the covenant, was p^esent and evident to his Omniscience before, and
therefore would then have prevented the making of it. If then men, whose wills
are mutable, whose wisdoms may miscarry, who may repent and be willing to
revoke their own covenants again, do by their hand, seal, and delivery
disable themselves to disanull their own act, when it is once past: much more
God, who is not like man that he should repent* when he makes a covenant,
does make it sure and stable, constant and irreversible, especially since it is
a Covenant established Heb. 6. 17. 18. Psalm. 110. 4.
by an oath, as the Apostle elsewhere shows, and when God swears he cannot
repent* Thus the Apostle prooveth the Covenant of mercy and grace to be
Perpetual, from the Immutability and wisdom of him that made i^; and if it
be perpetual, then all other subsequent acts of God do refer some way or
other unto it.

It follows verse 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the Promises made, he
says not, and to seeds as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ.] Where by One, we understand one mystically and in aggregato, not
personally or individually; and by Christ, the whole Church, consisting of the
Head and Members, as he is elsewhere taken. 1 Cor. 12 12. Now these words do
further ratify the stabilitie of the Covenant; for though a Covenant be in it
self never so constant and irreversible, yet if all the parties which have
interest in or by it should cease, the Covenant would of it self by
consequence expire and grow void: but here, as the covenant is most constant
in regard of the wisdom, and unvariablenesse of him that made it, so it can
never expire for want of a ^eede to whom it is made; for as long as Christ has
a Church, and Members upon earth, so long shall the Promise be of force.

Verse. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant which was confirmed before of God
in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disanull that it should make the Promise of none effect.] These words are a
Prolepsis or prevention of an objection which might be made. A man might thus
argue: when two laws are made, whereof the one is expressly contradictory to
the other, the later does in common presumption abrogate and disanull the
former (else men should be bound to contraries, and so punishments would be
unavoydable.) But here we find that four hundred and thirty years after the
promise to Abraham, there was a Law published extremely contrary unto the
promise: A law without mercy or compassion, a law both impossible and
inexorable, which can neither be obeyed, nor endured: therefore it should seem
that some cause or other had happened to make God repent, and revoke his former
covenant. The Apostle retorts this Objection. And his meaning I thus apprehend.
If there be a covenant made, by a Lawgiver in wisdom infinite, to foresee
before hand, and to prevent any inconveniences which might follow upon it, any
reasons which might fall out to abrogate it; A Lawgiver in all his ways
constant and immutable, (as being by no improvidence, disappointments, or
unexpected emergencies ever put to repent) and this covenant made to a man and
his seed for ever, and that without dependence upon any condition, (being all
of Grace and Promise) save only that Abraham have a seed, and Christ a Body:
Then if it happen, that another law be after made, which prima facie, and in
strict construction, does implie a contradiction to the terms and nature of
the former Law (for Abrogation notwithstanding whereof there have no other
reasons at all de novo intercurr'd, then only such as were actually in being
when it was made, namely the sins of the world, and yet were not then valid
enough to prevent the making, and therefore by consequence have no force to
alter or disanull it) then it is certain that this latter law must be
understood in some other sense, and admit of some other subordinate use,
which may well consist with the being and force of the former covenant; and not
in that which prima facie seems to contradict, and by consequence to abrogate
it.

Now in the next words, verse 18. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is
no more of Promise: but God gave it to Abraham by Promise.* The Apostle shows,
what the purpose of the Covenant to Abraham was, namely to give life and
salvation by Grace and Promise, and therefore what the purpose of the latter
covenant by Moses was not, neither could be, namely to give the same life by
working; since in those respects there would be contradiction and
inconsistencie in the Covenants, and so by consequence instability and
unfaithfulness in him that made them. The maine conclusion then which hitherto
the Apostle has driven at is this, that the coming of the Law has not voyded
the promise, and that the Law is not of force toward the seed to whom the
promise is made, in any such sense as carries contradiction unto, and by
consequence implies abrogation of the Promise before made. Therefore if it be
not to stand in a contradiction, it follows that it must in subordination to
the Gospel, and so to tend to Evangelicall purposes.

This this Apostle proceeds to show, verse 19. Wherefore (...) serves the
Law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come* to
whom the Promise was made; and it was ordained by Angels, in the hand of a
Mediator. * To what en^ says the Apostle should there be a publication of a
Law, so expressly contrary to the Covenant formerly made? In his Answer to this
doubt, there are many things worthy of especial observation. First, (...). It
was added or put to. It was not set up alone, as a thing ingr^sse by it self,
as any adequate, complete, solid rule of righteousness; (as it was given to
Adam in Paradise) much less was it published as a thing to void and disa ull
any precedent covenant: but, so far was it from abrogating, that it was added
to the Promise* Now when one thing is made an Appendant or Add^ament to
another, it does necessarily put the being of that to which it is Appendant,
and presuppose a strength and vigor in it still. But how then was it added? not
by way of Ingrediencie as a Part of the Covenant, as if the Promise had been
incomplete without the Law; (for then the same Covenant should consist of
contradictory materials, and so should overthrow it self; ( For if it be of
works, it is no more of grace, else grace is no more grace) but it was added
by way of Subserviencie and Attendance, the better to advance and make
effectual the Covenant it self. In Adams heart the Law was set up solitary
and as a whole rule of righteousness and salvation in it self: but though the
some Law were by Moses revived, yet not at all to the same purpose, but only
to help forward and introduce another and a better Covenant.

Secondly, It was Added because of Transgressions.* To make them appear, to
awaken the Consciences of men (who without a Law would not impute, nor charge
their sins upon themselves) and make them acknowledge the guilt of them, and
own the condemnation which was due unto them: to discover and disclose the
venom of our sinful nature, to open the mouth of the sepulcher, and make the
heart smell the stinch of its own foulness.

Thirdly, Till the seed should come unto whom the Promise was made.* There
were two great promises made to Abraham and his seed. The one, In thy-seed
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, and this Promise respects the
Person of Christ* (which yet seems to be a Promise not so much made to
Christ, as in him to Abraham and all nations (who were Abraham's seed by
Promise, though not after the flesh as Saint Paul distinguishes, Romans 9) The
other, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. which respects
all nations who should believe. Now which way soever we understand these words
they confirm the point which we are upon, that the Law has Evangelicall
purposes If we understand by seed the Person of Christ, the^ this shows that
the Law was put to the Promise, the better to raise and stir up in men the
expectations of Christ, the promised seed, who should deliver them from that
unavoidable bondage and curse, which the Law did s^ale and conclude them under.
If we understand by seed the faithful (which I rather approve) then the
Apostles meaning is this, that as long as any are either to come into the unity
of Christ's body, and to have the Covenant of Grace unto them applied; or to be
kept in the Body of Christ when they are com^ (...); so long there will be use
of the Law to discover Transgressions, both i^ the unregenerate that they may
s^e ^o Christ for Sanctuary, and (...) those that are already called, that they
may learn to cast all their faith and hope, and expectations of righteousness
upon him ^ull. For the same reason which compels men to come in, is requisite
also to keep them in; else why does not God utterly destroy sin in the
Faithful? Certainly he has no delight to see Christ have leprous members,
or to see sin in his own people. Only because he will still have them see the
necessity of righteousness by faith, and of grace in Christ; he therefore
suffers concupiscence to stir in them, and the Law to conclude them under the
curse. This then manifestly shows that there was no other intention in
publishing the Law* but with reference to the seed; that is, with Evangelicall
purposes, to show mercy: not with reference to those that perish, who would
have had condemnation enough without the Law.

Fourthly, It was ordained by Angels, (who are Ministering Spirits sent forth
for the good of those that shall be saved) in the Hand* or by the Ministry of
a Mediator.] Namely of Moses (with relation unto whom Christ is called Mediator
of a better Covenant) for as Christ was the substantial and universal
Mediator between God and Man: So Moses was to that people a representative,
typical, or national* Mediator. He stood between the Lord and the people
when they were afraid at the sight of Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
the fire in the Mount, and this evidently declares that the Law was published
in mercy and pacification, not in fury or reveng^ (For the work of a Mediator
is to negotiate peace, and treat for reconcilement between parti^s offended.)
where as if the Lord had intended death in the publishing of the Law, he would
not have proclaimed it in the hand of a Mediator, but of an Executioner.

Verse 20. Now a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one.] Two
expositions I conceive may be given of these words, both which tend to clear
that use of the Law which we are upon. First, where there is a Mediator there
must be parties at variance that are two by their differences and
disagreements, and not one. This then shows first for what reason the Law was
promulgated, namely to convince men of their offenses which had separated
between them and God, who were at the first one in peace and mutual affections
toward each other. Secondly, the words following show why the Law was
published in the Hand of a Mediator, because God is one: Though the law serve
to convince men thus of their sinful variance with God, yet they should not
thereupon despair, and sink under the fear of his wrath: for as he made a
Covenant of Promise to Abraham and his seed, so he is the same God still; One
in his Grace and Mercy toward sinners; As a Mediator does show that men by
sin are at variance with God, so does he show likewise that God by Grace is
at unity with men. For when the party offended sends a mediator to him who had
done the offense to parley and make tender of a reconcilement, two things do
herein manifestly appear. First, that before this there was a breach, or else
there would have been no need of a Mediator. Secondly, that notwithstanding
that breach, yet the party offended (from whom the Mediator comes) is at unity
and peace again; so that though a mediator is not of one, but of disagreeing
parties; yet God is one, that is, He, in sending this Mediator does declare to
mankind, that He is at peace and unity with them again, if they will accept
of the reconcilement.

A second exposition may be thus. A Mediator is not of One. By One here may
happily be understood not one Party* but one matter, business, or Covenant. And
then the meaning runs thus. As the Lord has published Two Covenants, A
Promise to Abraham, and a Law to Israel, so he has appointed Two Mediators of
those covenants or businesses which he had to communicate to men. Moses the
Mediator of the Law (for the Law came by Moses;) and Christ the Mediator of the
Promise or better covenant, ( For Grace came by Jesus Christ) Moses the
representative, and Christ the substantial and real Mediator. But now though
there be two Covenants, and two Mediators, and they so much in appearance
contrary unto one another, as that God may in them seem inconstant, and to
have by one cancelled and repented for the other: yet all this while God is
One, that is, He is the same in both Covenants, carries the same purpose and
intention both in the Law and in the Gospel, namely a benevolence and desire
of reconcilement with men.

Verse. 21. Is the Law then against the Promises of God? God forbid: for if
there had been a Law given which could have given Life, verily Righteousness
should have been by the Law.] Here we have an Objection of the Jews. If God
be One, then He does not speak one thing and mean another, pronounce the Law
in some words, and require them to be otherwise understoode: And then it will
follow that the Law is against the Promises, for in the common construct on and
sense of the words it is manifestly contrary. This Objection the Apostle does
retort upon them. In as much as the Law would be against the Promise if it
should stand for a rule of Justification by it self, and not for a ma^uduction
unto Christ; therefore God being one and the same, constant in his Promise for
Righteousness which he made to Abraham, therefore they were in a manifest
error who sought for righteousness from the Law, because that would evidently
infer one of these two things, either inconstancy in Gods Will, or
inconsistencie in his acts. The substance and strength of the Apostles answer I
take to be this. Contrariety is properly in the Nature of things considered by
themselves. Now though there be in the Law an accidental contrariety to the
Gospel by reason of the sin of man which has brought weakness upon it, so
that the Law now curses, and the Gospel blesses; the Law now condemns, and
the Gospel justifies; yet of it self it is not contrary. For if any Law
would have given life and righteousness, this would have done it. That which
is Ex se, considered in it self, Apt to carry to the same end whereunto
another thing carries, is not of it self contrary thereunto: but the Law is of
it self apt to carry unto Life and Righteousness, as now the Gospel does
therefore of it self it is not contrary to the Gospel; but that difference
which is, is from the sin of m^n which has weakened the Law. But now the Law in
the hand of a Medi^tor, is not only not against, but it is for the Promises
Suppose we two ways unto one City, whereof the one is Accidentally, either by
bogges, or enclosures, or some other reasons become utterly unpassable, the
other smooth and easy, these are not contrary ways considered in themselves
(for of themselves they point both unto one place) but only contrary in
respect of travelers, because the one will de facto bring to the City which
the other by accident is unable to do. So here, the Law is one way t^ Heaven,
the Gospel another; but sin has made the Law weak and unpassable, which
otherwise of it self would have sufficed unto righteousness. And yet even
thus the Law is not against the Promise: for the impossibility which we find
in the Law, enforces us to bethink our selves of a better and surer way to
bring us unto righteousness and salvation. And this the Apostle shows in the
next words.

Verse. 22. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the Promise
by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.] Though Sin
have made the Law contrary to the Promise, in that it curses and condemns,
and concludes men under sin and wrath: yet such is the mercy of God that he
has subordinated all this, and made it subservient unto the Gospel, that the
Promise thereby may be applied, and advanced. For it is all ordered to no other
purpose but that men might believe, and inherit the Promises. But what? Does
the Law make men believe, or beget Faith? Formally it does not, but by way of
preparation and manuduction it does: As when a man finds one way shut up, he
is thereby induced to enquire after another. To sum up all that has been
spoken touching the use of the Law in a plain similitude. Suppose we a Prince
should proclaim a pardon to all Traitors if they would come in and plead it:
and after this should send forth his officers to attach, imprison, examine,
convince, arraigne, threaten, and condemn them. Is he now contrary to
himself? has he ^epented of his mercy? No, but he is unwilling to lose his
mercy, he is desirous to have the honor of his mercy acknowledged unto him;
and therefore he brings them unto these extremities, that when their mouth
is stopped, and their guilt made evident, they may, with the more humility and
abhorrencie of their former lewdness, acknowledge the Justness of the Law,
which would condemn them, and the great mercy of the Prince, who has given
them liberty to plead his pardon. The same is the case between God and us.
First, to Abraham he made promise of mercy and blessedness to all that would
plead interest in it for the remission of their sins. But men were secure,
and heedlesse of their estate, and though sin was in them, and death reigned
over them, yet being without a Law to evidence this sin and death unto their
consciences, therefore they imputed it not to themselves, they would not own
them, nor charge themselves with them, and by consequence found no necessity of
pleading that promise. Hereupon the Lord published by Moses a severe and
terrible Law, so terrible that Moses himself did exceedingly Heb. 12.
fear and quake; A Law which filled the Air with Thunder, and the Mount with
fire; A Law full of blackness, darkness, and Tempest; A Law which they who
heard it could not endure, but entreated that it might not be sp^ken to them
any more: yet in all this God does but pursue his first purpose of mercy, and
take a course to make his Gospel accounted worthy of all acceptance; that
when by this Law men shall be roused from their security, shut up under the
guilt of infinite transgressions, affrighted with the fire and tempest, the
blackness and darkness, the darts and curses of this Law against sin, they
may then run from Sina unto Sion, even to Jesus the Mediator of the new
Covenant, and by Faith plead that pardon and remission which in him was
promised. Thus we see the point in the general ^leered, That God in the
publication of the Law by Moses on mount Sina, had none but merciful and
Evangelicall intentions. I shall further draw down the doctrine of the use of
the Law into a few conclusions.

First, The Law is not given ex primaria intention, to condemn men. There was
condemnation enough in the World between Adam and Moses, before the Law was
new published. It is true the Law shall prove a condemning and judging* Law
unto impenitent and unbeleeving sinners: But to condemn or judge men by it was
no more Gods intention in the publishing of it by the ministry of Moses, (I
speak of condemnation not pronounced, but executed) then it was his purpose to
condemn men by the Gospel, which yet (...). ^ (...) ^.
de facto, will be a savor of death unto death to all that despise it. It is
said that Christ should be as well for the fa^ as for the ri^ing of many in
Israel, and that he should be a stone of stumbling, and a rock of off^nce;
yet he faith of himself, I came not to condemn the World, but that the World
by me might be save^. The meaning is, the condemnation of the World was no
motive no^ impulsive cause of my coming, though it were an accident^ll event,
con^quent, and emergencie thereupon. Even so the condemnation which by the Law
will be aggravated upon (...) sinners, the pouring forth of more wrath and
vengeance then reigned in the World between Adam and Moses, was no motive in
Gods intention to publish the Law by his ministry, but only the furtherance
and advancement of the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, The Law was not published by Moses on mount Sina (as it was given to
Adam in Paradise) to iusti* fie or to save men. God never appoints any thing to
an end to which it is utterly unsurable and improper: Now Romans 8. 3. Heb. 7.
Col. 2.
the Law by sin is become weak and unprofitable to the purpose of
righteousness or salvation; nay it was in that regard Against us, as Saint
Paul says; and therefore we are delivered from it as a Rule of justification,
though not as a rule of service and obedience.

Thirdly, The uses of the Law are several according to diverse considerations
of it. For we may consider it either Per se, in it self, according to the
primarie intention thereof in its being and new publication; or Per accidens,
according to those secondary and inferior effects thereof. By accident or
secondarily, The Law does, first, Si lex jubens assit and spiritus Iuvans
desit, per ipsam prohibitionem deside. ^io peccati crescente, atque vincente,
etiam reatus praevaricationis accedit. Aug. de Civ. dei. lib 21. cap. 16. and
83. Qu^st. cap. 66.
irritate, enrage, exasperate lust, by reason of the venomous and malicious
quality which is in sin. And this the Law does not by ingenerating or
implanting lust in the heart, but by exciting, calling out, and occasioning
that which was there before; as a chain does not beget any fury in a wolf,
nor a bridge infuse any strength into the water, nor the presence of an enemy
instill or create de novo any malice in a man, but only occasionally reduce
unto Act, and call forth that rage which though less discerned, was yet
habitually there before.

Secondly, the Law by accident does punish and curse sin. I say, by accident,
because punishment is in no law the maine intention of the Lawgiver; but
something added thereunto, to back, strengthen, and enforce the obedience
which is principally intended. Neither could the Law have cursed man at all, if
his disobedience had not thereunto made way; which shows that the curse was
not the primary intention of the Law, but only a secondary and subsequent act
upon the failing of the principal. For I doubt not but the Lord accounts
himself more gloryfied by the Active and voluntary services, then by the
Passive and enforced sufferings of the Creature. Herein says our Savior, is
my Father glorified that Ioh 15.
you bring forth much fruit.

Secondly, consider the Law by it self and in its primary intention, and so
there are two principal uses for which it serves. First, It has rationem
speculi, It is as a (...). Clem. Alex. strom. li. 7.
glass to manifest and discover sin and death, and thereupon to compel men
to fly for sanctuary unto Christ, and when they see their misery, to sue out
their pardon. And this the Law does, first, by convincing the Conscience of its
own widenes, (as the Prophet David speaks, I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy Law is exceeding broad.) By revealing the compass of sin
in proportion to the wideness, and the filthynesse of sin in proportion to the
purity of that Holy Law; by discovering the depth and foulness, the
deceitfulness and desperate mischief of the heart by nature; and giving some
evidences to the soul of that horrid, endless, and insupportable vengeance
which is due to sin. We know says the Apostle. that whatsoever things the
Law says, it says to those that are under the Law; That every mouth may be
stopped, and all the World may become guilty before God.

Secondly, By judging, sentencing, applying wrath to the Romans 3 19.
Soul in particular, For when it has stopped a man's mouth, evidenced his
guiltiness, concluded him under sin, it then pronounces him to be a cursed
and condemned Gal. 3. 10.
Creature, exposed, without any strength or possibility to evade or overcome,
unto all the wrath which his sins have deserved. Therefore it is called the
ministry 2. Cor. 3.
of death and condemnation, which pronounces a most rigorous and unmitigable
curse upon the smallest, and most imperceptible deviation from Gods Will
revealed.

Thirdly, by awakening the Conscience, begetting a legal faith and spirit of
bondage, to see it self thus miserable by the Law, hedged in with Thorns, and
shut up under Hos. 2. 6, 7. Rom 8. 15. Act. 2. 37.
wrath. For the spirit first by the Law begets bondage and fear, pricks
the Conscience, reduces a man to impossibilities, that he knows not what to
do* nor which way to turn, before it works the Spirit of Adoption, or make
a man think with the Prodigal that he has a Father to deliver him. And by
these Gradations the Law Aug. de great. Chri. lib. 1. cap. 8. Contr. 2. Epist*
Pelag l 4 c. 5 de perfect Instit. c. 5. 19. de Not. and Great. c. 11. 16. 22.
Ep. 144. 157, 200.
leads to Faith in Christ; so that though in all these respects the works of
the law be works of bondage, yet the Ends and Purposes of God in them are Ends
of Mercy.

Secondly, The Law has Rationem Fraeni and regulae, to cohibite and restrain
from sin, and to order the life of a man. And in this sense likewise it is
added to the Gospel, as the Rule is to the hand of the workman. For as the
Rule works nothing without the hand of the Artificer to guide and moderate
it, because of it self it is dead, and the workman works nothing without
his Rule; Fides efficit quod lex imperat. Aug. lib. 83. quest. c. 66. Litera
ju^etur, spiritu donatur. ^d. Epist. 200. Non san^ta per legem infir ita^ sed
convicta. Epist. 157
So the Law can only show what is good, but gives no power at all to do it
(for that is the work of the Spirit by the Gospel) yet Evangelicall Grace
directs a man to no other obedience then that of which the Law is the Rule.

Now then to make some use of all this which has been said: This shows the
ignorance and absurdity of those men who cry down preaching of the Law, as a
course leading to despair and coffeehouse, though we find by Saint Paul
that it leads unto Christ. To preach the Law alone by it self, we confess
is to pervert the use of it; neither have we any power or commission so to do
( for we have our power for edification and not for destruction.) It was
published as an appendant to the Gospel, and so must it be preached; It was
published in the hand of a Mediator, and it must be preached in the hand of a
Mediator; It was published Evangelycally, and it must be so preached: But yet
we must preach the Law, and that in its own fearful shapes: for though it
were published in Mercy, yet it was published with Thunder, Fire, Tempests, and
Darkness even in the hand of a Mediator: for this is the method of the Holy
Ghost, to convince first of sin, and then to reveal righteousness Ioh. 16.
8.
and refuge in Christ. The Law is the forerunner that makes room, and prepares
welcome in the Soul for Christ. I will shake all nations, and the desire of
all nations Hag 2. 7.
shall come, says the Lord; to note unto us that a man will never desire
Christ indeed, till he be first shaken. As in Elias his vision the still voice
came after the Tempest, so does Christ in his voice of Mercy follow the
shakings and Tempests of the Law. First the Spirit of Eliah in the preaching of
repentance for sin, and then the Kingdom of God in the approach of Christ
and evidences of reconcilement to the Soul. And the reason is, because men are
so wedded to their sins, that they will not accept of Mercy on fair terms,
so, as to forsake sin withal; as mad men that must be bound before they can
be cured, so are men in their lusts; the Law must hamper and shut them up,
before the Gospel, and the spirit of liberty will be welcome to them. Now
this is Gods resolution to humble the soul so low till it can in truth and
seriousness bid Christ welcome upon any conditions: His Mercy* and the blood
of his Son is so precious and invaluable, that he will not ca^ it away where
no notice shall be taken of it; but he will make the heart subscribe
experimentally to that Truth of his, That it is a saying worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners. And we know
a man must be brought to great extremities, who can esteem as welcome as life
the presence of such a man who comes with a sword to cut of his members, or cut
out his eyes: and yet this is the manner of Christ's coming, to bring a Cross,
and a Sword with him, to hew off our lusts (which are our earthly members) and
to Crucify us unto the world.

But what then? M^st nothing be preached but damnation and Hell to men? God
forbid. We have commission to preach nothing but Christ and life in him: and
therefore we never preach the Law, but with reference and manuduction unto him.
The truth is, Intentionally we preach nothing but Salvation; we come with no
other intention but that every man who hears us might believe and be saved;
we have our power only for edification, and not for destruction: but
conditionally we preach Salvation and Damnation. He that believes Mark. 16. 16.
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned; that is the sum of
our Commission. But it is further very observable in that place that preaching
of the Gospel is preaching both of Salvation, and of Damnation upon the
several conditions. So then, when we preach the Law, we preach Salvation to
them that fear it: (as the Lord showed mercy to Josiah because his heart
trembled, and 2. Chron. 34. 27.
humbled it self at his Law) and when we preach the Gospel, we preach
Damnation to them that desp^se it. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation. The Gospel Heb. 2. 2, 3.
is Salvation of it self, but he that neglects Salvation is the m^re certain
to perish; and that with a double destruction, Death unto Death, to that wrath
of God 2. Cor 2 16. Ioh. 3 36 Heb. 10. 28, 29. 2. ^hes. 1. 8.
which ab^deth upon him before, will come a sorer cond^mnation, by trampling
under foot the blood of the Covenant, and not obeying the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Here then are two rules to be observed. First, by the ministers of the Word,
that they so preach the Law as that it may still appear to be an appendant
unto the Gospel, and ^ot suffer the ministry to be evil spoken of by men who
watch for advantages. We must endeavor so to manage the dispensation of the
Law, that men may not thereby be exasperated, but put in mind of the Sanctuary
to which they should fly. The heart of man is broken as a flint, with a hard
and a soft together: A Hammer and A Pillow is the best way to break a flint; A
Prison and a Pardon, A Scourge and a Salve, A Curse and a Savior, is the best
way to humble and convert a sinner. When we convince the hearers that all the
te^rors we pronounce are out of compassion to them; that we have mercy and
balm in store to power into every wound that we make, that all the blows we
give are not to kill their Souls, but their sins; that though our words bring
fire and fury with them, yet they are still in the hand of a Mediator; that the
Law is not to break them unto desperation, but unto humiliation, not to drive
them unto fury but unto Faith, to show them Hell indeed, but withal to keep
them from it; if we do not by these meane^ save their Souls, yet we shall
stop their mouths, that they shall be ashamed to blaspheme the commission by
which we speak.

Secondly, The people likewise should learn to rejoice when the Law is
preached as it was published; that is, when the Conscience is thereby
affrighted, and made to tremble at the presence of God, and to cry unto the
Mediator as the people did unto Moses, Let not God speak Exodus 20. 19.
any more to us l^st we die, Speak thou with us and we will hear. For when
sin is only by the Law discovered, and death laid open, to cry out against
such preaching, is a shrewd argument of a mind not willing to be disquieted
in sin, or to be tormented before the time; of a soul which would have
Christ, and yet not leave her former husband; which would have him no other
king then the stump of wood was to the frogs in the fable, or the moulten
Calfe unto Israel in the Wilderness, a quiet idol, whom every lust might
securely provoke, and dance about. As the Law may be preached too much, when it
is preached without the principal, which is the Gospel: so the Gospel and
the mercy therein may be preached too much (or rather indeed too little)
because it is with less success; If we may call it preaching and not rather
perverting of the Gospel* when it is preached without the appendant, which is
the Law.

This therefore should in the next place teach all of us to study and delight
in the Law of God, as that which sets forth, and makes more glorious and
conspicuous the mercy of Christ. Acquaintance with our selves in the Law, w^ll*
First, keep us more lo^ly and vile in our own* eyes, make us feel our own
pollution and poverty; and that will again make us the more delight in the
Law, which is so faithful to render the face of the Conscience; and so make a
man the more willing, and earnest to be cleansed. Their heart, says David, is
as fat as Psalm. 119. 70.
grease, but I delight in thy Law. The more the Law does discover our own
leanness, scraggednesse and penury, the more does the Soul of a Holy man
delight in it because Gods mercy is magnified the more, who fills the Luke
1. 53* Matthew. 11. 28. Hos. 14. 3.
hungry, and refr^sheth the weary, and with whom the fatherl^sse finds
mercy.

Secondly* It will make us more careful to live by Faith more bold to approach
the throne of Grace for mercy to cover, and for Grace to cure our sores and
nakedness. In matters of life and death, impudence and boldness is not
unseasonable. A man will never die for modesty: when the Soul is convinced by
the Law that it is accursed, and eternally lost, if it do not speedily plead
Christ's satisfaction at the Throne of Grace, it is emboldned to run unto him:
when it finds an issue of uncleanenesse upon it, it will set a price upon the
meanest thing about Christ, and be glad to touch the hemme of his garment. When
a Child has any strength, beauty, or lovelynesse in himself, he will happily
depend upon his own parts, and expectations to raise a fortune and preferment
for himself: but when a Child is full of indigence, impotencie, crookedness,
and deformity, if he were not then supported with this hope, I have a father,
and Parents do not cast out their Children for their deformities he could not
live with comfort or assurance: so the sense of our own pollutions and
uncleanenesse, taking off all conceits of any lovelynesse in our selves, or of
any goodness in us to attract the affections of God, makes us r^ly only on
his fatherly compassion. When our Savior called the poor woman of Syrophenicia
Dog, a beastly and unclean Creature, yet she takes not this for a deny all,
but turns it into argument. The less I have by right, the more I hope for by
mercy; even men afford their Dogs enough to keep them alive, and I ask no
more. When the Angel put the hollow of Jacobs thigh out of joint, yet he
would not let him Genesis 32.
go; the more lame he was, the more reason he had to hold. The Prodigal was
not kept away or driven of from his resolution, by the fear, shame, or misery
of his present estate; for he had one word which was able to make way for him
through all this, the name of Father. He considered, I can but be rejected at
the last, and I am already as low as a rejection can cast me; so I shall loose
nothing by returning, for I therefore return because I have nothing; and
though I have done enough to be for ever shut out of doors, yet it may be,
the word Father may have rhetoric enough in it to beg a reconcilement, and to
procure an admittance amongst my fathers servants.

Thirdly, It will make us give God the Glory of his mercy Esaias. 50* 10.
the more, when we have the deeper acquaintance Mul^um terret scriptura
factura securum. Aug. Epist.
with our own misery. And God most of all delights in that work of Faith,
which, when the Soul walks in darkness and has no light, yet trusts in
his Name and stays upon him.

Fourthly, It will make our comforts and refreshments the sweeter, when they
come. The greater the humiliation* the deeper the tranquillity. As fire is
hottest in the coldest weather: so comfort is sweetest in the greatest
extremities; shaking settles the peace of the heart the more. The spirit is a
Comforter, as well when he convinces of sin, as of righteousness and
judgment; because he does it to make righteousness the more acceptable, and
Judgment the more beautiful.

Lastly, acquaintance with our own foulness and diseases by the Law, will
make us more careful to keep in Christ's company, and to walk according unto
his Will; because he is a Physician to cure, a refiner to purge, a Father and a
Husband to compassionate our estate. The less beauty or worth there is in us,
the more carefully should we study to please him, who loved us for himself,
and married us out of pity to our deformities, not out of delight in our
beauty. Humility keeps the heart tractable and pliant. As melted wax is
easily fashioned, so an humble spirit is easily fashioned unto Christ's Image:
whereas a stone, a bard and stubborn heart, must be hewed and hammered before
it will take any shape. Pride, selfe-confidence, and conceitednesse, are the
p^nciples of disobedience; men will hold their wonted courses till they be
humbled by the Law. They are not humbled, Ier. 44. 10.
says the Lord, unto this day, and the consequent hereof is, neither have they
feared nor walked in my Law. Ier. 13 17. Neh. 9. 16. 17.
If you will not hear, that is, if you will still disobey the Lords messages,
my Soul shall weep in secret for your pride; to note that pride is the
principle of disobedience. They and our fathers, says ^ehemiah in his
confession, deal^ proudly, and hardened their necks* and hearkered not unto thy
Commandments; and refused to obey. And therefore Ez kiah used this persuasion
to the ten tribes to come up to Jerusalem unto the Lords Passover. Be ye 2.
Cron. 30 8.
not stiffenecked as your fathers, but yield your selves unto the Lord. To note
that humiliation is the way unto obedience; when once the heart is humbled it
will be glad to walk with God. Humble thyselfe says the Prophet, Mic 6. 8.
to walk with thy God. Receiv^ the ingraffed Word Iam* 1. 21.
with meekness, says the Apostle. When the Heart is first made meek and
lowly, it will then be ready to receive the Word, and the Word ready to
incorporate in it, as seed in torn and harrowed ground. When Paul was
dis^ounted, and cast down upon the Earth, terrified and astonished at the
Heavenly vision, immediately he is qualyfied for obedience, Lord what will thou have me to do? When the Soul is convinced by the Law, that Act. 9. 6.
of it self it comes short of the Glory o^ God* walks in darkness, and can
go no way but to Hell; It will then with joy and thankfulness fo^ow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes; as being well assured, that though the way of the Lamb
be a way of blood, yet the End is a Throne of Glory, and a Crown of Life.

FINIS.
THE LIFE OF CHRIST: OR, THE FELLOWSHIP OF THE SAINTS WITH HIM, IN HIS LIFE,
Sufferings, and Resurrection.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS Preacher to the Honorable Society of Lincolns Inn.

PAX OPVLENTIAM. SAPIENTIA PACEM.
FK

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Bostocke. 1631.

THE LIFE OF CHRIST.
1. JOHN 5. 12. He that has the Son, has Life.
HAving showed the Insufficiency of the Creature to make man happy, as being
full of vanity, and the Insufficiency of Man to make himself Happy, as
being full of sin; we now proceed in the last place to discover first the
Fountain of Life and Happiness, Christ; and secondly the Channel by which it
is from him unto us conveyed, the Instrument whereby we draw it from him,
namely the knowledge of him, and fellowship with him in his resurrection and
sufferings.

These words we see contain a Doctrine of the greatest consequence to the
Soul of Man in the whole Scriptures, and that which is indeed the sum of
them all. They contain the sum of man's desires, Life, and the sum of Gods
mercies, Christ, and the sum of man's duty, Faith; Christ the Fountain, Life
the Derivation, and Faith the Conveyance.

Whatsoever things are excellent and desirable, are in the Scripture comprised
under the name of Life, as the lesser under the greater; for Life is better
then meat, and the body then ray meant. And whatsoever Excellencies can be
named, we have them all from Christ. In Him, says the Apostle, are bid the
treasures of wisdom Col. 2. 3.
and knowledge. H^d, not to the purpose that they may not be found, but to the
purpose that they may be sought. And we may note from the expression, that
Christ is a Treasurer of his Fathers Wisdom; He has Wisdom, as the Kings
treasurer has wealth, as an Officer, a Depositarie, a Dispenser of it to the
friends and servants of his father. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
He is made unto us Wisdom. The Apostle says that in him there are Ephesians. 3 8.
unsearchable riches, an inexhausted treasury of Grace and Wisdom. And there
had need be a treasure of riches in him, for there is a treasure of sin in
us: so our Savior calls it, Math. 12. 35.
the treasure of an evil heart. Ioh. 1. 14.
He was full of Grace and Truth. Not as a vessel, but as Zach. 13. 1.
a Fountain, and as Mal. 4. 2.
a Sun; to note that He was not only full of Grace, but that the fullness
of Grace was in Him. Col. 1. 19.
It pleased the Father that in him should all f^lnesse dwell. Ioh. 3. 34.
God gave not the Spirit in measure unto Him. And as there is a fullness in
Him, so there is a Communion in us, Ioh. 1. 16. 2. Cor. 3. 18.
Of his fullness we receive Grace for Grace, that is, as a Child in
generation receives from his Parents member for member, or the paper from the
Press letter for letter, or the glass from the face image for image; so in
regeneration Christ is fully Gal. 4. 19.
formed (...) a man, and he receives in some measure and proportion Grace for
Grace: there is no Grace in Christ appertaining to general sanctification
which is not in some weak degree fashioned i^ Him Thus there is to Christ a
fullness of Grace answerable to Rom 1. 29.
a fullness o^ sin which is in us. The Prophet calls him ^sai. 9. 6.
a Prince of Peace, not as Moses only was a man of peace, but a Prince of
peace. If Moses had been a Prince of peace, how easily might he have instilled
peaceable and calm affections into the mutinous and murmuring people? But
though he had it in himself, yet he had it not to distribute. But Christ
has Peace, as a King has Honors, to dispense and* dispose of it to whom he
will. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. If I Ioh. 14. 27.
should run over all the particulars of Grace or Mercy, we should find them
all proceed from him; He is our 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Passover, says the Apostle. As in Egypt wheresoever there was the blood of
the Passover there was life, and where it was not, there was death; so where
this our Passover is, there is life; and where he is not, there is Exodus 12.
23. 30. Phil. 1. 21. Gal. 2. 20.
death: To me to live is Christ, says the Apostle; and again, now I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life that I live, I live by the Faith
of the Son of God, who loved me, and gvae himself for me.

To consider more particular this Life which we have from Christ. First, It is
a Life of Righteousness: for Romans 1. 17. 2. Cor. 3. 6, 7, 9. Romans 5. 17, 21.
Life and Righteousness are in the Scripture taken for the same, (because sin
does immediately make a man dead in law, Ioh. 3. 18.
He that believes not is condemned already, and Genesis 3. 17.
in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.) And this Life
(being a Resurrection from a preceding death) has two things belonging unto
it. First, there is a Liberty and Deliverance wrought for us from that under
which we were before held. Secondly, there is an Inheritance purchased for us,
the Privilege and Honor of being called the Sons of God conferred upon us.
There are three Offices or Parts of the Mediation of Christ. First, his
Satisfaction as he is our Heb. 7. 22.
Surety, whereby he Col. 2. 14. Esai. 53. 4.
paid our debt, Gal. 3. 13. 2. Cor. 5. 21.
underwent the curse of our sins, 1. P^. 2. 24.
bare them all in his body upon the Tree, Gal. 4. 4.
became subject to the Law for us, in our nature, and representatively in our
stead, Math. 3. 15.
fulfill all righteousness in the Law required, both Active and Passive for
us. For we must note that there are two things in the Law intended; One
principal, obedience, and another secondary, malediction, upon supposition of
disobedience; so that sin being once committed, there must be a double act to
justification, the suffering of the curse, and the fulfilling of righteousness
a new. Unto a double apprehension of Justice in God there must answer a double
act of righteousness in man, or in his surety for him; To Gods punishing
Justice a righteousness Passive, whereby a man is rectus in curia again; and
to Gods commanding Justice a righteousness Active, whereby he is reconciled
and made acceptable to God again. The one a satisfaction for the injury we
have done unto God as our Judge; the other the performance of a service which
we owe unto him as our Maker. Secondly, In Christ as a Mediator, there is a
merit likewise belonging unto both these acts of obedience in Him, by virtue of
his infinite person which was the Priest, and of his Divine nature which was
the Altar, that offered up and sanctified all his Obedience. By the redundancie
of which Merit (after satisfaction thereby made unto His Fathers Justice for
our debt) there is further, a purchase made of Grace, and Glory, and of all
good things in our behalf. He was made of a woman, made under the law; First,
toredeeme those that were under the Law, which is the satisfaction and payment
He has wrought. Secondly, That we might receive the Adoption or the
inheritance of Sons, which is the Purchase He has made for us. Thirdly,
there is the Intercession of Christ as our Advocate, which is the presenting of
these his Merits unto his Father for us, whereby He applies, and perpetuateth
unto us the effects of them, namely our deliverance, and our Adoption or
Inheritance. So then the life of righteousness consists in two things. First,
The remission of sin, and thereupon deliverance from the Guilt of it, and
curse of the Law against it; which is an effect of the satisfaction of Christ's
Merit. Secondly, Adoption, or the acceptance of our persons and admittance
into so high favor as to be heirs of Salvation and Happiness, which is the
effect of the Redundancie of Christ's Merit; there being a greater excess and
proportion of virtue in his obedience, then of malignitie or unpleasingnesse in
our disobedience.

To consider both these together; we are delivered, First, from Sin and the
Guilt or Damnation thereof: There is Romans 8. 1.
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; their Esai. 43 25. Act. 3 19.
sins are blotted out, and Ier 31. 34. Heb 8 12.
forgotten, and Mic. 7. 19.
cast into the depth of the Sea, and Esai. 44 22.
done away as a cloud or mist by the heat of the Sun, they are Psalm* 32. 1.
forgiven and covered, and not imputed unto us, Dan. 9. 24.
they are finished and made an end of, Esai. 53. 6.
they were all laid upon Christ, and He has been a 1. Ioh 2. 2.
propitiation for them, and his flesh a veil between them and his Fathers
wrath; and in opposition hereunto, His obedience and righteousness is made
ours. He is 1. Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
made unto us righteousness, and we are the righteousness of God in Him, we
are Romans 13. 14.
clothed with Him, and appear in the sight of God as parts and portions of
Christ himself; for Ephesians. 1. 23.
the Church is the fullness of Him that fills all in all.

Secondly, we are consequently delivered from the Law, so far forth as it is
the 1. Cor 15. 56.
strength of sin; and are constituted under another and better regiment,
which the Apostle calls Romans 6. 14.
Grace, or the Romans 3. 27.
Law of Faith. First, we are delivered from the Law as a Covenant of
righteousness; and expect Justification and Salvation only by faith in Him
who is Ier. 23. 6.
The Lord our Righteousness. Rom 10. 4. Romans 3. 20. 21.
Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness. We are righteous by the
righteousness of God without the Law; that is, not that righteousness by
which God as God is righteous, but by a righteousness which we have, not by
nature, or in our selves, or from any principles of our creation, (which Saint
Paul calls Man's own righteousness) but from the mere grace and gift of God.
Phil. 3. 9. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.


Secondly, hereupon consequently we are delivered from the rigor of the Law,
which consists in two things: first it requires perfect obedience: secondly,
Gal. 3. 10.
perpetual obedience. We must do all things that are written in the Book of
the Law, and we must continue to do them. Now from this we are delivered,
though not as a Duty, yet as such a necessity as brings death upon the fail
in it. When a man's conscience does summon him before Gods tribunal to be
justified or condemned; Psalm. 143. 2.
he dares not trust Math 5. 48.
his own performances, because no flesh can be righteous in Gods sight. Though
the Gospel both command, and Luke 1. 72, 75.
promise, and Tit. 2 11, 12.
work holiness in us; yet when we go to find out that to which we must
stand for our last trial, by which we resolve to expect remission of sins,
and inheritance with the Saints, there is so much pollution and fleshly
ingredients in our best works, that we dare trust none but Christ's own
adequate performance of the Law, whereby we are delivered from the rigor and
inexorablenesse thereof. That inherent and habitual exactness which the Law
requires in our persons in supplied by the merit of Christ: that actual
perfection which it requires in our services, is supplied by the incense, and
intercession of Christ. And though we are full of weakness, all our
righteousness as a menstruous cloth, many rags and remnants of the old Adam
cleave still unto us, and we are kept under that captivity and unavoydable
service of sin which he sold us under: yet this Privilege and Immunitie we
have by Christ, that our desires are accepted, that God spares us as Sons,
2. Cor 8. 12. Mal. 3. 17. Hos. 11. 3. Hos. 14. 4.
that Christ takes away all the iniquity of our Holy things; that when we
faint he leads us, when we fall he pitties us, and heales us, when we turn and
repent he forgives, accepts, welcomes, and feasts us with his compassions.

Thirdly, we are delivered from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. Esai. 53 5.
1. These. 1. 10.
Christ being made a curse for us, and the chastisement of our peace being laid
on him. From punishments eternal, He has delivered us from the wrath to come,
and from punishments Temporal, as formal punishments. When we are judged of
the Lord, we are chastened, but we are not condemned; they are for declaration
of Gods displeasure, but not of his fury or vengeance; they are to amend us,
and not to consume us; blows Poena emendatoria non inters^ctoria. Aug. To. 1.
de lib. Arb. lib. 3. cap. 25.
that polish us for the Temple and conform us unto our Head, and weane us from
the world, not tastes and forerunners of further wrath. They are like Jobs
dunghill set up to see a Redeemer upon. And besides this, as Sons of promise we
are blessed with faithful Abraham, have interest in that precious virtue of
the Gospel which makes all things work together for the best to those that
love God.

Lastly, we are hereupon consequently delivered from those effects of the
spirit of bondage which come along with the Law. And they are principally
three. First, Romans 7. 9.
To manifest to the Conscience that a man is in a desperate and damnable
condition, in stead whereof there comes along with Christ to the Soul a Spirit
of Romans 8. 15.
Adoption, and of 2. Tim. 1. 7.
a sound mind, which says unto the Soul that God is our Salvation, settles
the heart to rest and cleave unto Gods Promises; 2. Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13. 14.
Ephesians. 4. 30. 1. Cor. 2. 10. 12.
te^ifies, seals, secures, certifies our inheritance unto us. Secondly, to
Romans 3 19. Mat. 22 12.
stop the mouth, and drive out of Gods presence, and leave utterly Romans 1.
20. 2. 1.
unexcusable, that a man shall have nothing to allege why the curse should not
be pronounced against him, but shall in his conscience subscribe to the
righteousness of Gods severity. In stead whereof we have in Christ a Ephesians. 2.
18. Heb. 10. 19.
free approach into Gods presence; words put into our mouths by the Zach 12.
10. Romans 8 26.
spirit of supplications to reveal our requests, to debate, and plead in Gods
Court of mercy; to 2. Cor. 7. 11.
clear our selves from the accusations of Satan; to appeal from them to
Christ, and in him to make this just apology for our selves. I confess I am a
grievous sinner, (and there is not a Soul in Heaven Christ only excepted
which has not been so, though I the chief of all) In Law then I am gone, and
have nothing to answer there, but only to appeal to a more merciful Court.
But this I can in truth of heart say, that I deny my own works, that I
bewail my corruptions, that the things which I do I allow not, that it is no
more I that do them, but sin that dwells in me; that I am truly willing to
part from any lust, that I can heartily pray against my closest corruptions,
that I delight in the Law of God in mine inner man, that I am an unwilling
captive to the Law in my members, that I feel, and cry out of my wretchedness
in this so unavoydable subjection, that I desire to fear Gods Name, that I
love the Communion of his Spirit and Saints; and I know I have none of these
affections from nature (in that I agree with Satan:) these are spiritual and
heavenly impressions, and where there is a piece of the spirit, where there is
a little of heaven, that will undoubtedly carry the soul in which it is to the
place where all the Spirit is. If God would destroy me, he would not Judge. 13.
23.
have done so much for my Soul; he would never have given me any dram of
Christ's Spirit to carry to hell, or to be burnt with me. No man will throw his
jewels into a sink, or cast his pearls under the feet of swine: certainly
God will send none of his own graces into Hell, nor suffer any sparkle of his
own holiness and divine nature to be cast away in that lake of
forgetfulness. If He have begun these good works in me, He will fi^sh them in
his own time; and I will wa^e upon him and expect the Salvation of the Lord.
Thirdly, to 2. Tim. 1 7. Heb. 10. 27.
terri^ and (...) the Soul, with a fearful expectation of fiery (...) and
execution of the curse. In stead whereof the soul is calmed with a spiritual
serenity and Romans 5. 1. Ioh. 16. 33. Romans 14. 17.
peace, which is the beginning of Gods Kingdom, armed with a sweet security,
and Prove. 28. 1. Romans 8. 33. Psalm. 56. 11.
Lion-like boldness, against all the powers and assaults of Men or Angels;
crowned and refreshed with the 1. Pet. 1. 8. Romans 15. 13.
joy of Faith, with the first fruits of the Spirit, with the clusters of the
Heavenly Canaan, with the earnest of its inheritance, with the prefruition and
preapprehension of Gods presence and Glory. This is the Life of Righteousness
which we have from Christ; Ephesians. 1. 14.
(...) a Redemption and deliverance from sin and the Law; Ioh. 1. 12.
and (...), a Privilege, right and interest in the purchased possession.

Secondly, He that has the Son has Life, in regard of Holiness, as he has
Col. 2. 6.
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so he walks in Him: Ephesians. 2. 10.
we are in Him created or raised up from the first death, unto good works,
that we should walk in them. Of our selves we are Romans 5. 6. 10.
without strength, without love, without Ephesians. 2. 1.
life; no power, no liking, no possibility to do good; not any principle of
Holiness or Obedience in us. It is He that Ephesians. 3. 16. Phil. 4. 13.
strengthens, that Hos. 2. 14. Psalm. 110. 3. 1. Ioh. 4. 19.
winnes, that Ioh. 5. 25. 26. Ioh. 14. 19.
quickens us by His Spirit to His Service.

We should here consider Holiness something more largely, and show when good
works are Vital, and so from Christ; and when only mortal, earthly, and
upon false principles, and so from our selves. But having done this before in
the doctrine of the reign of sin; I will only name some other discourses of
a Vital Operation, and so proceed.

First, Life has ever an Internal principle, a seed within it self, a
natural heat, with the fountain thereof, (...). Aris^. De Respirat. cap. 8.
by which the body is made operative and vigorous: and therefore in living
Creatures the Ibid. Arist.
heart first lives, because it is the forge of spirits, and the fountain of
heat. So Holiness which comes from Christ begins within, proceeds from an
Iam. 1. 21. 1. Ioh. 3 9.
ingraffed and implanted seed, from the Ier. 32. 40.
fear of God in the heart, and the Ier. 31. 33.
Law put into the inner man. The Heb. 9. 14.
Conscience is cleansed, Ephesians. 4. 23.
the spirit of the mind is renewed, the Rom 7. 22.
delights and desires of the heart are changed, the bent and bias of the
thoughts are new set, ^al. 4. 19. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ is formed, and dwells within, the whole man is Matt. 3. 11.
baptized with the Holy Ghost as with fire, which from the Altar of the heart,
where it is first kindled, breaks out, and quickneth every faculty and
member. Fire when it prevails will not be hid nor kept in.

Secondly, Life has ever a nutritive appetite joined with it, and that is most
set upon such things as are of the (...). Arist. De Histor. Animal. lib. 8.
cap. 1.
same matter and principles with the nature nourished: so where a man is by the
spirit of Christ quickened unto a Life of Holiness, he will have a 1. Pet 2. 2.
Genesis 1. 11.
hungring* thirsting, and most ardent affection to all those sincere,
uncorrupted, and Heavenly Truths, which are proportionable to that Spirit of
Christ, which is in him.

Thirdly, Life is Generative and Communicative of it self, all living
Creatures have some seminary of generation for propagating their own kind;
so that spirit of Holiness which we have from Christ, is a fruitful spirit,
that endeavors to shed, multiply, and derive himself from one unto another.
Therefore he descended in fiery tongues, to note this multiplying and
communicating property which he has. The tongue is a member made for
Communion, and nothing so generative of it self as fire. They that feared the
Lord spoke often to one Mal. 4. 16. Esai. 2. 3. Ier. 3. 3. 17.
another, says the Prophet. Many people shall gather together, and say come
ye, and let us go to the Mountain of the Lord, etc.

Lastly, where there is perfect life, there is sense too of any violence
offered to it: so where the Spirit of God is, will be a tenderness, and
grief from the sins, or temptations which do assault him. As that great
sin, which the Scripture calls blaspheming of the Holy Ghost, and despighting
of the Spirit of Grace, is after a more especial manner called the sin
against the Holy Ghost; as being a sin which bids open defiance to the
Truth, Grace, Life and Promises, which that Spirit reveals and confirms
unto us; so every smaller sin does in its manner and measure grieve this
spirit, even as every distemper in the body does bring pain in some measure
unto the natural soul. A living member is sensible of the smallest prick,
whereas a body in the Grave is not pained, nor disaffected with the weight and
darkness of the earth, the g^awing of worms, the stinch of rotte^nesse, nor
any violences of dissolution, because the principle ofsense is departed: so
though wicked men lie in rotten and noisome lusts, have the guilt of many
millions of sins like so many rocks and mountains of Lead on their souls,
do daily cut and tear themselves like the Lunaticke in the Gospel, yet they
feel nothing of all this, because they have no spirit of life in them: whereas
another, in whom Christ is formed, would be constrained with tears of blood,
and most bitter repentance to wash the wound of spirit, which but one of those
fearful oaths, or unclean actions, (which the others multiply and wallow in
with delight) would make within them.

Now, He who has the Son, has holiness upon two grounds, according to
that double relation which Holiness has unto Christ. For it*respecteth Him as
the Principle and Fountain from whence it comes, and as the rule or pattern
unto which it answers. Holiness is called the Image of God; now as the face is
both the Fountain of that Image or species which is shed upon the glass, and
likewise the exact pattern and example of it too: so Christ is both the
Principle of Holiness, by whom it is wrought, and the Rule unto which it is
proportioned.

First, Christ is the Principle and Fountain of Holiness, as the head is of
sense or motion; from him the whole body is joined together and compacted, and
so makes increase and edification of it self in Love. The ointment ran down
from Aarons head unto the skirts of his garment, to note the effusion of the
spirit of Holiness from Christ unto his lowest members. Ye have received an
unction from the holy One, says the Apostle. 1. Ioh. 2* 20.
What this influence of Christ into his members is we shall more particularly
open in the consequent parts of this discourse.

Secondly, Christ is the Rule and Pattern of holiness to his Church. Our
Sanctification consists only in a conformity unto his ways. For more
distinct understanding of which point we must note, first, that Christ had
several ways and works to walk through. Sometimes we find him walking to
Golgotha and the Garden, which was the work of his merit and passion.
Sometimes to the Mount with Peter, James and John, which was the work of his
glory and trans-figuration. Sometimes upon the sea and through the midst of
Enemies, which was his work of power and miracles. Sometimes in the midst of
the seven golden Candlestickes, which was his work of government, guidance,
and influence on the Church. Lastly, we find him going about, and doing good,
submitting himself unto his parents, going apart by himself to pray, and in
other the like works of his ordinary obedience.

Secondly, of these works of Christ we must note, that some are
uncommunicable, others communicable. Uncommunicable are, first, his works of
Merit and Mediation. There is but one Mediator between God and man, the man
Christ. There is no other name under heaven by which a man may be saved, but
the name of Christ. There is no Redemption nor intercession to be wrought by
any man but by Christ. None have to do with the Censer to offer incense, who
have not to do with the Altar to offer Sacrifice. Secondly, his work of
Government and Influence into the Church, his dispensing of the spirit, his
quickening of his Word, his subduing of his enemies, his collecting of his
members, are all personal Honors which belong unto Him as Head of the Church.
Those which are Communicable, and wherein we may be by his Grace made
partakers, are such as either belong to the other life, or to this. In the
Phil. 3. 21. 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
other life our Bodies shall be made Conformed to the transfigured and
Glorious body of Christ; when He appears we shall be made like unto Him, by
the power whereby He subdueth all things unto Himself. Here, some are again
extraordinarily Communicable, being for ministry and service, not for sanctity
or Salvation. Such were the miraculous works of the Apostles, which were unto
them by way of privilege and temporary dispensation granted. Others
ordinarily, and universally to all his members. So then it remains that our
formal and complete Sanctification consists in a Conformity to the ways of
Christ's ordinary Obedience. The whole Life of Christ was a Discipline, a
Living, Shining, and exemplary Precept unto men, a Visible Commentary on Gods
Law. Therefore we find such names given unto Him in the Scriptures, as
signify not only Preeminence, but exemplarynesse; A Dan. ^ 25.
Prince, Esai. 55. 4.
a Leader, Math. 2. 6.
a Governor, Heb. 2 10.
a Captain, an Heb. 1 3.
Apostle and high Priest, 1. Pet 2. 25. 1 Pet 5. 4.
a chief Sheepeheard and Bishop, Heb. 6. 20.
a Forerunner, or Conduct into Glory, a Exodus 13 21.
Light to the Jews, Luke 2 32.
a Light to the Gentiles, a Ioh. 1. 9.
Light to every man that enters into the World. All which titles as they
declare his Dignity, that He was the first borne of every Creature, so they
intimate likewise that He was proposed to be the Author and Pattern of
Holiness to his people. All other Saints are to be imitated only with
limitation unto Him, and so far as they in their conversation express his
Life and Spirit; Be ye followers of me even as I am of Christ. But Aug. de
mend^c. ad Consen. lib. 2. cap. 9.
we must (...) pin our obedience to the example of any Saint, lest we happen
to stumble and break our bones, as they did. Wherefore are the falls and
apostacies, the errors and infirmities of holy men in Scripture registered?
Certainly, the Lord delights not to keep those sins upon record for men
to gaze on, which himself has put behind his own back, and wiped out of
the book of his own remembrance. He delights not in the dishonor and
deformities of his worthies. But Aug. De not. and great. cap. 35. Cavendae
tempestates and flenda naufragia.

Ad hoc peccata illorum bominum scripta sunt ut Apostolica illa sententia
ubique tremenda sit, Qui videtur stare, videat ne cadat. Aug. de Doctr. Christ.
li. 3. c. 23. David Amicus Dei, and Solomon amabilis eius victi sunt, ut and
ruinae nobis ad cautione^ and poenitudinis ad salutem exempla praeberent. Hier.
To. 1. Epist 9.


they are recorded for our sakes, set up for landmarks to warn every man to
take heed of adventuring (on any man's authority) upon those rocks where such
renowned and noble Saints have before miscarried. Children of light indeed they
are, but their light is like the light of the Moon subject to mixtures,
wainings, decays, eclipses. Christ only is the Sun of righteousness, that
has a plenitude, indeficiencie, unerring holiness, which neither is deceived,
nor can deceive.

Now further this conformity unto Christ must be in all his obedience. First,
in his active obedience unto the Law, Matt 11. 29.
Learn of me, says he, for I am meek and lowly. Ioh 13. 15.
I have given you an Example that you should do as I have done unto you. The
action was but temporary, and according to the custom of the place and age,
but the affection was universal, the humility of his heart. Phil. 2. 5.
Let the same mind, says the Apostle, be in you, which was in Christ, that
is, have the same judgment, opinions, affections, compassions, as Christ had.
1. Pet. 1. 15.
As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. Secondly, in his passive obedience, though not in the end or
purposes, yet in the manner of it, Run with patience, says the Apostle, the
race which is set before you, looking unto Heb. 12. 1, 2.
Jesus, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despised
the shame, etc. If the head be gotten through a strait place, all the members
will venture after. Therefore since Christ has gone through shame,
contradiction, death, to his glory, let us not be wearied, nor faint or
despair in our minds. The head does not think all its work ended when it is
gotten through it self, but takes care, and is mindful of the members that
follow. Therefore the Apostle calls our sufferings A fulfilling or Col. 1. 24.
making up of the sufferings of Christ. The Resolution of all is briefly this,
We must follow Christ in those things which he both did and commanded; not in
those things which he did, but not commanded. Una passi^ Domini and servorum.
De Du^l. Martyr. apud Cyprian.


But here it may be objected, Christ was Himself voluntarily poor; 2. Cor 8.
9. Luke 9. 58. Luke 8. 3. Mark. 10. 21.
He became poor for our sakes, and he commanded poverty to the young man, go
sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor. Is every man to be herein a
follower of Christ? To this I answer in general, that poverty was not in
Christ any act of Moral Obedience, no^ to the young man any command of Moral
Obedience. First, for Christ's poverty we may conceive that it was a requisite
preparatorie act to the work of redemption, and to the magnifying of his
spiritual power in the subduing of his enemies, and saving of his people; when
it appeared that thereunto no external accessions nor contribution of
temporal greatness did concur. And secondly for the command to the young
man, it was merely personal, and indeed not so much intending obedience to
the letter of the precept, as trial of the sincerity of the man's former
profession, and conviction of him touching those misperswasions and
selfedeceits which made him trust in himself for righteousness like that of
God to Abraham to offer up his Son, which was not intended for death to
Isaake, but for trial to Abraham, and for manifestation of his faith.

It may be further objected, How can we be Holy, as Christ is Holy? First the
thing is impossible, and secondly, if we could, there would be no need of
Christ; if we were bound to be so Holy, righteousness would come by a Law of
works. To this I answer; the Law is not nullyfied, nor curtall'd by the mercy
of Christ: we are as fully bound to the obedience of it as Adam was, though not
upon such bad terms, and evil consequences as he; under danger of contracting
sin, though not under danger of incurring death. So much as any justified
person comes short of complete and universal obedience to the Law, so much he
sins, as Adam did, though God be pleased to pardon that sin by the merit
of Christ. Christ came to deliver from sin, but not to privilege any man to
commit it: though he came to be a curse for sin, yet He came not to be a
Cloak for sin. Secondly, Christ is needful in two respects: First, because
we cannot come to full and perfect obedience, and so His Grace is requisite to
pardon and cover our failings: Secondly, because that which we do attain
unto, is not of or from our selves, and so his spirit is requisite to
strengthen us unto his service. Thirdly, when the Scripture requires us to be
Holy and perfect as Christ and God, by as, we understand not equality in the
compass, but quality in the Truth of our Holiness: As when the Apostle
says, That we must love our neighbor Rom 13. 9.
as our selves, the meaning is not that our love to our neighbor should be
mathematically equal to the love of our selves; for the Law does allow of
degrees in Love according to the degrees of relation and neerenesse in Gal. 6.
10.
the thing loved: Do good unto all men, specially to those of the household of
Faith. Love to a friend may safely be Romans 12 9.
greater then to a stranger; and to a wife or child, then to a friend: yet in
all, our love to others must be of the self same nature, as true, real,
cordial, sincere, solid as that to our selves. We must love our neighbor as
we do our selves, that is, unfainedly, and without dissimulation.

Let us further consider the Grounds of this point touching the Conformity
which is between the nature and spiritual life of Christians and of Christ
(because it is a Doctrine of principal consequence.) First this was one of the
Ends of Christ's coming. Two purposes He came for; A restitution of us to our
interest in Salvation, and a restoring our original qualities of Holiness
unto us. He came to sanctify, and cleanse the Church, that it should be Holy
and without blemish; unblameable and unreproveable Ephesians. 5. 26. Col. 1. 22. Tit.
2. 14.
in his sight: To Redeem, and to purify his people. The one is the work of
his Merit which goes upward to the Satisfaction of his Father; the other the
work of his Spirit and Grace, which goes downward to the Sanctification of
his Church. In the one He bestows his righteousness upon us by imputation;
in the other He fashioneth his ^mage in us by renovation. That man then has no
claim to the payment Christ has made, nor to the inheritance He has
purchased, who has not the Life of Christ fashioned in his nature and
conversation.

But if Christ be not only a Savior to Redeem, but a Rule to Sanctify, what
use or service is left unto the Law? I answer, that the Law is still a Rule,
but not a comfortable, effectual, delightful rule without Christ applying,
and sweetning it unto us. The Law only comes with commands, but Christ with
strength, love, willingness, and life to obey them. The Law alone comes like a
Schoolmaster with a scourge, a curse along with it; but when Christ comes with
the Law, He comes as a Father, with precepts to teach, and with compassions to
spare. The Law is a Lion, and Christ our Sampson that slew the Lion; as long as
the Law is alone, so long it is alive, and comes with terror, and fury upon
every Soul it meets: but when Christ has slain the Law, taken away that
which was the strength of it, namely the guilt of sin, then there is honey in
the Lion, a Math. 11. 30. Iam. 1. 25. 1. Ioh. 5. 3.
sweetness in the duties required by the Law. It is then an easy yoke, and a
Law of liberty, the Commandments are not then grievous, but the heart
delights Ut non sit terribile sed suave mandatum. Aug. Contr. Pelag. and
Celest. lib. 1. c. 13. Ut innotescat quod latebat, and suave fiat quod non
delectabat* gratiae Dei est quae hominum adjuvat voluntates. Aug. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 17.
in them, and loves them, even as the honey and the honey comb. Of it self
it is Math. 22. 13.
the cord of a Judge which binds hand and foot, and shackleth unto
condemnation; but by Christ it is made the Hos. 11. 4.
cord of a man, and the band of Love, by which He teaches us to go^, even as a
nurse her infant.

Secondly, Holiness must needs consist in a Conformity unto Christ, if we
consider the nature of it. We are then Sanctified when we are re-endued with
that Image of God after which we were at first created. Some Ad imaginem
Christi futuri. non tantum Dei opuserat sed pignus. Tertul. de Resur. Christi.
cap. 6.
have conceived that we are therefore said to be created after Gods Image,
because we were made after the Image of Christ, who was to come; but this is
contradicted by the Apostle, who says that Romans 5. 14. 1. Cor. 1^. 45.
Adam was the figure of Christ, and not Christ the pattern of Adam; yet that
created Holiness is renewed in us after the Image of Christ. 1. Cor. 15. 49
As we have borne the image of the earthly Adam, who was taken out of the
Earth, an image of sin, and guilt: So we must bear the Image of the
Heavenly Adam, who is the Lord from Heaven, an Image of Life and Holiness. We
were Romans 8. 29.
predestined, says the Apostle, to be conformed unto the Image of the Son;
Conformed in his Nature, Holiness; in His End, Happiness; and in the way
thereunto, Sufferings. 2. Cor. 3. 18.
We all, says he, beholding with open face as in a glass, that is in Christ,
or 2. Cor. 4* 6.
in the face of Christ, the Glory of God, are changed into the same Image with
Christ, (He the Image of his Father, and we of Him) from glory to glory, that
is, either from glory inchoate in obedience and grace here (for the Saints in
their very sufferings are glorious and conformable to the Glory of Christ* The
1. Pet. 4. 14.
Spirit of Glory is upon you in your reproaches for Christ) unto Glory
consummate in Heaven, and Salvation here. after: or from glory to glory, that
is, Grace for Grace, the Glorious Image of Gods Holiness in Christ fashioning,
and producing it self in the hearts of the faithful, as an Image or species
of light shining on a glass, does from thence fashion it self on the wall, or
in another glass. Holiness is the Image of God; now in an Image there are two
things required. First, a similitude of one thing unto another. Secondly, A
Deduction, derivation, impression of that similitude upon the one from the
other, and with relation thereunto. For though there be the similitude of snow
in milk, yet the one is not the image of the other. Now then when an image is
universally lost, that no man living can furnish his neighbor with it to draw
from thence another for himself, there must be recourse to the prototype and
original, or else it cannot be had. Now in Adam there was an universal
obliteration of Gods Holy Image out of himself, and all his posterity. Unto
God therefore Himself we must have recourse to repair this Image again. But
how can this be? The Apostle tells us, that He is an Inaccessible, an
unapproachable God, no man can draw near him, but he will be licked up and
devoured like the 1. Tim. 6* 16.
stubble by the fire; and yet, if a man could come near him (as in some sense
he is Act. 17. 27.
not far from every one of us) yet He is an 1. Tim. 1. 17.
Invisible God, no man can see Him, and live; no man can have a view of his
face to new draw it again. We are all by sin come Romans 3. 23.
short of His Glory; as impossible it is for any man to become holy again as
it is to see that which is invisible, or to approach unto that which is
Inaccessible; except the Lord be pleased through some veil or other to
exhibit His Image again unto us, and through some glass to let it shine upon
us, we shall be everlastingly destitute of it. And this He has been pleased
to do through the Heb. 10. 20.
veil of Christ's flesh, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
God was manifested in the flesh; in that flesh He was Ioh. 14. 9.
made visible, and we have an access into the Holiest of all through the
veil, that is to say, Christ's flesh; in that flesh He was made accessible. By
Him says the Apostle we have an Ephesians. 2. 18.
access unto the Father. He was the Image of the Invisible God. He that Col.
1. 15.
has seen Him has seen the Father. For as God was in him reconciling the
World unto Himself, so was He in Him revealing Himself unto the World. No
man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son Ioh. 1. 1^.
which is in the bosom of the Father He has revealed Him.

Thirdly, consider the quality of the mystical body. It is a true rule, That
that which is first and best in any Primum and optimum in unoquoque genere est
Regula caeterorum.
kind is the rule and measure of all the rest. And therefore Christ being the
first and chiefest member in the Church, He is to be the ground of conformity
to the rest. And there is indeed a mutual suteablenesse between the Head and
the Members. Christ by compassion Conformable to His Members in their
infirmity, ( We have not an high Priest who cannot be touched with a Heb. 4.
15. Heb. 2. 11.
feeling of our infirmities) And the members by communion conformable to Christ
in His Sanctity; Both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are of
one. Exodus 30. 29.


Fourthly Holiness in the Scripture is called an Unction. All the vessels of
the Tabernacle were sanctified by that Holy Unction which was prescribed Moses.
Ye have received an ointment, says S. John, which teaches you all 1. Ioh. 2.
20.
things. It is an ointment which heals our wounds, and cleanses our nature,
and mollyfieth our Consciences, and opens our eyes, and consecrateth our
persons unto royal, sacred, and peculiar services. Now though Christ were
anointed with this Holy Oil above his fellows, yet not without his fellows;
but all they are by his unction sanctified. Light is principally in the Sun,
and sap in the root, and water in the Fountain; yet there is a derivation,
a conformity in the beam, branches, and streams to their originals: Only
here is the difference; in Christ there is a fullness, in us only a measure;
and in Christ there is a pureness, but in us a mixture.

Fifthly and lastly, Christ is the Sum of the whole Scriptures, and therefore
necessarily the Rule of Holiness. For the 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17.
Scripture is profitable to make a man perfect, and to furnish him unto all
good works. Saint Paul professes Act. 10. 20, 27.
that he withheld nothing which was profitable, but delivered the whole
Counsel of God; and yet elsewhere we find the Sum of his preaching was 1.
Cor. 1. 21, 22.
Christ crucified: and therefore that which the Scripture 1. Cor. 2. 2.
calls (...). 31. 33.
the writing of the Law in our hearts, it calls Gal. 4. 19.
the forming of Christ in us; to note that Christ is the sum and substance of
the whole Law. He (...). Clem. Alex.
came to men first in his Word, and after in his Body; fulfilling the types,
accomplishing the predictions, performing the commands, remooving the burdens*
exhibiting the precepts of the whole Law in a most exemplarie and perfect
conversation.

Now for our further applycation of this Doctrine unto use and practice: we may
hence first receive a twofold Instruction. First, touching the proportions
wherein our holiness must bear conformity unto Christ; for conformity
cannot be without proportion. Here then we may observe four particulars
wherein our holiness is to be proportionable unto Christ's. First, it must
have the same principle and seed^ with Christ's, namely his Spirit. As in Christ
there were two natures, so in either nature there was Holiness after a
several manner. In his Divine nature he was holy by essence and
underivatively* in His humane by consecration, and unction with the Spirit; and
in this we are to bear proportion unto him. Our holiness must proceed from
the same Spirit whereby he was sanctified; only with this difference. The
Spirit of Holiness was Christ's, Inr^ proprio, by virtue of the by postaticall
union of the humane nature with the divine in the unity of his person. By
means whereof it was impossible for the humane nature in him not to be
sanctified, and filled with Grace. But to us the Spirit belongs by an inferior
union unto Christ as our Head, from whom it is unto us derived and dispensed in
such proportions as He is in mercy pleased to observe toward his members. But
yet though we have not as He a plenitude of the Spirit, yet we have the same
in Truth and substance with Him. As it is the same light which breaks forth
in the dawning of the day, and inhereth in the Glorious body of the Sun,
though here in fullness, and there but in measure: So the Apostle says we are
all 2. Cor. 3. 18. 1. Cor 6. 17. Ephesians. 4. 4.
changed into the same Image with Christ by the Spirit of our God. And he that
is joined unto the Lord is one spirit, and that there is but one Body and one
Spirit between Christ and his members.

Secondly, our Holiness must be conformable to Christ's in the Ends of it.
First, the Glory of God: Father, Ioh. 17. 4.
says he, I have gloryfied thee on earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do. Wherein there are three notable things for our imitation
First that God must first give us our works, before we must do them. We must
have his warrant and authority for all we do. If a man could be so full of
selfe-zeale (if I may so call it) of irregular and unprescribed devotion, as to
offer rivers of oil, or mountains of cattle, or the first borne of his body
for the sin of his soul, should neglect and macerate Mic. 6. 7, 8. Col 2. 23.
his body and dishonor his flesh into the gastlynesse, and image of a dead
carcass; yet if the Lord have not first showed it, nor required it of him, it
will all prove but the vanity, and pride of a fleshly mind. Secondly, Col. 2.
18.
as we must do nothing but that which God requires, and gives us to do, so
we must therein aim at Ioh 4. 34. Heb. 6. 6.
his Glory; as his Authority must be the ground, so his Honor must be the
End of all our works: and thirdly, God is never glorified, but by finishing
His works. To begin, and then fall back, is to put Christ to shame.

Secondly, all Christ's works were done for the good of the Church. He was
given and borne for us. He was made Esai. 9. 6.
sin and curse for us. For our righteousness and redemption 2. Cor 5. 21.
Ioh 16. 7.
he came, and for our expediencie he returned again. When the Apostle urges
the Philippians not to look to their own things, but every man also on the
things of Phil. 2. 4. 5.
others, he presses them with this argument, Let the same mind be in you
which was in Christ Jesus. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and
therefore to him there could be no accession; all that he did was verse. 17.
for his Church; and this Saint Paul seals with his own example: If I be
offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with
you all. And else* 2. Cor. 12. 15.
where, I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I beloved. Only here is the difference,
Christ's obedience was meritorious for the redemption of His Church, ours only
ministerial for the edification of the Church: we do all things, says the
Apostle, for your edification. When the 2. Cor. 12. 19. Col. 1. 24.
Apostle says, I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ
for his Bodies sake, which is the Church: We are not to conceive it in our
adversaries gloss, that it was to merit, expiate, satisfy for the Church; but
only to benefit and edify it. Let him expound himself. Phil. 1. 12. 13. 2.
Tim. 2. 10.
The things which happened unto me, namely my bonds in Christ, have fallen out
rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel: and again, I endure all things for
the Elects sake, that they may also obtain the Salvation, not which my
sufferings merit, but which is in Christ Jesus. To note that the sufferings of
the Saints are ministerially serviceable to that Salvation of the Church, unto
which the sufferings of Christ are alone meritorious and availeable.

Thirdly, our holiness must be Proportionable to Christ's in the parts of it.
It must be universal: the whole Ephesians. 4. 16.
man must be spiritually formed and organized unto the measure of Christ.
Every part must have its measure, and every joint its supply. Holiness is a
resurrection; all that which fell must be restored; and it is a generation, all
the parts of him that begets must be fashioned. The God of peace sanctify
you throughout, and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body may be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Lastly, our Holiness must be proportion ed unto Christ in the manner of
working: I shall observe but three Math. 16. 24.
particulars of many. First, it must be done with selfedenyall; He that will
follow Christ must deny himself: Christ for us denied himself, and his own
will; His natural love toward his own life yielded to his merciful love
toward his members; not as I will in my natural desire to decline
dissolution, but as thou will in thy merciful purpose to save thy Church. Many
men will be content to serve God as long as they may with all advantage
themselves: but to serve him and deny themselves is a work which they have not
learned. Ephraim Hos. 10. 11. 1. Cor. ^. 9.
loves to tread out the corn, says the Prophet. You know the mouth of the
Ox was not to be muzled that trod out the corn, he had his work and reward
together. But plowing is only in hope: for the present it is a hungry and a
hard work. So, says he, while Ephraim may serve me and himself, make
religion serve his other secular purposes, he will be very forward: but when he
must plow, that is, serve in hope of a Harvest, but in pain for the present,
he has an easier plow going of his own, as it follows, ye have plowed
wickedness.

Secondly, it must be done in obedience unto God. Phil 2. 8* Ioh. 4 34. Heb.
1. 9.
Christ emptied himself, and became obedient; It was his meat and drink to
do the Will of his Father: even unto that bitter work of his Passion he was
anointed with the oil of gladness; to note that though as made of a woman,
partaker of the same passions and natural affections with us, he did decline
it, and shrink from it; yet, as made under the Law, he did most voluntarily
and obediently undertake it. Thou have prepared me a Heb. 10. 5. 7.
body. In the volume of thy book it is written of me, Lo I come to do thy
Will O God.

Lastly, our holiness must have growth and proficiencie with it, grow in
grace. Let these things be in you and abound; as it is said of Christ, that He
increased in wisdom Luke 2 40. ^2. Heb. 5. 8.
and favor with God and men, and that He learned obedience by the things which
He suffered. If it be here objected, that Christ was ever full, and had the
Spirit without measure even from the womb; For in as much as his Divine nature
was in his infancy as fully united to his humane as ever after, therefore the
fullness of grace, which was a consequent thereupon, was as much as ever after:
To this I answer, that certain it is Christ was ever full of Grace and
Spirit; but that excludes not his growth in them, proportionably to the
ripeness, and by consequence capacity of his humane nature. Suppose Uid.
Cameron. de Eccles page 152.
we the Sun were vegetable and a subject of augmentation, though it would be
never true to say that it is fuller of light then it was, yet it would be true
to say that it has more light now, then it had when it was of a lesser
capacity: Even so Christ being in all things save sin like unto us, and
therefore like us in the degrees and progresses of natural maturitie, though
he were ever full of Grace, may yet be said to grow in it, and to learn,
because as the capacity of his nature was enlarged, the spring of Grace within
him did rise up and proportionably fill it.

Secondly, from this Doctrine of our conformity in Holiness to the life of
Christ we may be instructed touching the vigor of the Law, and the consonancie
and concurrencie thereof with the Gospel. True it is that Christ is the End of
the Law, and that we are not under the Law, but under Grace: Yet it is as true
that Christ came not to destroy the Law, and that no jot nor tittle thereof
shall fall to the ground. We are not under the Law for Justification of our
persons, as Adam; nor for satisfaction of Divine Justice, as those that perish;
but we are under it as a document of obedience, and a rule of living. It is now
published from mount Sion, as a Law of liberty, and a new Law; not as a Law of
condemnation and bond age. The obedience thereof is not removed, but the
disobedience thereof is both pardoned and cured. Necessary is the observation
of it as as a fruit of Faith, not as a condition of Life or Righteousness,
Necessary, necessitate praecepti, as a thing commanded, the transgressing
whereof is an incurring of sin; not necessitate medy, as a strict and
undispensable mean of Salvation, the transgression whereof is a peremptory
obligation unto death. Three things Christ has done to the Law for us. First,
He has mitigated the rig^r and removed the curse from it, as it is a killing
letter, and ministry of death. Secondly, He has by his Spirit conferred all
the principles of obedience upon us; wisdom to contrive, will to desire,
strength to execute, love to delight in the services of it. The Law only
commands, but Christ enables. Thirdly, He has by his exemplary holiness
chalked out unto us, and conducted us in the way of obedience: for all our
obedience comes from Christ, and that either as unto members from his Spirit,
or as unto Disciples from his Doctrine and Example. We see then the necessity
of our being in Christ, not only for righteousness, but for obedience: for we
must have Life, before we can have Operation. If we live Gal. 5. 25.
in the spirit, let us walk^ also in the spirit. Whereas out of Christ a man is
under the whole Law, as an insupportable yoke, as an impossible and yet
inexorable rule; as a Covenant of Righteousness, and condition by which he
must be tried, by which he must everlastingly stand or fall before the
tribunal of Christ, when he shall come in flaming fire to take vengeance on
those who, though convinced of their iusufficiencie to observe the Law, have
yet disobeyed the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly we may hence learn
the necessity of diligent attendance on the holy Scriptures and places where
they are explained: there is 1. Ioh. 2 6.
no abiding in Christ but by walking as he walked: there is no walking as he
walked, but by knowing how he walked: and this is only by the Scriptures, in
which He is Math. 28. 20.
yet amongst us, Revel. 1 13.
walking in the midst of his Church, Gal 3. 1.
Crucified before our eyes, set forth and 1. Ioh. 1. 2, 3.
declared unto us: Ioh. 20. 30. 31.
many other signs Jesus did which are not written says the Apostle, but these
are written that you might believe, and that believing you might have life. We
know not any of Christ's ways or works but by the Word; and therefore they who
give no attendance unto that, declare that they regard not the ways of Christ,
nor have any care to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes.

Secondly, we must from hence be exhorted to take heed of usurping Christ's
honor to our selves, of being our own rule or way. The Lord is a jealous God,
and will not suffer any to be a self mover, or a God unto himself. It is one
of Gods extremest judgments to give men over to themselves, and leave them to
follow their own rules. When he has first wo^d men by his Spirit, and that
is resisted; enticed them by his mercies, and they are abused; threatened them
with his judgments, and they are misattributed to second causes; cried unto
them by his prophets, and they are reviled; sent his own Son to persuade
them, and he is trampled on and despised: when he offers to teach them, and
they stop their ears; to lead them, and they pull away their shoulder; to
convert them, and they hardened their heart; when they set up mounds against the
Gospel, as it were to nonplus and pose the mercies of God, that there may be
no remedy left; then after all these ind^gnities to the Spirit of Grace, this
is the judgment with which God uses to revenge the quarrrell of his Grace and
Covenant, to leave them to the hardness and impenitencie Act. 14. 16.
of their own hearts, to be a rule and way unto themselves. My people would
not hearken to my voice, Romans 1. 26. Psalm. 81. 12. Magna Dei ira est (...) non
irasca^ur De^s. Hieron epist 33. a^ Cas^at. Ira est Dei non intellig^re
delicta, ne sequatur poeni^ntia. Cyprian. Epist. 3. Percussi sunt animi ^citate
ut nec intelligant delicta nec plangant. Indignantis Dei mayor est haec ira.
Idem de lapsis.
and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lust;
and they walked in their own counsels. Let us therefore take heed of a
will-holynesse. We are the servants of Christ, and our members are to be the
instruments of righteousness; and servants are to be governed by the will of
their masters, and members to be guided by the influence of the head, and
instruments to be applied to all their services by the superior cause. Heb.
8. 5.
Every thing which Moses did about the Tabernacle was to be done after the
pattern which he had seen in the mount; and every thing which we do in these
spiritual Tabernacles, we are to do after the pattern of him who is set
before us. The services of Israel, after their revolt from the house of David,
when they built Altars and multiplied sacrifices, were as chargeable, as
specious, and in humane discourse every whit as rational, as those at
Jerusalem; yet we find when they would be wiser then God, and prescribe the
way wherein they meant to worship him all Hos 10 6. 5. Ier. 48. 13.
ended in shame and dishonor; Bethel which was Gods house before is turned into
Bethaven, a house of vanity: Hos. 8. 14. Nox ex Arbitrio Deo serviendu^, sed
ex imperio. vid. Tertul. de Ieiun. cap. 13. vid. Chrysostom. in Ro^. Homil. 2.
Aug. de Civi. Dei lib. 1. c. 26. and lib. 5. cap. 18.
Israel has forgotten his Maker, and builds Temples says the Prophet. One
would think that he who buildes temples had God, who was in the^ to be
worshipped, often in his mind; but to remember God otherwise then he has
required, to build many temples, when he had appointed but one temple and one
altar for all that people to resort unto, this was by forgetting Gods Will and
Word to forget likewise his service and worship, because to serve him otherwise
then he requires is not to worship but to rob and mock him. 1 In Gods service
it is a greater sin to do that which we are not to do, then not to do
that which we are commanded. This is but a sin of omission; but that a sin
of sacrilege and high contempt: in this we charge the law only with
difficulty, but in that with folly; in this we discover our weakness to do
the will, but in that we declare our impudence and arrogancy to control the
wisdom of God: In this we acknowledge our own insufficiency, in that we
deny the all-sufficiencie and plenitude of Gods own Law. But what ever opinion
men have of their own wisdoms, and contributions in Gods service, yet he
esteems them all but as ^udicrous things, as games, and plays, and acting of
mimicall dancings: Hooker lib. 2. sect. 6.
The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to Exodus 32. 6.
play.

What ever action therefore you go about, do it by Rule, enquire out of the
scriptures whether Christ would have done it or no, at least whether he allow
it or no. It is true, somethings are lawful and expedient with us, which were
not suitable unto the person of Christ. Marriage is honorable with all other
men, but it did not befit his person who came into the world to spiritual
purposes only, to beget sons and daughters unto God, and to be mystically
married unto his Church. To write books is commendable with men, because like
Abel being dead they may still speak, and teach those who never saw them. But
it would have been derogatory to the person, and unbecomming the office of
Christ. For it is his prerogative to be in the midst of the seven
candlestickes, to be present to all his members, to teach by power and not by
ministry, to teach by his Spirit, Cathedram in coelis habet, qui Corda docet.
and not by his pen, to teach the hearts of men, and not their eyes or ears.
He has no mortality, distance, or absence to be by such means supplied. It
became him to commit these ministerial actions to his servants, and to reserve
to himself that great honor of writing his Law in the hearts of his people,
and making them to be his epistle. But yet I say as in these things we must
respect his allowance, so in others let us ref^ect upon his example. When thou
art tempted to looseness, and immoderate living, ask thy conscience but this
question, would Christ have d^unke unto swinishnesse, or eaten unto excess?
would he have wasted his precious time at slewes, stages, or tavernes, or
taken delight in sinful and desperate fellowships? Did Christ frequently pray
both with his Disciples, and alone by himself, and shall Inever either in my
family or in my closet think upon God? did Christ open his wounds, and shall
not I open my mouth? was not his blood too precious to redeem, and is my
breath too good to instruct his Church? was Christ merciful to his enemies,
and shall I be cruel to his members? Again for the manner of Christ's
obedience; did Christ serve God without all selfe-ends, merely in obedience,
and to glorify him; and shall I make Gods worship subordinate to my aims and
his religion serve turns? shall I do what I do without any love or joy,
merely out of slavish fear, and compulsion of conscience? Thus if we did
resolve our services into their true originals, and measure them by the
Holiness of Christ, and have him ever before our eyes, it would be a great
means of living in comfort and spiritual conformity to Gods Law.

And there are, amongst diverse others, two great encouragements thereunto.
First, while we follow Christ we are out of all danger, his Angels have us in
their arms, we are under the protection of his promises, as every good subject
in the kings way is under the kings protection. Peter never denied Christ, nor
was assaulted Luke 22. 54, 55, 56.
by the servants of the high priest till he gave over following him. Secondly,
the more we follow Christ the nearer still we come unto him. Because Christ is
entered into his rest, he is now at home, he is not now in motion, but he
sits still at his Fathers right hand, and has no higher nor no further to
go: and therefore so long as I hasten and press forward in his way, I must
needs be the nearer unto him. Your Salvation is nearer, Romans 3. 11.
says the Apostle, then when you first believed. Romans 13. 11.


But a man will say, how shall I do to follow Christ? Math. 16. 24.
I answer in one word, deny thy self, and thou do then follow him: get out
of thine own way and thou can not miss of his. The world never rules us but
by our Iam. 4. 4. 5. 1. Ioh. 2. 16, 17. Iam. 4 7.
own lusts; Satan never overcomes us but by our own wills, and with our
own weapons; when he is resisted he flies. As Hanibal was wont to say that
the only way to fight against Rome was in Italy: so the other enemies of our
salvation know that there is no conquering the soul but in its own way. As
soon as any man forsakes his own way, Christ is at hand to lead him into his.
He will be wisdom to those that deny their own reason; he will be
Redemption to those that despise their own merits; he will be sanctification
to those that cast of their own lusts; he will be salvation to those that
relinquish their own ends; he will be all things to those that are nothing to
themselves. Now we have (as I may so speak) two selfs. A self of nature, and
a self of sin; and both must be denied for Christ. This we must ever cast
away as a snare, and that we must be ever ready to lay down, as a sacrifice,
when he is pleased to set himself in competition with it. And so much for the
Life of Holiness which we have in Christ.

Lastly, he that has the Son has the Life of glory assured to him. For He
Ephesians. 2. 6.
has made us to sit together with him in Heavenly places: and (...). 2.
when He appears we shall be like him. He shall change (...) 3 21
our vile bodies into the similitude of his Glorious body. When ^. The. 4. 17.
He comes we shall meet him, and be ever with him. ^. 2^. 17
He is ascended to his Father and our Father, to his God and our God, and
therefore to Luke 22. 30. (...) 1. 2. P^t 1. 1^.
his Kingdom and Math. 19. 14. (...). 2. 5. Reve. 5. 10.
our Kingdom: His by personal propriety, and hypostaticall union; ours by
his purchase and merit, and by our mystical union and fellowship with him. He
is gone to prepare a place for us. In Earth He was our surety to answer the
penalty of our sins; and in Heaven, He is our Advocate, to take seifin and
possession of that Kingdom for us; Our Captain, and Forerunner, and high
Priest, who has not only carried our names, but has broken off the veil of
the Sanctuary, and given us access into the Holiest of all. And he that has
the Son, has this life already in three regards. First, in p^etio, he has
the price that procured it esteemed his. It was bought with the precious blood
of Christ in his Name, and to his use, and it was so bought for him that he
has a present right and claim unto it. It is not his i^ Reversion after an
expiration of any others right (there are no lease^ nor reversions in Heaven)
but it is his as an inheritance is the heirs after the death of the Ancestor,
who yet by minority of years, or distance of place may occupy and possess
it by some other person. Secondly, He has it in promisso, He has Gods
Charter, his Assurance sealed with an oath, and a double Sacrament, to
establish his heart in the expectation of it. By Heb. 6. 18.
two immutable things, faith the Apostle, namely the Word and the Oath of God,
wherein it was impossible for him to he, we have strong consolation, and great
ground of hope; which hope is sure and steadfast, and leads us unto that place
which is within the veil, whither Christ our Forerunner is gone before us.
Thirdly, He has it in Romans 8. 23. Nunc aliquid propigno^ accip^us ut ipsam
plen^tudinem desiderare no^erimus. Aug. Epist 6
primitijs, in the earnest, and first fruits and hansell of it; in those Number.
13. 23.
few clusters of grapes, and bunches of figs, those Graces of Christ's Spirit,
that peace, comfort, serenitie, which is shed forth into the heart already from
that Heavenly Canaan. The Holy Spirit of Promise is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the Redemption or full fruition and Revelation of our
purchased possession to the praise of his Glory. The Graces of the Spirit in
the soul are Ephesians. 1. 14. Ioh. 16. 13, 14, 15.
as certain and infallible evidences of Salvation, as the day star or the
morning aurora is of the ensuing day, or Sunne-rising. For all spiritual
things in the Soul are the beginnings of Heaven, parcels of that Spirit, the
fullness and residue whereof is in Christ's keeping to adorn us with when he
shall present us unto his Father.

But this Doctrine of the Life of Glory is in this life more to be made use of,
then curiously to be enquired into. O then where the Math. 6. 21.
Treasure is, let the heart be; Math. 24. 28.
where the body is, let the Eagles resort; if we are already free men of
heaven, let our thoughts, our language, our Phil. 3 20.
conversation, our Trading be for Heaven. Let us set our faces toward our
home. Romans 13. 11.
Let us awake out of sleep, considering that now our salvation is nearer then
when we first believed. If we have 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
a hope to be like him at his coming, let us purify our selves even as he is
pure; since there is a Phil. 3. 13, 14.
price, a high calling, a crown before us, let us press forward with all
Math. 11. 12.
violence of devotion, never think our selves far enough, but prepare our
hearts still, and lay hold on every advantage to further our progress: Since
there is Heb. 4. 9, 11.
a rest remaining for the people of God, let us labor to enter into it, and to
Heb. 10. 20, 23
hold fast our profession, that 2. Cor. 5. 9.
as well absent as present we may be accepted of him.

Secondly, since we know that if our 2. Cor. 5. 1, 2.
earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; Let us feel the burden of
our fleshly corruptions, and Romans 8. 23.
groan after our redemption. Let us long for the revelation of the Sons of
God, and for his 2. Tim. 4. 8.
appearing, as the Saints under the Altar, Revel. 6. 10.
How long Lord Jesus, Holy and Just.

Thirdly, let us with enlarged and ravished affections, with all the vigor and
activitie of enflamed hearts recount the great love of God, who has not only
delivered us from his wrath, but made us Sons, married his own infinite
Majesty to our nature in the unity of his Sons person, and made us in him
Revel. 1. 6.
Kings, Priests, and Heirs unto God. 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
Beloved what manner of Love, How unsearchable, How bottomless, how surpassing
the apprehensions of Men or Angels is the Love of God to us, says the Apostle,
that we should be called the Sons of God.

Lastly, if God will glorify us with his Life hereafter, let us labor as much
as we can to glorify Him in our lives here. It was our Saviors argument (who
might have entered into Glory as his own without any such way of procurement,
if his own voluntary undertaking the office of Mediator had not concluded
him.) Glorify me with thy self, with the glory which I had with Ioh. 17. 4,
5.
thee before the World was; for I have gloryfied thee on Earth, I have finished
the work which thou gave me to do. If we are indeed persuaded that there
is laid up for us a Crown of righteousness, we cannot but with Saint Paul
resolve to fight a good fight, to finish our 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8. Ioh. 15. 8.
course, to keep the faith, to bring forth much fruit that our Father may be
glorified in us.

And now having unfolded this threefold Life which the faithful have in
Christ, we may further take notice of three attributes or properties of this
life, both to humble and to secure us; and they are all couched in one word of
the Apostle, your life is hid with Christ in God. Col. 3. 3. Psalm. 36. 9.
It is in Christ's keeping, as in the hands of a faithful depositary, and it is
a Life in God, a full Life, a derivation from the Fountain of Life, where it
is surer and sweeter then in any Cisterne. Here then are three properties of a
Christians Life in Christ; first, Obscurity; secondly, Plenty; thirdly,
safety or Eternity. First it is an obscure life, a secret and mysterious
life; so the Apostle calls 1. Tim. 3. 6.
Godliness a Mystery. As there is a mystery of iniquity, and the hidden
things of uncleanness: so there is a Mystery of Godliness, and the 1. Pet.
3. 4.
hidden man of the heart. The Life of Grace first is hidden totally from the
wicked. Prove. 14. 10.
A stranger does not intermeddle with a righteous man's joy; 1. Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man knows not any things of Gods spirit; Saint Peter gives the
reason, because he is 2. Pet. 1. 9.
blind, and cannot see a far off. Now the things of God are deep things,
and high things, upward 1 Cor. 2. 10.
they have too much brightness, and downward they have too much darkness for
purblinde eyes to apprehend. Secondly, It is hid in some sort from the
faithful themselves. First, under the prevalencie of their corruptions, and
adherencie of concupiscence, as Corn under a heap of chafe, or a wall under
the Ivy, or metal under the rust which overgrowes it. Secondly, under the
winnowings and temptations of Satan. As in sifting of Corn the branne being
lightest gets upmost, so when Satan disquiets the heart, that which is finest,
and should most comfort, will sink and be out of sight. Thirdly, under
spiritual desertions, and trials; as in an Eclipse, when the face of the Sun
is intercepted, the Moon loses her light: so when God, who is our light,
hides his Countenance from us, no marvel if we can discover no good nor
comfort in our selves.

Secondly, the life of glory is much more obscure and secret; for
notwithstanding the first fruits and inchoations thereof be in this life
begun in the peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost (as in an Eclipse
of the Sun some dim glimpses do glance from the edges of the interposed
body) yet in regard of the plenarie infusion of glorious endowments, and those
prerogatives of the flesh which belong unto it at the redemption of the body,
it is a hidden mystery; It is a light which is Psalm. 97. 11.
only sowed for the righteous; though we expect a revelation of it, yet now it
is but as corn in the ground, covered over with much darkness. Now we are
Sons, says 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
Saint John, we have Ius ad rem, right unto our Life and Crown already; but we
are in a far country like the prodigal, absent from the Lord; and therefore
It does not yet appear what we shall be: we can no more distinctly understand
the excellency of our inheritance by these seals and assurances which ratify
our right thereunto, then one who never saw the Sun could conjecture the
light and luster thereof by the twinkling of a little star, or the picture
thereof in a table; Only this we know, that when he shall appear, we shall
be like unto him; not only in true holiness, for so we are like him now (we
are already created after him in righteousness and true holiness) but in full
holiness too; we shall be filled with Ephesians 4. 24. Ephesians. 3. 19. Psalm. 17. 15.
Ephesians. 4 30.
all the fullness of God, as the same Apostle speaks: Such a fullness as shall
satisfy us: when I awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Therefore
the last day is by an emphasis called a Day of redemption. First, in regard of
the manifestation and Revelation thereof. The Lord shall then appear and be
revealed from Heaven, all those curtens shall be drawn, those vailes between
us and our Glory, those skins with which the Arc is overlaid, shall be torn
and removed: our sins, our earthly condition, our manifold afflictions, the
seeming poverty and foolishness of the ordinances, shall be all laid aside,
and then we shall see our Redeemer, not as Job did from a dunghill, nor as
Moses through a Cloud, but we shall know even as we are known.

Here then we see one of the maine reasons why wicked men despise religion,
and Prove. 29. 27.
abominate the righteous, as Esai. 8. 14, 18. Zach. 3. 8. Psalm. 71. 7.
signs and wonders to be spoken against. They judge of Spiritual things as
blind men do of colors. These are hidden mysteries to them, no marvel if they
count it a strange thing, and a very madness that others run not to their
excess. But our comfort is that our hope is Germen, a growing thing, a stone
full of eyes, a hidden Manna, (sweet though secret) a new name, which Revel.
2. 17.
though no other man can know, yet he that receives it is able to read.

And this is the reason too why the Saints themselves are not enough affected
with the beauty of Holiness, because it is in great part hidden even from
them by corruptions, and admixture of earthly lusts. Lift up your Luke 21. 28.
heads, says our Savior, for your redemption draws nigh: noting unto us,
that so long as the thoughts and affections of men are downward, their
redemption is out of their sight. Open thou mine eyes, says David, that Psalm.
119. 18, 19
I may behold the wondrous things out of thy Law: I am a stranger on earth, O
hide not thy Commandments from me. When a man makes himself a stranger unto
earthly things, and sets not any of his choicest affections and desires on
them, he is then qualified to see those mysteries and wonders which are in the
Law. If there were no earth, there would be no darkness (for the shadow of
the earth is that which makes the night, and the body of the earth which
absenteth the Sun from our view) It is much more certain in spiritual
things, the light of Gods Word and Graces would not be eclipsed, if earthly
affections did not interpose themselves. This is the reason why men go on in
their sins and believe not the Word, because they have a veil over their
eyes, which hides the beauty of it from them. Who Esai. 53. 1.
has believed our report, or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? says
the Prophet: intimating unto us, that the Word will not be believed, till it
be revealed. Act. 16. 14.
The Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend unto Paul's preaching. As soon as
the veil is taken away by Christ, and the Truth, Goodness, and beauty of the
Gospel discovered, there is immediately wrought a clear assent and
subscription in the mind, an earnest longing and desire in the heart, a
constant purpose and resolution in the will to forsake all things as dung in
comparison of that excellent knowledge. As in the discovery of mathematical
conclusions there is such demonstrative and invincible evidence as would make a
man wonder he had not understood them before: so in the discoveries of Grace
unto the Soul, the Spirit does so thoroughly convince a man, that he wonders
at his former stupiditie, which never admired such things before.

Again the faithful are here to be directed in this state of obscurity how
to carry themselves under those corruptions, temptations, desertions, which
here hide the brightness and beauty of their life from them. First, above all
preserve sincerity in the heart. There is nothing in us so perfect, so
contrary to our corruptions as sincerity; that will ever be to the soul in
the midst of darkness as a chinke in a Dungeon, through which it may discern
some glimmerings of light; whereas without it all other shows and pretenses
are but like windows fastened upon a thick wall only for uniformitie in the
building; though they seem specious to the beholder without, yet inward they
transmit no light at all, because they are laid over an opace body. Secondly,
foster not temptations, do not plead nor promote the Devils cause, set not
forward thine enemies suggestions. Though it be our duty to have our sins
always before us, so it be upon the suggestion and proposal of Gods Spirit;
yet we must turn our eyes from our very sins when Satan displayes them.
Christ will be confessed, but he forbids the Devils to confess him; and God
will have sin to be felt and seen, but as a duty, not as a temptation; in
his own Word, not in Satan's false glasses; to draw us unto him, not to drive
or deter us from him. When the spirit convinces of sin, it is to amend us;
but when Satan does it, it is only to affright and confound us. And commonly
he drives to one sin, to cover another. Again the spirit opens sin in the
soul as a Chirurgian does a wound, in a close room, with fire, friends, and
remedies about him: but the devil first draw's a man from the Word, from
Christ, from the promises, and then strips the soul, and opens the wounds
thereof in the cold air only to kill and torment, not to cure or releeve. In
such a case therefore the Soul should lay the faster hold upon Christ, and
when there is no light should trust upon the name of the Lord and stay upon his
God. Thirdly, In spiritual desertions exercise faith to see God when He is
absent: go into the watch Tower, review thine own and other men's experiences
of Gods dealing; resolve to trust him though he kill thee; resolve to cleave to
him, as Elisha to Eliah, though he offer to depart from thee; resolve to
venture upon him when he seems angry and armed against thee; resolve to run
after him when he has forsaken thee; endure rather his blows, then his
absence; therefore he removes that thou should cry after him; therefore he
hides from thee, not that thou should lose him, but only that thou should
seek him: And there is most comfort in a life recovered. Difficulties sweeten
our fruition; and there is a fullness in Chtist which will at last be an ample
reward of all preceding discomforts.

Secondly, the life which we have by Christ is a plenteous and abundant life.
Ioh. 10. 10.
I am come, says he, that they might have Life, and that they might have it
more abundantly. Ioh. 7. 37.
He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water, like the Ezekiel. 47. 3. 4. 5.
waters of Ezekiels vision which swelled from the ancles to the loins, and
from thence to an unpassable Stream. So the Apostle says, that the Lord had
Tit. 3. 6.
shed forth the spirit abundantly in the renewing of his Saints. And it is an
observation which you may easily make, that sundry times in the Apostles
writings, the Graces of the Gospel are called the Ephesians. 1. 7. 2. 7. 3. 8. Col
1. 27. Heb. 11. 26.
riches of Christ, and the riches of his Grace, and the riches of his mystery,
and the riches of his Glory, and the riches of his reproaches, and the Math.
12. 35.
treasure of a good heart; By all which is expressed the pretiousnes, and the
abundance of the Spirit which we have from the Life of Christ. Therefore the
Spirit is compared unto Esai. 12 3. Ioh 7. 38.
water, and that not only to sprinkle and bedew men, but to wash and baptize
them; Act. 1. 5.
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. As water knows no bounds within it
self, is only limited by the vessel which holds it; so the Spirit is of a
very spreading and unlimited property it self, and is only straightened by the
narrowness of those hearts unto which it comes. 2. Cor 6. 12.
Ye are not straightened in us, says the Apostle, or in our ministry, we
preach abundance of Grace unto you; but ye are straightened in your own bowels;
you are like narrow mouthed vessels; though floudes of knowledge, fall down, (
Esai 11 9.
The Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
Sea,) yet but drops fall in. This is a great grieving of the Spirit of Life,
and indignity done to the springing and abounding virtue which he brings, for
us by our supinnes and security to damme up this fountain, to let this garden
of spices be over grown with weeds; to nippe, stifle, and keep under the
Graces of Christ; not to receive a proportionable measure of growth to those
means, and influences which he affords us.

Lastly, the Life which we have from Christ is a Safe, an Abiding, an Eternal
Life: the longer it continues, the more it aboundes. It is such a life as
runs not into death. Our earthly life is indeed but a dying and decaying
life: but our Spiritual life is a growing life. It is called in the Scripture
our abiding in Christ, to note that our estate in him is a fixed, constant and
secure estate.

Life can End in Death but upon two reasons; either by an inward principle and
proponsion, carrying it through slow and insensible progresses to a
dissolution; or by the assaults and violence of outward oppositions: either it
must be a natural or a violent death. Now the life which we have from Christ
has no seeds of mortality in it self, because it comes from Christ: and as
he saw no corruption, so nothing that rises from him does of it self tend to
corruption; for Christ dies no more, death has no more power over him. He now
lives ever; not only by himself, but over his members; not only as man, but
as a member of his own Body, which Body of it self, and as it is His Body,
in that Spiritual and Heavenly Constitution, and under that denomination can
no more die, then Christ suffer again. For the Body of Christ, qua tale, has
no seeds of corruption in it from him. For the Apostle says, that the seed
by which we are regenerated is 1. Pet. 1. 23.
Incorruptible seed.

All the danger then must be from foreign assault, and external violence. But
against all this we have the power and strength of Christ himself to oppose.
Heb. 7. ^5.
He is able to save to the uttermost those that come unto God by Him. Let us
consider more particularly the violences which may be offered to our Life in
Christ.

First, the world assaults us with manifold tepmtations; On the left hand with
skorne, misreports, persecutions, and cruel mockings, with Giants and sons
of Anak: On the right hand with allurements, objects, promises, dalliances, and
(...), with midianitish women. How shall we secure our lives against such a
siege of snares? Our Savior quiets us in that case; Ioh. 16. 33.
be of good cheer, I have overcome the World. Alas may the Soul answer, If
Sampson should have seen a little child under the paw of a Lion, and should
thus comfort him, be of good cheer for I have overcome a Lion, what safety or
assurance could hence arise to him who had not the strength of Sampson. But we
must know that Christ overcame not for himself, but for us; and as he has
overcome the world for us, so he does it In us likewise by his Grace; 1. Ioh.
5. 4. 5.
This is the victory which overcommeth the World, even your Faith.

Secondly, nay but Satan is a more powerful, subtle, deep, wily, working
adversary then the world. Where shall I have protection and security against
him? I answer, in that promise to man, and curse to the Serpent; Genesis 31. 5.
The seed of the woman shall bruize thy head, and thou shall bruize his heel.
He thy Head, He shall tear out thy sting, and crush thy projects and
machinations against his Church, but thou only His heel; the vital parts
shall be above thy reach. And this Christ did not for himself, but for us.
Romans 16. 20.
The God of Peace, says the Apostle, shall bruize Satan under your feet. He
shall be under our feet, but it is a greater strength then ours which shall
keep him down. The victory is Gods, the benefit and insultation ours. If He
come as a Serpent with cunning craftiness to seduce us, Christ is a stronger
Serpent, a Serpent of Brass; and what hurt can a Serpent of flesh do unto a
Serpent of Brass? If as a Lion, with rage and fiery assaults: Christ is a
stronger Lion, A Lion of the Tribe of Iud^, the victorious Tribe. Judge. 1. 1. 2.
Who shall go up for us against the Cananites first? Judah shall go up. If he
come as an Angel of light to persuade us to presume and sin; The Psalm. 130. 4.
mercy of Christ begets fear: The 2. Cor. 5. 15.
Love of Christ constrains us. Satan can but allure to disobedience, but
Christ can constrain us to live unto him. If he come as an Angel of
darkness to terrify us with despairing suggestions, because we have sinned:
1. Ioh. 2. 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate; and Romans 8. 33.
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is Christ that is
dead, yea rather that is risen again, who also sits at the right hand of
God, to make intercession for us.

Thirdly, but I have an enemy within me which is the most dangerous of all.
The World may be if not overcome, yet endured, and by being endured it will at
last be overcome. The Devil may be driven away for a time, though he return
again: but the flesh is an Romans 7. 17.
Inhabiting sin, and an Heb. 12. 1.
encompassing sin. If I break through it, yet it is still within me; and if
I reject it, yet it is still about me. Saint Paul who triumphed and insulted
over all the rest, over the World, Romans 8. 35 37. Gal. 6. 14.
Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay in
all these things we are more then conquerors through him that loved us. Over
Satan and Hell, 1. Cor. 15. 55.
O Death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? Even he cries out
against this enemy his own flesh. Romans 7. 23.
O wrethed man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of Death? Yet
even against this unremoveable and unvanquishable corruption the Life of Christ
is safe in us upon these grounds. First, we have his Prayer which helps to
subdue it, and to sanctify our nature: Ioh 17. 17.
Sanctify them by thy Truth. Secondly, we have His Virtue and Power to purge
it out, and to cure it: Mal. 4. 2.
The Sun of righteousness has healing in his wings. Thirdly, we have His
office and sidelitie to appeal unto, and where to complain against our own
flesh. He undertook it as a part of his business to Tit. 2. 14.
purge and cleanse his people. Fourthly, we have His Spirit to Gal 5 17.
combat and wrestle with it, and so by little and little to crucify it in us;
and lastly we have his Merits as Sanctuary to fly unto; to forgive them here,
and hereafter to expel them.

Fourthly, for all this I am full of doubts and restless Heb 8. 13.
fears, which do continually fight within me, and make my spirit languish and
sink; and that which may decay, may likewise expire and vanish away. To this I
answer, that which inwardly decays and sinketh at the foundation is
perishable: but that which in its operations, and, quoad nos, in regard of
sense and present complacencie may seem to decay, does not yet perish in its
substance. A Cloud may hide the Sun from the eye, but can never blot it out
of his orb. Nay, Spiritual grief is to that light which is sown in the
heart, but like harrowing to the Earth; it macerates for the time, but withal
it tends to joy and beauty. There is difference between the pains of a woman
in travel, and the pains of a gout, or some mortal disease: for though that
be as extreme in smart, and present irkefomenesse as the other, yet it
contains in it, and it proceeds from a Matter Ioh. 16. 21.
of Joy: And all the wrestlings of the Soul with the enemies of Salvation are
but as the pains of a woman in travel; when Christ is fashioned, when the
issue i^ victorious and with gain, the soul no more remembers those
afflictions which were but for a moment.

Fifthly and lastly, I have fallen into many and great sins, and if all sin
be of a mortal and venomous operation, how can my Life in Christ consist with
such heavy provocations and apostacies? To this in general I answer. If the
sight of thy sins make thee look to Christ, If ^hou Ma^k. 9 23.
can believe, all things are possible. It is possible for thy greatest Hos.
14. 4.
apostacies to vanish like a Cloud, and to be forgotten. Though sin have
weakened the Law, that we cannot be saved by that; yet it has not weakened
Faith, or made that unable to save. For 1. Cor 15. 56.
the strength of sin is the Law, it has its condemning virtue from thence.
Now by Faith we are not Rom* 6. 14.
under the Law, but under Grace. When once we are incorporate into Christ's
body, and made partakers of the new Covenant, Plane dicimus decessisse Legem
quoa^ oner a non quoad justiti^m. T^rtul. de pudicit. cap* 6.
though we are still under the Laws conduct, in regard of its obedience (which
is made sweet and easy by Grace) yet we are not under the laws maled^ction.
So that though sin in a Believer be a transgression of the Law, and does
certainly Ad castigationem non ad damnationem. Ibid. cap. 19.
incur Gods displeasure; Evacuatur pec^atum, non ut non sit, s^d ut non ^bsit
A^g. de peccat. Mer. and R^miss. lib. 1. cap. 39.
yet it does not de fect^ (though it do de merito) subject him to wrath and
vengeance, because every justified man is a person priviledg'd, though not from
the duties, yet from the curses of the Law. If the King should graciously
exempt any subject from the Laws penalty, and yet require of him the Laws
obedience; if that man offend, he b^ch transgre^sed the Law, and provoked the
displeasure of the Prince, who happily will make him some other way to (...) it:
yet his offense does not nullyfie his privilege, nor void the Princes grace,
which gave him an immunitie from the fo^feitures, though not from the
observance of the Law. Adultery amongst the Jews was punished with Death, and
Theft only wtth restitution: amongstus Adultery is not punished with Death,
and Theft is. Now then though a Jew and an Englishman be both bound to the
obedience of both these Laws, yet a Jew is not to die for Theft, nor an
Englishman for Adultery, because we are not under the Judicial Laws of that
people, nor they under our Laws: Even so those sins which to a man under the
covenant of works do, d^ facto, bring Death if he continue always under that
covenant, do only create a Merit of Death in those who are under the Covenant
of Grace, but do not actually exclude them from Salvation, because without Non
filios Di abol^ faciunt quaecumque peccata -- filios autem Diaboli infid^lit as
facit, quod peccatum proprium vocatur. Aug. contr. dua^ Epist. Pe lag. lib. 3.
cap. 3.
infidelity no sin does peremptorily and quoad eventum condemn.

But it may here further be objected, How can I believe under the weight of
such a finne? Or how is Faith able to hold me up under so heavy a guilt? I
answer, the more the greatness of si^ne does appear, and the heavier the
weight thereof is to the Soul, there is the Grace of God more abundant to
beget Faith, and the strength of Faith is prevalent against any thing which
would oppose it. To understand this, we must note that the strength of Faith
does not arise out of the formal quality thereof, (for Faith in it self, as
a habit and endowment of the Soul, is as weak as other graces;) but only out
of the relation it has to Christ. Faith denotates a mutual Act between us
and Christ; and therefore the Faith of the patriarche^ is expressed in the
Apostle by Heb. 11. 13.
saluting or embracing; they did not only claspe Christ, but he them again.
So that the strength of Faith takes in the strength of Christ, because it puts
Christ into a man, who by his Spirit Ephesians. 3. 13.
dwells and Gal, 2. 20.
lives in us. And here it is worth our observing, that the reason why the
house in the Math. 7. 25.
parable did stand firm against all tempests, was because it was founded upon
a Rock. Why? may not a weak superstruction ofrotten and inconsistent
materials be built upon a sound foundation? As a strong house falls from a
weak foundation, may not in like manner a weak house by a tempest fall from a
strong foundation? Surely in Christ's Temple it is not as in ordinary material
buildings. In these though the whole frame stand upon the foundation, yet it
stands together by the strength of the parts amongst themselves, and therefore
their mutual weakness and failings do prejudice the stabilitie of the whole.
But in the Church, the strength of Christ the foundation is not an immanent,
personal, fixed thing; but a derivative and an effused strength which runs
through the whole building. Because the foundation being a vital foundation is
able to shed forth and transfuse its stability into the whole structure. What
ever the materials are of themselves, though never so frail, yet being once
incorporated in the building, they are presently transformed into the nature
and firmness of their foundation. To whom coming as unto a living stone,
says Saint Peter, ye also 1. Pet. 2. 4, 5.
as lively stones are built up a spiritual house; to note unto us the
transformation and uniformitie of the Saints with Christ, both in their
spiritual nature, and in the firmness and stabilitie of the same.

More particularly the strength of Faith preserues us from all our spiritual
enemies. From the Devil 1. Ioh. 5. 18.
He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one touches Him
not. Ephesians. 6. 16.
Above all take the shield of Faith, by which you shall be able to quench all
the fury darts of the wicked. From the World; 1. Ioh 5. 4.
This is the victory which overcommeth the World, even our Faith. From our
fleshly corruptions; Act 15. 9.
The Heart is purified by Faith. Romans 8. 2.
The Law of the Spirit of Life in Jesus Christ, (that is, the Law of Faith)
has made me free from the Law of Sin, that is, the Law of the members, or
fleshly concupiscence. And all this is strengthened by the Power of God; not by
Faith alone are we kept, but 1. Pet. 1. 5.
ye are kept, says Saint Peter, By the power of God through Faith unto
Salvation: and that not such a Power as that is wherewith he concurreth in the
ordinary and natural operations of the Creature, which proportioneth it
self, and condescendeth unto the exigencie of second causes, failing where
they fail, and accommodating the measure of his agencie to those materials
which the second causes have supplied (as we see when a Child is borne with
fewer parts then are due to natural integrity, Gods concurrence has limited
it self to the materials which are defective, and has not supplied nor made
up the failings of nature) but that power whereby he preserves men unto
Salvation does prevent, bend, and carry the heart of man (which is the
secondary agent) unto the effect it self, does remove every obstacle which
might endanger his purpos^ in saving the Creature, and makes his people a
willing people.

But you will say, Faith is indeed by these means stronger then sin when it
works* but not when it sleeps; and the working of Faith, being dependant
upon the faculties of the Soul which are essentially mutable and incostant in
operation, must needs be uncertain too: that sin, though it be sarre
weaker then Faith, may yet, when by our security Faith is fallen asleep,
surprise and kill it, even as Ia^l a weak woman upon the same advantage killed
Sisera a strong Captain. But though Faith fleepe, yet He that keeps Israel
does neither slumber nor sleep, and we are kept not only by Faith, but by His
Power, which Power works all our works for us and in us, gives us both the
Will and the Deed; Prima gratia quae data est primo Adam est illa qua fit ut
Homo habeat Iustitiam sivelit; se^unda, quae potentior est in secundo Adam,
(...) potest, qua etiam fit ut velit, and tantum velit, tantoque ardore
diligat, ut carnis v^luntatem, contraria concupiscentem, voluntate spiritus
vincat, etc. vid. Aug. de Corrept* and Great. cap. 11. 12.
the Gift of continuing in His Fear, and the Will so to continue. The heart of
the king, says Solomon, that is the most sovereign, unconquerable,
peremptory, and unsubjected will in the World, is in the Hand of God, even as
clay in the hand of the Potter. So that though our hearts in regard of
themselves be not only at large and indeterminate to any Spiritual
operations, but have an extreme reluctancie to all the motions of Gods Spirit*
yet considering their subordination to Gods merciful purposes, to the Power of
His Grace, to His Heb. 3. 1. Romans 8. 28.
Heavenly Vid. Aug. de Corrept. and great. cap. 9. 12. Contra Julian. lib. 5
cap. 4. De praedest. Sanct. cap. 16. 17. and Epist. 106.
Call according unto purpose, to the exceeding greatness and working of his
mighty Power, manifest it is, that they are Subventum est infirmitati
voluntatis Humanae, ut Divina gratia Inde^ and in superabiliter ageretur, etc.
-- (...) permisit (...) vel let, ins^ mos (...). Aug. de Corrept. and Great.
cap. 12.
vndeclinable mightily, by Non lege atque dectrina-insonante forins^cus, sed
interna atque occulta, mirabili ac ineffabili potestate operatur Deus in
cordi^us hominum, non sol^m veras Revelationes sed etiam bonas voluntates. Aug.
de Great. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 24* Occul^ssima and efficacissima potestate.
Contr. 2. epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 20.
a hidden, wonderful, most effectual power; yea, by an Hab^t dens Humanorum
cordium quo placet inclinandorum Omnipotentissimam potestatem. de Cor. and Gr.
^. cap. 14.
Omnipotent facility, and yet Non ut nolentes credant, sed ut volentes ex
nolentibus fiant. Contr. 2. cpist. Pelag* l. 1. cap. 19. Agit omnipotens in
cordibus hominum etiam motu^ voluntatis, etc. De Great. and lib. arb. cap. 21.
certum est nos velle cum vo^, sed ille facit ut velimus: Ibid. cap. 16.
most sweetly and connaturally moved unto Grace. They are all the frequent
words of Holy Austin, that Vid. Prosper. Contr. Collator. cap. 1. Alvar^z. de
Auxil. lib. 1. d^sp. 5 Rob. Abbot* de Great. in praefat.
Champion of Grace, whose unvaluable industry in that behalf all after ages
have admired, but hardly paralelled.

Now then for the further establishing the heart of a man, seriously and
searchingly humbled with the sense and consciousnesse of some great relapse
(for what I shall say can yield no comfort to a man in an unrelenting,
obdurate, and persisting apostafie Let him consider the safety and firmness
of his life in Christ upon these grounds.

First, Gods Eternal Love and free Grace, which is toward us the Highest
link of Salvation, both in order of time, nature, and causalitie. Romans 8. 29,
30.
Whom He predestined, those also He called; and whom He called, those He
Justified; and whom He Justified, those also He glorified. Verba praeteri^
(...) posuit (...) etiam (...), tanq^am jam (...) Deus, quae jam ut ^ierent ex
aet^rnitate d^sposuit etc. August. de Corrept. and great. cap 9.
It is not those He will glorify, but has glorified. To note that
glorification is linked and folded up with justification, and is present with
it in regard of their Eternal coexistencie in the predisposition and order of
God, though not in effectu operis, in actual execution. Now Ephesians. 2. 9. 1. Ioh.
4. 10. Aug. de Civ. De^. lib. 14 cap. 1 Retract l. ^. c. 23. contr. lultan lib.
5. cap. 4. and lib. 6. cap. 19. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 10. 15.
this Eternal Love and Grace of God is not founded upon reasons in the Object;
for Romans 4. 5.
He Justified, and by consequence loved the ungodly. He Rom, 5. 8, 10.
Loved us when we were his enemies; and enemies we were not but by Col. 1. 21.
wicked works. Now then if wicked works could not prevent the Love of God,
why should we think that they can nullyfie or destroy it? If His Grace did
prevent sinners before their repentance, that they might return, shall it not
much more preserve repenting sinners that they may not perish? If the mass,
guilt, and greatness of Adams sin, in which all men were equally sharers,
and in which equality God looked upon us with Love and Grace (then Vid. Aug.
de Civ. de. lib. 21. c. 12 Enchirid. ca. 45. Tertul. co^tr. ^udaeos. cap. 2.
which sin a greater I think cannot be committed against the Law of God) If
the bloody and crimsin sins of the unconverted part of our life, wherein we
drew iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes: If
neither Exodus 34. 7.
iniquity, transgression, nor sin; neither sin of nature, nor sin of
course and custom, nor sin of rebellion and contumacie could pose the
goodness and favor of God to us then, nor intercept or frustrate his Counsel
of loving us when we were his enemies: why should any other sins overturne p
Sive cum impium p^e justificat Iustus -- sive cum Iustum just glorificat pius
-- Eadem est operatio gratiae, quae meritum hominis bonum and initiat ad
justitiam, and consummat ad gloriam: primo inchoans in homine voluntatem bonam;
deinde eandem voluntatem adjuvans inchoatam; ut eadem voluntas and divino dono
bona sit; and divino adjutorio malam superare concupiscent^am possit: ac sic
inpraesentivita, gratiae adjutorio, infirmitati non cedat; i^ ^utura autem,
gratiae beneficio, infirmitatem non habeat, etc. Fulgent. ad Monimum. lib. 1.
the stability of the same love and counsel, when q Ier. 3^. 40.
we are once his Sons, and have a spirit given us to bewail and lament our
falls. I cannot here omit the excellent words of P Fulgentius, to this purpose.
The same Grace, says he, of Gods Immutable Counsel does both begin our
merit unto righteousness, and consummate it unto Glory; does here make the
will not to yield to the infirmity of the flesh, and does hereafter free it
from all infirmity; does here renew it Continuo Iuvamine, and elsewhere Iugi
auxilio, with an uninterrupted supportance, and at last bring it to a full
Glory.

Secondly, Gods Promise flowing from this Love and Grace. Ier. 32. 40.
An everlasting Covenant will I make, says God, and observe how it comes to be
everlasting, and not frustrated or made temporary by us: I will not turn away
from them, says the Lord, to do them good. True Lord; we know thou do not
repent thee of thy Love; but though thou turn not from us, O how frail, how
apt are we to turn away from thee, and so to nullify this thy Covenant of
mercy unto our selves! Nay, says the Lord, I will put my fear into their
hearts and they shall not depart from me. So elsewhere the Lord tells us that
his Covenant should be as the water of Noah; the sins of Esai. 54. 9, 10.
men can no more utterly cancel or reverse Gods Covenant of mercy toward
them, then they can bring back Noah's flood into the World again: though for a
moment he may be angry and hide His face, yet His mercy in the maine is great
and everlasting. The Promises of God as they have Truth, so they have Power in
them; they do not depend upon our resolutions whether they shall be executed
or no, but by Faith apprehending them, and by Hope waiting upon God in them,
they frame and accommodate the heart to those conditions which introduce then
Execution. Deus ficit ut nos fa^iamus quae praecepit: nos non facimus ut ille
faciat quae promisit. Aug.
God makes us to do the things which He commands, we do not make Him to do
the things which He promises. 1. p^t. 15.
Tee are kept, says the Apostle, by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation. Faith is first by Gods Power wrought and preserved (It is the Col.
2. 12.
Faith of the operation of God, namely that powerful operation which raised
Christ from the dead: and 1. Cor. 2. 5.
your Faith stands not in the wisdom of men, but in the Power of God) And
then it becomes an effectual instrument of the same power to preserve us unto
Salvation. Ioh. 6. 45. Quisquis non venit profecto nec didicit. Aug. de Great.
Christi lib. 1. cap. 14.
They shall be all taught of God, and every man that has heard and learned of
the Father, comes unto me. There is a voluntary attendance of the heart of
man upon the ineffable sweetness of the Fathers teaching: to conclude this
point with that excellent and comfortable speech of the Lord in the prophet.
Mal. 3. 6.
I the Lord change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. It is
nothing in or from your selves, but only the immutabilitie of my Grace and
Promises which preserves you from being consumed.

Thirdly, the Obsignation of the Spirit ratifying and securing these promises
to the hearts of the faithful, for the spirit is the Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Ephesians. 4.
30.
hansell, earnest, and seal of our Redemption; and it is not only an
obsignation (...), unto redemption, arguing the certainty of the end upon
condition of the means; but it is an 2. Cor. 1. ^1.
establishing of us (...) too, into Christ as a means unto that end; so that
from the first fruits of the Spirit a man may conclude his interest in the
whole at last, as Saint Paul from the resurrection of 1. Cor. 15. 20.
Christ the first fruits argues to the final accomplishment of the
resurrection.

Fourthly, the nature and effects of Faith, whose property it is to make
future things present to the believer, and to give them a Being, and by
consequence a necessity and certainty to the apprehensions of the Soul, even
when they have not a Being in themselves. Saint Paul call's it the subsistencie
of things to come, and the evidence Heb. 11. 1.
and demonstration of things not seen: which our Saviors words do more fully
explain; He that drinks my blood has eternal Life, and shall never thirst.
Ioh. 6. 54.
Though Eternal Life be to come in regard of the full fruition, yet it is
present already in regard of the first fruits of it; And therefore we find
our Savior take a future medium to prove a present Blessedness, (...), Luke
6. 22, 32.
ye are blessed when men shall hate you, etc: for great is your reward in
Heaven. Which inference could not be sound unless that future medium were
certain by the Power of Faith, giving unto the promises of God as it were a
presubsistencie. For it is the privilege of Faith (...). Chrisost. Homil. 9.
in Romans
to look upon things to come, as if they were already conferred upon us. And
the Apostle uses the like argument; Sin shall not have dominion over you,
for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. This were a strange inference
in natural or civil things, to say you shall not die, because you are in
health; or you shall not be rejected, because you are in favor. But the
Covenant of Grace, being seall'd by an Oath, makes all the grants which therein
are made, irreversible, and constant. So that now, as when a man is dead to the
Being of sin (as the Saints departed this life are) the Being of sin does
no more trouble them, nor return upon them: so when a man is dead to the
dominion of sin, that dominion shall never any more return upon him.

Consider further the formal effect of Faith, which is to Ephesians. 3. 17.
unite a man unto Christ. By means of which union, Christ and we are made 1.
Cor. 10. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 13. 1. Cor. 6. 17.
one Body: for He that is joined to Christ is one, and the Apostle says, that
Ephesians. 5. 23.
He is the Savior of his Body, and then surely of every member of his Body
too; for 1. Cor. 12. 25.
the members have all care one of ^ther, else the Body of Christ would be a
mangled and a maimed thing, and not as Saint Paul calls it, Ephesians. 1. 23.
(...), the fullness of Him that fills all in all. In the Body of Christ
there is Ephesians. 4. 16.
a supply to every joint, a measure of every part, an edification and growth of
the whole compacted body, from Him who is equally the Head to all.

Being thus united unto Christ, first the Death and Merit of Christ is ours;
whatsoever He really in His humane nature suffered for sin, we are in
moderated Justice reputed to have suffered with Him. The Apostle says, that we
were crucified and dead with Christ, and Romans 6. 6, 7, 8. Gal. 6. 14.
that as truly, as the hand which steals is punished when the back is
beaten; and surely if a man were crucified in and with Christ, by reason of His
mystical communion with him) then he was crucified, as Christ, for all (...)
which should otherwise have lain upon him. He was not in Christ to cleanse
some sins, and out of him to bear others himself. For the Apostle assures
us that the Merit of Christ is unconfined by any sin. The blood 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
of Christ cleanses from all sin. As Saint Ambrose said to Monica the mother
of Austen, when with many tears she bewailed her sons unconversion: Non
potest tot lacrymarum filius perire, that is, that it could not be Aug. Confess.
lib. 3. cap. 13.
that the Son of so many tears should perish; so may I more certainly say
to any Soul that is soundly and in truth humbled with the sense of any
grievous relapse, non potest tot lacrymarum frater perire, It cannot be that
the brother of so many tears, and so precious blood, which from Christ
trickled down with an unperishable soveraigntie unto the lowest and sinfullest
of his body, should perish for want of compassion in Him who felt the weight
of our sufferings, or for want of recovery from him who has the fullness of
Grace and Spirit.

Secondly, the Life of Christ is ours likewise. Christ lives in me, says the
Apostle. Now the Life of Christ is free from the power and the reach of death.
If death could not hold Him when it had Him, much less can it reach or
overtake Him having once escaped. He died once unto sin, but He lives unto
God: likewise says Saint Paul, reckon you your selves to be dead unto sin,
but Romans 6 9, 10, 11, 14.
alive unto God, and that through or in Jesus Christ, by whom we in like
manner are made partakers of that Life which He by rising again from the
Grave, did assume, as we were by Ada^ made obnoxious to the same death which
heby failing did incur and contract. 1. Cor. 15 45, 49. Rom 5. 15, 21.
For Christ is the second Adam, and as we have borne the Image of the earthly
in sin and guilt; so must we bear the Image of the Heavenly in Life and
righteousness: and Romans 6. 4. ^ph. 2. 1, 5. Phil. 3. 10, 14. (...). 12, 13.
Col. 3. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5
that which in us answers to the Resurrection and Life of Christ (which He
ever lives) is our holiness and newness of life, as the Apostle plainly
shows, to note P^r hunc mediatorem D^eus ostendit eos, quos ejus sanguine
redemit, facere se ex mal^s (...) ceps in (...) bonos -- est quippe in nobis
per hanc Dei gratiam in bono recipiendo, and pereveranter ten^ndo, non solum
posse quod volumus, sed etiam velle quod possumus, quod nonfuit in primo
homine. Quid erit autem liberius libero arbitrio quando non poterit servire
peccato, etc. Aug. de Corrept. and Grant. cap 11. 12.
that our Renovation likewise ought to be perpetual and constant, not frail
and mutable, as when it depended upon the life of the first Adam, and not of
the second.

Thirdly, the Kingdom of Christ is ours also. Now His Kingdom is not
perishable, but eternal: a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, or destroyed as
the Apostle speaks. Heb. 12. 28.

Fourthly the Sonneship and by consequence ^tance of Christ is ours. I speak
not of His personal Sonneship by eternal generation, but of that dignity and
honor which He had as Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 2, 5, 6.
the first borne of every Creature, and Heir of all things. That Sonneship
which He had as He was borne from the Dead; Act. 13. 33.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, namely in the Resurrection,
in which respect He is called Col. 1. 18. Revel 1. 5.
the first borne, and the first begotten of the Dead. In this dignity of
Christ, of being Romans 8. 17. Gal. 3. 29.
Heirs, and a kind of first borne unto God, do we in our measure partake,
for we are called the Heb. 12. 23.
Church of the first borne, and Iam. 1. 18.
a kind of first fruits of His Creatures: For though those attributes may be
limited to the Exodus 4 12. Ier. 2. 3, 14. Ier. 31. 9.
Jews in regard of precedencie to the Gentiles; yet in regard of the
inheritance (which was usually and properly to descend to the first borne) they
may be applied to all, for of all believers the Apostle Act. 13. 46.
says, If you are Sons, then are ye heirs, Coheires with Christ. We hold in
chief under his guardianship and protection, as his sequel and dependant. Now
from hence our Saviors argument may bring much comfort and assurance; Ioh. 8.
35.
The Son abides in the house for ever; and the House of God is His Church,
not in Ioh. 14. 2.
Heaven only, but 1. Tim. 3. 15. Dr. White against Fish. p. 53
on Earth likewise, as the Apostle shows.

Fifthly, Christ's victories are ours: He overcame Col. 2. 13* ^4.
Ioh. 16. 33.
the World, and Heb. 4. 15. Math. 4. 11.
Temptations, and Col. 2. 15. Luke 11. 22.
Enemies and Sins for us. And therefore they shall not be able to 1. Cor.
15. 26.
overcome Him in us. Heb. 2. 18.
He is able to succor them that are tempted. He who once overcame them for
us, will certainly subdue them in us: He that will overcome the last Enemy,
will overcome all that are before; (for if any be left, the last is not
overcome.)

Lastly, we have the benefit of Christ's Intercession: I have prayed for thee
that thy Faith fail not. It is spoken of a saving Faith, as the Dr. Reynolds
confer* with Heart. cap. 7. Divis 8. D^. Abbot in Thomson. diatrib cap. 18.
Falla est (inquit Maldonatus Iesu^ta) opinio eorum qui putant Petrum fidem
negando perdidisse* in loc.
learned prove at large. And I have showed before Quod dicit Petro, -- Toti
eccles. dictum putandum est. ^esuitaibid.
that particular promises in Scripture are universally applyable to any man
whose case is parallel to that particular. If then Peter's (...) did not by
reason of this prayer of Christ overturne his Salvation, or bring a Rogavit ut
haberet in side li^, fortissima^, (...) perseverantissima^ voluntare^ Aug. de
(...)* and great cap. 8.
total deficiencie upon his faith; why should any man, who is truly and
deeply humbled with the sense of relapse, or consciousnesse of some sin, not
of ^rij reatus. Salvian. (...) nae (...). (...).
ordinary guilt, or daily incursion, but indeed very heinous, and therefore to
be repented of with tears of blood, yet why should he in this case of sound
humiliation stagger in the hope of forgiveness, or mistrust Gods mercy, since
a greater sin then Peter's, in the gross matter of it, can I think hardly be
committed by any justified man.

These are the comforts which may secure the Life of Christ, in a lapsed but
repenting sinner: the sum of all is this. Since we stand not, like Adam, upon
our own bottom, but are branches of such a Vine as never withers, Members of
such a Head as never dies, sharers in such a Spirit as cleanses, heals, and
purifieth the heart, partakers of such promises as are sealed with the Oath of
God: Since we live not by our own life, but by the Life of Christ; are not
led or sealed by our own spirit, but by the Spirit of Christ; do not
obtain mercy by our own prayers, but by the Intercession of Christ; stand
not reconciled unto God by our own endeavors, but by the propitiation wrought
by Christ, who loved us when we were enemies and in our blood; who is both
willing and able to save us to the uttermost, and to preserve his own mercies
in us; to whose Ioh. 6. 39.
office it belongs to take order that none who are given unto him be lost;
undoubtedly that Life of Christ in us, which is thus underpropped, though it be
not priviledg'd from temptations, no nor from Hos. 11. 7, 11.
backeslidings, yet is an abiding Life: He who raised Psalm. 56. 13.
our Soul from death, will either preserve our feet from falling, or, if we
do fall, Hos. 14. 4.
will heal our backflidings, and will save us freely.

Infinitely therefore does it concern the Soul of every man to be restless
and unsatisfied with any other good thing, till he find himself entitled unto
this happy Communion with the Life of Christ, which will never fail him. As
all the Creatures in the world, so man especially has in him a twofold desire;
a desire of perfection, and a desire of perpetuity; a desire to advance, and a
desire to preserve his Being. Fecisti nos ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum
donec requiescat in ^e. Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 1. Cum Beati esse omnes
homines volunt, si vere volunt, profecto esse immortales volunt, aliter enim
beati esse non possunt. Aug. de Trin. l. 13. cap 8. Cujus jam non difficulter
occurrit Vtroque conjuncto effici beatitudinem, quam recto proposito
intellectualis natura desiderat: Hoc est, ut b^no incommutabili, quod Deus est,
sine ulla molestia perfr^atur, and in cose in aeternum esse mansurum, nec ulla
dubitatione cunct^tur, ne^utto errore fallatur. Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 11. cap.
13.
Now then till a man's Soul, after many rovings and inquisitions, has at last
fixed it self upon some such good thing as has compass enough to satiate and
replenish the vastness of these two desires: impossible it is for that Soul,
though otherwise filled with a confluence of all the glory, wealth, wisdom,
learning and curiosity of Solomon himself, to have solid contentment enough
to withstand the fears of the smallest danger, or to outface the accusations
of the smallest sin. Now then let us suppose that any good things of this
World, without the Life of Christ, were able to satisfy one of these two
desires, to perfect and advance our nature (though indeed it be far
otherwise, since without Christ they are all but like a stone in a Serpents
head, or a Pearl in an Oyster; not our perfections, but our diseases, like
Cleopatra her precious stone; when she wore it, a Jewel; but when she drank
it, an excrement. I may boldly say that as long as a man is out of Christ, he
were better be a beggar, or an idiote, then to be the steward of riches,
honors, learning and wisdom, which should have been improved to the Glory
of Him that gave them, and yet to be able to give up at that great day of
accounts no other reckoning unto God but this: Thy riches have been the
authors of my covetousness and oppression; thy honors, the steps of my
haughtiness and ambition; thy learning and wisdom, the fuel of my pride.)
But now I say, suppose that nature could receive any true advancement by these
things; yet alas, when a man shall begin to think with himself, may not God
this night take me away, like the fool in the Gospel, from all these things,
or all these from me? May I not, nay must I not within these few years, in
stead of mine honor, be laid under men's feet? In stead of my purple and
scarlet, be clothed with rottenness? In stead of my luxury and delycacies,
become my self the food of worms? Is not the poor soul in my bosom an
immortal soul? Must it not have a being, as long as there is a God who is
able to support it? And will not my bags and titles, my pleasures and
preferments, my learning and natural endowments, every thing save my sins
and mine adversaries, and mine own Conscience forsake me, when I once enter
into that immortality? When a man I say shall begin to summon his heart unto
such sad accounts as these, how will his face gather blackness, and his knees
tremble, and his heart be even damped and blasted with amazement in the midst
of all the vanities and lies of this present world? What a fearful thing is
it for an eternal soul to have nothing between it, and eternal misery to
rest upon, but that which will moulder away and crumble into dust under it, and
so leave it alone to sink into bottomless calamity? O Beloved, when men
shall have passed many millions of years in another world, which no millions
of years can shorten or diminish, what accession of comfort can then come to
those glorious joys which we shall be filled with in Heaven, or what
diminution or mitigation of that unsupportable anguish which without ease or
end must be suffered in Hell, by the remembrance of those few hours of
transitory contentments, which we have here, not without the mixture of much
sorrow and allay enjoyed? What smacke or relish think you has Dives now left
him of all his delicacies, or Esau of his pottage? What pleasure has the rich
fool of his full Barnes, or the young man of his great possessions? What
delight has Iezabel in her paint, or Ahab in the Vineyard purchased with the
innocent blood of Him that owned it? How much policy has Achitophel, or how
much pomp has Herod, or how much rhetoric has Tertullus left to escape or
to bribe the torments, which out of Christ they must for ever suffer? O how
infinitely does it concern the Soul of every man to find this Life of Christ
to rest upon, which will never forsake him till it bring him to that day of
Redemption, wherein he shall be filled with blessedness infinitely
proportionable to the most vast and unlimited capacities of the Creature.

And now when we can secure our Consciences in the inward, true, and spiritual
renovation of our heart, in this invincible and unperishable obsignation of the
spirit, who knitteth us as really (though mistically) unto Christ, as his
sinews and joints do fasten the parts of his sacred body together; how may our
heads be crowned with joy, and our hearts sweetly bathe themselves in the
perfruition and preoccupation of those rivers of glory which attend that Spirit
wheresoever he goes? Many things I know there are which may extremely
disharten us in this interim of mortality; many things which therein encounter
and oppose our progress. The rage, malice and subtilty of Satan; the frowns,
flatterles, threats, and insinuations of this present World; the impatience
and stubbornness of our own flesh; the struglings and counterlustings of our
own potent corruptions; the daily consciousnesse of our falls and
infirmities; the continual intercourse of our doubts and fears; the ebbing
and languishing, decaying and even expiring of our Faith and Graces; the
frequent experience of Gods just displeasure, and spiritual desertions,
leaving the Soul to its own dumpes and darkness. Sometimes like froward
children we throw our selves down and will not stand: and sometimes there
comes a tempest which blows us down that we cannot stand. And now whither
should a poor Soul, which is thus on all sides invitoned with fears and
dangers, betake it self? Surely so long as it looks either within or about it
self, no marvel if it be ready to sink under the concurrent opposition of so
many assaults.

But though there be nothing in thee, nor about thee, yet there is something
above thee which can hold thee up. If there be strength in the merit, life,
kingdom, victories, Intercession of the Lord Jesus: If there be comfort in the
Covenant, Promises, and Oath of God, believe, and all this strength and comfort
is thine: lean not upon thine own wisdom, trust not thine own
righteousness, arrogate nothing to thy self but impotencie to good: no
strength of thy self but against thy self, and Gods Grace; no power but to
resist and withstand the Spirit. But rest only upon the Promises and Power of
Him who is Alpha and Omega, the Author and Finisher of thy Faith; Who is a Head
to take care of his weakest members. When thou art as weak as a worm in thine
own sense, yet fear not O worm Jacob, be not dismaide O Men of Israel, says
the Lord, for I am thy God, I will Esai. 41. 10, 14.
strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness, that is, with the strength of my Truth and Promises.
How shall I give thee up Ephraim, It is spoken to backsliding Ephraim; How
shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah, how shall I set
thee as Zeboim? That is, How shall I make mine own Church as the cities of
Sodom? My heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together, and
mark the reason of all. I am God, and not man. Though you are Men, subject to
many changes and miscarriages, yet I am not a Man that I should repent of my
goodness, and therefore I will not turn to destroy Ephraim.

But now as men who look upon the Sun, when they look downward again upon
darker objects, can scarce see or distinguish any thing; so ought it to be
with us, our looking up unto God should make us see nothing in ourselves, but
matter to be humbled by, and driven back unto him again. If once the strong
man begin to glory in his strength, or the wise man in his wisdom; If our
prosperity and security make us resolve with David, that we shall never be
moved: If because we find our corruptions wounded and mortified, we begin
to insult over them more with our pride, then with our faith: How easy and
just is it with God to let in Satan upon us, to remove his hand from under us,
to overshadow and withdraw His countenance from us, to set on our very wounded
corruptious upon us to burn up our city, and peradventure to plunge us in the
guilt of some such fearful sins, as at the very names and first suggestions
whereof we would happily before have been startled and amazed? Alas what are
we to David, and Peter, to Solomon and Hezekiah, men of such daily communion
and intimate acquaintance with the Almighty. And yet notwithstanding what
fearful testimonies have they left upon record for all posterity to take
notice what a frail and inconstant creature man is, when once Gods Spirit
departs from him? That the strength of the greatest champions in the Church of
God is but like the strength of Sampson, of whom in all his great exployts the
Scripture says, that Judge. 14. 6, 19. 15. 14.
The Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and when he was overcome, that Judge.
16. 20.
the Lord was departed from him. We should therefore labor to Psalm. 2. 11.
rejoice in the Lord with trembling, to Phil. 2. 12.
work out our salvation with fear, to pray that we may be delivered from our
selves, and from the trains of Satan; that we may never know by our own
fearful experience, into what an incredible excess of sinning our flesh,
though otherwise mortified, would break forth, if God should a little subduct
his hand, and give us over a while to the violence of our own passions, to the
treachery of our own hearts. We should be very watchful and cautious
against our selvees, that we presume not to sin, because Grace has
abounded. Rom 6. 1.
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? says the
Apostle. What a monstrous perverting of the grace and mercy of God is this to
build straw and stubble upon so precious a foundation? Surely we would esteem
that man prodigiously foolish and contumelious unto nature, who should spend
his time, substance, and industry to find out a perverse philosophers stone,
that should turn all the gold it touched into lead or dross: how injurious
then and reproachful are they to the grace of God, who extract their own
presumptions out of His mercy, and turn the redundancie of divine Grace into
an advantage and privilege of sinning? As if Gods mercy had no other use then
a dogs grass, or a drunkards vomit, or a Sr. Edwin Sands relation.
Papists confession to his Priest, to absolve us for some sins that there
might be room made for more. Surely Grace teaches men to make other
conclusions from Gods mercy. Psalm. 119. 17.
Deal bou^tifully with thy servant that I may keep thy Word, was David's
inference from Gods favor. And Saint Romans 2 4, 5.
Paul assures us that none but hard and impenitent hearts despise the goodness
and riches of Gods patience and forbearance, not knowing that the goodness of
God should lead them to repentance. It is the work of grace to re-imprint the
image of God in us, to conform us unto Christ, to bend and incline the heart
to a Spiritual delight in the Law, to remoove in some measure the ignorance of
our minds, that we may see the beauty and wonders of Gods Law, and the
difficulty and frowardness of the fleshly will against grace, that Gods
Commands may not be grievous, but sweet unto us.

These are the branches and properties of that Life which we have from Christ.
And we have them from Him at the Son, as a middle person between us and his
Father. First, because the Son has His Fathers Seal: Has Ioh. 5. 26, 27.
Math. 28. 18.
Judgment, Power, liberty to dispose of and dispense Life and Salvation to
whom He will. Ioh. 6. 27.
Labor for the Meat that endures unto Eternal Life, which the Son of Man
shall give unto you; for Him has God the Father sealed. Secondly, because the
Ioh. 1. 18.
Son is in his Fathers bosom, has His heart, His ear, His affections, and
therefore He is Ioh. 11. 42.
heard always in whatsoever He desires for any of His members: and this
interest in His Fathers Love was that by which He raised Lazarus unto Life
again. Lastly, he that has the Son, has the greatest gift which the Father
ever gave unto the World. He cannot deny Life where He has given the Son;
He cannot withold silver where He has given gold and Diamonds: Romans 8. 32.
If He spared not His Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not
with Him freely give us all things?

Now our life is conveyed from Christ unto us. First, by Imputation of His
merit, whereby our persons are made righteous and acceptable unto God.
Secondly, by Infusion or communion with His Spirit, which sanctifies our
nature, and enables us to do spiritual services. For though we exclude works
from Justification formally considered; yet we require them of every Justified
man; neither does any Faith Justify but that which works by Love, though it
justify not under that reason as a working Faith, but under that relative
office of receiving and applying Christ. Thirdly, by His Life and Intercession,
applying His merits unto us, and presenting our services unto His Father, as
lively sacrifices, cleansed from those mixtures of deadness and corruption,
which as passing from us did cleave unto them.

Having thus unfolded our Life by Christ, we are in the last place to inquire
into that Propriety which we have unto Christ, which is the ground of the
Life we receive from Him. For one thing cannot be the principle and seed of
Life unto another, except there be some Ioh. 1. 12.
union, and fellowship, which may be the ground of the conveyance: and this is
that which the Text call's the having of Christ, which is the same with that of
Saint John, To as many as received Him, He gave power to be called the Sons
of God. So then there must be a mutual Act, Christ exhibiteth Himself unto
us, and we adhere, and dwell in Him; whereby there is wrought a Nostra and
ipsius conjuncti^, nec miscet personas, nec unit substantias; sed affectus
(...), and confederat voluntates, Cypr. de coena Domini.
Unity of will's, a Confederacy of affections, a Participation of natures, a
concurrence to the making up of the same body; so that Christ accounts
Himself incomplete without His Church. This union of the faithful to Christ,
being one of those deep things of God which are not discernable without the
Spirit, is yet set forth unto us in the Scriptures under sundry vulgar and
obvious similitudes, which I will but touch upon.

It is first set forth by the expression of a Body, consisting of diverse
members. Romans 12. 4, 5. 1. Cor. 12. 12. 13. Ephesians, 1. 22, 23. In which places the
purpose of the Apostle is to show how the proportion that is between Christ
and His Church, answers to that relation which is between the members of a
Body and the Head. For as in the natural Body all the members are joined by
nerves and vital ligatures unto the Head, from whence they receive their
strength and sensation, and do, by virtue of that union to the Head, retain a
fellowship and communion amongst themselves: So is it between Christ and His
Church. Every member of the true and mystical Body of Christ is by a secret
knot of his Spirit so fastened unto him, and so compacted with the other members
by that which every joint supplieth, as that the whole world of Elect, from
Christ the Head and first borne of the Creatures, unto the lowest and meanest
of all His members, do make up but one Body, unto which Christ, by being the
Head, has these principal relations. First, He is the principle of all
Spiritual Vid. Aq^in. p^rt. 3. q. 8. art. ^ (...). disi. 3. qu. 13. de gra^ia
capitis.
Influences, as the Head of natural. All the Grace in us is but an overflowing
and measure from His fullness. Secondly, He is the principle of all government
and direction; all the wisdom and prudence of the Church is from Him. He is
the everlasting Counsel, or the Light that inlightneth every man that comes
into the world, the power and the wisdom of God unto us. Thirdly, He is
conformable to the members (for Christ's Church is no monster) and makes them
conformable unto Him; He to us in our infirmities, tempted in all things as we
are; and we to Him in His holiness: He that Sanctifies and they that are
Sanctified are all of one. Now as in a body we resolve the whole into no parts
but those which are integrall and proper to it in the nature of a living and
organicall Body, namely the members; though many things else are in the Body,
yet nothing belongs integrally unto it, but the members: So many men are in the
Body of Christ, only by an external and sacramental admission, or by some
false and presumptuous persuasions and professions (as wennes or excrements in
the natural body) they do no services, they exercise no vital and spiritual
functions, but rather cumber and infest the members.

Secondly, this union is compared unto a building or house, Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 1.
Tim. 3. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 5. whose stones are knitte together by the juncture and
bond of Love, and are firmly grounded upon the Elect precious and sure
foundation, who as He does by His power uphold Heb. 1. 3.
all things, so much more those that are built upon Him. Now as in a structure
the stones cannot subsist in the building by any qualities or inherent virtues
of their own, but only by that direct and perpendicular dependence, and
subsistence which they have upon the foundation: so in the Church no graces, no
carvings, no inherent excellencies do hold men up, but only that full and
sole reliance, and subsistence of the Soul upon Christ. If a man have any
other bottom that holds him up, if he be not even and full upon Christ, if he
be not in all things levelled and proportioned unto him by the doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets (which is therefore likewise called a foundation, because
by it we are set right upon Christ, who is the Foundation of foundations,
Esai. 28. 16.
as the Scripture spcakes) He cannot abide in the building for ever; the wall
and the foundation must all have the same center; and there must be the same
propensions, and affections in us which were in Christ, His Rule must be ours,
and His Ends ours, and His Will ours. If there be any such exorbitancies, and
swellings out, as make the heart have quite another point and center to move
to, other grounds to fix upon, if men will despise the Word, will not be pared
and regulated to the foundation, but will trust in oppression and
perverseness, and stay on that; this iniquity will at length prove a breach
Esai. 30. 12, 13.
which comes suddenly at an instant.

Thirdly, this union is co^par'd to an ingrafture of a branch Ioh. 15. 1, 5.
in a tree, whereby the juice and nourishment of the stock is conveyed, and the
branch thereby quickened to bring forth fruit. Where by the way it is worth our
noting that the Church is most usually in this particular compared Exck. 15. 3.
to a Vine, and the branches of a Vine, to note that there is nothing of worth
or expectation in Christians, but their fruit. A man cannot make a pin to
fasten in a wall of the branch of a vine. An unfruitefull Christian is the most
unprofitable Creature that is; there are no secondarie uses which can mediate
(as I may so speak) for a dead vine, to keep that from the fire: either it
must be for fruit or for fuel; to all other purposes it is utterly improper
and unprofitable.

Now we must observe, that a Branch may be in a Tree two ways. First, by a
mere corporeal adherencie, or continuation with the stock; by cleaving and
sticking to the body of the Tree; and so every dead branch is in the Tree, as
well as those that live: but this alone is not that which our Savior requires,
for such branches the husbandman will cut off and cast (...) fire. Secondly, by
a real participation of the life, sapp^ and influences of the root, which
unto the former sort of branches, though offered, yet is not received, because
of the inward deadness and indisposition that is in it: thus it is between
Christ and Christians. That which makes us to be in Christ after any kind of
way is Faith. And according to the differences of Faith are these differences
of being in Christ to be discerned. Saint James makes mention of a dead Faith,
when men are in Christ by some general acknowledgement, by external
profession, Ian^. ^. 26.
by a partial dependence (coming to Him only as to a Jesus for room and
shelter to keep them from the fire; not as to a Christ for grace and
government in His service) not by any particular and willing attraction of
those vital influences, those working principles of grace and obedience which
are from him shed abroad upon true believers. And this is the semi-conversion
and imperfect renovation of many men, whereby they receive from Him only
general light of truth and common virtues, which make them visibly, and
externally branches in Him. But Saint Paul makes mention of a lively,
operative, unfeigned faith, which in true believers draws in the power of
Christ's death, and the virtue of His resurrection, unto the mortification of
sin, and quickening of Spirit, and bringing forth f^uite unto God, and this
only is that which is the ground of our life from Him. The Life that I live, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God.

Lastly, this Union unto Christ is compared unto Marriage* Psalm. 45. Ephesians. 5.
32, whereby the Church has a right and propriety created to the body, name,
goods, table, possessions, purchases of Christ, and does reciprocally become
all His, resigning its will, ways, desires unto His government. Now for the
discovery of this we may consider either the essentials, or the consequents of
marriage. The former has for the genu^ the most general requisite, consent:
and that must have these differencies and restrictions. First, it must be a
Lumbar. did. c. 4 distinct. 27. Ubi non est ut^iusque consessus, non potest
esse matrimonium. Instit. Iur. Can. lib. 2. Tit. 11. nup^ias igitur Aquin.
supplem. 3. partis qu. 45. art. 1. Fran. a victor. Relect. 7. part. 1.
mutual consent: for though Christ declare His good will, when He knocks at
our doors, and beseeches us in the ministry of His Word; yet if we keep our
distance, reject His tokens of Love and Favor, and stop our ears to His
invitations, there is then no covenant made; this is but a wooing, and no
marriage. Secondly, it must be a Verba praesentem consensum exprimentia sant
necessaria. Iustit. Iur. Can. lib. 2. Tit 11.. Licet autem per solum Lumbard.
lib. 4. distinct. 28. Francisc. a victoria. Relect. 7. part. ^. Punct. 2.
present consent, and in words de pr^senti, or else it is only a Promise, but
no Contract. Many men, like Balaam would feign die the death of the righteous,
but live their own lives; would feign belong to Christ at the last, and have
nothing to do with Him ever before; would have Him out of need, but not at
all out of love; and therefo^ for the present they put Him off: Many other
suitors they have whom they cannot defer, or deny; till at last peradventure
He grow jealous and weary, departs from them, and turns unto those who will
esteem Him worthy of more acceptance. Act. 13. 46. Act 22. 21.
Seeing you put the Word from you, faith the Apostle, and judge your selves
unworthy of Eternal Life, Lo we turn unto the Gentiles. Thirdly, it must be
free and unconstrained; for compulsion makes it a ravishment, and not a
marriage. They Quorum unum corpus est, unas debet esse and animus. Urban. ^n
Decret. part. 2. cause. 31. Lumbard. Did. 29.
who must be but one Body, ought first to agree in the same free and willing
resolution. Many men when God Psa. 78. 34, 37.
slayes them, will enquire early after Him; when He puts them upon a rack
will give a forced consent to serve Him; when He 2. King. 17. 25. 26.
sends His Lions amongst them, will send for His Priests to instruct them how
to worship Him; but this is only to flatter with their lips, that they may
escape the present pain; (like the howling devotion of some desperate Mariner
in a storm) not at all out of cordial and sinceere affection; wicked men
deal no better with God, then the froggs in the fable with the block which
was thrown in to be their king. When He makes a noise, and disturbes their
peace; when He falls heavy upon them, they are sore affrighted, and seem to
reverence His Power: but if He suffer their stream to be calm about them,
and stir not up His wrath, they securely dance about Him, and reassume their
wonted looseness. Fourthly, it must be Qui errat nen sentit, Ergo nec
consentit. Decret. part. 2. Cau. 29 qu. 1. Error circa ca (...) sunt de
ess^ntia contractus vit^at cont^ctum. Fran^ victoria* Relect 7 part. 1. panct.
2.
without error, for he that erres; cannot consent. If a woman take her self
upon some absence of her husband to be now free from him, and conceive him
dead, and thereupon marry again; if it appear that the Decret. part 2. Cause.
34 q. 1. 2.
former husband is yet living, there was a mistake and error in the person, and
so a nullity in the contract. So if a man mistake himself, judge himself free
from his former tie unto sin and the Law, and yet live in obedience to his
lusts still, and is not cleansed from ^is filthiness, he cannot give any full
consent to Christ, who ^ill have a chaste spouse, without adulterers, or
corrivals. Lastly, It must Quod perpetuitati repugnat, matrimonium tollit.
Aquin. supplem. 3 part. qu. 47. art 3. In matrimonio est quasi quaedam servitus
perpetua. Ibid. art 6.
be an universal and perpetual consent, for all time, and in all states and
conditions. This is a great difference between a wife, and a strumpet: A wife
takes her husband upon all terms; his burdens, as well as his goods; his
troubles, as well as his pleasures: whereas a strumpet is only for hire and
lust; when the purse is emptied, or the body wasted, the love is at an end. So
here, He that will have Christ, must have Him All; (for Christ is not divided)
must entertain Him to all purposes, must follow the Lamb wheresoever He
goes, must leave Father, Mother, Wife, Children, his own life for Christ;
must take as well His Yoke, as His Crown; as well His Sufferings, as His
Salvation; as well His Grace, as His Mercy; as well His Spirit to lead, as
His Blood to redeem. He that will be his own Master to do the works of his
own will, must, if he can, be his own Savior too, to deliver his soul
from the wrath to come.

The consequents and intendments of marriage are two, Convictus and Proles.
First mutual society; Christ and a Christian must live together, have
intimate, and dear acquaintance with each other; the spirit of a Christian
must solace it self in the arms and embracements, in the riches and
loveliness of Christ; in his absence and removes long after Him; in His
presence and returns delight in Him, and entertain Him with such pure
affections, and Heavenly desires, as may make him take pleasure in His Beauty.
Secondly, there must be a fruitfulness in us, we must bring forth unto God.
Christ will not have a barren Spouse: every one that loves Him, keeps His
Commandments.

Now then in one word to unfold the more distinct quality of this our union to
Christ, we may consider a Dr. Reynolds confer. with Heart c. 1. divis. 2
threefold unity. Of Persons in one nature; of natures in one Person; of
natures and Persons in one quality. In the first is one God. In the second, is
one Christ. In the third, is one Church. Our union unto Christ is the last of
these, whereby He and we are all spiritually united to the making up of one
mystical Body. The Occulta communicatione and inspi* atione gratiae spiritalis
quisquis haeret Domino unus spiritus est. Aug. de peccat. Mer. and Remiss. lib.
1. cap. 10. 1. Ioh 3. 24. 4. 13.
formal reason or bond of this union is the Spirit of Christ, by which as by
immortal and abiding seed we are begotten a new unto Christ. For He being the
second Adam, we are spiritually in Him, and from Him, as we are naturally, or
corruptly, in and from Adam. Romans 5. 18. Non est mulieris semen ratione quadam
plebeia and vulgari, sed conceptus e spiritu sancto. Itaque non est si^ n^tus
ut esset omnium hominum caput, se^ eorum tautu^ quos ex uni^erso hu^ano genere
corrupto Deus voluit regenera re per spiritum sanctum, etc. Cameron ^e (...).
page 88.
As Adam was the fountain of all that are naturally generated, and by that
means transmitted condemnation to all chat are One with Him: so Christ is the
Head of all that are Spiritually borne again, and by that means transmitteth
grace and righteousness to all that are one with him.

From this Union of the faithful unto Christ does immediately arise a
Communion with Him in all such good things as he is pleased to Communicate. I
will but touch them, it having been the subject of this discourse hitherto.

First, we have a Communion with Him in His merits, Non est s^lvatus cruce
^hristi qui non est crucifixus in Christo. Non est crucificus in Christo, qui
non est membrum corporis Christi. Prosper. Resp. ad C^pitul. G^illorum. cap. 9.
Christo proprie ecclesia unitur quatenus Crucifixus est, and excitatus a
mortu^s, ne^pe ut in Christi morte ecclesi^ sit veluti satisfaciens Deo, and
expians pe^tata non in s^, sed in capite. In resurrectione autem ecclesia sit
veluti defuncta satisfactione, etc. (...) de ecclesia pa^. 106. Adeo arcto
v^nculo Christus and ecclesia conjunct^ s^nt ut Christus sit veluti peccator in
ecclesia, ecclesia veluti defuncta paeua peccatian Christo. Ibid. page 127.
which are as fully imputed unto us for Justification, as if His sufferings had
been by us endured, or the debt by us satisfied. As we find in the body
medicines often apylyed unto sound parts, not with relation to themselves, but
to cure others which are unsound; In a distillation of ^hewmes on the eyes, we
cup and scarifie the neck which was unaffected, to draw back the humor from
the part distempered: even so Christ the glorious and innocent Head of a
miserable and leprous body suffered Himself to be wounded and crucified; to
wrestle with the wrath of His Father; to be One with a wretched people in the
condition of their infirmities, as He was with His Father in the unity of
divine holiness; that so by his infirmity beirg joined unto us, the Communion
of His purity might join us unto God again. Solus pro nobis suscepit si^e
malis meritis paenam, ut nos per illum sine bonis meritis consequeremur
gratiam. Aug. contr. 2. epistolas pelag. lib. 4. c. 4. Hugo de sacram l. 2
part. 1. c. 12.
He alone without any demerit of His suffered our punishment, that we without
any merit of ours might obtain His Grace. Illa in corpore Christi vulnera non
erant Christi vulnera sed Latronis. Ambr. sermon. de latrone.
The pains of Christ's wounds were His, but the profit ours; the holes in His
hands and side were His, but the balm which issued out was ours; the thorns
were His, but the Crown was ours: in one word, the price which He paid was
His, but the Inheritance which He purchased was ours. All the ignominy and
agony of His Cross was infinitely unbeseeming so honorable a Person as
Christ, if it had not been necessary for so vile a sinner as man.

Secondly, we have Communion with Him in His Life and Graces by habitual and
real infusion and inhabitation of His Spirit unto Sanctification. For we are
1. Cor. 1. 2.
Sanctified in Him, and Ioh. 15. 4.
except we abide in Him, we cannot bring forth fruit. Christ comes not only
with a passion, but with an unction to consecrate us to Himself: except thou
be a partaker as well of this, as of that, be as willing to be rull'd, as
redeemed by Christ; In Him indeed thou art, but it is as a withered branch in a
fruitful vine; while thou art in Him, it is to thy shame, that thou should
be dead, where there is such abundance of Life; and the time will come that
thou shall be cut off from Him: Every branch in me that bears not fruit, He
takes away.

Lastly, we have Communion with Him in many privileges and dignities. But here
we must distinguish of the privileges of Christ: some, are personal and
incommunicable; others, general and communicable. Of the former sort are all
such as belong unto Him either in regard of His Divine Person, as to be the
everlasting Son, the word and wisdom of His Father, the express Image of
His Person, and brightness of His Glory, the upholder of all things by the
Word of His Power, and the like; or in regard of His Office, as to be the
Redeemer of the Church, the Author and finisher of our Faith, the Prince of our
Salvation, the propitiation for the sins of the world, the second Adam, the
Mediator between God and Man, in which things He is alone, and there is none
with Him. Other privileges there are which are communicable, all which may be
comprised under this general of being fellow members with Him in the most
glorious Body and society of Creatures in the world.

The particulars I touched before. First, we have communion in some sort with
Him in His Holy unction, where by we are consecrated to be Revel. 1. 6.
Kings and Priests, to subdue our corruptions, to conquer spiritual
wickedness, to offer up the sacrifices of prayer, praises, alms and Holy
services; for we are by Him a ^. Per. 2. 9.
royal priesthood.

Secondly we have Communion in His victories; we are Romans 8. 37.
more then conquerors through Him, because in the midst of the enemies
insultations, and our own distresses, the victory is still ours. The enemy
may kill us, but not overcome us, because our death is victorious. As Christ
Col 2. 15.
triumphed upon the Cross, and had His government on His shoulders: so we
Romans 5. 3.
rejoice in afflictions, glory in tribulations, and in all of them, in a
confluence and conspiracy of them all, we are more then conquerors.

Thirdly, we have Communion with Christ in His Ioh. 20. 17.
Sonship, from whence it comes to pass that Christ and His Church do
interchangeably take one another names: Sometimes He is not ashamed to call
Himself Jacob and Israel. Psalm. 24, 6.
This is the generation of them that seek thy face O Jacob, and Esai. 49. 3.
Thou art my servant O Israel in whom I will be glorified, says the Lord
speaking unto Christ: n yea He gives to the Church His own Name. 1 Cor. 12.
12.
As there are many members, and yet but one body; so is Christ: Aug. de Civ.
Des. lib. 17. c. 18. (...) ^ de unitate Eccles^e cap. 4. Totus Christus caput
and corpus est, homines sancti and fideles fiunt cum homine Christo (...).
depeccat Mer and (...). lib. 1. (...). 3^. Ita and Christus. Non dixit, (...)
and Christi, sed ita and Christus, ostendens Christum recte appellari etiam
universum, hoc est caput cum corpore suo quod est Ecclesia. Id. To 4. lib. 83.
qu. 69.
that is, so is the Church of Christ. And 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
what manner of love is this, says the Apostle, that we should be called the
Sons of God? From hence it comes that we have fellowship with the Father,
access and approach with confidence for all needful supplies, assurance of
His care in all extremities, interest in the inheritance which He reserveth
for His Children, confidence to be spared in all our failings, and to be
accepted in all our sincere and willing services; secret debates, spiritual
conferences of the heart with God, He speaking unto our spirits by His Spirit
in the Word, and we by the same spirit speaking unto Him in prayers,
complaints, supplycations, thankesgivings, covenants, resolutions: Cant. 1. 2.
He kissing us with kisses of Love and comfort, and wae kissing Him again
with Psalm. 2. 12.
kisses of reverence and worship.

We see then, to conclude all, what an absolute necessity lies upon us of
having Christ, because with Him we have Romans 8. 32.
All things, and Phil. 4. 13.
can do all things: without Him we are Revel. 3. 17.
poor and Ioh. 15* 5.
can do nothing. And the more necessary the duty, the more sinful the
neglect: especially considering that Christ withholds not Himself, but is
ready to meet, to prevent, to attend every heart that in truth desires Him. If
a man have a serious, simple, sincere will, to come wholly to Christ, not to be
held back from him by His dearest and closest corruptions* by the sweetest
pleasures, or strongest temptations, which can allure or assault him, he may
draw near unto Him with boldness, and assurance of acceptance: he has a
call, Christ Rev. 22. 17.
inviteth, yea ^. Cor. 5. 10.
entreats him, and therefore he may come: he has a 1. Ioh. 3. 24.
command, Christ requires it of him, and therefore he must come.

And now when we have Christ, how careful should we be to keep Him; how
tender and watchful over all our behaviors toward Him, lest He be grieved
and depart again. The Spirit of the Lord is a Nes delicata est Dei spiritus.
Te^t.
delicate spirit, most sensible of those injuries which his friends do him.
Let us therefore take heed of violating, afflicting, discouraging, grieving
this Spirit (which is the bond of all our union and interest with Christ) in
any of those his sacred breathings and operations upon the Soul. But when He
teaches, let us submit and obey, receive the belief and the love of His
Truth: when He promises, let us neither distrust nor despise, but embrace as
true, and admire as precious, all the offers which He makes to us: when He
contends with our lusts in His Word and secret suggestions, let him not always
strive, but let us give up our fleshly affections to be crucified by Him: when
He woes and invites us, when He offers to lead and to draw us, let us not
stop the ear, or pull away the shoulder, or draw backward like froward
children, or cast cold water in the face of Grace, by thwarting the motions,
and rebelling against the dictates thereof, but let us yield our selves unto
Him, captivate all our lusts, and consecrate all our powers, and submit all our
desires to His rule and government; and then when He has been a Spirit of
union, to incorporate us into Christ's Body; and a Spirit of unction, to
sanctify us with His Grace, He will undoubtedly be a Spirit of comfort and
assurance, to seal us unto the day of our full redemption.

THE LIFE OF CHRIST.
PHILIP. 3. 10. That I may know Him, and the Power of His Resurrection, and the
fellowship of His sufferings.
THe purpose of the Apostle in this place is to arm the church of the
Philippians against those false Iudaizing Teachers that Confounded Christ and
Moses, Circumcision and the Gospel together. This he does by Arguments
Personal from men, and by arguments real from the matter it self. Arguments
Personal are first from the disposition, quality, End of those false teachers,
whom he describes ver. 3. They are evil trees, and therefore no great heed to
be given to the fruits they bear, to the doctrines they obtrude. They are
Dogs, unclean beasts, that bark only for their bellies, and do not only
bark, but watch their times to bite too. They are Evil workers; though they
come like fellow workers with Christ, pretending much strictnes in the
edification of the Church, yet indeed their business is only to pull down and
to pervert. They are the Concision, where the Apostle by an I^onicall
paranomasia shows the end of their doctrines, They preach indeed Circumcision,
but their business is schism and Concision; In the Law it was Circumcision,
Gods ordinance, but now being by Christ abolished it is nothing at all but a
bare Concision or cutting of the flesh, and will in the Event prove a rent and
schism in the Church. The Second personal Argument is taken from the Apostles
own condition, who neither by nature nor Education was an enemy to legal
Ceremonies, who in all points had as great reason to vindicate the Law, and to
boast in fleshly privileges as any of those False Teachers. ver. 4. He was by
nature an Israelite of the whole blood as well as they; by Education, of the
strictest sect of all, a pharise; by custom and practice a persecutor of the
Church, under that very name because the law he had been bred under was
engdanger'd by that new way; and in his course of life altogether unblameable
in regard of legal Obedience and observations: and lastly in his opinions
touching them, he counted them gainful things, and rested upon them for his
salvation, till the Lord opened his eyes, to see the light of the Glorious
Gospel of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The arguments from the matter are
first from the Substance of which Circumcision was the shadow. We are the
Circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, etc.
Verse. 3. They boast in the flesh, they have a Concision, but we are the
Circumcision, because we have the fruit and Truth of Circumcision, the
spiritual worship of God, which is opposite to external Ceremonies. Ioh. 4.
23. Secondly from the plenitude and all sufficiency of Christ, which stands
not in need of any legal accession to piece it out, and this the Apostle
shows by his own practice and experience. What things were (...) to me those
I counted loss for Christ, because they were things that kept him from Christ
before, and he repeats the same words Confidently again, that he might not to
be thought to have spoken them unaduisedly or in a heat, yea doubtless and I
count all things but loss for the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, As a merchant in a
tempest is contented to Suffer the loss of all his goods to redeem his life,
or rather as a man will be content to part with all his own beggarly furniture
for a Jewel of great value, Math. 13. 44. Only here we are to note that the
Apostle did not suffer the loss of them quoad Substantiam, in regard of the
Substance of the duties, but quoad qualitatem et officium Iustificandi, in
regard of that dependence, and Expectation of happiness which he had from them
before. Neither did he only Suffer the loss of them (as a man may do of
things which are excellent in themselves and use, as a merchant throws his
wares out of the ship, when yet he dearly loves the, and delights in the^) but
he shows what estimation he had of them, I count them dung, that I may win
Christ, I Count them then filthy carrion: so the word signifies; (...), quasi
(...), garbage and filth that is thrown out to dogs, things which dogs (such as
he describes these false teachers to be) may delight in; but the spirit of God
in a sincere heart cannot relish nor savor in comparison of Christ. And may be
found in him, when I shall appear before the face of God, or may find in him
All that I loose for him, that is a most plentiful recompense for any legal
commodities which I part from for his sake, not Having mine own
righteousness, etc. Here the Apostle distinguishes of a twofold
Righteousness; Legal, which is a man's own, because a man must come by it by
working himself, Romans 10. 5. And Evangelicall, which is not a man's own, but
the righteousness of God Romans 3. 21. 22. Freely given to us by grace through
Christ. That I may know Him, etc. That I may have the Experience of his Grace
and mercy in Justifying me freely by faith through the virtue of his sufferings
and resurrection.

Here then we have these two things set down, first, the Pretiousnesse,
secondly the nature of Saving Faith. The Pretiousnesse is in the whole scope of
the place, for the words are a comparative speech, where faith is preferred
before all legal or moral performances. The nature is opened by the Act of it
Knowledge, and the Object, the virtue of Christ's Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his Sufferings.

Touching the former of these two, the scope of the Apostle in this place is to
show, that faith is the most precious and excellent gift of God to a Christian
man. So it is Expressly called by Saint Peter, a precious faith. 2. Pet. 1. 1.
For understanding of which point me must note that faith may be Considered in
a double respect. Either as it is a Quality inherent in the Soul, or as an
Instrument whereby the Soul apprehends some other thing. Now in the same
thing there is much difference between it self as a Quality, and as an
Instrument. Heat as a Quality, can only produce the like quality again, but
as an Instrument of the Sun it can produce life and sense, things of more
excellency then the Quality it self. Faith as a Quality is noe better then
other graces of the spirit, but as an Instrument so it has a Quickening quality
which noe other Grace has. The just shall live by Faith. Heb. 10. 38.

This pretiousnesse of Faith is seen chiefly in two respects. First, in
regard of the Objects, and secondly, in regard of the Offices of it. First
Faith has the most pretitious and excellent object of any other, Christ and
his Truth, and promises. Herein, says the Apostle, God commended His Love, in
that when we were sinners Christ died, Romans 5. 8. This was the sovereign and
most excellent love token and testification of divine favor that ever was sent
from Heaven to men. God so loved the world, so superlatively, so beyond all
measure or apprehension, that He gave His Son, Ioh. 3 16. There is such a
compass of all dimensions in Gods love manifested through Christ, such a
height and length, and breadth, and depth, as makes it exceed all knowledge,
Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. It is exceeding and unsearchable riches. In one word that which
Ephesians. 2. 7. Ephesians. 3. 8.
faith looks upon in Christ is the price, the purchase, and the promises which
we have by Him. The price which made satisfaction unto God; the purchase which
procured Salvation for us; and the promises which comfort and secure us in the
certainty of both; and all these are precious things, The blood of Christ,
precious blood: 1. Pet. 1. 18. The promises of Christ, precious promises: 2.
Pet. 1. 4. And the purchase of Christ, a very exceeding and abundant weight of
Glory. 2. Cor. 4. 17. But it may be objected, Have not other Graces the same
object as well as Faith? Do we not love Christ, and fear Him, and hope in
Him, and desire Him, as well as Believe in (...). Clem. Alex. strom. lib. 2.
Him? True indeed, but herein is the excellency of Faith, that it is the
first grace which looks toward Christ.

Now the Scripture uses to commend things by their order and precedencie. As
the women are commended for coming first to the Sepulcher; the messenger which
brings the first tidings of good things is ever most welcome; the servant who
is nearest his masters person is esteemed the best man in that order: so Faith
being the first grace that brings tidings of Salvation, the nearest Grace to
Christ's Person, is therefore the most excellent in regard of the object.

Secondly, Faith is the most precious Grace in regard of the offices of it.
Though in its inherent and habitual qualification it be no more noble then
other graces, yer in the offices which it executes, it is far more excellent
then any. Two pieces of parchment and wax are in themselves of little or no
difference in value, but in their offices which they bear as instruments or
patents one may as far exceed the other as a man's life exceedes his lands;
for one may be a pardon of life, the other a lease of a Cottage. One man in a
City may in his personal estate be much inferior to another, yet as an
Officer in the City he may have a great precedence and distance above him.
Compare a piece of gold with a seal of silver or brass, and it may have far
more worth in it self; yet the seal has an Office or Relative power to
ratify covenants of far more worth then the piece of gold: so is it between
Faith and other Graces; Consider Faith in its inherent properties, so it is not
more noble then the rest: but consider it as an instrument, by God appointed
for the most noble offices, so is it the most superlative and excellent grace.
These offices which are to it peculiar, I take it, are principally these three.
The first to unite to Christ, and give possession of Him. The Apostle prays
for the Ephesians, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by Faith. Ephesians* 3. 17.
Wealth in the Mine does no good at all till it be severed and appropriated to
persons and uses: Water in the Fountain is of no service unto me, till it be
conveyed thence to mine own Cisterne; the light of the Sun brings no comfort
to him who has no eyes to enjoy it: So though Christ be a Mine full of
excellent and unsearchable riches, a Fountain full of comforts and
refreshments, a Sun of righteousness, a Captain and Prince of Life and
Salvation, yet till He is made ours, till there be some bond and communion
between Him and us, we remain as poor and miserable as if this Fountain had
never been opened, no^ this Mine discovered.

Now this Union to and Communion with Christ is on our part the work of Faith,
which is as it were the spiritual joint and ligament by which Christ and a
Christian are coupled. In one place we are said to live by Christ, Because I
live, says he, you shall live also. Ioh. 14. 19. In another, by Faith, The
Just shall live by Faith. Heb. 10. 38. How by both? By Christ, as the
Fountain; By Faith, as the pipe conveying water to us from the fountain; By
Christ, as the Foundation; By Faith, as the Cement knitting us to the
foundation; By Christ, as the Treasure; By Faith, as the clue which directs; as
the Keye which opens, and let us in to that Treasure. This the Apostle
explaines in the former place, where he shows by what means Faith makes us
live, namely by giving us an entrance and approach to Christ; for he opposes
Faith to drawing back, verse. 19. 30. Noting that the proper work of Faith, is
to carry us unto Christ, as our Savior Himself expounds believing in Him,
by coming unto Him, Ioh. 6. 64. 65. Therefore the Apostle puts both together,
not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I live, I live by the Faith
of the Son of God. Gal. 2. 20. Faith is compared to eating and drinking, Ioh.
6. and we know there is no sense requires such an intimate and secret union to
its object as that of tasting, no sense that is the instrument of so near a
union as that. So then as the motion of the mouth in eating is not in the
nature of a motion any whit more excellent then the motion of the eye or foot,
or of it self in speaking; yet in the isntrumental office of life and
nourishment it is far more necessary: So though Faith in the substance of it
as it is an inherent quality has no singular excellency above other graces;
yet as it is an instrument of conveying Christ our spiritual Bread unto our
souls, and so of assimilating and incorporating us into Him, which no other
Grace can do, no more then the motion of the eye or foot can nourish the
body; so it is the most precious and useful of all others. It may be objected,
do not other graces join a man unto Christ, as well as Faith? Union is the
proper effect of Love; therefore we are one with Christ as well by loving Him,
as by believing in Him.

To this I answer, that Love makes only a moral union in affections, but
Faith makes a mystical union, a more close and intimate fellowship in nature
between us and Christ. Besides, Faith is the immediate tie between Christ and
a Christian, but love a secondary union following upon, and grounded on the
former. By nature we are all enemies to Christ and His Kingdom, of the Jews
mind, we will not have this man to reign over us: therefore till by Faith
we are thoroughly persuaded of Christ's Love to us, we can never repay Love to
Him again. Herein is Love, says the Apostle, not that we loved God, but that
He loved us, and sent His Son. 1. Ioh. 4 10. Now between Gods Love and ours
comes Faith to make us One with Christ* we have known and believed the Love
that God has to us. ver. 16. And hence it follows that because by Faith as
He is so are we in this world, therefore Our love to Him is made perfect, and
so we love Him because He first loved us, verse. 19. So that we see the union
we have with Christ by Love presupposes the Unity we have in Him by Faith;
so Faith still has the preeminence.

The second office wherein consists the excellency of Faith is a consequent of
the former, namely to justify a man: for there is no man righteous in the
sight of God any further then he is taken into the unity of Christ, and into
the fellowship of His Merits. God is alone well pleased in Christ, and till a
man be a member of His Body, a part of His fullness, he cannot appear in
Gods presence. This was the reason why Christ would have none of His bones
broken, or taken of from the Communion of His natural body, Ioh. 19. 36. to
note the indissoluble union which was to be between Him and His mystical
Members. So that now as in a natural body the member is certainly fast to
the whole so long as the bones are firm and sound: so in the mystical, where
the body is, there must every member be too, because the bones must not be
broken asunder. If then Christ go to Heaven, if He stand unblameable before
Gods justice, we al shall in him appear so too; because his bones cannot be
broken. That which thus puts us into the Unity of Christ, must needs Justify
our persons, and set us right in the presence of God: and this is our Faith.
The Apostle gives two excellent reasons why our Justification should be of
Faith rather then of any other grace. The first on Gods part, that it might be
of Grace: The second on the part of the promise, that the promise might be sure
to all the seed. Romans 4. 16. First, Justification that is by Faith is of mere
Grace and favor, no way of work or merit. For the Act whereby Faith
Iustifies, is an act of humility, and selfe-dereliction, a holy despair of any
thing in our selves, and a going to Christ, a receiving, a looking toward Him
and His Al-sufficiencie; so that as Marie said of her self, so we may say of
Faith; The Lord has respect unto the lowlynes of his grace, which is so far
from looking inward for matter of Justification, that it self as it is a work
of the heart, (...) credere, does not justify, but only as it is an
apprehension or taking hold of Christ. For as the hand in the very receiving of
a thing must needs first make it self empty (If it be full before, it must
let all that go ere it can take hold on any other thing:) So Faith being a
receiving of Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. must needs suppose an emptiness in the soul
before.

Faith has two properties (as a Hand) To work and to receive; when Faith
purifies the heart, supports the droaping spirits, works by love, carries a
man through afflictions and the like, these are the works of Faith: when Faith
Accepts of righteousness in Christ, and receives Him as the gift of His
Fathers Love, when it embraces the promises a far of, Heb. 11. 13. and lays
hold on Eternal Life, 1. Tim. 6. 12. This is the receiving act of Faith. Now
Faith justifies not by working (lest the effect should not be wholly of Grace,
but partly of Grace, and partly of work, Ephesians, 2. 8, 9.) but by bare
receiving, and accepting or yielding consent to that righteousness, which in
regard of working was the righteousness of Christ, Romans 5. 18. and in regard
of disposing, imputing, appropriating unto us, was the righteousness of God,
Romans 3. 21. 1. Cor. 1, 30. Phil, 3. 9. To make the point of Justification by
the receiving and not the working of Faith plain, let us consider it by a
familiar similitude.

Suppose a Chirurgian should perfectly cure the hand of a poor man from some
desperate wound which utterly disabled him for any work: when he has so done,
should at one time freely bestow some good alms upon the man, to the receiving
whereof he was enabled by the former cure; and at another time should set the
man about some work, unto the which likewise the former cure had enabled him;
and the work being done, should give him a reward proportionable to his
labor: I demand which of these two gifts are arguments of greater grace in
the man, either the recompensing of that labor which was wrought by the
strength he restored, or the free bestowing of an equal gift, unto the
receiving whereof likewise he himself gave ability? Any man will easily
answer that the gift was a work of more free grace then the reward, though
unto both way was made by His own merciful cure; for all the mercy which was
showed in the cure was not able to nullify the intrinsecall proportion which
afterward did arise between the work and the reward. Now this is the plain
difference between our doctrine and the doctrine of our adversaries in the
point of Justification. They say we are justified by Grace, and yet by works,
because grace enables us to work: we say we are justified freely, not by the
works of grace, but by the grace which bestows our Justification, and
therewith our strength of working unto us. For surely Gods free grace is more
magnified in giving us undeservedly both righteousness and works; then in
giving us works to deserve our righteousness.

Secondly, Justification by Faith does make the promise sure to all the seed.
If unto a beggar should be proposed some excellent benefit upon condition to
perform some acceptable and perfect service unto the person that offers it;
whom yet it would be impossible to please by working, without some exact
ability for the duty required; the man might easily doubt of the certainty
of the benefit, because his performance of the condition required is
uncertain: but if the same benefit should be proposed upon no other act on
his part required, then only the acknowledgement of his own want, and the
willing acceptance of the thing offered, a man could not be unsure of it: So
if the Lord should propose righteousness o^ salvation to a man upon condition
of his moral obedience, man's corruptions are so many, and his abilities so
weak, his enemies so potent, and his heart so treacherous to comply with them,
that the promise cannot be made sure to him upon the concurrence of his own
works. But when there is nothing required of a man but to cleave to Christ,
nothing but to relinquish his own endeavors, and to accept the help of a
sure Savior, and to rely upon the sure mercies of David, this must needs make
our righteousness and salvation to be as certain as is the value of the
merits, or fidelity of the promise, on which we rely. If there be nothing
requisite to the firmness and consistencie of a house, but only to be put
upon the foundation, then the house must needs be as sure as the foundation; if
there be nothing requisite to the safenesse of a man's money or writings, but
to put them in a closet or box, the things must needs be as safe as the place
into which they are put: so since nothing else is required to make our
salvation sure but only to rest upon Christ, who is a safe foundation to his
Church, Math. 16. 18. and a certain Treasure, Col. 3. 3. Faith which alone
puts us into him, does therewithal make our Salvation sure unto us. Behold I
lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious, (there is both our
foundation and our Treasure) now the safety which Faith brings from hence is
this, He that believes shall not be confounded, or put to shame; in the
Prophet it is, shall not make have, 1. Pet. 2. 6. both words express safety.
For a man to rely upon another for any good thing, and at last to fail in his
expectation, this must needs shame him in the disappointment of his hopes; but
when the hopes of a man are grounded upon the unsearchable riches, and the
unfaileable promise, and the immutable truth, power, and goodness of God;
impossible it is that the faith of such a man should shame or deceive him. When
a man is secure and certain of any good thing, he is contented to wait the
season of it; David by Gods promise, and unction was certain of the kingdom,
and therefore he would not take away the life of Saul when it was in his power,
but waited till the time of his death by God appointed should come, 1. Sam. 26.
9, 10, 11. but when a man is unconsident of a thing, he is ready to snatch at
every probability, to make use of every occasion that happens to further his
desires. If I should see two men going toward the Court in competition for
some office or preferment, and should observe the one to ride night and day in
full speed, to deny himself the comforts of the way, and to express much
impatiencie and indignation at every stoppage that met him; the other to take
time and leisure, to rely upon the former promises of the prince, or the
prevalencie of some honorable friends, and to laugh at the gredinesse of his
competitor, I should easily conclude that the hopes of that man were greater,
whose have as less: for when a man has a thing already in promise, and that
from the hands of a man of whose power and fidelity he has infallible
assurance, he is not over vehement for performance, but willingly attends the
times and good pleasure of his friend. Now Habet ^ides oculos su^s quibus
quodammodo videt verum esse quod nondum videt. Aug. Ep. 222. (...). Clem. Alex.
strom. lib. 2. Anticipatio and praecomprehensio Ibid. (...). Ibid lib. 5.
this is the business of faith to give a being to the things we hope for, and
though in themselves they be a far of, and out of sight, yet to make them
subsistent and at hand in the promise, even within the reach and embracement of
Faith, Heb. 11. 1, 13. So that Faith does therefore keep a man from greediness
and precipitancie in his pursuit, and from confusion and shame in his hopes of
good, because it sees them as safe, and certain in the power and promises of
Christ, as if they were already made good unto him. So then to conclude this
point, Faith being the only Grace wherein is magnified the fullness and
freeness of Gods favor, and wherein is secured his promise to all the seed;
It must needs be the fittest grace for a merciful Justification.

The third office of Faith, is having put us into Christ, and Justified us by
him, to give us together with Him all other things, which is the conviction
that the Apostle makes, Romans 8. 32. If He have given us Christ, how shall He
not with Him freely also give us all things? These All Things, are of two
sorts. First, All graces: Secondly, All secular good things. Saint Peter puts
them together, and shows how they run from Christ to us, through Faith as
the pipe; His divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain to Life
and Godliness, and that through the knowledge (that is, the Faith) of him that
has called us to glory and virtue. 2. Pet. 1. 3.

First all Graces: Faith is the first Grace in a Christian Soul, and the
spring of the rest. This is the maine business of that excellent chapter, Heb.
11. to show how Faith was the master wheel in the lives and actions of those
holy men whose renown is there upon record. The Apostle tells us that Faith
works by Love, Gal. 5. 6. where by Love we may understand either generally
the universal habit of all other operative graces, and then the sense is, that
Faith does as it were actuate and animate all other habits of grace, and apply
them to their (...). Clem. Alex. strom lib. 2.
several works: Or rather particularly, that Love of God which is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost; and then the method and meaning of the place
is this. First, Faith shows us the great Love of God in Christ, The life that
I live, says the Apostle, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave Himself for me. Gal. 2. 20. where we see the principal discovery
that Faith makes in Christ, and that it fixes upon is His love to us; and this
is a most sovereign and superlative love: Herein says the Apostle God
commended, God heaped together His Love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 5. 8.

Secondly, Faith having thus revealed to our hearts the Love of God in Christ,
does kindle in them a reciprocal Love toward Christ again, working in us the
same mind that is in Christ, Phil. 2. 5. and enflaming our spirits to a
retribution of Love for Love. We have believed the Love that God has to us,
says the Apostle, and therefore, says he, we love Him because He loved us
first. 1. Ioh. 4. 16, 19. Thus Faith works Love.

But now thirdly there is a further power in Faith, for it does not only work
Love, but it works by Love as the text speaks: that is, it makes use of
that Love which it has thus kindled, as of a goad and incentive to further
obedience; for that Love which we repay unto Christ again, stirs us unto an
intimate and Heavenly communion with Him, unto an entire and spiritual
conformity unto Him. And the reason is, because it is a conjugall Love, and
therefore a fruitful love, for the end of marriage is fructification. Ye are
become dead to the Law, says the Apostle, by the body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another, even to Him who is raised from the dead, and the
end of this spiritual marriage is added, That we should bring forth fruit
unto God, which is presently after expounded, That we should serve in newness
of Spirit, Romans 7 4 6. If a man Love me, says our savior, he will keep my
Words: and this obedience is the child of Faith as it is set down in the same
place, ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you; and
immediately upon this Faith it follows, He that bath my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved
of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self unto Him, Ioh.
14. 20. 21, 22, 23. In which place there are these things of excellent
observation. First the noble objects that Faith does contemplate, even the
excellency of Gods Love unto us in Christ. You shall know that I am in my
Father; in His bosom, in His bowels, in His dearest affection: One with Him in
mercy, in counsel, in power. That He and I both go one way; have both one
decree and resolution of Grace and compassion toward sinners: And that you are
in me, your nature in me, your infirmities in me, the punishment of your
sins upon me, that I am bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh, that you
are in my heart, and in my tenderest affections, that you were crucifi^a
together with me, Romans 6. 6. 8. Ephesians. 2. 6.
that you live together with (...), that you sit together with me in Heavenly
places; that ^ died your death, that you rose my resurrection, that I pray your
prayers, that you were my righteousness, and that I am in you, by my merits to
justify you, by my Grace and Spirit to renew and purify you, by my Power to
keep you, by my wisdom to lead you, by my Communion and Compassion to share
with you in all your troubles; these are the mysteries of the Love of the
Father and the Son to us.

Now this Love kindles a Love in us again, and that Love shows it self in
two things. First in having the Commandments of Christ; that is in accepting
of them, in giving audience unto them, in opening our eyes to see, and our
hearts to entertain the wonders of the Law. And secondly in keeping of them,
in putting to the strength of our Love (for Love is as strong as Death; it will
make a man neglectfull of his own life, to serve and please the person whom he
loves) that so we may perform the duties which so good a Savior requires of
us. And now as our Love was not the first mover ( we loved Him, because He
loved us first) So neither shall it be the last; as the Father and the Son did
by their first Love provoke ours, so will they by their second Love reward
ours. And therefore it sollowes; He that loves me shall be loved of my Father,
and I will love him. This is not meant of a new Love, but of a further
declaration of their former Love, namely in a more close and familiar
communion, and Heavenly cohabitation with them; we will come unto Him, and
make our abode with Him, we will show Him our face, we will make all our
goodness to pass before Him, we will converse and commune with His Spirit,
we will Suppe with Him, we will provide Him a feast of fatted things, and of
refined wine, we will open the breasts of consolation, and delight Him with
the abundance of Glory. Excellent to the purpose of the present point is that
place of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5. 14, 15. The Love of Christ, says he,
constrains us, that is, either Christ's Love to us by Faith apprehended, or
our Love to Christ by the apprehension of His Love wrought in us, does by a
kind of sweet and lovely violence win, and overrule our hearts; not to live
henceforth unto our selves, but unto Him that died for us and rose again: and
the root of this strong persuasion is adjoined, namely because we thus judge,
because we know and believe, that if one died for all, then all are dead to the
guilt, and to the power of sin, and ought to live a new life conformable to
the resurrection of Christ again. Therefore in two parallel places the Apostle
uses promiscuously Faith and a new Creature. In Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Gal. 5. 6.
Faith which works by Love, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, but a
Gal. 6. 15.
new creature. The reason of which promiscuous acceptance the Apostle renders
the inseparable union between faith and renovation. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.

Secondly, Faith gives us all good things requisite to our condition. Adam was
created Lord of his fellow inferior Creatures, invested with propriety to
them all. In his fall he made a forfeiture of every good thing which God gave
him: In the second Covenant a reconciliation being procured, Faith entitling a
man to the Covenant does likewise re-invest him with the Creatures again. All
things, says the Apostle, are yours, and he opens the title and conveyance of
them, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 1. Cor. 3. 23. So elsewhere he
says that the living God gives us all things richly to enjoy, that is, not
only the possession but the use of the things, 1. Tim. 6. 17. where by all
things we may understand, first the liberty and enlargement of Christians, as
it stands in opposition to the pedagogie and discipline of Moses Law, which
distinguished the Creatures into clean and unclean, and so by consequence
into useful and unusefull; so that now by any immediate tie of conscience we
are not prohibited the free enjoyment of any Creature of God. Secondly by all
things we understand not all simply, but all requisites; All that in regard of
our state and course are necessary to life and godliness. O woman, says our
Savior, great is thy Faith, Be it unto thee even as thou will, Math. 15. 28.
This is a large grant to ask what we will and to have promise of obtaining it;
but he who promises to believers what they will, does likewise regulate and
confine their wills to desire nothing but with subordination to His Will;
Tantum habet quantum vult, qui nihil vult nisi quod habet. Sen.
nothing but their own portion, that which is food convenient for them. The
heathen man could say, That man has as much as he desires, who desires
nothing but what he has. So we may say of a Christian, he has indeed
whatsoever he will, because God gives him a heart to desire nothing but that
which is Gods promise and his own necessity.

Now all these things Faith gives us, first because it gives us the Fountain,
and secondly the Promises of them all. First Faith carries us to the Fountain,
that is, to God. With thee, says the Prophet David, there is the Fountain of
Life. Psalm. 36. 9. And we are of God in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 1. 30. Now we know there is a kind of All-sufficiencie in a Fountain,
what ever water a man wants, he may have his supply at the Fountain; whereas
Cisternes and broken pits will be presently exhausted. We may observe in many
fountains that to the eye they seem to have far less water in them for the
time, then some greater torrent or winter flood which over^unnes whole
valleys, and carries away woods and stones before it: yet Job tell's us that a
Torrent will make men ashamed in summer, when they turn aside for water to
refresh them, and can find none, Job. 6. 19. 20. But he that comes to a
Fountain for refreshment shall never be ashamed, because it is living and
growing water, and so makes a perpetual supply. So the Faithful oftentimes
have less wealth and abundance of earthly things then other men: yet
notwithstanding they have therewith all the Fountain, and so by consequence
they have more certainty, and more sweetness. First more certainty for
Fountain water is Living water, and so it multiplies; whereas other men have
their water in Cisterns that are broken, full of holes and chinkes to let it
out at again: so the Prophets tells us of some that drudge and labor, but it
is in the fire, their work perishes as fast as it grows; and of others that
eatne wages, but put it in a bag with holes, it falls out as fast as it is
put in. What are these holes, this fire that melts, and lets out the estates of
wicked men; they are principally these two. First, the lusts of their own
hearts, Te ask and receive not, because ye spend it upon your lusts, says the
Apostle; and as lust keeps it away, so lust lets it out when we have it. How
many great estates have Wine and women, Hawks and Hounds, fashions and
complements, pride and vainglory, humors and projects, quarrels and
dissentions, the back, the belly, the eye, the ear, the tongue, the many
inventions of an idle head, the many exorbitancies of a wandering heart, melted
away, and reduced to nothing. Every member of the body, every appetite of the
soul, so many chinkes to let out an estate. But now the faithful have their
lusts abated, their hearts ordered, the dropsy and intemperancie of their
affections removed, and so all the holes at which Gods blessings might soke
away are stopped up. Secondly, the cisternes of wicked men are broken, and
their bags full of holes by the secret judgment and curse of God punishing
their sinful lusts in their sinful gain, blasting and withering their
fruitless estates, as Christ did the barren fig tree. We see how the Lord
threatens to curse the people for their sins in their going out and coming
in, in their basket and in their store: to break the staff of their bread, to
take away their cup from their mouth, to take his Wine and his Oil to himself
again, to consume their palaces with fire, to remove their bankers, to
discover their treasures, and to seek out their hidden things, to hear the
cry of the beam, and of the stone out of the wall, and to pull them out of
their nests, even from among the Stars, with infinite other the like
expressions, in which the Lord uses to show unto us the power and vigilancie
of his Justice in the administration of the World: Whereas the faithful have
the Bread and the Word, the Creatures and the blessings of God together, and so
have more certainty in these things. The Woman's Oil and Meal was not much,
yet it increased, and went along with her occasions, there was a Spring in the
Cruse and in the Barrel, it was living Oil, and living Meal, that grew, and
held out in the famine. As a man's occasions are, so the Fountain supplies him.
If he want a Cup, a Bucket, a Cisterne full, there is in the Fountain
answerable to all his wants: so whatever necessity the Lord brings the
faithful unto, he gives them an eye to see, a heart to rest in, and to expect
in the use of honest means a supply proportionable to each of them. And as
they have more certainty, so have they more sweetness in the waters which
they fetch from the Fountain. Water in pits and cisternes rots, and grows
muddy and unfavorie; so do the Creatures of God to wicked men. Cares, fears,
jealousies, desires, hopes, ends, infinite commixtures and disturbances deprive
the Creatures of their native relish and pureness. The sweetest wine to an
aguish palate tastes of that bitter humor which it there finds. So lusts and
curses interweaving themselves with the Creatures in a wicked man's hands, must
needs take away the sense of their simple goodness, turn their table to a
snare, and the things which should have been for their good into an occasion of
falling. Whereas the faithful by the Word and Prayer have the Creature
sanctified, seasoned, and perfumed unto their use again, have the curse of God
removed, and their own lusts corrected, and withheld from mingling with them.
Thus faith gives us all things in the Fountain, more certain, and more sweet,
by stopping the holes which did let them out, and by removing the lusts and
curses which did before embitter them.

Secondly, Faith gives us all things by giving us the Promises. Godliness has
the promises of this life, and that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. Wicked men
have good things only by Gods general providence, which makes his Sun to
shine as well on them as on the just by a common bounty. But this manner of
tenure is liable to many forfeitures, curses, taxations; many inrodes and
devastations, by wolvish and wasting lusts; and by consequence is not able to
settle and secure the heart in the enioyment of them. But now by Faith in the
promises the godly have their hold altered, have their estate settled in a
better and surer tenure, delivered from those many encumbrances and
intanglements unto the which before they were obnoxious; so that now a man's
heart is secured beyond all doubts or humane fears. A poor man may object; I
am not wise enough to order my affairs, I am disabled by sickness and
weakness to attend my Calling, my charge increases upon me, and my
probabilities of providing for them wax smaller then before. But yet Faith is
able to answer these and all other the like objections, by proposing the
promise. Do thou live by thine own strength? Do thou prosper by thine own
wisdom and industry, or by the blessing and truth of God in his promises? and
is Gods Truth an Accepter of persons? Is not his fidelity as firm toward
weak and poor, as toward rich believers? Is there any want or weakness,
any poverty or deficiency in heaven? Do the promises of God stand in need of
man's wisdom or strength to bring them to pass? Can thy increase of charge or
occasions, exhaust the Treasures, or dry up the Fountains and truth of God?
If an honorable and wealthy person have occasions to enlarge his retinue, and
live at a higher pitch then before, yet because he has abundance, he does not
repine at this necessity. All the faithful are of the household and family of
God, who is no whit the poorer in his state and power by maintaining many or
few. He gives to all men, and yet he gives liberally, Iam 1. 5. which no rich
man in the World is able to do* because as he gives to others, himself
decreaseth. But God gives out of a Fountain, as the Sun gives light, which
whether it shine to one, or to thousands, retains still equal light in it
self, neither can the eyes of men exhaust or draw out the light of the Sun.
All the Creatures are mine, says God, upon a thousand hills. If a thousand
hills can bear corn enough, or feed Cattle enough for any poor man's relief,
he need not doubt or fear; for God has still thousands of mountains, as it
were so many granaries or storehouses, in his truth and promises, for the
faithful in any straits to have recourse unto. And thus faith gives us all
things by entituling us to the Promises.

Against all this which has been spoken touching the excellency of Faith, may
be objected that determination of the Apostle; Now abides Faith, Hope, and
Charity, these three; but the greatest of these is Charity, 1. Cor. 13. 13.
By which comparison this point touching the precedence of faith seems to be
impaired. To which I answer; That the Apostle speaks of a greatness
extensive, in regard of duration, Charity being an everlasting Grace, but
faith pertaining only to this life, as being requisite to the present quality
and states of the Church: (for faith and fruition are opposed, 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Faith looks upon things in their promises, fruition in their real existence)
but now consider faith as an instrument to lay hold on Christ, and the precious
promises of life and grace in him, and consider it as a Root, a living
principle to put the heart in work, to purify the conscience, to inflame the
heart to spiritual obedience, and a retribution of holy love to God for all
his love to us in his Son; and thus Faith exceeds Charity as the motion of
the mouth in eating, which is an act that tends immediately to life, does the
motion of the mouth in speaking, which tends not to an end so important, nor
absolutely necessary.

Another objection may be this. Other Graces make a man like Christ, which
Faith cannot do, because Christ could not believe unto justification, or life,
having the Fountain of both abundantly in himself, whereas the proper and
primitive work of Faith is to carry a man out of himself, and to make him see
all his sufficiency in another. To which I answer two ways. First, Christ had
faith, though not to such purposes as we: Faith in the common nature of it, as
it imports assent to all divine truth, and adherence, or reliance of the soul
to the benefit and goodness which the same brings with it (for ratio veritatis
and ratio commodi are the two objects of a right faith, or rather several
qualifications of the same object) thus it is a Legal thing, coming under the
compass of those duties of the Law, unto which Christ made himself subject.
But faith as a Condition, an Officer, an Instrument of justification, so it
could not stand with Christ, who was not to be righteous by believing, but to
be himself the righteousness of those that believe. But in other respects
when the Apostle says, he was heard in that which he feared, when he says
himself, My God, my God; it is manifest, that though he had not faith for
righteousness, yet he had it for deliverance, that though he were not saved by
believing, yet he was obedient in believing. Secondly, it is more to be one
with Christ, then to be like him; more to be a part of him, then a picture:
now faith makes a unity with Christ, other graces only a resemblance; faith
makes a man a member, others only a follower of him; and so in that respect
still Faith has the prehemiuence.

Now then from the great necessity and pretiousnesse of this duty we may first
infer the greatness of their sin, who neglect it, who live with no sense of
the want, and little sorrow for the weakness of it, to lie, swear, revell,
cozen, to live in the practice of any notorious outrage, and moral enormitie,
many men esteem heinous and unworthy; But to live in infidelity, without the
knowledge or fellowship of Christ, in an utter unacquaintance with their own
unworthiness, and unexperience of their everlasting insufficiencies to
compass or contrive their own salvation, are things seldom or never
seriously thought on by them. And yet infidelity is indeed the edge, and sting
of all other sins, that which binds them and their guilt everlastingly upon
the soul, and locketh them like shackles to the conscience, which otherwise by
the help of Christ might easily shake them of. He that believes, says
Christ, is not condemned, he that believes not is condemned already, and Ioh.
3. 18. 36. Votat Constantiam and penitissimam rei adhaesionem. Camer.
the wrath of God abides on him. There is a displeasure which is but for a
moment, a wrath which does only sing, and blow upon the soul, and then away;
such the faithful themselves after some bold adventure into the ways of
sin, may have experience of. And there is a wrath which is constant,
permanent, intimately and everlastingly adherent unto the Soul, which will
seize only upon unbelievers. The spirit shall convince the World of Esai 54.
7, 8.
Sin because they believe not, says Christ. Sin there stands in opposition
to righteousness, and Judgment, or Ioh. 16. 8.
holiness; so that the meaning is, The spirit shall convince men that they are
unrighteous and unholie men, held under by the guilt, condemnation, and power
of sin; shut up in fast chains unto the wrath and judgment of the great
Day; unauoidably cast and condemned in the Court of Law, because they fled not
by faith unto that office of mercy and reconciliation which the Father has
erected in his beloved Son. All sins do of themselves deserve damnation,
but none do de facto infer damnation without infidelity. This was that
great provocation in the Wilderness which kept the people out of the Land of
Promise, and for which God is said to have been grieved forty years
together. How long will this people provoke me? How long will it be ere they
believe in me? they despised the holy Land, they believed not his word; they
drew backward, and turned again in Heb. 10 39. Act. 7. 39.
their hearts into Egypt. The Apostle sums up all their murmurings and
provocations, for which they were excluded that type of heaven, in this one
word, They entered Heb. 3. 19.
not in (...), because of their unbelief. If there be but one only medicine
against a deadly disease, and when that is offered to the sick person he
refuse it, and throw it under his feet, the state of that man is infallibly
desperate and remediless. There is but one name, but one Act. 4. 12. Heb. 10.
14. Heb. 9. 13. 14. Heb. 2. 3.
sacrifice, but one blood, by which we can be saved, perfected, and purged for
ever, and without which God can have no pleasure in us: how can we then escape
if we neglect so great salvation, and trample under foot the blood of the
Covenant? It is a fruitless labor and an endless folly for men to use any
other courses (be they in appearance never so specious, probable, rigorous,
mortified, Pharisaicall, nay angelical) for extricating themselves out of the
maze of sin, or exonerating their consciences of the guilt or power thereof
without faith. Though a man could scourge out of his own body rivers of
blood, and in a neglect of himself could outfast Moses or Elias; though he
could wear out his knees with prayer, and had his eyes nailed unto heaven;
though he could build hospitals for all the poor on the earth, and exhaust the
Mines of India into alms; though he could walk like an Angel of light, and
with the glittering of an outward holiness dazzle the eyes of all beholders;
nay (if it were possible to be conceived) though he should live for a thousand
years in a perfect and perpetual observation of the whole Law of God, his
original corruption, or any one, though the least digression and deviation
from that Law, alone excepted: yet such a man as this could no more appear
before the tribunal of Gods Justice, then stubble before a consuming fire. It
is only Christ in the bush that can keep the fire from burning; It is only
Christ in the heart that can keep sin from condemning. (...), without me,
that is, separated Ioh. 15. 5.
from me, ye can do nothing toward the justification of your persons, or
salvation of your souls, or sanctification of your lives or natures. No burden
can a man shake off, no obstacle can he break through, no temptation can he
overcome without faith; shake off every thing Heb. 12. 1. 2.
that presses down, and the sin which hangs so fast on, and run with
patience (namely through all oppositions and contradictions,) the race that is
set before you, says the Apostle. But how shall we do such unfeasible works?
He shows that in the next words, (...), looking of from our selves unto Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith. When a man looks inward upon his own
strength, he may as justly despair of moving sin from his soul, as of
casting down Mountains with one of his fingers: but he who is able to give us
faith, is by that able to make all things possible unto us. The world tempts
with promises, wages, pleasures of sin, with frowns, threats, and
persecutions for righteousness: If a man have not faith to see in Christ more
precious promises, more sure mercies, more full rewards, more abundant and
everlasting pleasures: to see in the frowns of God more terror, in the wrath
of God more bitterness, in the threats of God more certainty, in the Law of God
more curses, then all the world can load him withal; impossible it is that he
should stand under such assaults; for this is the victory which overcommeth the
world, even our faith. Satan discharges his fiery darts upon the soul, 1.
Ioh 5. 4. Ephesians. 6. 16.
darts pointed and poisoned with the venom of Serpents, which set the heart on
fire from one lust unto another: if a man have not put on Christ, do not make
use of the shield of faith, to hold up his heart with the promises of victory,
to hold out the triumph of Christ over the powers of death and darkness; to
see himself under the protection of him who has already thrown down the
Dragon from Heaven, who has Satan in a chain, and the keys of the
bottomless Pit in his own command; to say unto him, The Lord rebuke thee
Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee; impossible it is
to quench any of his temptations, or to stand before the rage and fury of so
roaring a Lion. Whom resist, says S. Peter, steadfast in the faith. Our
corruptions 1. Pet. 5. 9.
set upon us with our own strength, with high imaginations, with strong
reasonings, with lustful dalliances, with treacherous solicitations, with
plausible pretenses, with violent importunities, with deceitful promises, with
fearful prejudices, with profound and unsearchable points and trains; on all
sides lust stirs and works within us like sparkles in a dried leaf, and sets
every faculty against it self. The mind tempts it self unto vanity, the
understanding tempts it self unto error and curiosity; the will tempts it
self unto frowardness and contuinacie; the heart tempts it self unto
hardness and security. If a man have not faith, impossible Act. 15. 9. Mic. 7.
1^.
it is either to make any requests to God against himself, or to deny the
requests of sin which himself makes. It is faith alone which must purify
the heart, and trust his power and fidelity who is both willing and able to
subdue corruptions. In vain it is to strive, except a man strive lawfully. In
Iam 1. 6. 7.
prayer, it is faith which must make us successful: in the Heb. 4. 2.
word, it is faith which must make us profitable: In 1. Cor. 15. 58.
obedience, it is faith which must make us cheerful: in Heb. 10. 36. 38.
afflictions; it is faith which must make us patient: in Heb. 11. 33. 36.
trials, it is faith which must make us resolute: in Esaias 50. 10. Jonah 2. 4.
desertions it is faith which must make us comfortable: in Heb. 10. 38.
life it is faith which must make us fruitful: and in Romans 9. 37. 38.
death, it is faith which must make us victorious. So that as he said of water,
(...), so may I of faith, It is of all things the most sovereign and precious,
because it is of universal use in the life of man. Therefore the Apostle
calls men without faith 2. These. 3. 2.
Absurd men, because it is an unreasonable and sottish thing for a workman to
be without his chief instrument, and that which is universally requisite to
every one of his works. A Husbandman without a plow, or a builder without a
rule, a preacher without a bible, a Christian without faith, are things equally
absurd and unreasonable. And yet thus unreasonable are men usually. By faith
Moses repelled and fled from the solicitations of his adulterous mistress; and
have they then faith that run upon temptations of lust, let their hearts wallow
in the speculations, and their bodies in the beds of uncleanenesse? Faith made
David look to God when Shimei reviled him; and have they faith that dart out
oaths, stabs, and execrations at once against their enemy and against God?
Faith made Noah when he was warned of God to fear, and Josiah to tremble at
his word; and have they faith who mock the messengers, and despise the Word,
and misuse the Prophets, and reject the remedies, and slight the times of
their peace and visitation which God gives them? Faith made Abraham put a sword
to the throat of his beloved son, the Son of blessing, and the Son of
promise; and have they then faith who will not sacrifice a stinking lust, nor
part from a prodigious vanity when God requires it? O what a world of sweetness
and closenes is there in sin to our nature, when men love a lust, a rag, a
fashion, an excrement, better then Abraham did his Son Isaak. Faith made
Moses suffer rather the reproaches of Christ then the riches of Egypt; and have
they faith, who had rather be without Christ then their profits and pleasures;
who subordinate the blood, the spirit, the will, the ways, the glory of Christ
to their earthly designs and base resolutions? By faith he feared not the
wrath of a King; and have they faith who fear the breath of fools, and would
feign be religious, if it did not discredit them, and crush their arts of
compliance, plausibilitie, and ambition? Thus every sin wilfully committed is
backed and strengthened with infidelity. If men did by faith see him that is
invisible, an unapproachable light, and a consuming fire; see the sword in his
left hand to revenge iniquity, and the Crown in his right hand to reward
holiness; look upon his judgments as present in his power, and upon his
glory as present in his promises; It could not be that they should go on in
such outrages against him and his Law. Know you not, says the Apostle, that
neither 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10
fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, etc. nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God? Nothing but
faith can unbinde and unlocke the sins from the soul, and by faith not only
their guilt, but their power and dominion is removed and subdued.

A second use and inference from this Doctrine is to inflame the heart to seek
for faith as for a precious Jewel, or a hidden treasure. Men are never
satisfied with Iam. 5. 3. 1. Tim. 6. 19.
earthly treasures, though oftentimes they heap them up for the last day: How
much more careful should they be to lay up a good foundation for the time to
come, that they may obtain eternal life? Great encouragement we may have
hereunto upon these considerations.

First, the more faith a man has, the more comfort he may take in all the good
things which he does enjoy. He may look upon them as the witnesses of Gods
truth and promises, as the tokens of his love, as the accessions Matthew. 6 32.
and supernumerary accruments unto his Kingdom, as the supplies and daily
provisions of a Father which cares for us.

Secondly, the more faith a man has, the more security he has against all
evils, he may undergo them with patience, with Romans 5. 3. 4.
hope, with Iam. 1. 2. 3.
joy, with Romans 8. 37. 38. 1 Cor. 15 55.
triumph, with Esai. 27. 8. 9.
profit. He may look upon them as 1. Pet. 1. 6.
needful things, as 1. Pet. 1. 7.
precious things, as 1. Pet. 4. 13.
conformities unto Christ his Head, as the Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Heb. 12. 11.
seeds of peace, righteousness and praises; As rain though it make the way
foul, yet it makes the Land fruitful.

Thirdly, the more faith a man has, the more certain and victorious will his
conquests be against his enemies: that which by faith we rely upon, and put
on, will be impregnable munition, and impenetrable armor to secure us. The
love, the blood, the compassions, the temptations of Christ, Heb. 12. 32, 33.
these by faith apprehended have pulled down walls, subdued kingdoms,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the sword, and turned to flight the armies of the Aliens.

Fourthly, the more faith a man has, the more insight he has into Christ,
and those mysteries of salvation which the 1. Pet. 1. 12.
Angels desire to look into. (...) Theodor. de Cur. gr^c. affect. ^erm. 1.
Faith is the eye, and mouth, ^rede and Manducasti. Aug.
and (...)* (...). Alex. Strom. l. 5.
ear of the soul, by which we peep through the curtains of mortality, and
take a view and foretaste of heavenly things, whereby we have a more secret and
intimate communion with God in his Covenants, promises, precepts; in his will
guiding us by counsel; and in his face, comforting us with his favor.

Fifthly, the more faith a man has, the more tranquillity and establishment
of heart shall he find in the midst of all spiritual desertions, distractions
and difficulties. When a man's wits are non*plusd, his reason posed, his
contrivances and counsels disappointed, his heart clouded with sorrow, and
fear; when he walks in darkness, and has no light; O then to have a
sanctuary, an Altar to fly unto; to have a God to role himself upon, to lean
upon his wisdom, to lay hold upon his Covenant, to Lam. 3. 26, 31.
wait quietly upon the salvation of that God, who does not cast off for ever;
but though he cause grief, yet will have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies; Psalm. 37. 5.
to commit his way to him who is able to bring it to pass, and to do
abundantly above the thoughts, desires, expectations, or petitions of men: what
peace and serenity must this be to the ^oule which is otherwise without light
and peace?

Lastly, the more faith a man has, the more joy and glory he has in
spiritual, the more contentment and quietness in earthly things. Being
justified by faith, we Romans 5. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 8. Heb. 13. 5, 6.
have peace with God; in whom believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakeable, and
full of glory. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as you have, for he has said, I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee. Earthly-mindednesse and worldly cares grow out of want of faith.
In these and a world the like respects should we be moov'd to seek for this
grace: and that so much the more carefully, because the heart is of it self
barren, and therefore very unfit to have a foreign plant grow in it; very apt
to overtop it with lusts and vanities. We must therefore be diligent to make
our assurance full and certain; diligent in the Word of faith, and 2. Pet. 1.
10. Romans 10. 8. 2. Cor. 4. 13. Heb. 6. 12.
with the spirit of faith. Beeyee not slothful, says the Apostle, but
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promises.

Lastly, we must do with faith, as men do with precious things, Try it, and
put it to the touchstone, that we may prove whether it be truly valuable and
unfeigned; because there is much counterfeite faith, as there is false money,
and deceitful jewels, and wild herbs in the field, which very nearly
resemble those that are right and pure. This is an argument which has been
much travailed in by men of more learning and spirit; and therefore I will but
touch upon it, by considering four principal effects of this Grace.

The first is a love and liking of those spiritual truths which by faith the
heart assenteth unto: for according as is the evidence and pretiousnesse of the
thing believed, such is the measure of our love unto it. For saving faith is an
assent with adherence and delight, contrary to that of Devils, which is with
trembling and horror; and that delight is nothing else but a kind of relish
and experience of the goodness of that truth which we assent (...). Just.
Mar^. Qu. Orthodox. 98.
unto. Whereupon it necessarily follows even from the dictate of nature (which
instructs a man to love that which works in him comfort and delight) that
from this assent must arise a love of those truths whence such sweetness does
issue. By the first act of faith we apprehend God a reconcilable God; by the
second a reconciled God; for faith shows us Ephesians. 5. 25 Romans 5. 5. 8. 1. Ioh.
4. 16. Cant. 5. 10. 16.
Gods love to us in Christ, proposes him as altogether lovely, the chiefest of
ten thousand, and thereby beget^eth in us a love unto Christ again: and this
love is a sincere, uncorrupted, immortal b 1. Ioh. ^. 19. 5. 1.
love; a conjugall and superlative love; nothing must be loved in competition
with Christ; every thing must be rejected and cast away, either as a snare when
he Romans 7. 4. Math. 0 37. L^k. 14. 26.
hates it, or as a Sacrifice when he calls for it. Therefore Ephesians 6. 24.
God required the nearest of a man's blood in some cases Deuteronomy. 13 6. 9.
to throw the first stone at an Idolater; to show, that no relations should
preponderate, or over-sway our hearts from his love. Christ and earthly things
often come into competition in the life of a man. In every un just gain,
Christ and a bribe, or Christ and cruelty; in every oath or execration, Christ
and a blasphemy; in every sinful fashion, Christ and a ragge, or Christ and an
excrement; in every vainglorious affectation, Christ and a blast; in every
intemperancy, Christ and a vomit, a stagger, a shame, a disease. O where is
that faith in men which should overcome the world, and the things of the world?
Why should men delight in any thing while they live, which when they ^e on
their death*beds (a time speedily approaching) they shall never be able to
reflect on with comfort, nor to recount without amazement and horror?
Certainly he that fosters any Dalila or darling lust against the will and
command of Christ, well may he delude himself with foolish conceits that he
loves the Lord Jesus; but let him be assured, that though he may be deceived,
yet God will not be mocked; not every one that faith, Lord, Lord, shall be
accounted the friends of Christ, but they who keep his Commandments.

The second effect of faith is Assiance and Hope, confidently for the present
relying on the goodness, and for the future waiting on the power of God, which
shall to the full in due time perform, what in his word he has promised. I
have set life and death before you, says Moses to the people, That thou may
love the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy 30. 20. 2. Cor. 5. 6.
and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou may cleave unto him, etc.
We are confident, says the Apostle, knowing that whilst we are at home in
the body we are absent from the Lord. When once the mind of a man is wrought
so to assent unto divine promises made in Christ as to acknowledge an interest,
claim, and propriety unto them, and that to be at last actually performed, not
by a man, who may be subject both to unfaithfulness in keeping, and disability
in performing his promises, but by Almighty God, who the better to confirm our
faith in him, has both by word and oath engaged his fidelity, and is
altogether omnipotent to do^ what he has purposed or promised: Impossible it
is but from such an assent grounded on the veracity and all sufficiency of God,
there should result in the mind of a faithful man, a confident dependence on
such Promises: renouncing in the mean time all selfe-concurrencie, as in it
self utterly impotent, and to the fullfilling of such a work, as is to be by
Gods own omnipotency eff^cted, altogether irrequisite: and resolving in the
midst of temptations to rely on him, to hold fast his mercy and the profession
of his faith without wavering, having an eye to the recompense of reward, and
being assured that he who has promised will certainly bring it to pass.

A third effect of faith is joy and peace of Conscience: Romans 15-13.
Being justified by faith we have peace with God. The God of peace fill you
with all joy and peace in believing. The mind is by the relish and experience
of sweetness in Gods Promises, composed unto a settled calmness and serenity.
I do not mean a Dead peace, which is only an immobility and sleepiness of
Conscience, like the rest of a dreaming man on the top of a mast, but such a
peace as a man may by afyllogisme of the practical judgment, upon right
examination of his own interest unto Christ, safely infer unto himself. The
wicked often have an appearance of peace as well as the faithful, but there is
a great difference. For there is but a door between a wicked man and his
sin, which will certainly one day open, and then sin at the door will fly
upon the Soul: but between a faithful man and his sin there is a wall of
fire, and an immovable and impregnable fort, even the merits of Christ: the
wicked man's peace grows out of Ignorance of God, the Law, himself: but a
righteous man's peace grows out of the knowledge of God, and Christ. So that
there are two things in it, Tranquillity, it is a quiet thing, and serenitie,
it is a clear and distinct thing. However, if a faithful man have not present
peace (because peace is an effect not of the first and direct, but of the
second and reflexive act of faith) yet there is ever with all faith the seed of
peace, and a resolution to seek and to sue it out.

The last effect of faith which I shall now speak of is fructification; faith
works by love. And it works first, Repentance, whereby we are not only to
understand grief for sin, or a sense of the weight and guilt of it, which is
only a legal thing (if it proceed no farther) and may go before faith; but
hatred of sin, as a thing contrary to that new spirit of holiness and grace,
which in Christ we have received. For as sense of sin as a cursed thing (which
is legal humiliation) does arise from that faith whereby we believe and
assent to the truth of God in all his threatenings (which is a legal faith): so
the Abominating of sin as an unclean thing and contrary to the image and
holiness of God (which is evangelicall repentance) does arise from
evangelicall faith, whereby we look upon God as most merciful, most holy, and
therefore most worthy to be imitated and served. Secondly, Renovation, and
that two fold. First, inward in the constitution of the heart which is by faith
purified. Secondly, outward in the conversation and practice, when a man out of
the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and as he has
received the Lord Jesus so walks in him. Now in all our obedience we must
observe these three Rules. First, that binding power which is in the law, does
solely depend upon the authority of the Lawgiver who is God. He that
customarilie, and without care of obedience, or fear of displeasure, or
antipathy of spirit, breaks any one Commandment, ventures to violate that
authority which by one and the same ordination made the whole law equally
binding, and by consequence is habitually, and in praeparatione Iam. 2. 10.
animi a transgressor of the whole Law. And therefore Obedience must not be
partial but universal, as proceeding from that faith which has respect
equally to all Gods will, and looks upon him as most true and most holy in all
his commands. Secondly, As God, so his Law is a spiritual and a perfect Law,
and therefore requires an inward universality of the subject, as well as that
other of the Precepts which we walk by. I mean such a spiritual and sincere
obedience of the heart, as may, without any mercenary or reserved respects,
uniformely sway our whole man unto the same way and end. Thirdly, In every Law
all matter Homogeneall and of the same kind with the particular named, every
sprig, seed, original of the Duty is included, as all the branches of a tree
belong unto the same stock. And by these rules we are to examine the truth of
our obedience.

Before I draw down these premises to a particular* Assumption and
Applycation, I must for Caution sake premise that faith may be in the heart
either habitually, as an actus primus, a form or seed, or principle of
working, or else actually as an actus secundus, a particular Operation; and
that in the former sense it does but remotely dispose and order the soul to
these properties; but in the later it does more visibly and distinctly produce
them. So then according as the heart is deaded in the exercise of Faith, so do
these properties thereof more dimly appear, and more remisly work.

Secondly, we must note that according as faith has several workings, so
Satan has several ways to assault and weaken it. There are two maine works
of Faith, Obedience, and Comfort, to purify and to pacify the heart: and
according unto these, so Satan tempts. His maine end is to wrong and dishonor
God, and therefore chiefly he labors to disable the former virtue of Faith,
and tempts to sin against God. But when he cannot proceed so far, he
labors to discomfort and crush the spirits of men: when he prevails in the
former, he weakens all the properties of Faith: when in the later only, he
does not then weaken all, but only intercept and darken a Christians peace.

For understanding this point, we must note that there are many acts of faith.
Some direct, that look outward toward Christ, others reflexive, that look
inward upon themselves. The first act of faith is that whereby a man having
been formerly reduced unto extremities and impossibilities within himself,
looks upon God as Omnipotent, and so able to save; as merciful, and in Christ
reconcilable, and so likely to save if he be sought unto.

Hereupon grows a second act, namely a kind of exclusive resolution, to be
think himself of no new ways; to trust no inferior causes for salvation, or
righteousness, to sell all, to count them all dung, not to consult any more with
flesh or blood, but to prepare the heart to seek the Lord: To resolve as the
Lepers in the famine Gal. 1. 16. 2. Chron. 30. 19 2. King. 7. 3. 4.
at Samaria, not to continue in the state he is in, nor yet to return to the
City, to his wonted haunts and ways, where he shall be sure to perish: and
from this resolution a man cannot by any discomforts be removed, or made to
bethink himself of any other new way, but only that which he sees is
possible and probable, and where he knows, if he find acceptance, he shall
have supplies and life enough: and this act may consist with much fear, doubt,
and trembling. The Syrians had food, and Samaria had none, therefore the Lepers
resolve to venture abroad. Yet this they cannot do without much doubting and
distrust, because the Syrians whom they should meet with were their enemies.
However this resolution overruled them, because in their present estate, they
were sure to perish, in the other there was room for hope, and possibility of
living; and that carried them co Esters resolution; If we perish, we perish:
such is the Act of Faith in this present case. It is well assured that in the
case a man is in, there is nothing but death to be expected; therefore it
makes him resolve to relinquish that. It looks upon God as plenteous in power
and mercy, and so likely to save, and yet it sees him too as armed with
Justice against sin, as justly provoked and wearied in his patience; and
therefore may fear to be rejected, and not saved alive. Yet because in the
former state there is a certainty to perish, and in the later a possibility not
to perish, therefore from hence arises a third act, a conclusive and positive
purpose to trust Christ. I will not only deny all other ways, but I will
resolve to try this way, to set about it, to go to him that has plenty of
redemption and Life. If I must perish, yet He shall reject me; I will not
reject my self* I will go unto Him. And this act or resolution of faith is
built upon these grounds.

First, because Gods Love and free Grace is the first original mover in our
salvation. If God did begin His work upon prevision of any thing in and from
our selves, we should never dare to come unto Him, because we should never
find any thing in our selves to ground His mercy toward us upon. But now the
Love of God is so absolute and independent, that it does not only require
nothing in us to excite and to call it out, but it is not so much as grounded
upon Christ himself. I speak of His first Love and Grace: Christ was not the
impulsive cause of Gods first Love to mankind, but was Himself the great gift
which God sent to men therein to testify that He did freely love them before.
God so loved the John. 3. 16. 1. John. 4. 10.
World, that He gave His Son. Herein is Love, not that we loved Him, but that
He loved us and sent His Son. The love must needs go before the gift, because
the gift is an effect, a token, a testimony of the Love. Christ first Ephesians.
5. 25.
loved the Church, before He gave Himself for it. Now then if the first Love
of God to man was not procured, merited, or excited by Christ Himself as
Mediator; but was altogether absolute: Romans 9. 11.
much less does the Love of God ground it self upon any thing in us. The
whole series of our Salvation is made up without respect to any thing of ours,
or from us. 1. John. 4. 19. Hos. 14. 4.
He Loved us without cause or ground in our selves. For we Love Him, because He
first loved us. He elected us of mere grace, without cause or ground from our
selves. Romans 11. 5. 6.
There is a remnant, says the Apostle, according to the Election of grace; and
if of grace, then is it no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace.
He called us without Intuition of any thing in our selves, 1. Tim. 1. 9.
(...), says the Apostle, not according to our own works, but according to
His purpose and grace He called us with an Holy calling. He Justified us
without any ground in or from our selves, Romans 3. 14. 4. 5. 5. 10.
freely by his grace, when we were enemies and ungodly persons. He saves us
without any ground in and from our selv's. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selvs'. There is
nothing in us of which we may boast in the matter of Salvation, and therefore
there is nothing in us which should make us despair or fly from God: for all
the gradations and progresses of our Salvation are alone from His Grace.

Secondly, because there is an All-sufficiencie in the righteousness and
merits of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
To cleanse all sin, Heb. 7. 25.
To consummate all our salvation, to subdue all our enemies, Romans 8. 31. 32.
To answer all our objections, to silence all challenges and charges that are
laid against us.

Thirdly, because of the manifold experiences which many other grievous sinners
have found of the same love, and All-sufficiencie. When Faith looks upon a
converted Manasse, upon a thief translated into paradise, upon a persecutor
turned into an Apostle; and when it considers that God Mal. 2. 15.
has a residue of spirit still, that the blood of Christ is an inexhausted
fountain, and that these spectacles of Gods compassion are in the Scriptures
exhibited, that Romans 15. 4.
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, and that
God in 1. Tim. 1. 16.
them did show forth all long suffering for a pattern to those who should
after believe in Him: It then makes a man reflect inward upon himself, and
resolve to try that gate, at which they have entered before.

Fourthly, because there is a generality and unlimitednesse in the Invitation
unto Christ. Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me all that are weary. Rev. 22. 17.
Let every one that will come. There is in Christ erected an Office of
Salvation, a Heavenly Chancerie of equity and mercy, not only to moderate
the rigor, but to reverse and revoke the very acts of the Law. Christ is Romans
3. 25. Act. 1^. 47. ^sal. 2 6.
set forth or proposed openly as Esai. 8. 14.
a Sanctuary, and Esai. 18. 3.
ensign for the natious to fly unto; and He has sent His Mark. 16. 15.
Ambassadors abroad to warn, and to invite every man. As a Fountain is open
for any man to drink, and a school for any man to learn, and the Gate of a
City for any man to enter, and a Court of Equity for any man to relieve
himself: so Christ is publicly 2. Cor. ^. 20.
and universally set forth as a general refuge from the wrath to come, upon no
other condition then such a will as is nor only desirous to enjoy His mercy,
but to submit to His Kingdom, and glorify the power of His Spirit and Grace
in new obedience.

Fifthly, because God Himself works the work and the will in us. For in the
new Covenant God works first. In the first Covenant man was able by his
created and natural strength to work his own condition, and so to expect
Gods performance: But in the New, as there is difference in the things
covenanted, then only righteousness and Salvation, now Ier. 31. 34.
remission of sins and adoption; in the Ier. 33. 21.
means or intermediate causes, which are now Ier. 32. 4. ^ 33. 20.
Christ and His righteousness and Spirit; in the Ier. 31. 33. 32. 39. Ex^k.
11. 19. 20. 36. 26. 27.
stability, that a perishable, this an eternal and final Covenant, that can
never be changed; in the conditions, there legal obedience, here only faith,
and the certain consequent thereof repentance: So likewise is there difference
in the manner of performing these conditions; for now God Himself begins
first to work upon us, and in us, before we move or stir toward Him. He
does not only command us, and leave us to our created strength to obey the
Command, but He furnishes us with His own Grace and Spirit to fulfill the
Command, and when He bids us come unto Him, He does likewise draw us unto Him.
In this Covenant the first Treaty is between God and Christ. For though the
Covenant be between God and us; yet the negotiation and transaction of it is
between God and Christ, who was Heb. 7. 22. 8. 6.
a surety of the Covenant for us. For first God in His decree of Love bestowed
us upon Christ. Ioh. 17. 2.
(Thine they were, and thou gave them unto me) we were Ephe. 1. 4.
chosen in Him: we to be members in Him, and He to be a Head and Fountain
unto us of all grace and glory. For Ioh. 10. 18. Ioh. 14. 14.
God had committed unto Him an Office of power to redeem His Church, and He
received a Commandment from His Father to finish the work of mediation.

Secondly, being thus made Christ's, partly by the gift of Gods eternal Love,
partly by Christ's own voluntary susception of that Office whereby He was to
be a Head and Captain of Salvation to His Members; God in due time reveals
Himself, His Name, Power, and Covenant unto us: Ioh. 17. 6.
I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me, and this is the
tender of the Covenant, and beginning of a Treaty with us. And here God
begins to work in us: for though the Covenant be proposed under a condition;
yet God gives us as well the condition as the Covenant. Our Faith is Col. 2.
12. 1. Cor. 2. 5.
the operation of God, and the work of his Power: Gratias ago tibi
clementissime Domine quia quod quaer is a me prius ipse donasti. Cyprian.
that which he requires of us, He does bestow upon us; and here the first work
of God is Esai. 54. 9. 13.
spiritual and heavenly teaching. The second, is the terminus, or product of
that teaching Ephesians. 4. 20. Qui Credunt pradicatore forinsecus insonante, intus a
patre audiunt atque discunt: qui autem non credunt foris audiunt, intus ^on
audiunt. Aug. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 8.
our learning which I call Gods work, not as if we did nothing when we are
said to learn, and to come unto Christ; but because all that we do is by the
strength and grace which from Him we receive: we come unto Christ as a child
may be said to come unto his mother, or nurse, who holds him at a distance from
her self, and draws him nearer and nearer when she calls him. Thus as we were
made Christ's by donation, Thou gave them me; so after likewise by
incorporation, and unity of natures with him in his spirit, and having this
Spirit of Christ, He thereby works in us the will and the deed, and thus Ioh.
3 33.
our seal^ is put unto Gods covenant, and we have a constat of it in our
selves in some measure; whereas 1. Ioh. 3. 10.
jnfidelitie makes God a liar, by saying either I look for life some other
way, or I have nothing to do to depend on Christ for it, though God have
proposed Him as an all-sufficient Savior. Now then when man has experience of
Gods working this will in him, when he finds his heart opened to attend, and
his will ready to obey the call: when he is made desirous to fear Gods Name,
and prepared to seek His face, ready to subscribe and bear witness to all
Gods ways and methodes of saving; That He is righteous in His Judgments, if
He should condemn; wonderful in His patience, when He does forbear; mighty
in His power, wisdom, and mercy, when He does convert; unsearchable in the
riches and treasures of Christ, when he does Justify; most holy, pure and good
in all His commands; the sovereign Lord of our persons and lives, to order and
dispose them at His will; on the sense and experience of these works does grow
that conclusion and resolution to cleave to Christ.

Lastly, because this act of Faith is our duty to God: As we may come to
Christ because we are called, so we must come, because we are commanded. For
as Christ was Ioh. 10. 18.
commanded to save us, so we are 1. Ioh. 3. 24.
commanded to believe in Him. From these and the like considerations arises a
purpose to rely on Christ. But yet still this purpose at first by the mixture
of sin, the pragmaticalnesse and importunity of Satan in tempting, the
unexperience of the heart in trials, the tenderness of the spirit, and fresh
sight and reflection on the state of sin, is very weak, and consists with
much fear, doubts, trepidation, shrinking, mistrust of it self. And therefore
though all other effects flow in great measure from it, yet that of comfort,
and calmness of spirit, more weakly; because the heart being most busied in
sprituall debatements, prayers, groans, conflicts, struglings of heart,
languishing and sighing importunities of spirit, is not at leisure to reflect
on its own translated condition, or in the seeds time of tears to reap a
harvest of Joy. As a tree new planted is apt to be bended at every touch or
blast of wind, or children newborn to cry at every turn and noise, so men
in their first conversion are usually more retentive of fearful, then of more
comfortable impressions.

The last act then of Faith is that reflexive act, whereby a man knows his
own Faith and Knowledge of Christ, which is the assurance of faith upon which
the joy and peace of a Christian does principally depend; and has its several
differences and degrees according to the evidence and cleerenesse of that
reflection. As beauty is more distinctly rendered in a clear, then in a dim
and disturbed glass; so is comfort more distinct and evident according to the
proportions of evidence and assurance in faith. So then to conclude with this
general rule; according as the habits of faith are more firm and radicated;
the acts more strong, constant and evident; the conquests and experiences more
frequent and successful; so are the properties more evident and conspicuous.
For the measure and magnitude of a proper passion and effect, does ever follow
the perfection of the nature and cause whence it proceeds: And therefore every
man as he tenders either the love and obedience he owes to God, or the comfort
he desires in himself to enjoy, must labor to attain the highest pitch of
Faith, and still with Saint Paul to grow in the knowledge of him and his
resurrection and sufferings. So then upon these premises the heart is to
examine it self touching the truth of faith in it. Do I love all divine
truth, not because it is proportionable to my desires, but conformable unto God
who is the Author of it? Can I in all estates without murmuring, impatiencie,
or rebellion, cast my self upon Gods mercy, and trust in Him though He should
kill me? Do I wholly renounce all self confidence and dependence, all
worthiness or concurrence of my self to righteousness? Can I willingly, and
in the truth and sincerity of my heart, own all shame and condemnation, and
acquit God as most righteous and holy if He should reject me? Do I not build
either my hopes or fears upon the faces of men, nor make either them or my
self the rule or end of my desires? Do I yield and seriously endeavor an
universal obedience unto all. Gods law, and that in the whole extent and
latitude thereof, without any allowance, exception, or reservation? Is not my
obedience mercenarie, but sincere? Do I not dispense with my self for the
least sprigges of sin, for irregular thoughts, for occasions of offense, for
appearances of evil, for motions of concupiscence, for idle words, and vain
conversation, for any thing that carries with it the face of sin? And when in
any of these I am overtaken, do I bewail my weakness, and renew my
resolutions against it? In a word, when I have impartially and uprightly
measured mine own heart by the rule, does it not condemn me of
selfe-deceite, of hypocrisy, of halting and dissembling, of halfing and
prevaricating in Gods service? I may then comfortably conclude, that my Faith
is in some measure operative and effectual in me: Which yet I may further
try by the nature of it, as it is further expressed by the Apostle in the
Text; That I may know him.

Here we see the nature of faith is expressed by an act of knowledge, and that
act (respectively to justification) limited to Christ; This is eternal Life to
know thee, and him whom thou have sent: where by knowledge I understand a
certain and evident assent. Now such assents are of two sorts; some grounded
upon the evidence of the object, and that light which the thing assented unto
does carry and present to the understanding; as I assent to this truth, that
the Sun is light by the evidence of the thing it self: and this kind of
assent the Apostle contradistinguisheth from faith by the name of sight. Others
are grounded upon the authority or authenticalnesse of a narrator, upon whose
report while we rely without any evidence of the thing it self, the assent
which we produce is an assent of faith or credence. Now that Faith is a
certain ass^nt, and that even above the Aquin. 2. 2^. (...). art. 8. Greg.
val. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. (...). 4 punct 8. (...). 2. (...)* q. 1 art. 4.
certainty of mere natural conclusions, is on all hands I think confessed:
because, how ever in regard of our weakness and distrust, we are often
subject to stagger, yet in the thing it self, it depends upon the
infallibility of Gods own Word, who has said it, and is by consequence
nearer unto him who is the fountain o^ all truth, and therefore must needs
more share in the properties of truth, which are certainty and evid^nce, then
any proved by mere natural reasons: and the assent produced by it is
differenced from suspicion, hesita^cie, ^ubitation in the opinion of school^men
themselves. Now then in as much as we are bound to yield an evident assent unto
divine truths, necessary hereunto it is that the und^rstanding be convinced of
these two things. First, that God is of infallible authority, and cannot lie
nor deceive (which thing is a principle by the light of nature evident and
unquestioned.) Secondly, that this authority which in faith I rely upon is
indeed and infallibly Gods own authority.

The means whereby I come to know that may be either extraordinary, as
revelation, such as was made by the Prophets concerning future events; or else
ordinary and common to the faithful. This the Papists say is the authority of
the Church. Against which if one would dispute much might be said. Briefly
(granting first unto the Church a ministerial, introductory, persuasive, and
conducting concurrence in this work, pointing unto the star, which yet it
self shines by its own light, reaching forth and exhibiting the light, which
Aug de doctrine. Christ. lib. 1. (...) proaem.
though in it self visible, could not be so ordinarily to me, u^lesse thus
presented; explaning the evidence of those truths unto which I assent for their
own intrinsecall certain^y:) I do here demand how it is that each man comes
to believe? The Colliar will quickly make a wise answer, as the Church
believes. But now how or why does the Church believe these or these truths to
be divine? Surely not because the Church has so determined; our Savior
Himself would not be so believed. If I bear record of my self, my record is
not true. Ioh. 5. 31. Ephesians. 1. 23.
Well then, the Church must needs believe by the spirit which leads it into
all truth. And what is the Church, but the Body of Christ, the congregrtion of
the faithful, consisting of diverse members? And what work is that whereby the
Spirit does illuminate and raise the understanding to perceive aright divine
truth, but only that 1. Ioh. 2. 27. Ioh. 10. 4.
Ointment which dwells in you, says the Apostle, whereby Christ's sheep are
enabled to hear His voice, in matters of more Heavenly and fundamental
consequence, and to distinguish the same from the voice of strangers?

Now, have not all the faithful of this unction? Does it not run down from
the head to the skirts of the garment? Are we not all a royal Priesthood? and
in 1. Per. 2. 9.
both these respects anointed by the Spirit? And having all the Spirit,
(though in different measures and degrees) is it not in congruitie probable
that we have with Him received those vivificall and illightning operations
which come along with him? Capable is the poorest member in Christ's Church,
being grown to maturitie of years, of information in the faith. Strange
therefore it is, that the Spirit, not leaving me destitute of other quickening
graces, should in this only leave my poor soul to travel as far as Rome,
to see that by a candle, or rather by an ignis fatuus, which himself might
more evidently make known unto me. For the Spirit does beget knowledge. We
have received the spirit which is of 1. Cor. 2. 12.
God, that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God. And
again, Hereby we know that we dwell 1. Ioh. 4. 13. 1. Ioh. 3. 24.
in Him and He in us, because He has given us of His Spirit. And again,
Hereby we know that He abides in us, by the Spirit which He has given us:
Especially since we must take even the determinations of the Church and Pope,
(though they were infallible in themselves) at second hand as they pass
through the mouth of a Priest, whose authority, being not infallible, nor
apostolical, but humane, impossible it is not but that he may misreport His
holy Father, and by that means misguide and delude an unsettled soul.

Again I demand, How does it appear unto me, that the Judgment of the
Church is infallible, when it alone is the warrant of my Faith? That this is it
self no principle, nor to the light of natural reason primo intuit^ manifest
ex evidentia terminorum, is most certain. For that this company of men should
not err, when other companies of men may err, cannot possibly be immediate^y
and por se evident, since there must first needs apriori be discovered some
internal difference between those men, from whence, as from an antecedent
principle, this difference of erring or not erring must needs grow.

Now then I demand, what is that whereby I do assent unto this proposition (in
case it were true) That the Church cannot err? The Church it self it cannot
be, since nothing bears record of it self, and if it should, the proof would
be more ridiculous then the opinion, being but idem peridem, and petitio
quaestionis. Above the Church a Priori there is not any light but the
scriptures and the spirit. Therefore needs by these must I assent unto that one
proposition at least. And if unto that by these, why then by the same light may
I not assent unto all other divine truths, since evident it is, that the same
light which enables me rightly to apprehend one object, is sufficient also to
any other, for which a lesser light then that is presumed to suffice? So then a
true faith has its evidence and certainty grounded upon the Authority of the
word, as the instrument, and of the spirit of God raising and quickening the
soul to attend, and acknowledge the things therein revealed, and to set to its
own seal unto the truth and goodness of them. But how do I know either this
word to be Gods Word, or this spirit to be Gods spirit, since there are sundry
false and lying spirits? I answer, first, ad Hominem, there are many particular
Churches, and Bishops, which take themselves to be equally with Rome members,
and Bishops of the universal Church. How shall it invincibly appear to my
Conscience that other Churches and Bishops all, save this only, do or may
err? and that this, which will have me to believe her infallibility, is not
her self an heretical and revolted Church? This is a question controuerted.
By what authority shall it be decided, or into what principles a priori
resolved? and how shall the evidence of those principles appear to the
Conscience? That the Popes are successors of Peter in his see of Rome, that
they are doctrinall as well as personal successors, that Peter did there sit
as moderator of the Catholic Church, that his infallibility should not stick
to his chair at Antioch, as well as to that at Rome; that Christ gave him a
principality, jurisdiction, and Apostleship to have to himself over all
others, and to leave to his successors; who though otherwise private men, and
not any of the penmen of the holy Ghost, should yet have after him a power
over those Apostles who survivd Peter (as it is manifest John did.) That the
scripture does say any title of all this, that the traditions which do say it
are a divine word, are al controversed points: and though there be sorceries
more then enough in the Church of Rome, yet I doubt whether they have yet
enough to conjure themselves out of that circle, which the agitation of these
questions do carry them in. But secondly, there are sundry lights, there is
light in the Sun, and there is light in a blazing or falling star. How
shall I difference these lights will you say? surely I know not otherwise then
by the lights themselves; undoubtedlie the spirit brings a proper, distinctive,
uncommunicable Majesty and luster into the soul, which cannot be by any false
spirit counterfeited: and this spirit does open first the eye, and then the
Word, and does in that discover not as insit as veritatis those marks of truth
and certainty there, which are as apparent as the light, which is without any
other medium, by it self discerned.

Thus then we see in the general, That saving faith is an assent created by the
word and spirit. We must note further that this knowledge is two fold, first,
General, mental, sp^culative, and this is simply necessary, not as a part of
saving faith, but as a medium, degree, and passage thereunto. Romans 10. 14, 15.
For how can men believe without a teacher? Secondly, particular, practical,
Applicative, which carries the soul to Christ and there ^ixeth it. ^o whom
shall we go? Ioh. 6. 68, 69.
thou have the words of eternal life; we believe and are sure that thou art
that Christ. I know that my Redeemer Job 19. 25. Ephesians. 4. 13. 3. 17, 18.
lives. That ye being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend,
and to know the Love of Christ. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave Gal. 2. 20.
himself for me. By his knowledge shall my righteous Esaias 53. 11.
servant justify many. This saving knowledge must b^e commensurate to the
object known, and to the ends for which it is instituted, which are Christ to
be made ours for righteousness and salvation. Now Christ is not proposed as an
object of bare and naked truth to be assented unto, but as a Sovereign and
saving truth to do good unto men. He is proposed, as the Desire of all flesh.
It is Hag. 2. 7. Romans 10. 10.
the heart which believes; With the heart man believes unto righteousness,
and Christ dwells by faith in the Ephesians. 3. 17.
heart; If thou beleevest with all thine heart thou may be Act. 8. 37.
bap^ized. And the heart does not only look for truth but for goodness in
the objects which it desires, for an allsufficiencie and adequate ground of
full satisfaction to the appetites of the soul; such a compass of goodness
as upon which the whole man may test, and rely, and unto the which he may have
a personal propriety, holdfast, and possession. So then in one word, faith is
a particular assent unto the truth and goodness of God in Christ, his sufferings
and resurrection, as an allsufficient and open treasury of righteousness and
salvation to every one which comes unto them; and thereupon a resolution of the
heart there to fix and fasten for those things, and to look no further.

Now this faith is called knowledge. First, in regard of the principles of it,
The Romans 10. 14. 2. Cor. 4. 13.
word and spirit: both which produce faith by a way of 1. Cor. 14. 24. Ioh. 16.
8.
conviction, and manifestation. Secondly, in regard of the ground of believing,
which is the knowledge of Gods will revealed: for none must dare demand or take
any thing from God, till he have revealed his will of giving it; Romans 10. 14.
Heb. 13. 5. 1. Cron. 17. 25.
He has said, must be the ground of our faith.. Thirdly, in regard of the
certainty and undoubtednesse which there is in the assent of faith. Romans 4. 21.
Abraham was fully persuaded of Gods power and promise; now there is a twofold
certainty: a certainty of the thing believed, because of the power and promise
of him that has said it; and a certainty of the mind believing. The former is
as full and sure to one believer as to any other, as an Alms is as certainly
and fully given to one poor man who yet receives it with a shaking and Palsy
hand, as it is to another that receives it with more strength. But the mind of
one man may be more certain and assured then another, or then it self at
some other time: sometimes it may have a certainty of evidence, assurance, and
full persuasion of Gods goodness; sometimes a certainty only of Adherence, in
the midst of the buffets of Satan, and some strong temptations, whereby it
resolves to cleave unto God in Christ, though it walk in darkness, and have
no light. Fourthly, and lastly, in regard of the last Reflexive Act 1. Ioh. 2.
3. 2. Tim. 1. 12.
Whereby we know that we know him, and Romans 1. 17. 2. Pet. 3. 18.
believe in him. And yet both this and all the rest are capable of grow'th, as
the Apostle here intimates; we know here but in part, and therefore our
knowledge of Him may still increase. The heart may have more plentiful
experience of Gods mercy in comfotting, guiding, defending, illightning,
sanctifying it, which the Scripture calls the Ephesians. 4. 20. Phil. 4. 11.
learning of Christ, and thereupon cannot but desire to have more knowledge of
Him, and Communion with Him: especially in those two great benefits, His
Resurrection and sufferings.

And the power of His resurrection.] The Apostles desire in these words is
double. First, that he may find the workings of that power in his soul, which
was showed in the resurrection of Christ from the Dead, that is, the Power of
the Spirit of Holiness, which is the mighty principle of Faith in the heart.
That Spirit Romans 1. 4. Romans 8. 11. 1. Pet. 3 18. EPhe. 1* 19. C^. 12.
of Holiness which quickened Christ from the Dead, does by the same glorious
power beget Faith and other graces in the Soul. It is as great a work of the
Spirit to form Christ in the heart of a sinner, as it was to fashion Him in
the womb of a virgin.

Secondly, that He may feel the resurrection of Christ to have a Power in Him.
Now Christ's resurrection has a twofold Power upon us or toward us. First, to
apply all His merits unto us, to accomplish the work of His satisfaction, to
declare his conquest over death, and to propose himself as an All-sufficient
Savior to the faithful. As the stamp adds no virtue nor matter of real
value to a piece of gould, but only makes that value which before it had,
actually applyable and current: So the resurrection of Christ, though it was no
part of the price or satisfaction which Christ made, yet it was that which made
them all of force to His members. Therefore the Apostle says that Christ was
Justified in 1. Tim. 3. 16.
Spirit. In His Death He suffered as a malefactor, and did undertake the guilt
of our sins (so far as it denotes an obligation unto punishment, though not
a meritoriousnesse of punishment;) but by that Spirit which raised Him from the
Dead He was Justified Himself, that is, He declared to the world that He had
shaken of all that guilt from Himself, and as it were left it in His Grave
with His Grave clothes. For as Christ's righteousness is compared to a robe of
triumph, so may our guilt to a garment of Death, which Christ in His
Resurrection shook all of, to note that Death had no holdfast at all of Him.
When Lazarus was raised, It is said that He Ioh. 11. 44.
came forth bound hand and foot with Grave clothes, to note that He came not
out as a victor over Death, unto which He was to return again: but when
Christ rose He left them behind, because death was to have Ioh. 20. 6, 7.
no more power over Him. Thus by His resurrection He was declared to have gone
through the whole punishment Revel. 1. 18.
which He was to suffer for sin, and being thus justified himself, that he
was able also to justify others that believed in him. This is the reason why
the Apostle uses these words to prove the resurrection of Christ, I will give
you* the Act. 13. 34.
sure mercies of David, for none of Gods mercies had been sure to us if Christ
had been held under by death; 1. Cor. 15. 17.
Our faith had been vain, we had been yet in our sins. But his work being
fully finished, the mercy which thereupon depended was made certain, and as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 4. 16.
sure unto all the (...). Thus as the Day wherein Redemption is victorious and
consummate is called the Ephesians 4. 30. Rom 8. ^3.
day of Redemption: so the work wherein the merits of Christ were declared
victorious is said to Romans 4 25.
have been for our justification, because they were thereby made appliable unto
that purpose.

The second work of the Power of Christ's Resurrection is to overcome all death
in us, and restore us to life again. Therefore he is called Romans 14. 9.
the Lord of the living, and Act. 3. 15.
the Prince of life, to note that his life is operative unto others. we are by
his Resurrection secured first against the death and Law, which we were held
under; for every sinne^ is condemned already. Now when Christ was condemned for
sin, he thereby delivered us from the death of the Law, which is the curse:
so that though some of the grave clothes may not be quite shaken off, but that
we may be subject to the workings and fears of the Law upon some occasions,
yet the malediction thereof is for ever removed. Secondly, we are secured
against the death in sin, 1. Pet. 1. 3. Romans ^. 11. Romans 6. 4.
regenerated, quickened, renewed, fashioned by the power of godliness, which
tameth our rebellions, subdueth our corruptions, and turns all our affections
another way. Thirdly, against Ioh. 6. 39, 40. 1. Cor. 1^. ^2, 23 Revel. 1. 5.
the hold-fast and conquest of death in the grave, from whence we shall be
Heb. 5. 9. Heb. 4. 9, 10. 1. These. 4. 16, 17
translated unto glory: a specimen and resemblance of this was showed at the
resurrection of Christ, Mat. 27. 52. 53.
when the graves were opened, and many dead bodies of the Saints arose, and
entered into the City. As a Prince in his inauguration or sosemne state opens
prisons, and unlooseth many which there were bound, to honor his solemnity:
so did Christ do to those Saints at his resurrection, and in them gave
assurance to all his of their conquest over the last Enemy.

What a fearful condition then are all men out of Christ in, who shall have
no interest in His resurrection? Rise indeed they shall, but barely by his
power as their Act. 17. 31. Luke 20. ^6. Luke 14. 14.
Judge, not by fellowship with him as the first fruits and first borne of the
dead; and therefore theirs shall not be properly, or at least comfortably a
Resurrection, no more than a condemned persons going from the prison to his
execution may be called an enlargement. Pharaoh^ Butler and Baker went both out
of prison, but they were not both delivered; so the righteous and the wicked
shall all appear before Christ, and be gathered out of their graves, but they
shall not all be Children of the Resurrection, for that belongs only to the
just. The wicked shall be dead everlastingly to all the pleasures and ways of
sin, which here they wallowed in. As there remains nothing to a drunkard or
adulterer after all his youthful excesses but crudities, rottenness,
diseases, and the worm of Conscience; so the wicked shall carry no worlds nor
satisfactions of lust to hell with them, their Psalm. 49. 17.
glory shall not descend after them. These things are truths written with a
sun beam in the book of God: First, That 1. These. 4. 16, 18. Matthew. 25. 46.
none out of Christ shall rise unto Glory. Secondly, That Ioh. 15. 2. Mal. 3.
3. Tit. 2. 14. Psalm. 110 3.
all who are in him are purged from the Love and power of sin, are made a
people willingly obedient unto his scepter and the government of his grace and
spirit; and have eyes given them to see no beauty but in his kingdom. Thirdly,
Hereupon it is manifest Heb. 12. 14. Revel. 22. 15.
that no unclean thing shall rise unto glory. A prince in the day of his
state, or any royal solemnity, will not admit beggars, or base companions into
his presence. Habak. 1. 13.
He is of purer eyes then to behold, much less to communicate with unclean
persons. Matthew. 5. 8. 2. Tim. 2. 21.
None but the pure in heart shall see God. Fourthly, that every 2. Tim. 3. 13.
Revel. 22. 11.
wicked man waxes worse and worse, that he who is filthy grows more filthy,
Heb. 3. 12, 13.
that sin hardneth the heart, and Heb. 10. 39.
infidelity hasteneth perdition. Whence the conclusion is evident, That every
impenitent sinner, who without any inward hatred and purposes of revenge
against sin, without godly sorrow forepast, and spiritual renovation for
aftertimes, allows himself to continue in any course of uncleanness, spends
all his time and strength to no other purpose, then Romans 2. 5. Iam. 5. 3. Deuteronomy.
32. 34. 35. Esai. 30. 33.
only to heap up coals of Juniper against his own soul, and to gather
together a treasure of sins and wrath, like an infinite pile of wood to burn
himself in.

Again, this power of Christ's resurrection is a ground of solid and invincible
comfort to the faithful in any pressures or calamities though never so
desperate, because God has power and promises to raise them up again. This is
a sufficient supportance, first, Against any either public, or private
afflictions. However the Church may seem to be reduced to as low and
uncureable an estate Ezekiel. 37. 11. Lam. 3. 6.
as dried bones in a grave, or the brands of wood in a fire, yet it shall be
but like Psalm. Hos. 6. 2. 3. Mic. 7. 8. Zach. 3. 2.
the darkness of a night, after two days he will revive again, His goings
forth in the defense of his Church are prepared as the morning. When Job. 19.
25. 27.
Job was upon a dunghill, and his reins were consumed within him; When Ioh. 2.
2. 7.
Jonah was at the bottom of the Mountains, and the weeds wrapped about his
head, and the great billows and waves went over him, so that he seemed as cast
out of Gods sight; When Psalm. 138. 7.
David was in the midst of troubles, and Esai. 38. 17.
Ezekiah in great bitterness, this power of God to raise unto life again was
the only refuge and comfort they had. Secondly, against all temptations and
discomforts: Satan's trains and policies come too late after once Christ is
risen from the dead; for Romans 8. 33, 34. Heb. 7. 14, 25.
in his resurrection the Church is discharged and set at large. Thirdly,
against Death it self; because we shall come out of our graves as gold out of
the fire, or miners out of their pits, laden with gold and glory at the last.

Lastly, we must from hence learn Col. 3. 1.
to seek those things that are above whither Christ is gone. Ioh. 18. 36.
Christ's Kingdom is not here, and therefore our hearts should not be here.
Ephesians. 4. 8.
He is ascended on high, and has given gifts unto Men, as absent lovers send
tokens to each other, to attract the affections, and call thither the thoughts.
If Christ would have had our hearts rest on the earth, He would have continued
with us here, Ioh. 17. 24.
but it is his Will that we be where He is: and therefore we must make it the
maine business of our life to move toward him. Things of a nature incline to
one another even to their prejudice. A stone will fall to his center, though
there be so many rubbes in the way, that it is sure to be broken all to pieces
in the motion. The same should be a Christians resolution. Christ is his
Center, and Heaven is his Country, and therefore thither he must conclude to
go, notwithstanding he must be broken in the way with manifold temptations,
and afflictions. Saint 2 Cor. 5. 4.
Paul desired, if it had been possible, to be clothed upon, and to have his
mortality swallowed up of life, and to get whole to Heaven. But if he may not
have it upon so good terms, he will not only Ibib. ver. 8.
confidently endure, but Phil. 1. 23. 1 Mercatura est quaedam amittere vt
maiora lu creris. Tertul.
desire to be dissolved and broken in pieces, that by any means he may come to
Christ, because that, being best of all, will be an abundant recompense for
any intercurrent damage. It is not a loss, but a marriage and honor for a
woman to forsake her own kindred, and house, to go to a husband: neither is it
a loss but a preferment for the soul, to relinquish for a time the body,
that it may go to Christ, who has married it unto himself for ever.

And the fellowship of his sufferings] This fellowship notes two things: First,
A participation in the benefits of his Sufferings; Secondly, A Conformity of
ours to his. First, His Romans 6. 6. Col. 2. 12.
Sufferings are Ours; we were buried and Crucified with him, and that again
notes two things. First, we communicate in the Price of Christ's Death, covering
the guilt of sin, satisfying the wrath of God, and being an Expiation and
propitiation for us. Secondly, in the Heb. 9. 14. Col. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 24. Ioh.
16. 11. Luke 11. 21. 1. Ioh. 3. ^.
Power of his Death, cleansing our Consciences from dead works, mortifying our
earthly members, crucifying our old man, subduing our iniquities and
corruptions, pulling down the throne of Satan, spoiling him of all his armor,
and destroying the works of the Devil. And this power works, first, by the
prophetical office of Christ, Revealing; secondly, by his Regal office,
applying and reaching forth the power of his blood to subdue sin, as it had
before triumphed over death and Satan.

But here the maine point and question will be, what this mighty power of the
Death of Christ is thus to kill sin in us, and wherein the Causality thereof
Consists? To this I answer that Christ's Death is a threefold Cause of the
death of sin in his members.

First, It is Causa meritoria, A meritorious Cause. For Christ's death was so
great aprice that it did deserve at Gods hand to have our sins subdued. All
power and Judgment was given unto him by his father, and that power was given
him to purchase his Church withal. And this was amongst other of the
covenants, that their sins should be Crucified. He gave himself unto Ephesians. 5.
25, 26.
Gods Justice for his Church; and that which by that gift he purchased, was the
sanctification and cleansing of it. Now as a price is said to do that which a
man does by the power which that price purchased: so the blood of Christ is
said to cleanse us, because the office or power whereby he purifieth us, was
Conferd upon him Sub intuitu pretij, under the condition of suffering. For it
was Heb. 9. 22. 23.
necessary that remission and purification should be by blood.

Secondly, it is Causa exemplaris, The death of Christ was the Exemplar
pattern, and Idea of our Death to sin. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
He did bear our sins in his Body on the tree, to show that as his Body did
naturally, so sin did by analogy and legally dye. Therefore the Apostle
says that he was made sin for us; to note that not only our persons 2. Cor.
5. 21.
were in Gods account Crucified with him unto Justification; but that sin it
self did hang upon his Cross with him unto monification and holiness. In
which respect Saint Paul says, That he condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8. 3.
because he died as sin in Abstracto. And in this regard of mor^ification we
are said to be planted in the likeness of Christ's Death; because as when an
Ambassador does solemnize the marriage of his king with a foreign princess,
that is truly effected between the parties themselves, which is transacted by
the agent, and representative person to that purpose and service autho^: so
Christ being made sin for us (as the Sacrifice had the sins of the people
emptied upon him) and in that relation, Dying; sin it self likewise dies in
us. And there is a proportion between the Death of the Cross which Christ
died, and the Dying of sin in us. Christ died as a Servant, to note that
sin should not rule, but be brought into slaverie and bondage: He died a
Curse, to note that we should look upon sin as an accursed and devoted
thing, and therefore should not with Achan hide, or reserve any: He Drank
vinegar on his Cross, to note that we should make sin feel the sharpness
of Gods displeasure aginst it* he was fast naild unto the Cross, to note that
we should put sin out of ease, and leave noe lust or Corruption at large,
but crucify the whole body thereof. Lastly though he did not presently die,
yet there he did hang till he died; to note that we should never give over
subduing sin while it has any life or working in us. Thus the Death of
Christ is the pattern of the death of sin.

Thirdly, It is Causa Obiectiva, an Impelling or moving cause as Objects are.
For Objects have an Attractive Ioh. 7. 21. 2 Samuel 11. 2. 3. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 16.
Power. Acha^ saw the wedge of gold, and then Coveted it. David saw Bathsh^ba,
and then desired her. Therefore the apostle mentions Lusts of the Eye, which
are kindled by the Things of the world. As the strength of imagination fixing
upon a blackemoo^e on the wall made the woman bring forth a black child: so
there is ^ kind of spiritual Imaginative power in faith to crucify sin by
looking upon Christ Crucified. As the Brazen Serpent did heal those who had
been bitten by the fiery Numb. 21. 9.
serpents (...) obiectum fides, merely by being looked upon: so Christ
Crucified does heal sin by being looked upon with the ey^ of faith. Now faith
looks upon Christ crucified, and bleeding, First, as the gift of his fathers
love, as a token and spectacle of more unsearchable and transcendent mercy,
then the comprehension of the whole host of Angels can reach unto. And hereby
Romans 5. 8.
the heart is ravished with love again, and with a grateful desire of
returning all our time, parts, powers, services unto him, who spared not the
son of his own love for us. Secondly, It looks on him As a sacrifice Heb.
9. ^6.
for Sin, and Expiation thereof to Gods Justice; and hereby the heart is
framed to an humble fear of reproaching, voiding, nullifying unto it self the
Death of Christ, or by Continuance in sin of crucifying the Lord Jesus
again. It is made more distinctly, in the sufferings of Christ, to know that
infinite guilt, and hellish filthiness which is in sin, which brought so
great a punishment upon so great a person; And hereupon grows to a more
serious Hatred thereof, and carefulness^ against it, as being a greater enemy
unto his Jesus, then Judas that betrayed, or the Pharisees that accu^ed, or the
soldiers that Crucified him; as being more sharp to the soul of Christ then
the nails or spears that pierced his sacred body. How shall I dare (thinks
the faithful soul) to live in those sins by which I may as truly be
denominated a betrayer and Crucifier of him that saved me, as Judas, or
Pilate, were? Thirdly It looks on him as Our Forerunnerinto Glory. whither
Heb. 6. 20. Luke 24. 26. 1. Pe^. 1. 11.
he E^tred not but by away of blood. From whence the heart easily concludes, if
Christ Entered not into his own glory but by suffering, how shall I enter into
that glory which is none of mine, if I shed not the blood of my lusts, and take
order to Crucify all them before I go?

So then none can Conclude that Christ died for him, who finds not himself
Set against the life of sin within him, in whom the body of Corruption is not
so lesned, as that it does no more ^ule to wast his conscience or enrage his
heart. If a man grow worse and worse, his heart more hard, his Conscience more
senseless, his resolutions more desperate, his ^are more dead, his courses
more car^all and worldly then before; certainly the fellowship and virtue of
the blood of Christ has hitherto done little good to such a man. And what a
woeful thing is it for a man to live and die in an estate much more miserable
then if there never had been any Jesus given unto men? For that man who has
heard of Christ, at whose heart he has knocked, unto whose Math. 11. 21, 24
Heb. 10, 28. 29.
Conscience he has been revealed, and yet never believes in him unto
righteousness, or sanctification, but lives and dies in his filthiness, shall
be punished with a far sorer Condemnation, then those of Tire, Sydon, or
Sodom, that knew nothing of him. O then let us labor to show forth the power
of Christ's Death, and that he died not in vain unto us. Though we cannot yet
totally kill, yet let us crucify our corruptions, weaken their vigor, abate
their rage, dispossess them of the throne in our hearts, put them unto shame:
and in as much as Christ has Suffered for sin, let us cease from sin, and
live the rest of our time not to the will of the 1. Pet. 1. 2. 3.
flesh, nor to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

The second part of our fellowship in sufferings with Christ is the conformity
of ours to His. In all our afflictions Esai. 63. 9. Col. 1. 24.
he is afflicted; and Saint Paul calls His sufferings the filling up of that
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. Not as if Christ's sufferings
were imperfect ( for By one offering He^ has perfected for ever them that are
Heb. 10. 14.
sanctified.) But as Christ has Personal sufferings i^ corpore proprio, in
His humane Body, as Mediator, which once for ever He finished: So He has
general sufferings in corp^re mystico, in His Church, as a member with the
rest.

Now of these sufferings of the Church we must note that they have no
conformity with Christ's in these two things. First, not in Officio, in the
office of Christ's sufferings; for His were meritorious and satisfactorie; Ours
only mini^teriall, and for edification. Secondly, not in (...) and (...), not
in the weight and measure of them; not so bitter, heavy, and woeful as Christ's
were* For the sufferings of Christ, upon any other Creature, would have crushed
him as low as Hell, and swallowed him up for ever. In other respects there is a
conformity of our sufferings to Christ's; so that He esteems them His.

Our sufferings are: First, such as we draw upon our selves by our own folly;
and even in these afflictions which Christ as the King ^ver His people
inflic^eth upon them, yet as their Head and fellow member He compassionateth
and as it were smarteth with them. For Christ is so full of tenderness, and so
acquainted with Heb. 4. 15.
sorrows, that we may justly conceive Him touched with the feeling of those
pains, which yet He Himself sees needful for them. Secondly, *such as are
by God Iam. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 7.
imposed for trial and exercise of those graces which himself gives; and in
these we have a twofold Communion and conformity to Christ: First, By
association; Christ: 1. Pet. 4. 14.
gives us His Spirit to draw in the same yoke with us, and to hold us under
them by His strength. That Spirit of Holiness by which Christ overcame his
sufferings, helps our infirmities in ours. Secondly, in the manner 1. Pet. 2.
21, 23.
of undergoing them, with a proportion of that meeknes and patience which
Christ showed in His sufferings. Thirdly, such as are cas^ upon us by the
injuries of Satan Act* 9. 4. 1. Pet. 4. 14, 16. Math. 5. 11. Ioh. 15. 18, 19.
Genesis 3. 15. 2. Tim. 1. 8.
and wicked men. And these also bear conformity unto Christ's, as in the two
former respects, so thirdly in the cause of them, for it is Christ only whom in
his members Satan and ^he world do persecute. All the enmity that is between
them is because of the seed of the woman. If Christ were now amongst us in the
fashion of a servant and in a low condition as once he was* and should convince
men of their wickedness as searchingly as once he did, He would doubtless be
the most hated man upon the Earth. Now that He is conceived of, as God in
glory, men deal with him as Ioa^ with Abner, they kiss and flatter him in the
outward profession of His Name and Worship; and they stabbe and persecute Him
in the hatred of His ways and members. And this is the principal reason why
so many stand of from a through embracing of Christ and his ways; because when
they are indeed in His body, they must go His way to Heaven, which was a way
of suffering. They that will live godly 2. Tim. 3 12. 1. Pet. 4 4. Esai. 8. 18.
Zach. 3. 8.
in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, and be by wicked men esteemed as
signs and wonders to be spoken against, and that not only amongst pagans,
and professed enemies to the Truth, but even in Israel, and amongst those who
externally make the same profession.

But this should comfort us in all our sufferings for Christ's sake, and for our
obedience to His Gospel; that we drink of our masters own Cup, that we
Math. 20. 23.
fill up that which is wanting of His afflictions, that Christ Himself was
called a Samaritane, a Devil, a wine-b^bber, entrapped, spied* snared, slain;
and He who is now our Captain to lead us, will hereafter be our Iam 1. 2. 12.
Crown to reward us; we may safely 1. Ioh. ^. 2. Heb 12. 2. 3.
look upon Christ's issue, and know it to be ours. First, we have Christ's
fellowship in them; and if it were possible, a man were better be in Hell with
Christ, then in Heaven without Him: for His presence would make any place a
Heaven, as the Ueios habitante Camillo, Illic Roma fuit.
King makes any place the Court. Secondly, we have ^hil 4. 12.
Christ's strength to bear them. Thirdly, (...). 6. 13.
His victories to overcome them. Fourthly, Luc. 22 32.
His Intercession to preserve us from falling away in them. Fifthly, His Graces
to be the more gloryfied by them, as a Torch when it is shaken shines the
brighter. Sixthly. His compassion to moderate and proportion them to the
measure of strength which He gives us: And lastly, His Crown on our heads,
His Palm in our hands, His triumphall Garments upon us, when we shall have
tasted our measure of them. For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: For the things which are seen are Temporal, but the things which
are not seen, are Eternal.

FINIS.

