FIrst ye thust be diligent to know your Masters pleasure and to know the
order, and custom of his house. For diverse masters are of sundry conditions
and appetites. And if thou be admitted in any office as Buttry, or Pantry, in
some places they are all one. Then take an inue^tory of all such things as ye
take charge of, how it is spent. For it pleases a master to have a true
reckening, the^ in your office of ye pantry se yt your bread be chipped and
squared, and note how much ye spend in one day. Also se your napry clean, and
sort every thig by it self, the clean from ye foul and keep your house of
office clean, and all that belongs to it. When your master will go to his
meat, take a towel about your neck, the^ take a cupbord cloth, a basin and an
ewer, and a towell to array your cupborde, then cover your table, and set on
salt, bread and trenchours, the salt before ye bread, and trenchours before the
salt, and set your napkins and spones on the cupbord ready, and lay every man a
tre^chour and napkin and a spone: and if ye have mo messes then one at your
masters table consider what degree ye persons are of, and thereafter you may
serve the^, and the^ set down every thig at that mess as before, except your
karuing knives. If there be many ge^tleme^ or yome^, the^ set on bread, salt,
tre^chours, spones, after they be set, or else after ye custo^ of the house.
Also so^ do use to set before every man a lofe of bread and his cup, and some
use the contrary, thus must you have respect to the custo^ of your house, and
in some places it is use to set drink and a lofe or two. In some places the
keruer does use to sewe and set down and goes before the course, and bears
no dishe, and in some place, he bears the first dishe, and makes obeysaunce
to his Master, and sets it down covered before the degree of a Knight, or
else not used, and take of the couers and set them by. Also the karuer has
authority to carue to all at his masters mes in special, also unto other that
sit joining by them if he list, also ye have voyders in a redines to avoid the
morsels that they do lean on their trenchours. Then with your trenchour knife
take of such fragments and put them in your voyder, and set the^ clea^ again.
And whether your soueraign have trenchours or bread void the o^ce or twice,
specialy when they are wet, or give him clean, and as ye se men leave eating of
the first and second dish: so avoid them from the table. And then if that so
be ye have any more courses then one or two: ye may make the more have in
voyding, and ever let one dish or two stand till the next course, and then take
up all and set down fresh and clean voyders withal, and let the^ not be to
full or ye empty them, and then set clean again and look what sauce is
ordained for any meat void away the sauce thereof when ye take away the meat.
And at the degree of a knight ye may set down your cup, covered, and lift of
the cover and set it on again, and when he lists to drink and takes of the
cover: take the cover in thy hand and set it on again, and when he has dronken
look the cup of wine or ale be not empty, but often renewed. Also the karuer
shall break his dish before his master or at side Cupbord with clean knives,
and se there be no lack of bread nor ale, and when men have well eaten, and do
begin to ware weary of eating, or if ye perceive by ye countenance of your
master when ye shall take up the meat and void the table: begin at the lowest
mease, take away your spones if there be any, howbeit ye may avoid them, after
brothes and bake meats are past. Then take away your voiders and then your
dishes of meat as they were set down so take the^ up in order and then set
down cheese or fruits, and that ended avoid your chese and fruits and cover
your cup, Ale or Wine, first avoid the Ale, and the^ the Wine, then set on a
broad voyder and put therein the small pieces of bread and small cromes, with
trenchours and napkins, and with your trenchour knife or napkin make clean the
table, then set away your bread whole and also your voyder, and then take up
the salt and make obeysaunce, mark if your master use to wash at the table,
or standing, if he be at the table cast a clean towel upon your table cloth and
set down your basin and ewer before your sovereign, and take the ewer in
your hand and give the^ water, then avoid your basin and ewer and fold ye
board cloth together with your towell therein, and so take them of the board.
And when your sovereign shall wash: set your towel on the left hand of him,
and the water before you at supper or dinner, if it be to bedward set up your
basin and your towel on the cupbord again. And if your master will have any
conceits after diner, as Apples, Nuts or cream, then lay forth a towel on the
board, and set thero^ a lofe or two, se that ye have trenchours and spoones in
a redines if need require, and then serve forth your master well, and so take
it up again with a voyder.

The ordering of your Masters chamber at night to bedward.

Array your cupborde with a cupborde cloth with your basin and ewer, ca^dle
light and towel, if ye have help set one to bear a Torch, or some other light
before and another fellow to bear a Towel for your table with bread as thou
see need. And if you have banquet dishes whatsoever it be, as fruits put in
sundry dishes and all other confections and conceits of spicery, also when the
dishes are emty avoid the^ from the table, if your sovereign be a Knight or
Squier: set down your dishes covered and your cup also. And if your sovereign
be not set at the table let your dishes stand covered til he be set, and when
he is set: then take away the voiders. And when your master ente^deth to
bedward se that ye have fire and candle sufficient, and se ye have clean water
in at night and in the morning, and if your master ly in fresh sheets dry of
the dankishenes by the fire. And if he lie in a strange place, se his sheets
be clean and sweet, and then fold down his bed, and warm his night kerchef,
and se his house of office be clean, and help of his clothing and draw the
curtains, and make sure the fire and ca^ble, and avoid the dogs and shut all
the doors. And in the evening or in the mornig your master being alone if ye
have any thing to say to him, then is good layser and time to know his
pleasure. In the morning if it be cold make a fire and have in clean water,
and bring him his Peticote warm with his Doublet and all his Apparel clean
brushed, and his shoes made clean, and help to array him, trus his points,
strike up his hosen clean, and se all thing clean and clenly about him, give
him good attendaunce, and in especial among strangers, for attendaunce does
plese masters very well. Thus doing with diligence God will prefer you to honor
and good fortune,

Here follows the book of Nurtur and of good manners, for Man and Child.

AL ye that woold learn, and then would be called wise
Obedience learn in youth, in age it will avoid vice
I am blind in Poets art, thereof I can no skill,
Al eloquence I put a part, and follow mine own will,
Corrupt in speech my breues and longs to know:
Borne and bred in Devonshire, my terms will well show
Take ye best and leave the worst, of truth I mean none il
If the matter be not curious, thinte^t is good mark it well
Pardon I ask if I offend, thus boldly for to write
To master or servant (young and old) I do my self submit
I would reform both youth and age, if any thing be amiss
To you will I show my mind, reform ye where need is
All that have young people, good manners set them to learn
To their elders with gentle condicto^s, let do nor say no harm
If they do il, wise men may report their Parents sone
How should they teach other good, belike the^ selves ca^ none
I good Father makes good Children, if wisdom be the^ win

