MYTHOMYSTES WHEREIN A SHORT SVRVAY IS TAKEN OF THE NATVRE AND VALVE OF TRVE
POESY AND DEPTH OF THE ANCIENTS ABOVE OUR MODERN POETS.

To which is annexed the Tale of Narcissus briefly mythologized



LONDON, Printed for Henry Seyle, at the Tigers-head in St. Paul's Churchyard.

To the Right Honll: and my euer-honor'd Lord, Henry Lord Matrauers.
MY LORD
As I have ever been a lover (though ignorant one) of the Art of Painting, a
fruit of the Fancy that may be fitly called a silent Poesy, so of necessity
must I love her Sister the Art of Poesy, which is no other then a speaking
Painting or Picture. And because I presume your Lop: favoring, and so well
understanding the one, cannot but understand, and like the other, I adventure
to present a slight drafte of her to your Lop: that as you have daily before
your eyes, one of the best suruayes of what is, or can be in Picture, you may
have likewise limned, though in little, by a creature no less your own then
they are (how artfully I dare not avouch, but sure) a true picture of her
Sister Poesy. A Birth (my Lord) some months since conceived, and even as soon
borne; and which, though now open to other eyes, yet asks no other honor then
your acceptance; to whom in grateful acknowledgment of your noble favors,
are (no less then this his slight issue is,) for ever dedicated the best of
the poor indeauors of the parent

Your Lops. humble, and most affectionate servant H: R:

TO THE CANDID AND INGENVOVS READER.
Look not generous Reader (for such I write to) for more in the few following
leaves, then a plain and simple verity; vnadorned at all with eloquution, or
Rhetorical phrase; glosses fitter perhaps to be set upon silken and thin
paradoxicall semblances, then appertaining to the care of who desires to lay
down a naked and unmasked Truth. Nor expect here an Encomium or praise of
any such thing as the world ordinarily takes Poesy for; That same thing being
(as I conceive) a superficial mere outside of Sense, or gaye bark only
(without the body) of Reason; Witness so many excellent wits that have taken
so much pains in these times to defend her; which sure they would not have
done, if what is generally received now a days for Poesy, were not merely a
faculty, or occupation of so little consequence, as by the lovers thereof
rather to be (in their own favor) excused, then for any good in the thing it
self, to be commended. Nor must thou here expect thy solution, if thy
curiosity inuit thee to a satisfaction in any the vnder-Accidents, but in
merely the Essential Form, of true Poesy: Such I call the Accidents or
appendixes thereto, as conduce somewhat to the Matter, and End, nothing to the
real Form and Essence thereof. And these accidents (as I call them) our
commenders and defenders of Poesy have chiefly, and indeed sufficiently
insisted, and dilated upon; and are first, those flowers (as they are called)
of Rhetoric, consisting of their Anaphoras, Epist^ophes, Metaphors,
Metonymyes, Synecdoches and those their other potent Tropes and Figures;
helps, (if at all of use to furnish out expressions with,) much properer sure,
and more fitly belonging to Poesy then Oratory; yet such helps, as if Nature
have not beforehand in his birth, given a Poet, all such forced Art will come
behind as lame to the business, and deficient, as the best-taught country
Morris d^uncer with all his bells and napkins, will ill deserve to be in an
Inn of Court at Christmas, termed the thing they call a fine reueller. The
other Accidents of Poesy, and that are the greater part of the appurtenances
thereof, in the accoumpt of our Poets of these times, are also here utterly
vnmencioned, such as are, what sort of Poem may admit the blanke verse, what
requires exact rhyme; where the strong line (as they call it) where the gentle,
sorts best; what subject must have the verse of so many feet, what of other;
where the masculine rhyme, where the feminine, and where the threesillabled
(which the Italians call their rhyme sdrucciole) are to be used. These (I say)
and the like Adjuncts of Poesy, (elsewhere amply discoursed of by many curious
wits) are not here mentioned. Only what I conceived fit to speak (and with
what breuity I could) of the Ancient Poets in general, and of the Form and
real Essence of true Poesy, considered merely in it own worth and validity,
without extrinsick and suppeditatiue ornament at all, together with the
parallel of their foil (our Modern Poets and Poesyes,) I have, (to the end to
redeem in some part, and vindicate that excellent Art from the injury it
suffers in the worlds general misprizion and misconstruction thereof,) here
touched, and but touched; the rather to awake some abler understanding then my
own, to the pursuit (if they please) of a theme (I conceive) well worthy a
greater industry, and happyer leisures then I my self possess.

MYTHOMYSTES.
WHEREIN A SHORT SVRVAY IS TAKEN OF THE NATVRE AND VALVE OF TRVE Poesy, and
depth of the Ancients above our Modern Poets.
I Have thought upon the times we live in; and am forced to affirm the world
is decrepit, and out of its age and doting estate, subject to all the
imperfections that are inseparable from that wrack and maime of Nature, that
the young behold with horror, and the sufferers thereof lie under with murmur
and languishme^t. Even the general Soul of this great Creature, whereof every
one of ours is a several piece, ^emes bedrid, as upon her deathbed, and near
the time of her dissolution to a second better estate, and being: the years of
her strength are past; and she is now nothing but disease for the Souls health
is no other than merely the knowledge of the Truth of things. Which health,
the worlds youth inioyed; and has now F^r (...) world (...) l^st (...) y^th,
a^ the times b^in to w^ (...). (...) ^d. (...). 14.
exchanged for it, all the diseases of all errors, heresies, and different
sects and schisms of opinions and understandings in all matter of Arts,
Sciences, and Learnings whatsoever. To help on these diseases to incurability,
what age has ever been so fruitful of liberty in all kinds, and of all
permission and allowance for this reason of ours, to run wildely all her own
hurtfullest ways without bridle, bound, or limit at all? For instance; what
books have we of what ever knowledge, or in what mysteries soever, wisely by
our Ancients (for avoiding of this present malady the world is now fallen into)
couched, and carefully infoulded, but must be by every illiterate person
without exception, deflowred and broke open, or broke in pieces, because beyond
his skill to unlock the^? Or what Law have we that prouides for the restraint
of these myriads of hot headed wranglers, and ignorant writers and teachers,
which, out of the bare privilege of perhaps but puny graduate in some
University, will venture upon all, even the most removed and most abstruse
knowledges, as perfect understanders and expounders of them, upon the single
warrant of their own brain; or inuenters of better themselves, than all
Antiquity could deliver down to them; out of the treasonous mint of their own
imaginations? What havoc, what mischief to all learnings, and how great a
multiplicity of poisonous errors and heresies must not of necessity hence
ensue, and ouerspread the face of all Truths whatsoever?

Among these heresies (to omit those in matter of Divinity, or the right form
of worshipping God, which the Doctors of his Church are sitter to make the
subjects of their tongues and pens, than I, a Layman, and all-vnworthy the
task,) among, I say, these, (if I may so call them) heresies, or ridiculous
absurdities in matter of humane letters, and their professors in these times, I
find none so gross, nor indeed any so great scandal, or maime to humane
learning, as in the almost general abuse, and violence offered to the
excellent art of (...), first, by those learned (as they think themselves) of
our days, who call themselves Poets; and next, by such as out of their
ignorance, heed not how much they profane that high and sacred title in
calling them so.

From the number of these first mentioned, (for, for the last, I will not
mention them; nor yet say as a grave Father, and holy one too, of certain
obstinate heretics said; Decipiantur in nomine diaboli; but charitably wish
their reformation, and cure of their blindness;) from the multitude (I say) of
the common rimers in these our modern times, and modern tongues, I will
exempt some few, as of a better rank and condition than the rest. And first to
begin with Spain. I will say it may justly boast to have afforded (but many
Ages since) excellent Poets, as Seneca, the Tragedian, Lucan, and Martial the
Epigrammatist, with others; and in these latter times, as diverse in Prose,
some good Theologians also in Rhyme; but for other Poesies in their (now spoke)
tongue, of any great name, (not to extol their trifling, though extolled
Celestina, nor the second part of their Diana de Monte Major, better much than
the first; and these but poeticke prosers neither,) I cannot say it affords
many, if any at all: The inclination of that people being to spend much more
wit, and more happily in those prose Romances they abound in, such as their
Lazarillo, Don Quixote, Guzman, and those kind of ^uenta's of their Picaro's,
and Gitanillas, than in Rhyme. The French likewise, more than for a Rensart, or
Des-Portes, but chiefly their Salust, (who may pass among the best of our
modernes,) I can say little of* Italy has in all times, as in all abilities of
the mind besides, been much fertiler than either of these, in Poets. Among
whom, (to omit a Petrarch, who though he was an excellent rimer in his own
tongue, and for his Latin Africa justly deserved the laurel that was given
him; yet was a much excellenter Philosopher in prose; and with him, a Bembo,
Dante, Ang: Politiano, Caporale, Pietro Aretino, Sannazaro, Guarini, and diverse
others, men of rare fancy all) I must prefer chiefly three; as the grave and
learned Tasso, in his Set giorni, (a divine work) and his Gierusalem
liberata, so far as an excellent pile of merely Moral Philosophy may
deserve. Then, Ariosto, for the artfull woofe of his ingenious, though
vnmeaning fables; the best, perhaps, have in that kind been sung since Ovid.
And lastly, that smoothwrit Adonis of Marino, full of various conception, and
diversity of learning. The Douche I cannot mention, being a stranger to their
minds, and manners; therefore I will return home to my Contrymen, and
mother tongue: And here, exempt from the rest, a Chaucer, for some of his
poems; chiefly his Troylus and Cr^sside. Then the generous and ingenious
Sidney, for his smooth and artfull Arcadia (and who I could wish had choze
rather to have left us of his pen, an Encomiasticke Poem in honor, then
prose-Apology in defense, of his favorite, the excellent Art of Poesy.) Next, I
must approve the learned Spencer, in the rest of his Poems, no less then his
Fairy Queen, an exact body of the Ethicke doctrine: though some good judgments
have wished (and perhaps not without cause) that he had therein been a little
freer of his fiction, and not so close ri^etted to his Moral; no less then
many do to Daniells Civil wars, that it were (though otherwise a commendable
work) yet somewhat more than a true Chronicle history in rhyme; who, in other
less labored things, (...) have indeed more happily, (h^er, always clearly
and smooth^ written. We have among us a late-writ Polyolbion, also and an
Agincourte, wherein I will only blame their honest Authors ill fate, in not
having laid him out some happier Clime, to have given honor and life to, in
some happier language. After these, (besides some late dead) there are others
now living, drammaticke and liricke writers, that I must deservedly commend for
those parts of fancy and imagination they ^ossesse; and should much more, could
we see them somewhat more, force those gifts, and liberal graces of Nature,
to the end she gave them; and therewith, work and constantly tire upon sollid
knowledges; the which having from the rich fountes of our reverend Ancients,
drawn with unwearied, and wholsomely employed industrie^ they might in no
less pleasing and profitable fictions than they have done (the very fittest
conduit-pipes) derive down to us the understanding of things even farthest
removed from us, and most worthy our speculation, and knowledge. But alas,
such children of obedience, I must take leave to say, the most of our ordinary
pretenders to Poesy now a days, are to their own, and the diseased times ill
habits, as the rack will not be able to make the most advised among twenty of
them confess, to have farther inquired, or attended to more, in the best of
their Authors they have chosen to read and study, than merely his style,
phrase, and manner of expression; or scarce suffered themselves to look beyond
the dimension of their own brain, for any better counsel or instruction
elsewhere. What can we expect then of the Poems they write? Or what can a man
me thinks liken them more fitly to, than to Ixion's issue? for he that with
merely a natural vein, (and a little vanity of nature, which I can be
content to allow a Poet) writes without other grounds of sollid learning, than
the best of these ungrounded rimers understand or aim at, what does he more
than embrace assembled clouds with Ixion, and beget only Monsters? This might
yet be borne with, did not these people as co^fidently usurp to themselves the
title of Scholars, and learned men, as if they possessed the knowledges of all
the Magi, the wise East did ever breed; when, let me demand but a reason for
security of my judgment in allowing them for such, they strait give me to
know they understand the Greek, and Latin; and in conclusion, I discover, the
complete crown of all their ambition is but to be styled by others a good
Latinist or Grecian, and then they style themselves good Scholars. So would I
too, had I not before hand been taught to say: Non quia Graeca scias, vel
calls verba Latina, Doctus es aut sapiens, sed quia vera vides; and besides,
happened to know a late travailing Odcombian among us; that became (I know not
for what mortaller sin than his variety of language) the common scorn, and
contempt of all the abusiue wits of the time; yet possessed both those languages
in great perfection; as his eloquent orations ^ortney made him stand, and
speak Greek upon his head with his (...).
in both toungs; (and uttered upon his own* head without prompting) have ever
sufficiently testified. Now, finding this to be the greate^ part of the
Schollership these our Poets endeavor to have, and which many of them also
have; I find with all, they (...) d^wne as satisfied, as if their vnf^ breasts
contained each one the learning and wisdom of an Orpheus, Virgil, H^sio,
(...), and Homer altogether. When as, what have they else but the bark and
clothing m^erely wherein their high and profound doctrines lay? Never looking
farther into those their golden fictions for any higher sense, or any thing
diuiner in them infoulded and hid from the vulgar, but lu^ed with the
meruellous expression and artfull contexture of their fables- tanquam
paruipueri (as one says) per brumam ad ignem s^ssitantes, aniles nugas
fabellasque de Poetis imbibunt, cum interim de vtiliore sanctioreque sententia
minime sunt solliciti.

I have staid longer, and rubde harder me thinks than needs, upon the sore
of our now a day Poets. Let me leave them, and look back to the never enough
honored Ancients; and set them before our eyes, who no less deservedly wore
the name of Prophets, and Priuy-counsellors of the Gods (to use their own Him.
in Odiss.
phrase, or Sons of the Gods, as Plato (...) Repub. lib. (...).
calls them) than Poets. To the end we may, if in this declining state of the
world we cannot rectify our oblique one, by their perfect and strait line, yet
endeavor it: and in the mean time give the awefull reverence due to them, for
the many regions of distance between their knowledges and ours. And this that
we may the better do, let us parallel them with the Poets (if I may so call
them) of our times, in three things only, and so carry along together their
strait and our crooked line; for our better knowledge of them, and reformation
of our selves. In the first place then, let us take a suruay of their natural
inclination and propensenesse to the acquisitio^ of the knowledge of truth, by
what is delivered to us of them; as also, of their willing neglect, and
auersion from all worldly business and cogitations that might be hindrances in
the way to their desired end.

1. It is in humane experience found, as well as by all writers determined,
that the powerfullest of all the affects of the mind is Love, and therefore the
divine Plato In Phaed^.
says, it is justly called Roma; which among the Greeks, is force, potency, or
vehemence. Of this Love there be two kinds; Celestial or Intellectual; or
else Carnal or Vulgar. Of both these kinds Sal^mon has spoken excellently; of
the Vulgar, in his Proverbs as a Moral, and in his Ecclesiastes as a Natural
Philosopher; and diuine-like of the divine and Intellectual Love in his
Canticle; for which it is called among all the rest of the holy Scripture
Canticum canticorum, as the most sacred and divine. The object of this
Celestial or Intellectual Love, (for the other, or vulgar Love it concerns
me not to mention,) is the excellency of the Beauty of Supernall and
Intellectual things: To the contemplation whereof, rational and wise Spirits
are forcibly raised and lifted aloft; yea lifted oftentimes so far (says
Plato) In Ione.
above mortality, as even- in Deum transeunt, and so full fraught with the
delight and abondance of the pleasure they feel in those their eleuations,
raptures, and mental alienations (wherein the sold remains for a time quite
separated as it were from the body) do not only sing with the ingenious Ovid:
Est D^us in nobis, agitante calescimus illo, But ^n an Extaticke manner, and to
use Plato's In Ione.
phrase) diuino afflatu co^cilati, cry out with the intraunced Zoroaster-Ope
thine eyes, open them wide; raise and lift them aloft. And of this, the
excellent Prince ^o: Picus-Mirandula, (in a discourse of his upon the doctrine
of Plato) gives the reason; saying: Such, whose understanding (being by
Philosophical study refined and illuminated) knows this sensible Beauty to
be but the image of another more pure and excellent, leaving the love of this,
desire to see the other; and perseuering in this elevation of the mind, arrive
at last to that celestial love; which although it lives in the understanding
of the soul of every man, yet they only (says he) make use of it, and they
are but few, who separating themselves wholly from the care of the body, seem
thence oftentimes extaticke, and as it were quite ravished and exalted above the
earth and all earthly amusements. And farther, in another place of that
Treatise, Fol. 507.
adds that many with the fervent love of the beauty and excellence of
intellectual things, have been so raized above all earthly considerations, as
they have lost the use of their corporal eyes. Homer (says he) with seeing
the ghost of Achilles, which inspired him with that Poeticke fury, that who
with understanding reads, shall find to contain in it all intellectual
contemplation, was thereby deprived (or feigned to be deprived) of his
corporal eyesight, as one that seeing all things above, could not attend to
the heeding of triuiall and meaner things below. And such rapture of the
spirit, is expressed (says he) in the fable of (...) that Calima^us sings; who
for having seen Pallas naked (which (...) no other than that Ideall ^y, when
proceeds all sincere wisdom, and not clothed or covered with corporal
matter) became suddenly blind, and was by the same Pallas made a Prophet; so as
that which blinded his corporal eyes, opened to him the eyes of his
understanding; by which he saw not only all things past, but also all that were
to come.

Lo, these, and such Spirits as these the learned Picus speaks of, such were
those of those Ancient Fathers of all learning, and ^yresia like Prophets, as
Poets: such their neglect of the body, and business of the world! Such their
blindness to all things of triuiall and inferior condition; And such lastly
were those extaticke eleuations; or that truly -diuinus furor of theirs, which
Plato speaking of In I^ne.
says it is a thing so sacred, as-non sine maximo fauore Dei comparari queat;
cannot be attained to without the wonderful favor of God. And which self
thing themselves meant in their fable of that beautiful Ganimede, they sing of,
(which interpreted, is the Contemplation of the Soul, or the Rational part of
Man) so dear to the God of gods and men, as that he raises it up to heaven,
there to power out to him (as they make him his cupbearer) the sovereign
Nectar of Sapience and wisdom, the liquor he is only best pleased and
delighted with. These were those fathers (as I lately called them) and fountes
of knowledge and learning; or nurses of wisdom, from whose pregnant breasts the
whole world has sucked the best part of all the humane knowledge it it has;
And from whose wise and excellent fables (as * one of our late Mythologians
truly notes) All those Nata^ Comes.
were after them called Philosophers took their grounds and first initia
Philosophandi; adding, that their Philosophy was no other than merely-
fabularum sensa ab inuolucris exuuijsque fabularum explicata-the senses and
meanings of fables taken out and separated from their husks and inuoluements.
With whom the excellent Io: Picus (or rather Phaenix as wisemen Ang^
Politianus, (who likewise calls him- Doctiorum omnium doctissimus,) Pau:
Iouius, Baroaldus, and our Sir Tho^ Moore, who (among infinite many others)
has voluminously write his praises.
have named him) consenting, says in his Apologia (speaking of the Poesies of
Zoroaster and Orpheu^-Orpheus apud Graecos ferme intiger; Zoroaster apud eos
mancus, apud Caldaeos absolutior legitur. Ambo (says he) priscae Sapientiae
patres and authors. Both of them fathers and authors of the ancient Wisdom.
With these also the most autenticke Iamblicus, the Caldean, who writes-
Pythagoras had- Orphicam Theologiam tanquam exemplar, ad quam ipse suam
effingeret formaretque philosophiam; the Theology of Orpheus as his copy and
pattern, by which he formed and fashioned his philosophy. I will ad a word
more of the before-cited Picus; who thus far farther of Orpheus in particular
In Apolog. fol. 83.
says- Sacreta de Numeris doctrina, and quicquid magnum sublimeque habuit
Graeca philosophia, ab Orphei institutis vt a primo font manauit; the
mystical doctrine of Numbers, and what ever the Greek philosophy had in it
great and high, flowed all from the Institutions of Orpheus, as from their
first fount. And of the rest of his rank and fraternity, those- Sapientiae
patres, ac duces (as Plato In Lyside.
calls those old excellent Poets), I will conclude in general, with the
testimony of first, the now-mentioned Plato; who says likewise elsewhere In
(...).
Nihil aliud sunt quam deorum interpretes; they are no other than the
Interpreters of the gods. And in another place In Phaedro.
that-their praeclara poemata non hominum sunt inuenta, sed caelestia munera.
Their excellent Poems are not the inventions of men, but gifts and and graces
of heaven. And lastly with Farra the learned Alexandrian, who speaking likewise
(...). (...). 32.
of the old Poets, says. Their fables are all full of most high Mysteries; and
have in them that splendour that is shed into the fancy and intellect, ravished,
and inflamed with divine fury. And in the same Treatise makes this particular
fol. 322.
mention of some of them- and in those times flourished Linus, Orpheus, Museus,
Homer, Hesiod, and all the other most famous of that truly golden age.

Now to apply this short view we have taken of these ancient Poets; whither
there appears ought in any our students, or writers of our times, be they
Poets or Philosophers (I put them together, as who are, or should be both
professors of but one, and the same learning, though by the one received and
delivered in the apparel of verse, the other of prose,) that may in any degree
of coherence suffer a parallel with either the Inclinations or Abilities of
such as these before mentioned, I wish we could see cause to grant. but rather,
that there is in them (for ought appears) no such inclination to the love or
search of any great or high truths (for the Truths sake, merely) nor the
like neglect of the world and blindness to the vanities thereof, in respect of
it, nor lastly, any fruits from them, sauouring of the like Industry, or
bearing any shadow scarce of similitude with that of theirs, we may positiuely
affirm; as a truth no less obuious to every man's eye, than the lamentable
cause and occasion thereof is to every man's understanding; which is the mean
accoumpt, or rather contempt and scorn that in these days, all vngaining
Sciences, and that conduce not immediately to worldly profit, or popular
eminence, are held in the. Poet especially.

Qual vaghezza di lauro, qual di mirto?
Pouera, e nuda vai filosofia,
Dice la turba al vil guadagno intesa.
Whence it is, that much time spent in sollid contemplative studies is held
vain and unnecessary; and these slight flashes of vngrou^ded fancy, (ingenious
Nothings, and mere imbroideries upon copwebbs) that the world swarms with,
(like sophisticate alchimy gold that will not abide the first touch, yet
glitters more in the eye than the sadd weight yer true gold), are only labored
for and attended too; because they take best, and most please the corrupt taste
and false appetite of the sordid and barbarous times we live in. And yet to
speak a troth, I cannot herein blame the diseased world so much, as I do the
infelicity of that sacred Art of Poesy; which like the sovereign prescriptions
of a Galen or Hypocrates, ordered and dispensed by illiterate Empyricks or
dogleeches, must needs (as the best phisicks ill handled) prove but so much
variety of poison instead of cure. And such are the mont'ibanke Rimers of the
time, and so faulty, that have so much abused their prefession, and the world;
and stuck so general a scandal upon that excellent Physic of the mind;
with the poison of their meritricious flatteries, and base servile fawning at
the heels of worldly wealth and greatness, as makes it abhorred of all men;
and most, of those that are of most understanding. For indeed what can be more
contemptible, or breed a greater indignation in wise, and understanding minds,
than to see the study of Wisdom made not only a mercinary, but vicious
occupation. And that same pu^icam Palladem, (as a wise Author from the like
resentment aptly says) deorum munere inter homines diuersantem eijci, explodi
exibilari, Non habere qui amet, qui faueat, nisi ipsa quasi prostans, and
praefloratae virginitatis accepta mercedula, maleparatum aes in amatoris
arculam referat.

2. The second great disparity, that I find between those ancient Fathers of
learning, and our modern writers, is in the price and estimation they held
their knowledges in. Which appears in the care they took to conceal them
from the unworthy vulgar; and which does no less commend their wisdom, than
conclude (by their contrary course) our Modernes, empty, and barren of any
thing rare and precious in them; who in all probability would not prostitute
all they know to the rape and spoil of every illiterate reader, were they not
conscious to themselves their treasor deserves not many locks to guard it
under. But that I may not conclude upon a- non concessum, for I remember I have
heard it affirmed, (and by some too that the time calls Scholars), that the
Ancients certainly spoke their meanings as plain as they could, and were the
honester men for doing so; and there may be more birds beside, of the same
feather with these; therefore I will in charity speak a word or two for these
peoples instruction; and in the mean between the whining Heraclite, and
ouer-rigid Democritus (as much as in me lies) comiter erranti monstrare viam.

Let such then as are to learn whither to conceal their knowledges, was the
intent and studied purpose of the Ancient Poets all, and most of the ancient
Philosophers also; let such I say, know, that, when in the worlds youth and
capabler estate, those old wise Egyptian Priests began to search out the
Mysteries of Nature, (which was at first the whole worlds only divinity) they
deuized, to the end to retain among themselves what they had found, (lest it
should be abused and vilefied by being delivered to the vulgar) certain marks,
and characters of things, under which all the precepts of their wisdom were
contained; which marks they called Hieroglyphics or sacred grauings. And more
then thus, they delivered little: or what ever it was, yet always
dissimulanter, and in Enigma's and mystical riddles, as their following
disciples also did. And this prouizo of theirs, those Images of Sphynx they
placed before all their Temples did insinuate; and which they set for
admonitions, that high and Mystical matters should by riddles and enigmaticall
knotts be kept inuiolate from the profane Multitude. I will give instance of
one or two of them. The authentike testimony late cited (to other purpose) by
me of Orpheus, and his learning, (viz. That he was one of the priscae
sapientiae patres, and that the Secreta de numeris doctrina and what ever the
Greek Philosophy had in it- Magnum and sublime, did from his Institutions, vt
a primo font manare,) has these words immediately following- Sed qui erat
veterum mos philosophorum, ita Orpheus suorum dogmatum mysteria fabularum
intexit inuolucris, and poetico velamento dissimulauit; vt si quis legate illos
Hymnos nihil subesse credat praeter fabellas nugasque meracis fimas-but as it
was the manner of the Ancient Philosophers, so Orpheus within the foults and
inuoluements of fables, hid the mysteries of his doctrine; and dissembled the^
under a poeticke mask; so as who reads those hymns of his, will not believe
any thing to be included under them, but mere tales and trifles. Homer
likewise, by the same mouth positiuely auerred to have included in his two
Poems of Iliads and Odisses-all intellectual contemplation; and which are
called the Sun and Moon of the Earth, for the light they bear (as one well
notes) before all Learning; (and of which Democritus speaking, (as Farra In
Settena: fol. 259.
the Alexandrian observes) says- it was impossible but Homer, to have composed
so wonderful works, must have been endued with a divine and inspired nature;
who under a curious, and pleasing veil of fable, has taught the world how
great and excellent the beauty of true wisdom is. no less then Ang:
Politianus who says In Ambra.
- Omnia in his, and ab his sunt omnia.) yet what appears (I say) in these
works of Homer to the mere; or ignorant reader, at all of doctrine or
document, or more, than two fictious impossible tales, or lies of many men that
never were, and thousands of deeds that never were done? Nor less cautious
than these, were most of the Ancient Philosophers also. The divine Plato
writing to a friend of his de supremis substantijs-Per aenigmata (says he)
dicendum est: ne si epistola forte ad aliorum peruenerit manus, quae tibi
scribimus, ab alijs intelligantur-we must write in enigma's and riddles; lest
if it come to other hands; what we write to thee, be understood by others.
Aristotle of those his books, wherein he treates of Supernatural things, says
(as Aulus Gellius testifies) In Nect: Attic:
that- they wereediti, and non editi; as much as to say, Mystically or
enigmatically written; adding farther- cognobiles ijs tantum erunt qui nos
audiunt-they shall be only known to our hearers or disciples. and this
closeness Pythagoras also having learned of those his Masters, and taught it
his disciples, he was made the Master of Silence. And who, as all the doctrines
he delivered were (after the manner of the Hebrews, Egyptians, and most
ancient Poets,) laid down in enigmaticall and figurative notions, so one
among other of his is this- Give not readily thy right hand to every one, by
which Precept (says the profound Iamblicus In lib: (...) Mister:
) that great Master aduertiseth that we ought not to communicate to unworthy
minds, and not yet practiced in the understanding of occulte doctrines, those
misterious instructions that are only to be opened (says he) and taught to
sacred and sublime wits, and such as have been a^ long time exercised and
versed in them.

Now, from this means that the first ancients used, of delivering their
knowledges thus among themselves by word of mouth; and by successiue reception
from them down to after ages, That Art of mystical writing by Numbers,
wherein they couched under a fabulous attire, those their verbal Instructions,
was after, called Scientia Cabalae, or the Science of reception: Cabala among
the Hebrews signifying no other than the Latin receptio: A learning by the
ancients held in high estimation and reverence and not without great reason;
for if God (as the excellent Io: Picus In Apolog. fol. 115.
rehearses)- nihil casu, sed omnia per suam sapientiam vt in pondere and
mensura, ita in numero disposuit; did nothing by chance, but through his
wisdom disposed all things as in weight and measure, so likewise in number;
(and which taught the ingenious Saluste to say, Sig^. du Bertas in his Columns.
that, --

-- -- Sacred harmony
And law of Number did accompany
Th'allmighty most, when first his ordinance
Appointed Earth to rest, and Heaven to dance)
Well might Plato In Epimenide.
consequently affirm that- among all liberal Arts, and contemplative
Sciences, the chiefest and most divine was the-Scientia numerandi. and who
likewise questioning why Man was the wisest of Animalls, answers himself
again (as Aristotle in his Problemes observes)- quia numerare nouit-because
he could number. no less than Auenzoar the Babylonian, whose frequent word by
Albumazars report (as Picus Mirandula In Apolog:
notes) was- eum emnia nosse qui nouerat numerare-that he knows all things
that knows number. But howsoever an Art thus highly cried up by the Ancients;
Yet a Learning (I say) now more than half lost; or at least by such as
possess any limb of it, rather talked of, thau taught. Rabanus a great Doctor
of the Christian Church only excepted, who has writ a particular book- de
Numerorum virtutibus. by diverse others, as Ambrose, Nazianzen, Origin,
Augustine, and many more, (as the learned Io: Picus at large in his Apology
shows) reuerendly mentioned, but never published in their writings. And I am
fully of opinion (which till I find reason to recant, I will not be ashamed to
own) that the Ignorance of this Art, and the worlds mayme in the want, or not
understanding of it, is insinuated in the Poets generally-sung fable of
Orpheus: whom they faigne to have recovered his Euridice from Hell, with his
Music; that is Truth and Equity, from darkness of Barbarism and Ignorance,
with his profound and excellent Doctrines; but, that in the thick caliginous
way to the vpper-earth, she was lost again; and remains lost to us, that read
and understand him not, for want, merely of the knowledge of that Art of
Numbers that should unlock and explane his Mystical meanings to us.

This Learning of the Egyptians (thus concealed by them, as I have showed)
being transferred from them to the Greeks; was by them from hand to hand
delivered still in fabulous riddles among them; and thence down to the
Latins. Of which beads, the ingenious Ovid has made a curious and excellent
chain; though perhaps he understood not their depth; as our wisest
Naturalists doubt not to affirm, his other Country men I ucretius, and that
more learned Scholar (I mean Imitater) of Hesiod, the singular Uirgil, did;
and which are the sinews and marrow, no less than stars and ornaments of
his incomparable Poems: And still by them, as by their masters before them,
preserved with equal care, from the mischief of diuulgation, or Profanation:
a vice by the Ancients in general, no less than by Moses particularly, in
the delivering of the Law (according to the opinions of the most learned, both
Christian Divines, and Jewish Rabines) with singular caution provided against
and avoided. Write (said the Angel to Esdras) Lib: 2. ca: ^2. ver: 37.
all these things that thou have seen, in a book, and hide them, and teach
them only to the wise of the people, whose hearts thou know may comprehend
and keep these secrets. And since I late mentioned that great Secretary of God,
Mos^s, to whose sacred pen as we cannot attribute too much, so, that we may
give the greater reverence to him, and consequently the greater credit to the
authority of those Ancient followers and imitaters of his, or (that I may
righter say, and not irreverently) those iointrunners with him in the same
example of closeness, and care to conceal, I will speak a word or two of
him. And upon the warrant of greater understandings than my own, auerre That
it is the firm opinion of all ancient writers, which (as an indubitable
troth), they do all with one mouth confirm^, that the full and entire knowledge
of all wisdom both divine and humane, is included in the five books of the
Mosaicke law- dissimulata autem, and occultata (as the excellent Io: Picus in
his learned In Heptap:
exposition upon him says) in literis ipsis, quibus dictiones legis contextae
sunt-But hidden and disguized even in the letters themselves that form the
precepts of the Law. And the same Picus, in In Apolog: fo: 81.
another discourse of his upon the books of Moses more at large to the same
purpose says- Scribunt non modo celebres Hebraeoru^ doctores (whom afterward
he names, Fo: 116.
as) Rabi Eliazar, Rabi Moysis de Aegypto, Rabi Simeon Ben Lagis, Rabi Ismahel,
Rabi Iodam, and Rabi Nachinan; sed ex nostris quoque Esdras, Hilarious, and
Origines, Mosem non legem modo, quam quinque exaratam libris posteris reliquit,
sed secretiorem quoque, and veram legis enarrationem in monte diuinitus
accepisse. Praeceptum autem ei a Deo, vt legem quidem populo publicaret, legis
autem interpretationem nec traderet literis nec inuulgaret, sed ipse Jesus Naue
tantum; tum ille, alijs deinceps sacerdotum primoribus, magna silentij
religione reuelaret-the most renowned and authe^tique not only among the Hebrew
Doctors, as Rabi Eliazar, Rabi Moses de Aegypto, Rabi Symeon etc. but among
ours ^lso, Esdras, Hillary, and Origin, do write that Moses received from God
upon the mount not the Law only, which he has left in five books exactly
delivered to posteri^y, but the more hidden also, and true explanation of the
Law: But with all, was warned and commanded by God, that as he should publish
the Law to the People, so the interpretation thereof, he should neither commit
to letters nor diuulge; but he to Joshua only and Joshua to the other succeeding
primaries among the Priests; and that, under a great religion of secrecy. and
concludes- Et merito quidem; Nam satis erat vulgaribus, and per simplicem
historiam nunc Dei potentiam, nunc in improbos iram, in bonos clementiam, in
omnes iustitiam agnoscere, and per diuina salutariaque praecepta, ad been
beateque viuendum and cultum relligionis institui; at misteria secretiora, and
sub cortice legis rudique verborum praetextu latitantia altissimae diuinitatis
arcana plebi palam facere, quid erat aliud quam dare sanctum canibus, and inter
porcos spargere margaritas; and not without great reason; for it was enough for
the multitude to be by merely the simple story, taught and made to know, now
the Power of God, now his Wrath against the wicked, Clemency toward the good,
and Justice to all; and by divine and wholesome precepts instructed in the
ways of religion, and holy life. But those secreter Mysteries, and
abstrusities of most high divinity, hidden and concealed under the bark, and
rude cover of the words, to have diuulged and laid these open to the vulgar;
what had it been other than to give holy things to dogs, and cast pearls among
swine? So he. And this little that I have here rehearsed (for in a thing so
known to all that are knowers, me thinks I have said rather too much than
otherwise) shall serve for instance of Moses his mystical manner of writing.
Which I have the rather done for instruction of some ignorant, though stiff
opposers of this truth, that I have lately met with; but chiefly in
justification of those other wise Ancients of his, and succeeding times,
Poets, and Philosophers, that were no less careful then Moses was, not to
give- Sanctum canibus, (as before said) nor inter porcos spargere margaritas.

Now to go about to examine whither it appears our Modernes (Poets especially,
for I will exempt diverse late prose-writers), have any the like closeness as
before mentioned; were a work sure as vain and unnecessary, as it is a truth
firm and unquestionable, that they possess the knowledge of no such mysteries
as deserve the use of any art at all for their concealing.

3. The last, and greatest disparity, and wherein above all others, the
grossest defect and maime appears, in our Modernes (and especially Poets) in
respect of the Ancients; is their general ignorance, even throughout all of
them, in any the mysteries and hidden properties of Nature; which as an
vnconcerning Inquisition it appears not in their writings they have at all
troubled their heads with. Poets I said especially (and indeed only) for we
have many Prose men excellent natural Philosophers in these late times; and
that observe strictly that closeness of their wise Masters the reverend
Ancients; So as now a days our Philosophers are all our Poets, or what our
Poets should be; and our Poesies grown to be little better than fardles of
such small ware as those Merchants the French call pedlers, carry up and down
to sell; whissles, painted rattles, and such like Bartholomew-babyes. for what
other are our common vninstructing fabulous rimes then amusements for fools
and children? But our Rimes (say they) are full of Moral doctrine. be it so.
But why not delivered then in plain prose and as openly to every man's
understanding, as it deserves to be taught, and commonly known by every one.
The Ancients (say they) were Authors of Fables, which they sung in measured
numbers, as we in imitation of them do. True: but sure enough their meanings
were of more high nature, and more difficult to be found out, then any book of
Manners we shall readily meet withal affoordes; else they had not writ them
so obscurely, or we should find them out more easily, and make some use of
them: whereas not understanding nor seeking to understand them, we make none at
all. We live in a myste, blind and benighted; and since our first fathers
disobedience poisoned himself and his posterity, Man is become the
imperfectest and most deficient Animal of all the field: for then he lost that
Instinct that the Beast retains; though with him the beast, and with it the
whole vegitable and general Terrene nature also suffered, and still groans
under the loss of their first purity, occasioned by his fall. What concerns
him now so nearly as to attend to the cultiuating or refining, and thereby
advancing of his rational part, to the purchase and regaining of his first
lost felicity? And what means to conduce to this purchase, can there be, but
the knowledge first, and love next (for none can love but what he first
knows) of his Maker, for whose love and service he was only made? And how can
this blind, lame, and utterly imperfect Man, with so great a lode to boot of
original and actual offense upon his back, hope to approach this supreme
altitude, and immensity, which -- -- In quella inaccessibil luce,
Quafi in alta caligine s'asconde,
(as an excellent Poetesse La Sig: ^a vitto: Colonna.
discribes the inscrutable Being of God) but by two means only: the one, by
laying his burden on him that on his Cross bore the burden of all our
defectes, and interpositions between us and the hope of the vision of his
blessed Essence face to face hereafter; and the other, by careful search of
him here in this life (according to Saint Paul's instruction), in his works;
who tells us Rom: cap: 1. ver: 20.
- those inuifible things of God are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made; or by the works of his blessed hands? So as, between
these two main and only means of acqui^ing here the knowledge, and hereafter
the vision of him wherein all our present and future happiness consists, what
middle place (to descend to my former discourse) can these men's Moral
Philosophy (trow we) challenge? which in its first Masters and teachers time,
before there was any better divinity known, might well enough pass for a
course kind of divinity; but howeuer, such as one, as (with the leave of our
Poets) needs no fiction to clothe or conceal it in. And therefore utterly
unfit to be the Subject of Poems: since it contains in it but the obuious
restraints or impulsions of the Humane Sense and will, to or from what it ynly
beforehand (without extrinsicke force or law) feels and knows it ought to
shun, or embrace. The other two more removed and harder lessons do
certainly more in the affair both of soul and body, concern us. And these
(if we be wise enough to love our selves so well), we must seek and take from
the hands of their fittest teachers. As, in the first, we need go no farther
(though learned and wise Writers have made mention, and to high purpose, of a
Theologia Philosophica, as they call some of the doctrines of the ancient
Poets), then to the Doctors, and Doctrines of that Church that God dyed to
plant, and which shall live till the worlds death. And for instruction in our
next necessary Lesson, to wit, the Mysteries of Nature, we must, if we will
follow Plato's advice- inquire of those (and by them be directed) who lived
nearest to the time of the gods; meaning the old wise Ethnicks: among whom, the
best Masters were certainly most, if not all of them, Poets; and from whose
fires (as I have formerly touched) the greatest part of all humane knowledges
have taken their first light. Among these, I say, and not elsewhere (excepting
the sacred Old Law only) must we search for the knowledge of the wise, and
hidden ways and workings of our great Gods hand maid, Nature. But alas who
finds, or who seeks now adays to find them? Nay (what is more strange)
there want not of these learned of our times, that will not be entreated to
admit those excellent Masters of knowledge to mean (if they allow them any
meaning) scarce other at all, then merely Moral doctrine.

I have known Latin and Greek Interpreters of them in these times; men
otherwise of much art, and such as able to render their Authors phrase to the
height of their good, in our worse language; yet ask the most, as I have some
of them, and I fear they will answer, as one (and the best) of our Greek
translators has ingenuously confessed to me, that for more then matter of
Morality, he has discovered little in his Authors meanings. Yet my old good
friend as well as I wish him, (and very well I wish him for those parts of
Fancy, Industry, and meritorious Ability that are in him) must pardon me that
I affirm, it is not truer that there ever was such a thing as a Musaeus, or
Hesiod, or Homer, whom he has taught to speak excellent English; then it is,
that the least part of the Doctrine (or their wisest expositors abuse me, and
other Ignorants with me) that they meant to lay down in those their wise,
though impossible fables, was matter of Manners, but chiefly Nature: No less
then in the rest of those few before, and many after them, whom all Antiquity
has cried up for excellent Poets, and called their works perfect Poems.

For proof of which Truth; we will first mention two or three of the best of
them; and to omit the multiplicity of less autentike testimonies, that all
Authors are full of, allege only the beforecited Mirandula, who speaking of
that- Magia naturalis, or natural wisdom, or as he defines it In Apolog: so:
112.
- exacta and absoluta cognitio omnium rerum naturalium-the exact and absolute
knowledge of all natural things (which the Ancients were Masters of) says,
Ibid: s^. 80.
that in that Art (among some others he mentions) Praestitit Homerus, Homer
excelled; and who- vt omnes alias sapientias, ita hanc quoque sub sui V^yxis
erroribus dissimulauit-as all other knowledges, so has hiddenly laid down
this also in his Ulysses his travails. As likewise of Orpheus In Conclus.
- Nihil efficacius Hymnis Orphei in naturali Magia, si debita musica, animi
intentio, and coeterae circumstantiae quas norunt sapientes fuerint adhibitae:
There is nothing of greater efficacy then the hymns of Orpheus in natural
Magic, if the fitting music, intention of the mind, and other circumstances
which are known to the wise, be considered and applied. And again Ibid.
- that they are of no less power in natural magic, or to the understanding
thereof, then the Psalms of David are in the Caball, or to understand the
Cabalistick Science by. And lastly, Zoroaster; who that he was a possessor
likewise of that- absoluta cognitio rerum Naturalium before metioned, no less
then of that Theological Philosophy his expounders find in him, may appear by
that Doctrine of his (in particular) of the- Scala a Tartaro ad primum ignem,
which the learned Io: Picus interprets In Conclu:
- Seriem naturarum vniuersi a non gradu materiae, ad eum qui est super omnem
gradum graduate protensum-the series or concatenation of the universal
Natures, from a no degree (as he speaks) of matter, to him that is above or
beyond all degree graduately extended; no less then by that Attribute (in
general) given him by all the learned of all Ages; viz: that he was one of the
greatest (as first) of Natural Magicians, or Masters of the absolute knowledge
of all Nature.

To omit (as I said) the Testimonies of an infinity of other Authors in
confirmation of the before-affirmed troth; who knows not, that most, if not
all of those fables in all the rest of the Ancients, of their gods and
goddesses especially, with the affinities, entercourses, and commerces between
themselves, and with others; (of which, as Homer, that Greek Oracle is
abu^dantly full, so the rest, as a Hesiod, Linus the Master, and Musaeus the
Scoller of Orpheus, and (as we have said) Zoroaster, and Orpheus himself, and
all those most ancient, (if we may believe their best expounders and relaters
of most we have of them, made the maine grounds and Subjects of their
writings;) who knows not (I say) that most, if not all, of those their fables
of this kind, and which have of all learned, in all ages, been chiefly
termed Poetic, and sit matter for Poesy; have never been by any wise
expounder made to mean other then merely the Generation of the Elements, with
their Virtues, and Changes; the Courses of the Stars, with their Powers, and
Influences; and all the most important Secrets of Nature, hanging necessarily
upon the knowledge of These; which could not suffer so simple a Relation as the
Ethick doctrine requires; because by the vulgarity of Those, much mischief
must in all reason ensue; being (also) of those tenderer things, that are
soonest profaned and vilefied by their cheapnesse; and This, cannot for the
general benefit of mankind be among the plainest of lessons too commonly
known and openly diuulged to every body.

I will not deny but the Ancients mingled much doctrine of Morality (yea, high
Divinity also) with their Natural Philosophy; as the late mentioned Zoroaster
first; who has divinely sung of the Essence and attributes of God. and was (as
the learned Farra auouches), In Settena: for 57.
- the first Author of that Religious Philosophy, or Philosophical Religion,
that was after followed and amplified by Mercurius Trismegistus, Orpheus,
Aglaophemus, Pythagoras, Eudoxus, Socrates, Plato, etc. And Orpheus next; who,
as he writ particular books; of Astrology, first (as Lucian In Dialog: de
Astrol:
tells us) of any man; as also of diseases and their cures; of the natures and
qualities of the Elements; of the force of Love or agreement in Natural
things; and many more that we read of, besides his Hymns which are perhaps the
greatest part of what now remains of him here among us: so his expounders
likewise find in him that Theologia Philosophica as they call it, which they
give to Zoroaster. Witness Pausanias, who reports In Boeoti^:
- Orpheus multahumanae politicaeque vitae vtilia inuenit: and vniuersam
Theologiam primus aperuit, and nesariorum f^orum expiationes excogitauit, etc.
But let us hear how himself In I^b: de verbo sacr^.
sings; and which is by Eusebius Pamphilus, in his honor rehearsed Lib: 13. de
Praep: Euangel:
.

O you that virtue follow, to my sense
Bend your attentive minds: Profane ones hence.
And thou Musaeus, who alone the shine
Highly contemplat'st of the forms divine,
Learn my notes; which with thinward eye behold,
And untouched in thy sacred bosom hold.
Incline thee by my safe-aduizing verse
To the high Author of this Universe.
One only, all immortal, such is he;
Whose Being I discover thus to thee;
This alone-perfect, this eternal King
Raised above all, created every thing,
And all things gouernes. with the Spirit alone
(Not otherwise) to be beheld, or known.
From him no ill springs. there is no god but he.
Think now, and look about thee prudently;
And better to discover him, lo I
His tracts and footsteps upon earth, and high
Strong hand behold, but cannot him descrie;
Who (to an vnimaginable height
Raised) in dark clouds conceales him from my sight.
Only a Caldean Meaning (...) Moses; who the holy (...) says- (...). unless
with Eusebius, we will have him mean the Patriarch Abraham.
saw him; and the grace
Has now aloft to view him face to face.
His sacred right hand graspes the Ocean; and
Touched with it, the proud mountains trembling stand
Even from the deep roots to their utmost height:
Nor feels at all th'immensnesse of their weight,
He, who above the heaven does dwell, yet guides
And gouernes all that under heaven abides.
Over all, through all does his va^l power extend;
Of th'Vniuerse beginning, midds, and end.
And as these two divine Authors in particular, so likewise among the r^ of the
Ancient Poets in general, I will grant they have in their Poesies (as I have
said) mingled much Morality with their Ethick doctrines. As in their Hercules
(...), U^s, Aene^s and other their Heroes they have given example of all
virtues; and punished all vices; as pride and ambition, in their Giants and
(...), etc. Contempt of the gods, in their Niobe, Ar^hne, Cass^ope, M^dusa,
Amphion, Mar^s, the M^eides, etc. murder, lust, couetise, and the rest, in
their (...), Ixion, S^phus, Mid^, T^, T^, etc. Yet questionless infinite many
more of their fables then these,) though even these and the rest of this kind
want not among our best Mythologians their Physic, as well as Ethick
meanings,) as all those of their gods and goddesses, with their powers and
dignies, and all passage of affinity and commerce between themselves, and
between them and others, were (as I have said before) made to mean mere
matter of Nature; and in no possibility of Sense to be wrested to the doctrine
of Manners, unless a man will (withal) be so inhumane as to allow all those
riotts rapes, murders, a^ ulteries, incestes, and those nefaria and nefanda,
vnnaturally-seeming vices that they tell of them, to be (literally or Morally
taken) sit examples of Manners, or wholesome instructions for the lives of men
to be leuelled and directed by.

Whereas, on the contrary side, (that I may instance some of them) who can make
that Rape of Pro^rpine, whom her mother Ceres (that under the Species of Corn
might include as well the whole Genus of the Vegetable nature) sought so long
for in the earth, to mean other, then the putrefaction, and succeeding
generation of the Seeds we commit to Pluto, or the earth? whom they make the
God o^ weal^h, calling him also Dis quasi dives (the same in Latin that Pluto
is in Greek) rich, or wealthy, because all things have their original from
the earth, and return to the earth again. Or what can Jupiters blasting of
his beloved Semele, after his having defloured her, and the wrapping of his
son he got on her (Bacchus, or wine) in his thigh after his production mean
other then the necessity of the Airs heat to his birth, in the generation;
and (after a violent pressure and dilaceration of his mother the Grape) the
like close imprisoning of him also, in a fit vessel, till he gain his full
maturity, and come to be fit aliment?

After these two particular scandalous fabl^s, and which I will call but
inferior speculations, yet necessary documents, because, of the Natures of
Come, and Wine, the Sustentacula vitae; (To omit the Adultery of Mars and
Venus, by which the Chemists will have meant the inseperability of those two
Metals that carry their names; witness that exuberance of Uenus or copper
which we call Vitriole, that is seldom or never found without some mixture
more or less of Mars or iron in it; as her husband Uulcan, or material fire
finds and shows the practitioners in Chemistry. And with this, other also of
the like obuiouser kind of truths in Nature; as Hebe's stumbling and f^lling
with the Nectar bowl in her hand, and thereby discovering her hidden parts to
the gods, as she served them at their board; meaning the nakedness of the
trees and plants in Autumn, when all their leaves are fallen from them by the
downfall or departure of the Spring, which their H^be, or goddess of youth as
the Ancients called her (because the Spring renewes and makes young all
things) means. And with these, the Inceste of Mirrha with her father; meaning
the Myrrh-tree, which the Sun (father of Plants) inflames, and making ouertures
in it, there flows thence that odorous Sabaean gum we call Myrrh, (meant
by her child Adonis, which interpreted is sweet, pleasant, or delightful.) To
omit (I say) these, and the like triuialler (though true) observations in
Nature; and that carry also so foul a face to the eye; I would ask who can
make those fights and cont^ntions that the wise Homer faignes between his Gods
and Goddesses to mean other then the natural Contrariety of the Elements: and
especially of the Fire and Water; which as they are tempered and reconciled by
the air, so Juno (which signifies the aerie region) reconciles, and accords the
warring Gods. and next, what in general those frequent, and no less
scandalous brawles between Jupiter and (his wife and sister) Juno, can be made
to mean other, then those Meteors occasioned by the upper and lower Region of
the Airs differing temperatures; Or what all those his unlawful loves, his
compressing so many Dryads, Nayads, and Nereiads (woodnymphes, and
waternymphes) and the rest, can mean other then merely the Fires power upon
the Earth, and waters; (a study of a higher nature and vaster extente then the
first alleged) and which Jupiters Inceste with his sister Ceres likewise
means; and is the same with the tale of the contention of Phaeton which is
Incendium, with the son of Isis which is Terra.

A Theme too infinite to pursue; and no less a fault here, then (perhaps) a
folly at all to mention: For (besides the being a subject utterly unfit to
suffer a mixture with a discourse of so light a nature as this of mine, where a
slight touch at the general mistake and abuse of Poesy in our times, was only
intended) suppose a man should (whereas I have here laid down the fair sense
of but two or three of the foulest of them) be at the pains of running through
all the Fables of the Ancients, and out of them show the reader, and lead him
by the fingar as it were (who yet can discover nothing but matter of Manners in
them) to the speculation of the entire Secret of our great God of Nature, in
his miraculous fabric of this World, (which, their god Pan, or the universal
simple bodies, and seeds of all Nature, gotten by Mercury or the divine Will,
by which all things came to be created means;) And (beginning with Moses)
show him how the Spirit of God first moving upon the waters (a Mystery perhaps
by few of our duller Modernes understood, though a Thales Milefius, or
Heraclius the Ephesian, two Heathens, could instruct them) they faigne him
under the name of Jupiter, by compressing Latona (meaning the shades or
darkness of the first Chaos) to have begot on her, Apollo and Diana, which is
the Sun and Moon, when he said- fiat lux, and lux fuit, and carry him along
from this beginning to the end and complete knowledge of all Nature, which as
Moses darkely, they no less darkely delivered;) Suppose (I say) a man should
take this task upon him, I would feign know who they are that would be
perhaps, at least, that were, fit readers now a days of such a Treatise?
Because what one of a million of our Scollers or writers among us, understands,
or cares to be made understand scarce the lowest and triuiallest of Natures
ways? much less seeks to draw (by wisely observing her higher and more
hidden workings) any profitabler use or benefit from them, for their own, or
the public good, then perhaps to make an Almanac, or a diuingbote to take
butts or crabs under water with; or else some Douch waterbellowes, by rarefying
water into a comprest air to blow the fire withal?

Whenas if they could, but from that poor step, learn the way to get a little
higher up the right scale of Nature, and really indeed accord, and make a firm
peace and agreement between all the discordant Elements; and (as the Fable of
Cupids wrassle with Pan, and ouercomming him, teaches them the beginning of all
Natures productions are love and strife,) endeavor to irritate also, and force
this Pan, or Simple Matter of things to his fit procreatiue ability, by an
industrious and wise strife and colluctation with him; then they might perhaps
do somewhat in Philosophy not vnworth the talking of. No less then our common
practitioners in Physic might better deserve their names then most of them do;
(for to be a Physician, what is it but to be a general Naturalist, not mere
transcriber and applyer of particular book- recipes?) if they would but
practice, by that Rule and Base of Nature the world was built upon, to make
likewise and establish that Equality and concord between those warring
Elements (which are the Complexions) in Man's body, that one exceed not an other
in their Qualities: Or if they could but give better instance of their
acquaintance with the ways of Philosophy, then in burdning and oppressing
nature, rather then otherwise, as most of them do, with their crude Vegetable
and Mineral Physics, for not understanding the necessity, (or though they
did, yet not the Art) of exalting and bettering their natures, by correcting or
remoouing their inbred imperfections, with that fit preparation that Nature
teaches them.

The hidden workings of which wise Mistress, could we fully in all her ways
comprehend, how much would it clear, and how infinitely ennoble our blind and
groueling conditions, by exalting our understandings to the sight (as I have
before touched) of God, or- those invisible things of God (to use S. Paul's words
once again) which are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made; and thence instructing us, not sawcily to leap, but by the linkes of that
golden chain of Homer, that reaches from the foot of Jupiters throne to the
Farthe, more knowingly, and consesequently more humbly climb up to him, who
ought to be indeed the only end and period of all our knowledge, and
understanding. the which in us though but a small fainte beam of that our
great blessed Sun, yet is that breath of life that he breathed into us, to draw
us thereby (fecisti nos Domine propeter te; says the holy S. Augustine) In
Confess:
nearer to him, then all irrational Animalls of his making; as a no less
tenderly loving Father, then immense and omnipotent Creator.

To whom as we cannot give too much love and reverence; so neither can we
with too wary hands approach his sacred Mysteries in Holy Writ. Howbeit I must
(to return home to my former discourse) in honor and just praise of the
before mentioned wise Ancients (and with the premised befitting caution) not
doubt to say, that as his Instructions in the holy Scripture, and especially in
the old Law, must of necessity reach as far farther then the bare historical
truth (though not in the same manner) as extends the difference in our selves
between Nature alone, and Nature and Grace united; so likewise, that one, and
a great portion of the doctrine of that part of holy Writ, the wise Ethnicks
undoubtedly possessed in all perfection; to wit, the knowledge of all Natures
most high and hidden ways and workings: and though far short in the safer part
of wisdom, of their more enlightened successors, yet was the bare light (or
rather fire) of nature in them, enough to draw the^ as high as Reason could
help flesh and blood to reach heaven with. Nay which is more, were it not wide
of my purpose (though it contradicts it not) to conster them other then mere
children of Nature, I might perhaps gain favor of some of our weaker
persuaders in their spiritual Cures (if to flank and strengthen the divine
letter wi^h prophaner Authorities, be in this backward and incredulous age, not
irrequisite) by paralelling in the Historical part I mean chiefly, and as it
lies, the Sacred letter and Ethnic Poesyes together to a large extention: And
beginning with Moses, show them, all those- dij ma^orum gentium from Saturn to
Deucalions deluge, were but names for Adam, Caine, Lamech and the rest of their
successors to Noah's flood: Nor that their Rhaea (or Terra, mother of all the
Gods) and Uenus, could be other then Moses his Eua and Noem... What other can
He fiod's * Pandora-the Lib: 1. Oper: and dier:
first and beautifullest of all women, by whom all evils were dispersed and
spread upon the Earth, mean then Moses his Eve? What can Homers Ate, whom he
calls* the first daughter of Ilia: lib: 19.
Jupiter, and a woman pernicious and harmefull to all us mortals; and in an
other place tells how the wisest of men was cosened and deceived by his wife;
what can he I say, mean in these women but Eve? What was the Poets Bacchus but
his Noah, or Noachus, first corrupted to Boachu^, and after, by remoouing a
letter, to Bacchus; who, (as Moses tells us of Noah,) was the first likewise in
their account, that planted the vine, and taught men the use of wines soon
after the universal deluge? What can be plainer then that by their Ianus they
meant Noah also, whom they give two faces to, for having seen both the old and
new world; and which, his name (in Hebrew, Iain, or wine) likewise confirms;
Noah being (as we late alleged Moses for witness) the first inuentor of the
use of wines? What could they mean by their Golden-Age, when -- Nulli
subigebant arua coloni;
-- -- Ipsaque tellus
Omnia liberius, nullo poscente ferebat;
But the state of Man before his Sin? and consequently by their Iron age, but
the worlds infelicity, and miseries that succeeded his fall? when -- Luctus,
and vltrices posuere cubilia curae;
Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus,
Et metus, and malesuada fames, and turpis egestas.
Lastly, (for I have too much already exceeded my commission) what can Adonis
horti among the Poets mean other then Moses his Eden, or terrestrial
Paradise? the Hebrew Eden being Uoluptas or Delitiae, whence the Greek (...)
(or pleasure) seems necessarily derived: The Caldaeans and Perfians (so I am
told) called it Pardeis, the Greeks, (...), the Latins altered the Greek
name to Paradisus; which as Eden, is (as, In Noc: Attic.
Aulus Gellius defines it) Locus amaenissimus, and voluptatis plenissimus; the
which self thing the ancient both Poets and Philosophers certainly meant by
their- horti Hesperidum likewise.

Now though we reverence Moses more (as we ought to do) then these his
condisciples, because inspired so far above them with the immediate spirit of
Almighty God; yet ought we nevertheless to reverence them, and the wisdom of
their fables, howeuer not understood by every body: his condisciples I call
them, because they read both under their Egyptian teachers one lesson; and
were (as Moses of himself says) expert in the learning of the Egyptians: yea
many of them (and Poets all) were (to speak fitlyer) the teachers of that
Learning themselves, and Masters therein no less then Moses. How can we then
indeed attribute too much to their knowledges, though delivered out of wise
consideration in riddles and fictious tales?

But alas (with shame enough may we speak it) so far are we now adays from
giving the due to them they deserve, as those their learned and excellent
fables seem rather read to be abused, then studied in these times; and even by
people too that are, or would be accounted profound men.

What child of learning or lover of Truth could abide to see great pretenders
to learning among us, that doubt, and obstinately too, whether the precious
treasure of that wisdom of the Ancients, so carefully by them left sealed up
to the use of their true Heirs (the wise and worthy of their posterity) be any
more indeed then a legacy of mere old wives tales to poison the world with. If
we will call this but ignorance, let us go farther; and suppose that a man (nor
unlearned one neither) shall have taken pains in four or five fables of the
Ancients to unfold and deliver us much doctrine and high meanings in them,
which he calls their wisdom; and yet the same man in an other Treatise of his,
shall say of those ancient Fables.- I think they were first made, and their
expositions devised afterward: and a little after- Of Homer himself,
notwithstanding he was made a kind of Scripture by the latter Scooles of the
Graecians, yet I should without any difficulty pronounce his fables had in his
own meaning no such inwardnesse, etc. What shall we make of such willing
contradictio^s, when a man to vent a few fancies of his own, shall tell us
first, they are the wisdom of the Ancients; and next, that those Ancient
fables were but mere fables, and without wisdom or meaning, til their
expositours gave them a meaning; and then, scornefully and contemptuously (as
if all Poetry were but Play-vanity) shut up that discourse of his of Poetry,
with- It is not good to stay too long in the Theater.

But let me not stick too long neither in this mire; nor seem ouer-sensible of
wrong to what can suffer none; for- Veritas (says the holy writ) magna es^,
and praeualebit: and such are (nor less great and prevailing then truth it
self) those before mentioned Arcana of our wise Ancients; which no Barbarism
I know can efface; nor all the dampes and thick fogs by dull and durty
Ignorance breathed on them, darken at all, or hide from the quick eye of select
and happier understandings; who know full well, the ripest friutes of knowledge
grow ever highest; while the lower-hanging boughs (for every ones gripe) are
either barren, or their fruit too sour to be worth the gathering. And among
such may they ever rest, safe wrapped up in their husks, and inuoluements: And
let our writers write (if it can be no better) and Rime^s rhyme still after
their accustomed and most accepted manner, and still captiuate and ravish their
like hearers. Though in my own inclination, I could with much iuster alacrety,
then in person of the Roman Poet, with his- Uilia miretur vulgus; or Roman
Orator, with his- Similes habent sua labra lactucas (while he laughed to see a
greedy Ass at his suitable thissles,) wish we might each one, according to the
measure of his illumination, and by the direction of Gods two great books,
that of his law first, and that of the Creature next, (wherein, to use the
excellent ^o: Picus his phrase In Conclus:
- leguntur magnalia Dei-the wonderful things of God are read) run on together
in a safe and firm rode of Truth: to the end that vindicating some part of
our lost Heritage and Beatitude here, we may thence (an advantage the holy
Maximus Tyrius In Sermon:
says the more happy spirits have over others) arrive the less Aliens and
strangers in the Land of our eternal Heritage, and Beatitude hereafter.

APPENDIX.
The before-written Treatise of the dignity of the old Poets and their
Poesies, falling into the view of some not iniudicious eyes; Among them, there
arose question, how it could be, that Plato, so great a lover and honorer of
the Ancient. Poets in general, and of Homer (one of the best of them) in
particular; should exclude and banish him nevertheless out of his
Commonwealth: To which is easily and briefly answered, that, as there is no
City, corporation, or commonwealth in the world, but differs from all others,
if not in all, at least in some particular laws, institutions, or customs;
so, most reasonable is it, that such a Commonwealth as Plato forms, should
more then any other, be differing from all others, in new Laws, rules, and
institutions: His intention being to frame an assembly of men, or republike,
which consisting only of Reason, was rather the Idaea of what a perfect
commonwealth should be, then as either being, or easy or possible to be put
into Act. He forms all his Citizens, divine, heroique, and perfectly
Philosophic and wise spirits, and such as are already arrived to the sum of
all intellectual height, and perfection of virtue and Sapience; And therefore
can have no need of a Homer or his instructions, to show them the way to be,
or make them what they are already made: In all other Commonwealths, the case
is differing; where Homers, Hesiods, Orpheusses, and those Fathers of knowledge
and learning, are ever necessary, to allure with the sweetness and pleasure of
their fictions, the minds of men to the love and knowledge of virtue and
wisdom: So as, out of this respect merely, and not that he was at all the
less worthy of honor and admiration, (in his fit place of use) was Homer
exempt, and shut out from Plato's imaginary assembly, and excellent republike.
And therefore I will conclude with Maximus Tyrius, who says (as ^arra
Alexandrinus observes In Sette^r:
) - We ought to give honor to Plato; but yet (...), as we rob not the great
Homer, nor (...) him of his due and deserved praises.

FINIS.
THE TALE OF NARCISSUS briefly Mythologised.

Aduertisment to the Reader.
AFter I had writ the precedent Discourse of the value of true Poesy, and
therein given a short general Notion only, of the being (as I conceived)
somewhat in the fables of the Ancients, considerable, and to be esteemed above
the multitude of the vninstructing works of most of our Modern Poets; I
remembered my self of the Fable of their Narcissus, which I had diverse years
since, put into Euglish: and finding it not void of his meaning, no less then
those other the like documents delivered in Fables by the wise Ancients for
the worlds instruction; I was not vnwilliug to annexe it (together with a short
observation upon it) to the former Treatise: to the end the worthy lover of
Truth, finding in but this one among a million of their fables, somewhat he
perhaps before, heeded (or understood) not, (though a tale frequently read by
every body) he might the less err in his search of humane knowledge; being
prompted where it is in an ample manner to be found and approached: to wit,
among the wiser expounders of the excellent fictions of those ancient Fathers
and masters of learning and wisdom.

LIriope (fair Nymphe, of Thetis borne)
The god Cephissus loved; and having long
In vain her maidenly denialls boarne,
Forced her at last his silver streams among.
'Tweene them a buoye was got, fair as the Morn,
And (if truth were in grave Tiresia's tongue)
Immortal as his Sire; might he know never,
But live a stranger to himself for ever.
No sooner from his birthday bad the Sun
After three Lusters, in his carre of light
Three yearly rounds more through the Zodiac run,
When this bright-visadg'd buoye (Narcissus hight)
Was grown to that supreme perfection
Of beauty and grace, combinde to breed delight,
As no degree, no sex, no age are free,
But all perforce of him enamored be.
The winning features of his face were such,
As the best beauties seemed to his, but bad;
Sweet, soft, and fresh to look upon, and touch,
The tender hue was of the lovely lad;
Widows desired, and married wives as much,
And every maid a longing for him had;
No heart so chaste, and free from amo'rous fire,
But he could tainte, and kindle with desire.
Yet his proud hawty mind had in disdain
What ever beauty came within his fight;
Nor car'de the choycest Virgins love to gain,
Whereto by kind, Nature does man inuit;
Nor yet of riper women sought to'obtaine
The vs'de allay of the bloods appetite;
But only lou'de, ador'de, and deifi'de
Himself, dispizing all the world beside.
One day, that lovely browe, those lively eyes,
That ruby lip, that alabaster chi^e
And crimson cheek of his, a Nymphe espyes,
A Nymphe that never does to speak begin,
But readily to such as speak, replies;
Though all her words lame and imperfect been,
While in her mouth confounding all the rest,
Her last word only comes out perfectest.
This Nymphe which then, and still we Echo name,
That answers others speech, but speaks to none,
Was not as now, a mere voice peec'd, and lame,
But form and substance had of flesh and bone;
When to her tongue that imperfection came
To vente but half words, and them not her own,
Through a disdain she in the breast did raise
Of Juno, ielious of her husbands ways.
Ere which a voice she had, so sweet to the ear,
With a discourse so smooth, and full of pleasure,
As it a heaven was her words to hear,
Words which the heauyest grieuance and displeasure
Could mitigate, and easyer make to bear,
(Of sweet and sage so equal was their measure;)
For still she kept them by discretion good,
Within the seemly bounds of womanhood.
Far was this fair maids fair toungs glory spread,
Winning the minds of all men, by the swaye
Of her imperious eloquution ledd,
Where with a thousand brabbles every day
Among the Nymphs, Siluans, and shepherds bredd
She easily atton'de; but Heavens queen (aye
Frying in a jelious fire) refte her of the' honor
Of her smooth speech, for the shrewd turns 't had done her.
Juno, that ever had a ielious head,
(Her husband did so often her bed abuse)
Meaning to have stolen upon him, where i'bed
She thought he took the pleasure he did use,
This Nymphe to' auuerte (by good aduizement ledd)
The mischief that such errors often ensues,
Would with smooth stories entertayne his queen,
Till he had time to get away unseen.
Having bin often beguild with this deceit,
Juno at length (...) aim of ^er speech perceived,
And said, You shall (Nymphe) with your subtle bayte
Catch me no more, or I am much deceived;
Your fluent tongue shall have a medcine strait,
That by' it I may be never after grieved;
When you have fewer words to speak, we will see
How you can make your wonted sport with me.
And what she threatened, quickly took effect;
For, from that time she could speak plain no more,
Nor but repeat (such was her toungs defect)
Pieces of words that had bin spoke before.
This Nymphe, the buoy whom so much beauty decked
No sooner viewed, but love assailed sore
Her breast; she proves to him her thoughts to break
In words, but cannot first begin to speak.
Amazed as mute she slands, loath to be seen,
And to a thicket by, anon she hyes;
Thence, (where he laid was on a flowery green,)
Conuayes about him her attentive eyes
In many' a fearful glance, the boughs between,
Then, how to' aproach him nearer, does deuize;
S^ill with new fuel feeding her desire,
Till all her breast falls of a burning fire.
While thus the inkindled maid viewes him unseen,
And neither yet, a word to other spoke,
He hears a noise among the bushes green
That unawares her foot did (tripping) make,
And looks if any had about him been,
But sees not her that languisht for his sake.
Hear I not one? quoth he; One, says the maid:
Framing a troth from the last word he said.
Much at this voice began the lad to muze,
But whence it yssue'd could not yet deuize;
And as men often on such occasion use;
Now here now there he throws his earnest eyes;
Then once again he thus his speech renewes,
May not I see thee? she, I see thee, cries;
He turns, and looks this way, and that again;
She fears and hides her, and he looks in vain.
Still more and more amazed he grows, and goes
Searching each place about him busily,
But nothing finds: then cries come hither; those
Words she returns, and cries come hither; he
Says here I am, do thou thy self disclose,
For as I hear, feign would I know thee. She
Replies I know thee: so she did; for none
Ere came so near her heart as he had done.
He adds (desirous to hear out the rest)
If then thou know me, come and let us embrace;
And let us embrace, she soon replies: that blessed
And sovereign word enforced her from the place
Where she was hidd, and from her maiden breast
Chasing her fear, she' appears before the face
Of the fair buoy, whose words assured her clearly,
She should embrace him whom she loved so dearly.
Her neck to wreathe with his, she fair inclined,
Her arms to meet his arms, extended be;
But he that was quite of another mind,
Says, Do not think I love thee; readily
I love thee, she replies, rudely unkind
He adds, nor ever will I love thee. She
Still says, I love thee, as she said before;
He held his peace, and she could speak no more.
She hides her shaming eyes, the froward lad
Pusheth her from him, and then from her flies.
She ynly raues, well nigh with sorrow mad
To' have wooed him so, that does her love despize;
And if by such a tongue as erst she had,
But half the grief that in her bosom lies
Were vtt'red, she might move with her laments
The heavens, the Earth, and all the Elements.
Her pale sick looks the woeful witness bear
Of her hearts agonye, and bitter teene;
Her flesh she batters, martyrs her fair baire,
And, shaming ere to be of any seen,
Hides her in some wild wood or cave, and there
Answers perhaps if she have questioned been;
And more and more increases every day
Loves flame in her, and meltes her life away.
That flame eftsoone began all her body blast;
Th'humor and blood resolved into gross air;
The flesh to ashes in a moment past,
That was so sleeke to feel, and looked so fair,
The bones and voice only remained at last;
But soon the bones to hard stones turned are;
All that of her now lives is th'empty sound
That from the caves does to our ears rebound.
Beside this Nymphe, not the most fair Napaea
Or Hamadriad that was ever borne,
Could move Narcissus; no not Cytherea
Or wise Minerua could his fancy turn.
Among the neglected troop, a Nymphe to' Astraea
For justice prays, and vengiance on the scorn
Of this disdainefull youth, that does despize
Not nymphs alone, but heavenly deities.
O thou (she cries) whose all-impartiall hand
The balance of heavens Equity sustaines,
Do on this hawty head that does withstand
Nature, and heaven, and all the world disdaines,
Due justice; o let some auengeing brande
Teach him by's own to pity others pains,
And grant he may himself approve the grieves
He has to thousands given, and daily gives.
The just Petition that this Nymphe preferred,
Which she with rayning eyes repeated often,
The Poures immortal had no sooner heard,
But they Ramnusia summond from alofte,
Whose sad doom was (and was not long deferred)
That love should render his hard boosome soft;
But such a love, and of so strange a nature,
As nere before possessed human creature.
Within a shady grove (under a hill)
That opes into a meadow fair, and wide,
Whose ample face a thousand py'ed flowers fill,
And many' an odorous herb, and plant beside,
Rizeth a fountain fresh and cool; for still
The wood of one, and of the other side
The shady shoulders, of the hill defend it,
That the warm midday sun cannot offend it.
The water of this well is ever clear,
And of that wonderful transparency,
That his deep bottom seems to rise, and near
Offer it self to the behoulders eye.
The hot Sun burns the ground, and every where
Shepherd and sheep to the cool shadows fly;
When love, (to' avenge himself) to this Fount guides
This lovely buoy in whom no love abides.
Scalt with the Sun, and weary with the chase,
He seeks to rest himself, and quench his thirst,
And glad of having found so fit a place,
Lays by his bow and quiver from him first,
Then, his impatient drouth away to chase,
Inclines him to the flattring Fount. accursed
For ever may that trech'erous mirbor be
Wherein he hapt his own fair shade to see.
While ore the Fountains face his fair face lies,
And greedy lips the cooling liquor draw,
A greater hea^e does in his breast arise,
Caused by the shade he in the water saw.
Love finding soon whereon he fixed his eyes,
Began to the head his goulden arrow draw,
And all his heart with the vain love infected
Of what the liquid-christall glass reflected.
The beauteous image that he sees so clearly,
And his own shadow in the fountain makes;
Not for a shadow immateriall merely,
But for a body palpable, he takes;
Each part apart, then altogether nearly
Viewes, and grows thirstier as his thirst he slakes;
His eye his own eye sees, and loves the sight,
While with it self it does it self delight.
He' extolls the lip, admires the cheek, where he
The red and white so aptly mingled finds;
His either eye a star he deemes to be;
The shining hair that the brow fair imbindes,
He calls a sun-beame, it is so bright to see;
And his affection so his reason blindes,
As all this fair for which all eyes adore him,
He still imputes to what he sees before him.
Long gazing with this earnest admiration,
(Which well his every gesture testifies,)
The shadow seems copartner in his passion,
And in the same unrest to sympathize;
His own cach motion in the self same fashon
Appearing manifestly to his eyes;
The same expression that he gives his pain,
The same the shadow renders him again.
Transported with the filly vain desire
That the deceiptfull shadow breeds in him,
With his inkindled lips he presses nigher
To kiss the lips that on the water swim;
Those lips, as if they did his lips require,
Arize with equal have to the wells brimme;
But his abused lips their purpose miss,
And only the deluding water kiss.
The water (troubled) does the shade deface
With many' a wrinkle, he for fear to looze it,
Extends with loving have over the place
His greedy arms, of either side to' incloze it;
But they (beguild) only vain air embrace;
He frowing looks again; that frowns, he wooes it
Again with smiles. ah dire and cruel law
Of thy own frown (poor buoy) to stand in awe.
Yll-fated wretch, alas what do thou see
That in thy breast this mutiny awakes?
Perceiu'st thou not that what enamors thee
Is but the shadow thy own body makes?
And of how strange, and filly a quality
The passion is wherewith thy bosom aches,
That fondly flatters thee, it is still without thee,
When what thou seek'st, thou ever bear about thee?
So near about thee, as thou needst not fear
But while thou tarriest here, 'twill tarry too;
And when thou weary art of staying here,
'Twill go along with thee where ere thou go:
I see thine eyes blubbred with many'a tear,
And weary'ed, yet not satisfied with woe;
Thou mourn'dst at first, to' allay and ease thy pain,
And now thon mourn'st to see that mourn again.
The tears the shadow shedds, does this accursed
Fond lover for a firm assurance take,
That what he loves, feels no less amorous thirste,
And in compassion sorrows for his sake.
He opes his arms to' embrace it at first;
The Shade consents, and does like gesture make:
He nothing gripes; but turns, and rudely tears
His hair, and drownes his rosy cheeks in tears.
Desire of food, nor want of sleep can free
His thought from prosequuting still the woe
His tirannizing Passion breeds, whence be
Becoms a despe'rate pray to his lou'dfoe;
The enamourd eyes will nere auuerted be
From their own splendour, that enthralls him so,
As (spite of any reason can instruct him)
They sure will to a speedy death conduct him.
He rises up at length, and standing by,
Points to the Founte, as author of the wrong
His heart received through his unwary eye;
Then these sad accents the leau'd woods among
Sighs from his breasts impatient agony;
Ye woods to whom these wailing words belong,
(For you already have beheld in part
The wretched plight of my afflicted heart.)
Ye woods, whose brows to heaven, and feet to hell
Through the air and ample earth extended be,
That have so long held your fair right so well
Against the uncivil winters injury,
And many' a loue-sick wight have sure heard tell
The story of his sadd captivity
Among your dumb shades, O tell mee' if ever breast
Y' have heard with such a love as mine, possessed.
What heart ere such a darkness found to' infould it,
To love a false and fleeting thing so dear,
Which when I think within my arms I hold it,
Is fled from me, and I am nere the near;
I find my error; somewhat does withhould it,
And my delusion plainly does appear;
Yet can I nere the more auuerte my mind
From seeking still what I shall never find.
But see this woe that does all woe surmount,
What is it bars, what is it hinders me?
Is It either foming sea, or craggy mount,
Strong gate, or thick wall reared to' eternity?
Alas it is but a narrow shallow fount
That Is interposed tweene my desires and me,
Where what I seek, appears, and would come to me,
Did not the jelious waters bold it fro' me.
For I my head no sooner downwards hold,
With will to' impresse those ruby lips with mine,
But with like will (redyer then can be told)
It smiles, and does the beauteous head incline.
O thou fair fabric of celestial mould
Come forth, and let our lips and bosoms join;
Leave that unfriendly fountain, and come hither,
And sport we in this flowery mede together.
Aymee I call, but none will answer me.
Come yet at last, if but to let me know
Since I am young, lovely, and fair to see,
Why thou do hide thy self, and shun me so;
Look in my face, and view the harmony
The various flowers make that there freshly grow,
And tell me then, wherefore thou do abhor
That, that a thousand hearts do languish for.
I know (wretch that I am) I know thee now:
The art my own shadow merely; it is the shine
That falls upon the waters crystal brow
From this bright face, and beauteous limbs of mine,
And nothing else; I find, alas I know
It Is I and only I for which I pine;
At my own eyes alone (unhappy elfe)
I light the fire wherein I burn my self.
I know that I am it, and it is I
That both the loved am, and lover too;
But to allay my feau'rous malady
Alas what shall I say, what shall I do?
Shall I my self, to woo my self, apply,
Or stay perhaps till other do me woo?
Aymee, wealth makes me poor; accursed blessing
To pine in want, with overmuch possessing.
Ah could I this flesh-frame asunder part
And take a body from this body free;
And (having what I love so well, aparte,)
Divide my love between them equally,
So as they both, one interlouing heart
Possessed; I might perhaps contented be:
But o alas it never may be done
To make that two, that Nature made but one.
Under the combrous weight my soul does bear,
Wanting the mean it self to satisfy,
I fainte, and feel my death aproaching near;
And more I grieve a thousand fold to dye,
That in my ruin, that that is more dear
Then life to me, must fall as well as I;
Deaths face were not so sour to look upon,
Might that sweet face survive when I were gone.
He weeps, and to the water turns again,
Where he the weeping feigned Narcissus viewes;
And every tear which the false fair eyes rain,
The impatience of his balefull woe renewes;
He strives to touch the loved cause of his pain,
Troubling the waters that his eyes abuse;
Then chafes, and cries if I may neither feel
Nor hear, at least let me behold thee still.
He raues impatient of his hearts vnreste,
His garment tears, martyrs his hair and rendes it:
Then with his each bent sist, his inn'ocent breast
Beats, but the weed he wears somewhat defends it;
He finds it, and (himself more to moleste)
Remooues the garment, and starknak'd offends it
With many' a churlish blow, and so betakes him
Wholly to 's woe, as one whose sense forsakes him.
The battr'ed juory breast shows to the view
Like halfe-ripe grapes, apples, half red, or roses
Strewn on some lilly bank, that (blowing nue)
The virgin leaves to the warm Sun disclozes;
And such, as though changed from the former hue,
Yet naught at all of his first beauty loozes,
But seems (though sore perhaps, and akeing more)
As fair, or fairer then it was before.
He stoopes againes to take an other sight
Of the beloved occasion of his woe;
The water shows him soon the evil plight
The flesh was in had boarne so many' a blow;
He mournes to see it; and stody'ing how he might
Heal, and appeaze what he had injured so,
His arms (though well he knows the labor vain)
He needs will plunge into the fount again.
The water mooues, he mournes, the Shadow flies;
He lets it settle, and then looks again.
And now the fatal fire wherein he fryes,
His Sense consumes, through too much sense of pain;
So th'ore, that in a melting furnace lies,
Grows warm, then hot; nor long does so remain,
But meltes, (the fire tyring upon it the whiles)
And fusible, 'as the liquid water boiles.
The white, and fair vermilion faded be
That late imbellisht and adorned him so;
His eye the faint lidd couers heavily;
Each limb grows slack and powrelesse. Ecco although
He loathed and used her so disdainefully
Has still accompany'de him in his woe,
And ever would repeat, and answer make
Well as she could, to whatsoere he spoke.
What sound his hands (beating each other) made,
Or when his bosom felt their battery,
She the like sound returns. he to the Shade
Languishing cries, Behold for thee I dye:
For thee I dye, answers th'inamour'd maid,
Remembering her own cruel destiny.
At length he sadly sighs farewell, and dies.
Farewell says Echo, and no more replies.
His ghost is to the shades infernal gone,
And (carry'ng still his error with him) there
Looks him in those pale streams of Acheron,
And wooes, and winnes himself, and never the near.
The Nymphs and hamadryads every one
With the sad Nayads who his sisters were,
With shriekes and cries which they to heaven enforce,
Strew their fair shorn hairs on the bloudlesse corse.
Ecco, (that grieves no less then the other do)
Confounds her lamentation loud with theirs;
And would her tresses tear, and her flesh too,
Had she them still; but as she may, she bears
Her part in every sound of grief, and woe,
That from beat hand, or wayling voice she hears.
If any (weeping) cry, aymee he is gone,
She says the same, and multiplies the moan.
His fun'erall pile rounded with tapers bright,
The wayling Nymphs prepare without delay;
But the dead corse is vanished from their fight;
And in the place where the pale carcass lay,
A flower with yallow seed, and leaves milk white
Appears; a fairer flower April nor May
Yields; for it keeps much of his beauty still.
Some called a Lilly, some a Daffadill.
Observation upon the Tale of Narcissus.
As not the least of the Fables of the Ancients but had their meanings, and
most of them diverse meanings also, so no less has this of Narcissus, which
Ovid has smoothely sung, and I paraphrastically Engglisht after my own way,
and for my own pleasure. Wherein I am not unwilling to render (withal) what,
as I am taught a little by my own Genius, and more by better understandings
then my own, the Fable was by the first deuizers thereof made to mean. And
first, for the Geographick part; the Sense thereof is the Geographick sense.
(I conceive) obuious enough: The Tale tells us, the god Cephissus, a great
River in Boeotia, that running through the ager Atticus or Attick field (as the
place was aunciently called meets, and mingles his streams with the
Water-nymphe Liriope, a narrow brook so named; and having between them
compassed a flat low ground almost Iland-wise, before their falling together
into the Phalerick gulphe, they were fitly called the Parents of this Narcissus
or Daffadill, being a flower which, (besides the specificall nature it has to
grow, and thrive best in waterish places,) the medowy grounds those waters
encompassed, did chiefly yield and abound in. This Narcissus is fained to
eschew and fly the company the Physic sense.
of all women, no less then of the Nymphe Ecco that is enamored and doates
upon him; denoting by this auuersion of his, the nature of the flower that
bears his name; for the daffadill or water-lilly, the seeds thereof
especially (as the applyers of them in medcine have observed) do powerfully
extinguish the ability and desire of carnal copulation, by ouercooling of the
Animal seed; no less then does Porcelane, Lettuce, Agnus castus, Calamint,
White violetts, and the like of that kind. From this his before mentioned
quality, and the ill effect it works in man's body, his name Narcissus (which
is torpedo, languor, segnities-slothe, stupiditie, laziness) was by the
Anncients not unfitly given to this vegitable. And they out of this
consideration likewise feigned that Preserpine, when Pluto ravished her away as
she was gathering flowers, had her lap full of Narcissusses; because lazy and
vnbusied women are most subject unto such inconveniences. And because
slothful, inactive, and vnindustrious minds are for the most part incapable
of producing any permanent, substantial or real effects or fruit in any
kind, this frail flower therefore (the symbol of such like imperfect and
dificient inclinations,) was among the number of lost, dead, and
soone-to-be-forgotten things, by those Ancient inuestigators of Natures
trueths, particularly dedicated to their Infernal gods. The Moral expounders
of this Fable will have the Moral sense.
it mean thus,- Ecco, or Fame, (a fair voice) loves and wooes Narcissus, or
Philautia; but the selfe-louing man, enamored (like this Narcissus) only on
himself, and blind to all pleasures but those of the Sense, despises and
slightes the more to be embraced happiness of a lasting renown, and memory;
and therefore dying, his fame, and all of him dies with him, and he becomes
only- charus dis inferis. A much higher and nobler meaning the Divine sense.
then any of these before delivered, is by excellent Authors given to this
Fable: wherein we must know, that as all the first wise Ancients in general,
under characters, figures, and simboles of things, laid down the precepts of
their wisdom to Posterity, so in particular did Pythagoras, who (as the most
autentick Iamblicus the Caldaean tells us) delivered also the most part of his
doctrines in figurative, tipick, and symbolick Notions: among which, one of his
documents is this- While the winds breathe, adore Ecco. This Wind is (as the
before-mencioned Iamblicus, by consent of his other fellow- Cabalists says)
the Symbol of the Breath of God; and Ecco, the Reflection of this divine
breath, or Spirit upon us; or (as they interpret it) -the daughter of the
divine voice; which through the beatifying splendour it shedds and diffuses
through the Soul, is justly worthy to be reverenced and adored by us. This
Ecco descending upon a Narcissus, or such a Soul as (impurely and vitiously
affected) slights, and stops his ears to the Divine voice, or shutts his heart
from divine Inspirations, through his being enamored of not himself, but his
own shadow merely, ^d (buried in the ordures of the Sense) follows corporal
shadows, and flies the light and purity of Intellectual Beauty, he becoms
thence (being dispoyled, (as the great Iamblicus speaks) of his propper,
native, and celestial virtue, and ability,) an earthy, weak, worthless
thing, and fit sacrifize for only eternal oblivion, and the dij inferi; to
whom the Ancients (as is before noted) bequeathed and dedicated this their
lazy, stupid, and for-euer-famelesse Narcissus.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl: 2. lin: 7. for than. read then, and so throughout the book. fol: 3. lin:
12 for hotheaded read hotheaded. fol: 20. lin: 13. for-it it has r. it has.
fol: 21. lin: 7. for-intiger, r. integer. in the marginall note ibid: for
Baroaldus r. Beroalaus, and for write his praises. r. writ his praises. fo: 22.
lin: 20. for. and and graces. r. and graces. fo: 23. lin: 12. for. whither r.
whether. fo: 24. lin: vltim: for. are held in the. Poet espetially. r. are held
in. the Poet espe^ially. fo: 26. lin: 7. for-prefession. r. profession. and 5.
lines after for fawning r. fawnings. ibid: lin: 22. for- publicam r. pudicam.
fo: 31. lin: 4. for. Homer likewise. r. In Homer likewise. fo: 33. lin: 20.
for. a liaue bin as. r. as have bin a. fo: 36. lin. 2. for than: r. then. fo:
40. lin. vltim: for Rabi Moses. r. Rabi Moysi^. fo: 43. lin: 4. for knowledge.
r. knowledge. fo: 55. lin. 11. for of them; made. r. of them) mad^ fo: 61. lin:
1. for. digni^. r. dignities.

