THE CELESTIAL PVBLICAN.

A Sacred Poem: Lively describing the Birth, Progress, Bloody Passion, and
glorious Resurrection of our SAVIOVR.

THE SPIRITVALL SEA FIGHT.

The Mischievous Deceites of The WORLD, The FLESH, The Vicious Courtier.

The IESVITE.

The DEVIL.

Seven several Poems, with sundry Epitaphs and Anagrams.

By Nathanael Richards Gent.

COELVM CVPIO.

LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Roger Michell. 16^^.

THE AVTHOR.
N o man so high, but er'e he die may fall.
A ll Flesh is frail, all subject unto thrall;
T here is no content on Earth, none certain bred
H ealthfull; to day we live, to morrow dead.
A rt, nor Promotion, mends not each man's state,
N or are the Greatest Men most Fortunate.
A duancement's but a Smoke, Delight a Toy,
E ach glit'ring Pomp, each Soul seducing Joy,
L ike Hell-bred Poisons work the Souls annoy.
R eiect all lewd, vile, vain affecting pleasure,
I ntend thy future good Celestial Treasure,
C ontest with Sin; Heavens holy Armor wear,
H e that will conquer, he must Patience bear,
A t such rare Combats; Sacred aid is sent
R especting Man, all danger to prevent,
D ear is the Love of God, in him delight,
S eeke Heavenly Joys, those comforts infinite.
TO THE HEAVENLY LOVER OF DIVINE POEMS.
GOod Books, Good Minds best please, where bad Minds be,
Desert shall still be raild at, Vice pass free,
Envy, Debate, Pride, Flattery, and a whore;
The Vicious minded Fool, minds nothing more.
Harlots, for hot sinne-offerings shall find
Favor, and Friends, to them the World is kind,
But when the wealth of Souls, in Virtues Line
Leuells Man's crooked Thoughts, to thoughts Divine.
It Is slighted then; Most Worldlings, like false Friend,
Love not for Virtue, but their own base Ends.
Times Lordly Churl, deep read, in Errors School,
Esteems Plaine-Dealing, but a Virtuous Fool:
Therefore to thee, whose Sacred Soul desires
Celestial Solace, Heavenly Holy fires.
To thy Religious thoughts, apt to prevent,
And fly from Sin; to thee I this present.
To the Reader.
Here Is no Luxurious Verse to please the Ears
Of Whorish Minds (stranger to blessed Tears.)
No Court-Confounding Complement, nor style
Offeigned Poesy, nor base Flatties Guile:
Soule-suffering Grief for sin, I here express;
Wishing to All, Immortal happiness.
True Penitence gains Heaven; throws Sinners down
To raise them up to an Immortal Crown.
Devoted to Your Virtues, NATHANAEL RICHARDS.

THE CELESTIAL PVBLICAN.
I That have imperfections on my head,
Past Stars in number, or those sands that spread
The vast Seas bottom; shall not I confess,
How often against God, I desp'rately transgress,
Put off Repentance still from day to day,
Abuse his Mighty Patience, still delay
His dread Command; And like a senseless Sot,
Unmindful of his Mercies, mind them not:
No sooner do I find a good thought take me,
But from that Virtue, Flesh and Blood do shake me,
The longer life, the more I sin, and fall
From bad to worse, from worse to worst of all.
Let others boast their goodness, for my part,
Wretch that I am, I have a sinful Heart.
So tide and bound, fettered and chained within
So strong a Prison; such a Maze of sin,
That it is as far unlikely for me worm
E're to wind out, as for to raise a Storm,
Or slack a Tempest; Works of Wonder stand,
Far from the Reach of Mortals weak command,
None but the Hand of God, his special Grace,
Can pull me forth the Dungeon of disgrace.
It Is God that frees poor Man from all the Vices
Of this Worlds wicked villainous Entices.
And shall I then, in impious ways uneven
Offend so good a God; Defend me Heaven.
My trembling Conscience tells me, I have been
A very fearful Sinner, Slave to sin;
Of all Men, most unworthy of Salvation;
My sins deserve Heavens wrath, Hell and damnation,
Yet Mercy, Mercy Lord, Mercy I crave,
Shield my sad soul from the infernal Grave.
*Strangle my growing sins in their beginning,
*Demollish Lord in me Custom in sinning.
*For that is such a kind of desperate thing
*Men dream not on; O it is a damned sting!
*And thus it creepes on us; thoughts that are bent
*To Evil, get Delight, Delight Consent,
*Consent draws Action, Action Custom breeds,
*And as the Sick-Man, Simile.
(whom his own death feeds)
*Custom at large, takes sense of sin away,
*Sends souls to Hell, when it is too late to pray,
The Doom supernall never finds return,
To call thee back to Grace; think on it, or burn.
Think Heavens sweet, silver, Saints-Bell, toles all in,
To fright thee every Morn from vggly sin.
Let Mercy, every Evening (which does keep
Thee from Day-dangers, Death resembling sleep)
Be to thy soul a Prayer Book, to imprint
Tears in thine Eyes; Grief in thy Heart of flint.
Be it so, heavenly Father, unto me,
To me, and every one; Make us to see
And shun Sins Custom; with thy sacred wings
Guard us from Danger, Blessed King of Kings,
Thou that at Home, abroad, at Sea, on land,
Here, there, and every where, did ever stand,
My sure Protector, against griefs infinite,
Danger, the Jaws of Famine, Worlds despite,
Sickness, sad discontent, when I and Care,
Shook hands with sorrows Minion deep despair,
At that most wretched Time (my thoughts locked up
Beyond all hope of help;) then Mercies Cup
I freely tasted; blessed be thy Name
To me (my Gracious God,) prove still the same.
In my Extremes of grief, I called on thee,
Merciful God, and thou did set me free,
Thou were my only Comfort in distress,
Food, Raiment, all my Cure in heaviness,
My true Physician in unruly madness,
Celestial Music, in my sadest sadness,
Though all the World forsake me, God is kind,
He solace gives to my disconsolate mind,
O be the same for ever, may no ill
Seduce my soul to disobay thy will.
While others careless of their Souls true health
Greedy (like Hell) hunger for worldly wealth,
Preferment, Pride, the insatiate Devil, Lust,
Luxurious Fare, and vainly put their trust
In glassie Glory, couzening State behavior,
In valor Conquest, and Monarchall favor.
While Souls thus err, O thou the Lord of light,
Make me Heauen's Champion, Virtues Favorite.
*Field Honor's but a Vapor, the sound breast
*Puts on Church Armor; Faith, and sleights the rest.
*In love to Virtue, and true godly fear,
*Dwells Honor, not in Darts, Bow, Sling or Spear,
*Not in vain Beauty, Strength, the Pride of Wit,
*Presuming Riches, Learning, Valor, Credit,
*High Birth, Nobility, nor Gravity,
*Humanity, nor yet Virginity;
*But in the Humble Soul, whom holy Story
*Speaks, to maintain God, and the Gospels Glory,
*The King, and Kingdoms safety, Churches Peace,
*The Virgins Right, Widows, and Fatherless:
*These are the Noble steps which ever wait
*On Virtues Court, it is the true way of State
*That never fails (as sacred Scripture says)
*The humble, meek, Religious Knights of Faith.
O Heavenly Father, give me Grace to fly
Delight in sin, or suffer me to dye:
*Pleasures are poisons to this Soul of mine,
*There Is no true Joy on earth; but what is divine.
Lord, teach me for to prize this world at naught,
Upon thy Blessedness be all my thought.
*Make me (my God) in hate to impure lives,
*Kick at that Life, which Life of Heaven depriues.
Make me to feel, those wonted holy fires,
Which rapt my soul in sanctifide desires,
(Ravished all sense) and with admired amaze,
Exposed me, to that blessed burning blaze
Of glorious contemplation; thoughts divine
Then like Heavens Tapers in my Soul did shine; Simile.

But now that Glory fails; my soul has served
Folly so long; it is ready to be steru'd.
Dark sins desire has dimmed the Crystal sight,
Of Meditation, turned my Day to Night,
To dismal Night; where only I may see
My self alone, stand like a desolate Tree
Forsaken of all her Leaves; the Fruit dead,
And every Branch of comfort withered.
Naked performance, of Heavens sacred Word,
Pulls Hell on me; Me thinks the flaming sword,
Of Gods just vengeance, houer's over my head,
The Element burns, Simile.
the stars like molten Lead
Threaten destruction; while distressed I,
Like a condemned wretch sentenced to die,
Stand quaking at the Horror, dreadful woe
Shiuers my sinful soul. What shall I do?
Pity me King of Thunder, Heaven, and Earth,
Merciful Maker; thou that did give me Birth,
Thou that can muster Angels in the sky,
To safeguard souls from black impiety,
Thou that do feed, and clothe, and still persevere
To give me Health, be merciful for ever.
I that am poor, weak, feeble, and too apt
By the worlds whorish ways to be entrapt:
I that am slothful, dull, and negligent,
Unmindful of thy dread Commandment,
Beseech thy pardon, forgive my coldness
In serving thee; pardon that sinful boldness.
Pardon all idle prate; sins rotten talk,
Let not my steps tread that accursed walk
Which leads to lewdness, base delight in Pleasure,
Desire of Pomp, Vainglory, Tottering Treasure.
Deal not, O deal not with me as my merit
Truly deserves; drive out the vggly spirit
Of all uncleanness from my filthy flesh,
(My drooping soul with sanctity refresh.)
Shroud me beneath thy sacred Countenance,
Give me thy Servant David's Repentance,
The Patiency of Job, Paul's Purity,
And soule-afflicted Peter's weeping eye:
With holy Tears, Lord, make me to reject
The sin I (sinne-sicke sinner) most affect.
Hear me (Miraculous Majesty) and give
A Period to my cares, let me not live
Frustrate of heavenly thoughts; O send redress
(Thou bidst me write) keep me from Idleness,
From all ill Company, All ways unjust,
Sin, Satan, and the Laborynth of Lust,
Simile.
*Like Joseph (Mighty Maker) make me fly
*The tempting Baits of Beauties burning Eye.
*Divert my sad distressed soul from vice,
*And Ravish me with love of Paradise.
*Let not my wandering Eyes swim in the fire
*Of Lust-stung looks; nor let the loose desire
*Of woman's naked Paps, burn out mine Eyes
*With senseless gazing; make me to despise
*All base desires, sins of ill-gouern'd youth,
*All wicked Customs, against thy sacred Truth.
Suffer me, Worm unworthy, not in vain
To call on thee, let me some comfort gain
Or kneel for ever; happy man were I
To kneel, and pray, and praying thus to die.
My Arms are spread, come sempeternall Essence,
Ravish my soul; come blessed penitence,
Give me a thousand stabs; my soul has need
Of many thousand Tears; then let it bleed
Pierce, pierce my stubborn Heart; make that the Inn
Of Grace, which yet is but the house of sin.
At my dull follies I Will no longer wincke,
Sorrow shall be my Pen, sad Tears my Incke,
Misery my Paper, whereon I Will write
The sorrows of my soul, my Youth's delight,
My Paths of Pleasure, prodigal expenses,
My scarlet Crimes, and all my black offenses.
This Book I Will Dedicate unto my Heart,
My Heart, chief Actor, in sins Tragic part,
My Heart unprincely, Reuelling within
My Body, that Banqueting House of sin.
There chained to the Magic Music of free will,
Riots in poisoned pleasures, lewdly ill.
All that belongs to the Body every part,
(My soul alone excepted) serves my Heart,
Best pleased, and best at ease with pleasures Bane,
Most glad, to be most bad, and in that vain
Traitor to Truth; Each Limme a Mortal Foe,
To work my universal overthrow,
And to that end, with rude insatiate eyes,
Run all a whoring after vanities,
Soule-damning Banquets, Pomp, bewitching joy,
Forsake eternal Glory for a Toy;
Debarring hope of Heaven, and sweet Salvation,
For moment pleasure, licorish damnation.
O false, false Heart, false to thy dearest friend,
Wound me no more, for pity make an End.
I pity thy black life, nor can forbear
For thee, to shed, many a bleeding Tear.
Thou art my foe, and yet to see thee feed
Fat for Hells shambles my poor soul does bleed.
Bleeds inward, vndiscern'd of any Eye,
Except my God, and my own misery.
What shall I do? feign would I shun the sin
My frailty most delights to wander in:
And yet I cannot; when I strive against vice
To stand most firm, I Am tript up in a trice.
*Oh what a misery it is to have a mind
*For to be truly honest, well inclinde
*And not to be suffered; such is the state,
*Of my sad bleeding soul unfortunate.
Poor soul, that lives like Fortunes football tossed,
In hazard every minute to be lost,
As is the ship among Rocks, Simile.
steerd by the skill
Of an imperfect Pilats desperate will.
Which, like a fruitless naught respected fly, Simile.

Careless of danger, pain or misery,
Cutting the Air, flies at self-will so fast,
Till in the Spiders web it is caught at last.
So pleasure, soothing pleasure, does beguile,
The sinful Body with her covert guile,
Being the only cause, when life for breath
During her short space, vainly strives against death,
Then like a mast-lesse Bark in stormy weather, Simile.

The soul drives up and down, it knows not whether,
At last, for life misse-led, (sins that excel)
Body and soul at once, Iumpe into Hell.
*O thou the King, of those eternal fires
*Which spangle Heaven; good God grant my desires
*Infuse in me thy Grace, or I shall stray
*And so become a fearful Castaway.
*Help, or I sink, below the low degree,
*Of sins extremest infelicitie.
*Come, come Lord Jesus, O come thou and give
*Help to my helpless soul; I that do live
Simile.
Like the distressed Bird, trapt in a Snare,
Caught by a lime-twig flying from the Air;
In which distress, for comforts sweet relief,
Poor Innocent, with wings adds woe, to grief,
So fares my soul, striving sins snare to fly
Forced by deceit, lives snared in penury.
Accompaned with comfortless despair,
With sobs, and groans, and selfe-consuming care
In Sable sorrow sits, there sighs, and mournes, Simile.

Wastes, and consumes, like a spent Taper burns
Only for a slash, ready to go out,
With multitude of sins circl'd about.
The very thought does shake me, and the fear
Rowze my flint Heart, Simile.
that like a frighted Dear
Amazed stands; attaints mine eyes of treason,
Those eyes exclaim, against the eyes of reason,
The eye of reason, blames their wanton sight
As over ruled by foolish appetite,
Each guilty of their fault, to sin stand thrall,
No Limme but helps, the oppressed soul to fall,
*Man at the best, his vertu's very little,
*His state a Bubble, at the strong'st most brittle,
Simile.
*Man's life is like a Game at Tables, where
*A good chance happ'ning; if you do not there
*Mend it with some good play; the sad Games loss
*Will vex thy grieved soul, prove the sole cross
*To all thy comforts; All quietness than
Simile.
*Leaves thee; and like a drunken seruing-man,
(...)
*Which at his masters most need goes astray,
*Is ever sure, still to be out o'th way.
What shall I do? Where, whether shall I fly?
Here, there, I know not where, lie down and dye,
Up soul to Heaven, there get a glorious Crown,
I am too weak, too vile, sin pulls me down
O my unworthiness, my shame, my sin
When shall I shake thee of, when, when begin,
No; wilt not be, can I not do the good
I would? Must I be ruled by flesh, and blood?
Weep on, weep on, dissolve hard heart of flint,
Melt, melt thou stony rock, Tears never stint
Drop Marble Mount, drop to a crimson flood,
Sink my sins in Seas of penitent blood.
Come folded Arms, and you sad Eyes, sad Heart,
Come Soul oppressed with sorrow, play thy Part,
Haste to some gloomy-groue, there all alone
On the green mantled Earth, sigh, sob, and groan,
Spend precious time, with sacred thoghts that bears
Heaven in their Eyes, true Virtue in their tears,
Complain I will to fortune, not that whore
Which makes lean art, and pale-faced wisdom poor,
I Will not complain to her; but to that Ens
Almighty Fortune; in diuinest sense,
Groueling on Earth for sin; I Will cast forth groans,
Sighs shall convert to Tears; Tears into moanes.
Then will I start, from ground my Body raise
Shoot mine Eyes upward; against Heaven I Will gaze
Think on my God; my God, whose sacred Will
I have abused; my God most just to kill
Damn Soul, and Body, my rememb'rance blot
Out of the Book of Life, I that forgot
(In midst of all vain joys, Intemp'rate healths
Loose wanton chambering lascivious stealths.)
All-seeing Heaven; a God so good, so great,
He that to feed us with Spiritual meat,
Took humane shape; came down from Heaven, The Nativity of Christ.
to Earth
Entered the World; at whose soule-sauing Birth
The everlasting gates of Mercy stood
Open to all; His hour of flesh and blood,
Turned night to day, Heavens glittering Angel came
And to poor men, poor sheepheards did proclaim
A Savior borne, sins fury to control,
Never was such sweet music to the soul,
Before his coming; the Nativity
Of Christ brings mortals firm felicity.
*Mild was his Birth; his Life creations wonder,
*His death, deaths terror; O thou God of thunder,
*Master of man's salvation, all the Earth
*Reapt plenitude of Joy, when thou tookst Birth,
*Mortals were big with sin, villainy ripe,
*Hells dreadful Dragon, ready for to gripe
*Souls in his vggly paws; But then stepped in
*Our Savior; he redeemd lost souls, whose sin
*Gave them to death eternal; blessed hour,
*Blessed Nativity, thrice blessed power,
*Me thinks at thought of thy Nativity,
*I lie perfumed in Immortality.
When Christ was borne, all were newborn again,
Nere came like Music to the hearts of Men:
Angels for joy, clap their Celestial Wings,
And every Saint, every Crowned Martyr Sings
(Magnifico Deum) to mortals peace
The calm of Conscience, and shall mortals cease
Their glad expressions? No, let hate to vice
Dissolve sins cloud; Echo to Paradise
Our Saviors welcome, let us never more
Lie down to our dishonours like a whore Simile.

Dead to good council; never let dark deeds
Defile the Soul; Lets root up all the seeds
Of Pride, Lust, Envy, Hatred, and in place
Plant wisdom, meek humility and grace.
*Christ's Glory came cloathd in humility,
*To teach our Hell-bred Pride, Ciuility.
*Borne of a Virgin, came to the world a stranger
*His Palace an Oxe-stall, his Bed a Manger:
Over whose obscure abode, Heavens Taper shinde;
And to the souls of wisest Men diuinde
Great Natures wonder; pointed them the way
To find the worlds Redeemer; they obey
Made toward that fixed star which in the sky
Was the blessed Virgin Mary's Canopie.
To Beth-lehem they came; there with hearts glad
Adored the King of Glory, poorly clad.
Nor could blood thirsty Herod's strict command,
Nor bloody butchering of Babes withstand
His blessed Birth; whose admiration brings
Joy to the world; blessed be that King of Kings,
He that to cure sins Leaporous disease
A Heavenly Progress fetched, the Geste these:
CHRIST'S Setting forth from's Celestial PALACE, The Adamant of Glory.
Lodged in the Virgins Womb; from that blessed PLACE, To the Manger went; from
Manger to the Cross; From Cross departed (with his dear Bloods loss) Unto
the SEPVLCHER; there made all even, And so Returned, Gloriously Home to HEAVEN.
To HEAVEN, from whence LORD let thy SACRED FIRE, GLISTER upon my SOVLE, whose
sole Desire, Begges MERCY for my Sins, makes known to THEE, THOU that have
RAVIHST ALL, have Ravished Me.

The Passion of Christ.
Thirty three years Christ's sanctity did were
The Cloth of our Redemption, and did bear
Times heavy yoke of crosses, that we might,
With ease sustain all wrongs; in him delight
Simile.
*Like Martyred Stephen, whose loud crying groans
*Gained Heaven in the middle of a storm of stones.
*Love lead him on; in Death this Saint was Taster,
*And first, that followed his Immortal Master
*Christ Crucifide; whom none that truly hears,
*But sure 'twill thawe their frozen hearts to tears.
*Christ's whole Life was a Martyrdom, and Cross,
*Active, and Passive, and his dear bloods loss
*The Tragic Part, the bloody Scene which none
*But he himself must Act, and Act alone.
*Alone for us, (Heavens Glorious Lamp of Grace
*Grou'ling on Earth) fell on his sacred Face,
*He that is ever Lord of Mercies seat,
*Watered the Garden Cedron with the sweat
*Of bloody Brows, and Body; heaviness,
*And deadly sorrow, seized his blessedness:
*A kiss betrayed him, and a perjured lie,
*Was the Reward for all his purity,
In scorn, this Prince of Heaven was buffetted,
Spighted, spitted at, Extremely scourged,
Yet Torture never moved him; he was silent,
In all his bitter sufferings patient.
Never did Earthly King, (free from annoy)
Receive his Crown, nor with a greater joy
Went to his Coronation Dignifide
As Glories King; went to be Crucifide.
In him the Jews derided Majesty,
Condemned Innocence, scourged Piety,
*Head, Hands, Side, Feet, they to the Cross did Fix
*Made him all over a bloody Crucifixe.
Simile.
*Satan and Death like saucy serieants went
*To seize on him; to sheere that Innocent
*Blessed Lamb of God; But he who was to save
*All that belieu'd; they had no power to shave,
*His Patience, Death, and Devils force did quell
*He took the Great Leuiathan of Hell
*With the hook of his Cross; made him his slave
*Captived the Devil, and subdued the Grave,
Simile.
*Like a long looked for Book, Christ in the Press
Was kept, to come in Print forth, for to bless
*Our souls with that Salvation which does give
*New Life, whereby Eternally we live.
INRI.
Suffer'dst the Crown of Thorns t'empale thy Brain, The Key of Heaven.

Which down thy Checkes forced showers of Blood to rain:
Suffer'dst the piercing LAVNCE, that like a FLOVD
Sluc'd, from thy wounded Side, thy precious BLOOD
Nayl'd to the Cross; there CHRIST lost Souls to win,
Suffered, the World's huge ponderous weight of Sin.
Dear Savior sweet, sweet was thy dear Compassion,
Dearly expressed in that most bitter PASSION;
When whipped and scourged, thou mildly suffer'dst all,
Blows, Buffets, Blasphemies, VIN'GER and GALL,
Insulting Foes Reproach, Mockes, Scoffings, Scorn,
Thy SINEWS to be Rackt, thy BODY Torn.
Heavens Wrath, Hel's Rage;
On CHRIST, all Torments fell
To save our Souls from those blew flames in Hell.
At which the amazed EARTH with horror shook,
Darkness possessed the WORLD, Day Light forsook.
INRI.
CAN muddie Mortals mind their Actual EVILS,
And not Christ's SVFF'RINGS? (Such resemble Devils:)
HAPPY the MAN, whose sacred SOVLE is bent,
FOR Christ's ENDVRINGS, firmly to REPENT,
What Tongue? What Pen? Not all Man's Wit can tell
CHRIST'S Torments; they exceeded pains in Hell:
Her wonted course; the Sun obscured his Light,
At Death of JESUS CHRIST; that bloody sight
Made HELL to quake; Devils with Admiration,
Tremble to see the Cause of MAN'S Salvation!
Oh the rich thought, strike, strike amazing Thunder,
Shake Natures Frame; this impious Age with wonder!
And all for MAN,
Ungrateful, wretched MAN,
Are we not bound, to love and fear Him than?
O, yes, to spend whole hours, days, months, and years
In true Repentant Showers, and Floods of Tears.
Blessed, Blessed, O Blessed, Be that Divinity, The PYRAMID OF Paradise.
Three Sacred Persons GOD in Unity, WHOSE glorious Rauishing Resurrection,
Restored Us (lost) to Grace, Oh PERFECTION! Purify thou my Soul, my Heart, my
Mind: Snatch me from Earth, to Heaven make me inclined, Wholly to Thee, (All
worldly Pomp despising) Fix my THOVGHTS ever, On thy Blessed RISING: Give ME
A Sempeternall Reverence, To Thy ALL-glorious high Omnipotence. I that am
clogged with sin, and wretchedness, Desperate thoughts hunting after
Worldliness;) Thy Blessed Protection crave, clear the great score, Of all my
foul misdeeds, that I no more So great a Sinner prove; Lord let my strife,
Against my sins, Raise me from Death to Life. And from the Foot of vggly
sins disgrace, Mount, mount, my SOVLE, to the Pyramid of Grace.

Did each one truly know the true delight,
Wherein the wise contemplate Heavens rich sight,
'Twould fright th'excessiue sinners God-lesse face,
Make him, as in a Glass see his disgrace,
Tear op'e his eyes, that all amazed with horror,
Trembling he may behold with dreadful terror,
A guard of Furies, sucking at his soul,
That he may see his sins, horrid and foul,
(Live as in sulphurous flames;) discern his Evil,
See the fierce Devil, and cease to be a Devil.
Cease from damnations Heir, licentious life,
Cease from extremes in sin, soule-murdring strife,
Abhor to study state with greater Zeal
Then Zeal to Heaven, or the souls Commonweal
Abhor with solemn Oaths perjured to tear,
And rack the Name of Christ dreadlesse of fear
Wounding afresh (with trembling fear I write)
Wonder of Angels, that great God of Light.
His wounds, with Oaths of wounds, flesh, blood and heart,
(Horror of darkness) O blaspheming part!
Too too much used among God-lesse souls, who still
Infinite good pay with infinite ill.
As if no thought remained of future good,
No tears for him, that shed his precious blood,
But as the comely Actor, Simile.
whose fair part
Upon the stage presents an honest heart
For two hours space, a Virtuous Noble Mind,
His Scene expired, basely to vice inclinde,
Drink, Drabs, and Oaths, making no other use
With his fair Part but with excess abuse:
*O you that stand on Pynacles of state
*Let not the World deceive you, least too late
*From off your slippery height you come in thrall,
*o pash your selves in pieces past recall.
*Sell not fare Lord-ships, to keep Lady-ships,
*Nor suck damnation from a strumpets lips.
*Touch not those Spells of Sparta, let them Rot
*When Virtue rules in Man, Lust lives forgot.
One only Iemme, that is all the store I have,
Great of that little nothing, which shall crave
Of Heavens Great En's, not for my self alone,
But for thee Reader, thee, and every one,
Rareness of Rare example, and withal
An everlasting sky of Grace to fall
Upon our war on Earth, desiring Heaven,
For ways on Earth are crooked, all uneven.
*Save me, O save me, thou Eternal Terror
*To damned souls, I do confess each Error,
*The many thousand sins, unseen, unfelt
Which long, too long in my hard heart have dwelt,
*To thee, to thee, thou Everliving being
*Of an Eternal Majesty All-seeing,
*With penitent Heart I come, I call, I cry,
*Pardon my sins, help thou All-viewing Eye.
*Look down Soule-sauing sacred God of Truth
*Forgive, the infinite follies of my youth.
*Shield me Divinity from Satan's Ginnes
*Lord lay not to my Charge my Parents sins:
*Glory of Goodness in thy Mercy hear me;
*Let Hate, Revenge, nor Envy never come near me,
*Let neither Pride, nor hope of gain deceive me,
*Nor pleasure, nor the want of Means bereave me
*Of sense; least senseless wholly I despair,
*And so become the wretched Child of care.
*O sacred Savior make me ever try
*To live by honest Means, or let me die;
*Though grief, and I, have well acquainted been,
*Lord let me never grieve, but for my sin.
*So shall thy Mercy, never forgetful stand
*While I have Tongue, a Pen, a Head, a Hand.
THE SPIRITVALL SEA FIGHT.
EM'prour of Angels, O thou King of Stars,
Man's perfect solace against sins bloody Wars
When I behold, with contemplation Eye
The silver Spangles of thy Glorious sky;
Me thinks in that Blew-paper-Booke of Heaven,
I see ways of Mortals all vneu'n
The wretched soul of Man in every Place
Lives as in Hell on Earth, without thy Grace,
Temptation on Temptation, past control
Alures the Body, to betray the Soul.
Hell's Black Prince, Troops of spirits every day
Invade my sinne-seidg'd-soule; Furies display
Infernal Banners; while the Drum of Death
Beats a dead March; and e're I can take Breath
Sounds shrill Alarums; hot Assaults begin
The souls fierce Fight; muffl'd in cloudy sin,
I live beset, Millions of spirits round
Shoot at my soul; I stand on no firm ground
But tread on earth, as on a Ball of Ice
I cannot stand, nor stir for slip'ry Vice.
My Soul's a Ship, tossed on the Mountain Seas
Of this vast World, she never lives ar ease;
*Her sails are sighs, her Anchor deep despair,
*Her Compass Error, her sad Pilot, Care;
Far of from safeties shore, floates on the waves
Of fearful billows, Soul devouring Graves.
Rough, blustering, stubborn storms, yield no relief
On every Shroud, Each Tackling, hangs a grief:
Death like a dark cloud, besets every Place,
Here Rocks of Ruin, their Pirates lie in Chase
In every corner, Mischiefs hourly lurk,
*Pride fights against us like a furious Turk; Simile.

*Lust like a trech'rous Spaniard; murdering French,
*Like an infected poyson's loathsome stench,
*Gluttony like a German, drunkenness
*Like a Dutch Dun-kercker; whose impiousnesse
*Styles him the Master Gunner, to give fire
*To all sins black Artillery, Hells Ire
*Infernal chaine-shot, All soule-murd'ring strife,
To sink Man's weather-beaten ship of Life,
Which to gain Grace, no sooner weighs Anchor,
Sets sail for safety, but straight sins Canker,
The devouring Devil, Pyrate for Hell,
Chasing flies after, and with black Arts spell
Commands to stay; sometimes with beauteous forms
With songs of Sirens sometimes; sometimes storms.
Such pitchie Tempests, to be night the way,
As if the horror of the lattet day
Frighted the World; so stops the soul from bliss,
Shoots through, and through her, so she steers amiss.
Then as in bloody Sea Fights Men may see Simile.

Times sacrifice to valor, no man free
From desperate danger; every one maintains
The terror of the Fight (though with their brains
Dashed in each others Faces.) Vital breath,
Lost in a fighting flame; blood, and death:
Bullets, and Batteries, couers the ship all over
Her dismal deckes with horror, purple gore,
And scatterd limbs; so the souls Pinnace
In her spiritual fight sins does deface,
Murders our best of thoughts, like raging Seas,
Winds, storms and tempest drive us where they please.
The poor afflicted soul, Satan so blinds,
It knows not where she is; by whyzing winds.
Now tossed toth' top of all the Azure Sky,
Now tumbling as to Hell, with frighted Eye,
Her Flag of sins defiance Tempest-rent.
Her Sails torn all to Rags, her Maine-mast spent;
All out of Order: tossing to, and fro,
The soul distressed, knows not which way to go.
With gentle calm, check Satan's black storm, Lord,
We shipwreck else, Devils will come a Board
Burn with Hells wildfire, Flame, Ruin, Race,
Blot our souls hope, help Minister of Grace.
Safeties in Heaven, in this uncertain Life
Nothing but Hell-bred quick sands, War, and strife,
Soule-killing vapors, worldly vanities,
Thick clouds of vice Perpetual miseries,
There is a Voyage, to the Holy Land
In which the Truth, our blessed Card must stand
The Holy Ghost our Pilot to direct
The steerage of our course from sins neglect,
Toth' Haven, of Heaven; that happy Port of Rest,
Saluations Guard, true Cape of Comfort blessed.
There, Heavens bright Majesty, our Savior sweet,
Sits with the Hand of Mercy, for to Greet
And waft us to him; O may all that stray!
Sailing along the Coast of sorrow, Pray,
Pray unto him, he will guide their wandering Bark,
Tempest tossed hourly in the dreadful Dark.
If thou be Sea-sicke call upon him, and he
Shall soon with Health's sweet solace comfort thee;
Rebuke the raging winds, Times blackest storm,
And to a calm, Skie-swelling Seas reform:
No Rocks, Gulfs, Sands, nor Seas cloud-kissing waves
Sins dreadful Sea-fright, nor the desperate braues
Of Pirates, none shall hurt; let then thy care
See thy weak vessel Rigged, well Manned with prayer
And then launch forth, hoist sails, and when you spy
The Cape of good hope, keep it in thine eye.
Let holy thoughts, death threatening storms overcome*
That whatsoever chance there shall become,
The vessel of thy Body being foul,
Make sure to save the passenger, thy soul.
*He valiant, only Virtuous is that can
*Subdue his Sins; He Is the true Noble Man,
*There Is perfect valor, he true glory winnes,
*He Is the true Soldier, that subdues his sins:
*Breaks through the pikes of sin, all fiends that are
*In Hell, or Devils ruling in the Air,
(*Forcing his way to Heaven despite all charms)
*Enchantme^ts, dead-sleeps, all soule-flayling harms)
*Wrestling like Jacab, Simile.
constant in his fight
*Mindful of his maiestick-Makers sight.
To such belongs the Everlasting Crown
Of sempeternall Glory, true Ronowne;
Which to prepare thee for; cease to neglect
The Allmighties sacred service, let respect
Fear and true Reverence to his precious Word,
Be to thy soul that Helmet, Shield and Sword
Too strong for Satan, all the fiery Darts
Of Fiends and furies, Arm thy noble Parts
Thy Soul, thy Heart, thy Mind, strive to fulfill
(The Majesty of Heaven) his Divine Will.
And like the cunning curious Architect
Simile.
Earnest some goodly Building to Erect:
(Breaking his sleep) wholly imployes his mind
On the drawn Model; which when he does find
Exact, his Eye dwells ever then upon it,
And his affection never driven from it.
So when to thought we call our Saviors blood,
(That sempeternall platform of all good)
Shed for our sins, Let it for ever dwell
In the Idaea of our Minds, so Hell,
Sin, death, nor deadly desperate discontent,
Can bar the Heavenly heart from true content.
*What vggly worms are we that dare presume
*To pawn our souls for pleasure, dare consume
*Our Time on toys, when as we firmly know
*Time shall decay; we cannot feed, nor go,
*Nor promise life a Minuite; we pass to bed
*But Ignorant to rise alive, or dead.
*Admit daylight approaches, and the morn
*Inuites thee forth? thou never may return:
*Death by a thousand accidents does meet
*Health, Wealth, and Beauty; stabs them in the street,
*He that least thinks of death, some falling Tyle
*Timber, or Stone, does suddenly beguile
Him of his life, yea often when he refraines
And seeks to shun it, dasheth out his brains.
These Tragic Truths (true causes of dislike,)
Me-thinkes should move us to repent, and strike
A terror to our souls; force us to see
Man's outward danger; inward misery
Which like an unresisted roaring Tide
Runs through our veins, and apts the blood to pride
To all the sins that are, or ever were,
O horrid ill! have we not cause to fear,
To quake and tremble, when our dull dead Eyes
(Drunk with the poisoned dreggs of sin) never spies
The mischievous perils, and the black affright
That hourly wait, on the Spiritual fight.
Fiends live at Sea, and Furies on the Land,
*Gluttony for a Corporal does Stand,
*Au'rice a Pioner, Sloth you may spy
*An idle Gentleman of a Company.
*Wrath's the Serieant, Envy the Colors gain,
*Lust the Lieftennant is; Pride the Captain:
These in the Heart of every one take Place
Where cowardly soul's shun the blessed means of grace,
Let us for ever then resist all Evil
Wisdom commands us to defy the Devil;
To combat with our sins; oppose temptation,
Fight against Hell the Devil, and Damnation.
This for a Caveat take, strive to do well:
(Ingratitude to Heaven, picks open hell.)
While Grace is offered then, Watch, Fast, and Pray:
There Is no prevention in the latter day.
*None lives secure, that to his Vice lives friend,
*A Vicious life, often makes a vicious end.
*Strengthen me, my Creator, make me fight
*Thy HOLY BATTLE, let not the Worlds delight
*Dissuade my soul; sweet Jesus, for thy merits
*Enable me, Rowze my dejected Spirits,
*Vncharme Hells charm, O Sacred God untie
*My fettered Soul, let me not ever lie
*Lulled in the Strumpet lap of deadly sin,
*This Minute Sacred Savior now begin
*To give Release, and as thou did provide
*An Army of Angels, for Eliahs guide,
*Who (to secure him guirt with Enemies)
*Mounted his soul from worldly vanities.
*So Heavenly Day Star, blessed Jesus end
*This my Design thy holy Angel send
*To be my Guide, my Guard, my Sacred spell
*Against all Enchantments, witchcrafts, death, and hell
*So shall my Anthem every morning be
*Glory of Heaven, show mercy unto me,
*To me Times wretch, most wretched; vilely base
*Wanting thy sacred aid, spiritual grace.
*Remember not my frailties; make me to grow
*Great in thy love, thou that do truly know,
*Of all the Blessings unto Mortals given
*My chief desire on Earth, is Grace from Heaven,
*The Blessing of the Almighty Lord of Host,
*The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
*Preserve, be with me, now, and for ever when
*My Soul is most distressed, Amen, Amen.
Spes mea Christo.
THE WORLD.
Vain is this World, this Strumpet World that can
Yield nothing constant, Love 'twixt man and man,
Which next his Maker, should be most respected,
Is soonest broake; and most of all neglected,
Ungrateful, vile, the World's a very Whore,
Proud, rich in Vice, in Virtue most, most poor,
Misse-led by every vain Phantasticke Toy,
To forget God, bewitch't with carnal joy;
Bundles of Baubles, imbecilitie,
Biles of Apparel; Botch Nobility:
Lordships, Ladyships, Foolries and Fashions,
Lust-panting Humors; ten thousand Passions.
Rich Men, the more to blame, as this Age goes,
Debar housekeeping to maintain gay Clothes;
A Rich Caroach, three hundred pounds a Gown,
Thirty pounds a Smock, or their Wives will frown,
There is no living with them, they must ride
Where, when, and how they list in glit'ring Pride,
High flashing burning Bravery, blind Eyes,
Flint Hearts, dull Ears, deaf to all poor Men's cries
Such is the dullness of Mortality,
And such the World's cold Hospitality,
*Each dustie Magist'rate with Brib'rie fed,
*One robs the living, another robs the dead,
*A third the Arch-Theefe plays by cunning stealth,
*Knave Knights by Patent rob the Commonwealth,
*Join with much, too much, ill injustice, he
*Zodomiticall Lecher for a greedy Fee
*Dares license lust, glad if he may prevail,
*(Suck wealth from prostitute Harlots;) never fail
Man's mind which most his Maker should affect
(With fear, and trembling, and that true respect,
Belongs to his high Majesty) the Net
Of sin so snares, we worthless worms forget
God's Thunder-darting Vengeance, glorious state
Still forget God, forget to contemplate
With Rauishing Love, true love, pure heart, pure eyes,
That Is the defect makes hourly mischiefs rise,
*Ambitious Lords Attired in Anicke shape,
*Joy in the ways of Lust, Murder, and Rape,
*Ladies with charms, tricks, humors, that they have,
*Abuse their Lords, dispatch them to the Grave.
*The Iealious Husband (mischievous in ill)
*Through vain suspect, his constant wife to kill.
*The careless Clergy man in his degree
*Satan corrupts; makes for a golded fee
The greedy Lawyer fed by Clients strife,
Bribed angels take, for the true Angel life.
Just Judge, the unjust dustie Magistrate,
Father the Son, the Son the Father hate,
Brother, the Brother, prosecute to death,
Quarrel for Toys; stop one another breath.
The world does hourly tempt fools worldly wise,
The deceitful Tradesman, that seems precise,
And is an arrant knave; to think the honey
And only blessed life, still to get money.
Mockes at the poor man's virtue, and in pride
Styles him a virtuous fool; thus knaves deride
The poverty of Men, which does as far
(In Heavenly wealth) transcend them, as a star
The richest Iemme on Earth; But it is not so
With the worlds wealthy worldling; they say no,
Rich enough, Honest enough; all they can
Aims at the outward, not the inward man.
*Poverty made a scoff, a scorn, a wind:
*Gold smothers Virtue, blackest Actions blind.
*Gold got in God's name, with an honest face,
*Comes slow; but in the Devils name apace.
Such is the world's condition, Good Men's thrall,
On Earth there is no true comfort, none at all.
*The honest minded Scholar, shall never lack,
*Sorrow nor want of means to break his back.
*The pitiful Soldier, in his greatest need
*Has his throat cut, he shall be sure to bleed,
*The fair Gamester, for his mild square play.
*Is soonest coozen'd, sure to lose every day.
*The faithful Lover, still is paid with hate
*The more in love, the more unfortunate.
Be rich or poor, in high or low Estate
In The moderate Mean, or fully fortunate,
Insatiate Mankind, ever discontent,
Desires to live, but never lives content.
In scarcity of Corn, for plenty cry,
In plenty, straight forget God instantly.
Such is Man's Erring soul, which ought to know
*Life's, but a long sad Pilgrimage of woe, Simile.

*An Arc of travel, shop of vanity,
*Storehouse of trifles, Inhumanitie:
*A Field of Stones; a Path of thornie Pricks,
*Meadow of Scorpions, Grove of Basilisckes.
The Worlds unquiet rest, is all Man's foe,
*Dangers attend us, where so ere we go.
*Mischievous Deceits, Brawles, Quarrels, Fightings,
*False-hearted Neighborhood, base back-bitings.
*Friendship's so faithless Ripe, full blown with evil
*A friend to day, the next for gain proves Devil,
The World's condition right; it is slave to sin,
Beware of it; the worlds a cunning ginne
*Twill entrap souls; call then to God for Grace,
*Let grief for worldly Crosses, never take place,
*Never let sorrow run into extremes
*Unless for sin; so shall Celestial Beams
*Glorify thy Soul, make it Immortal,
*Free it from ills; what ever can befall
In this false promising World; this Maze of woe,
Where wretched Worldlings know not where to go
To wind them out; such are the various ways
Of life oppressing Years, Months, Weeks and Days.
As Prose ill read, abide too much misusing,
Or Virtuous verse, when rogues have the perusing,
*So fares it with the fair, and flourishing Line,
*Of that sweet Heavenly strain, Poesy Divine,
*Basely neglected by the Monster Crew,
*Of Puff-Paste muddie Minds; that pish, and mew,
*Make a wry, Close-stoole-face; a squint eyed glance
*At Virtuous verse; (whose sad mischance,
*Is to go unregarded,) when the crime
*Of a lascivious, Bastard, Ballet rhyme,
(*If baudy enough) though never so unfit
*Winnes favor, profit, and the praise of wit.
*Read with delight, and much, too much required,
*Coppies sought after, greedily desired:
*When perfect Poetry, Music to the soul
Truth's firm Opposer against crimes filthy soul
*(If Read) most read for fashion, small delight,
*No comfort, no respect, but scornful flight.
*And such is Virtues Foe; the Worlds proud Minion,
*In whom there is no true Love, no perfect Union.
O Divine Poesy I lament thy state,
To see thy Beauty disproportionate,
So poorly in esteem, their's few I see
Or none at all take true delight in thee.
*This wanton World far sooner will approve
*Joy in Pot-Poets, lousie Rimeing love,
*Or wanton Ouids strain, to itch the ear,
*And stir the blood to lust, rather then hear
*The Glorious Godly Aim of Noble Verse,
*Which points at Heaven; and tells us of that fierce
All-threatning Thunderer; he that descries
Our secret deeds; those blackest Actions spies
At which, amazed. my Muse stands wrapped in wonder,
Beggs Mercy, Mercy, O thou God of Thunder,
Or we shall shipwreck all; All too too blame
Far too unmindful of God's Sacred Name,
His Blessings day, by day, his, great Mercy
Long suffering, and Excelling Safety.
Why should we worm's stand precious in Heavens sight
And not be damned to Everlasting Night,
For our Foul erring sins, sins that Excel
The least whereof, merits the Pains of Hell.
Hell that this instant Gapes, to seize this world,
Deserving every moment to be hurled
To endless Flames; but for the Excellence
Of OUR FATHER'S, wonderful patience.
O for the Pen of pure perfection,
To character Man's imperfection,
Open the blind, excessive sinner's eyes,
(Force Tears for sin) make him, himself despise
'Twere Music to the Soul; Divine delight
Th'vndoubted Path to pleasures infinite.
Holla Commanding Empress of my Brain,
Whether thus flings my Muse; divert thy Strain:
Man is so far from making God amends,
That all his ways to wicked Actions bends,
The World's a Rack, Times Tenter-hooke to ketch
At minds most honest; makes a man a wretch:
Thousands in want, finding no way to cure it
Hazard the Gallows, rather then endure it,
Misery of Miseries, when Coin grows scant
Man's Fortun's Football, there is no woe to want;
It dulls brave wits, when nothing else can do it;
Tames, and makes desperate when Time brings us to it
Want makes a man turn Slave, unto a Slave
Scoft, scorned, and flouted at by every knave,
By every silken sodden-headed Fool,
That never felt Heavens scourge, nor Mis'ries School
Want, broacheth Mischiefs never thought upon,
Makes many an honest woman wanton.
Want (like a Madman) makes Men swear and Dice Simile.

Forget their God, turn Virtue into vice.
Husband, and wife, the Sister, and the Brother,
Compelled through want, devour one another.
Merchants, Lawyers, yea some Divines will fall
When want does soundly Gripe, tw'ill try them all.
And therefore (As an Antidote) be sure
First that thou pray to God, that is the maine Cure
Against Woluish-want; and then bethink thee sure
Upon some honest means; 'twill new Create
Thy understanding, put thee on a way
With Reu'rent Soul, on bended knees, each day
To serve thy God aright; so he from falling
Proves thy Protector, gives thee a Virtuous Calling
Heaven grant the Honest Mind may never know
The fierce Assaults of want, that Hell of woe,
Torture of Mind, Murderer of Modesty,
Highway to Theft, Cut-throate of Chastity.
The Key of Whoredom, Bane of that true Love
Which many boast, but few did ever prove.
Many vow Love, for ever to be true
Yet, when want comes, Whores are not more untrue.
How sweetly did that Sacred Psalmist sing
And run Times true Division on the string
Of Misery, when he of God did crave,
Nor Want, nor too much Wealth, least in the Grave
Of damned Despair, much want might hail him in
And Riches Mount him to the highest sin:
Lackey his way to lewdness, to mistrust
God's Mercies, and to practice ways unjust
A Holy fear seized on that blessed King
To dread want's Dangerous Dart, Proud Riches sting.
May the Good Man, still thirst for Mercies Cup;
Climb Jacobs sacred Ladder and mount up
Into a fiery Chariot, Burning Zeal,
Live a bright Angel in Heavens Common weal.
Free from this World; whose Pomp, and Bravery,
Is but a Land of Dirt, mere slavery,
THE FLESH.
Sin Acts foul Lust upon the Soul while it
Stands Puritan Punck-like, willing to commit.
The Flesh unto the Soul's a bitter Pill,
(Sweet gilded Poison, Candide over to kill.)
Hurrid, Carocht in Pride, which glit'ring show
Of swelling Pomp, whose sweet Effect is woe.
Fleshly delights beget much Misery
Makes Couples marry unadvisedly,
Thinking Love tittle tattles, can feed their wishes,
Love soon grows cold, where there is empty dishes.
Of all the sins that are, when nothing can
Ruin the Soul; the Flesh preuailes with Man,
His Eyes no sooner on Devotion wait,
But in steps Carnal Concupiscence straight
She Is at his Elbow still, to itch him on,
The Unhappy path to his Confusion.
*Chaste wives are Saints, women that wantonize
*Witches, all poison, Hell is in their Eyes,
In which, as in a Wilderness of woe,
In striving to get out, on mad men go
Stark mad, past sense, spite of all Books and Schools
Ruin their Fortunes, prove the Slaves to Fools
For an alluring Minutes trifling Joy
A lewd Insatiate Longing, a mere Toy.
*O woman, woman, thy bewitching motion,
*Fools wisdom, mads reason, and blinds al devotion
The Flesh (false Traitor like) strives to betray
The Soul to Hell, for an Infernal Prey.
Fleshly delight in Man, fears want of Breath
More then his God; sin, or Eternal Death,
*When just plagues come, the^ sin-sick sots can tremble
*Make known to all the World, how they dissemble,
*Pray with the lip, (not heart,) wrest sacred Text
*To serve their own Ends first, and then God next.
*Provide to live, in pestilent Times begin,
*Take greater Care to fly from death, then sin.
*There Is nothing in our Flesh, but wickedness
*Desire to live, and obscene wantonness.
We forget now that dreadful dismal chance
The Terrible Arrow of Gods vengeance,
When Death buried far more, then the Earth could swallow,
And no man to the Grave his Friend durst follow,
O why should Mortals wish, long life to live,
What Comfort? what true Joy does this life give?
*There Is nothing, not one thought that does us good,
*But it is strangled straight, by Flesh and blood,
*Holy Saint Paul, finding the Flesh Rebel,
*desired to be dissolved, proud Flesh to quell,
*And Sacred Symeon sung against sins increase
*Lord let thy servant now, depart in peace,
Shall such soule-sweetning preparations be
Forgotten quite; O blind security,
*Life loving Fortunes, how yea puff Men up,
*To hug their Follies, drink damnation's Cup.
What is it we behold, in this vain life,
But daily griefs and dangers; sin, and strife.
*When my soule-erring Eyes, staring behold
*A dangerous Strumpet, flame in glit'ring gold,
*(And murdering Beauty; sparkling from her Eye
*Burning Temptation) then me thinks I spy
*My most apparent mischief, plainly see
*How I never strive to please my God, as she
*Strives to please Men; such is the flaring Pride
*Of the vain Flesh, it hurts on every side.
There Is nothing constant in us, if to day
Virtue we love, to morrow Vice obey.
Man at the best, is now become so frail
As what cannot a spruce Queen, with a smooth Tail
Make him believe; such witchcraft ever fly,
Lust reuells, in the Magic of her eye.
That star-shooting, twinkling eye, does never shine,
But to the Ruin, of all thoughts divine.
Twixt her aluring Lips, there lives a Spell
To suck, and sincke, and kiss a man to Hell.
Touch but her Palms, there sins moist hand inuit
To a soule-damning Banquet; such delights,
As often makes the wisest Man an Ass,
Coward, and Fool, Times vicious Looking-glass.
Licorish entice pants on her Naked Breast,
Snaring the timorous soul, to all unrest.
And like a feauers Puse, to increase desire,
Beats thick upon the Heart, sets all on fire.
What a notorious Coxcombe unto sin,
Lust makes of Man, slave to a whores soft skin?
What Is a delicious Harlot but a Cheater,
A poisoned Marmalad Box, which rots the Eater,
A Harlot in her best of Brau'rie can
Be but a kind of greasy dripping-Pan,
So often put to the fire, it proves a flame,
So burns the Basting-Sticke, so Lust grows tame.
Love is a chaste Queen, noble Wisdoms Bride,
Lust a Hot Whore; for every Knave to ride;
*Love is a Virgin sprung from Virtues Race,
*Lust an alluring Strumpet past all Grace:
*Love is a virtuous wife, Times constant Woman
*Lust a proud Harlot, the true Scourge of Man.
The chief praise of a good wife does not lie
In outward show, but inward Piety,
If Virtue Rules her blood, she merits Love,
If not, I will assure thee she will prove
Like a deceitful Glass, where Man may see
He Is merely Cheated in her; O Misery
*Man makes a woman proud with looking at,
*A wondrous wanton toy, believe that,
*Mark but the cunning Beauty seeing men gaze,
*And yet not seems to see, note but her ways
See how she tempts, with what a charming smile,
Puts poison in her Eyes, eyes to beguile,
Seducing eyes, aimed at Eternal Light,
From Heaven, to look on Hell, prurient delight,
Decked, trimmed, adorned, trickt up to pull men on
With Pride of Eyes, to their confusion.
Note the variety of all her charms,
The Lazy, idle, stretching of the Arms;
The Yawne, and then the Hey-ho, rolling eye,
Sick stomach for the Act; O Luxury:
Thy flames, in wanton women, strangely move,
*She that delights in Lust, can never Love.
Observe each gesture, how she takes a pride
To itch the Bumbe; to friske from side to side,
Mop, mew, bite Lip, and wriggle with the Tail,
There Is not a joint about her that shall fail
To catch at Man; be Icie cold as stone,
She Will find a Trick to melt affection.
In each behavior lives a Venom snare,
There Is language in the curling of her hair,
Eyes, Cheeks, Lips, Hands, no motive Limme so weak
But serves to tempt; her very foot shall speak.
She Will part each other in such dalling sort
As if she would do with the Air for want of sport.
Cross legs, and then with itching thighs and knees
Open and shut the passage by degrees.
Takes pleasure to be seen to wantonize,
And is best pleased, to please Letchers Eyes.
*Like those Nice Dames that will in outward show
*Not wrong their husbands, no forsooth, O no,
*Not for a World; stand on their honesty,
*Quote Scripture, symper, look most modestly,
*Swear and forswear, should the first husband die,
*Never to wed more; Yet marry presently,
*And then protest the single life temptation,
*Phy out upon 't, foe to Procreation,
Thus seem in public pure; but in private
More secretly open, more insatiate
Then the hot Monkie 'th veneriall Mark
Skip, friske, and fling, do wonders in the dark.
And like the Jesuit, think Lust done by stealth
Dainty, secure, sudden, and done for health
*The only Cure, Lusts raging flames to quench,
*Is Aqua lachrimarum; that will stench
*The wounds, proud Harlots so delight to make
*On the poor soul of Man; make him to quake,
*A feared to stand on that false Rock of Ice
*Idleness, feeder of foul Carnal vice,
*Black errors cloud, South fog, which rots the mind
*Leapours the Souls, and is the Northern wind
*The cause of all sins Storms, that dangerous Flood
*Lusts surging Ocean swelling in Man's blood.
O Devil desire of Lust, me, me, forsake;
I charge thee hence, by him that made Hell quake
By that Almighty One, in sacred Trine
All Holy Spells, and Charms, Magic Divine.
By that sweet excellent Sacred Purity
(Sister of Angels) Virgin chastity.
Fly from me all base thoughts; be just mine Eyes;
And be your selves, hate wantons witcheries.
THE VICIOVS COVRTIER.
Go, harmless Satyr, if thou smell a Rat,
The Dog of Envy, of the black eyed Bat,
For opening the fair Truth, misconster sense,
Knit the base Brow, of daring impudence,
And wisely like a Wolfe-like Advocate,
Make thee dangerous, vile, a thing of hate,
If honest Satyr such thou meet, defy,
Spare not to give the Fools and Knaves the lie.
There was a Time, when had thou played the knave,
Thou might have flourisht and have flourisht brave.
Fortune that whore, the Worlds aluring Ginne
She had been true, had thou been true to Sin:
God knows I envy no Man for his Greatness,
For his Prosperity, true Worthiness,
I never reioyc'd at any Man's sad fall
But wish a Virtuous happy life to all.
This then my Comfort be, my mind appease,
He that writes best, can never all Men please.
None e're could shun, the Censure of a Knave,
Nor envy, of a currish Natured Slave.
*'It Is common now, without the cause discerning,
*Fools will find fault, with that, they have no learning.
I write not rash with Envy, to defame
For some particular wrong, any man's name,
Shall I at Fortunes Favorite grieved be,
Because Jove made me not, as great as he:
O no; 'twere basely bad, black is the soul,
Clogged with the horror of a sin so foul.
Fairly my Muse appears, only to show
What Is lewdly ill; that Noble Minds may know
The Vicious Courtier, he whose Mushrome sight
Time styles ignoble, a mere Carpet Knight.
A Lazy Lust-stung Lord, perjured, unjust,
Slave to the Itching of his Mistress Lust.
One that admires her bravery with Oaths
Much wicked-wit consumes in gaudy Clothes:
Which speaks him to the World a March-paine Man
A very mighty Muske-Cat; one that can,
(To please State-strumpets) turn Capital Calfe,
Reu'rence her shooe-shadow, in her behalf
Swear by Olympicke Jove, she is the Fairest
That e're breathed, most Excellent, the Rarest,
Spending the Time in Commendations,
In Sighs, Tales obscene, Visitations,
Set Faces, and set speeches, picked from Plays,
Quaint apish Gestures; O the many ways
(To please Madam Much-adoe) the rare Jewels,
Music, Masks, Baudie Banquets, Midnight-Reuels,
Cocke-Sparrow Humors, absurd Complement,
Which makes the Vicious Courtier confident,
So ridiculous blind; that his brave Trull,
(Times prurient Puppet) can persuade the Gull,
After her Fonne to paint, powder the hair
Which (catching Council) seeming passing rare,
Duly the Ass observes, curiously Nice,
Best pleased to immitate his Cockatrice,
To smell all Amber, chiefly to prevent
Lues Veneria, that infectious sent,
Bred in his rotten Entrals, through The Excess
Of stirring Meats, insatiate wantonness,
That too too common Delectation,
Poison of wholesome Recreation,
(Sins slavish servitude, Excessive ill,)
And Bane of Virtue; is much made of still,
By such; who (rather then the Enterprise
Of Noble true Knights lovely exercise,)
Delight in painted outside, Costly fare,
To study the fashion, look big and stare,
Advance the head like a Malt-Horse, be proud
And speak no matter what, so it be loud.
Bountiful to Bawdes, Mis'erable to the poor,
Sell all, whole Lordships to maintain a Whore;
To stir up the intellectuals of loose Ladies,
To melt their Chastity, get Bastard Babies,
Times were not so, when Worthies shined in Arms,
Reioyc'd in Virtue, not in the wanton Charms
(Of brave Madam Vanity the Puppet)
Loose Embrace of a consuming Strumpet,
But bravely fought for Virgins in distress,
Relieved poor Widows, and the Fatherless,
Striving with fair, renowned, valiant Acts
To chase Jniustice, punish evil Facts.
O blessed performance Noble race of men,
Worthy the praise of an Immortal Pen,
Your Famous Deeds, past stars, recorded stand,
For ever and ever, written by the hand
Of sacred Truth, to the Eternal shame
Of the sinne-branded Vicious Courtiers Name,
Let him that notice takes, take this of me,
Of Man of Money, or of low degree,
Let not the hope of gain bring that to pass,
Which makes a Dunce, observe a golden Ass,
Nor let thy Mind, at any time accord,
To be the Slave to an infamous Lord.
His Love to Vice, all virtuous Acts repel
As if no Plagues remained in spacious Hell.
Engaged to mischief, and to villainy,
To pleasure Vice, embrace iniquity,
The Honor due for Virtue; that Reward
Is naught (but base contempt) mere slight Regard
He that will get by such, must well dissemble
And tell the Fools, they God's on Earth resemble
Obsequiously the Parasite must play
And hazard black Damnation every Day.
Insinuate, and so wax knauish wise,
Be a stamped Villen, learn to temporize,
Swear, and forswear, deprave, inform, and lie,
Change each hour Religion, perjured die.
Plot, plot, and set friends hourly at debate,
Cling to the surer side, the weaker hate,
Turn Baud at midnight, ( Pander to the Itch
Of an Adulterate Cloth of silver Witch.)
Practice to know to mix with perilous Art
The deadly Poison with the amorous Dart,
Neatly obtaining, by times cunning skill,
With Stibium, and Cantharides to kill.
Such sudden Fellows, nimble in Damnation,
Are Vicious Courtiers greatest Estimation:
When disrespected Honest men forlorn
Live miserably wretched, Ragg'd and torn.
As for the true bred villain, he shall lack
Nor Gold, nor Cloth of Gold daubed on his back
Yet when the Slaves too many secrets know,
Often with a Spanish Fig, they headlong go
Hurrid to Hell, the damned souls to tell
What glorious villains, here on Earth do dwell.
*That with a Politicque strain, can make all sure
*Murder, with murder; murder, to secure.
*Drunk with Conceit, that greatness bears the sway
*Safely to Act, what Villainy it may.
*There is a Trick, such never fail to use
*In which their dearest Friends, they will most abuse
*With fair pretext of Honorable Love,
*In secure cunning, only to remove
*And shift him forth into another Air,
*To purge, and lessen, least his Virtues rare
* Should merit Kingly Favor, make him hie,
*Advanced in state to greatest Dignity.
*The Iealious thought whereof, to mischief bent,
*Does sund'ry secret practizes invent
*How to decline that growth, if none take root
*Swift Mercury, a sudden dram must do it.
*Others there are, that smiling Flatter all,
Prove for to each, but Friend to none at all
And such (beleeu't) make use of Time, and Place,
By servile slavery, most creeping base
(Kissing the Clawe) appears with Coxcombe bare,
Praising the Vicious Gloworme past compare,
With O-Right virtuous Lord; such sleeke Regard,
Replenish Flat'ries Cups, with full reward.
Like Spiders, webs of Flattery they weaue,
The pleasing Ears of Great-Ones to deceive:
Which once Entangl'd by some Quainte Devise
Chops off their heads, it is practiced in a trice.
They Will give occasion that may move discourse
And by a Trick, some dangerous Theme enforce,
To draw a doubtful question to the worst
They Will make men guilty, then betray them first,
These are the only spies, that gape for prey,
Cut-throates in silence, smile, and then betray.
Entrap the unskillful, beg their forfeit Lives
To graspe their States; thus the vile Villen thriues
Whose whispering poisons, speaks him sins supporter
Machiuillian Darkness, the Vicious Courtier..
Him, the true Noble Mind must ever shun,
Or live (in hazard still to be undone,)
Slave to the Vanity of Pomp, high Place,
Ambitious thoughts, Sin, and a double Face;
Cringes, and Creepings, all the base desires
Of sinful Life, plagued with infernal fires.
What e're thou arr that careless shall resort
To the Court of Vice, only to see the Court;
Take heed, beware of that Enchanted Glass,
Where Pride in Mortals, Fiends in Hell surpass.
There shall thou Masks, such midnight Revel find
Such Music, Banquets, to alure thy mind,
As will affright the blood of Chastity,
Turn Virgin Love, to hot Lust's Plurisie.
There shall thou those, of Venus Train behold,
Burning Temptation flame in glit'ring Gold
And though adorned with Pearl, the Richest stuff
Their inflate Pride, never think them brave enough.
Were Gowns Embost with Golden, Stars so fine,
That in each Star, a Diamond should shine,
Still, their high Towering lofty daring Pride
(Like Lust restrained) Lives never satisfide.
If checked for it; straight swiftest Mercury
Strikes dead the opgosing Foe to Venerie:
Like (sometimes) that sad most Lamented Knight
Who di'd by a Trick; in such a woeful plight
(By Sugar Candid Poisons) workt in Paste
(From Sin and Murder sent,) whose delicate Taste,
Under the fein'd pretense, of seeming good,
Consumed and burnt, his vital Crimson blood,
Such is the Mighty-Madams-Murdring spite,
*Court Concubines never kill, but with delight.
Curbed for their Pride, like God's ill Angels swell,
As if Earth's Devils, and the World their Hell.
*Pride is their Zeal, their Prayers forgetfulness,
* Charity, Contempt, their Virtue wantonness
*Plumpe, high-fed pampered flesh, on whom must wait
* Page, Pander, Parasite, preparation State,
*Gold: Glistring Glory, Cost, Curious diet,
*Insatiate Pleasure, and luxurious Riot.
And why all this high feeding, Rich Attire,
But like bright Beacons, flaming all on fire,
Threat Ruin, Death, and Hell; which wise men see,
And know what fools they make, know them to be
Soule-flaming firebrarnds, Expert in Evil
Witches, Hell-Cats, Factors for the Devil,
Sucke-blouds, Hyena, Sirens Crocodiles,
All Scylla and Charybdis, whose proud smiles,
Take pleasure to entice, make Men deface
Their Souls fair Temple, for a poor Embrace,
A lushious Pleasure, lewd lascivious greeting,
A pleasing sweet, but a most bitter sweeting.
Never was any great Arch-mischiefe done,
But by a Whore, or a Priest, first begun,
A Cloth of silver S^^^, Times Tissue Trull,
Can with close Cleopatra's Kisses Gull.
The greatest Kings and Dukes, love for an hour,
Nor is it them she loves, but their high power.
Grooms, of the meanest quality in Court,
Can make her fleshly fullness, sweeter sport,
A glorious she Smocke-statist can amaze,
Fire famous Troy, and set the world at gaze.
A Drab of State, is a consuming Flame,
Often, fires the Hearts of Princes, past reclaim.
Turns Joy; to deep and Melancholy sadness,
Poisons the blood, and fills the brain with madness,
*Why should she else, with painting seem more fair?
*Suffer her naked Breasts lie open bare?
*Why use false coulour'd hair, Embost with Gold?
*Pownc'd with Perfumes, Locks curled to behold?
*Why Oils? Waters for Teeth? Why void of Grace?
*With spots (like Rats-Dung) to black patch the face?
*Or why (in Baths of Milk) wash her proud skin?
*Why wrong Heavens work-manship, with such hie sin?
*If not like CIRCE, by enchantment strange,
*Men into Beasts and Beast-like natures change.
*Confounding sense, all reason sits a side,
*Such is the force of her affected Pride.
*A painted Face sleekt over by cunning Art,
*Is but the Pride of a luxurious Heart.
*A coffeehouse of God's work upon her,
*To woo men's Eyes to Lust, and her dishonor.
*Painting's the Nurse of black thoghts, damned devises,
*It makes the soul imitate greatest vices.
What is it else? but daring Impudence,
Against the bright Glory of Omnipotence,
Lusts Looking-glass, Torch of Iniquity,
The Imperious Mistress of all Witcherie,
A slimie sin, daubed over the painted wall
Of foulest Folly, to catch fools with all,
A painted Face, harbors a Heart of Flint,
There is no relish of Devotion in it.
Lust, Pride, and Envy, all the sins that are,
Waits on the painted Beauty falsely fair.
Still busy in her Ear, her Mind, her Eye,
To whore away Man's soul with foolerie,
The painted outside of a tempting Face,
Spotted with Hell, stands sequestered from Grace.
*Such Prodigal sinful sweetes, Men ought not have,
*Nor see the aluring Face, unfit to crave.
*Souls that will mount, high Heavens, Celestial state,
*Climbes Virtues Ladder; vicious Actions hate.
*Man, that will never be tempted, past his might,
*Runs from the Glit'ring Strumpet, flies her sight.
*O happy is the man, blessed for ever,
*Whose Life, in flying Sin, Joys to persevere.
Vita nihil peius iniqua.
THE IESVITE.
NOt like yt Mass Priest, he whose mouth is crammed
With words yt speak all Protestants are damned.
Him nor his Flock, I dare not censure so,
Nor mean to write more then I justly know
To be most true; In which known Path I find,
Counterfeit Catholics, so grossly blind,
They dare outface Heavens Truth, forged lies maintain
To Cloak the cunning Jesuits subtle Brain,
He that does Theefe-like wait for Virtues fall,
Lives in perpetual watch, to blow up all.
The President, recorded stands for ever.
In this Realms safety; which hel's Plot can never
Wipe from Rememb'rance; never shall the Evil
Of that close Secretary, to the Devil,
That Jesuit GARNET, live forgot while I,
Have Pen, or Hand, to write his Tragedy,
(That Mine of Murder, Mischiefs Master-vice,
Lodged in the Politicque skull of Avarice)
His desperate Soul was such, he durst to swim,
A Sea of Vice, be rackt in every Limme.
All Tortures suffer, rather then Reveal
The Treason, his Religion bids conceal.
Witness thou Ghost of Garnet, this is true.
He that han'gd, drawn, and quartered, had his due.
To him was known, the powder pitchie Treason,
Never to be forgot, he knew the season
When, where, and how, that sudden bloody blow,
(Black, Hell-bred, Thunder, flaming, overthrow,)
Should have bin given; knew the Times short space,
When no soul should have time to pray for Grace,
Or cry, God help; The Treason was so foul,
The Traitors would have damned both body and Soul
If in their power; and every soul in the Air
Tossed up, sent vnprepar'd of heavenly prayer,
With all their sins; O horrid, horrid Act,
All this the Jesuit knew; concealed the Fact,
And rather then disclose, least warning give,
King, Prince, and Nobles, not a soul should live,
Here was a Villain; yet I Have known in Spain,
The Traitors death so moan'd, such Credit gain,
(Though here he did, for Treasons just Complaint,)
There Monster Jesuits, make a Martyred Saint.
Mischievous Mass Priests to his meriting Fame,
At the high Altar in a spacious frame,
Advance to him, as to a Saint most blessed,
His Body-mangled Picture, thus expressed:
Garnets Picture.
Bare Head, white Beard, Looks sober, in his Gown,
*Him over head, Angels with Laurel Crown.
*About his Neck, a long large Halter tide,
*Hangs, (as befitting such) down the Left side.
*His Belly ripped, blood seeming open raw,
*Holding in his right hand, his pictured straw.
*Beneath his right side, flames a Heart in fire,
*'Boue his left side, Limbs quartered, Treasons hire,
*Presented on a Tower; which Pictured story
Straw-sainted set up to the Arch-Traitors Glory.
Inuites each eye, yea all the World to see
Jesuits, Protectors, of all Villainy.
*Poys'ning of Princes, held as trifling things,
*With them, it is meritorious to kill Kings.
Can this Religion be, they think it pure,
But Man never knew Religion more impure,
Their Church, is but their Baud, bad deeds to further,
The only sanctuary for blood and murder.
Plots, Practizes, hellish abomination,
Pardons for Treason, holy approbation
Of that ill-Sainted wretch (his cursed fault)
That Father to Faux, the Devil in the vault.
Such Judas-Iesuites ever Traitors prove
To King, and Prince; disloyal in their love.
*Yet outward fawning seem on bended knee
*Low as the earth; O true hypocrisy,
*Under the mild aspect of Reverence,
*In duty, and submisse obedience,
*With Oily Eloquence, best pleasing Phrase,
*Catching Orations, full of flat'ring praise,
*When in the Heart, abides no spot of good,
*All treacherous thoughts; all thirsting after blood,
*The fall of Princes, change, alteration,
*The Protestants Religion's desolation,
*Such is the Jesuits diue'lish disposition,
*The nature of the Beast, his true condition.
*He that can temporize, by Book maintain
*To serve his ends; and glut his God-lesse gain.
*Be what he least seems, cold in devotion,
Envious, at one another Promotion,
*Not lowly minded, but proud Ambitious,
*In tongue a Saint, in heart a Slave vicious.
*Preach divine patience, when himself shall be,
*The waspish Image of all Tyranny.
*Spleenatiue, choll'ricke, And who so offends,
*Is so far off from ever being friends,
All-bee't he seem a Calm, yet if he live,
He Will be revenged, be sure never to forgive.
Such is the Jesuit, such his double Face,
And such his charitable sign of Grace.
He that dares awe his Country, King and State,
Smile, and yet be a villain, all men hate,
Set Princes at debate, befoole the Times,
Poison the world, with irreligious Crimes,
Swell Battles, Murders, make whole Kingdoms shake;
Shed Innocent blood, all for Religions sake,
To defend Religion, what Religion's this,
To seem devout, and do so much amiss?
*Color Religion, with mere gullerie,
*Wrest sacred Text, to maintain Roguerie,
(*As if Religion were a formal Law,
*Religion only to keep fools in awe,)
Defend Controversies; woe to those days
Woe to such Serpent-snarling Church-Mens ways,
*Sin never triumphs, strikes a more Fatal stroke,
*Then when it is covered with Religions Cloak.
That Jesuit, he, who speaks divinely fair
Yet has a wicked life; I may compare
To fire, stand off, do not come too near it,
You then may safely warm; need not fear it.
But if thou unadvisedly presume,
Approach to nigh, thee it will burn, consume,
So the deceitful Priest, come not near him,
Shun his Acquaintance, you need not fear him.
Fly his dissembling sight, his black life spurn,
If lodged within your bosom, he will burn
With show of holiness burn and scortch,
Waste thee, in thy Estate, like a spent Tortch.
There Is not a Gentleman of means does die,
But with his Heir, the Jesuit presently
Shares in his Land; with show of Reverence,
(Winning of Souls) couers concupiscence.
Commits with all he likes, any Man's wife,
Makes her believe, it is to preserve his life.
Persuading Letch'rie, with their Ghostly Father,
No Sin, but a Deed of charity rather.
Sad-sickenesse to prevent, to scowre the Veins,
To mundifie, and for to purge the Reins,
Ergo plena Charitatis; An Act
Of mere Commiseration, such a Fact,
As to deny it, (were a damned sin)
Pulls curse on curse, which has for ever bin
Justly inflicted; punishing all those
Repugnant Natures, with the worst of woes,
Despair, assured confusion, dismal horror,
Sudden destruction, Death, Infernal Terror,
Hell, and the Devil; for that high offense
Of Stubborn refusal, disobedience,
A sin, impossible to be forgiven,
Such is the Jesuits charge; of purpose given,
To please his Lust; makes that, a gainefull Trade,
Lies with this Lady, and that Chamber-Maide.
Here gives a Pardon, there denounces Curses,
So betwixt both, sure to pick all their Purses.
The Nimble Slaves Church-knauerie can strip,
And fetch your greatest Lady over the hip.
With a religious show, put tricks upon her,
Rob the believing Fool, first of her honor,
Then pardon Sin; and then he may enthrall,
Rob her of Coin, Plate, Jewels, Smock and all,
Do, and undo, Her Charity's soon drawn
For baudie Jesuits, her best Smock to pawn,
Their thread of Doctrine among women spun,
Is to whore all, be she the chastest Nun,
If she deny to yield, Murder and Rape,
Shall Wolfe-like seize that prey, there is no escape,
Such is the Murdering Mind of him we call,
Natures Monster, Priest Jesuitical.
THE DEVIL.
SEarch all the Earth, you every where shall see,
Satan most busy, from the Church not free,
The very Pulpit haunts, and being vexed,
Seeks how to put the Preacher from his Text:
Such as teach others, yet themselves neglect,
And with sins Cassocke hide their own defect;
From Pew to Pew, unseen; Hel's Feind does creep,
To dull the Hearers Ears, loggs some a sleep,
Some to vain prattle, others still to pry,
With wanton looks, for a bewitching Eye.
Some greedily imployes, to spy out Fashions,
To glut the humors of proud women's passions.
Makes muddie Mortals, at each other look,
More then on Heaven, or Gods all blessed Book.
And such is Satan's craft, continual Motion,
To draw mankind from Heaven, and all Devotion.
Tempts some to Hate, Ambition, some to slide
The slip'rie sleights of Pomp, vn-paid for Pride,
Others to swim the Sea, Lust pleasing vice,
Some wet-damnation, most men Avarice
Servant to Satan; Satan which does strive,
Man of all heavenly solace to deprive.
God (for our sins) no sooner Angry grows,
But straight the Roaring, sudden Devil throws
His Paws on us; And like himself begins
(For Numbers numberless of desperate sins,)
To seize the Soul, made an Eternal prey
To burn in Hell, as Heavens just Castaway.
Such is the Fate of Souls, ensnared within
Satan's command; beware the Twigge of sin,
Least touch will take thee Prisoner; Hellish Guiles
Prove like the perilous paths of Crocodiles,
Who with their slimie Tongues (lickt over) prepare
To murder Mortals, by a slip'rie Snare.
Man is a Tree, whose Root what is it? thoughts evil,
Bad Deeds the Body, yielding to the Devil.
The Arms, ten proud aspiring discontents,
Breakers of all the Ten Commandments.
The Branches are, our proanesse unto ill,
The Leafes Pleasure, the fair Fruit sin, which still
With sweetest show of sweetness, tempts us on,
To feed and follow our destruction.
*There Is fear above us, fear beneath us,
*Fear round about, and yet no fear within us.
Satan like Dalilah, suffers not men,
For to see danger; is it not fitting then,
By holy violence, we seize the Sword
Of the Omnipotents, Omnipotent Word,
To slaughter sin in us; O shall not we
(That profess sacred Christianity,)
Conquer our Crimes; think on the life to come,
The rising of the Dead; that Day of Doom,
When this vast Orb of Earth shall blazing burn,
An all the World in Funeral Flames shall mourn,
Then Heaven and Hellamazing shall appear,
In two extremes; Joy, and excessive Fear;
Heaven in bright shining All Eternal Light,
Hell in the Horror of perpetual Night.
Heaven shall triumph, Hell tremble, Angels sing,
Gloria in Excelsis, to Heavens high King;
The King of Heaven; Heaven Joys perfect solace,
All-Rauishing, glit'ring, glist'ring Palace,
Pleasures Paradise, Immortal Dwelling,
All pure, excellent, past thought excelling,
Heavens Pauement are the stars, in what excess
Shines Heaven, when star-pau'd with stars numberless.
No thought of want, which mads the thoughts of men,
But plenties fullness, full abound in Heaven.
There, Virgin Chastity in Life oppressed,
Glitters in Saint-like Glory, lives most blessed,
The poor man tossed, from wrong, to injury,
In Heaven finds comfort, firm felicity.
The wronged widow, injured fatherless,
Bright Heaven releiues, gives all their woes redress.
*He that for ill, does good; Heaven will requite,
*Crown his fair soul, with Comforts infinite.
Is it not fit then, we our sins bewail,
Think still on Heaven; on Heaven that never did fail
The penitent heart, when (alas) distressed,
Naked, forlorn, when most of all oppressed.
Then sends relief, miraculous reliefes,
Such is the Love of Heaven, Heaven cures all griefs,
As for Times Wolfe-turn'd ill-affected great Ones,
Close-fisted to the poor, deaf to their Groans,
The villains of this Age, that make profession,
Of a pure Life; yet live by base oppression,
Hell shall confound their souls; that Den of Horror,
(Circl'd with black affright, blew-burning Terror)
Shall boil their souls, and bodies, toth' black sweat
Of an infernal poison; and that eat
Still to renew new pains; plagues that excel
Such are the neuer-dying pains of Hell.
There, painted Pride lives crowned in flaming fire.
The Glorious Strumpet, whipped with burning wire
Fed, is the Lust-prouoking Letcher there
With scortching Coals; such as delight to swear,
Swallow the Drunkards ever scalding Oil,
There, Usurers in Pooles of Sulphur boil,
Murder, Rape, Incest, endless torments feel,
The Rack of vengeance, and the burning wheel
Whirled round in blew flames, soule-amazing fear,
*More Plagues the^ Tongue can tell, the damned bear.
In burning Beds of steel, souls blazing fry,
Tortured with torments, such as never dye,
Cursing the Time of their abused Creation,
Parents, Fate, Sin, and their own damnation.
Better, O better never to be borne,
Then with such Terror-striking Torments torn,
Which to eschew, weep wonnes of earth, repent,
Weep, weep for sin, soule-killing sins prevent,
*Seek Heaven, shun Hell, fly from the worlds entice,
*Heavens the Reward of Virtue, Hell of Vice.
*Perfect Repentance, makes men bravely die,
*That never lived so; fly then Hels Misery,
*Defer not thy Repentance till to Morrow,
*Shed Tears for sin, O it is a sacred Sorrow.
*Repent or damn; for sin weep, and weep well,
*Souls that do floute at Tears, shall fry in Hell.
God in his infinite Mercy never forsakes
The soul which fights with sin, and undertakes
To do it is best endeavor; strives to expel
The subtle snares of sin, and strives to dwell
On Virtues mount (free from the tempting vice
Of the World, Flesh; and Devil, all th'entice
Of all ill Company; whose venom blood
Each divine thought in Man, each deed that is good,
Seeks to corrupt, to poison, betray souls,
And dry their virtues, like parcht parchment scroles.
From which dire Mischief, the Religious still
Protected stand, by the Almighties will.
Simile.
As the young Bird for food does never cease,
Opening the Mouth, until the Damme release
And cure the want it suffers; so should we
*With unlocked lips still pray, that God would free
*Our souls from sin, O it is a blessed task!
*God never leaves giving, till we leave to ask.
What a large, Extreme folly it is to spy
Man (like the Wolf for prey) how earnestly
He hunts for means; as if the only honey
Of Soul, and Body, did consist in money;
Meat drink and clothes; men sick, still pray for health,
Ready to be undone, for paltry wealth,
Freedom, and safety; And with shameless Faces
Forget to beg of God, Spiritual Graces.
*Many Men pray; But he the Glory winnes,
*Who prayer, to be disburthen'd from his sins;
And viewes the poor Man's Labor, with the Eye
Of sweet relief; there is Noble Charity:
The heart of such a Man, may sometimes shrink
Under Temptations weight, but never sink:
*God makes him here, Lord Steward of that store,
*He deals so chearefully among the poor;
*Gives him the Grace to think, when to his sight
*A poor wretch comes, to beg of him a Mite;
*He might have been that beggar, his Estate
*Transferred on him; and begging at his Gate,
Or in the street in Rags, oppressed with grief,
Glad to beseech him, for some poor relief;
To such fair souls; Iehoua in his love,
Gives Gifts of Grace; he their defense will prove,
God's promise is, (if fervently, we pray
And use our best endeavor every day
To fly from sin, resolving to betake us
To holy Means, he never will forsake us.
God, is so kind, he cannot, will not see
His Servants Slaves, to damned impiety.
Never did any, do their fair endeavor
To pray to him, that ever lost their labor.
Nay more; if God but see thy inclination
To pray; He will prevent thy supplication,
Answer thy full desire e're thou can crave,
Grant that, thy heart did never hope to have.
He made the Ear, to hear the happiness
We have from him; the Tongue still to confess
The Glory of his Name; our Eyes to see
The works of his Almighty Majesty.
Hand, Heart, Knee, Foot, God the whole man did frame
All to rejoice, in his All-Sacred Name.
And dare we Dust and Ashes cease to pray
To Him? O no; Heaven grant I never stray.
Ride thou my Soul upon some winged Cloud
To the Heavenly Harvest; Fly to the sacred Shroud
Of Sempeternall Safety; Fly the sight
Of blazing Beauty, flaring Earths delight,
Malicious Minds; mischievous Man's invention,
Fair Looks, false Hearts, stamped in a foul intention,
Take flight my Soul, fly from the dismal Den
Of this Dark Age; the impiuousnesse of Men
Fly from the ponderous Plummets of black Vice
Which pulls to Hell; help Prince of Paradise,
I faint, I die, sin loades my soul with Horror,
The World, the Flesh, and Devil, all with Terror
Hangs, on my fettered Limbs Prisoner to care
I live steru'd, Tortured, Tempted to despair.
Hear me Eternal Essence, which has made
My soul to pray, send me thy sacred aid
On the bright Sun Beams of thy sweet Salvation,
Draw (Lord) draw up the Dew of my Devotion.
Mount Soul, upon the wings of Charity,
Help Heaven, up Heart, Fly at Eternity
Rowz'd like a Towering Faulcon in despite
Of Hell, and Furies, Fly to thy Makers sight.
*Happy the Man, whose Actions, strive to swim.
*Through Seas of Tribulation unto him,
*The way to Heaven, is full of Rubbs, and Thorns,
*We cannot pass, but by the Lane of Scorns.
*The Devil sets his Baits, in every angle,
*No Corner's free from him, souls to entangle
Therefore, in Virtues Path, strive to excel,
Let fervent Faith, repulse the Fiend of hell.
Divines may Preach else till their Heart strings burst,
The Height of Sin will Mount; live still accursed.
FINIS.
Acrosticke Epitaphes upon King James, Prince Lodowicke, Duke of Richmond, Lord
Marquis Hamleton, and others.
KING JAMES his Epitaph.
K inde, Excellent King, Great Britains Solomon,
I ust Judge, his Sacred Majesty is gone,
N ow numbered mong the dead, upon whose Beer
G riefe through the world does sacrifice a Tear.
I nsighes, and tears, and groans, at his depart,
A Sea of woe broake in, seized every heart:
M irrour of Majesty, underneath thy Hearse,
E ach Poet, sadly sits, weeping in Verse.
S earch Earth's Circumference where shall you find
D welling in Kings, King JAMES his royal mind:
E ternitie so graced him, he did Shine,
C rown'd from his infancy, a King Divine;
E xc'llently Learned; Foreign Princes know it,
A King he was, and a most Sacred Poet.
S o constant, such a Peacemaker, what Eye
E uer beheld? His Life was Virtues Story,
D epriu'd by death, for his Immortal Glory.
Duke Richmonds Ghost. To his Princely Duchess.
L ife of that Love, to me on Earth, most Dear,
O cease to grieve, for me let no sad Tear
D rop from thy Fun'rall Eyes; Death came, I went
O 're ioyd from Earth, to Heavens pure Parlaiment.
W hy then sad sweet, which once my heart did burn
I n true Loves Flames, why do thou sit and mourn?
C leare Eyes, Look up, joy in the Allternall Trine,
K eepe tears for sin; so Turtle live Divine.
S aint like they live, where Virtue, rules high blood,
T 'is most, most fearful to be Great, not Good,
V nlocke thy treasure then; Heavens steward be
A nd what I left undone, do thou for me;
R eward thy Servants, Good Deeds lead the way
T o make us live best in the latter day.
So farewell Sweet, Good God from ways uneven
Thy Ship of Life steer to the Land of Heaven.
Duke Richmonds Epitaph.
FRom fogs of vanity, thick Clouds of Vice,
Locked from each Soul, seducing vain Entice,
Here lies Entoomb'd a gracious Prince, whose Birth
Almighty God framed of the purest Earth.
Through every Conduite of the Flesh, high strains
Of Royal blood, ran through his Azure Veins.
Like a fair printed Godly pleasing Book,
So did his Dead Corpse Living rarely look.
His Eyes toth' complete carriage of his Head
Were Leaves of Love, where none that knew but Read
A Body, so befitting every Limme,
Never was more becoming then in Him:
But now in Grave, that Form is changed to Clay
Which living shined, like to a Summers Day.
Gone is the subject of my mournful verse
His Sun is set; turned to a sable Hearse
Lodged in the Night, within a death bed laid
Formed by rude hands, the Pick Axe, and the Spade,
To put the world in mind, these days of sin,
Death shall deface as if they never had bin:
Witness the sad rememb'rance of that day
When this dead Duke, so early snatched away,
How soon that Morn, when to Attend his King
For to enact some memorable thing,
Death by the King of Kings, which writ was sent
To send his Soul to Heavens pure Parlaiment.
An Epitaph.
Pawse Reader, for me thinks I see appear
Sorrow in thy Face; there dropped a tender tear,
Is It even so; read on, here shall thou find,
(His Heaven on Earth) the beauty of his mind.
No vain affecting Pomp, Pride, nor Ambition
Bred in the bosom of his sweet condition,
*Deserving Love, Courteous he was to all,
* A Lover of Justice, Foe to Satan's thrall:
*True Friend to Virtue, Learning wholesome Laws,
*Wonderful valiant, in a Righteous Cause.
*Patron of Piety, Favorer of Arts;
*A Noble Cherrisher of all good Parts:
*What flourishing Virtue, e're made Man blessed
*But took a Lodging, in Duke Richmonds breast,
Heaven gave him high Birth, Scotland Princely Name,
France courtly Language, England Eternal Fame.
The modest garb, of grave civility,
Meekness with Love, and true Humility;
Vsher'd his Soul, the perfect Path to prove
The Rich content, of Great Iehoua's Love,
Round Crowned with Glory, sempeternall Light,
Glit'ring in Heaven blessed in his Makers sight
He Lives; that was, not only Great in blood
But what is far more Rare, a Great man Good.
The Lord Marquess HAMLETON. His Epitaph.
I f there be sighs, a Tear, or grievous Groan,
A Sorrow yet, never to Mortal known,
M ache here your Rendeuoze, sighs, tears, each moan,
E ach Eye behold, by Fatal stroke here lies,
S trucke into Earth; True Honou'rs Noble Prize.
H ow e're his Body in sad sickness sped,
A ngels with his fair Soul to Heaven are fled,
M auger the poisoned shafts of death and Hell,
L ing'ring disease; Earths Witchcraft, or sins spell,
E ternity, so graced him, Death was vexed
T o see him live; and therefore slew him next
O f all, to all our Worthyes lately sent,
N ever to die in Heavens True Parlaiment.
Arthur, Lord Chichester, His Epitaph.
A dmir'd, blessed Chichester, Counselor at war,
R eu'rent State worthy; Wisedom's Earth-bred Star,
T o the true grief of Kingdoms he is gone
H is fair Sunset, cold as the Marble stone.
V ictorious Viceroy; O with what a zeal,
R ul'd he Hybernias troublesome Commonweal.
C urb'd rough hair'd Kerne; in conquering Rebels hearts
H ee was beloved, and feared, for his rare parts,
I ustice, and Mercy Vsher'd him the way,
C onstant to Govern) that could best obey,
H onour and Virtue still (in him combinde,)
E xprest the fullness of his Noble Mind.
S ighs turned to Tears, sad Tears to greiuous groans
T hose sighs and Tears, to hundred thousand moanes,
E xprest for Him, wise, valiant, most descreet,
R are Fruit, made ripe for Heaven, for Earth too sweet.
To the Right Honorable Robert, Earl of Warwick, his Anagram in Latin.
ROBERTUS RICH: Anagramma CHRIST ROBVR: Englished O CHRIST, my Strength.
Relligio, Virtus, Pietas, hoc nomine constat
CHRIST ROBVR, sacrae Relligionis Apex.
How well, thy Name, and Virtue does agree,
Firm Faith is found in that, all worth in thee.
To the Right Honorable Sr. Julius Caesar, Knight, Mr. of the Rolls, etc. His
Annagram. JULIUS, CAESAR, Annagramma IVS, AC LIS VERA, Englished JUST DEALING,
AND TRVE STRIFE.
IN this your Honors Anagram I find,
Just Dealing Armed, with a Religious Mind,
Fixed in your Soul, Friend to despised Art,
And Noble Virtue, O thrice happy Heart,
Jacobs true strife with God, for glorious Fame,
Shines in the Virtue of your Noble Name,
By your Just Dealing, And True Strife with sin,
You conquer Hell, a holy Battle win.
Strive on fair soul, thy Zeal makes Heaven thy friend,
And Heavens high Chanc'ry Court thy Iournies end.
VERSES Upon the Principal Coat at Arms, of my Honorable Friend Sir HENRY
HEART, Knight of the Noble order of the Bath.
SYmbolus iste hominem, designant honor Potentem
Rex, Leo, (concessum est,) Ceruus, Princepsque Terrarum.
Thus expressed in English.
This Noble Arms fair Honor decks, and ancient worth inuests,
The Lion is the King (I grant) the Heart the Prince of Beasts.
Attributes belonging to the Heart.
Ingenious, quick, long lived, Chaste, Noble, wise,
Are attributes found proper that arise
To this brave Creatures praise; more to impart
SERTORIVS, lead his Army by a Heart:
And ALEXANDER took great pride to deck,
With Golden Collars the soft velvet Neck
Of those Heroicque Rangers, that took breath
Hundred years after Alexanders Death:
This being just, how much more stirs up Art
That Noble Name, set in a bounteous Heart.
An Acrosticke Composed at the Marriage Of my honored Friend Sir Thomas
Stanly, with the LADY his wife that now is. Fidelity.

Honor

Love


M arriage, that Sacred tie, vniteing Hearts
A mple in Circular Love, which never Parts,
R are gentle Bride, in your blessed Heart has placed
Y our Husbands Heart, he that so thinks him graced
S o far beyond expression; nothing can
T ell his high Joy, by you a Happy man;
A ngels Protect you both; May your fair worth
N atur'd like that Blessed Tree first brought you forth:
L iue long; So love, live blessed in one another
Y our sweetness grant (O Heaven) a joyful Mother.
Verses upon Sr. Thomas Stanly his Lady, her first being with Child.
God to this world with safe deliu'rance bring
That little world, Prime, Noble, Precious thing
Within your happy Womb; Long may it live
To live Times fair example, truly give
Next God, (full joy) praise to that Bodies worth
Blessed Tree of Happiness, first brought it forth;
That's all I can wish, which, to your true Joy
Through hearty Prayer I wish, a lovely Boy.
Hope.

Faith.

Charity.


The blessed Sirens of Eternity.
Firm Faith, Sweet Hope, and Sacred Charity,
For ever dwell; fair Minded Virtuous Dame,
In your two Hearts; now in one Bodies Frame,
Big with Rich Natures comely, curious dressing,
Jewel of Glory, God's Almighty Blessing:
O may your Pangs in Labor, prove as mild
As was the Virgin Mary; she whose Child
Remember in your Throws, you then with ease
Shall bear a Babe, that best your mind shall please:
So happy Mother, of a happy Son,
If Daughter happy Live, Heavens will be done.
A Memorial upon the Death of that True Honorable, Valiant Commander, Sr.
Francis Carew: Knight of the most noble and sacred Institution of the Bath to
our Sovereign Lord King Charles.
F all from mine Eyes, yea Tragic Tears of pity,
R un to my Pen, write, write Times mournful Dittie*
A nd to this dull Age, tell in Sorrows Tone,
N oble, Wise, Valiant Carew, he is gone.
C onquer'd for Love to Heaven, King, Country, State,
I n a just cause he died; O happy Fate,
S oule suffering Virtue, fully fortunate.
C all'd to the sacred Order of the Bath,
A Jemme he lived, and died a Knight of Faith,
R eligion drew him on to Wars fierce Fight,
E arth claimed her due; Death was to him delight,
W ho lived, and did, Heavens happy Favorite.
An Epitaph upon the Right Honorable Lady, the Lady Francis, Sister to
Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, and wife to Mr. John Gorges Esquire.
Ye Eyes that joy in the rareness of that Life,
Which makes Man blessed in a true Noble wife
Behold, here lies a Iemme, bereaved of Breath
That Excellent Lady, she that by Death
Stern Death subdued; her life and love did shine
Clear (as Heavens star,) like a true wife divine.
She was her Sexes wonder; hate to sin
Made her the Glory of her Noble kin,
She was (what can be said) Religious, kind,
A Saint on Earth, that bore an Angels Mind.
Upon the Death of Mistress Margaret Brograue.
M ilde, At Rough Grim Assaults, Restless Even Tired,
B eguirt with Death, mildely her soul aspired,
R ight upward flew to that Arch-glitring Heaven,
O f, for, and from whom, she at first was given.
G lory of Parents, farewell, modest, kind,
R are earthly Form, framed of a Heavenly Mind,
A ll the fond fashions of the world's entice,
V aine Woman's wish she slighted; tempting vice,
E uer she checked, with thoughts of Paradise.
Upon my worthy Friend Mr. CHARLES AYTE. CHARLES AYTE: Anagram REALY CHASTE.
THe true expression of a grateful Mind,
(For your long since past love to me so kind,
I never shall forget;) accept then this
Divine Note on your Name; Man's chiefest bliss,
Courts you fair Soul to such an happiness;
Words are too weak to tell, Pen to express.
While thousands in vain Lust, their life time waste,
Your Anagram, is what? Realy Chaste.
MARY HEATH. Anagram HA, MY HEART: Thus expressed:
Never had Virgin sweetness to the view
Of this vast World, a happier Name then you.
Your Anagram is such, it is ever used,
Amongst Turtle Lovers, that never love abused,
Virtues Chaste Queen, to you does here impart
Infinite Joy, in these words, Ha, My Heart.
TO My much respected true Friend, Master William Vtber.
W ith holy thoughts Lord make thee to repel
I nfernall sin; never may the charms of Hell,
L asciuious Temptings, nor the worlds delight
L ocke thee from Heaven; the Lord of Day and Night
I nspire thy Soul, Ravish thy Noble Sight
A rm'd with Faith, Hope, and Sacred Charity,
M ount (may thy Soul) Eternal Victory.
V aine World, what is it? but a Theme of sorrow
T imes slave, the stage of death from which we borrow
B rau'ry for one Day, and are dead to Morrow:
E arth's Pomp is nothing but a poys'ning Spell,
R iots vain Glory, Painted Iezabell.
TO His Respected Friend, Mr. VALENTINE OLDIS.
V ertue on Earth, (firm Enemy to Vice,
A ppearing Glorious, when the Worlds Entice
L aies Seidge unto the Soul; and with delight
E leuates holy Spirits against sins Fight)
N ames you the Man for Combat; points thee on
T o the Celestial Race; which thought upon
I nuites thy Soul to that perfection,
N o Tongue can tell; not all the Words content,
E quals the Mind, that is truly Penitent,
O n Gods great Mercy, ever cast an Eye,
L et, thy known dangerous Travails never die.
D eeds that have past the Storms, of Sea, and Land,
I n thee true Trial have, to make thee stand
S ins Foe, Truths Champion still, at Heavens command.
TO My beloved Friend Mr. FRANCIS HVRST.
F ly Friend from all vain thoughts, let thy fair youth
R unne Virtues Race, be still in Love with Truth.
A s Seamen strive in Neptunes Path to shun
N umberlesse Dangers; so like Times best Son,
C leare thy Soul's ship, from every stormy Spell,
I n this Worlds wicked Sea; Those waves of Evil,
S urges of Sin, the World, the Flesh, and Devil.
H ere as you read the Follies of the Time,
V ndaunted struggle to subdue each Crime,
R owze thee from sin, strive Virtues Top to clime,
S o from the high Pyramides of Grace,
T here houers over thy head an Angels place.
LOVES SONNET
LEt me not be with bitterness despighted
That an with you and only you delighted;
(Bear witness Angels) what I write is true,
I Love, and love, and love; and none but you.
Shall I then suffer Rack, be rackt, and torn.
Shall I then suffer hate, and churlish scorn
Will you my honest mind so much misuse,
Sweet Natures Love, to pity, not abuse;
O be so sweet, Live, and live long to cherish
My Pen, and me, or I for ever perish.
Sorrows Sonnet.
Once, I did love, so loved, and was beloved
As Heaven was angry sure, else we had proved
No-Star-crost Lovers our true Loves were such,
(Alas) we loved; and loved and loved too much
For see the luck, my Love kept from mine eyes
By her most cruel Friends; for Love she dies.
Then, like a burning Beacon set on fire
At sight of her sad Funeral my dear
Kindled, burned, fier'd, flamed, as twould pierce the sky,
Then would I perish feign; but Fates deny.
A thousand griefs at once, me thought did move
In my Mad brain; and then I was in Love,
Stark Mad in Love; all joys bereft me,
And nothing but despair, Sad sorrow left me.
Upon a Glitering Smock Gallant sitting at a Play.
YOnder she sits that flaunting Hat and Feather
Swells high my blood, and makes such stormy weather
In my betossed Brain, I am not I,
I Am stabd toth' very Heart, with her black Eye.
Oh did you see her, trip it on the ground,
Her Rattling silks thy senses would confound
That Mask of Hers, does mad me; hides the fair
Which (unseen) sure would seem past all compare.
*Eyes ache no more with looking on yon Toy
*She Will set thy Heart on fire like flaming Troy:
*Behold her Breasts are bare, O sight, O spell,
*Satan never sent a stronger Charm from Hell:
*Plumpe panting Globes of pleasure how yea please
*My erring Eyes, and yet like storms in Seas
Should my souls ship once touch her, 'twould be torn
And make me wish I never had bin borne.
Help Heaven least gazing on those Naked Twins
I do in thought commit a thousand sins:
The Great Alcides fiercest Monsters tamed,
Yet fairest Omphales sight, his valor shamed
High-spirited Hector, to the Field was won
For Beauteous Hellen, and all Troy undone.
A hundred thousand sad examples show
The Tragedy of Man, whose Eyes bestow
Liking to such proud Puppets as a woman,
Given ore to damned Pride, and true to no man.
The difference betwixt Acquaintance and a Friend.
THe difference 'twixt Acquaintance and a Friend,
Truth thus proclaims, Acquaintance will pretend
Many Good Morrowes, as how do you Sir,
Prattle, and Prate, and keep a stinking stir,
Of doing Good; Their tatling Tongues can baule,
Talk of much Good, but do no good at all.
Upon the unkindness of a Friend.
Witness fair Truth, is not that Judgment weak,
That will not give a true Friend leave to speak,
Shall I be dumb, when I behold my Friend,
In the vain ways of vanity to spend
His Coin, and be misse-lead by every Scab,
To drink this drunken health, visit that Drab,
Shall I behold my Friend whose fair intent
Inclines to good: fool it in Complement,
Talk with this prating Puppy, and that Ass,
Here give a Congie, there present a Glass,
Bowing the Body, bending the Anticke knee,
Out on such Coxcombe Curiosity,
It Is hateful, very scuruie, use it not
'Twill fool thy Fame, thy Reputation blot,
Let Reason rule, scorn not a friends advice,
Take heed of Pride, 'twas kicked from Paradise.
*Sins are soon known, Custom thy self to ill,
You cannot leave wickedness when you will.
The Ancient Fathers firmly say, unless
We sins occasion shun, we shall transgress.
Look toward Heaven then, let it not be said
Thou art a Whore to friendship, but a Maid,
Resolved in Virgin love, to live and die,
A Friend untainted in a true frinds Eye,
Be such a Friend, Or never take the name,
Of Friend upon thee, 'twill put out thy Fame,
Strumpet thy fair Repute, demollish quite
All peace of Conscience, dim thy Crystal sight,
From Glories view, and like a Toy of State,
(Powdered all ore with Pride) abuse thy Fate
True Turtle Friends should never take more delight
Then in th'inioying one another sight.
But now he is gone? flint hearted Friend, farewell,
I Will not complain to folly; yet I Will tell
Fair Truth how foully you have gone astray,
And in a wanton humor thrown away,
A Jewel, which thy Life Time thou in vain
May hope, but never find the like again.
Were thou sole Monarch of the world er'e I,
Would creep for favor to thee, I would dye,
Dye all alone, by that same sword, that Hand,
Of mine so ready still at thy command
Wau'ring, unkind, forgetful that thou art,
That never yet did, find a trech'rous heart
Lodged in my breast, my Head, Hand, Heart, Life, all,
To do you right, were ever at your call,
And am I slighted now; am I like Froth,
So soon blown out, O heaven where is Faith and Troth
Where lives true friendships manifestations,
Of love to me, all vows protestations,
If all be fled, then I will ner give more,
Trust to a friend, then to a common Whore,
Better be rackt upon the torturing wheel,
Or like Spaines Jndian Slave, Times Terror feel,
To very death, then Childishly to find
A friend unconstant, faithless, false, unkind.
FINIS.

