GODS HOLY HOUSE AND SERVICE, According to the primitive and most Christian
form thereof, described by Foulke Robarts, Bachelor of Divinity, and
Prebendary of NORWICH.

Psalm. 26. 8. I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place where
thine honor dwells.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold at the Greyhound in Saint
Paul's Church yard. 1639.

To all such, as through weakness of judgment, with some superstitious
fear, and not by any malevolent spirit of opposition and schism, are offended
at the Decency of our Churches, and the Reverend demeanure of our outward
expressions in Gods public Worship.
Loving Brethren,
THe worship of God has of late years been so carried in many places among
us, as if therein men were not about any business relating unto God. The
places of meetings being so ruinous and sordid, the people in the act of
prayers and praises demeaning themselves so, as if they sat in counsel with
God: (a gesture, of which Tertulian says, that in prayer, it is
irreligiosissimum, a most irreligious L. de orat.
thing,) rather than devoute and humble worships. Much irreverence was in
administering and receiving the holy Communion. I have often conceived hereupon,
that either Papist, Turk, or Pagan, observing our fashion, would think that
either our Churches were not the houses of the holy God, or that the people in
them were not about Gods worship. Our present most reverend Metropolian has in
his Metropoliticall visitation, laid those grounds, which have already reformed
much, and I trust will (by Gods mercy) soon reduce all things in Gods worship,
to due decency, and reverence, all England over; Not doubting of the like
success in other places, which we find in the Diocese of Norwich: For while
the right reverend Father now Lord Bishop of Elie, for the time his Lordship
was our Diocesan (as an other Elishaeus, in the spirit of Elias) his Lordship
so proceeded in this pious work, as that the work of the Lord prospered in
his hands. The house and service of God shines among us in the primitive
splendour, to the great good liking of all sober Christians. But as when S. Paul
preached of the resurrection, Some believed, others mocked, Act. 17.
So upon sight of this good work, so happily begun, and so effectually
followed; some joyfully conformed; others frowardly opposed. The one
encouraged, the other exasperated my poor zeal; first by preaching, and
private communications, and now by printing this slender treatise, to put forth
my self a weak labourer, under such Aholiabs, and Bezaliels, master workmen.

I do not in all this little treatise frame any one proposition, which I do
not in my conscience, conceive to be the truth of God. Nor do Iuse any
argument or reason, but such as I apprehend naturally to infer the
conclusion. My desire herein (God knows) is your satisfaction and right
information, in that, which not a little concerns Gods glory, and your good.
Think not that I would reduce all Gods worship, to bodily gestures; Neither
imagine, that it belongs to the soul alone: The soul is the most excellent
part, whose intentions recommend the expressions of the body unto God. But the
body is a part, and an essential part of the man; and must bear his part with
the soul in Gods worship. If the body act alone, then does God say, Man, where
is thy soul? If the soul alone take all upon it; then says God, where is, or
what does thy body? Where are thine eyes, thy hands, thy knees, thy legs, to
declare and accompany the lifting up, the humility, and the confidence of thy
soul? Thy whole man is to be employed in my worship: It is for God and for his
glory, that I do plead thus earnestly with my brethren. How decent a thing is
it in the eye of man, to behold bodies and souls accord and join together, in
the holy work? How does the visible and expressive devotion of one Christian,
beget and increase the same in an other? And how powerfully shall the reverend
behaviors and gestures of an whole Congregation together work one upon an
other? Is not God the more glorified when our devotion is quickened and
advanced. O my brethren; be not froward, but meek and tractable. Boy strous
men, in a spirit of error or opposition or both, have made too much stir,
troubled and affrighted honest hearts. On the other side, some men expressing
devotion outwardly, give too much scandal through want of probity. But I
beseech you turn away your eyes from men; turn them upon God, and then turn
them home upon your selves: And then, tell me; do you not perceive the Majesty
of God to be so great, as that it becomes the whole man, soul and body to
demean himself, in all points of humility and reverence, inward and outward,
when he is in Gods special presence? Is not the excellent goodness of God
such, as draws all men's eyes upon him, and feeds them all with expectation?
Is not his bounty such as fills every living thing with plenty of his
goodness? Shall not the eye then look up toward God, in admiration and hope?
Shall not the hand be lifted up, showing the heart ready to receive the
blessing, and to reach out thanks? Speak to God with the intention, judgment
and fervency of the soul. Speak also by the expressions of the members of thy
body. Speak by thy tongue; Speak by thine eyes; Speak by thine hands and by
thy knees. The tongue interprets the meaning of the soul, by words. The eyes
and hands interpret the confident expectation of the soul, by their elevation.
The knees interpret the humility of the soul by bowing. And so the rest of
our decent gestures do interpret the soul, every one in its own language,
which God intends, understands and accepts; when they truly declare
outwardly, what the soul conceives inwardly. But I am asked what need these
gestures and postures more now, than heretofore? Whereto I answer, that there
is no more need to use these decent and reverend gestures and expressions, in
the worship of God now, than heretofore. And that if heretofore we have been
defective in what was requisite, it is time that now we be reformed. Again, if
by heretofore, ye understand the space of 40. or 50. years last passed: I
confess that what we perform now, may seem a novelty. But if by heretofore
you mean the best and primitive times, of the ages next the Apostles, and
before the days superstition crept on: then I say that there is no more
required now, than what was in use in the practice of Christians heretofore.
God therefore give us grace to discern truth from error, and light from
darkness, and not to be put out of the way of true devotion, through a
panike fear of a supposed superstition; heartily prays

At my Study in Norwich, March. 4. 1638. Your loving brother, Fowlke Robarts.

The Contents.
Cap. 1. OF Holiness. 2 Of the holy place. 3 Of the consecration of Churches.
4 Consecration of Churches is not Leviticall, but moral. 5 That consecration
belongs also to our Churches under the Gospel. 6 Names whereby, Churches,
under the Gospel, have been called. 7 To ascribe holiness unto Churches, to
build them fair and to adorn them, is neither Popish, nor any way
superstitious. 8 Gods servants are holy and not superstitious. 9 Gods worship
is to be performed with outward expressions. 10 The several gestures used by
Gods servants, in his worship, are free from superstition 11 They who unjustly
charge us with superstition, are themselves most superstitious.


GODS HOLY HOUSE AND SERVICE.
CAP. I. Of Holiness.
THere is a twofold holiness: 1. Essential, Original, and Primitive. 2.
Accidental and derivative.

Essential, Original, and Primitive holiness is the holiness of God, or
rather God himself. Holy, Holy, Holy. Whom we call Primitive and Original
holiness; because that all other holiness is derived from God. who is holy,
in and of himself, yea holiness it self.

Accidental, derived or received holiness is that holiness which the
Creature has, who has no holiness, but from God; as the Moon has no light
but from the Sun.

All the holiness of the Creature is accidental. For the Creature may either
have or want holiness, and yet still remain the same entire creature; as the
Devil is now in substance the same Creature, which he was before his fall, and
Saint Paul, after his conversion, the same person, which he was before: though
his conditions be changed.

Again the holiness of the creature is either Inherent or Relative.

Inherent holiness is that wherewith the creature is so endued, as that it
makes his very nature and disposition holy, in voluntary conformity to the will
of God; as in Lot, compared with the Sodomites, and Michael, with the Devil.

Of this holiness no creature is capable, under or beneath the reasonable
creature, which is man. For this holiness is a voluntary conscious obedience,
and conformity to Gods will: according to the words of Saint Aug. Affectu
tenenda sanctitas, De diffin. Eccl. dogm.
the meaning whereof is, that holiness must be retained wittingly and
willingly; and Origin tells us, that qui verbo dei inservit, in sanctis se
esse credat. i. He that conformeth himself to Hom. 42. in Levit.
the Word of God, may assure himself that he is of the number of holy men;
Saint Paul conjoyneth both these, when he says, Ye have from the heart obeyed
the form of doctrine, which has been delivered unto you.

Relative holiness is, when the Creature without any qualifying of his nature
with inherent sanctity, is to be esteemed holy, in relation to the holy use,
whereto it is assigned. And in this sense times, places, oil, bread and
several utensills, Cum divino cultui applicantur. i. when they be Aq. 2 da. 2
de. q. 81. ar. 8.
applied to divine worship are holy.

Things are assigned to the worship of God, either immediately: as was the
Tabernacle and the Temple, which are therefore holy, Exodus 31. 1. Psalm. 5. 7.
The time for Gods worship, Exodus 20. 11. Men made Priests, Exodus 28. 41. Beasts
offered in sacifice, of the words sacrum facere: so the Oblation is a
consecration, Levit. 8. 28. And the Altar on which it is laid, is holy or
sanctified. Exodus 29. 44. These and the like are therefore holy, because they
are for holy use, viz. for Gods worship, and that immediately, being of use in
the very act thereof.

Other things belong to Gods worship, immediately: and therefore are holy in
that sense and degree: and of this sort are those things which concern the
maintenance of the Priests, as their Tithes, Levit. 27. 30. and those fragments
and shares of the Sacrifices allotted to be the Fee of the Priest, Levit. 2. 3.
and the Cities with their suburbs, appointed for their habitation. All which
though in regard of the Author of their consecration, are by God himself
immediately made holy; yet in regard of their use, they are holy immediately,
because they are for the use of those, who themselves were used in the holy act
of Gods Worship.

But passing by all others of this kind of holy things, I purpose to amplify
my self only in the holy place, the house of God; or the place of Gods
Worship, and the Service therein.

CAP. II. Of the Holy Place.
I Know not why I should not take it for granted, that there have been from
the beginning, certain set places, specially designed for Gods Worship,
howsoever we read not of any houses, temples, or such like Fabriques, wherein
to Worship God, before the days of Moses, who framed the Tabernacle by Gods
direction: yet we find that there were Altars for this use, from the days of
Noah, and we find them fixed in their places, to the which devout forefathers
repaired to Worship. And though Noah's Altar Genesis 9. be the first that we read
of, yet I make no doubt but that they had Altars before that time, even from
the beginning. For we do not find, that any Altar set up either by Jacob,
Genesis 33. or by Isaac Genesis 26. or by Abraham either Genesis 22. or cap. 13. or 12.
Or that by Noah, were set up by any special Commandment from God. And
therefore it is very probable, that the light of nature taught them, that the
place where God is to be Worshipped, ought to be differenced from other places:
and that what they offered unto God, should be decently set forth and not
either fluttishly or carelessly laid or thrown upon the bare ground, which
nature teaches to be too rude a fashion, of offering a present and therefore,
the very heathen (who had no direction, but from the light of nature) had their
Altars for their sacrifices and Worship of their Gods. And when Jacob made his
oblation Genesis 28. he powered his oil, not upon the ground; but upon the top
of the stone, which he had set up on end for that purpose, verse 18.

In the 35. of Genesis God does give Jacob a Commandment concerning the building
of an Altar at Bethel. But that does not imply that Jacob knew not, by the
light of nature, that oblations to God, ought to be laid on some pile, erected
for that purpose, as appears by his former practice both at Bethel, Genesis 28.
and at Shalem of Shechem to be his place of worship whilst he lived there Genesis
33. And therefore in Genesis 35. God does not so much inform Jacob, that there
must be a place for divine worship, specially distinguished, as put Jacob in
mind of his promise which he had made Genesis 28. concerning his Bethel or place
of worship, to be at Luz, according to his vow, and that now specially; when
upon the scandal which his sons had given in the land, the country was
grown too hot for him: whereupon, as it was needful for him to remove his
dwelling from among the enraged Sichemites; so also to have such a place for
worship, where he might abide, without repayring to the Altar, which he had
built at Shechem. And the commandes of God to Moses concerning Altars to be
made, Exodus 20. and cap. 27. and 30. and Deuteronomy. 27. relate not so much to the
Altars themselves, as the materials, whereof; the forms, wherein; and the
uses, for which, they shall be made. For it had long, or rather ever been the
use to have an Altar to specify the place of Gods worship, insomuch as Abraham
returning from Egypt, went to the place of the Altar which he had made at the
first, and there he called on the name of the Lord. And all this was
long-before the Institution of the Leviticall Priesthood, and therefore before
any Leviticall ceremony had any being, which sufficiently proves, that neither
an Altar, nor an oblation upon an Altar, nor the worship of God at an Altar, is
any thing Levitical (though of use in the Leviticall worship) no more then many
of our Churches are therefore Popish, because that either they are now, or
heretofore have been used by Papists.

Unto Moses God gave order to make a Tabernacle, a building, or an house,
whereat, and wherein, he would be worshipped. And such a building it was, as
sorted with the condition of the people at that time: being rather a booth or
tent, than an house. For as the people having then no settled abode, but being
on their journey in the wilderness had not then for their private harbor, any
houses fastened and immove^ble on their foundations: but tents or boothes, which
might be taken up, carried along and pitched again, as they should be
occasioned: so also the Room which they had for Gods worship was accordingly
remooveable and portable. Yea and after their settling in the Land of Canaan,
the Ark of God (though diverse times removed from place to place) yet for a
long time it remained in a tent, or under curtains, 2 Samuel 7. 2.

This when holy David considered, he thought it unreasonable, that he (though a
King, yet a man) should dwell in a better house, than any that God had for his
own worship: and thereupon resolved, to provide God of a more magnificent
habitation or place of worship; but God would not have it of David's building,
who had been a man 1 Chro. 28. 3.
of war, and shed much blood: Solomon therefore chosen thereto by God,
undertook and finished the work, which continuing in glory the space of 400.
years, to the 19. of the Reign of King Nabuchadnozor, was burnt down by the
Caldaeans, who also carried away the people of Judah Captives to Babylon, where
when they had continued the space of 70. years, they returned home, and
builded a second house for Gods worship which with some magnificent alterations
in the time of Herod the great, continued: the space of 490. years, unto the
7^. year of the incarnation of our blessed Savior.

After the assention of our Savior into heaven (the Apostles and Disciples
being dispersed on broad, and thereby the Gospel Preached over the world) men
were begotten to the Church says; and assembled themselves as they might in
See Mead Churches.
private houses, in woods, in dens, and caves: yet so as, their meeting
places were certain and set a part from common use to the worship of God and
Church edification: and though the malice of the heathen was great, raising
frequent and cruel persecutions against the Churches: yet they began betimes
to build Churches and as their number and means increased to enlarge, and
adorn them: insomuch as in this Island Joseph of Arimathca, having here
preached the Gospel, builded a Church in the Isle of Avalon or Aveland in
Somersetshire, which afterward, Devi Bishop of Saint David's repaired: and
lastly King Ivor. Converted to a Monastery.

Neither only in this Island, but also all over the world, Churches became by
degrees to be builded, enlarged and adorned. And though often the fury of
persecutors demolished them: yet still as the Churches obtained any peace and
favor, they repaired, enlarged and beautified their Churches: In which (as
also in their former less conspicuous and sumptuous places of religious
meetings) they might neither buy nor sell, nor treat of worldly matters, nor
eat and drink, other than at holy Communions. So were the Tert. Apol.
places of an holy esteem Holy Places.

CAP. III. Of Consecration of Churches.
NEither are Churches therefore holy only because they are applied to holy
uses: but they are first made holy, by special dedication and consecration, of
which the learned Zanchius gives this definition: Consecratio est, praemissis
precibus cum gratiarum action, templa ad In 4 precep^. c. 19. q. 2.
solum divini cultus usum deputare, ordinare que ac benedicere; and incipere
jam usurpare, i. Consecration is with prayers and thankesgivings to depute and
to ordain, and bless Temples, to the only use of the worship of God; and
accordingly to begin to put them in ure.

In which words we may consider three things. 1. The Alienation. 2. The
Assignation. 3. The Solemnity of the Act.

1. The Alienation is when the ground whereon a Church is built, together with
the Church or building it self, and so much ground about it as is intended for
the Churchyard, being all yet but common ground and building; i. such as the
owner may retain in his own hands and convert to what use he will, either
public or private, is surrendered into the hands of the Bishop, to the end
that it may be made holy unto God, whereby the right which the owner had
therein, is quite determined; and the common use whereto it might have been
put, is for ever prevented and put by. As, when King David intended to build an
Altar unto God, in the threshing floor of Araunah, he first buyeth it out of
the right and possession of Araunah, that when the Altar is there built, he
may consecrate it unto God, and Araunah for ever be excluded, and debarred from
any claim thereto.

2. The Assignation is the investing of Almighty God, in the right and
possession of that ground and building: For when the owner has surrendered it
into the hands of the Bishop, and given livery and seizin thereof to the
Bishop, so as now the Bishop is thereof fully possessed; yet is the Bishop
herein but Gods Atturny, so seized and possessed of this ground and building to
Gods use; to the which he does by special ceremony and solemnity assign it.
Whereupon it becomes now the house and ground of God, and God himself is
thereof specially possessed. In the Old Testament we find, that God, upon the
performance of the Dedication, does visibly show himself in possession; for
when Moses (who Exodus 40. is commanded to Anoint and hallow the Tabernacle and
all that is therein) had verse 23. finished the whole work, i. done all in
manner and form, as he had been directed, then v. 34. A Cloud covered the
tent of the Congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle. So
also 1. King 8. when the Temple being finished, all things had been set in
their order therein, and bountiful Sacrifices offered verse 5. and that the
Priests were come out of the holy place, verse 10. The place being now resigned
and prepared for God, to take his possession: then the Cloud filled the house
of the Lord, verse 10. And the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord.

3. Solemnity did also ever accompany this work; Jacob erecting his Altar,
Genesis 28. first acknowledges the place to be none other than the house of God,
a dreadful place, sets up the stone on end, powers oil thereon for an
oblation, makes there his vows to God, which he afterward performed cap.
35. Who will, may read at large, with what solemnity the Tabernacle was
dedicated, Exodus 40. And the Temple of Solomon 1. King. 8. And the second
Temple, 1. Esdr. 6. And when Judas Macchabeus had renewed the Altar, which
together with the Temple, the heathen had profaned: what time the heathen had
profaned it, even in that was it dedicated, with Songs and Cytterns and Harpes
and Cymballs. And then all the people fell on their faces, worshipping and
praising the God of heaven: who had given them so good success: and so they
kept the Dedication of the Altar 8. days.

CAP. IIII. Consecration of Temples and Churches, is not Leviticall but Moral.
THere is a conceit taken up upon imagination, and propagated by tradition,
without ground, that consecrations were mere Leviticall rites and Ceremonies,
against which fancy; we reason that consecrating of places to Gods Worship,
being neither peculiar to the Jews, under the Priesthood of Levi, nor any
type of any thing to be fulfilled in Christ, are not Leviticall but moral:
whereto the very heathen have been directed, by the light of nature See Live.
hist. To. dec. 1. l. 1. and l. 9. Tacit. hist. l. 4 fl. Vopis. in vita
Aureliani.
in all times among all nations. Nature informs us, that there is a God; that
God must be Worshipped, that there must be places, where publickely to perform
that worship; heathen men know all this and practice accordingly. And will any
man say or imagine, that to give thanks to God for affording a place for his
public worship: or by prayers to beg of God, that the prayers there made,
the Word there Preached, and the Sacraments there received, may be all
effectual under Gods blessing, is a matter Leviticall. Or it is a Jewish thing
to separate the place of Gods worship from common use? Or to shut up the house
of God from being an house of Merchandise? Where lies either Iudaisme,
superstition or any error in all this? And this is all that which we call
consecration or dedication.

Does not Nature teach men to acknowledge God, to be the Author of all the good
things which we receive, and therefore to receive them with thanks for them,
and prayers to God for his blessing upon them to our use; for every creature 1 Timothy 4. 5.
of God is good if it be received with thankesgiving, for then it is sanctified
by the Word and Prayer: In regard whereof, God taught us not Deuteronomy. 20. 5.
to enter upon the possession of a private house, without so dedicating it.
Shall consecration hold generally in the use of all Gods blessings, even of
those which concern only the use of this life? and is the creature sanctified
to our use, when it is received with prayer and thankesgiving? and shall we be
affrayd to say that the Church is specially sanctified to our use, or to call
it a consecrated or holy place, when it is a creature of God, set a part for
the worship of God, for the benefit of the soul, and for the furtherance of
the whole man, to everlasting Salvation?

We must not call every thing Jewish or Leviticall, which is done by a Jew or
Levite: no more than we term every thing Popish which is done by a Papist. But
as that only is Popish which is peculiar to a Papist, and wherein he in
doctrine or ceremony innovateth against the Word of God, and the faith and
practice of the primitive and purer Church; so that is Jewish or Leviticall,
which is peculiar to the people of the Jews or Leviticall worship; but that
which becomes all men to do, in all times and places, and whereto they are
guided by the light of nature, the Word of God, and presidents of Ancient
Orthodox Fathers, and sincere primitive Christians, is neither Jewish,
Leviticall, nor Popish; but moral pious and Christian.

That exemplary Knight, not unworthily styled Sir Hen Spelm.
a Magazine of learning, does in his book de non temerandis ecclesiis, extract
the moral from what was Leviticall in the Worship of God, from the first
institution of the Order of Levi, unto the period or expiring thereof, by
taking into consideration the distinct regions (as I may call them) of the
Temple. In the first whereof being the holy of holyes, was the divine presence
in the Arc, the Oracle and Mercy seat; into which none but the high Priest
might enter, and that but once in the year, and not without blood. In the
second, being the holy place, which was the court of the Priests, was the
Ceremonial worship and atonement by sacrifices, oblations and other
Leviticall rites; and therefore here were the holy vessels, the Shewbread, the
incense Altar; and in the Court the Altar of burnt Sacrifice. The third was the
outward Court, or Court of the people, called Salomons Porch: and this place
was for thankesgiving, Prayer, and Preaching. The two first regions or places
of the Temple, were Ceremonial in wordly elements: Mystical, signifying some
Spiritual things, to be fulfilled in Christ. Secret for the things there
performed, were remote from the eyes of the people. Leviticall, administered
only by that tribe. Judicial, for the use only of that people (temporal, to
endure only to the time of reformation. But the third place, with the duties
there performed, was free from the Ceremonies of the two former, all open to
the people. The mysteries were there explained; all the Tribes, people, and
nations had their access thither. The duties performed in this region, and so
the place it self, were and are to continue to the end of the world in specie,
though not in individuo, i. in the same kind, though not in the same
particular, to be of the same use all the world over; for so says Almighty God,
Mine house shall be called an house of Prayer Es. 56. 7.
to all nations. And the said worthy Knight further observes, that our Savior
Christ reformed not any thing in the two former places, the functions there
being at an end; but for so much as the functions of the third were to
continue, therefore he purges that place, and restores it to the former and
due sanctity.

An Argument drawn from the Tabernacle or Temple to our Churches, in things
Moral, and founded on the Law of nature is good, and concludes strongly. For
though the veil of the Temple be rent down, from the toppe^ to the bottom;
and an end be put to the Typical and Leviticall Worship: Yet the Temple was
not then thrown down, but continued standing, the space of 40. years after
the ascension of our Savior into heaven, for Moral worship and Service, and
was accordingly used by Christian people, for prayer and preaching, as is
evident Act. 3. 1. and cap. 5. 20, 21. And no doubt but that to this day it
might have continued the house of God, for moral worship: if the impiety of
the Jews had not provoked God to bring the Romans upon them, to destroy both
them and their Temple. The necessity that lay upon the Temple to be thrown
down, in regard of the Prophecy of our Savior Christ, foretelling the ruin
thereof, proceeded from our Savior his foreknowledge, looking to the vengeance
which the people deserved for their sins, and not from the nature of the
Temple, which might have continued for moral worship, though the Leviticall be
ceased. And to that effect the Masters of the Centuries (well known to be no
friends to superstition) observed well in these words; The Christians are Cent.
2. c 7.
daily in the Temple with one accord: Act. 2. The Apostles ceased not daily,
there to teach and to Preah Christ. Act. 5. Peter and John went up to the
Temple to pray, and they did Preach to the People, when they flocked together
in Salomons Porch, Act. 3. And the Apostles, being delivered out of prison, are
commanded not to Preach the Gospel in the Temple. Act. 5. And the whole
congregation came together with one accord in Salomons Porch, and S. Paul also
is apprehended in the Temple; and all this was after that our blessed Savior
had by his death and resurrection put an end to all Leviticall ceremonies.

If any object here, that when the Romans had burnt down and destroyed the
Temple, the anger of God was so great against it, as not to suffer any
rebuilding of it any more: the answer is ready, viz. that the anger of God was
not against the being of an house, for his worship in that place: but because
the unbeleeving Jews (as they did hate Christ, so being animated by that grand
enemy of Christ, the Apostate Julian) endeavored to erect there a Temple for
Leviticall worship and ceremonies, to be set up again, in defiance and slander
to the Cross of Christ, and prejudice of the Gospel. For the Christians did
afterward in that very place, where the Temple stood, and where the Jews were
not permitted by God to rebuild, set up a very fair and goodly Church, for
Christian worship, which Church was long blessed of God and became a
Patriarchall seat.

CAP. V. That Consecration belongs also to our Churches under the Gospel.
OUr Churches under the Gospel, are in the same condition with the third
region of the Temple, among the Jews: viz. Gods house of prayer, to all
nations. And therefore as that was so ours must be, no house of Merchandise:
but set a part from all common use, for the worship of God, thankesgiving,
Novel. 6.
prayer, preaching, and the like acts and exercises of Religion. Justinian made
a Law, that ecclesiastical persons should not celebrate divine offices, in
places not consecrate. And so has the Church anciently accustomed, to make the
places of Religious meetings, peculiar and proper for only religion and
devotion, by the solemn rites of consecration.

Saint Augustine, preaching 1200. years since, Sermon. de temp. 256.
at the consecration of a Church, begins thus; Celebritas hujus
congregationis dedicatio est domus orationis. i. The solemnity of this meeting
is the dedication of the house of prayer. Saint Ambrose L. 1. Ep. 5.
tells us that he and Felix had been invited ad consecrationem basilicae per
Bassianum. i. to the consecration of a Church by Bassianus. Athanasius Ep. ad
Constable.
does diverse times mention the consecration of Churches. Before all these
Alexander Bishop of Apol. ad Constable.
Alexandria (as testifies Athanasius) consecrated a Church with great
solemnity. Eusebius relates that upon the death of the tyrant Maximianus, L.
10. c. 3.
Optatum exhibetur spectaculum Celebrationes, viz. eccaeniorum per Civitates
and Oratoriorum recens structorum consecrationes. i. There appears a very
joyful spectacle or sight, viz. the yearly comemorations of the Dedications
of Churches, and Consecrations of others newly set up. And howsoever Pope
Higinus about the year 140. Decr. de consec. did. i. e. omnes Basilicae.
made a Decree that Churches should be consecrated; yet it is plain that that
Decree was but the ratification of what was then in use, rather than any
innovation or bringing in of a new fashion. For there were Consecrations of
Churches under Pope Evaristus about 40. years before that Decree Gratia.
of Higinus: and that either something before, or presently after, the death of
Saint John the Evangelist; for I find some uncertainety here, in matter of
Chronology, though the space of the time in difference is not long. And
indeed how can we imagine otherwise, but that so soon as the Christians had
any certain places for their religious meetings, they did for the more
Comfortable expectation of Gods blessing in them, dedicate them unto God by
prayer and thankesgiving?

Yea and the Primitive Christians were wont at the dedication of their Churches
to be exceedingly affected, and taken with excessive joy, at these
Dedications: whilst they considered that God had, as it were taken an house
among them, therein to entertain, feed, feast, and cloth them with his own
special presence, his holy Word, the blessed Sacraments, and the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, where also they might Communicate and impart
themselves by their prayers unto God: and confidently beg and have for all
their necessities and occasions, sufficiency of relief: and therefore as in
the Old Testament we find, that when Solomon Dedicated the Temple, he held a
great feast, the space of 14. days, And 1 King. 8.
then he blessed the people, and the people blessed him, and went to their
tents joyful and glad of heart, for all the goodness which the Lord had done
for David his servant, and for Israel his people: and as in the 6. Chapter of
the book of Ezra, They kept the Dedication of the house of God with joy, etc.
So also the primitive Christians used with much gladness and rejoicing to
solemnize the Dedications of their Churches. Eusebius in the place last cited
adds these words, Hic Psalmodiis ac reliquis divinitus L. 10.
nobis traditis elogiis: Illic divinis ac mysticis mysteriis, etc. ecclesiarum
presides panegyricis. conventus ornabant; and then, totis animi viribs
hilarique mente precando and gratias agendo deum bonorum authorem venerabantur.
i. Here with Hymns and divine praises. There with sacred and deep Mysteries,
etc. yea and the governors of the Churches did with public speeches solemnize
the meetings; and with songs and praises from the bottom of their hearts, and
with cheerful minds, praising and giving thanks, they worshipped God the
Author of all their good. Saint Augustine at the like solemnity has these
words, Consecrationem altaris hodie Celebramus (fratres) and Sermon. 255.
custe ac merito celebramus festivitatem, in qua unctus esse lapis, in quo
nobis divina Sacrificia consecrantur. i. We this day (brethren) celebrate the
Consecration of the Altar, and good cause have we to Celebrate that festivity,
wherein that stone has been anointed, upon which the Divine sacrifices are
consecrated for us.

And yet further, as when Macchabaeus had reconciled or new dedicated the
Sanctuary of God, and new built the Altar of burnt offerings, which the heathen
had profaned; they do not only Celebrate that Dedication, with great joy at
that time: but also ordain an anniversary or yearly commemoration and
continuation thereof, to posterity: So also the primitive Christians, when they
had once consecrated a Church, did use ever after to keep a solemn yearly
feast, upon the consecration day, for a thankful memorial of that blessing,
as may appear by the title of diverse Sermons of Saint Augustines, In
anniversario Tom. 10. de temp.
dedicationis Templi vel Altaris. i. In the yearly solemnity of the Dedication
of the Temple or Altar. In one of which Sermons, he speaks thus:
Quotiescunque (fratres Chrissimi) alt aris Sermon. 252.
vel templi festivitatem colimus, si diligenter ac fideliter attendimus and
sancte ac just vivimus, qui^quid in Templis manufactis agitur, id totum in
nobis spirituali aedificatione completur. i. as often as (most dear brethren)
we keep the Feast day of the Temple or Altar, if we diligently and faithfully
heed it; and live uprightly and godlily, then whatsoever is done in the
Temples made with hands, that is all fulfilled in us by spiritual edification.
And when Constantine had built that fair Sozom. l 2. c. 25. Niceph. hist. ed.
l. 8. c. 50.
and famous Temple in Mount Calvary, as he drew thither all the Bishops from
the Council of Tire, for the consecration thereof: So from that time the
Church of Jerusalem did yearly, for the space of eight days together,
celebrate the commemoration or remembrance of that Dedication. Nazianzen says
de eccaenijs celebrandis, Naz. orat. in nav. domicum. orat. 43.
legem veterem esse, eamque perclare constitutam. i. That the Law for the
yearly commemorations of the Dedications of Churches, is both ancient and
worthily enacted.

And to this day, as in other parts of the Christian world, so in this Realm
and Kingdom, we do celebrate these commemorations in diverse Parishes (though
men know not, that the Wake-day-feasts (as we call them) which they yearly
keep, are the days of the consecration of their Churches, in those Parishes,
and therefore should be celebrated with more seriousness, reverence and
devotion then usually they do.

About the one and thirtieth year of Henry 8. Holy days were grown to such
an unreasonable number, as that men had almost no time, to work and intend the
business of their callings; servants had so many play days, and poor people
so few working days, as began to breed much inconvenience, by reason of so
much idleness. Wherefore there came forth injunctions from the King by the
Convocation, for the restraint thereof: and whereas every Parish generally had
two special and peculiar holy days of their own every year; the one to the
memorial of the Saint, by whose name the Church was called (whom they of the
blinder times, superstitiously adoring, styled the Patron of the place) The
other was in commemoration of the dedication of the Church: it is enjoined that
the Feast of the Saint or Patron be no longer observed as an holy day, but that
it shall be lawful to all and singular persons to go to their work, mystery
or occupation, upon the same day, except the said feast be such, as else must
be universally kept, as an holy day. But the Feast of the Dedication of the
Church, the Injunction will have it still to be continued, though yet so, as it
must not be celebrated upon any working day; but in all places always on the
first Sunday in October: but we find that in most places, both these festivals
are let down, and so far discontinued, as that there is no remembrance of
them left, though yet in many places in this Kingdom, there is a plain
continuation of the one of them, or rather of them both contracted into one.
For where the Wakes in England are yet in use, I conceive that they continue a
remainder of the eccaenia, or Dedication Feasts: First, for that those
festivals are of so great antiquity, and therefore the liker, for the reverence
thereof to be continued. Secondly, for that they were wont to be celebrated
with so great solemnity as kept them the rather from being forgotten; and by
ancient Counsels were placed in the same rank with Council. Mogunt. de sest.
an. ca. 36. Council. Lugdun. de consecr. did. 3. c. 1.
Easter day, Ascension day, and Whitson day, and other such great and eminent
festivals. In a Council held at Oxford, Anno. 1222. the Festivalls are
distributed into three ranks, and the Feast of the Dedication of a Church is
numbered with those which are omni veneratione observanda. i. To be kept with
all solemnity and devotion. And thirdly, seeing that when the other, viz. the
Feast day of the Saint was dissanulled, this of the Dedication is ratified. All
which being laid together, do make it very probable that the Wake day Feast is
of the two the continuation of the Dedication Feast (for one of them (if not a
conjunction of both) it is certainly) and yet not without some reference to
the day of the Saint.

For if men (where these Feasts are yet in use) look well into it, they shall
plainly find, that the days whereon they keep these Wakes, are the days of
the memorial of those Saints, respectively, by whose names the several
Churches are called. I can insist in many; and the British word, whereby the
Britains do call those solemnities Gwul-Mab-Sant. i. The Saints holy day.
or festivals, does import as much. For though the Churches were built, and
houses unto God, for his Worship; yet to distinguish one from another, they
have every one the name of some Saint, whose memory the Bishop, Founders, and
people then thought good to continue. So that each of our Churches is the house
of God, and the memorial of some Saint, according to the words of Saint
Augustine, Nos martyribus nostris De Civit. dei. l. 22. c. 10.
non templa sicut diis, sed memorias, sicut hominibus mortuis (quorum apud deum
vivunt spiritus) fabricamus. i. We build not any Temples to our Martyrs, as if
they were Gods; but memorialls as of dead men (whose souls are alive with God)
and yet they reputed those Churches or so called them, Aedes Sacras, holy or
Sacred houses. For, Eusebius. de vit. constable. l. 3. c. 1.
they are set a part from common use; they are assigned to Gods Worship, they
are consecrated with solemn and special rites, and given up into Gods
possession, and their Dedications have long been commemorated with yearly
solemnites; whereupon it was decreed in the Council of Gangra. Si quis docet
domum Dei Contemp ibilem esse vel congregationes quae in ea fiant, Anathema
Cap. 5.
fit. i. If any man teach that the house of God or the Congregations there
assembled, are to be contemned or slighted, let him be accursed. And further
the words in that Council are, Domos Cap. 21.
Dei honoramus, and conventus qui in iis fiunt, tanquam sanctos and utiles
suscipimus, non claudentes pietatem in domibus, sed omnem locum in Dei nomine
aedificatum honoramus. i. We do honor the houses of God, and embrace the
assemblies there, as holy and good. Not that we shut up Piety in houses, but
that we honor all places which are built to the name of God.

So then the Piety of those times reputed Churches holy places, and yet no
otherwise holy than by a Relative holiness. viz. in regard of their
consecration, and the use whereto they are thereby assigned, which yet gives
no man liberty ever the more to slight the Church: For though creatures beneath
the reasonable, be capable of no other holiness, than this Relative holiness,
yet have they soundly smarted, who have dared to profane such holy things,
Nabuchadonosor 2 King. 25.
burnt up the houses of the Lord, and the Pillars of the basesse, and the
brazen Sea did the Caldaeans break in pieces, etc. But then mark what
followed; it is not long before that Nabuchadonosor is called to his account
for all this; when his Kingdom is departed from him, and he driven Dan. 4.
from men does eat grass as Oxen, has his body wet with the dew of heaven,
his hair grow like Eagles feathers, and his nails like the birds talons.
Baltasar will needs profane the holy vessels, and command them from the house
of Dan. 5.
God, for himself to carouse in, among his Concubines; But the wrath of God
does quickly power him out a Cup of vengeance, and sad news; that night he
lost his life, and the Medes and Persians possessed his Kingdom, Antiochus 1
Mac. 1.
makes the like havocke in the Temple, and the holy things thereof as
Nabuchadonosor had done before: and not long after he is met withal by the
hand of God, which smote him with an invisible and incureable plague,
tormenting his bowels and inward parts, his flesh rotting, his carcass
swarming with Lice, and stinking so grievously, as not to be endured; and in
this wretched case, he dyed miserably on the wild Mountains. And one maine
motive stirring God to expose the Jews to the fury of the Chaldaeans was, for
that 2 Chro. 36. 14.
they polluted the house of the Lord, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.

Does not the fearful death of Vzzah tell us, how wary we must be, and what
heed we must take of meddling with things hallowed or Consecrated; for what did
he but only touch the Arc with his hand, in no contempt or evil meaning but
with a good respect, to keep it from falling? But the Arc was holy, and Vzza
his hand was not to meddle therewith; he therefore dyed for this presumption;
and yet the holiness of the Arc was but relative holiness.

What should I say of the Sabbath day among the Jews, or of the Lords day
among the Christians? was the one? Or is the other holy, otherwise than by a
relative holiness? And yet we know, how severely they have been punished,
which violated the holiness of the Sabbath in the Old Testament: and we have
known of many terrible judgments, which have overtaken such as have abused
the other. Jerusalem is the holy City, and heaven it self is an holy place;
yet no otherwise holy than in relation to God there specially present. If then
heaven be holy, Jerusalem holy, the Lords day holy, the Sabbath was holy; then
the Church or place consecrated for Christians to assemble in, for the public
worship of Almighty God, is therefore holy, because being so consecrated, it
has such relation to God and his worship.

CAP. VI. Names whereby Churches under the Gospel have been called.
OUr English word Church, which in Scotland is sounded Kyrke, comes of the
Greek word Kuriak, of the word Krios, a Lord, so Kuriak or Church is, as if
you should say, belonging to the Lord; answerable whereto is the Latin name
Dominicum, by which the Church was anciently called, of the word Dominus a
Lord, so we have it, Ruffin. l. 1. c. 3. Sequere me ad Dominicum, i. De verbis
dominii Ser. 15.
Follow me to the Church, Saint Augustine tells us the reason, why the Church
is so called. Quemadmodum tempus Deo sacrum, dicitur dies Dominicus: Ita locus
Deo dicatus, dicitur Dominicum, i. As the time which is holy unto God is called
the Lords day, so the place which is dedicated unto God, is called Dominicum,
i. The Lords house. And thus the Church in the new Testament, agrees in phrase
with our forefathers in the Old Testament, who usually call the Temple and
places of Gods Worship, the house of the Lord.

Places of Christian and Religious meetings Cryptae. i. hiding places. For
sometimes in the heat of persecution, the Christians, though sincere, yet
either timorous or rather provident, not to be disturbed at their holy
meetings, did assemble in Caves in the earth in Woods and deserts as the
Apostles themselves Iuel. apol. part. 2. art. 3. Ioh. 20. 19. 1 King. 18. 13.
when they assembled in the night, with the doors shut for fear of the Jews,
and as the Prophets were hidden by fifty in a Cave; by the good Obediah. But O!
the goodness of our merciful God, who has placed unto us our Churches in
most open view: and made both the way thither, and our being there, safe and
comfortable. We need not with Nicodemus, go to Christ by night. The Church
doors are open at noone day, we are in no danger in going to, or being at
Church; but expose our selves to punishment, by keeping away. Happy are the
eyes which see the things which we see. And God give us grace to make good use
of so great blessings.

Churches have also the names of Oratories, of Orare to pray. For that
Christians in all their meetings, used to praise God, and to pray unto him.
Eusebius writing of the joyful L. 8. c. 1.
days, with the zeal and devotion of the Christians, before the persecution
began under Dioclesian says, Quis aggregationes multitudinis insignesque
concursus ad oratoria describeret? i. who was able to describe the gathering
together of the multitude, and their goodly flocking to the Oratories? And in
the next Chapter, lamentably bewailing what their sins had brought upon them,
he has these words; Oratoria a Culmine ad pavimentum usque deijci, ipsis
oculis vidimus. i. We have seen with our eyes, the Oratories L. 9. c. 10.
thrown down from the top to the bottom. And in an other place he calls
them Oratoria dominica, The Lords Oratories, (i.) houses of prayer to the Lord;
and thus to call Churches we have good warrant from Gods own edict, when he
said, Mine house shall be called an house of Prayer, to all Nations: who goes
to Church, goes to Gods house, to speak to God by prayer, and to hear God
speaking unto him by his Word. Look well to thy feet; take heed thou offer
not the Sacrifice of fools: Be not rash in speaking, but advised and serious
in thy Petitions. Be not blockish nor brutish, but reverent and heedfull in
thine attention; thou art here in talk with the high God, in his own house
and Chamber of presence.

Smnia is a name also given to Churches: of the Jacob, when he said how
dreadful is this place? It is none Genesis 28.
other, than the house of God, and gate of heaven. This is little considered or
regarded by those people who to profess against superstition, come into the
Church with their hands in their pockets, and their hats on their heads; and so
stalk up the Allie, and sit them down without any reverence. But to this
point more shall be said (God willing) in the ninth Chapter.

Churches sometimes are called Martyria, Martyrs, Ruffin. l. 2. c. 27, 28.
were placed and preserved in them; or because they have been named by the
name of some Martyr, at their Consecration, Martyrii vocabulum, Cent. 4. c. 5.
Constantini temporibus, cum in Martyrum memorias Templa Construerentur,
usurpari cepit, i. The word Martyrie began to be used in the days of
Canstantine, when Temples were consecrated to the memorial of Martyrs.

Templa is often the word for these houses of tectum or tegmen amplum. i. A
large or ample roof, wherein as in all other parts, it becomes Churches, to
exceed other buildings, as being erected for many to assemble in, for the
Worship of the high God. Others will have them called Templa, a Contemplando,
because that commonly both for their situation, bulk, and loftiness, they
were to be seen and discerned a far off. Eusebius says of Constantine,
Civitates quae videbantur vel maxim propter splendorem excellere, Devit.
Constable. l 3. c. 49.
templis egregiis magnificisque exornandas Curavit. i. He caused those Cities
which were specially the goodliest, to be adorned with notable and magnificent
Temples: and a little after he Cap. 51.
recites the Epistle of Constantine, to the Bishops of Palaestine, to purge
the ancient habitation of Abraham, from the Idolatry and impiety, wherewith it
had been profaned, and of which the Emperor says, Quem sane locum
decrevimus eximia Templi structura adornare, we have determined to adorn that
place with the fabrike of a goodly Temple.

We find Churches anciently styled Basilicae, as Basilica Sicinini, the Church
of Sicininus: Basilicae appellatio, pro templo, frequens esse apud Nazianzenum,
Ruffin. l. 2. c. 10. Cent. 4. 5.
Ambrosium and alios, i. Nazianzen, Ambrose and others, do usually call a
Temple by the name of Basilica. The word Basilica comes of asiles a King.
Basilica therefore is, as if one should say an house for a King. For so the
Church is the house of the great King, viz. Almighty God, or else because
Church is such and so fair a model of building, as becomes no less man
than a King. The Hebrews by the word (...) do express both a Temple and a
Palace; and to this purpose serve those words of description in Eusebius, L.
10. c. 2.
Ad immensam celsitudinem erigebantur, i. Temples or Churches were raised up to
an huge or wonderful height.

Time was when men in Christian humility reputed Genesis 18.
themselves dust and ashes, worms and no men: and thought it no reason that
themselves should dwell in magnificent Palaces, whilst the Ark of God is 2 Samuel 7. 2.
lodged in a booth: and therefore we see that anciently there were built for
God, Templa and Basilicae, i. Sumptuous and goodly Churches: for let us now
behold those Churches, which the devotion and Piety of our Fathers of old have
set up; and we shall easily perceive, if we compare them with the private
habitations and halls, even of great nobilities, erected in those days: that
Churches then might well bear the names of Templa and Basilicae. i. Lofty and
Royal buildings. But when we observe how private men's houses, of the later
editions, do tower it up, and advance their roofes to such an height, as quite
in ercepts and screenes up, the prospect of the houses of God in the Land. How
the Palaces of Knights and Gentlemen, draw all men's eyes upon them, whilst the
poor Church over-topped with her Patrons Pyramids, stands cringing behind,
as a shamed to be seen, so tattered without in her roof, walls, and windows:
so dusty, fullied, and forlorn within, as that the stone does cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the Timber does answer it; and both complain of an
irreligious age, producing men who think not God worthy of so good houses as
their own: how diverse particular men in a Parish, bestow usually every one of
them more upon their own houses, than all of them together will lay out upon
the house of God: we must needs think that this is an impiety, which to the
shame of our profession, has too long and too much prevailed. But God be
thanked who has put it into the heart of his sacred Majesty, our dread
Sovereign, and given zeal to our Ecclesiastical governors, under him, to
look better into the condition of Churches; whereby a blessed reformation is
begun. The Lord God, for whose glory they are so affected, increase their zeal
and prosper their pious endeavors: that we may behold the house and Worship of
God reduced to the Pristine and due esteem and splendour.

CAP. VII. That to ascribe holiness unto Churches; to build them fair; and to
adorn them; is neither Popish, nor any way Superstitious.
OUr Brethren who brook not that Churches should be deemed and used as holy:
cry out, that thus to respect Churches, is Popish and superstitious. But they
show not wherein this Superstition or Popery consists. But deal herein like
men that cry thieves, thieves: and yet neither tell who, nor what manner of men
these thieves are. So these people do as it were follow Superstion and Popery,
with hue and cry, all the World over; but they do not describe or set forth
this superstition and Popery; so that when we meet it, in our Churches, in
their consecration and usage of them (in all which they say it is) we may know
it, and deal therewith as becomes us.

Shall I tell them (what I am taught) that superstition is in Greek called
Deisidaimona: which signifies Plut. in Alex.
Deos esse metu credere. i. through fear to believe that there are Gods,
animum stolida timiditate complens. i. When the heart is fraught with foolish
fear. Or to speak with Nazianzen: superstitio est meticulose Deum colere, to
worship God timorously. To this effect Saint Paul speaks, using the word in
the adjective and comparative degree, Deisidaimonerou as if he should have
said, fearing God more than you need. To which purpose are the words of
Aquinas, who having declared out of the Gloss, that superstitio est relligo, 2
a. 2 ae. q. 9^.
ultra modum servata. i. Superstition is Religion, maintained beyond measure;
does after declare it to be, vitium religioni, oppositum, secundum excessum. i.
A vice opposite to Religion in the excess: as if he should say too much
Religion: and then least it should be imagined, that a man may be too
Religious; he explaineth himself and tells us, that he does not call
superstition Religion, in any other sense, than by way of Metaphor; because it
seems so, or looks something like unto religion. As when a crafty Mate is
called a wise fellow. And therefore afterward he calls it simulata religio,
counterfeit Religion. Again, he stateth superstition to consist either in the
Object, as when the Creature is worshipped in stead of the Creator: or else in
the manner of performance, whereof he gives this instance. If a man now under
the Gospel would worship the true God, with the Leviticall form and
Ceremonies.

And though I conceive that any kind of superstion may be referred, to one of
these two heads: yet to endeavor the further clearing of this point, I will
give one other distinction of Superstition, viz. Superstition is either
observing or abstaining. The first member of this distinction I take from the
words of Saint Paul, Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. Upon
Gal. 4. 10.
which words, a learned interpreter noting a fourefold observation of times. 1.
Physical. 2. Civil. 3. Ecclesiastical. 4. Superstitious, says, this
superstitious Heming.
observation of times is, quando opinio cultus, meriti, justitiae and
necessitatis accedit. i. When men have a conceit that one day makes them more
acceptable to God than another, with whom agrees Master Calvin, saying upon
the same text; Libera apud nos est and omni superstitione pura observatio. i.
The observation of times with us, is free, and without Superstition: as if he
should say, we do not ascribe any virtue, efficacy, luckinesse or Piety unto
one day or time, more than to another.

The other member of the distinction, viz. abstaining Superstition, I take from
the same Apostle, where he says; touch not, taste not, handle not, Which
words, Zanchie with other interpretors, reading, Eat not, taste not, handle
not, makes this Observation. Indicat Apostolus insatiabilem superstitiosorum
hominum in condendis novis observationibus libidinem. i. The Apostle shows
how eager superstitious men are in coining new observances. Hemingius also on
these words says: these are the words of the false Apostles, quibus
Superstitose decreta cumularunt. i. Wherewith they have superstitiously
multiplied decrees. The words of Piscator on this place are superstitiosorum
conatum exprimit. i. The Apostle sets forth the disposition of superstitious
people, afraid to touch, taste, or handle, those things in the touching,
tasting, and handling whereof there is no sin nor any danger. Of this
abstayning superstition I may say as David speaks of some men, they were in
great fear, were no fear was, which Psalm. 53. 5.
very thing in effect, S. Gregory applies to these kind of superstious
people, saying Superstitiosus omnia timet, terram, mare, aerem, caelum,
tenebras, lumen, strepitum, silentium, somnum. i. The superstitious In moral.
man stands in fear of every thing, of the earth, of the water, of the air,
of the sky, of the darkness, of the light, of noise, of silence, and of his
own dreams, suitable whereto are the words of the Philosopher. Qui
superstitione imbutus est, quietus esse nunquam potest. i. The superstitious
man is ever restless, or of an unquiet Spirit. For as it is in Curtius,
humanarum mentium ludibrium superstitio. i. Superstition is the very foolery of
the minds of men, for it is like a scare Crow in the brain, and makes a man
afraid of his own shadow, as he that durst not look out, for fear the sky
should fall.

Now then, having thus described superstition, and given you his true marks,
whereby you may know him, when you meet him: Let us betake ourselves to the
pursuit and search, some where among us this thief does lurk; and I doubt
not but to find him out, and bring him to light before we have done. And
herein I will deal as Laban did, when he sought his lost Idols, he made search
first in the tents of Jacob, Leah, and the handmaydes; Genesis 31.
and when he found them not there he went to ransacke in the Tent of Rachel,
where he might have found them, if he had not been too credulous. And I mean
to enter first into the Tents of Jacob, Leah, and the handmayds, that is, the
Cathedral and Parochian Churches. And that my brethren may see fair play, I
do request them to go along with me: and if they perceive me to pass by any
Corner unsought, and then to call me back to a more careful search.

And in this course, we cannot but begin with the Church yards, of Cathedral
and Parochian Churches. And being here, in the open air, I desire to know what
superstition is here to be either discerned or imagined? Master Carthwright is
angry with them; yet all that he has T. C. page 50. 6. 7. Defentra. 5. c. 2.
dives. 7.
to say against them is but this: That as they came in with the Monk, so they
might have gone out with him, for all the good they do. The Monk which he
means is Dionysius Pope of Rome, of whom Damasus says, that he was a Monk.
But Eusebius says that he was a Priest L. 7. c. 7.
and then Pope of Rome, when as yet the Bishops and Church of Rome flourished
in exemplary Anno. 266.
faith and probitie. But whether Dionysius were a Monk or a Priest before he
was Pope, and whether Churchyards (the constitution whereof is very ancient,
as appears by Athanasius Athan. apol.
and others) were first set out by Dionysius, is nothing to the purpose, to
prove in them, or in the use of them, any superstition. They are consecrated
with the Church unto God; as being the Courts of the Lords house. And have
been anciently used and yet may be, not only for Dormitories or burialls, but
also for divine worship, and have borne the name of Oratories for there they
did hold Synods, sing Psalms, Dur. deritibs.
and administer the Sacraments.

And before we enter into any of our Churches; we may in the Church yard, take
notice of the quarrel, which our brethren make to the very situation of them;
as having their fore part or upper end, standing always to the East. Of whom I
ask, and why not to the East? Is there any danger, in setting the upper end of
a Church into the East? Or is there any Commandment against it? If we ascribed
any holiness to the East, more than to any other quarter; or that we deemed
any Church or Chapel unholy, for not being placed so into the East: then
might this be accounted a superstitious observation of the East. But when this
is now done in imitation of the practice of Primitive times, continued unto
this present. And for order and conformity of one Church with another: And it
may be for some documentall signification: as that we under the Gospel look
into the East, as acknowledging the Son of righteousness to have risen unto
us, and to be shining upon us, with light and comfort* whereas the Temple for
Leviticall worship looked Westward, as it were toward the night, in token of
the Clouds and darkness under which the people were at that time. These and
diverse other good considerations might there be in the first placing of our
Churches in this manner without touch of superstition.

But I am told, that when we are within the Church, we find it divided, and a
partition or some mark of distinction set between the Church and the Chancell,
as we call it; and one part of the service is to be read in one place, and
another in another.

We are now entered into the Church, and we find it indeed as here it is
described. But as yet we find no Superstition. Distinctions of several places
in the house of God are not any conceit, crept in with Popery: but such as
have been Constituted and put in ure, very early in the Primitive Church, by
what partitions or boundaries every one of them was severed from other I cannot
so fully find out, neither is it material. Only, this is agreeable with good
reason, order and comelines, free from any color of Superstition: that as
there be several rancks of people, professing Church-unity, so they have their
places in their several distances. Some are unworthy to Come within the doors
of the Church and therefore are to stand without. Some are fit to be received
in, to be baptized: Some to be instructed in the grounds of Religion and to
repair with the rest of the Congregation: All which is done in the nave and
body of the Church. And as men profit in knowledge, and a working Faith, to
discern the Lords body They are admitted into a higher room; where the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, is to be administered, at the
holy Table, in the Chancell: which devideth it from the rest of the Church.

Seeing then, there are several offices orduties to be performed in the
Church: what Superstition is it, if there be distinct and several places for
them? If all places be by nature holy alike; and by Consecration, the whole
Chuch and every part thereof be set apart, for Gods worship: Then why is it not
as lawful to pray in one place thereof as in another? Is it lawful and and no
Superstition, to pray sometimes in the Desk or reading pew, and sometimes in
the Pulpit, and sometimes at the Font? why then may not it be as free from
offense, to pray sometimes at the Communion Table, and yet in a fifth or sixth
place if the Church require it at our hands.

And whereas our brethren say, that one part of the Service is read in one
place, and another part in another place, they are mistaken. For those prayers
which are read at the Communion Table, are not several parts of the same, but
are distinct Services; and so are they called the first and second service. The
first has been anciently called matutinae, and by Contraction Mattins, or the
early Service, whereunto came all that would, being not excommunicated, into the
nave or body of the Church. Which being ended the fashion was, after a while to
give warning by a small bell: And then the second Service began, at the
Communion Table: At which the company anciently was the fewer, demissa
Catechumenorum turba, the Company of those that were not yet fit for the
Communion, being sent away. In that therefore, we have the Communion Service at
the Communion Table this is no Superstition: but an orderly sorting of the
place to the business after the example of the purer and devouter times;
whereto we are reduced from the disorder, that these latter days have
produced. The Minister, before he begins the Communion, goes up into the
pulpit with an Homily or Sermon to prepare the Communicants (I hope no body
will find fault that a Sermon is made in the Pulpit) which ended, the Minister
returns to proceed in that which concerns the Communion, at the Table for
the Communion.

If we held, that some prayers were not accepable to God: except they were made
precisely in this or that place: Or if we reputed the Supper of the Lord
uneffectuall; if it be not received in the Chancell: then here were
superstition. But when we do things not upon any such fancy: but in obedience
and conformity to discipline and order, for decency and comeliness; we are no
way to be, either taxed or suspected, for Superstition. Why is it not as free
from Superstition to administer the Sacrament in one place of the Church, and
to pray in an other, as to pray in one place, and to preach in an other? and to
baptize in a third? Why is it not Superstition for the people to draw nere to
receive the Holy Sacrament, to their comfort at the Holy Table; more then for
the Minister to walk up and down the Church, and to Crowde into thronged
stools with the sacred body and blood of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, in his hands? In the people coming up to the holy Table where is
their spiritual food made ready for them is no Superstition: But in the
ministers going so, from stool to stool, or pew to pew there is much
irreverence and disorder, ill beseeming the administration of such a Sacrament.
(O my brethren) you are not called up to worship any, but the true God: nor to
worship the true God, after any manner, otherwise then God requires meekly
kneeling upon your knees. Some have grudged to receive the holy communion
kneeling: But that error has long since been discovered and reformed: and now
you take a new offense, not at the posture of the body, but the place where,
because it is at the rail, before the Communion Table. Do you not know and
confess that the word, the Sacrament and Prayer be of equal use and power in
all places: not as the place, but as the Grace of God shall give the blessing?
What Superstition is it to kneel at the rail more then at thy stool? or what
sin is it to lean upon the one more then upon the other? Only I should
think, that the nearer a man approaches to that table, whereupon he Sees
with his eyes the sacred body and blood of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
laid forth for him, to feed upon, to everlasting life: the more should he find
himself ravished with devotion and not skared with an immagination of
Superstition.

But we see already in many Churches (and do fear* that shortly we shall
behold the like in all) the Communion Table mounted up and elevated diverse
stepps or degrees, and encloased with rayles: But the font which is the laver
of regeneration standing at the lower end of the Church and left open to the
allies.

All this is true and yet ye may be without fear, that in all this there is
not any Superstition. For still, here is neither any false God worshipped, nor
any false manner of worship in all this: But whereas the party to be baptized
is to be entered or taken into the Congregation; the font or laver, by the which
he must be admitted, stands beneath at the entrance of the Church, ready to
receive and entertayne him. There is he made one of the Company of those, which
have right and interest in the privileges of that part of the Church, where
the font is placed: viz. the water of Baptism to wash away his sins the word
for his instruction, and prayer, whereby to Communicate himself to almighty
God until he be fitted to be further preferred to the holy Table. which is
therefore elevated or set down upon an higher floor then the rest of the
pavement; to be the more in the eyes and view of the people: that so for their
edification they may the better behold the behavior of the Priest,
Consecrating and setting apart the elements to become a Sacrament. And that the
very sight of the holy Table, at all times, may beget in the beholders an
hunger and thirst after that blessed food. The Table is enclosed with rayles,
to Preserve it from abuses whereto else it would be subject. In which case the
Church anciently used to be very careful. And if (as in some Churches it is)
the font were decently with rayles enclosed: it were (I speak under
correction) more suitable to the reverence due thereunto.

But to proceed in our Search. Let us look well about: least any nooke yet
shrowde some superstition. Here are the Kings arms set up: not for any matter
of divine worship: But to profess and testify the subjection of every soul
to the higher power. For as the written sentences upon the walls by letters, so
these Scutchions, by their expressions, do put us in mind of that Defender of
the Faitb, and of our duty to him, who is next and immediately under God,
supreme governor over al persons and causes as well ecclesiastical as
Temporal in all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions. And in all this there is
no Superstition.

O but look (says one) upon the Church windows and then tell me, what mean
those images

They are not there set, for any matter of worship of either God Saint or
Angel; but for history and ornament. No Christian (so far as I know) holds
Aholiah and Bezaliel the making of them. For, though many things in the
Tabernacle and Temple were typical: yet might nothing be there, which was
against the Moral law, or in it self evil and unlawful. And many things
were there, as well for ornament and decency as for typical signification.
Images Tert. Bazil. Nissen Aug. Cyril. Greg. Eusebius. Chris. Justin. Orig. Nazian.
then may be made; they have been made: and by the Primitive Churches
frequently used, in their Churches and Chalices; no word of God prohibiteth the
setting of them up in Churches: we perform no worship unto them nor to any
other by them. And therefore their being in our Churches is neither Leviticall
nor Superstitious.

It is too poor a conceit for any to fasten superstition upon our Churches,
because of that which the Papists do practice in theirs. For, what is
Superstitious among them, we leave unto them. And we perform only that,
which is lawful, decent and pious. The Papists do in many things, the same
which we do, but we omit many things, though not all things, which they
practice, we look not to the actions of Papists, for our direction: but to the
word of God and practice of ancient and Orthodox Christians, where the Papist
is so guided we gladly approve him, and do as he does, where he innovateth and
swarveth from this rule; we are sorry for him, and there leave him. We think not
the worse of any true Doctrine, Christian act, or devout demenure, for that a
Papist does or maintain the one, or perform the other. But we think the
better of a Papist the nearer he comes to truth and devotion. And the like
course we hold with others: so long, and no longer to hold with them, as in
Doctrine and practice they are devout and Christian.

If any take exception, against any rich furniture and utensill in our
Churches: and tell us of some Superstition in them: I wish that our brethen
could as well show us our Churches so rightly furnished; as we can clear them
from being therein Superstitious. In most of our Churches, besides the bible,
the Service or Common Prayer book, with the apology, the Priests vestments
(mean enough a pewter flagon, and a silver cup: what have we else: except we
will rekon the bells in the steeple? How many mean yomen be there in many
parishes in England, whose plate and rich stuff is more worth, then all the
whole furniture of his Parish church? In some great Parishes, in rich
Corporations, as also in diverse (but not in all) Cathedral Churches there is
some better provision to adorn the Church, to set out the Service and commend
our profession: of which, though some grudging say (which you know who) what
needs this waste? yet is herein no Superstition. For, was there any
Superstition in them that brought silver and gold for the use of the
Tabernacle, or Onix stone and other precious stones for the Ephod; more then in
them, that bestowed but Rames skins or goats hair? if any say that these
things were for Leviticall worship: I must request them to understand, that the
Leviticalnesse of things of the Tabernacle, or Temple consisted not in their
materials, as gold silver or the like; but in their typical relation to
Christ, and things in Christ, to be fulfilled. Again, was it Superstition in
the wisemen of the East to bring out of their treasures, and to Matt. 26. 7.
present unto Christ, Gold Frankincence and Myrhe, more then if they had
bestowed on him some cheaper commodity: was it Superstition in the woman to
power on the head of our blessed Savior, a box full of very precious ointment,
or in her that annoyntted his John 12. 13.
feet with costly Spicknard, more then if she had bathed them in fair water?
No. But as devout and godly people, they expressed their love and good
affection. The like we say of them that embalmed his dead body: And so of them
which are at cost in adorning and beautifying the house of God, and enriching
the place where his honor dwells: or in being at charge with those things
which belong to his worship: wherein we place no superstition or merit: but
only acknowledge and endevor our duty and thankfulness, our respect and
devotion to almighty God: according to the measure wherewith God has enabled
us.

It is true that S. Jerome seems something sharp, against the adorning of
Churches. But withal, the truth is, he does not condemn the thing it self;
for, Ep. 8. ad Demetr.
so he says of it: non ab nuo, non reprehendo. I disclaim it not, I reprehend
it not. But the Fathers heat is against such men, as pleased themselves with
the only walls and outward splendour of Churches, having Es. 1. 11, 12. c.
in the mean time neither faith nor charity. As when almighty God disclaimeth
the external glorious doings of Hypocrites, wanting true piety, sincerity Ep.
3. ad Helid.
and common honesty. For, that S. Jerome did not dislike the adorning and
beautifying of Churches, appears, in that he commends Nepotian for being
careful, Si niteret altar, templi parietes essent absque fuligine pavimenta
tersa, and quod basilicas diversis floribus, arborum comis, atque vitium
pampinis adumbrabat. i. That the Altar might be kept neat the walls fair, the
floor clean, and for that he did set forth the Churches with various flowers,
boughs of trees and vine branches. Gregory Nazianzen commends Gorgonias quod
sumptuosis donariis templa exornaverat. i. that he had bestowed costly gifts
upon Orat. in Lan. Gorg.
the adorning of Churches. Optatus reports that even in the days of
Maxentius there were very many ornaments for the Churches of Africa. And he
commends the Emperor Constans for that when he sent alms into Africa, for
the poor: he sent thither l. 1. ad parm. l. 3.
also ornaments for the Churches. So, his piety and his charity went hand in
hand.

Shall we imagine that God enriching the world with silver, and gold and
precious stones, has destined Hooker. l. 5. sect. 15.
these, only to set out secular pomp and state: and will have none but the
basest of his creatures to be employed in his own service? as Mr. Hooker
observes, and other learned countrymen of ours lately an swering an accusation
of the Papists, who would have the world believe, that we waver in our Religion
and lean to Popery, because of the cost now more then of late, bestowed in
beautifying of our Churches: has a passage so apt to this our purpose Chillin
hic. relig. of protest. in prefac.
as I think fit to transcribe it at full, in these words: What if out of
devotion toward God and a desire that he should be worshipped as in Spirit and
in Truth, in the first place: so also in the beauty of holiness? What if out
of fear, that too much simplicity and nakedness in the public worship of
God, may beget in the ordinary sort of men, a dull and stupide irreverence, and
out of hope that the outward state and glory of it, being well disposed and
wisely moderated, may engender, quicken, increase and nourish the inward
reverence, respect, and devotion, which is due unto Gods Sovereign Majesty and
power? What if out of a persuasion and desire, that Papists may be won over
to us the sooner, by the removing of this scandal out of their way, and out of
an holy Jelousie, that the weaker sort of Protestants might be the easier
seduced unto the^, by the magnificence and pomp of their Church Service, in
case it were not removed? I say, what if out of these considerations the
Governors of our Church, of late, more then formerly, have set themselves to
adorn and beautify the places, where Gods Honor dwells, and to make them as
heavenly as they can, with outward ornaments? Is this a sign that they are
warping toward Popery? Is this devotion in the Church of England an argument,
that she is coming over to the Church of Rome? Sr Edwyn Sandys I presume
(further says the author) every man will grant had no inclination that way;
yet he 40 years since, commended this part of de votion in Papists, and makes
no scruple of proposing it, to the imitation of Protestants. His words are.

This one thing I cannot but highly commend in that Survay of Religion imit.
sort and order, they spare nothing, which either cost can perform in
enriching, or skill in adorning, the Temple of God: or to set out his service,
with the greatest pomp and magificence that can be devised. And although for
the most part, much basnesse and childishness is predominant in the Masters
and contrivers of those ceremonies: yet this outward state and glory being well
disposed, does engender, quicken, increase and nourish the inward reverence,
respect and devotion, which is due unto Sovereign Majesty and Power. And
although I am not ignorant, that many men well reputed, have embraced the
thirsty opinion of that disciple, who thought all to be wasted that was
bestowed upon Christ, in that sort: and that it were much better bestowed on
him in the poor (yet with an eye perhaps, that themselves would be his
quarter Almoners) Notwithstanding I must confess, it will never sink into my
heart, that in proportion of reason, the allowance for furnishing out the
Service of God, should be measured by the scant and strickt rule of mere
necessity (a proportion so low, that nature to other most bountiful in matter
of necessity has not failed, no not the most ignoble creatures of the world)
and that for our selves no measure of heaping, but the most we can set. No rule
of expense, but to the utmost pomp we list: Or that God himself had so
enriched the lower parts of the world with such wounderfull variety of beauty
and glory, that they might serve only to the pampering of mortal man in his
pride; and that in the Service of the high Creator, Lord and giver (the outward
glory of whose higher palace may appear by the very Lamps that we see so
far off, burning gloriously in it) only the simpler, baser, cheaper, less
noble, less beautiful, less glorious things, should be employed. Especially,
seeing as in princes courts, so in the Service of God also, this outward state
and glory being well disposed, does (as I have said) engender, quicken,
increase and nourish the inward reverence, respect and devotion which is due to
Sovereign Majesty and power, which those whom the use thereof cannot persuade
unto would easily by the want thereof, be brougbt to confess: for which cause,
I crave leave to be excused by them herein, if, in zeal to the common Lord of
all; I choose rather to commend the virtue of an enemy: then to flatter the
vice and imbecility of a friend.

Finally I know not any that dissallow the adorning of Churches except
Anabaptists and Brownistes; into whose schism and faction too many of our
brethren seem to be too much inclining. Indeed Theod. l. 3. c. 12.
the unfaithful disciple before mentioned did grudge at what was bestowed on
Christ; and came not into the bag, which he had in keeping. And we read of
one Felix an apostate and great treasurer to the apostate Emperor Julian, who
beholding the goodly vessels which the piety of the good Constantine and
Constantius had bestowed upon the Church: said in the bitterness of his
malice: en quibus vasi^s ministratur Mariae filio. i. Behold what goodly
vessels the son of Mary is served in? But as the history relates; this son
of Beltal quickly came to a shameful end.

To adorn Churches is not Superstitious: but to deprive them of their
ornaments, to hinder their endowments, and to repine thereat, are all, no
better then sacrilegious.

And now me thinks I hear some of our brethren call upon me, to listen to the
sound that is made in our Churches, by voices of singers, by Organes and other
instruments of music, and to tell how I can clear this from being Popish or
superstitious?

But God be thanked: as there is no law to prohibit the use of music, even in
the Church Service: so withal, being rightly used, it is very useful and
profitable, for the spiritual man, in that it stirs up his christian
affection, the more chearefully to praise God. Pet. Mart. says that in Music
rightly and. judic. 5.
ordered tria bonorum genera concurrunt: honestum utile, jueundum. i. three
good things concur viz. comely profitable and pleasant. When God had brought
his people through the red sea: and therein whelmed the Egyptians: The
Israelites; as they express their gladness, by their songs: so, to proportion
their joy, the best they can, to the measure of their hapynesse do set their
ditty to an instrument of Music. The like is done by devoute Deborah. For
when God had given the life of Siserah into the hands of Jael; and peace to
Israel, in the confusion of Jabin: Then sung Deborah and Barak: praise ye the
Lord for a venging Israel.

But this was done once upon special occasion, at the red Sea, and not above
once more, in nere two hundred

But this was done in the public worship of God by the people of god; without
any breach of any law of God, and therefore it is still lawful to be done again
as well twice as once; and as well constantly as sometimes. And therefore the
King and prophet David the only man ever Chronicled to have been a man after
Gods own heart (and well might he so be, being so zealous as he was for the
house and honor of God) as Ps. 69. 9.
he composed his Psalms, to be tuned and sung to several instruments of
Music, for Gods honor; so he brought that music into the Church, and
erected 1 Chro. ea. 16. and Ca. 25.
the most glorious Quire that ever was under the cope of Heaven: for song in
the house of the Lord: with Cymballs, Psalteries and Harpes for the Service of
the house of God.

But this was in the old Testement and therefore

The is no such Institution among all the Leviticall Moses, and by Moses to the
people, 400 years before David was borne. Yea, the text tells us, 1 Chro.
25. 6.
plainly that this was according to the Kings order. And therefore, it is no
Leviticall ceremony in that there was no institution thereof before the days
of David. And then I hope here is no fear of Popery to be in the use of the
Church Music because it had the first Institution in the days of David: 1500
years before any Popery began. And therefore, Ephesians.
as it were in approbation of so good a practice, Colos.
our Savior Christ with his Disciples sing a Psalm at the end of the Sacred
Supper. And S. Paul advises the use of the Psalms hymns and spiritual Comm.
Judic. c. 5. N. 1.
Songs. Pet. Mart. proves that music has been of use in the Christian
Church from the days of the Apostles, because Plinius secundus writes unto
Trajan, eusebius. l. 3. l. 30
that the Christians did hymnos antelucanos Christo suo canere i. Sing Psalms
to their Christ, before day light. They found themselves thereby charged in
Gods worship. And I do assure my self, that man who shall bring to the Church,
where Music is rightly used, a devout heart not perverted with prejudice: and
attend unto the Praises of God which are set out with Music: cannot choose
but feel his thoughts therewith elevated and enlarged, the more pathetically
and feelingly, the more amply, and fervently to acknowledge and magnify the
goodness of God. It is true that some of the ancient Fathers do find fault
with the abuse of Music in Gods Worship: but that condemns not the right
use thereof, any more then the holy Supper is condemned by St. Paul, whilst he
blames those who shamefully profaned it.

In the right use therefore of church Music, there is good profit, and
edification to the affection but no Superstition.

CAP. VIII. Gods Servants are Holy and not Superstitious.
HOuses are usually framed to suit their owners: especially when they build
them for their own habitation. And such masters, such men. Solomon had not
only builded an house answeareable to the wisdom and state of so great a King:
but was also sorted with servants suitable to the wisdom Levit. 19. 2.
of their prince, and to the order and magnificence of his house and throne.
And God (whose house and habitation the Church is) is holy. The Church also
being Gods house, is holy. So the holy God has an holy house, as is suitable.
Neither will he want answerable servants, who by their holy demenure shall
manifest it to the world, that they are the Servants of the holy God. The true
servants of God must be holy* For, the Lord God their master is holy. And St.
Peter tells us, that we are an holy Nation. And here we do not mean only a
relative holiness, such as times places, garments and the like are capable of:
but such an holiness as is wrought by the holy Ghost in the reasonable
creature. And this holiness is either inhaesive or expressive.

In haesive holiness is that seasoning and gracious constitution, wherewith
the heart and conscience is Ps. 51.
inwardly so qualified, by the holy Ghost as disposes it wholly to the will,
honor and glory of almighty God. And this is it which David hungered after,
when he said. Create in me a mew heart, and Ephesians. 4. 24.
renew a right spirit within me. Yea this is that Image of God, according
whereunto man was fist created, in righteousness and true holiness.

Expressive holiness is the outward manifestation of the former, by the words
of our mouths, and by the performances and gestures of the rest of the lymbes
of our bodies: as in their several kinds we be occasioned, to make use of
them and this is fully required at our hands To. 12. 1. present your bodies a
living Sacrafice holy and acceptable unto God. This expressive holiness is to
be practiced two ways. First in our conninuall conversation before God.
Secondly in our special approaching unto God. As the duty of a Servant to his
Master is, first in being diligent and faithful in all his business. Secondly
in his respective behavior, when he comes to his Masters presence: or is in
speech with him: and yet more specially, when he is to crave favor, or to give
thanks for favors received from him. So the Servant of God, having his heart
possessed with the fear of God, is first very careful, that he offend not in
the tongue: that there be no pride nor lust in his eyes: that his feet neither
walk nor stand in the way of the ungodly: that his hands be free from bribery,
oppression and all iniquity. And finally that all his members be instruments of
righteousness unto God: and his conversation honest before the world: That his
light may so shine before men, that they may see his good works and glorify
his father which is in heaven.

God has made as well the body as the soul. And therefore he is to be served,
as well by the outward members of the body as by the inward abilities of the
soul. He that says by Solomon, Son give me thine heart. Says also by Saint
Paul, present your bodies a living sacrifice. And as there must be no strife
among the members: so, neither must the soul and body disagree, But join
sweetly, both 1 cor. 6. 20.
as one in the Service of God. And therefore he says Glorify God in your
bodies and spirits for they are Gods. And of all this, we must be constantly
careful, Ps. 16. 8.
so to set God always before our eyes, and to have always a good conscience
both toward God and toward Act. 24. 16.
man, that when we come to give an account of our Stewardship we may with joy
hear that comfortable approbation, of our Lord and Master well done good and
faithful servant.

But when the servant of God approaches unto God, in his holy House; ai his
holy Table, to speak to God by holy Prayer, to hear him in his holy word, to
give him thanks for received blessings, for health, food, raiment, manifold
preservations, forgiveness of sins, the hope and expectation of the joys of
heaven, to beg all things requisite for body or soul, to receive the holy
Sacrament of the body and blood of his blessed Savior thereby to be sealed to
the day of Redemption: Then, as to be specially reverend and devoute in heart
within; so, to express the same by such behavior and respect without, as may
show the reverence and humility suitable to, and becoming, the holy servant of
the holy God, in so holy a business, in the holy place. And in all this there
is no Superstition.

CHAP. IX. Gods worship is to be performed with outward expressions.
THat in the common way of our ordinary conversation, we must conscionably
serve God, as well with the members of our bodies, as with the faculties of our
souls, None, except peradventure some brutish familists (a generation given
over to a reprobate sense) will deny. But, I find it beyond exceptation
difficult, to persuade diverse men (who yet will seem specially zealous Pro.
23. 28.
to have God rightly worshipped) that in Gods worship there is any use of any
more then the soul or mind alone: And that, because it is said son, give me
thine heart. And herein they deal with us, as the Papists do in another case.
For, when we teach that a man is justified by faith in Christ. They presently
charge us that we exclude works as not requisite in a Christian. So, these men
hearing us urge, that the members of the body must be used in the worship of
God, except against us; as if we excluded the heart from this duty. But I would
gladly request my brethren to understand, that as being justifi^d by Jac. 2.
18.
faith, we labor to show our faith by our works, knowing that to be no true
or lively faith, which does not fructify and bring forth good works: So by
the outward gestures of our bodies, we declare that worship which is in the
heart, assuring our selves that there is no devotion in the heart of that man,
who makes no expression thereof, in his outward behavior. And whereas God
says son, give me thine heart. I conceive (under correction) that God
deals herein, as a tender father, who seeing his son plunged into some
dangerous gulf says son, give me thine hand, not that the father intends
to reskue only the childs hand: But because, the hand is the gainfullest
limb, for the child to reach out, and for the Father to take hold on, to draw
the whole child out of danger: So almighty God, seeing his child at a
lametable pass, ready to sink to the bottom of hell; says son give me thy
heart. That so God, having gained hold on the heart, may thereby draw the whole
man to eternal safety.

There is such correspondency, and sympathy between the Soul and the body; as
makes to accord one with an other, like those Creatures and wheels, mentioned
by the Prophet Ezech. when those went, these went; when those stood, these
stood: when those were lifted up, these were lifted up: for, the spirit of the
living Creatures was in the wheels. So, may I well say: when the Soul moves
forward in devotion Eze. 1. 21.
toward God; the body will not be left behind, but will bear the Soul
company. If the Soul in humility be dejected: then the body with a bare head,
a bowing waste and bended knees, is in all gestures of submission. If the Soul
be elevated and encouraged by desire and hope toward God: then the eye looks
up, and the hand is lifted up toward heaven, expressing outwardly the inward
disposition of the Soul. And on the other side every man finds in his own
experience, that his Soul does sympathise with the temper of his body. For, if
the body be tired with labor, the mind becomes heavy and dull. And do we
not perceive plainly, that when we betake our selves to our knees for prayer;
the Soul is humbled within us, by this very gesture? And when when we lift up
our hands and our eyes toward God, we feel an elevation of the Soul also
toward the throne of grace.

There is an instance in the book of Exodus which fully illustrateth this
point. For when Israel was in fight with Ameleck, Moses Aaron, and Hur went up
Exo. 17. 10. 11.
to the tope of the hill. And it came to pass when Moses lift up his hand,
Israel prevailed: And when he let down his hand Amaleck prevailed. Shall we
think that there was a charm in this his holding up and letting down of his
hand? Is it not manifest, that Moses was heard at his prayers to God, for his
people? and that, as his hands were borne up, his soul did bear up also, in
the greater measure of zeal and faith whereby his prayer became the more Lyr.
powerful? per hoc ostendttur suae orationis efficacia. i. by this is
manifested the efficacy or force of his prayer. Nec contra Amalechitas, tantum
vis armorum, Orig. in number. hom. 13.
quam Moysis valuit or atio. Vt enim elevasset manus ad Deum vincibatur
Amalech: remissae vero and dejectae vinci faciebant Israel. i. The force of
arms was not so powerful against Ameleck, as the prayer of Moses. For, as he
lifted up his hands, to God, Ameleck went by the worst: but if his hands settled
or fell down, Israel took the foil, St. Aug. speaks to the same effect.
And may we not conceive Ser. de tom 93.
that Saint Paul means the same thing, when he will have menat their prayers
to lift up pure hands? A learned interpreter speaks full home to this 1 Timothy
2. 8.
purpose saying, upon that text. Voluit hoc symbolo significare vim orationis.
Elevatio enim manuum contentionem orationis, remissio manuum remissionem
orationis adumbrabat. Elevans manus elevabat and mentem, Cornel. a lap.
and intendebat in Deum: Cum vero lassus remittebat manus remittebat and
orationem. i. He would by this symbol set out the force of prayer. For, the
lifting up of his hands did signify the earnestness of his prayer and the
settling of his hand the slaking of his devotion. In lifting up his hand he
rowsed up his spirit, and dealt with God the more fervenly: but when grown
weary he let fall his hand, then he cooled in his prayer.

As for my part. Whenever I see any man using outward reverence, in the act
of Gods worship; I shall judge him to be the more devoute within, by how much
the more he does outwardly express, in reverened gestures: Neither can I ever
be persuaded, that, that man is inwardly affected with reverence, toward God:
who does not outwardly declare the same, by the reverend behavior of his ^ a.
2 a. q. 94.
body. For as Aquinas alleges out of S. Aug. Exterior cultus est confessio
quaedam cultus interioris. i. The outward worship is a certain confession of
the inward worship. We cannot deny, but that men may make a fair outward show
of holiness and devotion when they are most foul within, through hypocrisy
and profaneness: as the Pharisees made long prayers, whilst they intended to
devour widows houses. But yet, let me prevent or repress insolent censures,
with the words of St. Paul: Who R^^ 14. 4.
art thou that judge another man's servant? Thou do with thine eyes see
reverence, in the outward behavior? Thou see not what is within, in the
heart. 1 Cor. 13. 7.
But Christian charity believes all things and hops all things: and
requires that we judge the best, according to the outward appearance. God
only is the judge of the heart, we are to judge according to what we see: and
not according to what we see not. We are taught to be devout and reverend,
both within and without: And to perform worship to God not with the body alone
nor with the Soul aalone; but with body and Soul both: that so we may not
separate those, which God has conjoined. No doubt, but there is too often an
outward show of much devotion and reverence, where there is none or very little
within For, impiety can dissemble. Satan can change himself into an Angel of
light. The woolfe can put on Sheep clothing. But there can be no inward
reverence or devotion in the heart, which does not show it self outwardly
(except peradventure when some perplexing terror, may for a time make a
Christian man discover humane frailety) for, true Religion loves not to
dissemble. The Angel of light will not transform himself into a Devil of
darkness: nor will the sheep cloth it self with the skin of a woolfe.
And the man which has a devout and Religious heart, will not seem profane,
but will declare his piety and probity outwardly, by the holiness of his
works in his conversation and by the reverendnesse of his behavior in the
worship of God.

The Schoolmen make a threefold act of adoration: Pined in 3. q. 25. ar. 2.
whereof the first is in the understanding, apprehending and conceiving the
excellency of the object, or that which is to be worshipped. The second in the
will, inclyning and disposing a man, to honor, that object. And both these they
call inward worship. The third act is the expression of that inward
apprehension and inclination, by sensible signs, as, by word, deed, or
gesture, and this they call outward worship. Ex duplici natura Compositi sumus
intellectuali and sensibili. Duplicem adorationem deo offerimus: Spirituale,
qua consistit in interiori mentis devotione and corporalem 2. 2. q. 14. ar. 2.
in exteriore corporis humiliatione i. We consist of a two fold nature,
intellectual and sensible. We perform to God a two fold worship: The one
Spiritual, consisting in the outward devotion, of the mind; and the other
corporal, in the outward humiliation of the body.

But here, my brethen are ready to tell me, that by these words of Aquinas,
what is done by the Josh. 4. 24. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
God is a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth, whereto they
add the words of St. Paul: bodily exercise profits little.

It may be thought, by these words, first, of Saint Paul, that bodily exercise
does profit some thing: though but a little: and we are not to neglect, much
more to abhor that, which may afford the least furtherance, in the way of
Godliness, and in Gods worship. But, if my brethren tell me, that I do much
mistake the meaning of the word, little in this text: I must tell them, that
they in thus applying it, to our behavior in the worship of God, do much more
mistake, and fearfully wrest the words, bodily exercise; Concerning the
meaning whereof, Interpreters do not readily agree. But, this I am sure of;
that of all the Interpreters which I have seen (and I have purposely made some
search) not one does understand them of those gestures of the body in Gods
worship which we now treat of. And it is manifest that the bodily exercises
whereof S. Paul speaks, are such as he sets in opposition unto true
godliness: and yet such as, wherein foolish people, perverted by hypocrites, and
guided by idle conceits, and no better then old wives fables, do place Religion.

Abstinency from meat and from marriage, v. 3. unto which we may add, long
and frequent watchings, pronouncing of long and many prayers, lying on the cold
ground, wearing hair cloth, and the like, with such kind of disciplining of
the body may profit something as they may be used. Cor. 7. 26.
For, S. Paul deemeth those people happy, in regard of the present necessity,
which were unmarried. And he allows those which are married, sometimes, and
upon some occasions to withdraw one from an other, that they may the better
dispose themselves to fasting and prayer. Watching fasting, and such other
chastisings of the body are also of profitable use, to tame the flesh, and to
bring it into subjection to the spirit: and so to make the whole man the fitter
for devotion. But if men place true Godliness, to consist in these very
exercises, and so conceive with themselves, that whilst they perform them,
they are eo nomine, for that alone, very good people, though otherwise they
live in the custom and practice of foul and known sins: then shall they
find that their bodily exercises do profit little: that is nothing at all, and
that in vain have they wearyed themselves therein. And so; if a man think
that though he neglect the true duties of godliness; he is yet a godly man;
because he is very exact in all the gestures of outward reverence in Gods
worship: I parallel that man with an other sect of hypocrites, whose whole
godliness consists, in going to to some selected Church, and in being
present where a Sermon is: though in the mean time, they learn nothing and
practice as little of any true godliness. Both these sorts of men I
acknowledge to be an hypocritical and superstitious generation both a like.
And of them both I say that they have a form of Godliness: but deny the power
thereof.

Though then bodily exercises profit not those, who place their whole Religion
and goodness in them, as they are mere bodily acts. Yet are they not
unprofitable for Christian men, who make the right use of them, either to tame
the body and to bring it into subjection, by fasting, sack cloth and ashes and
the like: or to make outward expression of inward devotion: as by bending the
knee, bowing the body, lifting up the hands and eyes and such like gestures in
Gods worship.

As for the words of our blessed Savior: God is a spirit, and must be
worshipped in spirit and in Ps^. 95. 6.
trutb. I ask those men, which allege them against outward reverence; what
they will say to holy and devoute David when he says: O come let us worship
and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker? Does not the spirit of God
here require the gestures, of bowing down and kneeling to be used in Gods
worship?

But for further satisfaction herein we will spend a few lines (though one
would think words needless in so clear a case) in the exposition of our
Saviors words. We therefore give our brethren to understand, that the word
Spirit in scripture has diverse sinifications, as i. The regenerate man is
called the Spirit. Matthew. 26. 41. The Spirit is willing the flesh is weak 2 The
will or inclination. 2 Cron. 36. 22. The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus. 3
The courage of a man. Josh. 5. 1. There was no spirit in them any more because
of the children of Israel, 4 Understanding and knowledge Dan. 5. 12. An
excellent Spirit and understanding and knowlegde were found in Daniell. 5
Doctrine or teaching 1 John 4. 1. Believe not every Spirit but try the Spirits.
So then, take the word Spirit in any of these significations and it will
nothing hinder the use of corporal or bodily gestures in the worship of God.
For, to worship God in Spirit, is to worship him with a regenerate or new man
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians. 4. 24. It
is no compassing of Gods Altar, without hands washed in Innocence Ps. 26. 6. no
praying to God without pure hands lifted up. 1 Timothy 8. No coming into the
marriage feast without a wedding garment. Mat. 22. So, it is not for any to
perform the holy act of worship, to the holy God, that is not regenerate and
holy and will so worship in spirit and truth i. in true holiness. For, God
requires such to worship him. 2. God must be worshipped in Spirit. i. with a
willing ready and cheerful mind Deborah in her song Iudic. 5. 2. does praise
God for the people that became so willing. And 1 Pet. 5. 2. Gods flock must be
fed, not by constraint but willingly and so, Gods worship must be performed in
Spirit, that is, willingly. 3. God must be worshipped in spirit. i. Not faintly
and droopingly: but courageously and zealously in the fervency of the spirit as
Romans 10, 11. 5 God must be worshipped in spirit and in truth. i. with
understanding and knowledge, rightly informed. Lastly: God must be worshipped in
spirit and truth. i. Guided by the holy spirit of God: as all the sons of God
are led by the spirit. Romans 8. 14. which leads unto all truth. Joh. 16. 13.
And this is home to the text in spirit and truth; when in Gods worship we so
make use of either body or soul as by Gods word and spirit, we are thereto
directed. Corporal acts may be done in the Spirit as our Saviors going up to
the mount. Mat. 4. was a Corporal act, and yet it was done in the Spirit: For,
he was led by the Spirit v. 1. And to this effect are the words of the
Schoole-man clear and full, in in the place before alleged, Adoratio
Corporalis in Spiritu fit, in quantum ex spirituali devotione procedit, and ad
eam ordinatur. i. Bodily worship is 2. 2. q 84. ar. i
done in the spirit, in as much as it proceeds from spiritual devotion, and
is made to serve thereunto. When our brethren Pray or Preach, do they not use a
bodily member, viz. the tongue, to express themselves withal? The using of the
tongue is a bodily exercise, as well as the bowing of the knee. And yet, I
hope, they think that they do both Preach and Pray in the spirit. Are not
eating and drinking bodily actions? And yet I trust we do eat and drink in
the spirit: when we do it in the fear of God, and (as St. Paul advises) to 1
Cor. 10. 31.
Gods glory. We read in Rev. 4. v. 10. of four and twenty Elders, who fell
down on their faces and worshipped him, who lives for ever. Shall we say
that they woshiped not in Spirit and truth, because they used a gesture of
humility and reverence in falling down upon their faces? It is lamentable to
behold men pretending sincerity and love of truth, thus perversely wringing
Gods holy word and wilfully shutting their eyes, against so clear light of so
manifest a truth.

When the knee is bent, the body bowed or the hand lifted up devoutly unto God:
these are indeed bodily exercises or acts done by the members of the body, as
outward expressions of inward devotion: but no acts of Superstition.

CHAP. X. The several gestures used by Gods Servants in his worship are all
free from Superstition.
WE have hitherto made scearch, in and about the house of God, or place of
Christian assembly, we have carefully pryed into every nooke and corner
thereof, and observed the Servants of God, performing worship unto God, so as
their inward devotions are declared and expressed by their outward gestures and
demeanures; God being so worshipped by their whole man, body and Soul. But in
all this we have found no Superstition. But (...) all things decently and in
good order. Come we now and examine those outward demeanures, gestures and
expressions, severally and perticularly: And all that we do in our Churches in
their distinct forms and postures: least yet, under any of them, some piece of
superstition be paradventure concealed, and here I must confess, some evil
Surmisers have unjustly caused much suspicion: For, our justification therefore
and the manifesting of truth to Gods glory, Come and see all that is done in
our Churches.

We confess our sins unto God. We beg pardon at the hands of God. We
give God thanks for what we have received* We crave from God what we stand
in need of. We remember the afflictions of all distressed people, with our
prayers for them all, and our alms to the poorer sort. We read, and hear
read, the holy Bible and godly expositions, homilyes and sermons, whereby the
ignorant are instructed, the unruly admonished, the backward exhorted, the
hard-hearted terrefied, the feeble encouraged the aflicted conscience
comforted. We administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper. Is
any of these any superstitious act? Our scrupulous brethren allow all this. But
then thus they take exception.

In your very entrance into the Church, you

If we taught men, that they ought not to pray pray continually, and in all
things to give thanks. Is it not thus extant in our book of common prayer? It
is very meet right and our bounden duty, that we should at all times and in
all places give thanks to thee O holy father, Lord of heaven and earth. Is
there not in that book special service to be used in private houses, at the
bed side of sick people? Is not the book it self free and vendible, by every
Stationer, not only for the public worship in Churches: but also for the use
of every private man in his own house? Be there not also plenty of other books
in print, of forms of prayers to be made unto God, upon several occasions at
any time, in any place, by any man, whose soul is possessed with so good
devotion? And therefore it is plain, that our devotion and discipline does not
therefore incline us to pray, when we come within a Church; as if we held that
the only place, where a man may pray: but for that the Church is an house of
prayer (as we have already showed) this very place puts a man in mind, and
calls upon him, there specially, to pray: in so much that it is a place
purposely set apart, for that very end and purpose: that whatsoever a man does
elsewhere, yet here he should pray because this is the house of prayer. We
uncover our heads in the Church: as in the presence Chamber on earth, of the
King of heaven and earth. And when we pray, we kneel, because kneeling is the
gesture of humility, becoming a man who prefers his petition, to the God of
heaven.

In the fourth Century, a time abounding with prodigious haeresies, arose one
Eustachius, who, among others of his profane opinions, wherewith many became
infected, maintained: that Churches Council. Gangr.
and meetings therein are to be despised. Damascus and Saint Augustine mention
this to have been the haeresie of the Messalini otherwise called Euchites and
Enthusiastes, who also had so mean an opinion of Baptism and the Lords
supper, as that they held Dan. de haeres. 8 Aug. Sermon. contra Arrianos. l. 4.
C. 11. de ecliis. c. 37.
them altogether uneffectuall and unprofitable: as Theodoret reports.
Turrecremata tells us, that the fratricellian haeritiques a most impure sect,
maintained among other things, Eccelsiam non plus valere ad orandum: quam
porcorum stabulum. i. That the Church avayleth a man for prayer, no more then a
swine-sty. O my brethren, conform not yourselves to the abominable fancies of
these filthy dreamers, odious to God, and in the judgment of the Church damned
haeretiques.

To pray, is no superstitius act. To pray kneeling is no superstition. To pray
in a Church, as we showed cap. 4. is no superstition. To use reverend gestures
and behavior of humility, in the presence of God, is no superstition. To
repute the Church to be Gods house is no superstition, Therefore, for a man
entering into a Church to put off his hat, and being come in, to kneel down
and to pray to God: are no superstition but pious acts of christian devotion.

You have so many several gestures and postures;

I have already showed that a reverend heart can sober, in the general, except
also they be suitable and fit to express the present act, whereto they are
applied. And first, for sitting. If humane frailty specially in aged people,
could endure it) sitting would not at all be used in the house of God;
specially during the holy business of Gods service. But in consideration of
the infirmity of flesh and blood, Rest is sometimes requisite: least too much
weakness either diminish or disturb devotion. Therefore, the indulgence of
the Church permits us, to sit whilst the minister is reading or expounding
any part of the word of God for our instruction: and while doctrines are taught
and applied for our further edification. But when we come to utter an hymn or
petition, then the minister, who before spoke unto the people, does now join
with the people: and both minister and people, with one heart and voice, join
in a language to almighty God. And therefore, compose themselves to a gesture
of solemn adoration and worship: which I never knew sitting to be: neither do
I thnike that any president can be found in all the whole Bible, of any, either
Congregations assembled or persons in private, sitting at their solemn worship
of almighty God. We find in the revelation Apoc. 4. 2.
God described upon his throne: and four and twenty Elders, wearing crowns,
sitting upon so many seats, round about the throne. And anon, those Elders
betake themselves to worship him that sits on the throne. But now they keep
themselves no longer on their seats: when they are to perform the act of
solemn worship. But they fall down before him that sat on the throne, and
cast their crowns before the throne saying, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive
glory etc. So also cap. 11. ver. 16. there are 24 Elders, who sit before God,
on their seats. But when they worship they fall down on their faces. We read
also of some that worshipped God standing. So did the publican (...) standing a
far off, he said: God be merciful to me a sinner. And a great company whom no
man could number, did stand before the Luc. 18. 13.
throne, in the sight of the Lamb and cried with a loud Apoc. 7. 8.
voice saying: Salvation from our God which sits on the throne. And
therefore we give glory to the father son and holy Ghost: or recite some
hymn, appointed by the Church to be pronounced by the Minister and people
jointly, to glorify and praise God withal standing; both in imitation of
these examples, and also accompting it the more reverend gesture then sitting
(which we never find used in the solemn and public worship by Gods people.
And in all this no man can point out any Superstition.

Again, we use the gesture of standing, when we publicly rehearse the
articles of our faith, or attend unto those choice portions of the Gospel,
appointed for their special times and occasions. And both these are the same:
For, the Creed is the breviate of the Gospel, and the Gospel is in the
Creed or the articles of our Faith at large. At the rehearsing of the one, and
at the reading of the other, we stand up. The reason is, to signify and
express hereby our resolution and readynesse to stand, and persevere to the
end, in this Faith, which we do profess. And this expression is according to
scripture: which by the metaphor of standing sets out Christian fortitude
and perseverance as Romans 5. 2. we are by faitb admitted to this grace wherein
we stand. And cap. 11. 20. Thou stand by faith. So 1 Cor. 16. 13. Stand in
the faith. And 1 Pet. 5. 12. This is the grace wherein ye stand. So then, we
by this gesture of standing at the Creed or Gospel, profess our constancy or
perseverance.

But when the scripture speaks of standing in spiritual standing.

It is very true. And when we by our bodily standing do profess our
spiritual standing, we do

One would think that no body should be so absurd, as to dislike the gesture of
kneeling in prayer. But because I have seen with mine eyes, and that not
seldom, whole troops of men and women, and those not of the meanest, in the
time and place of divine Service, while prayers and supplications were made
unto God, sit all the while. I think not altogether needless, to free the
gesture of kneeling in Gods worship, from all suspicion of superstition. And
that by precept, practice and reason, For precept take the words of the
Psalmist Ps. 95. 6.
O come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel, before the Lord our maker.
For practice we will look upon the farest president. Our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ kneeled down and prayed. If Luc. 22. 41.
men will be ruled by reason, they will not, when they are to petition the
King, of Kings, omit such a gesture of humility, as kneeling is, being the most
suitable for a man at his prayers, and for this cause we kneel at the holy
Communion receiving; whereat, we both lift up thankful hearts unto God, for
the death and resurection of Jesus Christ: as also beg of God, that by the
merits thereof, our bodies and Souls may be preserved to everlasting life? It
is not denied, but that a man may pray sitting, walking, standing or laid
along: For we ought to pray always. But when a man betaketh himself to a set
exercise of prayer, and that specially, in the public Congregation, kneeling
is the fittest, and no Superstitious gesture.

But, though diverse things in use with you in

How weak the consciences of these men be, I must leave it to God to judge of.
But I must needs think that their fancies are strong whilst they will not
believe, but that they have better knowledge then their teachers, and more
wisdom then their Governors. For, they will prescribe, what the minister must
teach, and how, both Church and Commonwealth must be ordered. And wherein
their Ministers teach, or their Governors Command, otherwise then they like
of, they will slight the one, and disobey the other. But, to come to the point.
What is that, which is so offensive above the rest. Let it come forth: and
show its Superstitious face: that when we see it to be such we may abhor it
thereafter. It is, as I am told (for else I should never have magnified it) The
bowing which we use at the name of Jesus and at the Communion Table.

For, as the name of Jesus, the plain text tells me: that every knee shall
bow thereat. But forward people think to evade the authority of this text,
Phil. 2. 10.
by saying, that the word Name does in scripture sometimes signify power. And
this we deny not: and we acknowledge further, that it also signifies diverse
other things, as, fame or renoune 2 Cro. 26. 8. His name went forth to the
entrance of Egypt. So it signifies also Posterity Deuteronomy. 25 7. My husbands
brother refuses to raise up a name unto his brother. It is taken for memory or
remembran^^ Es. 56. 5. God will give the eunuchs in his house a name. But now
what of all this? will they say that the reverence mentioned in the text
Philip. 2. is to be given peradventure to the power, renown or memory of the
son of God: and not to be done, when we hear him named by the name JESUS?
But then, here would I know of them, which of these, power renown or memory,
shall I conceive to be meant in this text by the word Name? If they say, his
power, then I ask why not his renown? If they say his renown, then why, not
his memorial? For, the word Name does in Scripture, by a trope, signify every
one of these. And when we leave the proper sense of any word in Scripture, we
must show some necessity why we do so, and make it plain, that it must be
taken in that significative sense, which we give thereof. It is not enough to
say, such De doct. Chr^^. 3 C. 10.
a word is in some places taken in a figurative sense and therefore I will so
understand it here, and where I list besides. St Austine, dealing with such
loose expounders of Scripture, says Nihil facilius est quam dicere Tropus est:
figura est, modus quidam dicendi est, Hebraismus est. i. It is an easy matter
to say, it is a Trope: It is a figure: It is a certain form of speech: It is
an Hebraisme. And therefore he gives this rule. Oration figurata est; quae
proprieintellecta, nec ad fidem nec ad dilectionem nec ad ullam aedificationem
acco^modari potest. i. Then is the speech figurative, when it cannot be made to
serve, for either faith or charity or any edification, in the proper sense of
the words. Illy^^cus, that one of the centuristes, well known to be no friend
to Superstition does among the rest of his rules, for the right understa^ding
of scripture, give this for De rat. Cogn. Sacr. lit.
one. Verba sacraru^ literaru^ proprie acccipienda sunt, nisi loci sensus in
alique^ fidei articulu^ propala^ incurrat. i. The words of holy Scripture are
to be understood in their proper sense: ecept that so, the meaning of the words
do directy fall foul upon some articles of faith. And in an other place he thus
advises. Ne quaerat aliquis umbras aut sectetur somnia allegorianum, nisi
manifesta sit allegoria; and literalis se^sus sit alioquin inutilis aut
absurdus. i. let not a man hunt after shadows or dream of allegories, except
there be a manifest allegory: And that without an allegory, the literal sense
be unprofitable and absurd. And to this point a learned Countriman of our own
speaks home, saying Allegoryes Perk. in. gal. 4. 24.
are to be admitted, when the words sound against common reason, analogy of
faith or good manners.

Let us consider these rules, and see, if there be any necessity that the word
Name, in the text to the Philipians, be understood in any other then the proper
sense. Is it against common reason, Faith, Charity or good manners, so to
understand it? Or is it against the scope of that place, or of any other part
or piece of scripture; for me to bow my knee, or to express reverence, by any
seemly outward gesture, when I hear my blessed Lord and Savior named, by his
proper name, JESUS? How then dare I suffer my fancy, here to leave the prop^^
^^ase, and to devise a figure: as if I might work the Scripture, like a nose
of wax, as I list my self? I will here add one rule more which we have from
Saint Hillary. Optimus lector est, qui dictorum intelligentiam expectat ex
dictis, potius quam imponat, et retulerit potius quam attulerit: Neque cogat id
videri dictis contineri, quod ante lectionem praesumpserit intelligendum. i. He
is the best l. de trin. 1.
reader of Scriptures, who looks for the meaning of the words in the words,
rather then puts or imposes a meaning upon them: who fetches the sense
from the words, rather then brings it unto them. And who enforces not that
to seem to be contained in them, which he presumed to find there before he read
them.

If any man will contend that yet there is an allegory knees are there ascribed
to things in heaven and things in earth and things under the earth. I answer,
that when knees are ascribed name, or in the word knees, so far as the duty
concerns man. But it is very dangerous, against the faith of a good
Conscience, and against the true rules of right interpreting the Scriptures,
thus to rove at figures and to imagine allegories where we need not: and upon
bare uncertain conjectures, not knowing certainly, what to stand unto.

But by this bowing at the name of Jesus we shall Son above the Father and the
holy Ghost.

No such matter; but we shall honor the Father Son: For so says the text,
that this is done to the glory of God the Father. And seeing no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord: but by the holy Ghost: Let us never fear, that, that
respect which we do to our Savior, by the instinct and direction of the holy
Ghost, can be any diminution or disparagement to the holy Ghost. Will any man
say, that the blessed virgin Mary, did disparage either the Father or the holy
Ghost, when she said: My spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior? Luc. 1. 47.


But why then is this reverence done at the name

Because that, not the Father nor the holy Ghost but the Son made himself of
no reputation and took upon him the shape of a servant and became obedient to
the death, even the death of the Cross; therefore God has exalted Him and
given Him a name above every Phil. 2.
name that at the name of Jesus every Knee should bow.

Shall I reverence a word or bow to a sound of letters?

We bow to and worship, not the word, sound mind of the duty which we owe to
God our Savior.

Why is this special reverence done at this, more then at any other name of
God?

Every name of God is reverend and holy. But whereas a sinful man shall find
terror, in other Jesus, because he shall save his people from their sins.
And, there is no other name under heaven given, Matthew. 1. 21. Luc. 4. 12.
whereby we must be saved. For so much therefore, as in this name we find the
greatest, yea unspeakable Comfort: It is agreeable to good reason, that we be
by this name stirred up and affected with unspeakable joy within: and that we
make expression thereof, to the glory of God, by devout outward reverence.

I would, my brethren which are so scrupulous in this point, would, without
prejudice, read the learned and clear tteatises, which are extant on this
argument: and specially that exquisite piece of that most learned and judicious
Bishop Andrews And that, (setting aside their causeless quarrel, against his
being Lord Bishop) they would weigh his reasons with an humble spirit, and an
heart lifted Joh. 16. 13.
up to God, through Jesus Christ to be guided by that Spirit of truth, which
our Savior promised to send, to guide us all, into all truth. Then I make no
doubt, but they would soon see, that in bowing the knee to God, at the mention
of the name of Jesus; there is no Superstition.

But you call the Communion table an altar: and

We are not by any Canon or rule (that I know) required, to call it an altar.
And the now Lord Elie (a man specially zealous to restore Gods public worship
to the primitive luster) in the articles which he lately exhibited, in his
visitation, when he was Bishop of Norwich, does Chrysostom. Nyssen. (...)
not at all call it by the name altar, but sometime the Communion table; and
sometime in the words of the Fathers the holy Table. And yet, it has anciently
been called indifferently, by either name, Coal from the Altar. Altar.
Christianum. (...). Antid. Lincol.
Altar or Table: and may indifferently bear either name: as is abundantly
cleared of late, by diverse learned pens; who have eased me, from any labor
in this point: and are sufficient to satisfy any reasonable spirit.

Neither know I any particular or oppositive law enjoining us, to bow at the
altar or Communion table. Yet the devotion of those which do practice it, being
grounded upon the custom of the Catholic Church of Christ: is (in my poor
judgment) not only justifiable but also commendable. For what is there to be
said against it?

It is superstition, in Gods worship, to bow or do

We do not bow, to the table: but, at the table by himself or in some room
amongst his family, kneeleth at his chair or table is not said to kneel to
his stool or table. So, we, that bow at the Communion table, do our reverence
there, not to the table, but to God, at the table.

And why there more then any where else?

I answer first, by such another question. Why Moses commanded Exodus 3. 5 at
the fire bush to put his shoes from his feet, rather there, then in any other
place? I hope he will answer me with Gods own reason and words viz. because the
place was holy ground. Then I ask once more; what made that place holyer then
an other? will it not be confessed to be, Gods special presence, there
specially manifested in the voice that spoke and the fire which burned not the
bush? All this is clear and undeniable. And from hence then, thus it follows
necessarily A place, where God by special signs manifests his special
presence, is more holy then another place. (though not in nature, yet in use
and relation) And there, men are to demean themselves, with special reverence
therefore. But the Communion table is a place, where God manifests himself,
specially present, in the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore men ought there to demean themselves with
special reverence, toward God, there specially present. For, when a man
considers the love of God in Jesus Christ sealed unto him, by the body and
blood of Christ, whereof the Communion table does specially put him in mind,
as being a table specially set up, and set apart, for that banquet; then the
heart (if it be right) is lifted up in reverend thankefullnesse to our
merciful God: and the body boweth, to express that reverence and
thankfulness, which the heart conceives.

If the Sacrament were always on the table,

The Communion table, being, appropriated for the Service of the Communion
retains still body and blood of Christ: and therefore, to be reverently
thankful. And so it continues still an holy Table: in the regard of the holy
things, which belong unto it, though they be not really present upon it.

If this matter of permanent relation, seems Genesis 28.
harsh to any: let him consider a passage in the book of Genesis where the case is
thus: God in a dream exhibiteth unto Jacob special signs of his special
presence, in that place where Jacob was then sleeping. In the morning Jacob
awaketh. But then, there appears not any of those signs. And yet, in
relation to that presence of God, which had in the night before appeared unto
him, in those signs he says: O how dreadful is (not was) this place It is
(not was) the house of God. Is the place now the house of God, and a place to
affect Jacob with dread, though the signs be not present, upon the place? And
shall not the Communion table be still the table of God, and an holy Table to
affect us with reverence, though the sacrament be not always actually on the
table? Did not our Savior call the Temple an house of Prayer, and not allow it
to be at all an house of Merchandise? Neither might it serve the turn of the
money changers to save them from the whip, to have said: we will not trade in
the Temple, in the time of Sacrifice or of Prayer or of Preaching; but only,
when the Service is ended. For, the Temple is always an house of prayer:
whether men be there at Matt. 13. 21.
Prayers, or not. And so the holy Table is always the Communion Table, or
Table of the Lord: whether the Sacrament be upon it or not. Does not our
Savior also tell us, that he which swears by the Temple, swears by him
that dwells in the Temple? The Temple was ordained for the worship of God:
And therefore God dwelled in the Temple in special manner- Idcirco jurans per
templum juratper Lyr.
Deum qui colitur in Templo. i. For that very cause, he that swears by the
Temple swears by God which is worshipped in the Temple. Will any body now be
so idle as to say, that this rule does hold, if a man swear just then, when
they are at Prayer, or at Sacrifice in the Temple, and not else: but that a man
swearing by the Temple, when the Service is done, does not swear by God? Is it
not also in the same Chapter said, by the same sacred mouth that he which
swears by the Altar, swears by it, and by all that is upon it? Should he
not now show himself senceles, who should say, that this rule holds only so
long as there is any Sacrifice or Oblation on the Altar and no longer? This
were right to follow the profane sense of strange people in this age, who
inmitate or comply with the filthy Fratricellians, before mentioned, which
allow no difference, between a Church and a Barn, when Service is ended: or
between the Communion Table, and their own common table, when the
administration of the sacrament is over. But know we, who in duty and humility
submit our selves, to be taught by God, in his holy word; that as between God
and the Temple, between the Oblation and the Altar, in the old Testament: so
now between God and the Church, between the Communion table and the body and
blood of Christ under the Gospel: the relation does continue. So that,
whenever the holy table comes into our eyes, it ought to put us in mind,
of the mercy of God, in the blood and merit of Jesus Christ. And shall not then
this object beget thankfulness and reverence in my heart? Or may not that
reverence which is conceived in mine heart be expressed in the gestures of my
body? we do reverence at our entrance into the Kings Chamber of presence, and
all the while we are there, and specially when we come near the chair of
state: though his Majesty be not there in person. And our brethren do not call
this Superstition. But let them then tell me. Should we not much more do so,
when we come into the Church, which is the presence of God; and while we are
there, and specially when we approach the holy Table? But they tell us, that it
is not the like reason; because the one is Civil and the other a Religious
reverence. Whereas, if their reason could reach it: or if their frowardness
would acknowledge it, the reason or argument is most strong, and drawn a
minori ad majus, from the lesser to the greater thus: If we reverence a King,
who is a mortal man, at the simboles of his Majesty: and memorials of his
Soveraignity: how much more the God of heaven, in our entrance into his house
and drawing near his holy Table? Neither let them flatter themselves with the
misseunderstood and misseapplyed distinction of Religious and Civil reverence:
When Religion does not less bind us to reverence God, with our whole man, body
and soul, then civility does oblige us to respect man: neither does religion
bar but regulate actions and matters of civility. Therefore, by how much more
God is greater then man, and the Sovereign more to be honored then his
Deputy: we are to be more reverent in the Church, then in the Kings Chamber of
presence, and at the Communion Table, then at the chair of State. If we are to
reverence the King not with the body alone but also with the heart, so are we
to reverence God, not only with the heart: but also with the body. And so God
in the King, and the King for God, with the whole man. So that this very gesture
of bowing at the Communion Table rightly performed is not at all any
Superstition but rather a Christian duty.

CHAP. XI. They who unjustly charge us with Superstition, are themselves most
Superstitious.
WE have made search in the tents of Jacob Leah, and the handmaydes, narrowly:
but but have not found yet any of Labans Idols: That is we have considered, the
Cathedral and and parochian Churches, and taken notice of every corner, and of
every particular thing and gesture done and used in the same. But God be
thanked we have not in any of them found any Superstition. And therefore we
confidently return a non est inventus. i. There is no Superstition found in
all our Churches.

Come we now then, into the Tent of Rachell. I mean the society of those, who
challenge us of Superstition. I hope, it will not offend the^, that we give them
the name of Rachell. For, as she was the fairest of all the wives of Jacob: so
these men conceive them selves to be, the purest and sincerest, and so, the
fairest worshippers of all the rest. But we no sooner come into her tent, but
that we find her verbally very respective of her Father: Yet really and in
deed, very undutifull and hypocritical. Let it Genesis 31.
not displease my Lord, that I can not rise; For the custom of women is upon
me. Let it not displease, is very smooth language. The term, Lord, as indeed
it was a word of reverence in the mouth of Sarah to her husband: so, it seems
a little of respect from the tongue of Rachell to her Father: But the plain
truth is, that it is not the displeasure of her Father, but the retaining of
her Idols and persevering in her Superstition, that she regards. Nor is she
ashamed to tell her Father, I can not rise. And least she might be suspected to
speak falsely (as she did) she has like a cunning dissembler, quickly found a
fair Cloak, to palliate her iniquity, and to make her lie to seem a truth.
The Custom of women is upon her. Fallitur pater commento muliebri ac
honestissima ratione ac specie deluditur. The Father is deluded with a trick
of a woman's wit, and beguiled with a fair pretense and semblance. I am not
very willing to fasten these conditions and tricks of Rachell, too hard upon my
brethren. Yet what, is true is true: And God give us all grace, neither
uncharitably to misconster, nor perversely or unadvisedly to give cause, to be
suspected, of either frowardness hypocrisy or any other impiety.

But as for those of our brethren, which separate from us in their practice and
fashion of worshipping God; they will many (if not the most) of them, give (when
they list) unto our Fathers and Governors calm and submissive langvage, at
least to their faces. But withal they cannot rise, they cannot stand, they
cannot bow, they cannot come up: They cannot stand nor rise to make confession
of their Faith: nor to praise God in the congregation with hymns and
doxologies: They cannot bow at the name of Jesus: They cannot draw near and
come up to the Communion table: But why can they not? They have the ability of
their limbs (God be thanked) but more truly then Rachell may these men say the
custom of women is upon them. Long since, the woman began; and ever since,
both men and women have gotten a custom, to affect and pretend more wisdom,
and knowledge then ever God laid out for them, forgetting the rule of the
Apostle that no man think of himself more highly then he ought to think: but
to think soberly as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith and Romans
22. 3. v. 16.
not to be wise in their own conceits. But when against plain evidence of
Scripture and grounds of common reason, men persist and be overcarried against
authority; what is this but frowardness and wilfulness, a very Custom of
women? the poverty of whose judgment, in the weakness of their sex, is
captivated to the unrulinesse of their affections, ut non persuadeas etiamsi
persuaseris. i. They will do what they list in despite of reason. And then,
what is this but flat Idolatry, when their own conceits are so preferred and
magnified, and God in his ordinances slighted.

But our brethren will plead that it is not conceit or fancy, but Conscience
that withdrawes them from conforming with us, in the forms and gestures used
by us, in Gods worship. And then I must tell them, that when the things in use
are, both by authority required, and by primitive and purer antiquity
practiced; and in their nature suitable to the actions which they accompany: and
nowhere forbidden by the word of God: Their standing out in these things cannot
be true Conscience which is ever guided by the will of God. But fancy and
self-conceit does overbeare men; and take up that room and power in their
hearts, and that authority over their affections and practices which belong
properly to almighty God. And so Conceit and Fancy is obeyed and followed, and
become an Idol, shutting out the Sovereignty of God, and placing it self, or
rather placed by men, as a God in their hearts. For his servants ye are to whom
ye obey. And whatsoever we submit our selves unto contrary to the word and
ordinance of God, that is by us made our God and Idol: and we therein are
become plain Idolaters, worshipping the Creature above the Creator. And the
time will come, when they shall plainly understand, that their stiffness of
body and mind will be found out to be mere Idolatry: When our humble and
reverend bowings shall be approoved for gestures of Christian Devotion.

And yet further, seeing that Superstition, as we showed before, Consists not
only in overvaluing and too much doting upon the Creature, but also in
starting at the lawful use of the creature: so as, a man thinks himself,
ipso facto, defiled in his soul by touching, tasteing or handling of any thing
which is touched, tasted or handled, without any breach of any law of God, or
lawful constitution of man. As for example: if a man should now abstain from
eating Swines flesh, in a conceit that it does now defile or make a man a
sinner. This were plain Superstition. So if in time of Lent, or on any of the
days upon the which we are commanded by Law to abstain from eating flesh, a
man should imagine now, that it is a sin to eat flesh, not so much in regard
of the wholesome Laws of the State and Church, which do indeed bind the
conscience. 1 Pet. 2. 13. as in a conceit, that flesh as it is flesh, eaten on
such a day, has a special power to defile or make a man a sinner: this also
were mere Superstition. For in both these cases, a man conceives himself
defiled, and made a sinner, by that use of the Creature which God simply
forbids not. And as, thus the rule holds in the use of the Creatures of
God; so does it also in the actions of men which are in themselves indifferent.
i. neither good nor bad: but as they be applied. As for example, to kneel to
bow, to stand, to go from one place to another are things in themselves
indifferent. No where forbidden by any Law of God or man. And therefore for a
man to think that he does sin in the performance of any of these; or to
abstain from them for fear of sinning thereby, is plain Superstition. For it
imputes sin unto that which has none in it.

If my brethren yet allege, that they do not abstain from these actions or
gestures, merely as they are actions or gestures: but as they are applied in
the worship of God. Then I desire to know of them, whether kneeling, bowing,
standing or going do of things indifferent in themselves then become a sin,
when I kneel to God, stand up to God, or go to God? And I dare boldly enough
affirm it, neither need it any proof, that there is not in our worship of
God, any other kneeling, bowing, standing or going required or used but unto
God. Let men insist where they will, and they shall soon see (if they be not
wilfully blind) the case most manifest: and that not we, observing these
things, but our brethren in their, either timorous starting at them, or in
their wilful opposing of them, are the superstitious people: as more fully
appears by what we have said of this kind of superstition, before cap. 7. It
is true indeed, that our brethen seem desirous to shun Popish superstition: But
then not discerning between Popish superstition and true outward devotion, they
fall upon an other worse superstition. For true Religion and devotion is a
virtue placed between two extremes: whereof, the one is secundum excessum i.
in the excess or too much according to the words of Aquinas; And such is much
of the superstition of Popery; ascribing too much to the creature. The other
extreme secundum defectum. i. in the defect, or too little. And wtih this is
the Anabaptist and Brownist and the rest of the sectaries, that go in that
tracke, much infected; not permitting garments or the lymbes of our bodies or
the like, to be any use in the worship of God And therefore these may be
compared to those in the Prophet Amos, whose case is, as if a man did fly from
a Lion and a bear met him: or went into In moral.
the house and leaned on the wall, and a serpent bit him: according whereto is
the observation of St. Gregory. Quidam dum fugiunt latrones aut feras, in avia
incidunt aut barathra. Sic quidam Superstitionem ita fugiunt, ut incidant in
impietatem. i. Some do so run a way from thieves or wild beasts, as that they
fall upon Gulfes and unpassable places: And so, some do so avoid or shun
Superstition as that they become impious or irreligious.

If this language seem too harsh to any of my brethren, I request them to
consider, that these actions and gestures of ours in Gods worship, being in
themselves indifferent, and withal applied, not unto any Idol, or unlawful
act, but unto God; and that also according to ancient Christian practice, and
constitutions ecclesiastical not only of foraigne councels, but of our own
state and hierachy, under so Christian a Prince: they that refuse herein to be
conformed, specially in those things which be expressly enjoined, are therein
not only Superstitious, but also guilty of one of the greatest sins, worse
than witch craft, disobedience, which is also iniquity and IDOLATRY.

Thus have we cleared our holy house of God, his servants and Service (as we
do perform it) from all Idolatry and Superstition. We have also made it
manifest, that our accusers themselves are (while they are not aware) a
Superstitious people. And therefore I say. Brother, pull the beam of
Superstition out of thine own eye: and then I trust in God, thou shall
clearly see that there are no such motes in our eyes, as thou did imagine.
Remember that the members of thy body do, in their kind, owe service and
worship unto God: as well as the abilities and faculties of the soul. Rob
not God then of his due: least under a pretense of abhorring Idols, thou
committest Sacrilege.

FINIS.
Imprimatur tractatus hic cui Titulus est (Gods holy House and Service) modo
intra december menses proxime sequentes, typis mandetur.

Fulhamae Iulii ultimo. 163^. Sa. Baker.

Diverse quotations in the Margin, something out of their due places, and
imperfect pointings in the pages, the Reader is requested to pardon. But such
errors as pervert the sense of the Author, are to be mended thus.
Page 3. line 22 and 23. for immediately, read mediately. p. 4. l. 2 for
immediately, r. mediately. p. 5. b. 24. for to be, r. where was. p. 7. l. 14.
blot out it. p. 8. l. 8. and 13. for Church, r. Christian. p. 12. l. 30. for,
it is, r. is it? p. 21. l. 3. for custe, r. just, and l. 4. for esse, r. est.
p. 32. l 16. for because Church, v. because the Church, and l. 18. for (...),
r. (...), p. 37. l. 21. for were, r. where, p. 38. l 28. blot out, and, p. 39.
in marg. for dives, r. divis. p. 41. l. 18. for Church, r. Christian, p. 43. l.
25. blot out not. p. 46. l. 22. for to use, r. to use it. p. 48. l. 2. for
rightly, r. richly. and l. 16. for which you, r. with you. and l. 24. for of
things, r. of the things. p. 50. l. 20. for and other, r. and another. p. 52.
l. 10 for thyrstie, r. thriftie. and l. 22. for set, r. get. p. 55. l. 18. for
the is, r. there is p. 56. l. 7, 8. for charged, r. cheared. and l. 9. for that
man, r. that that man. p. 61. l. 31. for makes to, r. makes them to. p. 63.
l. 3. for heard, r. hard. and l. 11. for vincibatur, r. vincebatur. p. 66. l.
2. for spirituale qua, r. spiritualem quam. p. 72. l. 11. for (...), r. (...).
p. 74. l. 29. for Damascus, r. Damasus. p. 77. l. 31. blot out, in. p. 80. l.
15. for magnified, r, imagined. and l. 18, for for as, r. as for. and l. 20.
for forward, r. froward. p. 86. l. 21. for oppositive, r. positive. p. 93. l.
13. for little, r. title. p. 98. l. 11. for be any, r. be of any.


