A VIEW OF THE CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL LAW, AND wherein the practice of them
is streitned, and may be relieved within this Land.

Written by THOMAS RIDLEY Doctor of the Civil Law.

Iura sua vnicuique professioni sunt seruanda, alioqui nihil aliud erit, quam
omnium ordinum confusio. c. peruenit. 11. q. 1. LONDON, Printed for the Company
of Stationers Anno. 1607.

To the High and Mighty Prince JAMES, by the grace of God, King of great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
MOST gracious Sovereign, since it has pleased your Majesty of your Princely
care toward the Church, and your common wealth, to take knowledge of some
differences that are in Judicature between your Ecclesiastical and Civil
Law, and the Temporal Law of this Land (by which jointly your Majesty's State
is managed next after your own most rare providence, and the wisdom of such,
whom it has pleased your Highness to associat unto your self in the great
affairs of your Kingdom) I have bin bold to offer unto your Majesty this
simple Treatise, as that which does lay out the cause of those Differences more
particulerly than any man hitherto has expressed the same. In coming to which
(because I do speak for those parts of your Majesty's Laws, which are less
known unto your people, and esteemed no otherwise of them than they see the
practice thereof to be here within your Land) I have thought good, as it were
in a brief, to set out the whole sum of both the Laws to the view of the
people, that they may see there is more worth in those for whom I speak, than
was by many conceived to be: so that the profession of the Ecclesiastical and
Civil Law may appear to the world, neither to be ilde nor unfit for the
State; so far as it has pleased the Royal predecessors of your Highness to
give entertainment unto it, and your Majesty your self to admit of it. In all
which there is no other thing sought, than that such grieuances as have bin of
late offered by one Jurisdiction unto the other, and in consequence, to all
your subjects, who follow any suits in the Civil or Ecclesiastical Courts,
may by your Princely wisdom be considered, and by your authority be
redressed, if they be found to be grieuances indeed: for now as things are,
neither Jurisdiction knows their own bounds, but one snatcheth from the
other, in manner, as in a batable ground lying between two Kingdoms; but so
that the weaker ever goes to the worse, and that which is mightier preuailes
against the other: the professors thereof being rather willing to give Laws
and interpretations to other, than to take or admit of any against themselves.
For which, the weaker appeals unto your Highness, humbly desiring your
Majesty's upright and sincere Judgment to discern where the wrong is, and to
redress it accordingly, which is a work worthy your Majesty's high
consideration. For as the Land is yours, so also the Sea is yours, and the
Church is under your Highness protection, as a child is under his Tutor; so
that all the Laws thereof appertain unto your Majesty's care and comfort
alike: For which, not only the whole profession of your Ecclesiastical and
Civil Lawyers that now are, but those which shall succeed in those places for
ever hereafter unto the worlds end, will praise and magnify your Majesty's
gracious favor toward them, and we that now are will pray to God for the
long and happy prosperity of your Highness, and your posterity over us,
during the continuance of this Heaven and this Earth, and after the passing
away thereof, a perpetual fruition of the new Heaven and the new Earth, wherein
righteousness only shall dwell for ever.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful Subject, Thomas Ridley.

To the Reader.
GENTLE Reader, I confess, as I meditated this Treatise upon mine own motion
(as I do sometimes matters of other argument, when my leisure serves me
thereto) so also I do not set it out to the view of the world upon mine own
motion, but was desirous it should have bin keept in, saving that I must obey
where I am bound. The thing that gave me cause to this meditation, was, that I
saw many times how meanly men esteemed of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law of
this Land, valuing them by the practice of so much of them, as we have among
us. And therefore I thought good, although not wholly to unfold the riches of
them, yet to make show of them folded up, in such sort as Mercers make show of
their silks and veluets, laid up in whole pieces in their shops; whereby it
may be seen what great variety they have of all these kind of wares, although
the goodness of the ware it self cannot be discerned, because it is foulded
up: Beside, seeing how frequent prohibitions are in these days in causes of
either cognizance more than have bin in former time, I thought it not unworthy
my labor to inquire and see upon what just grounds they are raised up in this
multitude; not of any humor I have to gain say the lawful proceedings of any
court (which I reverence and most readily acknowledge their authority in all
things belonging to their place) but to know and search out the truth of those
suggestions that give cause unto these prohibitions. For whenas such Laws as
are written of these businesses, are written indifferently as well for the one
Jurisdiction as the other, no man is to be offended, if the one Jurisdiction
finding it self pressed by the partial interpretation (as it supposes) of the
other, inquire the ground of such interpretation, and labor to redress it if
it may be, by the right interpretation thereof: To the end that either
Jurisdiction may retain their own right, and not the one be ouertopt by the
other, as it seems to be at this day: And that in such matters (as they
conceive) of their own right, as depend of no other authority but of the
Prince alone: which is the thing only that is sought in this little Treatise.
And therefore the Reverend Judges of this Land are to be entreated, that they
will vouchsafe an equal interpretation of these matters as well to the one
Jurisdiction as the other, for so it is comely for them to do; and if they do
it not the other are not so dull senced, but they can perceive it, nor so
daunted, but that they can fly for succor unto him, to whose high place and
wisdom, the deciding of these differences does of right appertain. PENELOPE
is said to have had many wooers comely in person and eloquent in speech, but
she respected none but her own ULYSSES. Such should be the mind of a Judge,
that whatsoever other appearance or show of truth be offered, one saying this is
the true sense of the Law, and another that; yet the Judge should respect none
but the very true germane and genuine sense thereof indeed. Which if it were
religiously or indifferently observed in every Court, then needed not this
complaint that now is, but every Jurisdiction should peaceably hold his own
right, such as the Prince, Law, or Custom has afforded unto it.

THOMAS RIDLEY.

The contents of this Book.
THE Division of the whole book into four parts. page 1. What right or Law is
ingenerall. 1. What is the Law public, and what the Law private. 1. 2. What is
the Law of Nature. 2. What is the Law of Nations. 2. What the Law Civil. 2.
That there be four Tomes of the Civil Law; The Digest, the Code, the
Authentic and the Feuds. 3. The Institutes are an Epitome of the Digest. 3.
What is the Digest, and why it is so called, and why the same are called the
Pandects. 3. What are the Institutes, and why they are so called. 4. The
Pandects or Digest are divided into seven parts, and they again into fifty
Books. 4. That the first part thereof contains four Books, and what is the
sum thereof. 4. That the second part has eight books, and what is the contents
thereof. 5. That the third part stretches it self into eight books, and what
they contein. 6. That the fourth part contains eight books, and the contents
thereof. 7. That the fifth part comprehends nine books, and the matter
thereof. 9. That the sixth is spent in seven books, and the subject thereof 11.
That the seventh part is divided into six books, and the matter thereof. 15.
The second Volume of the Civil Law, is the Code which is distributed into
twelve books. 27 Why the Code is so called. 28 The Argument of the first book
of the Code. 30. 31. 32 The 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. book of the Code, contain
like Titles as were handled in some one or other book of the Digest, except
only a few; as De Edendo, de Indicta viduitate, de Caducis Tollendis, and some
other small number beside 33 The Contents of the tenth book of the Code. 33.
34. 35. 36. 37. The Argument of the eleventh book of the Code. 38. vsque ad
page 41. The matter of the twelfth book of the Code. 41. The Authenticks are
the third Volume of the Civil Law, and why they are so called. 45. That the
Authenticks are divided into 9. collations. 45. What is the sum of the first
Collation. 46. What is the matter of the second collation. 47. What of the
third. 48. What of the fourth. 49. What of the fifth. 50. What of the sixth. 52.
What of the seventh. 54. What of the eighth. 55. What of the ninth. 56. That
the feuds are the fourth and last volume of the Civil Law. 61. What a Feud is,
why it is so called, and who were the first authors thereof. 61. 62. How many
kind of Feuds there be, viz. Temporal or perpetual. 62. 63. What is a Temporal
Feud. 63. What a perpetual Feud. 63. Perpetual Feuds are gotten either by
inuestiture, or by Succession. 63 What is Inuestiture. 64 What is Succession.
64 Of perpetual Feuds some are Regal, some other not regal. 65 What are Regal
feuds. 65 That of Regal Feuds, some are Ecclesiastical, some Seculer, and
what either of them are. 65 What be not Regal Feuds. 65 Beside, of Feuds some
are Liege, some other not Liege, and what either of them are. 65 What be
vassals or liegemen, and how many sorts there be thereof. 65 What be
Valuasores Maiores, and what Minores. 65 By how many ways a Feud is lost. 65
What is the Canon Law, and that there are two principal parts thereof, the
Decrees and the Decretals. 66 What be the Decrees, and whereof they are
collected, and who was the author thereof. 66 That there be two parts of the
Decrees, the Distinctions and the causes. 66 What the Distinctions do
contain, and what the causes. 67 What be the Decretals, and whence they are
gathered. 67 That there be three volumes of the Decretals, the one called the
Decretals of Gregory the ninth, the other the sixth, the other the Clementines:
who be the authors thereof, and when they were first set out. 68 That each of
them is divided into five books. 68 What the first book of the Decretals
comprehends. 68. 69. 70. What the second. 71. 72 What the third. 73 What the
fourth. 74 What the fifth. 75. 76. 77 That the things the Civil Law is
conversant in here in this Realm, are either ordinary or extraordinary. 78
Of the ordinary, some are Civil some other are criminal. 79 Ordinary Civil
matters are all Marine matters pertaining to the ship it self, or any part
thereof, and all contracts between party and party, concerning things done
upon or beyond the sea. 79 Of shipwracks, which notwithstanding are so of the
cognition of the Civil Law within this Realm, as that they are granted by the
Kings Commission to the Lord Admiral and other which have like Jurisdiction.
83 The manner of proceeding in Civil Marine matters. 84 Of Piracie, and what it
is, which also is held by the Regal Commission, and the manner of proceeding
therein. 85 Of extraordinary matters belonging to the Civil law, within this
Land, by the benefit of the Prince. 86 Negotiation between Prince and Prince,
and the treaty thereof. 86 Martial causes in an Army, Civil or criminal,
and the ordering of them both. 87 The bearing of Arms, and the ranging of
every one into his room of honor, and the diversity of them, and how they are
to be come by. 89 Of the diversity of colors in bearing Arms, and which is
the chiefest of them. 91. 92 Of Emperors and Kings, and the great Epithites
they have in the Civil Law. 92 Of Precedencie and Protoclisie in great persons
next after the Emperor and King. 93 Of Knights and Doctors of Law, and their
precedencie. 95 Of Esquires and Gentlemen. 95. 96 Of great personages, how they
succeed each other in inheritance, and other places of honor. 97 Of women's
government, and the defense thereof 98 Certain questions in Succession
between a brother borne before his fathers Kingdom, and a brother after, who
shall succeed. 100 Questions between the Kings second son living at his fathers
death, and the eldest brothers son, his father dying before the Kings death,
who shall succeed. 101 Of the Tytles of the Canon law in use or out of use
among us. 102 Some out of use, by reason of the palpable Idolatry they
contained. 103 Some other out of use, because they were contrary to the laws
of the land. 103 Of Bishops Chauncelors, their Office and Antiquity. 104 Of
those Tytles that are absolute in use among us, recited by Doctor Cosen in his
Apology for Ecclesiastical proceeding. 109 How the exercise of the Civil and
Canon Law is impeached within this Realm, and by how many ways. 109 What is a
Praemunire. 109 That Ecclesiastical Judges executing the Kings Ecclesiastical
Law, cannot be within the compass of a Praemunire, as Prem. is understood by
the statut of R. 2, and H. 4. 110 That the word Elsewhere, in the said statuts
cannot be understood of the Kings Ecclesiastical Courts here within the Land.
111 What is a Prohibition, and how many sorts are thereof. 113 Of Admiral
causes, and in what sort they are hindered. 115 Of Actions of Trouer, and how
far Fictions in Law are to be admitted, and how far not. 116. etc. Wherein last
Wills and Testaments are impeached. 121 Of the care that Princes of this Realm
have had for the due payment of Tithes unto the Church, and the preserving of
the cognizance thereof unto the Ecclesiastical Courts of this Land, both
before the conquest and since. 124 etc. That the Statutes of the xxvii. and
xxxii. of H. the viii and the 2. of Edward the vi. c. 13. intended for the true
payment of Tithe, and the preservation of the trial thereof unto the
Ecclesiastical Courts, are now turned to the hinderance of them both. 128.
etc. That customs of payment of tithes are triable only at the
Ecclesiastical courts. 131. etc. That the lymits and bounds of Parishes are of
the Ecclesiastical cognizance only. 135 That the clause of treble Damages in
the 13. chapter 2. Edw. 6. is to be sued in the Ecclesiastical courts only.
137. That the naming of law or Statute in a statut, does not make it to be of
the Temporal cognizance, if the matter thereof be Ecclesiastical. 139. etc.
How it comes to pass that when tithes were never clogged with custom,
prescription, or composition under the Law, they are clogged with the same
under the Gospel, and the causes thereof. 142 Tithes anon after the dissolution
of the Jews policy were entertained by the Christians, as a natural
provision for the Ministers of the Gospel, and leased out by God unto the
Jews for the time of their policy only. 142 That Charles Martell, Father of
King Pippin was the first that ever took tithes from the Church, and assigned
them over to Lay men in fee, and upon what occasion. 145 That to the imitation
of this fact of Martell, other Princes did the like every one in his Kingdom.
145 That this fact of Martel, being done about the year 606. stood vnreuersed
until the Lateran council, under Alexander, Anno 1189. and that the
reformation was then but in part. 146 That Ecclesiastical Judges admit pleas
in discharge of tithes, and the manner of tything, contrary to the conceit that
is had of them. 149 Of Privileges, and how they came in. 150 That by reason of
the frequence of privileges, Statutes of Mortmaine came in. 150 Of the
beginning of cloistered monks in the west Church of Christendom, and that the
author thereof was one Benedict a Roman about the year 606. 153 That from
Benedict and his order flowed all the rest of the orders of Religious men. 153.
etc. That the admiration that these Religious men did breed of themselves in
the head of Princes and Popes, did procure appropriations of parsonages, and
immunities from Tiths. 153 That the over conceit that men had of prayer above
preaching in the church, was an adiuuant cause thereunto. 154 Whether
Appropriations came first from Princes or Popes it is questionable. 155
Exemptions from tithes brought in by Pope Paschall in favor toward all sorts
of Religious men. 158 The same restrained by Pope Adrian, and limited to the
Cystertians, Hospitallers, Templers, and the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem
only, saving to the other, the Tithes of grounds labored with their own
hands only 159 That Innocent the third, in the third Lateran Council 1120.
restrained those four orders from immunitie of Tithes for such grounds as they
should acquire after that council: which Henry the fourth imitating, provided
by two Statutes of this Land against their immunitie. 159 That if this
reuocation of Immunitie by Innocent the third, and these two Acts of Henry the
fourth, were well weighed, they would ouerturne many of the privileges
challenged by the Statut of 31. H. 8. c. 13. for exemption of Monastery Lands
from Tithes. 160 That Real compositions for Tithes are the devise of
Ecclesiastical Lawyers, and are to be tried by the Ecclesiastical Courts. 160
That the curiosity of Schoolmen in their distinctions upon Tithes have helped
forward Appropriations and Exemptions from Tithes. 161 The opinion examined, as
concerning the quotitie of tithes, whether it be Moral, Ceremonial, or
Judicial. 161. etc. That a Bishop being Lord of a Manor, and prime founder of
a Benefice, could not in the first erection thereof, by his own capacity,
retain any Tithes in his hand, and pass the same after in lay-fee to his
tenants, and so give cause to his tenants of prescription against the parson.
165 That Bishops indowments in the beginning stood not in Tithes, but in
finable Lands. 167 That the turning of Bishops indowments into tenthes or
tithes for impropriat parsonages is unsuitable to the first institution, and
very dangerous. 168 That it had bin a worthy work in the first reformers of
Religion, if they had returned to every parish their own parsonage: and the
dislike that God may seem to have conceived of that. 169 That tithes are a
Parochian right, and how Parishes in the Christian world, came first to be
instituted. 171 That tithes of Minerals are due. 174 That tithes of Turues be
due. 178 That the cognizance of barren, heath, and wast grounds belongs to
the Ecclesiastical courts, and what every of them are. 180 That the boughs of
great trees are tythable, and so also are the bodies, but in the case of the
Statute only. 185 In what cases diffamatorie words belong to the
Ecclesiastical, and in what to the common law. 191 That the suit of bastardie,
as well in the principal as in the incident belongs unto the Ecclesiastical
Law. 199 The means to relieve the Ecclesiastical courts. 209 The right
interpretation of Laws and Statuts. 209 Wherein the three Statutes for tithes
may be supplied. 212 What things may be ordered by the Civil Law, yet not
provided for by the common Law, and others of like nature to those that are
expressed. 215 Of the necessity of retaining the practice of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical law within this Land. 224. etc.


FINIS.
A VIEW OF THE Civil and Ecclesiastical Law: also wherein it is straighted,
and wherein it may be relieved.
BEFORE I show how necessary it is for his Majesty and the Realm, to
maintain the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, as they are now practiced among
us in this Realm, I will set down as it were in a brief, what the Civil and
the Ecclesiastical Laws are: then will I show how far forth they are here
in use and practice among us: thirdly wherein we are abridged and put beside
the use and possession thereof, by the Common Law, even contrary to the old
practice thereof, and the true sense and meaning of the Laws of this Realm
and the Statutes in this behalf provided: and lastly, wherein we might be
relieved and admitted to the practice of many things in the Civil Law without
prejudice to the Common Law; and so both the Laws might know their own
grounds and proper subjects, and not one to be iumbled with the other as it is
at this day, to the great vexation of the Subject. But before I speak of the
Civil Law in particular, I will define what Right or Law is in genetall: Law
therefore is (as Vlpian says, L. 10. in fin ff. de Iusticia and Iure) the
knowledge of Civil, and humane things, the understanding of those things which
are just unjust. This Law is primarily divided into the law public and the
law private. The public, is that which appertains to the general state of
the common wealth, for I mean the law public, not in respect of the form,
that they were publicly made, as we make laws in our Parliaments, for so all
the Civil Law is public, as made by public authority; but in respect of
the object or end thereof, for that they concern the Church, the Clergy, the
Magistrate, and other like public functions, none of which level at the rule
of equity, or equality between man and man, as private laws do, but aim at
that which is most fit in general for the common State.

The private Law, or the private men's Law, is that which concerns every singular
man's state, which, for that it is occupied in giving every man his own, it
must of necessity be proportionable to the rule of Equality and Justice.

Private Law, is of three sorts, the law of Nature, the law of Nations, and the
law Civil.

The law of Nature, is that which Nature has taught every living creature, as
the care and defense of every creatures life, desire of liberty, the
conjunction of male and female for procreation sake.

The law of Nations, is that which common reason has established among men,
and is observed alike in all Nations, as distinctions of men's rights, building
of houses, erecting of Cities, society of life, judgments of controversies,
war, peace, captivity, co^tracts, obligations, succession, and such like.

The law Civil, being largely taken, is the law that every particular Nation
frames to it self, as the Athenians laws, and the laws of Lacedemon, in
which sense also, the law of England may be called the Civil law, for that it
is the proper and private law of this Nation: but in more strict sort, the
Civil law is the law, which the old Romans used, and is for the great wisdom
and equity thereof at this day, as it were, the common law of all well governed
Nations, a very few only excepted.

And certainly, albeit sundry other Nations by the light of Nature, have many
Rules and Maxims of the Civil law: yet, if all the constitutions, customs, and
laws, of all other people and countries were put together (I except none, save
ye laws of the Hebrews, which came immediately from God) they are not comparable
to the law of the Romans, neither in wisdom nor equity, neither in gravity
nor in sufficiency. Whereupon it is, that most of other Nations, (saving our
own) although they receive not the Civil law wholly for their law, yet they so
much admire the equity thereof, that they interpret their own laws thereby.
Peckins de regul. iuris reg. Quae a iure co^i regul. 28.

The whole Civil law it self, is reduced or brought into 4. Tomes, whereof
the first contains the Digest or Pandects, taken out of 27. old reverent
lawyers works, whereof sundry were before the coming of Christ, other flourished
in the Emperors days, eue^ unto ye time of Maximinus, as it appears by
Spartianus and Lampridius, in ye life of the said Emperor: which said Tome is
divided into 50. books, of which, every one contains sundry titles of great
wisdom and variety.

To this Tome, I add the Institutions, which are a brief of all the former
books, composed of purpose by the Emperor in the behalf of young learners, that
thereby having the whole Digest drawn into a Compendium of 4. books only, they
might with more alacrity, go forward in ye study of the law having, as it
were, ye first Elements of the whole profession in this little Treatise; whereas
otherwise without ye help hereof, their weak minds might be clogged with the
multitud and variety thereof, and so either altogether leave their studies, or
with more labor and diffidence (which oftentimes discourageth young men's minds
in a long matter) come to the end thereof, to which, by the direction of this
brief, they might sooner attain unto, and that without much travel or
distrust.

The Digests have their name, of that they are put into a comely order by the
Author, ranging every book and title into his proper place, such as either the
course of Nature affords them, or are fittest for the practice of the
profession.

The same book again, is called Pandects, of the greek words (...), for that it
co^priseth in it self, al whatsoever Justinian drew out of 150000. verses of
the old books of the law.

The Institutes are so called because they are as it were masters and
instructors to the ignorant, and show an easy way to the obteining of the
knowledge of the Law.

The matters wherein the whole law is occupied, are either the persons in the
common wealth, or the things belonging or not belonging to them, or the actions
whereby men do claim in judgments such things as are due unto them by law.

Upon a more particular, division the whole Digest is divided into seven
parts: whereof the first part standing upon four books, contains the
principles, and as it were, the first elements of the Law, as what Justice and
right is, from whence the Civil law has his beginning, what persons be the
object of the Civil law, what Magistrates the common wealth of the Romans
had, by whom either the laws were made or executed: the diverse kinds of
Jurisdictions which those magistrates used; mere, mixed, or simple, according
to their place: the corrections which the law used against such as disobey the
Judge, either in not appearing, or not performing that which is enjoined them:
what provision it made against such as by violence rescued men out of the
Judges hands: what Holidaies there were, wherein the Courts were not held: what
order the Law took against the plaintiff, that having cited the defendant had
no Libell ready to put into the Court, unless happily otherwise the parties
upon private agreement compounded the matter between them: who were to be
admitted advocates, and what causes bard them from that office: what is the
office of a Procurator, Solicitor, or Sindict, or Factor; and under what
cautions they were admitted, if they had no Proxy, or Mandat, or the party
principal did not in presence authorize them: how they were punished who upon
reward took upon them to vex men unjustly in the Law, in manner as common
Barators do: what persons having lost opportunity to allege any thing for
themselves beneficial in Law, may be restored thereto again, as Minors and
such other as by fear or craft of the adversary have bin driven away from
their lawful defense: how persons of common trust, as Mariners, Inholders, and
such like, are bound by Law to restore such things as they have taken in
charge to keep.

The second part, being distributed into viij. books, yields matter of
Judgment, as who may be Judge and who not: where and before what Judge every
one is to be conuented: how many kinds of Judgment there are, Civil,
Criminal, and mixed of both: by what actions things that are ours by right of
inheritance may be challenged, whether they be corporal or incorporall, what
action the Law affordes, if any man conceal that is ours, that we may come to
the sight thereof: what action lies against him who by evil persuasions or
leude inticement has corrupted another man's servant, or having run away by his
ill counsel, has concealed him from his master: what provision the Law has
against Dice-play and such as keep Dicing houses: how he is to be punished
which being put in trust to measure any man's ground, makes a false report of
the measure thereof: that no man hinder a corse of a dead body to be carried
to burial, or to be buried in such places as he and his predecessors have
right unto, or to build a Tomb to that purpose, and beautify the same.

The third part embracing xij. books, concerns personal actions, which rise
not of cause of right or possession, but of covenant and obligation; as things
credited or lent in a certain sum, the means how to recover the same if it
be denied, that is by oath of the party that denies it, unless he may be
convicted either by witness or instrument that he has forsworn himself:
how many kinds of oaths there are, voluntary out of Judgment, necessary
exacted by the Judge in doubtful cases, where otherwise there wants proof
to manifest the truth: Judicial, such as one party offers to another in
Judgment, and cannot be refused without just cause: and lastly, that which the
Judge offers to the plaintiff, as concerning the value of the thing which is
in strife, or the charges that he has bin at in recovering of the same: what
exceptions there lies against Obligations, as that which for cause was given,
and cause did not follow: that the cause was dishonest, for which that is
challenged that was given: that the sum was not due which was paid; and
therefore not to be exacted, but to be repaid: actions for things lent for a
certain time and to a certain use: actions for things pawned: actions that
either passengers have against Mariners for the goods or ware that they have
brought into the ship, or Mariners have against Passengers for their fraught:
actions of eiectment wherein the passengers and Mariners are bound each to
other for contribution of the losses of such things that have been cast into
the sea in the time of a storm or tempest, according to the quality and
quantity of the goods they have in the ship: actions whereby masters are bound
to answer for their servants contracts, and fathers for their childrens, in
such things, or negotiation as they have put them in trust withal, saving
where the child boroweth money without his fathers priuitie for riot, and for
such purpose as his father has no use thereof: Remedies for women, when by
weakness of their sexes, and lack of council, they have inwrapt themselves in
suertiship for other men: action of compensation, where a debt is demanded,
for which an equivalent portion has been received in lieu or satisfaction
thereof: actions of mandate or commandment, wherein one has done some work
or laid out some money upon an other man's mandate or word, and yet when he
requires allowance thereof, it is denied him: actions of society or
fellowship, wherein either the society is required to be maintained, and the
money put in common banck to be divided: actions of bargain and sale, either
pure or conditional, the bargain being once made, the loss and gain that
after happens is the buyers, unless the seller retain some further right in
the thing sold unto himself: actions of letting or setting either of the use
of a person, or the use of a thing upon a certain hyer: actions of change and
such like.

The fourth part being digested into eight books, ministers actions for such
things as are accessarie to contracts, such as pawnes and pledges are, which
are given for the better security of the contract: actions for restitution
wherein a man has been deceived in a bargain more then the half value of the
thing sold, or wherein the seller has concealed some fault in the thing sold,
which he ought by Law to have revealed, or promised some quality in the same,
which was not in it, or where the thing sold, has been euicted, by an other,
out of the hands of the buyer, himself using all just defense of Law for
himself: actions for interest and usury, and how many kinds thereof there be
that men use by land, lucratorie, compensatorie, and punitorie; whereof the
first is altogether unlawful, the other two allowed where either just gain
cease, or just loss follows, upon that occasion, that which is lent is not
paid according to the day of covenant. Sea usury, otherwise called nautick
usury, is greater then land usury, and yet allowed by Law, for that the
seafaring man takes upon himself the danger of the transporting thereof, and
securing the same at such place as it is appointed to be delivered. In deciding
of matters of controversy, the Law proceeds sometimes by witnesses, sometimes
by instruments, sometimes by presumptions, where knowledge or ignorance of fact
or Law is presumed. Spousals are mutual promises of a future marriage:
marriage is a lawful coopling together of man and woman, the company and
society of the whole life, the Communion of all Divine and humane rites and
things, and of one and the same house, wrought by the consent and mutual good
will of the one toward the other: in espousals and marriages is to be
considered, who is to be joined together, at what years, and by whose
consent: there does wait and attend upon Marriages, Ioyntures, Dowries, and
such like, and sometimes Divorce, which is so called of the diversity of the
minds of those that are married; because such as are divorced go one a
diverse way from the other. The causes whereupon Divorces grow, are Adultery,
deadly hatred one toward another, intolerable cruelty, neerenesse of kindred
and affinity in degrees forbidden, impotencie on the one side or the other:
actions of Dowry after divorce or separation; actions against a man's wife
imbeaselling away his goods; actions against a husband, disclayming his own
child; and his wife being with child, if he make doubt thereof, means how and
where she shall be kept until her delivery, so that no false birth shall be
put in place of the true child; or that she abuse not her husband or the next
heir with a false show of that which is not. Tutelage and government of
children vnderage, which is either testamentarie, or due to the next of kin,
or dative, all which are either to be confirmed or disposed of by the
Magistrate. Administrations of Tutors and Curators, and how far they are
endangered by their office, and wherein they are to interpose their authority
and consent, and for what acts the pupils or minors may be sued, done by the
tutors or curators; how any may be argued to be a suspected tutor or curator;
and how and by whom he may be removed, if there appear just cause of
suspicion against him. A Tutor is chiefly set over the person of the child,
secondly over his goods: but the Curator or Guardian is chiefly set over the
goods, and then over the person of the child: children (their father being
dead) by ye order of the Judge, are to be brought up with their mother, unless
she has fled unto a second marriage, which if she have done, then is he to be
brought up with some of his nearest kin, such as is known to be an honest
man, and will have a care of his good education; with whom the Judge is to
allow him such maintenance, as all his stock be not spent therein, but
evermore something be left against he come to full age. When the time of
Tutelage or curatorship is ended, they are to render account unto the Judge,
what they have received, and how they have expended the same, and what residue
is left, and according as their proofs are, either by oath, or otherwise, so
the Judge either allows, or disalloweth the same. If the Tutors or Curators
prove bankrupt, or unable to satisfy the Pupil or Minor, then lies an action
against their suerties for the satisfaction of the same; and if both of them
fail, then lies it against the Judge, or Magistrate, if either he have not
received any caution at all of the Tutors or Curators, or has received an
insufficient caution, or insufficient suerties, knowing them to be
insufficient; otherwise he is not to secure fortune and future cases of the
child: the Tutors or curators are to sell nothing of those things that are the
childrens, saving such things which by keeping cannot be kept, unless they
have the order or decree of the Judge thereunto, which the Judge is not to
decree, unless the child be so far in debt that it cannot be satisfied without
selling some part of the other goods, or there be some other like just and
necessary cause like unto this which may not be avoided. As Minors have
curators and governors, so also mad persons and prodigal persons are appointed
to have governors by law, for that they can no more govern their own state
then the others can. Prodigal persons are they that know no time nor end of
spending, but riot or lavish out their goods without all discretion.

Under the fifth Section, which compriseth in it, nine books, are contained
last Wills and Testaments, and who they be that can make the same: and how many
kinds thereof there be, solemn or military, and they either put in writing,
or else Nuncupatiue: what is an unjust, or void Will: what is to be thought of
those things, which are found either to be blotted out, or interlyned in a
Will: how Heirs or Executors are to be instituted, or substituted in wills,
and under what conditions they may be either instituted, or substituted in the
same: What time an heir has to deliberat after the Testators death, before he
prove the Will: what is a military testament, and what privileges it has: how
the inheritance may be either got or lost: how Testaments are to be opened,
published, and writ out: what men's Testaments are not to be opened, and
published: Of the punishment of such, which a will being extant, seek by
administration, or some other like means to possess the goods: and of those
which either forbid, or compel any man to make a Will: Of the power or right
of Codicils: of Legacies, and bequests, as what things may be bequeathed, and
what not, to whom any thing may be bequeathed, and of the signification of the
words, and things which do appertain unto Legacies: of yearly and monthly
legacies, what time they be due, in the beginning of the year, or in the end:
which of them be pure, and which conditional: Of the use, profit, and benefit
of any thing bequeathed: of dwelling, and works of servants bequeathed: of
Dowry bequeathed, and what profit the Legatorie has thereby: Of choice or
election bequeathed: Of wheat, wine, and oil bequeathed, and what is contained
under every of them: Of ground furnished bequeathed, and the instruments
thereto belonging, and what is to be understood by that bequest: Of store
bequeathed, in Latin called Penus; what is comprised under that word: of
household stuff bequeathed: of education and bringing up bequeathed: of gold,
silver, women's attire, ornaments, and such like bequeathed, and what is to be
understood by every of them: how Legacies may be taken away: Of things that
are doubtful in a Will, and how they are to be understood: Of those things
that are left for punishment sake in a will, whether they be auaylable, or
otherwise: Of those things which being bequeathed in a Will, are counted
notwithstanding as not bequeathed: Of those things that are taken away from the
Legatories in the will, as unworthy of them: Of conditions, demonstrations, and
causes; what force they have, and how they prouaile in a Will. Of the Law
Folcidia, what it is, and how men thereby are restrained, for bequeathing any
more, then the three parts of their goods, so that a fourth part thereof should
still remainewith the heir; and if any man had received in Legacy more then
he might by the law Folcidia, that he should put in band to restore that, if
any unknown debt after should appear, so the same were true debt: at what day
a Legacy becomes due; that is straight from the death of the Testator, unless
it be left to be paid upon a certain or uncertain day, or under a condition;
and that the heir enter into band to pay the legacy when the day comes, or
the condition happen, and if he refuse to do it, then the legatorie to be put
in possession thereof until the day or condition happen.

The sixth part spreading it self over seven Books, handles matters of
possession of goods, or administration thereof, not growing out of the Civil
Law, which only makes heirs, and gives right of succession, but out of the
Pretorian Law, or Law of conscience, which in equity calls sundry to the
succession of other men's goods by administration, where there is no Will, and
in some cases where there is a Will, as where the will is concealed, or the
Erecutor renounceth the will, but if the will once appear, then the
administration forthwith cease. In cases where Administrations are to be
granted, the children of the deceased have liberty to take it, within a year
after the death of the deceased, and if they be further off of kind, then they
have only a hundred days to take it in, unless those which are to take it
are Infants, mad, deaf, dumb, or blind, in which cases there is a longer time
assigned. The Praetor granted administration not only according to the tables
of the Testament; but many times even against the tables of the Testament: as
where a child is not disinherited in his Fathers will by plain terms, but
passed over with silence only, as not remembered; or that the child was not
borne at the time of his death, and so not known whether any such child wear
living, or to be hoped for or not: In which case if it do after appear, the
Mother is put in possession of that which is the childs part. If there appear
no Will, the Administration is committed in this order, First, the children of
the deceased are admitted: Secondly, those that are next of kind in the Male
line: Thirdly, those that are next of kind in the Female line, (which
difference notwithstanding between Male and Female) at this day is taken away,
and they that are next of kind are equally admitted of their sex; Lastly comes
those which have right thereto, either in that they are man or wife. The Law
sundry times, where a thing is done, or intended to be done, against an other
man's right, and there is no provision for it in Law, yields the party
grieved an Interdict or Iniunction to hinder that which was intended to his
prejudice, As where one buyldeth an house contrary to the usual and received
form of buylding, to the injury of his neighbor, there lies an Iniunction
de noui operis nunciatione, which being once served, the offender is either to
desist from his work, or to put in suerties, he shall pull it down again, if
he do not within a very short time auow the lawfulnes thereof. Again, there
lies an Iniunction where hurt is not yet done, but feared to be done; as where
a house is ruinous, or the eues, or any outcast work thereof hangs
dangerously over the way, so that it is doubted it will fall and hurt some that
pass by, the owner or Lord thereof is to put in suertie to the Magistrate,
that if any be hurt, or miscarrie thereby he shall answer for it. If any cause
the water of the river, or rain water to run an other course than before time
it was wont to do, and that the neighbors are like to be prejudiced thereby,
the Law yields an Iniunction, either to stay the work that is intended, or
to secure the neighbors for the hurt that is like to follow thereupon. If
Customers, Collectors, or Tolle-gatherers exact more subsidy, or other like
public dueries then by Law they ought, or distraine any man's goods, upon
pretense thereof, or stay in their hand such duties as they have received,
whereby the party that has paid it falls into any forfeyture, or that they
repair not the public high ways, in which respect subsidies, tributes, and
other such like duties are given to Princes, they are to be punished in the
double value of that which they have received, and otherwise to be fined for
their ill dealing in that behalf. In gifts which are purely given, or under a
day, or condition, and specially in those that are given in contemplation of
death, which are compared to Legacies themselves, a right passes without
deliverance, and gives sufficient matter of challenge unto him to whom they
are given. The means or ways whereby the Lordship or right of any thing is
gotten, be it natural, as by the first occupying the same, by finding the
same, by bringing it into a form or fashion, by gayning by the sea or river,
by delivery, or such like: or be it by civil means, as by getting the
possession of any thing by good title, and good faith, so long as it will make
a just usurpation, or prescription, by holding it as heir, by holding it by a
gift, by taking it up as a thing forsaken, by holding it by legacy, dowry, or
inheritance, by coming to it by sentence definitive, or interlocutory, by
confession of the adversary, by cession of the party, by authority of the
Judge, and the same have been fraudulently alienated by the debtors, there
lies an Iniunction to put the party injured into possession. All Injunctions
for the most part are prohibitorie, and serve either to get, or to keep, or to
recover possession, and are called commonly by the first name of the writ, as
where one is denied the possession of inheritance belonging to him, an
Iniunction is granted him to put him in possession, called Quorum bonorum, or
if it be for a legacy, Quod legatorum, and if it be in general cases, Ne vis
fiat ei qui in possessionem missus est: That he that has gotten the custody
of the Will exhibit it: That no private buylding, or such like, be set up in a
holy and sanctified place, and if it be that it be pulled down again: That no
Nuisance be done in public places, or high ways, other then such as by the Law
are allowable: That public high ways be repaired: That nothing be done in any
River, or the banckes thereof, whereby Ships or Barks may not pass thereon:
That nothing be done in any common stream, whereby the water should be forced
to run otherwise this year, then it did the last Summer before: That it may be
lawful for every man to sail or row in any public stream: That the banks
of the river be repaired. Of force, and force armed, where two are in
possession of one thing, and neither of them came by the same by force, or by
secret slight, or by sufferance of an other, there lies an Iniunction for
continuance of either of their possession, called vti possidetis: That a man
may use such private way, as he has used the year past, and repair the same
without interruption of an other: That no man turn away the daily running
water, or the water which falls in Summer from an other man's house, or ground to
his hinderance: That water courses in ryuers, and other like places be
maintained: That such as have right to draw water out of any spring, or well,
be not forbid the use thereof, and that every one have free liberty to
cleanse, purge, and to repair the same, if there be any decay in it: That no
man be forbid to scour, purge, or cleanse his priuies, sincks, or vaults: That
whatsoever is done by open force, or secret subtilty, be restored into place it
was, before such force or subtilty was done, unless the party grieved release
the same: That he that holds any thing at an other man's will, restore the same
upon competent warning, or knowledge given him thereof: That a man may lop or
cut the boughs of an other man's tree annoying his ground, if after warning
given thereof, the owner thereof do not reform it. That it be lawful for a man
to gather such fruits of his, as fall from his own tree into an other man's
ground, without any trespass to the owner of the ground, so that he gather the
same within three days after they are so fallen; for otherwise the law presumes
he makes no reckoning of them, and fruits lying upon the ground do easily
putrify: That a man may challenge his children out of an other man's hand that
holds them from him: That a Tenant after his Lease is expyred may remove and
quietly carry away such things from the farm, as he brought thither, so that
the rent be paid, and those things which he brought thither were not bound for
the payment thereof. Actions are taken away, and possessions maintained by
exceptions, prescriptions, and preiudices, which themselves are many times in
steed of actions, as is the exception de re indicata, which is an exception
that determines the cause in controversy. Of Exceptions, some are perpetual
and peremptory, some are temporal and dilatory; Perpetual and peremptory are
they which evermore have place and can nerer be avoided; Temporal and dilatory
are they which are not evermore in place, but may be avoided: Exceptions are
alleged either because that is done which ought to be done, or that is done
that ought not to be done, or that is not done that ought to be done. Of
prescriptions likewise some are perpetual, some temporal; the effect of
either of them is to determine the actioney there in the manner of doing, or by
the time when it was done, or by the place where it was done, or by some other
like circumstance.

An Obligation is a bond of the Law, whereby a man is necessarily bound to pay
some thing to an other man: Obligations arise either out of bargains between
man and man, or out of some offense that is done: Obligations by bargains are
procured either by some thing that passes between the parties, that do
contract, or else is effected by words, or consent. Out of obligations spring
actions, which are nothing else but a right to prosecute that in judgment
which a man pretends to be due unto him, whereof there are two sorts; of
which one is a challenge for right of a thing due, the other a suit against a
person for some offense or trespass done.

The seventh and last part being divided into six Books, treats of
Obligations which stand in words, and their effect; how far two or more
principal debtors are bound to the creditor, in the whole, or every one for
his own part: Of Suerties, and how far they are bound, and whether the
discharge of the one be the release of the other: and by how many ways
Obligations by words are dissolved or released, by renouation, by payment, by
acceptance of the debt not paid, as if it were paid. Of Obligations some are
civil, as those which have been heretofore handled, some Pretorian or
pertaining to the Chauncery, as those whereby Tutors, Curators, and Proctors,
enter inte land unto a child, his state shall be safe, that is committed to
their hands: That, that shall be paid which the Judge cease: That the
Plaintiff shall ratify and allow that which his Proctor shall do for him, in
judgment, and such like. Criminal Judgments are private or public, that is,
they are commenced either upon private offenses, or upon public faults and
suits. Private offenses concern private men's revenge and injuries. Public, the
revenge or injury of the whole state. Private offenses which had ordinary
proceedings, and ordinatie punishment, were many, among which Theft is the
chiefest, which is a deceitful fingering of an other man's goods, with intent
to gain either the thing it self, or the use or possession thereof, so that
the mind alone makes not theft, but the act joined to the mind, be the
quantity never so small. Of Theftes, some are manifest, other not manifest;
manifest is that wherein the offender is either taken in the deed doing, or
taken before he could carry away the thing stolen thither whether he intended:
the punishment whereof was four double the value of that, which was stolen:
Not manifest was that wherein the party offending was not taken in the deed
doing, and the pain thereof was the double of that which was purloyned, or
taken away. If any pilfery or theft be done in a Ship, Tavern, or Inn, the
Master of the ship, tavern, or Inn, is to answer double the value thereof,
if the same be done by himself, or their selves, or any of their mariners or
servants: for it behooves them to have honest men, whom they are to employ in
such services: But if it be done by any of the passengers, or guests of the
house, the owners of the ship, tavern, or Inn, are not to answer for the
same, for they cannot turn away such guests as come into their house, neither
in all likelihood know they the quality or condition of their guests. If any
man privily, unwitting the owner thereof, cut down, hacke, or bark any tree
of any sort whatsoever, or those that are of the nature of trees, as Iuey
reeds, willows, so that they be spoiled, he is to answer the double value of
that he has cut down and spoiled: and further, if it be a Vine tree, to be
punished as a robber. He that takes any thing away from another by violence,
is to be punished in the worth four fold, for that it is a sin more grievous
then theft: If any man, upon any ill intent, make a Tumult, whereby any hurt
comes to any man, he shall answer double of that the party is harmed in: If
any, upon a burning of a house, or the fall thereof, or upon a shipwreck, or
the spoiling of a boat or ship, steal any thing away, or being put in trust to
keep any thing thereof, conceal the same, he shall pay the four double of
the same; but if any man set the same a fire himself, he is either to be cast
out to wild beasts, or is to be burnt with the same fire he went about to burn
another with. If any have spitefully contumeltously injured another man his
wife, or children, in deed, word, or writing, they are to forfait so much as
the party grieved shall esteem himself injured by, or the Judge shall tax it
at. A famous Libell is where a man has of malicious purpose writ, compounded,
or set out any thing to the infamy of another, without a name, or with a name,
and the punishment thereof is death, and anciently was, that he lost the power
or liberty to make a Will; the like punishment follows him that having found
an infamous Libell, does not by and by spoil the same, that the knowledge
thereof come not abroad, especially where the matter thereof is capital or
worthy death. Extraordinary crimes, are those which have no ordinary
punishment appointed them, but are arbitrarie at the Judges appointment, such
as are Sollicitors of other folks wedlockes, and Maids chastities, although
they miss of their purpose; such as of purpose cast mire, dirt, or any like
filth upon another, to the intent to disgrace him: such, as being with child,
of purpose cause themselves to miscarie: Such as keep brothell and baudy
houses, or other unlawful company: Iuglers, and such as carry about Snakes, and
other like Serpents and trumperie to put men in fear: Such as hide and
suppress Corn, to cause the price to be dearer: Such as either make, or use
false waights wittingly; for all which, because there is no proper punishment
provided in the Law, they are referred to the punishment of the Judge, who is
to punish them according to the quality of the fact, age, and understanding of
the offender, and other circumstances according as he shall think good; so,
notwithstanding that he exceed not a convenient measure therein, neither
stretch the same to death: but upon some great and weighty cause, he is to be
content with meaner punishment, as temporal banishment, whipping, or some
moderat pecuniarie mulct. For violating or defacing another man's sepulcher,
Infamy was imposed, besides a pecuniarie mulct to be divided between the
Prince and the party grieved, but if any dig up the corse of the deceased, the
punishment is death: If any, by fear of his office or authority, wring any
money from any man, or exact more fees in any matter than he ought to do, or
cause him to marry or do any other thing he would not do, the forfeiture is
four double the value of that which has been taken, beside further
punishment at the discretion of the Judge. Such as drive men's cattle out of
their ground, or sever them from the flock or heard, with intent to steal
them, if they do it with a weapon like unto a Robber, are condemned to be
thrown to wild beasts, otherwise are more lightly punished according to the
discretion of the Judge. Such as in Judgment take money on both sides, or
taking upon them, the defense of one side betray the cause and take money on
the other side, are infamous by law, and are punished at the discretion of the
Judge. Such as receive thieves and other like malefactors are punished, in like
sort as the thieves or malefactors themselves are; specially if they have
assisted them in their wickedness: otherwise, if they only knew it and
received them, they are more mildly to be punished, specially if the offenders
were their kinsmen: for their offense is not like theirs which entertain those
which are no kin unto them at all, when as it is natural for every one to
regard his own blood: and fathers are many times more careful for their
children then for themselves; but if that he that received them knew nothing
of the offense, then is he altogether to be excused. Such as break prison are
to be punished by death, because it is a certain treason to break the
Princes ward, but if they escape by the negligence of the Keepers, against whom
the presumption lies ever in this case, they are more lightly to be punished.
If any commit Burglarie, breaking up a door or wall, with intent to do a
Robbery, if they be base companions they are to be condemned to the Mines or
Galleys; but if they be of better reckoning, they are to be put from the rank
or order wherein they are, or to be banished for a season. Iuglers and like
Impostors which go about deceiving of the people with false tricks and toies,
hooks and such like, which insinuat themselves into other men's houses, with
purpose to steal, are punished at the discretion of the Judge. If any steal
or take away any thing out of the inheritance of another man, before either the
Will be proved, or adminstration be taken; an action of theft lies not,
because the inheritance, during the time, was counted no bodies, but he is to
be punished by the discretion of the Judge; yea, though it were the heir
himself that did it. Cosenage, whereby a man craftily suppresseth something he
should not, or puts one thing in another place, to the deceit of him that
he deals withal, or corrupts such wares which he utters, or does any
other thing collusorily, which is called of the Law Crimen Stellionatus, of a
little vermin or creature called Stellio, much like to a Lisard, most envious
to man, is censured by some ignominious and shamfull punishment, or by
disgracing the person, by putting him out of the Office, Place, or Order he is
in, or by inioyning him some servile work, or by banishing him for a time, or
by some like punishment, at the discretion of the Judge. If any plough up a
Mere balke, or remove any other mark which has accustomed to be a Mark or
bound between ground and grounds, which aunciently was counted reverend and
religious among men the offense is punished either by a pecuniarie mulct, or by
banishment, or whipping, at the discretion of the Judge. Unlawful Colleges,
Corporations, and assemblies, gathered together to bad uses, as to eating,
drinking, wantonness, heresy, conspiracy, as punished are public Routs or
Riots, otherwise at the discretion of the Judge: All these, before recited, are
called Populer Actions, because, not only he that is injured, but every other
honest subject may peruse and prosecute the same.

Public Judgments, are such which immediately pertain to the punishment of the
common wealth for example sake, and are examined, tried, and punished by a
public order appointed by Law, the party grieved, making himself party to
the suite, and following the same; the party accused in the mean while
remaining in prison, or putting in suerties for his appearance, and the party
grieved for the prosecuting of the same. The chiefest of which sort is Treason,
which is a diminishing or derogation of the Majesty of the people, or Prince,
on whom the people have collated all their power, which is punished with death,
and confiscation of the Lands and goods of the offender, and the eternal
abolishment of his memory. The next is Adultery, which is violating of another
man's bed, whose punishment aunciently was death, both in the man and in the
woman, but after it was mitigated in the woman, she being first whipped, and then
shut up in a Monastery: but by the Canons, other pains are inflicted. Under
Adultery are contained, Incest, Sodomy, Baudery, and all the rest of the sins
of that kind. Public force, is that which is done by a company of armed men,
collected together, and the correction thereof is perpetual banishment.
Private, which is done without Arms, the pain thereof is the loss of half the
parties goods, and the infamy of his name. Murderers and Poysoners, Witches
and Sorcerers, the crime being proved, dye the death: such as set men's houses a
fire, are to be consumed with fire themselves: such as Kill either Father or
Mother, or those that are in the place of Father or Mother, or any that are of
next a kin, their punishment is death; and in case of the Father and Mother,
beside the pain of death, the Parricide being first well whipped, so that the
blood do follow in good plenty, being sowed up into a sack, together with a
Dong, a Cock, and an Ape, he is thrown into the depth of the Sea. Such as
make false Certificats, forge false Wills, Depose false wittingly, suborne
witnesses, take money either to say, or not to say their knowledge of that
which they are demanded of in Judgment, corrupt Judgment, or cause it to be
corrupted, interline, put in, or raze out any thing out of any writing, that
the truth thereof may not appear as it was written, suppress Wills or
Testaments, or other like writings, counterfeit other men's hands and Seals,
opens any man's Will yet living, and imparteth the secrets thereof to the
parties adversary, vnsealeth such instruments or writings as are left with him
to keep, bequeath unto themselves Legacies in an other man's Will without his
good will and priuitie, wash or clip gold or sowder therein any corrupt
metals, make base silver money, pretend themselves to be Noble men or
Gentlemen, whereas otherwise they are but base persons, wilfully challenge unto
themselves another man's name, or Arms, cog and foist in women's labors or
otherwise, false births or Adulterous children, in stead of true and rightful
heirs, sell one and the same thing to two men, carry about false Pasports,
use false Measures, or corrupt those that are true, in some cases, are punished
by death, in other by banishment, imprisonment, or cutting of both or one of
the hands of the offender. If any bearing any public office, abuse the same to
gain, and does that for money which he ought to do for thanks; the Law
orders that the offender shall be called to account for his supposed
briberie, and if he be found guilty thereof, fineth him four fold double to
the party grieved, and beside, decrees him to be banished. Such as by il
devises and policies, raise up the price of corn, and other victual, or get
the whole sale of any merchandise into their hands, that they may sell it the
dearer, are punishable at the discretion of the Judge, which according to the
quality of the person and fact reaches sometimes to banishment, sometimes to
death it self. If any take, purloine, or interuert to his own use any money
dedicated to holy and public uses, or cause the same to be taken, purloyned
or interuerted, or if any take away any brazen table, wherein any public
Laws are graven, or the bounds of any Lands are described, or blot out or
change any thing thereof, or couenously pay in less money into the Exchequer,
then by right he ought to have done, and has not cleared with the Exchequer
for the residue, is to be condemned in the three double of that which is the
residue, and is beside to be banished.

If any, to get an Office, procure a number of hired voices, besides the loss
of the Office he sueth for, his punishment is temporal banishment. If any
steal away any child, the body of any freeman, and sell the same away, or
detain them against their will, the fault is death. If any slanderously charge
another with any false crime, or wittingly bear any false witness against
him, or willingly give any wrong Sentence against him, or on the contrary
side, dissembleth such faults as he knows, and colludeth with the
adversary, or gives over the prosecution of a crime, he has undertaken to
follow, until he have leave granted him by the Judge, to desist from his
accusation, the same is to be punished with the like kind of punishment that
he would have the other punished by, unless he be acquitted therefro by the
Princes Pardon, or that the Aduersaris be dead. In public Judgments where
the Offender appears not, Process is to be awarded out against against him for
his appearance, by a certain day to clear himself, at which day, if he
appear not, an Inuentory is taken of his goods, not to the intent they should
be spent but that they should be reserved to his use, if he return again
within a year, and clear himself; otherwise they become the Exchequers for
ever, how innocent soever the party afterward appears to be. If the
Offender be present in Judgment, and deny the fact, he is to be confuted by
witnesses, or other proof, or if there be just matter of suspicion, to be put
on the rack; which, albeit in matters of less danger, it is great cruelty,
yet in great and horrible crimes it is necessary: If the Offender have either
confessed the crime, or be convicted thereof, then it follows that the party
convicted, be punished either by death or otherwise, according to the qualitis
of the person, or condition of the offense. Punishments by death are four,
Hanging, Burning, Heading, and Casting the Offender to be devoured by wild
beasts, amongst which may be reckoned, Exile or Banishment, for that it takes
away a man's liberty, and bereaues him of his country, which to every good
subject, is as dear unto him as his life it self.

Punishments which did not inflict death, were many, and such as it pleased the
Magistrate in his discretion to appoint. The Law having passed upon the Offender
in such sort, as he has lost his life, liberty, or country, his goods became
forthwith forfaited to the Prince, such (I mean) as are of value: but for the
other, the Law allows them the prisoner, for his maintenance during the time
of his imprisonment, and satisfying such sees as are due to the Officers
thereof; which has place where the offender has no children, otherwise the
one half of his goods comes to his children, unless it be in case of
Treason where all is confiscated. They are also held for convict and guilty,
which either upon a guiltiness of mind make away themselves before Judgment,
or stop their Adversaries with a bribe, that they shall not follow the Law
against them, and their goods are no less confiscat then the others. But it is
otherwise in those which are banished for a time, or to a certain place, or in
such as the Law having once passed upon them, are either in their life or after
their death, by the bounty and mercy of the Prince restored; in which case
they recover Goods, Name, and Honor: the body being executed the carcass for
the most part is granted to burial, unless it be for matter of Treason or
other such like offense. If any have bin unjustly condemned, either by the
iniquity or unskillfulness of the Judge, the law allows him an appeal, that
is a provocation to a higher Judge, that he may hear the cause anew, and
reform that which is Judged amiss into better: and if the higher Judge find
the party grieved, has well appealed, he is to reuerse the former sentence,
otherwise to send the Offender back to the Judge from whence he came, there to
receive his punishment: yet some persons there be from whom no appeal lies,
as from the Prince, or Senate, because they represent the Prince; neither may
he appeal which has renounced his appeal. Appeals are made from lower
Judges to higher, and from him that is Delegated to him that did Delegate:
Appeals are to be made within ten days after Sentence given, or within ten
days after the Notice is come to the party, against whom the Sentence did
pass, unless there attend thereon a continual grief, in which case, a man
may appeal so long as the grief indures: the time to ask Dunissorie Letters,
is thirty days from the Sentence given; the time to present the same to the
Judge, is at the discretion of the Judge from whom; the time of prosecuting the
same is a year, or upon just cause two years, in which time, if the suit be
not ended, the cause is deserted, and to be sent back unto the Judge from whom
the Appeal was first made: while the Appeal hangs, nothing is to be
innouated, because by the Appeal the Judges hands are, as it were, bound: but
if the former Sentence were void by law, as in sundry cases they are, then
there needs no Appeal; for such Sentences never pass into a case Judged.
Appeals in criminal cases cannot be justified by a Proctor; but it is
otherwise in Civil causes. An Appeal in one cause does not exempt the party
appellant from his own Judge in other causes: If the appellant die, during the
time of the Appeal, and leave no heir behind him, the Appeal cease, but if
he leave an heir behind him, and the matter of the Appeal concerns none but
himself, he is not to be compelled to follow it, for every one may renounce
his own suite: but if it concern the Exchequer, or any other body, then may
he be compelled to follow it. The Exchequer is the Princes Treasury, and the
patrimony of the common wealth, and has many and singular prerogatives, which
private men have not. Such as are taken captive by the enemy, become their
servants, who have taken them, unless either they escape home again
themselves, or be ransomed by their friends, in both which cases they recover
all right and privileges they had in their own common wealth before. By the
Law all Subjects whatsoever are bound to serve the common wealth in war,
insomuch that if any being pressed withdraw himself, or his child from it, he is
to be counted as a rebel, and for his punishment is to be banished, and
mulcted or fined in the greatest part of his goods. As the privileges and
rewards of Soldiers were many to incorage them to virtue and manhood; so their
shames and punishments were great, to fear them from cowardice and vice: But
among the rest of the privileges of Soldiers, the old Soldiers were the
greatest. Of Subjects, some dwelt in Shires, and lived after their own Laws,
and yet nevertheless were made partakers of the honors of the City: some
other were inhabitants only in the common wealth, and had only a house in the
same place to dwell in, and had no right to bear office: some other were
strangers brought in, which were ruled by the Law of them among whom they
dwelt. Amongst those that dwelt in Shires, the chiefest Magistrate was he whom
they called Decurio, who was not sent by the people of Rome thither (for he was
a Magistrate of Magistrates) but elected by the people there; and his office
was, to keep the treasury of the Country, to provide victual, exact
tribute, and govern the state there, in manner as our Shirifes do here: His
office was only annual, least by liberty, and lust of government and
continuance thereof it might grow into a tyranny. Such as are Subjects, are to
serve the common wealth in such offices, places, and services, as their
ability is fit for, and the necessity of the common wealth requires. The
services of the Common wealth were of three sorts; Patrimoniall, such as belong
to every man's patrimony to perform, which stood chiefly upon payments and
charges, which were to go out of every man's inheritance toward the performance
of such burden as lay upon him by law, custom, or command of him that had
power thereto: Personal, which were to be performed by the care and industry
of the party and his corporal labor, without expense of his purse. Mixed,
which required both care of the mind, and labor of the body, and expense of
the purse, and are imposed as well in consideration of the thing, as the person,
which every subject is to undergo, unless by the Law, or by the indulgence of
the Prince they are excused; as some are excused by reason of old age, some by
young age, some for their dignity, some for their calling, some for their state
of body, some for that they serve in the necessary services of the Common
wealth at home, or abroad, as Imbassadors do, some for that they are necessary
places of services for Gods Religion, as cathedral Churches, and other
Churches are, some for that they are good and necessary places for Seminaries
for the Common wealth, for learning and such other employments, as Colleges,
Societies, and Schools of learnings and nurture are. Legates and Imbassadors
had immunitie from all public services, not only the time of their embassage,
but also two year after their return; They were called Legates, in that they
were chosen as fit men, out of many; their person was sacred both at home and
abroad, so that no man might lay violent hands on them without breach of the
Law of Nations. Such as are Magistrates of cities ought so to govern, that no
negligence may be justly imputed unto them, otherwise they are to answer it,
and that when their office is expyred, they give up a just account, both of
what they have received, and what they have laid out, and pay in the residue,
if there be any. Governors of Cities, together with the consent of the
Burgesses thereof, may set down such orders and decrees, as are for the benefit
and well ordering thereof, which are to be observed of all those which are
Inhabitants thereof, and being once well and duly set down, are not to be
reuersed, but to the good of the City or Comminalty. New public works, such
as are good for the Common weal every one may make without the leave of the
Prince, unless it be done for emulation, or cause of discord; but for old
works, in which stands the security of the Common wealth, as Castles, towers,
gates, and walls of Cities, nothing is to be done or innouated in them without
the Princes warrant, neither is it lawful for any man to grave his name in any
public work, unless it be his at whose cost the work is done. Faires are
authorized by Princes only and are invented for trade of merchandise, and
uttering of wares, which Countrymen have cause to buy, or sell: and have their
privileges, that no man in any Fair can be arrested for any private debt; they
are called Nundinae thereupon, that every ninth day they were holden, either in
one place or other: He that for x. years space intermitteth to use his Fair,
loses the privilege thereof. If any make any promise to a City or Common
wealth to do any thing upon certain cause, as that he might be made Consul, or
that he would repair some part of the City that was burnt, he shall by the
Law be compelled to perform his promise: for it is not meet that such promises
should be satisfied with repentance. Such as profess liberal Sciences in any
Common wealth, whereby youth is instructed, and brought up to knowledge, or be
Scholmasters, or professors of Physic, or be Midwiues, Notaries, Auditors, or
Casters of accounts, or Registers, the Law allows not only a competent
stipend in recompense of their skill and pains, but also affordes them means
how the same may be recovered, if it be denied. But as for Philosophers and
Lawyers, the Law has appointed them no stipend, not because they are not
reverend Sciences, and worthy of reward or stipend, but because either of them
are most honorable professions, whose worthiness is not to be valued or
dishonored by money: yet in these cases many things are honestly taken, which
are not honestly asked; and the Judge may according to the quality of the
cause, and the skill of the Advocate, the custom of the Court, and the worth
of the matter that is in hand, appoint them a fee answerable to their place, as
also to such as are Interpreters between parties in matters of traffic, when
one understands not an others language.

The second Tome of the Law is the Code, and stands in xij. Books, whereof
eight for the Titles follow in a manner the order of the Digest, a few titles
only excepted, which are added, besides those of the Digest, but as for the 4.
other, which are the first, the tenth, the 11. and the 12. although the subject
they treat of be named in the Digest, yet the things which are there named are
not handled in the Digest, and therefore will I pass over those 8. other, lest
happily I might seem to do one thing twice, and therefore will I refer the
Reader over to that which has bin said of them before in the handling of the
Digest; for they are almost twins of one mother, so that whosoever knows the
one, shall with no great difficulty discern the other, and come to the other
four, yet not mentioned there: But yet before I lay open the matter thereof, I
will in a word or two show why this volume of the Law is called the Code, who is
the author thereof, and out of whom it was collected, what moved the author
after so many learned titles set down before, of such things as are in the
Digest deduced, by such a number of worthy Lawiers (as the laws of the Digest
themselves do by their inscriptions show, for every law carries with him in
his forehead the name of his Author) to make a new flourish of the same, and
what the knowledge of the Code odth confer unto a Student or practiser of the
Law more than the knowledge of the Digest does.

The Code therefore is named of the word Caudex, that is the trunck or timber
of the tree from which the bark of the tree is pild or pulled off, of which men
aunciently used to make writing tables, artificially binding them up into the
form of a book, and using them for books, before the use of paper or
parchment was known, insomuch as many of these tables being bound together,
they were called a Code, or book: besides whereas the ancient Lawyers before
Iustinianus time, used to write their pleas and answers in scroules of paper
or parchment, Justinian himself first put them in a book, and therefore
termed them by the name of a Code.

The Code it self is compiled of the answers of 56. Emperors, and their wise
Council, whereof sundry were learned and skillful Lawyers, as the story of
that time does show, and the Laws themselves do name some of them, as that
most excellent and famous man Papinian, and some others; that is from the days
of Adrian the Emperor, unto the age of Justinian himself.

The cause that moved Justinian hereto was, that in the Digest he found not
every case decided that falls out in common use of life (for how is it possible
when as every moment there falls out new matter, for which former Laws made no
provision?) and therefore thought good to supply that by new Laws, which he
found defective in the old: so that the multiplication of those titles grew
not, that the Emperor had any meaning to fill the world with multitude of
Laws, for he had found the inconvenience thereof already, and therefore had
repealed and abolished so many thousand of old Laws, as he had; but it came
rather of that, that the multitude of causes were so many, that every day there
fell out some unexpected thing that was never heard of before: beside
notwithstanding the carfulness of the Emperor himself, and his great Lawyer
Treboman, and others, whom he used for the selecting and chosing out of the
purest, best, and most agreeing Laws among themselves, out of that indigested
heap of Laws, he then abolished; yet they were not so quick sighted, but in
that great work sundry antinomies or contrary Laws past them, which had need
to be expounded and amended, and the Authors to be recited. Further sundry of
ancient Laws were so subtlely written, that there was more wit then profit in
them, so that it was expedient the Emperor should explane the same, and putting
all subtlety a side, give a right sense unto the Law. Lastly whereas many
things were delivered by them briefly, and therefore obscurely, the Lawgiver
in his princely wisdom, set out the same in other Laws more plentiful and
distinctly, all which were the chiefest causes why the Emperor set out the
book of the Code.

The Code neither in style neither in method comes to the perfection of the
Digest, as that which for the style is a barbarous Thracian phrase Latinized,
such as never any mean Latinist spoke, whereas notwithstanding the style of
the Digest is very grave and pure, and such as does not much differ from the
eloquentest speech that ever the Romans used, and for the Method, it has no
particular disposition, other then such as is borrowed of the Digest it self,
and otherwise is rude and unskillful, where it does receede from the same: yet
does it not lack his good use, for to such as follow the practice of the law,
the knowledge of the Code is much more expedient then the knowledge of the
Digest is, for that the laws of the Code do determine matter in daily use of
life; which, when they are like in all ages (for the same is evermore upon the
stage, the persons a little altered) it cannot be but the learning thereof is
very profitable and expedient for the Common wealth, whereas notwithstanding
the learning of the Digest stands rather in discussing of subtle questions of
the Law, and enumerations of the variety of opinions of ancient Lawyers
thereupon, which have more commendation of wit, than benefit toward the common
wealth in them; but hereof hitherto.

The first Book of the Code treats of Religion, and the Rites and Ceremonies
thereto belonging, whereof I said there was no special Tractat in the Digest,
saving that it deuideth the public right into that which concerns the Church,
and Church men, and the Magistrates of the Common wealth, prosecuting the
latter branch thereof only, and omitting the first, because out of that
heathenish Religion which was used in those ancient Lawyers days, and those
supersticious Rites, whereof their Books were full, nothing could be taken
that might serve for our Religion: whereupon he instituted a new discourse
thereof in the Code, beginning first with the blessed Trinity, one in essence,
and three in person, wherein he sets down a brief sum of our Christian
faith, agreeable to the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles, and the four
first general Counsels, the Nicene, Constantinopolitan, Ephesine, and
Calcedon, forbidding any man publicly to dispute, or strive thereabout, taking
occasion upon the Nestorian Heresy, which not long before had sprung up, and
had mightily infected the Church, which Justinian by this confession of Faith
so published to the whole world, and penal Edict joined thereunto, hoped to
repress: After he has set down a full and sound confession of the Christian
faith, conformable to the Primitive Church, next he adds a title of the holy
Church it self, and of her privileges, which either concern Ecclesiastical
men's persons themselves, or their state, and substance, or the actions one
Ecclesiastical man had against an other, or with or against Lay persons: where
also he prosecuteth the degrees of Priests, or Ministers, their offices,
orders, and how the same are to be come by, (that is without bribes or Simonie,
or other worldly respect save the worth of the person only) and the rights of
holy places. Priests are so called, because they were consecrated, and as it
were severed from the rest of the people, and given up to God: which also were
called Elders, either because they were so in age, or ought to be in such
manners, and careful carriage of themselves. Amongst Priests, or Ministers,
Bishops have the first place, who are as it were the Overseers and
Superintendents of the rest, so called of their watchfulness, care, labor,
and faithfulness in teaching the people, and doing other duties, which they
owe unto the Church. The lowest degree of men among the Ecclesiastical
hierarchy were the Clerks, so called of their lot by which they were chosen
and allotted to Gods service. To Bishops Priests, and other of that rank, did
appertain the care of Hospitals, whereof some were for Orphans, some for
Infants, some for Impotent and diseased persons, some for Poor people, some
for Strangers, and other like miserable persons, and therefore together with
the title of Bishops and Clarks is joined the title of Hospitals, or
Almes-houses. In place next after the Bishops themselves, comes their power and
audience; for albeit the chiefest office of a Bishop is to instruct the people
in the doctrine of the word, and in good example of life: yet forasmuch as all
will not be obedient unto the word, neither brought by the persuasion thereof
to good nurture, and to be kept in order, and the eminency of the degree,
wherein the Bishops are placed, is not sufficient to keep the people in
obedience without some power and jurisdiction, and because the Church it self
is the mother and maintainer of Justice, therefore there is by the Emperor
himself, and his predecessors, as many as professed Christianity, certain
peculiar jurisdictions Ecclesiastical, assigned to the Bishops, more worthy
then the Civil, over persons and causes Ecclesiastical, such as touch the
Soul and Conscience, or do appertain to any charitable or godly uses: and
over the Laity so far forth as either the Laity themselves have bin content
to submit themselves unto their government, that is so far, as either it
concerns their Souls health, or the outward government of the Church in
things decent or comely, or that it concerns poor and miserable persons, such
as widows, orphans, captives, and such other like helpless people are, or
where the Civil Magistrates cannot be come by, or does voluntarily delay
judgment; in all which anciently a Bishop was to perform double faith and
sanctity, first of an vncorrupt Judge, and then of a holy Bishop. But in many
of these matters in these days, the Laity will not suffer themselves to be
controld, and therefore has taken away most of these dealings from them, yea,
even in charitable causes. Immediately follows a title of Heretics,
Maniches, Samaritans, Anabaptists, Apostataes, abusers of the Cross of Christ,
Jews, and worshippers of the host of heaven, Pagans, and of their Temples and
Sacrifices; whom the Bishop is not only to confute by learning, but also to
suppress by authority, for he has not the Spiritual sword in vain. The
Heretics, Jews, and Pagans shall not have Christian men and women to be
their servants: that such as fly to the Church for Sanctuary, or claim the
aid thereof, shall not be drawn from thence, unless the offense be heinous,
and done of a pretensed and purposed malice, in which case no Immunitie is to
be allowed them, but wicked people are to be punished according to their
desert, agreeable to the word of God it self, which would not have his Altar
be a refuge unto the wicked: And so far of that part of public right, which
appertains to the Priests, or Ministers, and their Function, which was
omitted in the Digest, but prosecuted in the Code. Now it follows, that with
like brevity I run over the three last Books of the Code, which themselves
were rather shadowed in the Digest, in the title of the right of the Exchequer,
then in any just proportion handled.

The first therefore of them sets out, what is the right of the Exchequer,
and in what things it stands, as in goods excheted, because there is no Heir
unto them, or that they are forfeyted by any offense worthy death, or
otherwise. How such as are in debt to the Exchequer, and their suerties are to
be sued. Of the right of those things which the Exchequer sels by outcry, where
he that offers most carries it away, and how the same may be revoked,
unless all rights and ceremonies be solemnly performed therein. How things
that are in Common between the Exchequer and private men, may be sold, and that
the Exchequer euict nothing that it has once sold, for that, it were a thing
against the dignity of the Exchequer, and would terrify private men for
bargaining with it. Of those that have borrowed money out of the public
receipts, and what penalty they incur, if they repay it not at their days
couenanted, sometimes the forfaiture of four double of that they have
borrowed, sometimes danger of life it self. That in cases of penalties, the
Exchequer be not preferred before such as the Offender was truly indebted
unto, but that they be first served, and then the Exchequer have only that
which is left. What usury the Exchequer may take, that is for money lent, and
not for such sums as grow out of Mulcts and Penalties. That such sentences that
are given against the Exchequer, may be retracted within three year following,
although ordinarily all other Sentences are irreuocable after ten days;
neither can be reformed after that time, either by rescript of the Prince, or
by pretense of new proof. Of the goods of such as exchet by reason they have
made no Will, and of the goods of Incorporations, that is, of such as dye
without Heirs, that they come not to the common bank of the city, but that
they exchet unto the Prince: Of Promotors, by whose information any goods are
confiscate, either by reason of the goods themselves, as that they are
adulterine, or that they are prohibited to be exported or imported, or upon
some other like cause, or by reason of the persons that have offended, and
crimes wherein they have offended; and their punishment, if they give in any
wrong information, or other then such as they are bound unto, by virtue of
their Office: and that they give no information in, but by advise of the
Attorney of the Exchequer, and that they make no information against their Lord
and Master, but in case of Treason: that it shall be lawful for no man to make
suite unto the Prince for those things that are confiscated unto the Exchequer,
as though it were more Honorable for the Prince to bestow such things on his
Courtiers, then to keep them to himself: and therefore, such as are the
Princes Secretaries, his Masters of Requests, and others that are of his
remembrance, are forbidden to make any Acts, Instruments, or other writings
hereof, unless the Prince of his own motion, and at no other man's suite, will
or command the same: Of such as put themselves into the Exchequer, upon any
confession made against themselves: Of such to whom the Prince jointly has
given any farm or like thing, that where one of them dies without an heir,
the other may succeed him: Of Treasure found, that the Exchequer be made
acquainted with it; and that if it be found in a public place, half goes
to the Exchequer, the other to the finder: but if it be in a private place,
then half to the Lord of the soil, and the other to the Finder: Of provision
for Corn and such other like: Of Tribute, which was an ordinary payment: Of
imposition and super-impositions, which were paiments laid upon the subject
above ordinary tax, for some present necessity, to which charges the
ordinary tax does not suffice; which was not to be done, but upon great and
urgent cause, by a council called together, and with the consent of the
subject: Of Collectors of the Subsidy, and in what manner they are to be
collected and brought into the Exchequer, and of the punishment of those that
in the collection thereof extort more than is due: that it shall be lawful to
distraine for Tribute unpaid: that such acquitances as the Exchequer shall
deliver unto the accomptants, shall be their full and final discharge: and
that the Subsidy Books shall every quarter be sent up into the Exchequer,
with the account of the Collectors, that thereby it may appear how much every
man has paid or owes unto the Exchequer: and that nothing may be done for
the grieuance of the poor, or the favor of the rich: Of the book of accounts
of yearly gifts that commonly Subjects present unto the Prince at New years
tide and otherwise, and that they be divided from the accounts of the
Exchequer: That no man be freed from the payment of Tribute: Of spending out
such ancient grain and other like provision as is laid up in the common
storehouse, and making provision for a new, and compelling the subjects, such
as have plenty of such grain, if it happen to be vinoed and mustie, to buy
the same, that the whole loss thereof may not lie upon the Exchequer: What
pension such Manors as the Prince has given or released from payment of
Subsidies shall give, and that no man be so hardy to beg such a matter of the
Prince lest the reuenews of the Exchequer be thereby diminished: Of Manors
that have been translated from the payment of one kind of provision to
another, or that have been in their taxation over rated: Of Brass that
Mineral Countries are to yield, or money in lieu thereof: Of Controllers,
whose Office it was to cast over again such accounts as were brought into the
Exchequer, or to examine them a new, least perhaps, there might be an error
in them.

And so far as concerning those things which do appertain to the account of
the Exchequer, or the patrimony thereof, or such pensions or payments as are
due unto the same. Now follows the other part of this tenth Book, which
contains the burdens, duties, or offices imposed on the subject by the
Exchequer, and what excuse the subject might allege in this behalf.

Burdens or duties, were either personal, as places of Honor, which were
not to be continued from the father to the child; or they be Patrimoniall which
are charged upon men's inheritance, either for the good of the common wealth, or
to enrich the Exchequer against dangers that are like to ensue: which are
undertook and performed either by those which are of necessity to obey that
which is enjoined them, or by those which offer themselves voluntarily thereto,
which seldom happens in patrimonial charges: but in matters of Honor and
Personal services, it many times comes to pass, that men excuse not
themselves from bearing of Offices, or doing of Personal services, although
they have an immunitie from them, either by the grant of the Prince, (which is
to be understood of extraordinary service only, and not of ordinary) or by
the benefit of the Law; for by the law men are many times upon just causes
excused from Personal services, so it be not from such services as no man can
excuse himself from; such as are Postings and carriages, when the Prince
passes by, or the Tenure of his Inheritance do so require it, and the
erecting and repairing of Bridges, Ways and Walls, the provision and carriage
of Corn, and other like kinds necessary for the maintenance of the Princes
house. Men are excused either generally from all kinds of services, or
particularly from some: as all Minors, specially such as are Students in any
famous University, whilst they give themselves there unto their book, are
excused fron all Personal services, but not from Patrimoniall services; as
also all old men of the age of seauentie years and upward, all professors of
Liberal Sciences, whereby the common wealth is benefited, all professors of
Physic, Grammar, Oratorie or Philosophy, so they be allowed by the
Magistrate and seven skillful men in the profession which they make show of,
and be not Supernumerarii, or above the number of those that are to be
allowed, in which number are, neither Poets or Auditors: they are also excused,
which upon just cause are dismissed, either out of the Army or out of the
Schools, either for lack of health, or that they are so wounded, that they can
neither serve in war any longer, nor longer endure study, which are so to be
understood that they yield excuse from Personal Services only and not from
Prediall.

Those things that yield excuse in part, from Personal services are these; the
Renting of the Princes custom, the baseness of the persons state, not fit to
bear any Office of credit, infamy, banishment, an amotion from a man's place
and degree, feminine sex, which are to undergo such Offices only, as are
agreeable to their sex. Imbassages imposed upon any by the Prince and his
Council, which has immunitie also of two years after their return, if the
Imbassage were into places becond the sea, or into any far country, not if it
were into any Country near at hand. Skill in any Manuel Art or Mysteries, to
the intent that they may have both time to learn their Arts, and so become the
Skilfuller in the same, and also have more alacrity to teach others in their
Mystery. That that care be had, that such are chosen to office, that they be
of the worthier sort for their virtue and place, and the richest for their
state: that no man be chosen to office for envy, and if any be, and the same
be proved, he that did choose him thereto is to be fined, and to pay the
expenses of the suite, unless he which is chosen die within short time after
the choice, then his successors are not bound thereto. Further, men are
excused, if being in one Office, they are chosen unto another, to the intent
they may the better execute and perform that office they have in hand: Such as
are remembrancers, which make Books of what is due to the Exchequer, and what
is brought in, Auditors, Receivers, Tellers, Granarers, Weighers, such as weigh
and try such gold as is brought and paid into the Exchequer; Collectors, that
is, such as gather up the gold that is due in the Provinces to the Exchequer,
and send the same over into the Exchequer, who are in no case to hold the same
longer in their hands than the Law allows them, much less to turn the same
to their own use, without great offense to the Prince and common wealth: the
like is for Crown gold, that is, of such gold that is put in Crowns, and
offered to the Prince upon any public gratulation, or any exploite that has
been happily achieved.

Justices of Peace, which are distributed by countries, for the more quiet and
peaceable government of the same, whose care was to seek out thieves and
malefactors, and to foresee that the Country people did make no mutiny, by
reason of the Taxes and Subsidies that were levied upon them: that for gold,
there might be paid silver, and again, silver for gold into the Exchequer, so
that the value thereof were made equal. Usurers, although they have no
possessions, yet they are no less bound to all patrimoniall or predial
charges, than if themselves had Lands and Hereditaments, although, for their
infamy, they are excluded from all personal charges that are of credit.

The Eleventh Book proceeds in the enumeration of other vocations, that are
exempted from personal services of the common wealth, besides those that have
bin named in the tenth Book: as masters of ships and Mariners, which served to
bring in any Merchandise or provision for the Princes household, out of foreign
Countries into the Princes storehouse; yea, although they were private men's
ships, which were employed to that service, so that if a private man's ship were
laden with any public provision, there could not any other private burden be
imposed upon him: for that, if the ship perish by shipwreck by reason of the
private burden that is put therein above the public charge, then he is to
answer the loss thereof unto the Exchequer, otherwise than in the case of
private men, who are themselves to bear the loss of those things which are
exported or imported; neither can they make gain of private men's shipwreck or
of those things which are cast out into the sea, to ease the lading of the
ship, but are bound to restore it to the owner, under pain of confiscation of
their goods by the Temporal Law, and excommunication of their persons by the
Ecclesiastical Magistrate. Add to this, Miners or Metallers, and the
governors of the same; gatherers of Muskels and other like shell fish, with
whose blood either Purple is made, or out of which Pearls are taken: which
color Princes only might use, as also velvet and cloth of gold, neither was
it lawful for any man (under the degree of the Prince) to wear the same,
saving only women in some sort, for that such ornaments are fitter for women
than men. Join to these Monetaries, which served to coin money, Wainemen or
Carmen, which with their own cattle carried or conveyed things which belonged
to the Princes Treasury. The like privilege had they which made Armor for
the Princes Armorie, as Spears, Breast plates, Darts, and such like; or made
Bridles, Girdles studded with pearl or precious stone unto the Court, for the
Kings household, who only were allowed to wear the same. Such as had the care
and government of any Corporations, as the Princes Bakers, Vintners,
Papersellers, Money Changers, professors of Liberal Sciences, specially in
Rome, and Constantinople, which after the seat of the Empire was translated
thither, had all the privileges of old Rome, saving the Ecclesiastical
primacie, for which notwithstanding there was long dissension between the two
cities.

Next after Rome and Constantinople, Beritus the chief City of Syria, had
great privileges, for the famous University which was in the same, and such
Provinces or Countries as served the same, or any of them with yearly
provision of Corn, Oil, Beef, Mutton, Porke, and such other like victual:
which provision was to be distributed among the poor and impotent of the
Cities, and not to be given to stout and valiant beggars, which are able to
get their living with their own hands, and therefore were to be compelled to
work. The Aldermen or Governors of Cities, for that they are employed in
matters of greater services: yet none of them were to be called to any office
before he had bin even with the common wealth, if happily any of them were in
debt to it; neither were they or any of them excused more than from personal
services, but in predial duties, they paid every one according to his rate.
But as for Enterlud-plaiers and houses of baudery, they had no exemption at
all, but paid double charges to the rest. Of Husbandmen, some are servants, as
Copiholders, others are free, as Freeholders, which notwithstanding themselves
are, as it were, bound unto the soil, and are rated in the Subsidy according
to their Acres, and if they have no Land, then according to the head or number
of their household; which notwithstanding, at this day is taken away, and these,
as well pay rent to the owners of the ground (wherein notwithstanding, the
Landlord cannot exact of them, or charge them above that which has bin
couenanted between them) as Tribute, and Headsiluer to the common wealth: for
the declining of which, and avoiding of necessary services of the common
wealth, as no man can put himself under the patronage of any Noble man, so
also they cannot be called from this service of the common wealth, to any
other. Country men, such as were addicted to the ground they tilled, although
the ground were their own, yet could they not sell it to any man, but to him
that was of the mother village wherein himself was. A Mother village, was that
whence all the villages round about were derived. Although all such husbandmen
as dwell in any village, are to pay Subsidy for such goods as they possess,
or such Lands as they hold; yet one neighbor is not to be disquieted or
arrested for another man's due: for that it is a thing unlawful to trouble one
for another, or not to cesse men indifferently, according to the value of their
Lands, and the worth of their goods. And therefore the Romans in rating of
matters of taxes, had first Cessers which rated men according to that which
they thought their state to be: then had they Leuellers or Surueyors, which
consired the rate set down, mended it, and made it even, easing such persons
or grounds as were ouer-rated, and charging more deeply such others as were
ouerlightly taxed, procuring such grounds as were wast and barren, should be
brought to tyllage, and that the barren should be joined with the fruitful,
that by such means the Prince might receive subsidy out of both: March grounds
and such as lie in the bounds of any kingdom, serve for the maintenance of
such garrisons as are there placed for the defense of the Marches, and such as
hold the said lands, are to pay an yearly provision or pension for the same;
as also the Princes pastures, woods, and forests, which are let out upon a
certain yearly rent, either for a certain time, or in fee farm for ever,
which in respect they pay an ordinary payment to the Prince, either in money,
or in provision, are discharged from all other ordinary and extraordinary
burdens. Public things are those which appertain to the Exchequer, or to the
Church, which may in like sort be rented out for a season, or for ever, as the
possession of the Exchequer may, so it be done to the certain benefit of the
Church, and under such solemnities, as in this case are required, otherwise it
cannot be let out but for 30. years, or for three lives. Fee farm is when
lands and tenements, or other hereditaments, are let out for ever under a
certain yearly rent, in reknowledgement of the sovereignty thereof,
belonging still to the first Lord whereby both the right and possession passes
to the farmer in fee.

The third and last of these Books, treats of the honors that the Exchequer
gives; of which the first and chiefest was the Pretorship, which anciently was
a great dignity, but after became an idle name only, and a burden to the
Senators, as in which at their own charges they were to set out plays and
shows, and gave unto the Emperor in consideration of his or their glebe land,
a certain quantity of gold called Aurum glebale, or if they had no glebe
land, then offered they to the Emperor an other piece of gold, called Follis
aurea, both which afterward were taken away. Next was the Consulship, which was
not to be sought by ambition, or by scatering money among the people, but by
clear suffrages and desert: After the Consulship came in place the Constable,
or Master of the Soldiors, and those which were called Patricij, for that their
fathers had bin Senators, whose place under Augustus was equal to the Consuls,
although they were in no office and function of the Common wealth; and the
other is not so much an administration as a dignity, as the Senatorship
aunciently was, into the which who that were admitted, were accounted as
Parents to the Prince, and Fathers to their Country: Fourthly in place, were
the Princes Chamberlaines, who were adorned with sundry privileges, and had
the title of honor: Fifthly, followed the Treasurer, who was Master of all the
receipts and treasure of the Prince, public or private, and of all such officers
as were underneath him: Then the Prenotarie, chief notarie or scribe of the
Court, who for that he had the pre-eminence, above all the Gentlemen of the
papers, whom we now call Secretaries, was called Primicerius, of the Greek word
(...) which signifies wax, which is interpreted a waxed Table, in which
aunciently they did write. After him that was first secretary, there was an
other called second Secretary, and so after other Clerks of the Counsel, who
were not all in one degree, but some were first, some were second, and so in
order as their person, place, and time did require: Over which was the Master
of the Rols, who now is called Chauncellor, and such as are of the Princes
privy Counsel, or assessors of his privy consistory, wherein he hears
ambassages, and debateth of the greatest affairs of the state, and other
weighty matters. The President or Tribune of the Schools, where young men were
trained up to feats of arms. The Martials or Presidents of Military
affairs: the Physicians of the Princes body, Constantine in old time honored
with the title of Earls, as he did the rest of his chief officers, but now
they are without the dignity of that title: The Earls of the Countries who
governed the provinces or shires whereof they were Earls: Professors of Law and
other sciences twenty years together deserved by the law to be made Earls.
The Porters of the Court, and the Princes watch, which watched nightly for the
defense of his body, the guard or protectors of the Princes body, and their
Captain, among which were chief the Standerd bearers, as in whom the Prince
reposed most trust, and used them chiefly in all matters of danger. Next unto
the Chauncellor, or Master of the Rolls, were the Clerks, and others that
served in the Rolls, in which the decrees and rescripts of the Prince, the
Supplications of the subject, and the orders thereupon set down are recorded,
laid up, and kept, as the rols of Remembrances, of Epistles, libels,
ordinances, gifts given by the Prince, and such like: besides such as serve the
Prince, not in matters of learning, or war, or the pen, or other like places
above named, but in actions of the common wealth, and in public offices
either of peace or war, and their Presidents or governors, among whom are
Postmasters, to whom the care of the public course does appertein, the
Tresurer of the chamber, who has the keeping of the privy purse, and such
things as come to the Prince by the way of gift, The Master of the horse, his
Queries and riders, the yeoman of the Styrop and the Princes footmen, The
Castillians or officers of the household, which were part of the Princes family,
appointed for the inward services of the Prince in the Court, as his tasters,
butlers, wayters, chamberers, and such other, and their governors, Harbingers,
which upon remove provide for the Princes lodgings; all which had sundry
privileges and immunities, for that they were all accounted as soldiers, as
also the eleven Schools for Henchmen, wherein sundry youths, under masters
appointed for that purpose were trained up, some in learning, some other in
Military discipline, that they might be made fit for the service of the Prince,
and Common wealth, and had for their better education an annual allowance of
the Prince, and from thence when they were sufficiently instructed, or trained
up, were sent out to such services as they were fit for.

Of such as were attendants about the Prince, and were employed in his service,
the chiefest of all were the Senators, and therefore are called in the Law, the
Companions of the Prince, and have all the privileges that Soldiers have: The
second order was of them that were Knight riders, which either did, or might
serve in war: In the third rank were such as were in dignity. All may be
compelled to serve in war, which have neither just excuse, nor exemption, nor
have any leave of the Captain to be absent, unless they be Merchant men, or
be indebted unto the Common wealth, or obnoxious to the Law, for any crime they
have committed.

Under the title of Military discipline is declared, how men are to be trained
up to the knowledge of war, what oath is to be taken of such as are pressed to
be Soldiers, how they are to be distributed into bands, what use or benefit
the Common wealth has by them, what is their office, and how they are to be
mustered, or else translated from one degree to an other, how they are to be
judged, if they offend, what privileges belong unto them, what stipend or
wages is due unto them; as allowance of Corn, and the baking of the same, into
biscuit, which was a kind of bread, twice baked for the better durance of it,
and the carriage thereof from place to place, so often as they happened to
remove, their liuerie or apparel, and the times of the delivery of the same,
or money in steed thereof, lodging and provision of salted meat the longer to
endure: how long soldiers may be absent from the camp, and who is to give
them leave of absence, and what is the punishment of them that without just
cause be longer absent from the Army then they have leave; of young soldiers,
and of their trayning up, of old soldiers, and of their privileges: Provision
for keeping safe the Sea coast, and ordinary high ways of the Country, that
such as journey may pass free without hurt or damage: of runnagates out of the
Army, and such as conceal them, and of either of their punishments: of the
sons of such officers as have died in the war, and of their preferment, if
any be fit for it, that they succeed in their fathers office, or room: Of the
Sergeant Mayor, the Clarke of the band, and other such officers of the Camp,
and of their office, reward, and punishment: of places disposed of, for publik
posts, and cariages in high beaten ways, and other by-ways on necessity,
and how the same and the Cattle are to be used, that is, that they be not
driven forward with staves or clubs, but with whips only: and that no post
horse, or carriage be taken, but for public use of post letters; to whom they
are to be granted, and for what time: Of the Apparitors, Sergeants, Sumners,
or Baylifes: of sundry great officers, and of their Scribes, and Registers, and
of their trials: Of the fees of Advocates, and of the extorcion of Apparitors.
And this is the sum of those things which are specially contained in the
Code, beside other things which it has, common with the Digest; the knowledge
whereof at this day, is not so necessary for the Ciuilian, who in this age has
little use thereof, as it is expedient for Councelors of State, and such as are
called to place in court, who may thereout mark many things to direct them in
their place, as the variety of those things which are herein handled does
very well show.

The third Volume of the Law is called the Authentikes, of the Greek word
(...), either because they have authority in themselves, as proceeding from
the Emperors own mouth, or that they are originals to other writings, that are
transcribed out of them.

The Authentikes therefore are a volume of new Constitutions, set out by
Justinian the Emperor, after the Code, and brought into the body of the Law
under one Book.

In the Authentikes, is not that order observed in the disposition of the
Laws, is either in the Digest, or the Code, but as occasion was offered of any
doubt, wherein the Princes resolution was necessary to every thing, so it is
set down without any other Method or form.

The whole Volume is divided into 9. Collations, Constitutions, or Sections,
and they again into 168. Nouels, which also are distributed into certain
Chapters.

They were called Nouels, because they were new Laws, compared to the Laws of
the Digest, or the Code.

Of these Constitutions, some were general, and did concern all, who had like
cause of doubt; some other were private, and did concern only the place or
persons, they were writ for, which I will ouerpasse with silence.

Of the general, the first title and first Novel of the first collation is,
that Heirs, Feoffees, executors, administrators, and their successors, shall
fulfill the will of the deceased, and within one year after his decease, shall
pay his Legacies and bequests: and if they be once sued for it, they shall
forthwith pay that which is due upon the Will (deducting only a fourth part,
which is due unto the heir by the Law Falcidia) or else to lose such bequestes
as themselves have in the Will.

That it shall not be lawful for Widows coming to second maryages, after
their first husband is dead, to sequester one of their children from the rest,
upon whom they will bestow such things, as her first husband gave her before
marriage, but that the benefit thereof shall be common to them all: Neither that
she convey it over to her second husband, or his children, and so defraud her
first husbands children. And that a man in like sort suruyuing his wife, shall
do the like toward his first wives children, as concerning such Dowry as the
first wife brought to her husband.

Of Suerties and Warranties, that the Creditors shall first sue their Debtors,
and take erecution against their goods, and finding them not payable, shall
then take their remedy against the Suerties.

Of Monks, that they buyld no Monasteries, but with the leave of the Bishop,
who is there with prayer to lay the first stone: And that the Bishop shall
appoint such an Abbot over the Monks, as in virtue, and in merit excels the
rest: And besides of their habit, conversation, professions, and change of
life, and who is to succeed them in their goods and inheritance.

Of Bishops and Clerks, that is, that Bishops and Clerks be of good fame, of
competent learning, and age, and that they be ordained and promoted without
Symonie, or briberie, or the injury of the present Incumbent: And that there
be a set number of Clerks in every Church, least the Church and Parishioners
thereby be over charged.

The second Collation treats of the Churches state, that the lands of the
Church be neither sold, aliened, nor changed away, but upon necessity, or that
they be let to farm for a time, or upon other just cause, no not with the
Prince himself, unless the change be as good, or better, than that which he
receives from the Church: and if any man presume contrary to this form, to
change with the Church, he shall loose both the thing he changed, and the
thing he would have changed for it, and both of them shall remain in the right
of the Church: And that no man give or change a barren piece of the ground with
the Church.

That Judges and Rulers of Provinces be made without gifts: of their office,
power, authority, and stipend, and that they swear, they shall so sincerly
and uprightly execute their office, as knowing they shall give an account
thereof to God and the King: which oath they shall undergo before the Bishop of
the place, and the chief men of that Province, whether they are sent to be
Judges or Governors.

Of the Masters of Requests, and their office, which offer to the Prince suitors
Petitions, and report them back from the Prince unto the Judges.

Of wicked and incestuous Marriages, and that such as marry within those
degrees, forfeit all that they have unto the Exchequer, for that when they
might make lawful Marriages, they rather choose to make unlawful Marriages.

The third Collation contains matter against Bawdes, that they be not
suffered in any place of the Roman Empire, that being once warned to forbear
their wicked profession, if they offend therein again, they die the death
therefore. If any man let any house to a bawd, knowing him to be a bawd, that
he shall for fait x. li. to the Prince, and his house shall be in danger to be
confiscated.

Of Majors and Governors of Cities, that such be chosen that be honest people,
and men of credit, and that no man of the City being thereto chosen, refuse
the same, and that such as are thereto chosen, shall swears they will proceed in
every matter, according to Law and conscience.

That there be a certain number of Clerks in every Church, and that it be
neither diminished, nor increased, and therefore that there be a translation of
those that abound in one Church, into an other Church that wants.

The precepts which Princes gave to Rulers of Provinces, were these in offect:
that whereas themselves were freely chosen thereunto, they should in due sort
and order go into their Provinces, that they should keep their hands pure from
bribes, that they should carefully look unto the Revenues of the Exchequer,
and the peace and quiet estate of the Province, repress outrages and
rebellions, procure that causes be ended with all indifferency, and ordinary
charges: to foresee that neither themselves, nor any of their officers, or
vnderministers, do injury to the people, least those that should help them,
do hurt them: To provide that the people want not necessary sustenance, and
keep the walls of the City in reparation: that they punish offenses according
to the Law, without respect to any man's privilege, neither admit any excuse in
the examining or correcting of the same, save innocence only: that they keep
their Officers in order: that they admit to their Counsel such as are good
men, and are mild toward such as are good, and sharp toward such as are
evil: that they afford not Protections to every man, neither to any one longer
than it is fit and convenient it should be: That where they remove, they vex
not the Country men with more carryages then is needful: that they suffer
Churches and other like holy places, to be a Sanctuary to murderers, and
other such like wicked men: that they suffer not Lands to be sold without fine
made to the Exchequer: that they regard not Letters or rescripts contrary to
Law, and against the weal public, unless they be seconded: That they suffer
not the Province to be disquieted under pretense of Religion, heresy, or sch
sme, but if there be any Canonical or ordinary thing to be done, they advise
thereabout with the Bishop: that they do not confiscat the goods of such as are
condemned: that they patronize no man unjustly: that no man set his Arms or
Cognusance upon another man's Lands: neither that any carry any weapon, unless
he be a Soldier.

What is an hereditarie portion, and how children are to succeed: of such as
deny their own hand writing, and how they are to be punished, as well in
personal as in real actions; and that such deniers after their denial be not
admitted to other exceptions: and the taking away the thing in controversy
from him, which denied the true owner to be Lord thereof.

The fourth Collation, handles matters of Marriage, and that marriage is made
only by consent, without either lying together, or instruments of dowry: Of
women that marry again within the year of mourning, which by Law in sundry
sorts was punished for confusion of their issue: that there be an equal
proportion in the Dowry, and the Ioynture: Of Divorce and separation of
marriages, and for what causes, by consent, for impotencie, for adultery: and
that Noble women, which after the death of their first husband, being noble
personages, marry to inferior men, shall loose the dignity of their first
husband, and follow the condition of their second husband.

Of Appeals, and within what time a man may appeal, and from whom, and to
whom the appeal is to be made.

That none which lends money to an husbandman, take his land to morgage, and
how much usury money a man may take of an husbandman.

Of her that was brought to bed the eleventh month, after her husbands
decease, and that such as are borne in the beginning of the same month, are to
be accounted for Legitimat, but such as are borne in the end thereof, are to be
holden for bastards.

Of instruments and their credit, and that in every instrument there be
protochols left, that is, signs and notes of the time, when such a contract
was made, and who was notarie and witnesses to the same, and that after it be
written fair, and engrossed in a lidger or fair mundum Book.

The fifth Collation forbids the alienacion or selling away of the immovable
possessions of the Church, unless it be done under certain solemnities, and
then only when the moveable goods are not sufficient to pay the debts of the
Church or holy place.

Further, it provides that the name of the Prince for the time being, be put
in all instruments, and the day and year when the instrument was made.

That the Oath of the deceased, as concerning the quantity of his goods, so
far as it touches the division of the same among his children, be holden for
good, but that it be in no sort prejudicial to the creditors.

Of women tumblers, and such other of like sort, which with the feats of their
body, maintain themselves, that no oath or suertie be taken of them, that they
will not leave that kind of life, since such oath is against good manners, and is
of no validity in Law.

That such gifts as are given by private men to their Prince, need no record,
but are good without inrolling of them, and in like sort such things as are
given by the Princes to private men.

That no person, thing, or gold of an other man be arested for another man's
debt, which they now call reprisals, and that he which is hurt by such
reprisals, shall recover the four double of the damages that he has suffered
thereby, and that one man be not beaten or stricken for another.

That he that calls a man into law out of his Territory, or Province where he
dwells, shall enter caution, if he obtain not in the suite against him, he
shall pay him so much as the Judge of the Court shall condemn him in. And that
he who has given his oath in Judgment, shall pay the whole costs of the suite,
but after shall be admitted to prosecute the same if he will, so that he put
in suerties to perform it.

That such women as are vnindowed shall have the fourth part of their husbands
substance, after his death, and in like sort the man in the woman's, if the man
or woman that suruiueth be poor.

That Churches or Religious persons may change grounds one with another: For
that one privileged persons right cease against another, that is in like
sort privileged.

That such changes of manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as are made
by Churchmen to the Prince, be not fained matters, and so by the Prince come to
other men's hands, who have set on the prince to make this change, and that the
change be made to the Princes house only, and if the Prince, after convey or
confer, the same upon any private man, it shall be lawful for the Church to
reenter upon the same again, and to reposseed it as in her former right.

That in greater Churches, Clerks may pay something for their first
admittance, but in lesser Churches it is not lawful.

That such as build, found, or indowe Churches (which must go before the rest)
do the same by the authority of the bishop; and that such as are called
patrons, may present their Clerks unto the Bishop, but that they cannot make
or ordain Clerks therein themselves.

That the sacred mysteries or ministeries be not done in private houses, but
be celebrated in public places, lest thereby things be done contrary to the
Catholic and Apostolic faith; unless they call to the celebrating of the
same, such Clerks, of whose faith and conformity there is no doubt made, or
are deputed thereto by the good will of the Bishop, but places to pray in every
man may have in his own house; if any thing be done to the contrary, the
house wherein these things are done, shall be confiscated, and themselves shall
be punished at the discretion of the Prince.

That neither such as be dead, nor the Corse or Funeral of them be injured by
the creditors, but that they be buried in peace.

That women's Ioyntures be not sold, or made away, no not even with their own
consent.

In what place, number, form, manner, and order, the princes counsel is to
sit, and come together.

That he that is conuented in judgment, if he wilfully absent himself, may be
condemned after issue is joined.

That no man build a Chapel or Oratorie in his house, without the leave of
the bishop, and before he consecrate the place by prayer, and set up the Cross
there, and make Procession in the place; and that before he build it he allot
out lands necessary for the maintenance of the same, and those that shall
attend on Gods service in the place: and that Bishops be not non-residents in
their Churches.

That all obey the Princes Judges, whether the cause be Civil or Criminal
they judge in, and that the causes be examined before them without respect of
persons, and in what sort the Process is to be framed against such as be
present, and how against those that be absent.

The sixth Collation, shows by what means children illegitimate, may be made
legitimat, that is, either by the Princes dispensation, or by the fathers
Testament, or by making instruments of marriage between the Mother and Father
of the children, so that the Mother die not before the perfecting of them, or
that she live riotously with other men, and so make her self unworthy to be a
wife.

That Noble personages marry not without instruments of Dowry, and such other
solemnities as are usual in this behalf, that is, that they profess the same
before the bishop, or minister of the place, and three or four witnesses at
the least, and that a remembrance thereof be left in writing, and kept with the
Monuments of the Church; but that it shall not be needful for meaner persons
to observe the former solemnities.

That such as were indebted to the Testator, or they to whom the Testator was
indebted, be not left Tutors or Gardens to their children; that if any such
be appointed a Tutor, a Curator be joined to him to have an oversight of his
dealing: that Tutors or Curators are not bound by Law to let out the Minors
money, but if they do, the interest shall be the Minors; and the Tutor shall
have every year two months to find out sufficient men, to whom he may let
the money out to hyer, for that it is let out at his peril: that if the Minors
state be great, so that there will be a yearly profit above his finding, the
Tutor shall lay up the residue for a stock against he comes to age, or buy land
therewith, if he can find out a good bargain, and a sure title: but if the
child's portion be small, so that it will not find him, then the Tutor or
Curator shall dispose of the Minors state as he would dispose of his own, to
which also he is bound by oath.

How such instruments are enrolled before Judges, as concerning matters of
borrowing and lending and such like, may have credit: how men may safely
bargain either with writing or without writing, if themselves be ignorant men;
and of the comparison of Letters, and what credit there is to be given to an
instrument, when the writings and witnesses do vary among themselves.

Of unchaste people, and such as Riot against nature, whose punishment is death.

Of such as dispitefully, on every light trifle, swear by God, and blaspheme
his holy name, against whom also is provided the sentence of death.

That the Justices of Peace, or other officers to that purpose appointed,
speedily dispatch the business of those which are of their Jurisdiction: that
such as come as strangers and forrainers out of other contries, having no just
cause of their coming, they send back again with their substance, to such
places as they came fro; but if they be idle vagabonds and Rogues, or other
like valiant beggars, they either drive them out of the place, or compel them
to labor: yet evermore having regard to provide for such as are honest, poor,
old, sick, or impotent.

That Clerks be first conuented before their Ordinary, and that the
Ordinary do speedily end the matter, that they may not be long absent from
their benefices: and that they be not drawn before temporal Judges, unless
the nature of the cause do so require it, as that it be a mere Civil cause,
or a criminal cause, belonging wholly to the Temporal court; wherein, if a
Clerk shall be found guilty, he shall first be deprived from his
ministry, and then shall be delivered over into the Seculer hands: but if
the crime be solely Ecclesiastical, the Bishop alone shall take knowledge
thereof, and punish it according as the Canons do require.

That where one dies without issue, leaving behind him brethren of the whole
blood, and brethren of the half blood; the brethren of the whole blood have
the pre-eminence in the lands and goods of the deceased, before the brethren of
the half blood, whether they be of the fathers side, or the mothers side.

That no man make Armor, or sell it, without the princes leave, unless they
be knives or other such like small weapons.

That proof by witnesses was devised to that end, that the truth should not be
concealed; and yet all are not fit to be witnesses, but such alone as are of
honest name and fame, and are without all supition of love, hatred, or
corruption; and that their dispositions be put in writing, that after the
witnesses be published, and their depositions be known, there be no more
production of witnesses, unless the party swear those proofs, came a new
unto his knowledge.

If Parents give profusely to one of their children, the other notwithstanding,
shall have their lawful porcions, unless they be proved to be unkind toward
their parents.

That women, albeit they be debtors or creditors, may be Tutors or Curators to
their children; and that there is not an oath to be exacted of them that they
will not marry again, so that they renounce their privilege granted unto them
per Senatus consultu^ Velleian^, and perform al other things, as other Tutors
do.

That Governors of Provinces are not to leave their charges before they are
called from thence by the Prince, otherwise they incur the danger of Treason.

That women's Dowries have a privilege before all other kinds of debt; that
what Dowry a woman had in her first marriage, she shall have the same in her
second marriage, neither shall it be lawful for her father to diminish it, if
it return again unto his hand.

That a man shall not have the property of his wives dowry, neither a woman
the property of that which is given her before marriage, but the property of
either of them shall come unto their children, yea though they marry not again.

Wills or Testaments made in the behoof of children stand good, howsoever
imperfect otherwise they are, but they are not available for strangers (but
strangers are they which are not children) neither mattereth it whether the
Will or Testament be writ by the fathers hand only, or by some other body by
his appointment; and as the father deuideth the goods among the children, so
they are to have their parts.

Of Heretics, and that such are Heretics which do refuse to receive the holy
Communion at the ministers hand in the Catholic Church: that Heretics are not
to be admitted to rooms and places of Honor, and that women Heretics may not
have such privilege as other women have in their Dowries.

That is called Mariners usury that is wont to be lent to Mariners or Merchant
men, specially such as trade by sea, which kind of lending, ye law calls
passage money, in which kind of usury, a man cannot go beyond the 100. part.

That Churches enjoy a 100. yards prescription.

That such things as are litigious, during the controversy, are not to be sold
away. A Litigious thing, is that whih is in suite between the plaintiff and
defendant.

That while the suite depends, there be no Letters or Edict procured from
the Prince concerning the cause in question, but that the cause be decided
according to the general Laws in use.

That in Divorces, the children be brought up with the innocent party, but at
the charges of the nocent, and that Divorces be not admitted, but upon causes
in Law expressed.

That no woman, whose husband is in warfare, or otherwise absent, shall marry
again, before she have certain intelligence of the death of her former
husband, either from the Captain under whom he served, or from the governor
of the place where he died; and if any woman marry again without such certain
intelligence, how long soever otherwise her husband be absent from her, both
she (and he who married her) shall be punished as adulterers, and if her former
husband after such marriage, return back again, she shall return again to
her former husband, if he will receive her, otherwise she shall live apart
from them both.

If any man beat his wife, for any other cause, than for which he may be justly
severed or divorced from her, he shall for such injury be punished.

If any man conceive a jealousy against his wife, as that she uses any other
man more familiarly then is meet she should, let him three several times
admonish him thereof, before three honest and substanciall men, and if after
such admonition he be found to commune with her, let him be accused of adultery
before such Judge, who has authority to correct such offenses.

The ninth and last Collation contains matter of succession in goods, that as
long as there be any descendent, either Male or Female, so long neither any
ascendent, or any collateral can succeed, and that if there be no discendent,
then the ascendent be preferred, before the collateral, unless they be
brethren or sisters of the whole blood, who are to succeed together with the
ascendent; but in ascendents, those are first called which are in the next
degree to the deceased, then after those which are in a more remote degree:
that in collaterals all be equally admitted, which are in the same degree, and
of the same Parents, whether they be male or female.

That the lands of any Church, Hospital, or other like Religious place, be not
sold, aliened, or changed, unless it be to the Princes house, or to, or with
an other like Religious place; and that in equal goodness and quantity, or
that it be for the redemption of Prisoners: and that they be not let out to any
private man more than for 30. years, or 3. lives, unless either the houses be
so ruynated, that they cannot be repaired without great charges of the Church,
or other religious houses, or that it be ouercharged with any debts or duties
belonging to the Exchequer, and thereby there comes small revenue to the
Church, or Religious place thereout; in every of which cases it is lawful to
let out the same for ever, reserving a yearly competent rent, and other
acknowledgements of other souerainties therein.

That the holy vessels of the Church be not sold away, unless it be for the
ransoming of Prisoners, or that the Church be in debt; in which case, if they
have more holy vessels than are necessary for the service of the Church, they
may sell those which are superfluous to any other Church, that needs them, or
otherwise dispose of them at their pleasure for the benefit of the Church, or
other holy place whose they are.

Where Usury in process of time does double the principal, there Usury for
the time to come does cease, and those particular payments which afterward do
follow are reckoned in the principal.

What kind of men are to be chosen Bishops, such as are sound in faith, of
honest life and conversation, and are learned, that such as choose them, swear
before the choice, they shall neither choose any for any reward, promise,
friendship, or any other sinister cause whatsoever, but for his worthynesse and
good parts only.

That none be ordained by Symonie, and if there be, that both the giver, taker,
and mediator thereof be punished according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, and
they all made unworthy to hold or enjoy any Ecclesiastical living hereafter.

That if any at the time of any Bishops election, object any thing against him
that is to be elected, the election be staid, till proof be made of that which
is objected by the adversary against the party elected, so that he prove the
same within 3. Months; and if any proceeding be to the consecration of of the
same Bishop in the mean time, it is void.

That the Bishop after he is ordained, may with out any danger of Law give or
consecrate his goods to the use of the Church, where he is made Bishop, and
that he may give such fees as are due to the electors by Law or custom.

That Clerks be not compelled to undergo personal functions, and services of
the common wealth, and that they busy not themselves in seculer affairs, and
so thereby be drawn from their spiritual function.

That Bishops for no matter or cause be drawn before a temporal Judge,
without the Kings special commandment, and if any Judge presume to call any
without such special warrant, the same is to loose his office, and to be
banished therefore.

That no Bishop absent himself from his Dioces without urgent occasion, or
that he be sent for by the Prince, and if any do absent himself above one
year, that he shall lack the profit of his Bishopric, and be deposed from
the same, if he return not again within a competent time appointed for the
same.

What manner of men are to be made Clerks, such as are learned, and are (...)
good Religion, of honest life and conversation, and are free from suspicion of
incontinency: that no Minister be less then 35. years of age, and that no
Deacon or Subdeacon be under 25. that all Clerks and Ministers be ordained
freely.

If any build a Church, and indow the same, that he may present a Clerk
thereto; so that he be worthy to be admitted thereto: but if he present an
unworthy man, then it appertains to the Bishop to place a worthy man therein.

If any Clerk be convicted to have sworn falsely, he is to be deprived his
office, and further to be punished at the discretion of the Bishop.

That Clerks be conuented before their own Bishops, and if the parties
litigant stand to the B. order, the Civil Judge shall put it in execution: but
if they agree not upon the judgment, then the Civil Judge is to examine it,
and either to confirm or infirm the B. order, and if he confirm it, then the
order to stand, and if not, then the party grieved to appeal.

If the cause be criminal, and the Bishop find the party guilty, then the
Bishop is to degrade him, and after to give him over to the seculer power: the
like course is to be held, if the cause be first examined before the temporal
Judge, and the party found guilty, for then he shall be sent to the Bishop to
be deprived, and after again shall be delivered to the seculer powers to be
punished.

That Bishops be conuented before their Metropolitans.

That such as in Service time do abuse, or iniure the Bishop, or any Clerk in
the Church, being at divine Service, be whipped, and sent into banishment: But if
they trouble thereby the divine Service it self, they are to dye the death for
the same.

That Lay men are not to say or celebrate divine Service, without the presence
of the Minister, and other Clerks thereto required.

That such as go to Law, swear in the beginning of the suit, that they have
neither promised, or will give oght to the Judge, and that usual fees be taken
by the Advocates Counselors, Procters, or Attournies, and if any man take more
than his ordinary fees, he shall be put from his place of practice, and forfeit
the four double of that he has taken.

That the 4. general Councels be holden as a Law, and that which is decreed in
them.

That the B. of Rome has the first place of sitting in all assemblies, and
then the B. of Constantinople.

That all Clergy men's possessions be discharged from all ordinary and
extraordinary payments, saving from the repairing of Bridges and High ways,
where the said possessions do lie.

That no man buyld a Church, or holy place, without the leave of the B. and
before the Bishop there say Service, and set up the sign of the Cross.

That no man in his own house suffer Service to be said, but by a Minister
allowed by the Bishop, under pain of confiscating of the house, if it be the
Lord of the house that presumes to do it, or banishment, if it be done by the
tenant.

If any bequeath any thing to God, it is to be paid to the Church where the
Testator dwelled.

If any devise by his last Will a Chapel, or Hospital, to be made, the
Bishop is to compel the Executors to perform it within five years, after the
decease of the Testator, and if the Testator name any governor, or poor
thereto, they are to be admitted, unless the Bishop shall find them unfit for
the room.

That the Bishop see such Legacies performed, as either are given for the
redemption of Prisoners, or for other godly uses.

That Masters of Hospitals make an account of their charge, in such sort as
Tutors do.

That such as lust against nature, and so become brutish, receive condign
punishment worthy their wickedness.

That such as make Enuches, themselves be made Enuches, and if they escape
alive, their goods to be forfeited to the Exchequer, and themselves be
imprisoned all the days of their life.

Such as by force steal away women, themselves, and such as are their
abbetters, and helpers, are to dye therefore, and that it shall not be lawful
for her that is carried away, to marry to him that does carry her away: and
that if her father do give his consent to such marriage, he is to be banished:
but if she marry him without her fathers consent, then is she not to take
benefit by her fathers will, or any other thing that is her fathers.

These, and sundry matters of great importance, and necessary for the well
governing of a Common wealth, are contained in the Authenticks, which I pass
over with dry foot, not because they are not necessary to be known, but
because I would not cloy the Reader even with those things which are good.

All these works are the labor of Justinian, as either gathered together by
him out of ancient Lawyers books, and such Emperors decrees, as went before
him, or else were decreed and ordained by himself, as matter and occasion
offered it self, and the youngest of them is near eleven hundred years of
age, that is within 500. years after Christ, or not much otherwise.

The last Tome of the Civil Law is the Feudes, that is the books of Customs
and Services that the subject or vassal does to his Prince, or Lord, for such
lands or fees as he holds of him.

This piece of the Law, although it was not much in use in the old Emperors
days, yet Justinian himself seems to acknowledge them in his Novel
constitutions, calling them (...), and those which are more careful to seek
out the beginning of them, bring them, some from the ancient Clientles or
retinewes the ancient Romans before Christ his time had, as Budeus does; some
other from Alexander Seuerus time, who as Lampridius in the life of Alexander
says, gave such lands as he won out of the Enemies hands to his Lords
Marchers, and his soldiers, that they should be theirs, and their heirs for
ever, so they would be Soldiers, neither should they come at any time to the
hands of any private man, saying, they would more lustily serve, if they fought
for their own land; which opinion comes next to the ancient border-grounds
of the Romans, whereof there is a Title in the 11. Book of the Code, Defundis
Limitrophis, that is of Border-ground: Others refer it over to Constantine the
greats time, which inacted for the benefit of his soldiers, that such
Lordships and lands as before time they had their wages out of, should pass
over unto their heirs, and be appropriated to their family, or stock, so
that they found and mainteyned continually a certain number of soldiers.

From whence soever it descended, this is certain, that it came very late to
be a particular volume of the Law it self. The compilers or gatherers together
thereof were Obertus de Horto, and Giraldus Compagist, two Senators of
Millaine, who partly out of the Civil Law, and partly out of the Customs of
Millaine drew the same, but without form or order.

The word it self is a barbarous word, but had his origin notwithstanding as
Isidor says from the word Foedus, being a good Latin word, and so is to be
interpreted tanquam Feodum, that is, as a thing couenanted between two: Others
deduce it from the word Fides, as it were in Latin Fideum, and by a more
pleasant pronunciation Feudum, whereupon such as are Feudataries to other, are
called in Latin Fideles, because they owe faith and allegiance to such whose
feudataries they are, who in the Lomhard tongue are called Vassals. Beside,
Fealty, which some call Hominium, by the Feudists is termed Homage: for the
nature of a Feude is this, that it draws with it faith and homage: so that
such as are feudataries, or fee men, profess themselves to owe faith to such
to whom they are in fee, and that they are his men; insomuch as when a fee man
dies, his Heir does make faith, and does his homage to the Lord, as is well
seen both in the Lord Spiritual and Temporal of this land, who both in their
creation, and also in their succession one after an other swear an oath, and
do their homage to their Sovereign, and do pay other duties which are
simbols and signs of their subjection to their sovereign: And for others that
are under the degree of Barons, and yet are fee men unto the King, and so do
not manuell obedience unto his Majesty, they pay yearly something in respect
of their homage, according to the quantity or quality of the fee or tenure
they hold of the Prince.

A Feude in English may be called a tenure, which caused Littleton when he
treated of Feudes, so far forth as they are here in use in England (Such as are
all those which are called in Latin Feuda militaria, and Feuda scutiferorum,
called by Justinian (...), which are by the Laws of the land, termed by the
named of knights services, and Escuage,) to call them by the names of Tenures.

A Feude is a grant of lands, honors, or fees, made either to a man at the will
of the Lord, or Sovereign, or for the Feudataries own life, or to him, or his
heirs for ever, under condition, that he and his heirs in case where the
feude is perpetual, do acknowledge the gyuer and his heirs to be their Lord
and Sovereign, and shall bear faith and allegiance unto him, and his, for
the said Tenure, and shall do such service to him and his for the same, as is
between them couenanted, or is proper to the nature of the feude.

Of Feudes, some are Temporal, some other are Perpetual.

Temporal feudes are those that are given, either for term of a man's life, or
for years, or at the will of the Lord, for some service done, or to be done;
such as are Annuities given to Lawyers for counsel, Pensions given to
Physicians for their advise, Stipends to any Teacher of arts and sciences,
Fees for keeping of Towers or Castles, called by Feudists Castalia, and is by
Littleton called Castle ward, although by him it is taken for a state of
inheritance.

Perpetual Feudes are rights which men have by grant from the Sovereign, or
chief Lord of the soil or territory, to have, hold, use, occupy, and enjoy
honors, manors, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, to him and his heirs for
ever, upon condition that the said vassal or party, his heytes and
successors, do homage and fealty to his Lord, his heirs and successors, for
such honors, lands, or hereditaments, and do him either service in war,
according as it is couenanted between the Lord and his vassal, or such other
service as the nature of his tenure does require, or if he fail therein, shall
either find some other in his room to do the same, or else pay a certain
sum of money in liew thereof.

Although this Tenure by the first creation thereof be perpetual, yet that the
sovereignty thereof should not still remain unprofitable to the first Lord,
the whole benefyt thereof going continually to the vassal or tenant; it is
provided that the Sovereign or chief Lord the first year, the heir or
Successor of the vassal comes unto his land, shall have the whole revenue of
his liuelihood for that year, or a certain sum of money in token of the
return thereof unto the Lord, and the redemption thereof made again by the
tenant, which by the Law of the Nouels is called (...), and is well nigh the
same that we call livery, which every heir that holds in Knights service,
sueth out before he take possession of his land, as heir to his ancesters.

This Tenure is got either by Inuestiture or by Succession.

Inuestiture is the same that we call Creation, and is the primier grant of a
feude or tenure to any, with all rights and solemnities thereto belonging,
wherein the homager, or feodatarie for the most part upon his knees promises
faith and allegiance under a solemn oath unto his Lord, and his successors.

Succession is whereby the eldest son succeeds, the father in his
inheritance, and if he fail and have no issue, then the next brother, and so
in order successively, and if there be no son, then the next heir male, and
if their be no heir male, then the land escheats unto the Lord. For the
Lumbards, from whom the feudes first came, or at the least were chiefly derived
from them, directing all their policy as the Lacedemons did, to matters of
war, had no seminine feudes among them, but after by process of time, there
were created as well Feminine feuds as Masculine feuds, insomuch as where there
was no issue male to put them from it, women did succeed in the inheritance.

Of Feuds, some are regal, some not regal: Regal are those which are given
by the prince only, neither do belong to any inferior to give.

Of these, some are Ecclesiastical, as Archbishopricks, Bishoprics and such
like: Others are Civil or Temporal, as Dukedomes, Earledomes, Vicounts, and
Lords, who by that are distinguished from the rest of the people, that they
have the conducting of the Princes Army at home and abroad, if they be thereto
appointed, and have right of Peers in making of Laws, in matters of trial,
and such other like businesses.

Not Regal are those which hold not immediately of the Prince, but are holden
of such Ecclesiastical or Civil States which have had their Honors
immediately from the Prince.

Besides of Feuds, some are Liege, others not Liege; Liege Feuds, are they in
the which the vassal or feodatorie promises absolute fealty or faith to his
Lord, against all men without exception of the King himself, or any other more
ancient Lord to whom besides he owes alleagance or service. Of this sort there
is none in this Realm of England, but such as are made to the King himself,
as appears by Littleton in the title of Homage, wherein is specially excepted
the faith which the Homager owes to his Lord the King.

Feuds not Liege, are such wherein Homage is done, with special reservation of
his faith and allegiance to the prince and Sovereign.

Of such as are Vassals or Liege men, some are called Valuasores maiores;
others Valuasores minores. Valuasores maiores are such as hold great places of
the State under the Emperor or King, as are the degrees of Honor before
named, and are called Peers of the Land, which only gives Nobility.
Valuasores minores, are those which are no Peers of the Land, and yet have a
pre-eminence above the people, and are, as it were, in a middle Region between
the people and the Nobility, such as are Knights, Squires, and Gentlemen.

The Feuds are lost by sundry ways, by default of issue of him to whom it was
first given, which they call Apertura feodi; by surrender thereof, which by them
is termed Refutatio feodi; by forfaiture, and that was in two sorts, either by
not doing the service that his tenure did require, or by committing some
villenous act against his Lord, as in conspiring his Sovereigns death,
defiling his bed, or deflowring his daughter, or some other like act
treacherous to his Lord, and unworthy of himself.

And so much of the Civil Law, and the Books thereunto pertaining. Now it
follows I do in like order speak of the Canon Law, which is more hardly
thought upon among the people, for that the subject thereof, in many points, is
of many gross and superstitious matters used in the time of Papistrie, as of
the Mass, and such other like trumperie; and yet there are in it beside, many
things of great wisdom, and even those matters of superstition themselves,
being in a generality, well applied to the true service of God, may have a
good use and understanding.

The Canon Law, has his name of the Greek word Canon, which in English is a
Rule, because it leads a man straight, neither draws him to the one side or
the other, but rather corrects that which is out of Leuill and Line.

The Canon Law consists partly of certain Rules, taken out of the holy
Scripture, partly of the writings of the ancient fathers of the Church, partly
of the ordinances of general and prouincial Councels, partly of the Decrees of
Popes of formerages.

Of the Canon Law, there are two principal parts, the Decrees and the
Decretals.

The Decrees are Ecclesiastical constitutions, made by the Pope and Cardinals,
at no man's suite, and are either Rules taken out of the Scripture, or Sentences
out of the ancient Fathers, or Decrees of Councels.

The Decrees were first gathered together by Ivo, Bishop of Carnat, about the
year of our Lord God but afterward polished and perfected by Gratian, a monk
of the order of Saint Bennets, in the year 1149. and allowed by Eugenius the
Pope, whose Confessor he was, to be read in Schools, and to be alleged for
Law.

Of all the several volumes of the Canon Law, the Decrees are the auncientest,
as having their beginning from the time of Constantine the great, the first
Christian Emperor of Rome, who first gave leave to the Christians freely to
assemble themselves together, and to make wholesome laws for the well
government of the Church.

The Decrees are divided into three parts, whereof the first teaches of the
origin and beginning of the Canon law, and describes and sets out the
rights, dignities, degrees of ecclesiastical persons, and the manner of their
elections, ordinations, and offices, and stands of one hundred and ten
distinctions.

The second part sets out the causes, questions, and answers of this Law,
which are in number 36. and are full of great variety, wisdom, and delight.

The third and last part, contains matter of consecration of all sacred
things, as of Churches, bread and wine in the Sacrament, what days and Feasts
the Primitive Church used for the receiving thereof, of the ministering of the
Sacraments in Baptism, and the use of imposition of hands, all which is set
out under five distinctions.

The Decretals are Canonical Epistles, written either by the Pope alone, or by
the Pope and Cardinals, at the instance or suite of some one or more for the
ordering and determining of some matter in controversy, and have the
authority of a law in themselves.

Of the Decretals there be three volumes, according to the number of the
authors which did devise and publish them.

The first volume of the Decretals was gathered together by Ramundus Barcinius,
Chaplein to Gregory the ninth, at his the said Gregory's commandment about
the year 1231. and published by him to be read in schools, and used for Law in
all Ecclesiastical Courts.

The sext is the work of Boniface the eight, methoded by him about the year
1298. by which, as he added something to the ordinance of his predecessors, so
he took away many things that were superfluous and contrary to themselves,
and retained the rest.

The third volume of the Decretals, are called the Clementines, because they
were made by Pope Clement the fifth of that name, and published by him in the
Council of Vienna about the year of grace 1308.

To these may be added the Extrauagants of John the xxij. and some other
Bishops of Rome, whose authors are not known, and are as Novel constitutions
unto the rest.

Every of these former volumes, are divided into five Books, and contain, in
a manner, one and the same titles, whereof the first in every of them, is the
title of the blessed Trinity, and of the Catholic faith, wherein is set
down by every of them a particular belief, diverse in words, but all one in
substance, with the ancient Symbols, or belief of the old Orthodox, or
Catholic Church.

Secondly, there comes in place the treaty of Rescripts, Constitutions and
Customs, and the authority of them, and when they are to be taken for Law:
after follows the means whereby the greater governors of the Church, as
namely, Archbishops, Bishops, and such like come unto their room, which was in
two sorts, according as the parties place or degree was when he was called unto
the room, as if he were under the degree of a Bishop, and was called to be
Bishop, or being a Bishop, was called to be an Archbishop, or to be the Pope
himself, he was thereto to be elected by the Deane and Chapter of the Church
where he was to be Bishop, or by the College of the Cardinals in the
Popedom; but if he were already a Bishop or an Archbishop, and were to be
preferred unto any other Bishopric or Archbishopric, then was he to be
required by the church, he was desired unto and not elected, which in the Law
was called Postulation; after Postulation followed translation by the superior,
to the Sea to the which he was postulated or required; after Election followed
Corfirmation and Consecration of him that was elected, which both were to be
done in a time limited by the Canons, otherwise the party elected, lost his
right therein.

Bishops and other beneficed men, sundry times upon sundry occasions resign
their benefices, and therefore is set down what a renunciation or resignation
is, who is to renounce, and into whose hands and upon what causes a man may
renounce his benefice or bishopric: and because vnder-Ministers are
oftentimes negligent in their Cure, that the people, in the mean time may not
be defrauded of Divine Service, the Sacraments, and the food of the word of
God; it is provided that the Bishop shall supply the negligence of such
Ministers as are underneath him in his Jurisdiction: besides, because holy
orders are not to be given but by imposition of hands, with prayer and fasting,
four fit times in the year, are for the same lymitted, where also is set
down how they are to be qualified which are to be ordered, what trial or
examination is to be had of them, what age they are to be of, and what gifts
of body or mind they are to be endowed withal: what Sacraments may be
reiterated, what not: that Ministers sons are not to succeed their fathers in
those benefices wherein their fathers immediately before were Pastors or
governors, lest happily thereby there might be claimed a succession or
inheritance in the same: that no bondmen or accomptants, men distorted or
deformed in body, bigamists or twice married men, be admitted to holy orders.

Of wandering Clerks, and how that they are not to be admitted to minister in
another Diocese, then where they are ordered without the Dimissarie Letters of
the bishop under whom they were ordered.

Of Archdeacons, Archpriests, Sacrists, vicars, what they are, and wherein their
particular offices do consist.

Of the office of Judges in general, and their power, whether they be
Delegats, Legates a latere, or Judges ordinary.

Of difference in Jurisdiction between Ministers and Ministers, and what
obedience the inferior Ministers are to yield unto their superiors.

Of Truce and Peace, which Ecclesiastical Judges are to procure, that truces be
kept from Saturday in the evening, until Monday in the morning, and that there
be no fighting from the first day of the Aduent, until the eight day after
Twelfe tide, and that war likewise do cease, from the beginning of Lent,
until the eight day after Easter, under pain of Excommunication, against him
that presumes to do the contrary; and that in time of war, neither Priests,
Clerks, Merchant men, country men, either going to the field or coming from
the field, or being in the field, or the cattle with which they plough, or the
seed with which they sow, be hurt or violated.

Judges, before men enter into the dangerous events of Law, are to persuad the
parties litigant by private covenants and agreement to compound the controversy
between them, wherein if they prevail not, then the parties are to provide
themselves of Aduocats, Proctors, or Sindects according as they are private men
or bodies politic to furnish their cause, and direct them in proceeding.

If any Church has bin hurt in any contract of bargain or sale, or in
demising of any Lease, or by the Proctors negligence, it is to be restored
again into her former state, to allege and plead that for it self, which is
agreeable to Law and conscience. The like grace is to be granted to all other
Litigants whatsoever, who have by fear or violence, or any other like unjust
cause, been hindered from the prosecution of their right.

If any, seeing a suite like to be commenced against him, do either appeal
before he be served with Process, or alienat away the thing whereupon the
suite was like to grow, he is to be compeld to hold plee of the same cause,
before the Judge from whom he did appeal, and to answer his adversary, as
though still he were owner of the thing he did in policy sell or alienat away.

Many times, things which otherwise can have no speedy end by Law, are
compounded by arbiterment. Arbitrators ought to be od in number, that if they
disagree, that which is concluded by the greater part may prevail. An
arbiterment is a power given by the parties Litigant to some, to hear and
determine some matter in suite between them, and to pronounce upon the same,
to which they are to bind themselves under a penalty to stand.

The first Book, having set out the first object of the Law, which stands in
the persons who make up the Judgment, as in the person of the Judge himself,
the Aduocats, Proctors and Clients, there follows in the second book, the
second object of the same, which is the Judgments themselves, which are to be
commenced by a Citation, and that in a competent court fit for the same, by a
Libell offered up in the court by the plaintiff, to the Judge, which is to
contain the sum of that which is required in Judgment; where, if the
defendant do again reconuent the plaintiff, he is to answer, albeit the
defendant be not of that Jurisdiction: the libel being admitted, the defendant
is to join issue, and yet before either of them enter any further into the
cause, that there may be fair and sincere dealing in the same, and that all
suspicion of malicious dealing therein may be taken away, each of them are to
take an oath, the Plaintiff, that he does not of any malice prosecute the
suite against the Defendant, or the Defendant of any malice maintain the suit
against the plaintiff, but that they verily believe their cause is good, and
that they hope they shall be able to prove, the one his libell, the other his
exceptions, if he shall put in any into the Court. The cause being begun,
delays are often granted, if either there come any Holyday between, or any
other like just cause be offered, as for producing of witnesses and such like:
If there be no just cause of delay, then the Judge is to go on in the due
course of Law, (provided always that more be not demanded by the plaintiff
than is due) and that the cause possessarie be handled before the petitorie,
and that he that is spoiled, be first and before all things restored to that
thing or place whereof he was spoiled, or from which he was put fro; yea,
though he have nothing else to allege for himself beside the bare spoliation
it self. If the one side or other wilfully or deceiptfully decline Judgment,
the Judge is to put the other in possession of that which is in demand, or at
the lest, to sequester the fruits and possessions of that which is in
controversy; but if both parties appear and join issue affirmatively, then
is it but a question of Law, and not a fact, neither does there remain ought
else to be done by the Judge, but that he give sentence against him that has
confessed it, and put his sentence in execucion. But if issue be joined
negatiuely, then is the plaintiff to prove his Libell, so far as it consists in
fact, by witnesses which are to be compelled by Law if they will not come, or
appear voluntarily, by public and private instruments, by presumptions, by
conjectures, by oath; which being done, the Defendant in like sort is to be
admitted to prove his exceptions, and clear his prescription if he be able
to allege any, in which he is Plaintiff, neither is he bound thereto, before
the Plaintiff have perfected and proved his own right.

After proofs are brought on either side, and the same thoroughly disputed on
by the Aduocats, the Judge is to give sentence, which he is to frame according
to the Libell and proofs formerly deduced in the cause. The sentence being
given, Execution is to be awarded, unless there be an appeal made from it
within ten days by the Law, but fifteen days by the Statute of this Land,
from the time the party, against whom sentence was given, had knowledge
thereof, or unless it be appealed incontinently at the acts, and in writing
before a public notary, or at the lest the party against whom the sentence
proceeded, within due time, take his journey toward the higher Judge to
prosecute the same, by whom the former sentence is either confirmed or
infirmed, in the second instance.

The third book conteyneth such Civil matters, and causes as are liable to
the Ecclesiastical Courts, as the honest life or conversation of Clerks, and
their comely comportment in all their demeanor, with what women they are to
cohabit, and dwell with, whereby they may be free from all suspicion of ill
life, and with whom not, which of them may be married by the law of the Canons,
and which not, in what cases they may be allowed to be non resident, and in
what not, and how such as are non residents may be called home unto their cure,
and if they return not upon process sent out against them, how they are to be
punished, namely by deprivation or sequestration of the fruits and commodities
of their benefice.

Prebends and dignities are preferments for Clerks, but not for such as are
idle or absent from the same without just cause: but if any Clerk or Minister
be sick, and his disease be curable he is to receive the benefit of his
prebend or dignity in his absence, as though he were present; but if it be
contagious, or incurable, then is he to be put from the exercise of his office,
and a helper or coadiutor to be joined unto him, and they both to be mayntained
of his stipend.

Prebends or dignities are to be got by institution, which are to be given by
the Bishop, or his Chauncelor, or such other as have Episcopal jurisdiction,
without which, neither any benefice is lawfully gotten, or can lawfully be
retained. Benefices not void, ought neither to be granted, neither to be
promised; but such as are void ought to be granted within six months after
knowledge of the voydance thereof, otherwise the grant of them diuolueth and
comes unto the superior: he that causes himself to be instituted into a
benefice, the Incumbent thereof being alive, himself is to be deposed from his
orders.

While any Benefice, or Bishopric is void, nothing is to be changed or
innouated in it; and such gifts, sales, or changes of Ecclesiastical things, as
are made by the Bishop, or any other like Prelate, without the consent of the
Chapter, are void in Law: and such Benefices as do become void, are to be
bestowed without any impayring or diminution of the same.

In what case the goods and possessions of the Church may be alienated, and in
what not, and that such things as are alienated, be alienated by the greater
part of the Chapter, otherwise the alienation is void: What goods of the
Church may be lent, what sold, what bought, what changed, what demised, or let
to lease, what Morgaged, or let to pawn. After these follow Tractats of last
Wills and Testaments, of succession by way of Intestate, of Burials, of Tithes,
first Fruits and Offerings: Of Monks, and their state in sundry sorts, of the
right of Patronage, of Synodals and Procurations, of consecration of Churches,
of Celebration of Divine service, and the Eucharist, of Baptism, and the
effect thereof, of a Priest not baptized, of Fasting, Purification of women,
and other like Ceremonies pertaining to Ecclesiastical discipline: Of buylding
and repayring Churches, and of their Churchyards, and the immunitie that
belongs to them both, and of sundry other things in like sort pertaining to the
Church. That Clerks and other Ecclesiastical men trouble not themselves about
Civil matters, contrary to their office and profession.

The fourth Book disposes of matters of Espousals and Matrimony, and shows
what words make espousals, what Matrimony, of the Betrothing of such as are
under age, of clandestine Espousals and Contracts, and of what account they are
to be had of in the Church, and how they may be made good: Of her that has
betrothed her self to two men, whose wife she shall be, what conditions may
be put in Espousals, and what not, what Clerks or Votaries may marry, and what
not: of him that has married her, with whom before he has committed
Adultery, and whether the same second Matrimony be good, whereupon the
resolution of the Law is, that if the women knew not that he had an other wife,
he cannot leave her, his first (...) under pretense he had an other wi^e (...)
that if she knew of it, and did join with him (...) ^^king away his wife, he
cannot (...) her, (...) he were separated from the other, as (...): Whether
Leprose men and other which are (...) with like contagious diseases may marry,
and whether being married, the marriage may not be dissolved upon this point:
Of kindred spiritual or legal, and in what sort they hinder marriage, of him
that has known his own wives sister, or his own cosen german, and whether
this offense do break the Matrimony that is contracted, or do hinder the
Matrimony that is to be contracted: Within what degrees of consanguinitie or
affinity a man may marry: Of such as are cold of Nature, or enchanted by
Sorcery, whether they may marry; The like respect is of Women, who are unfit
for men: Of such as marry against the Interdict or prohibition of the Church,
and what penalty they incur: What Children be held legitimat: who they be that
may be accusers or witnesses in cases of dissolution of Marriages between man
and wife: Of Divorces between man and wife, which are called of the diversity
of minds that are then between them, for that one seeks to go apart from
the other, and in what cases divorces are allowed, and how many kinds there be
of them: of gifts between man and wife, what security they have in Law, and
that the Dowry after the divorce be restored to the woman, so that it be not
in case of Adultery, and other such like filthynesse: Of second Marriages, in
what cases they are to be permitted, in what not.

The fifth Book treats of such Criminal matters as are handled in
Ecclesiastical Courts, wherein the proceeding is either by accusation, whereto
the Accuser does subscribe his name, because it tends to punishment: or else
by denunciation, whereto the Informer does not subscribe his name, because it
tends only to the amendment of the party: or by Inquisition, which for the
most part is not used, but upon fame precedent, albeit sometimes it be without
fame: if once the fame be proved, then may inquiry be had of the truth of the
fact, but yet without malice or slander. The Criminal matters which are
prosecuted in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and censured by Canonical
punishments, are Symonie, and selling of Ecclesiastical graces and Benefices;
whereupon Prelates are forbid to let out their Jurisdictions under an annual
rent, and Masters and Preachers to teach for money. The punishment of Jews and
Saracens, and their servants, that is, if a Jew have a servant that desires to
be a Christian, the Jew shall be compeld to sell him to the Christian for xij.
pence: That it shall not be lawful for them to take any Christian to be their
servant: that they may repair their old Synagogues, but not build new: that it
shall not be lawful for them upon good Friday, to open either their doors, or
windows: that their wives neither have Christian Nurces, nor themselves be
nurces to Christian women: that they wear diverse apparel from the Christians,
whereby they may be known, and other ignominies of like sort. Who be
Heretics, and what be their punishments: who be Schismatickes, and what be
their punishments. Of Apostataes, Anabaptists, and their punishments: of those
that kill their own Children, and their punishments: of such as lay out young
children, and other feeble persons to other men's pity, which themselves have
not, and how they are to be punished: of voluntary or casual murders: of
Tilts, Barriers, and Tornament: of Clerks that fight in combat: of Archers
that fight against Christians: of Whoredom and adultery, and how they are to
be punnished: of such as ravish women, and their punishment: of Thieves and
Robbers: of usury and the pain thereof: of deceit and falsehood: of Sorcery:
of collusion and Cosonage, and the revealing of the same: of Childrens offenses
and that they are not to be punished with the like severity as men's offenses
are: of Clerks hunters, or hawkers, who if they often times use and sport
themselves therein, if they be Bishops, they are to be suspended, from the
Communion three months, if Ministers or Priests two, but if he be a Deacon, he
is to be suspended from his office: If a Clerk often times strike other men,
and being admonished to forbear such kind of violence, do nevertheless
continue in his folly, he is to be deposed: If a Bishop cause any man
rigorously to be whipped, he is to be suspended from saying service two months:
Such as speak ill of Princes, and other like great persons spiritual or
temporal, are to be punished, so that other by their example may take heed to
speak ill, specially such as blaspheme the Majesty of the almighty God: If
Clerks excommunicated, deposed, or interdicted, in that they came to the
highest order without passing thorough the inferior orders, or that they came
to the same order couenously, and deceiptfully, or being not ordered at all, or
at the lest not ordered lawfully, dare take upon them either to Minister the
holy Sacraments, or to say divine Service, are to be deposed from their office
and from their benefice, and never after to be ordered: Prelates are not to
grieve their subjects either with rash suspension, or excommunication of their
persons, or interdicting of their Churches, but they are to execute all those
censures of the Church in judicial order: they are not easily to suffer any
man to hold two Benefices, where one may suffice, or to retain any thing to
his own use, in a Church wherein he has collation, or subjection, and that he
is not to bestow any benefice upon any that is unworthy for the same, either in
life or doctrine, with sundry other excesses of Prelates in the like sort: If
any begin to build a Church or Chapel to the prejudice of an other, and it be
denounced unto him by the Parson or parishioners of the other Church, that he
go no further in the said works, until the Law has determined it, whether it
be a nuisance or not. Of the Privilege of Prelates, and wherein they exceed
there privilege: of canonical purgation which is enjoined, when as yet there
is no certain proof of the crime, but there is a common voice and fame of the
fact, which is to be cleared by the oath of him who is charged by the fame,
that he has not committed the fact, and the oath of his good neighbors, who
swear they believe that he has taken a true oath: Of vulgar purgation, which
was performed by combat, and passing by burning fire, which is worthily
rejected, for that thereby the innocent many times was condemned, and God
thereby did seem to be tempted: Of injuries and wrongs done: Of
Ecclesiastical punishments due to offenses, among which one is, That so often
as one offends, so often he is to be punished: And that Prelates do not take
reward to wink at men in their sins, or turn corrections into pecuniary
pains upon gain of fylthie lucre: Of Penances and Pardons, or remissions: Of
Excommunication, which is the greatest punishment in the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and who, and in what cases men are to be stricken thereby.

Of all these goodly and excellent Titles of the Civil and Canon Law, so full
of wisdom, so full of variety, so well serving for every moment, and state of
the Common wealth in peace or in war, as nothing can be more, the Professors
thereof have very little use here within this Realm.

For first for the Civil Law, (beside the two Universities of this land, that
of Cambridge, and the other of Oxford, to whom the Kings of this Realm have
granted a larger liberty, in the practice of these Laws, than to any other
place of the Kingdom; for that their purpose was to have young men trained up
there, in a more ripe knowledge of these professions, that when they came
abroad, they might be more ready in all matters of negotiation and commerce,
that the Prince or state have need of them to deal in with foreign Nations,
when they were thereto called; to which the Laws of this land, serve nothing
at all, by reason of the difference that is between their Law, which is either
wholly the Civil Law, or for the most part grounded on it, and the Law of our
Nation) a very few Titles are left to the Practisers thereof to deal in, and
most of them seldom and rare in use, as shall be hereafter showed, so that I
may well divide all the profession here of the Civil Law with us, into matters
ordinary and extraordinary.

The matters of ordinary conusance of the Civil Law here in this Land, are
Marine matters, of which some are Civil, some are Criminal.

Civil matters are those which concern either the free use of the Sea it
self, or the rights that men have to trade and traffic thereupon, or the
bargains, sales, or contracts, or as it were contracts that are made or done
beyond or upon the maine Sea, or any Creek thereof, or within as much space
from the Sea, as the greatest winter wave runs out, for any matter belonging
to any negotiation or merchandise, or any other thing to the Ship or trade
apperteyning.

And first for use of the Sea it self; the Law holds it to be ff ad legem
Rhodian. de I^ct^. tot. tit.
common, and that every one has right to trade and traffic upon the same, so
that it be without the prejudice of that Prince or Land, to whom the Sea is
adjoining. The like may be said for the shore it self, so that it be either
for the refreshing of themselves with water, or victual, or for the repayring
of their Ships, or buying any thing necessary thereunto, or it be either for
uttering of any commodity they have, or buying any thing again of the people,
upon whose land they touch: In which case it were barbarous to repel any
coming in peaceable manner; albeit it may happen upon some iealously of the
state, either for that it has some great foreign Enemy, whose continual
invasion they fear, or that the Sea coasts are much infested with Pirates,
that in this case there be made resistance, but when it is made manifest by flag
of Truce, or otherwise, they are no other but well meaning men, they are to be
intertayned with all kindness.

For Contracts in Marine causes, some are contracts in deed, some are as it
were contracts: Contracts in deed are all bargains and sales whatsoever made
between Merchant and Merchant for any commodity, fraught, or traffic in the
ship, or any sale or bargain made of the Ship, or any thing thereto belonging,
as Mastes, cordage, anchorage, victuals, or any other thing of like nature,
necessary for the employment of the ship.

Those things which are as it were contracts, are those perpetual rights,
which are between the Purser or Master of the Ship, and the Passengers, or
between one passenger and an other.

The perpetual right which is between the Purser or Master of the ship, and
the Passengers is, that the Purser or Master be answerable for all such wares
or goods as are brought into the ship, whether it be delivered to himself, or
any of his Mariners: for he ought not only to be just and honest himself, but
also use the ministry of honest people about him; and therefore the Master of
the ship is no less bound for their person, than his own. The Passengers
again are honestly and readily to pay the Master of the ship their fraught,
and all such other charges of diet, and other provision as they have put him
to; wherein if there be any default of any side, the Law affordes an action
called Exercitoria, whereby the one or the other may be relieved.

The Master of the ship is he who has the charge of the L. 1. ff. de
exercitoria action.
whole anchorage and government of the ship, and his office is either to let
the ship to hyre, or to buy and sell Merchandise, or to plie fares, or to
provide tacle and furniture for the ship.

The Purser, whom the Law calls Exercitor Nauis, is D^a^ l. prima 16. de
exercit. act.
he to whom all the profit or revenue of the ship does come, whether it be in
his own right, or in an others.

The Perpetual right that is between Passengers and Passengers, and Sailors
and passengers is, that in case of eiectments, and casting out of goods, and
other merchandise into the Sea in time of tempests, or other dangers, by rocks
or quick sands, for the lightning of the ship, because it is for the common
good of all that are in the ship, and the preservation of the rest of the
fraught of the ship, it be made up with the common contribution of all: for
good reason it is that they whose goods are saved hereby, should again with
their goods redeem the others loss according to such proportion of goods as
they have in the ship, and the Law of the Sea allows,

But in cases of Eiectments the Law of the Sea is this, (which was taken from
the people of Rodes, who in oldtime, were great seafaring men, and discouerers
of sundry Countries, whose Rules even to this day are holden for good among al
Mariners, for ye great equity and indifferency that is in them) that as well
the Master or Purser of the ship himself shall contribute for the preservation
of his ship, as also the passengers for such ware as they have in the ship, of
what sort soever it be, albeit happily it be but of small weight, as pearls,
precious stones, and such like; and if perchance there be some passengers in
the ship, who have no ware nor merchandise in it, yet because themselves are a
burden to the ship, estimate is to be made of his or their apparel, rings,
and Jewels, according to which he or they are to contribute toward the loss
of such things as are cast out into the sea: neither is there any thing in the
whole ship excepted, save only those things which are put therein to be spent,
for the common good of all, as victuals, fuel, and such like; for those things
are not brought in for any one private man's use, but for the benefit and service
of all: and so much the rather, for that if victuals fail, or other like
necessaries want, every one must contribute thereto, or impart of that which
he has for his own private provision; but of men's own bodies, unless they
be servants, there is no rate to be set, because a freemans body cannot be
esteemed.

In prising, estimate is to be made as well of those things which are lost, as
those things which are saved, and the price is to be set down, not for how
much they were bought, but for how much they might be sold, and that for the
present, lest the contributors should be overmuch charged. Neither is it to the
purpose that the goods which were lost, might have been sold for more, for
that herein is not regard to be had of the gain, but of the loss. And if any
thing that was thrown out were known to be decayed or made worse by washing
with salt water, it is not to be esteemed as a new fresh thing, but the price
thereof is to be abated accordingly.

Now the contribution is to be made in this manner, first the loss is to be
set down, then the rate of those things which are saved, out of which must be
drawn an equal portion, proportionable to the quantity of every man's goods
he has in the ship to make up the loss, deducting out of the loosers goods
himself, so much as is answerable to his proportion so that he shall neither
be made a clear sauer, nor a clear looser, but in a certain quantity
ratable to his part.

But this contribution is in that case to be made, if the ship be saved; for
otherwise if a wrack happen, either before the eiectment, or in the eiectment,
then whatsoever any of the vectors or passengers catch is his own, neither is
there any regard to be had of the loss of the ship, or of the goods, unless
perhaps afterward they be drawn out of the sea.

But here we are to note that neither the things that are thus eiected, leave
to be the first owners, neither become his that taks them up; for because the
first owner does not count them for goods cast away, but still he bears that
mind to them that if he may recover them, he will hold them as his own goods,
and in consideration of so much as afterward he shall recover the contribution
in the rest shall cease.

Neither if the Master of the ship himself by violence of the tempest, shall
loose a Maste or a Sail, he shall be more allowed therefore, than a Carpenter
to whom a house is let out to be built, shall be allowed for his axe or saw,
if he break it.

Beside in matters of wrack there is, as it were, a contract between them
which have lost their goods by shipwreck, and them upon whose Lands the said
goods are driven, that the same be restored to them or their heirs, if they
come in due time to claim the same: and therefore it is precisely forbid by L.
ne quid. ff. de incendio, ruina, and naufragio.
the Law, that no man shall meddle with such goods as are wrecked, and such as
are proved to have stolen any thing thereout are holden for robbers; for that
such goods being cast on land and recovered out of the sea, remain still his
who was the owner thereof, and descend upon his heir, neither excheat unto the
King, neither to any other whom the King L. 1. lib. 11. C. de naufragiis.
has privileged in this behalf. And therefore the Emperor Constantine the
great, says worthily in this case; If any ship at any time by shipwreck be
driven unto the shore or touch at any Land let the owners have it, and let not
my Exchequer meddle with it: for what right has my Exchequer in another man's
calamity, so that it should hunt after gain in such a woeful case as this is?
And yet if no kindred appear within a year and a day, or appearing, prove not
the goods shipwracked to be theirs, the goods come to the Exchequer even by
that Law: so much that law condemns carelessness, which is written
Vigilantibus and no^ dormientibus. And with this agree the Laws of this Land,
as taken out of these imperial laws; whereby it is ordered that such goods as
are saved out of the wrack, shall be kept, by the view of the Sheriff or some
other chief Officer, and delivered to the hands of such as are of the place
where the goods were found, so that if any sue for them and prove them to be
his, or to have perished in his keeping, they shall be restored unto him without
delay; otherwise they escheat unto the king, or to him to whom the king has
granted the same: And if any convey away any part of the same goods contrary to
the law, and be attainted thereof he shall be awarded to prison, and make fine at
the kings will, and yield damages unto the party grieved: and a wrack by the
laws of this land, is where all living things within the ship do perish, but
if a man, a dog, or a cat do escape out of the ship alive, it is otherwise.

For matters of contract, they are either in the petitorie, or in the
Possessorie. The Petitorie is that where the property of any thing is
challenged, this of all other suits is the hardest, because the proof thereof
is very difficill: Institut. de reru^ dimissione singulo (...) acquirendo reru^
dominio. ^^^deo and toto titul. C. de quadrienni^ prescript l. been.
for albeit the property of things may be got by many means, as well by the
law Civil, as by the law of Nations; yet is it not a thing so easy to be
proved, for that there must concur many things to the proof of a property,
otherwise you shall fail in your suit, as in a case of bargain and sail,
that there was such a contract between the buyer and the seller, that there
was either money paid for it, or that he that sold it was content to take the
buyers word for it, that delivery was made thereof, otherwise the C. de
acquirend. possess. l. 1. ext. c. 1. de consuetudin.
property passes not, but only in some few cases, in which neither possession
nor delivery is required. Lastly, that he which sold it was rightful owner
of it, otherwise can he not pass over a thing he had no right unto.

The Lordship or property of things, is bipartite; for either it is direct or
full, such as men have when they have not only the thing it self, whereof they
are Lords or Proprietaries, but also the use and commodity thereof; or else it
is profitable, as is the hold of Tenants and Farmers, who have the use, gain,
and possession of the thing, but the Lord the property and rent in
acknowledgement of his right and Sovereignty.

The Possessorie is that right whereby the use or possession of a thing is
claimed, of which there be three sorts: for it is either in getting of the
possession of that a man has not, or in keeping of the possession of that a
man has, or in recovering and regaining of the possession of that which is
lost.

The proceeding in all these Civil matters, is by Libell concluding to the
action, the party agent giving caution to prosecute the suite, and to pay what
shall be judged against him, if he fail in the suite; the Defendant on the
contraris part, securing his adversary by sufficient suertie, or other
caution, as shall seem meet for the present to the Judge, that he will
appear in Judgment, and will pay that which shall be adjudged against him,
and that he will ratify and allow all that his Proctor shall do in his name:
for to all these ends satisdation in Judgment is, which is nothing else but a
course to secure the adversary of that which is in debate before the Judge,
that on what side soever the cause shall have an end, the clyents may be sure
to get that which by law shall be adjudged unto them.

And so much of those matters whereof the Civil law here in England usually
holds plee, Now of the Criminal matters which belong to that Court, but yet
by way of Commission from the prince, and that is that horrible crime of
Pyracie, detested of God and man, the actors wherein Tully Cicer. 3. lib. off.
calls Enemies to al, and to whom neither faith nor oath is to be kept.

Piracie is called of the greek word (...) which is Deceptio in latin, and in
English Deceit, for that many times they pretend friendship when they intend
nothing else, but robbery and bloodshed; or they are so termed of the word
(...), that is, of their wandering up and down and resting in no place, but
coasting hither and thither to do mischief.

A Pyrat is a sea-theefe, who for to enrich himself, either by subtilty, or
open force, sets upon Merchants and others, trading by sea, ever spoiling
them of their loading, if they get the upper hand, and sometimes bereauing them
of their life, and sinking of their ships.

The proceeding in these Criminal matters, is by accusation and information,
and after by trial of twelve men upon the evidence, according to the laws of
this land, and the laws of the ancient Feudes of Lombardie, where the like
trial is, and from whence, it seems, this of ours was first derived. But
here must we note, that matters of reprisals are no Pyracies, although many
times there falls out no less outrage in them, for spoiling and slaying of men,
than does in the other: for that Reprisals are done by the princes commission,
granted to the subject for redress of some injury done to himself or his
subject by some other foreign Prince or Subject, and amends has bin required
by law, and cannot be had, whereupon license is given to the subject to relieve
himself by what way he can against the other Prince, or any of his subjects,
by taking so much goods of his as himself was indamaged; which course is held
among Princes the rather to afford Justice where it is lawfully demanded.
Bartol l. nullus number. 2. C. de Iudaeis and Caelicolis.

And thus much of the causes whith ordinarily do belong unto the cognizance of
the Civil law within this land. Now it follows that I speak somewhat of
those things wherein the Civil Law deals incidently and by authority of the
Prince, and is not the ordinary object of the Civil Law, howsoever otherwise
they cannot be handsomely dealt in, but by such as have the skill of the Civil
Law.

Whereof there be three sort, the first is matters of foreign treaty between
one prince and another, the second is the ordering of martial causes, whether
they be Civil or criminal in an Army, the last is the Judgments of
ensigns and Arms, and the decisions for challenges of rights of Honor and
precedencie, where any of them is in controversy.

For the first, whereas all other Nations in compass round about us be governed
by the Civil Law, and treaties are to be decided by law, both for those things
which are in question, and to be concluded by Law for those things which are
determined by consultation and agreed upon; who is thereto to be chosen rather
than a Ciuilian, to whom their law is known, as well as to themselves: and if
perhaps he understand not their language: yet he understands that language
wherein the laws themselves are written, and is the fittest tongue for
treatises between Princes and Princes, because it is a common tongue to the
learned of all the west part of the world, and thereby every Prince shall
retain his own majesty in parlying, as it were, in his own language, and
not be forced to speak in another Princes tongue, which no doubt, is a great
disadvantage to him that shall treat; for that every Nation has some proper
Idiom not so well discerned by the booke-speaker, as perceived by the Natives of
the country where it is spoken, and wherein a stranger may easily be deceived.

How much foreign Princes do esteem of the skill of a Ciuilian in these
matters, it may be understood thereby, that they never, for the most part send
any Embassage for the treaty of any league or matter of commerce, but that one
or more of them are Ciuilians. And if the care of these things be so great with
them, surely the estimation of the same ought not to be light with us: for by
what laws their leagues and negotiations are to be directed, by the same must
ours be ordered, so that for that point, one kind of learning must serve for
both; for that otherwise one Nation will not be conceived by the other what
their capitulations are.

Surely, such as over and besides their own experience, have the knowledge of
the Civil law, have herein a double help above another man that wants the
same. First their own understanding, which for the most part is of like
proportion as other folks is: Then the skill of the law it self, which is a
quintessence of wit above other humane learning, as being either wholly composed
of the mature and deliberate resolutions of such Emperors as then swayed the
whole world, or were the domes and judgments of such wise men, as then managed
the whole world and the affairs thereof under them. But who, when he sees a
sword in a scaberd, knows whether it will cut or not, although the form
thereof be a presumption, that it will cut: but do but draw it out of the
scaberd, and try the blade thereof, and then shall you see the sharpensse of
it: I make no application hereof, for that my meaning by my words may be well
enough known.

But in these matters, the wisdom of the State knows best what is to be
done, and I only remember what other Nations do, leaving the rest to their
grauest considerations, who by precedents of former times, and men of
experience, furnished with exoticke tongues, have carried this part of policy
very well and safely hitherto: but now to the ordering of Martial causes.

Martial causes are either Civil or Criminal, whereof both are determinable
by the Civil law. A Civil Martial cause, is where either the Captain or the
Soldier requires some thing that is due and withholden from him, as his
stipend, his apparel, which among the Romans was due twice a year, that is
for Summer apparel from the first day of April to the first of September, and
their Winter again from thence to April; his diet which among the Romans was
two days hard biscuit, the third softer bread, one day wine, one other day
vinegar, one day bacon and two days mutton; his privileges either in cases of
preferment, as to be removed from one degree to another, or in cases of
immunitie, as ff. de re militari andC. eod. tit. lib. 12. ff. de priuilegio
veteranoru^: and de castrensi peculio. andC. eodem tit. lib. 12. C. de
erogatione militaris annone andC. de vest. militari.
to be freed from all servile functions, and sundry other like, which a
diligent reader may gather out of the titles of the Digest and Code of
military affairs, and other like titles which accompany them.

Soldiers faults are either proper to themselves, or common with others.

Those are common with others, which fall into other men, and are corrected
with like ordinary proceeding as other crimes of like nature are, as
manslaughter, theft, adultery, and such like.

Those are proper which do properly appertain to military discipline, and
are punished by some unusual or extraordinary punishment, as are these, not
to appear at Musters: to serve under him he ought not to serve: to vage or
wander long from the Tents, although he return on his own head: to forsake
his Colors, or his Captain: to leave his standing: to fly over to the Enemy:
to utter the council of the Army unto the Enemy: to betray the Host: to be
disobedient to his Captain, Coronell, or Lieutenant: to loose or sell his
Armor, or to steal an other man's: to be negligent in forage, or providing of
victual: to neglect his watch: to make a mutiny, or fly first out of the
field, or other like, which are delivered in the late cited titles, of whom
Arrian, who wrote the life of Alexander the great, thus says; Every thing is
counted an offense in a Soldier, which is done contrary to the common
discipline; as to be negligent, to be stubborn, to be slothful.

The punishments wherewith Soldiers are corrected, are these, either corporal
punishment, or a pecuniarie mulct, or iniunction of some service to be done, or
amotion or removing out of their places, and sending away with shame.

By capital punishment is understood for the most part death, or at the least
beating, unless happily it be pardoned, either for the unskillfulness of the
soldior, or for the mutiny of the company, being thereto drawn by wine and
wantonness, or for the miseration or pity of the party offending.

All which a wise Judge moderateth according to the quality of the person, the
quantity of the crime, and the opportunity of the time.

The last extraordinary matter that the Civil Law Judge deals in, is the
bearing of Arms, and the ranging of every man into his room of honor,
according as his place requires: and here first of Arms. For skill in Armory,
although it be a thing now almost proper to the Herauldes of Arms, who were in
old time called Feciales, or Caduceatores, because they were messengers of war
and peace, either to proclaim the one, or denounce the other: yet the ground
thereof they have from the Civil Law, so that thereby to this day they may be
directed in their skill, or controled if they do amiss.

For besides, that there are many other places in the Law, C. vt nemo priuaetus
praedijs suis, vel alienis vela regia imponat. vt nemini liceat sine Iud.
author signaimponere etc. De statuis and imaginib. vt nemini liceat signum
saluatoris etc. De hi^ qui potentiori^ nomine titulos praedijs suis affigunt.
and ibi dect. ff de reru^ diuisio. l. sanctum.
which touch Armory, as appears by the titles here quoted in the margent,
Barthol. himself makes a special tractat thereof, and divides the whole
matter of Arms into 3. rancks, according to the diverse sorts of men that bare
them: for some are Arms of some public dignity and office, as the Arms of
the Legate, or Proconsull, the Arms of Bishops, the Arms of the Lord Admiral;
other are Arms of special dignities, as Arms of Kings and Princes, which no
man is to bear or paint in his house or stuff, unless it be for to show his
duty or subjection therein.

The third sort is, of those which are private men's Arms, of whom part have
them by the grant of the Prince, or by authority of those to whom the Prince
has given power to grant Arms to other, as has the Earl Marshall within
this Realm of England; others have taken them by their own authority, which
albeit in former times they might do, as also they might take such names as
every one did C. de ingenuis and manumiss. l. ad recognoscenda ff. de reru^
diuisione l. sanctum.
like of (for names and signs in the beginning were invented, for to know and
to discern one man from an other) and as every man might change his name, so
might he change his sign, so that it were not done in fraud and deceit: but
after it was forbidden, both that any man should change his C. de mutatione
noi^s l. 1. ff. de Falsis, l. falsi nominis.
name, because it was not thought it could be done with any good meaning, and
that no man should bear Arms of his own authority; and therefore Officers
were appointed under Princes, as I have said, who should give Arms to such as
deserved well of the common wealth, either in war or peace: for albeit in the
beginning Arms and Colors were proper to men of war, to avoid confusion in
the host, and to discern one company from an other, yet when it came to be a
matter of honor, it was challenged no less by men of peace, than by men of
war; for true in deed is that saying of Tully, Parua sunt foris arma nisi est
consilium domi: and the Emperor speaking of the benefit, that Advocates, and
L. aduocati C. de Aduocatis diuersoru^ iudiciorum.
such like bring to states and Common wealths, says thus, Advocates which
break the doubtful fates of causes, and with the strength of their defense
sundry times, as well in public causes as in private, raise up those that are
fallen, and relieve those which are wearied, do no less good unto mankind,
than if by war and wounds they saved their parents and Country: for we
(says he) do not count that they only do war for our Empire, which do
labor with sword, shield and Target, but also our Advocates, for indeed the
Advocates or Patrons of causes do war, which by confidence of their glorious
voice do defend the hope, life, and posterity of such as be in danger: thus
says he; and thereupon comes that distinction of Castrense peculium, Et
quasi castrense peculium, signifying thereby, that albeit Counselors to the
state, Lawyers, and such like be not actual warriers, yet they are
representiue warriers, and do no less serve the Common wealth than they. The
Soldier rises betime in the morning, that he may go forth to his exploit,
the Advocate that he may provide for his Clyents cause, he wakes by the
trumpet, the other by the cock, he orders the battle, the other his
Clyents business, he takes care his tents be not taken, the other that his
Clyents cause be not overthrown: so then either of them is a warrior, the one
abroad in the field, the other at home in the City, Beside Bartol treats in
that place, what things are borne in Arms, either natural, as beasts,
birds, fyshes, mountains, trees, flowers, sun, moon, stars, or such like:
or artificial, not taken from things eristent, as colors, simple and mixed,
divided by halfes or quarters, or by lines, direct, cross, overthwart, or such
other; then how each of these is to be carried, wherein art must follow
nature, that every thing figured, be borne according to the nature of that
which it does figure, and not otherwise: and therefore as in Ensigns, flagges,
or standerds, the spear or shaft goes before, and the streamer or colors
follow after, so the face of every creature that is figured or described in the
banner or hatchment, must look unto the shaft or spear; unless a man bear
two creatures, one looking toward the other, for then this observation has no
place, for vain it is to conjecture where things are certain, otherwise it is
the nature of the face to go before, and the body to follow after: and the
like reason is of the parts of every creature which is likewise borne in Armor,
which are distinguished by before and behind, whose site must be such, that
the head look to the spear, otherwise would it seem to go back like a
monster: but if the forepart alone of any creature be borne in a Scuchin, as
often it happens that men give only a Lion, Bear, or bulls head, for their
Arms, then must not the head directly look unto the shaft, but aside: further
every of these creatures, be so described in the coat as his vigor and
generositie be best set out, whether it be a feirce or savage beast, or a mild
or gentle creature. But for colors his rule is, that the noblest color be put
in the first part of the field, howsoever the coat be divided, quarter or
pale. And of Colors the golden color is the chiefest, as that which does
figure the Sun, which is the fountain of light, which is most acceptable to
every man's eye. The next is Purple or Red, which does figure the fire, that is
the highest and noblest of the four Elements, and next the sun it self in
dignity. The 3. is Blew, of the Heralds called Azure, and Ceruleus in Latin,
which figureth the Air, which is a clear and transparant body, and most
capable of light, and comes in nobility next after the fire. The 4. is white,
which comes near to the Light, and therefore is more noble than Black, that
draws near to darkness, and therefore is the basest of all Colors. And for
mixed colors, as every one has more or less of White or Black, so either
they are nobler or baser in reputation or degree. And thus much in general as
concerning the knowledge of Arms.

Now follows what the Civil Law holds as concerning Princes, and other
Honorable persons, and their successions and places, which a grave Judge of
this land Nedham 37. Hen. 6. fol. 21.
has anciently acknowledged to belong unto the Civil Law.

By the Civil Law, all power comes from God, as the Scripture teaches, and
among powers the two greatest are the Empire, and the Priesthood; for as God
has ordained the one to rule the outward man, and to bring all his actions
within the compass of reason, and so to establish Common wealths, and to
order the same: So also has he provided the other for the instruction of the
inward man, and the planting of Religion among men.

By the Empire, I understand not only the Empire of Rome (which sometimes bare
rule over most part of the world, at the lest ten mighty Kingdoms, which now
are grown into particular Empires and Monarchies themselves) but also every
several Kingdom, which acknowledges no other Emperor than his own
Sovereign; for howsoever they differ in name and title, yet is the office it
self all one: For every one of them is Gods immediate Vycar upon earth in their
own kingdoms, for matters appertayning unto Justice. Whereupon the Civil Law
gives them very honorable tytles, sometimes tearming them ff. de leg. 2. l.
ff. de legate. 2. l. C. 4. tit. 13. C. 1. tit. 3. l. 56. C. 1. tit. 1. l. 5.
Gods upon earth, for the great authority they have over other men under God;
sometimes Ministers of God, for the service they do God in their Common
wealths; sometimes most holy, and most Religious, for the care they ought to
have about Religion, and correcting of those things which are done against the
fear of God; for a king ought in all C. 1. tit. 1. l. 5.
things to propound the word of God before him for his rule, and to follow the
doctrine of the Apostles: sometimes they are called most mild, because a king
in all the course of his life, but specially in matters of punishment ought to
imitate C. 5. tit. 4. l. 23.
the mercy and favor of Almighty God.

Although the Emperor or King be reckoned among his L. fin. C. de verb. signif.
C. de dignitat. l. 8. lib. 1^.
Nobility, because he should not be puffed up with the glory of his place, and
conceive he were of a more excellent mould than the rest, when indeed we are
all of one, and the self same clay; yet he is both by the ordinance of God and
man (...), 1. Petri ca. 2. verse. 13.
(as the Apostle terms him) among them, that is one which is supreme
Sovereign above the rest, and whom they ought in all things to obey, so it be
not against the Law of God, and common Justice, for himself is in steed of the
whole Law; yea he is the Law it self, and the only interpreter A b c.
signific^. via ext de penitentijs etc. C. 6. tit. 23. l. 19 C. de testib. l.
omnium.
thereof, as in whose breast is the whole knowledge of the same; which albeit
the Doctors do hold with a qualification, as thereby understanding, not only
the Princes person, but also his Counselors, both which put together, make up
a perfect state of a Prince: yet forasmuch as all that benefit of wisdom and
government that comes from them unto the Common wealth, is principally
derived from the Prince, as from the head, who has vouchsafed to make them as
it were members of his body, and so by them to derive the power of his
government, unto all, it may be rightly said, that in the Princes breast,
rests the fullness of all knowledge, for the well ordering of his Common
wealth; for what they see, they see for him, what they hear, they hear for
his use, what they understand, they understand to do him service, and so
consequently of the rest of the actions of the mind and body, they obey the
Prince, (...) Arist. primo Ethicorum.
as their Sovereign: so then as the Prince has the primacie in the government
of his Common wealth, and all those which govern under him, govern by, and
for him, so also has he the precedence, and protoclesie, or foresitting in all
assemblies before the rest, and such other as have precedencie or foresitting,
have it by the Princes indulgencie.

Next unto the Prince is his Queen, who shines by the ^. 7. tit. 37. l. 3. in
princip.
beams of her King, and has the like prerogative as himself has. After them
comes next in place the Kings Children, because children in a sort are
partakers of their Fathers dignity: but yet among children there is a
difference, that the male be preferred before the female, and among those which
are males the eldest have the pre-eminence in going, sitting, speaking, and
other like matters of respect. After the kings Children follow in the next
rank Dukes, after them Marquesses, then Earls, fourthly Viconts* and last
Barons; all which have dignities either heritable, or granted by the bounty
of the Prince, whereupon their nobility is founded, and whereby they only and
no other are to be accounted Peers of the land. Among these for courtesy sake
are reckoned such as descend of Noble houses, every one according to his
degree, until the third generation: L. 1. C. de dignitat. lib. 12.
and the daughters of these great houses, so long as they marry to any that
are in degree of Peers, reteyne their fathers dignity, but if they marry
under the degree of Peers, then they loose their fathers place, and follow the
degree of their husband; which notwithstanding is in practice otherwise here
among us, but without any warrant of Law. The like is of the Widows of the
Peers, L. Mulieres 13. C. de dignitat. li. 12. C. de equestri dignitat. l.
^nica lib. 12.
who while they live sole, and unmarried, reteyne the nobility of their
husbands; but if they marry then they follow the condition of their second
husbands, be it honorable, or otherwise.

Next in place after Peers come Knights, whereof Cuiacius Cuiacius Lib. de
^eudis.
following the modern French Heraldrie, makes three sorts; one whereof he
calls Cheualliers, the other Bannerets, the third Bachilers, but sets
down no proper difference of the one from the other, and therefore I leave
that to be inquired of those, which shall be curious thereof. Among the Romans
for oght that I have read, ^. cu^ te. C. de Nuptijs.
there was but one order of them, and they were next in degree to the Senators
themselves, as with us they are to the Peers.

Between Knights, and Doctors of the Law, has ever bin question for
precedence, since either of them has but in credit in Commonweals, as may
appear both by the comparison that Tully makes between Lucius Murena, a
Knight of Rome, and Pub. Sulpitius a Lawyer, either of them standing for the
Consulship, in his eloquent Oration made for Murena, and many disputes of
Bartol and Baldus, arguing the case to and fro, which although be yet
disputable in foreign Countries, where the Civil Law is in credit; yet here
among us where all preferment is taken from it, and the Professors thereof are
shut up as it were into a narrow corner of their profession, it is without
controversy, and the prioritie thereof indubitable: but yet this Chassa^e^s de
gloria mund^ lib. 9.
is the resolution of those which are learned in this point, that in such acts
as concern learning, a Doctor is to be preferred before a Knight, but in acts
that concern Military knowledge, a Knight takes place before a Doctor: but in
other acts which are neither proper to the one, nor to the other, First are
preferred such Doctors as attend about the Prince; secondly such Knights as
wait upon the Prince: thirdly such Doctors as being not about the Prince, are
excellent in learning; fourthly come Knights without any place of preferment;
lastly Doctors of meaner gifts and place.

Although by the Civil Law there be no Gentlemen of title under Knights, but
all the rest went under the name of people, yet in other common wealths there
are, and with us be, even in this rank, which have names of pre-eminence,
whereby they are in degree above the rest; as with the French there are les
Gentilhomes, and le Gens de ordinances, and with us are Squiers and Gentlemen,
all which give Ensigns, or coat Armours, and thereby are distinguished from
the meaner people: in which respect Bartol calls them Noble, but yet of a
weak nobility, for that it has no further prerogative Bartol tractat. de
Insignis.
in it, then that it makes them differ from the baser sort of people.

Of these two sorts of Gentlemen with us, the Squier has the priority, who
seems by the common name we give him in Latin, to have had his origin, either
for that he carired the Armor of the King, Duke, or other great personage, as
we see not only in the holy Scriptures Saul Homer. Illiad. P^^n. lib. 35.
natura^^nstor.
and Jonathan, had their Armor bearers, but in Poets and other profane
stories, Patroclus was Achilles Armor bearer, and Clitus great Alexanders:
whereupon some write that (...) sieve (...), which is he whom we call Armiger in
Latin, is a footeman, that with a spear, shield, or head-peece, follows an
armed Knight in battle, or rather as some other suppose, it is the footman
himself armed in the field: howsoever the word be taken, this is sure, that
these were men of good account in the old time, as those which won themselves
credit out of war, and so their estimation remained in their posterity; and
as those were in time before, so are these which are in our days, as
discending for the most part from their worthy ancestors.

There is no dubbing or creating of these by the Princes hand, or him to whom
the Prince has given authority, as it is in the creating of the Nobility,
and the making of Knights, but every one whom the Captain has vouchsafed,
that service, is by the service it self a Squier; and that not only he which
has done the service in war, but also such which have done any equivalent
service in peace, as Lieutenants, and Shirifes of Shires, and Justices of Peace
within their County: for even in this as in other Promotions has that
distinction of the Law place, of Castrensis peculij, et quasi castrensis,
whereby service of the Common wealth at home, is leuelled and made equal with
that abroad. Gentlemen have their beginning either of blood, as that they are
borne of worshipful parents, or that they have done some thing worthyly in
peace or war L. 1. C. de dignitat. lib. 10. and 12.
whereby they deserve to bear Arms, and to be accounted gentlemen, for he is
a gentleman who is commonly so taken and reputed.

And this is the last and lowest order of them to whom the Law does allow any
challenge of precedencie.

Now it follows that I speak some something how great personages one
succeed in another in their places of honor.

And first, to begin with the Empire it self, as the greatest earthly dignity
under God, albeit in the beginning it were raised up by no right, but by
usurpation, Julius Caesar changing the former government of the State, and
challenging to himself, the whole managing of the same; yet after it came to
an orderly course, insomuch as he that had the present possession of it,
disposed it to his best liking, by his last Will and Testament. So Julius
himself devised it to Octauius his sisters son: and albeit that devise took
not effect, by reason of the treason that was wrought against Julius own
person, so that Octauius was feign to recover it by another right, even by the
death of Lepidus and Antonius his colleagues in office; yet that very Will of
Julius gave a pretense to Octauius, who after was called Augustus (because he
did increase the Empire with many worthy victories) to stand for the
inheritance of the Empire, in consideration of which title the Senate and
people of Rome more easily submitted themselves unto his government. Augustus
in like sort bequeathed it to Tiberius, and Tiberius to Caius: and so it came
from one to another, until some of them by cruelty and licentiousness of
life, became so odious to God and man, that the people rose against them, and
bereft them of that liberty, which they had prescribed in appointing of their
Successors, and somewhiles themselves, and somewhiles the Soldiors made choice
of whom they thought good, or by whom they thought best to be rewarded. And
thus the right of Succession unto the Empire was tossed up and down many hundred
years betwixt Inheritance, Bequest, and Election, until at the last, it came
unto that establed state, as now it is in, and settled Electors of the Empire,
so often as it happenned to be void. Succession in Kingdoms, in most part of
the world, in former time has been, and at this day is by right of blood, (a
few only excepted, which are Elective, as the Kingdom of Poleland is at this
day) and in Succession the eldest son takes place before the rest; and if
there be no heir male, then the eldest daughter succedeth in the kingdom, and
her issue: for Kingdoms (as also succession in other dignities) are impartible.
And yet France (to exclude Edward the third from the inheritance of the Crown
thereof, who descended of Isabell the sister of Charles the fair, and so was
next heir male unto the kingdom of France) alleged for themselves the Law
Salicke, pretending none which claimed by the woman, albeit he were the next
heir male in blood, was to succeed, as long as there were of the male line
alive, how far soever they were off in degree from the last king deceased. But
this is but a mere device of the French, fathered upon some rotten Record of
that part of their Nation, called Salii; of whom otherwise they have nothing
memorable to speak of, as being the basest Nation among them all, of whom they
report their people to have been compounded: but this devise served their
turn then, whether it were anciently invented, or newly coined. But howsoever
they oppose themselves against women's government, as Bodine Bodin lib. 6. de
repub.
there contriman, has of late stretched out the strength of his wit to devise
reasons against the government of that sex: certain it is, that the Law of God
has allowed it, as it appears in the example of Debora, who being a
Prophetess governed Israel forty years, and by her direction got the
Israelites a mighty victory over Sisera the captain of the host of Iaben:
and we among other Nations, have found by experience, gunaicotary or women's
government is nothing so unfortunate, as Bodine would make us believe it is. For
both in our late Queen, and also in her sister, (except only the case of
Religion, wherein she followed the error of the time, and was carried way more
with zeal than knowledge, and thereby is more to be pitied than to be
envied) what is in their government, the wisest Man-Prince in the world would
not desire to be in his own Regiment? for what is either in their private
carriages, (so you give no ear to virulent and malicious tongues, who report
surmises for substances, and tales for truths) or in their public government,
(so you lay not other men's faults to their charges) that any man can justly
blame? For that I may pass over the rest of their Heroical virtues fit for
women of their State (specially the late Queen, who was peerless among all
Queens that ever went before her, and unmatchable, as I verily do believe, by
any that ever shall succeed her) as their magnanimity whereby they subdued,
not only their domestical enemies, but vanquished even their foreign foes,
were their designements never so dangerous, not showing any token of
discouragement either in the treasonable attempts of the one, or in the
malicious complotiments of the other.

What an excellent work of hers was that, that then when all her neighbor
Kingdoms round about her were drunk with the cup of the fornication of the
whore of Babylon, she alone came out of Babylon, and so continued constantly
to the end, mauger the threats of the red fiery Dragon, and the floods of
water he cast out of his mouth after her? How excellent did she show her self
in those two virtues which do chiefly preserve Princes States, that is, Mercy
and Judgment, the Records of her time do show, so that I may spare to remember
any by name, which happily would be not well taken.

And yet, truth it is, that men's government is more agreeable to Nature than
women's is, whom God in the beginning put in subjection under man, and who for
the most part are by Nature weak in body, and thereby unable to put in
execution the great affairs of a Kingdom, and unsettled in judgment, and so
hardly can determine that which is right, and settle themselves thereupon: yet
by the numeration of certain ill governing Queens, to conclude a generality
against all government of women, is but an ill kind of arguing, for even by the
like reason a man might conclude against Kings, of which sort, although there
has bin many good, whom God has used as instruments to work great good unto
people in every kingdom, yet more of them have bin evil, as the Stories of
every country will show; and to abridge God of his power, that he cannot as
well govern by a woman as by a man, when it is his good pleasure so to do,
were great injury to God, and a great discredit to all woman kind: but to
return thither where I left.

In succession of Kings a question has been, where the King has had sons,
both before he came to the Kingdom and after, which of them is to succeed, he
that was borne before the Kingdom, as having the prerogative of his birthright,
or he that was dorne after, as being brought into the world under a greater
planet than the other, neither has there wanted reason or example for each
side to found themselves Herodot. lib. 4. Justin. lib. 11. Plutarchus in vita
Artoxerxis.
on: for Xerxes the son of Darius King of Persia being the eldest birth after
his father was inthronised in the Kingdom, carried away the Empire thereof from
his brother Artemines or Artebarsones borne before his father came to the
royal possession thereof: so Arseces the son of another Darius borne in the
time of his fathers Empire carried away the garland from his brother Cyrus
borne before the Empire: so Jews Duke of Millan borne after his father was
Gui^^ard. l. 1. Histor. ^lon^us Decad. 2. lib. 6. Mich. Ritius lib. 2. de
regib. H^^gar. Sigeb. in ^roni.
Duke, was preferred to the Dukedom, before his brother Galliasius borne
before the Dukedom. But these examples notwithstanding, and the opinion of
sundry Doctors to the contrary, common use of succession in these latter days
has gone to the contrary, and that not without good reason: for that it is
not meet, that any that have right to any succession by the progatiue of their
birthright (such as all elder brethren have) should be despoiled thereof, except
there be some evident cause of incapacitie to the contrary.

Beside sundry contentions have risen in kingdoms between the issue of the
eldest son of the king dying before his father, and the second brother
suruiuing the father, who should Reign after the Father, the Nephew
challenging the same unto him, by the title of his fathers birthright, and so
by the way of representation; for the eldest son, even the father yet living,
bears the person of the father: how much ff. de liberis and posthumis l in
suis.
then rather his father being dead? Whereupon the Law calls as well the son
Filiusfamilias, as the father Paterfamilias, for that the son, even during the
fathers life, is as it were Lord of his fathers state: the other claiming as
eldest son to his father, at the time of his death; upon which title, in old
Pausanias lib. 3. Historiaris.
time there grew controversy between Areus the son of Acrotatus eldest son to
Cleomines King of Lacedemon, and Cleomines second son to Cleomines, and uncle
to the said Areus, but after debate thereof, the Senate gave their sentence for
Areus right, against Cleomines: beside Eunomus Plutarch. in vita Licurg.
King of Lacedemon having two sons, Polydectes and Lycurgus, Polydectes dying
without children, Lycurgus succeeded in the kingdom, but after that he
understood Polydectes widow had a child, he yielded the Crown to him: wherein
he dealt far more religiously then either did king John, who upon like pretense
not only put by Arthur Plantaginet his eldest brothers son, from the succession
of the kingdom, but also, most unnaturally, took away his life from him; or
king Richard the third, who most barbarously, to come unto the kingdom, did not
only sley his two innocent Nephews, but also defamed his own mother, in
publishing to the world that the late king his brother, was a bastard. Our
Stories Bartel. l. si vi^ae matre C. de bonis maternis primogeniti filii no^
exclud^ secu^dogenitu^ in regno.
do not obscurely note that controversy of like matter, had like to grown
between Richard the second and John of Gaunt his uncle, and that he had
procured the counsel of sundry great learned men to this purpose, but that he
found the hearts of sundry Noblemen of the Land, (and specially the citizens of
London) to be against him; whereupon he desisted from his purpose, and
acknowledged his Nephews right. Yet notwithstanding, when as Charles the
second Vicerius in vita Henric^ 7.
King of Cicill, departed his life, and left behind him a Nephew of Charles his
clo^st son, surnamed Martellus, and his younger son Robert, and the matter came
in question which of them should succeed, Clement the fifth gave sentence for
Robert the younger son of Charles deceased, against the son of Martellus, being
Nephew to his Grandfather, and so caused the said Robert to be proclaimed king
of both Caecils; Clem. pastoralis de re iudicata.
which was done rather upon displeasure that Pope Clement conceived against the
Emperor Frederick, than that there was just cause so to do. And yet Glanuill,
an old reverent Lawyer of this Land, and Lord chief Justice under Henry the
second, seems to make this questionable here Glanuil l. 7. c. 3.
in England, who should be preferred, the Uncle or the Nephew.

And thus much of succession of kings, wherein the eldest among Males has the
prerogative, and the like in Females, if there be no Male: for that a Kingdom
is a dignity vndiuisible, and can come but to one, be he Male or Female; for
that otherwise great governments would soon come to small Rules and
Territories.

And the like that is said of Kingdoms, is to be held of all Dignities under
Kingdoms, where the eldest son is to be preferred before all his other
brethren, and they successively one before another, if there be no issue left
of them that go before; and the Male line is to be preferred before the
Feminine, and the Feminine before all the rest of the kindred, so it be not a
Masculine Feud, and the same intailed upon the heir Male.

And thus far, as concerning the matters wherein the Civil Law deals
directly or incidently within this Realm. Now it follows, to show how much
of all those titles of the Canon Law, which have bin before set down, are here
in practice among us.

Of those Titles of the Canon Law, which before have been recited, some are
out of use here with us in the singular or Indiuiduum, by reason of the gross
Idolatry they did contain in them; as the Title of the authority and use of
the Pal, the title of the Mass, the title of Relics and the worship of
Saints, the title of Monks, and Regular Canons, the title of the keeping of the
Eucharist, and Cream, and such other of like quality: but yet are retained in
the general: for in stead of them there are substituted in their places holy
worships, tending to the like end of godliness those other did pretend, but
void of those superstitious means the other thought to please God by; and so
in stead of the Mass, has come in the holy Communion; and in place of
worshipping of Saints, has succeeded a godly remembrance, and glorifying of
God in his Saints, and so of the rest whereof there is any right use within the
Church.

Some other are out of use as well among the Civil as Criminal titles,
because the matter that is therein treated of, is known notoriously to belong
to the conusance of the Common Law at this day, as the titles of Buying and
Selling, of Leasing, Letting, and taking to Farm, of Morgaging, and pledging,
of Giving by deed of gift, of Detecting of Collusion and Cosenage, of Murder,
of Theft, and receiving of Thieves, and such like.

And yet, I doubt not, but even these matters, as well Civil as Criminal, or
most of them, were aunciently in practice, and allowed in Bishops Courts in
this Land, among Clerks, to the which I am induced by three reasons: First,
that I find not only the foreign Authors of the Decretals, but also the
domestical Authors of the Legantines, being all most excellent wise men, as
the Stories of their several ages do report, to have inacted these several
constitutions, and to have inserted them, not only in the body of the Canon
Law, but also in the body of the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Land; and that
some wise men, sundry years after their ages, did write and comment upon the
same, as things expedient and profitable for the use of the Church, and the
government of the Clergy in those days; neither of which, I do presume, they
would have done, if in those ages there had not been good use and free
practice of them.

Secondly, that I find in the Code of Justinian, by sundry Laws, some of his
own making, some other of other Emperors before his time, even from the days
of Constantine the great, bishops in their Episcopal audience had the practice
of these matters as well Criminal as Civil, and to that end had they their
Officials or Chauncellors, whom the Law calls Ecclesiecdici or Episcoporum
Ecdici, that is, Church Lawyers, or Bishops Lawyers, men trained up in the
Civil and Canon Law of those ages, to direct them in matters of Judgment as
well in Ecclesiastical Criminal matters, as Ecclesiastical Civil matters.

And that these, which now are Bishops Chauncellers, are the very self same
persons in Office, that aunciently exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under
Bishops, and were called Ecclesiecdici, it may appear by that which Papias, an
old ancient Historiographer cited by Gothofred in his Annotations upon the
foresaid Law Omnem in the Code, and title de Episcopis and Clericis, and upon
the. Praeterea writes of them, who says thus, that Ecclesiecdici, or Ecdici
were those that were ayders and assisters to the Bishops in their
Jurisdictions, not astrict or bound to one place, but every where through the
whole Diocese supplying the absence of the Bishop, which is the very right
description of the Bishops Chauncellers that now are; who for that they carry
the Bishops authority with them every where for matters of Jurisdiction, and
that the Bishop and they make but one Consistory, are called the Bishops
Vicars general, both in respect their authority stretches it self
throughout the whole Diocese, and also to distinguish them from the
Commissaries of Bishops, whose authority is only in some certain place of
the Diocese, and some certain causes of the Jurisdiction, limited unto them
by the bishops, and therefore are called by the Law, Iudices or Officiales
foranei as if you would Clem 2. ca. foraneos de rescript.
say, Officiales astricti cuidam foro diocesis tantum.

So that it is a very mere conceit, that a certain gentleman, very learned
and eloquent, of late has written, that Chauncellers are men but of late
vpstart in the world, and that the sloth of bishops has brought in
Chauncelors, whereas in very deed, Chauncellers are equal, or near equal in
time to Bishops themselves, as both the Law it self, and Stories do show: yea
Chauncellers are so necessary Baldus l. aliquando ff. de officio Proconsulis.
officers to Bishops, that every Bishop must of necessity have a Chaunceller,
and if any Bishop would seem to be complete within himself, that he needed
not a Chaunceller, yet may the Archbishop of the Province wherein he is,
compel Couar. lib. 3. variarum resolut. c. 20. number. 4. S. Br^z^. l^b. 1. de
vica^^o (...) q. 46 n^m. 1. 4. 12. and 13.
him to take a Chaunceller, or if he refuse so to do, put a Chaunceller on
him: for that the Law does presume, it is a matter of more weight than one man
is able to sustain to govern a whole Diocese by himself alone; and
therefore howsoever the nomination of the Chaunceller be in the Bishop, yet his
authority comes from the Law, and Hostiensis in sum made officio Vicarij
numoro 2. in sine. nomirationem ab (...), potestatem vero a iure recipiuntur.
therefore he is no less accounted an Ordinary by the Law, than the Bishop is.
But truth it is, not the sloth of the Bishops, but the multitude and variety
of Ecclesiastical causes brought them in, which could not be defined by like
former precedents, but needed every one almost a new decision. And the cause
why Princes in the beginning granted to Clergy men these causes and their
Consistories, (for from Princes were derived in the beginning all these
authorities, as also the Religion it self is settled and protected in Kingdoms
by Princes, before there can be had a free passage thereof) was one that the
Clergy men thereby might not be drawn from their prayer and exercise of
divine service to follow matters of suites abroad: secondly that they were like
to have a more speedy and better dispatch and more indifferency before a Judge
of their own learning, than before a Judge of an other profession, for this is
true, and ever has bin, and I fear ever will be unto the end, that is said in
the gloss, and is in common saw, Laici opido semper infesti sunt Clericis:
Lastly that Clerks suits and quarrels should not be diuulged and spread abroad
among the lay people, and that many times to the great discredit of the whole
profession, specially in crimminall matters; wherein Princes aunciently so much
tendered the Clergy, that if any man among them had committed any thing worthy
death, or open shame he was not first executed, or put to his public disgrace,
before he was degraded by the Bishop, and his Clergy, and so was executed, and
put to shame, not as a Clerk, but as a lay malefactor; which regard toward
Ecclesiastical men, it were well it were still retained, both because the
consideration thereof is reverent and worthy the dignity of the Ministry,
whose office is most honorable, and also for that it is more ancient than any
Papisticall immunitie is.

The third and last reason that moves me that I should believe, that these
Titles sometimes were here in exercise among us in the Ecclesiastical Courts
is, that I find Glanuill, Glanuill lib. 12. cap. 15. de Legibus Angliae.
who himself lived under Henry the second, and was Lord chief Justice of
England in his days, sort to the Ecclesiastical Courts the plea of Tenements,
where the suit is between two Clerks, or between a Clerk and a Lay man, and
the plea is, De libera eleemosina feodi Ecclesiastici, et non petitur inde
recognitio, whether the frank fee be lay or Ecclesiastical: where also is
further added that if it be found by the Idem lib. 13. cap. 25.
verdict of legal and sufficient men, that it is of Ecclesiastical fee, it
shall not be after drawn to lay fee, no though it be held of the Church, by
services thereunto due and accustomed: secondly whereas land is demanded in
marriage by the husband, Idem lib. 7. cap. 18.
or the wife, or their heir, and the demand be against the giver, or his
heir, then it shall be at the choice of the demaunder, whether he will sue for
the same in the court Christian or in the secular Court: For says he, it
pertains unto the Ecclesiastical Courts to hold plea of dowries, which he
calls Maritagia, if so be the plaintiff so make choice of those Courts, for
the mutual affiance that is there made between the man and the wife, for
marriage to be had between them, and there is a dowry promised unto the man by
the woman's friends, neither shall this plea be carried unto the temporal
Courts, no though the lands be of Lay fee, so that it be certain the suit is
for a Dowry, but if the suit be against a stranger, it is otherwise: thirdly
the Kings prohibition forbidding Anno 24. Ed. 1.
the Clergy the dealing in many things which are of lay fee, forbids them no
one thing that is of Ecclesiastical fee, and to show the Princes meaning
precisely therein, that it was not his intent by that Prohibition to restrain
the Ecclesiastical Judges for proceeding in matters of Ecclesiastical fee, he
sets down in very terms these words (Recognisances touching Lay fee) as
though he would hereby signify to all men, that he would not touch matters of
Ecclesiastical fee, which did then wholly and properly appertain to the trial
of the Christian Court, as has bin before vouched out of Glanuill; who for the
place he then held, may be thought to have known the Laws of England, as then
they stood, and the right interpretation thereof, as well as any man then or now
living. And yet because there were some things of Lay fee, which the Clergy
then had cognizance of, as yet they have in some measure; as causes and matters
of Money, chattels, and debts, rising out of Testaments or Matrimony, because
he would have whatsoever belonged to the Clergy to be undoubted, excepteth
them from those things which belong to the Crown and dignity, and leaves
them to the ordering of the Christian Courts; which is nothing else but an
affirmance of that which Glanuill, and the rest of the ancient English
Lawyers, Bracton and Britton said before.

Lastly the provincial Constitution Aeternae de poenis, made in the days of
Henry the 3. plainly shows, that in those days all personal suits between
either Clerk or Clerk, or between Lay men complaynants, and Clerks
defendants (for ever the Plaintiff must follow the Court of the Defendant,
which to the Ecclesiastical men then was the Ecclesiastical Court) were tried
by the Spiritual Law, and not by the Temporal Law: which practice for that it
does accord with the judgment of those ancient Lawyers that have bin before
cited, and with the Prohibition it self, which there restrains only calling
of Lay men to make recognisances of matters of Lay fee; it may be a great
argument, that these things were of the Ecclesiastical right in those days:
from which I see not how the Ecclesiastical Courts are fallen, for I see
neither Law nor Statute to the contrary, unless perhaps they will say the
Statute of the 25. H. 8. cap. 19.
25. of H. 8. cap. 19. took the same away, as being hurtful to the kings
Prerogative royal, and repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this
Realm; which whether they be, or be not taken away by the stroke of that
Statute, I leave it to men of better experience in these matters than my self
to judge.

But yet this I find by experience to be true, That where there are two diverse
Jurisdictions in one Common wealth, unless they be carefully bounded by the
Prince, and an equal respect carried to both of them, so far as their places,
and the necessary use of them in the Common wealth requires; as the
advancement of the one increases, so the practice of the other decreaseth;
specially if one have got the countenance of the State more than the other:
which is the only cause at this day of the ouerflowing of the one, and the
ebbing of the other, but it is in his Sacred Majesty to redress it, not by
taking away any thing from that profession that is theirs, but by restoring to
this profession, that which is their own; but hereof (...).

For the rest of the matters that belong to the trial of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, some are acknowledged to be absolutely in use, some other are
challenged to be but in a certain measure in use.

In absolute use are those which never had any opposition against them, which
almost are those alone which belong to the Bishops degree or order; for all
things which come within the compass of the Ecclesiastical Law, are either
belonging to the Bishops degree, or his Jurisdiction: To his degree or order
belong the ordering of Ministers and Deacons, the confirmation of Children, the
dedication of Churches and Churchyards, and such like, none of which have been
challenged at any time to belong to any other Law. The second sort is of them
that belong to the Bishops jurisdiction, which is partly voluntary, partly
litigious: Voluntary is, when those with whom the dealing is, stand not
against it, but litigious it is, when it is oppugned by the one part or the
other; Of this latter sort many things in sundry ages have bin called in
question, but yet rescued and recovered again by the wise and grave Judges
themselves, who have found the challenge of them to be unjust. But what does
belong to either of them in private, or what causes do appertain to the whole
Jurisdiction in general, because they have bin already particulerly set down
by that famous man of worthy memory Doctor Cousin, in his learned Apology for
certain Cos in in his Apology part 1. c. 2.
proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts; I will not make a new catalogue of
them, but send the Reader for the knowledge thereof unto his Book; but yet in
my passage will I note which of them have bin most chiefly oppugned, and as
occasion shall fall out speak to them.

And thus much as concerning those parts of the Ecclesiastical Law, which are
here in use with us: Now it follows to show whereby the exercise of that
Jurisdiction which is granted to be of the Civil and Ecclesiastical
cognizance, is defeated and impeached by the Common Law of this Land, which is
the third part of this Division.

The impeachment therefore is by one of these means, by Praemunire, by
Prohibition, by Iniunction, by Supersedeas, by Indicauit, or Quare impedit: but
because the four last are nothing so frequent, nor so harmfull as the others,
and that this Book would grow into a huge volume, if I should prosecute them
all, I will only treat of the two first, and put over the rest unto some better
opportunity.

A Praemunire therefore is a writ awarded out of the kings Bench, against one
who has procured out any Bull, or like process of the Pope from Rome, or
elsewhere, for any Ecclesiastical place, or preferment within this Realm; or
does sue in any forteine Ecclesiastical Court, to defeat or impeach any
Judgment given in the Kings Court, whereby the body of the offender is to be
imprisoned during the Kings pleasure, his goods forfeyted, and his lands seized
into the Kings hand, so long as the offender lives.

This writ was much in use, during the time the Bishop of Romes authority was
in credit in this land, and very necessary it was it should be so, for being
then two like principal authorities acknowledged within this Land, the
Spiritual in the Pope, and the Temporal in the King; the Spiritual 25. Edw.
2. 27. Edw. 3. ca. 1. 38 Edw. 3. ca. 1. and 2. 7. Rich. 2. ca. 12. 13. Rich. 2.
ca. 2. 2. H. 4. cap. 3.
grew on so fast on the temporal, that it was to be feared (had not these
statutes bin provided to restrain the Popes interprises) the spiritual
Jurisdiction had devoured up the temporal, as the temporal now on the
contrary, side has almost swallowed up the spiritual. But since the foreign
authority in Spiritual matters is abolished, and either Jurisdiction is
agnised to be settled wholly, and only in the Prince of this land, sundry wise
men's opinion is, there can lie no Praemunire, by those Statutes at this day,
against any man exercising any subordinat Jurisdiction under the King, whether
the same be in the kings name, or in his name, who has the same immediately
from the King: for that now all Jurisdiction, whether it be Temporal or
Ecclesiastical is the Kings, and such Ecclesiastical Laws as now are in
force, are called the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, and the Kings
Ecclesiastical Courts; For that the King cannot have in himself a
contrariety of Jurisdiction, fighting one against the other, as it was in the
case between himself and the Pope, although he may have diversity of
Jurisdiction within himself, which for order sake, and for avoiding of
confusion in government, he may restrain to certain several kinds of causes,
and inflict punishment upon those that shall go beyond the bounds or limits
that are prescribed them: but to take them as enemies, or underminers of his
state, he can not; for the question here is not, who is head of the cause, or
Jurisdiction in controversy, but who is to hold plea thereof, or exercise the
Jurisdiction under that head, the Ecclesiastical or temporal Judge. Neither
is that to move any man that the Statutes made in former time against such
Prouisors, which vexed the King, and people of this land, with such unjust
suits, do not only provide against such process as came from Rome, but
against all others that came elsewhere, being like conditioned as they: for
that it was not the meaning of those Statutes, or any of them, thereby to tax
the Bishops Courts, or any Consistory within this land, for that none of them
ever used such malepert sawsinesse against the King, as to call the Judgments
of his Courts into question, although they went far in strayning upon those
things and causes, which were held to be of the Kings Temporal cognizance, as
may appear by the Kings Prohibition thereon framed. And beside the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates of this Land, in the greatest heat of
all this business, being then present in the Parliament whith the rest of the
Nobility, disauowed the Popes insolency toward the King in this behalf; and
assured him they would and ought to stand with his Majesty against the Pope,
in these and all other cases touching his Crown and Regalitie, as they were
bound by their allegiance: so that they being not guilty of these enterprises
against the King, but in as great a measure troubled in their own Jurisdiction
by the Pope, as the King himself was in the right of his Crown, as may
apppeare out of the course of the said Statutes; The word (Elsewhere) can in no
right sense be understood of them, or their Consistories: although some of late
time thinking all is good service to the Realm, that is done for the
advancement of the Common Law, and depressing of the Civil Law, have so
interpreted it, but without ground or warrant of the Statutes themselves, who
wholly make provision against foreign authority, and speak no word of
domestical proceedings. But the same word (Elsewhere) is to be meant and
conceived of the places of remove the Popes used in those days, being sometimes
at Rome in Italy, sometimes at Auignion in France, semetimes in other places,
as by the date of the Bulls, and other process of that age may be seen; which
several remoues of his, gave occasion to the Parliament of inserting the word
(Elsewhere,) in the body of those Statutes, that thereby the Statutes
providing against Process dated at Rome, they might not be eluded by like
Process dated at Auignion, or any other place of the Popes aboade, and so the
penalty thereof toward the offender might become void, and be frustrated.
Neither did the Laws of this Land at any time whiles the Popes authority was
in his greatest pride within this Realm, ever impute Praemunire to any
Spiritual Subject, dealing in any Temporal matter, by any ordinary power
within the land, but restrained them by Prohibition only; as it is plain by
the Kings Prohibition, wherein are the greatest matters that ever the Clergy
attempted by ordinary and domestical authority, and yet are refuted only by
Prohibition. But when as certain busie-headed fellows were not content to
press upon the kings Regal jurisdiction at home, but would seek for means
for preferment by foreign authority to control the Judgments given in the
kings Courts by process from the Pope; then were Premunires decreed, both to
punish those audacious enterprises of those factious Subjects, and also to
check the Popes insolency, that he should not venture hereafter to enterprise
such designements against the King and his people. But now since the fear
thereof is past, by reason all intercourse is taken away between the Kings
good Subjects, and the Court of Rome, it is not to be thought the meaning of
good and merciful Princes of this land is, the cause of these Statutes being
taken away, the effect thereof shall remain; and that good and dutiful
subjects stepping happily awry in the exercise of some part of their
Jurisdiction, (but yet without prejudice of the Prince, or his Regal power)
shall be punished with like rigor of Law, as those which were molesters,
greeuers, and disquieters of the whole estate. But yet notwithstanding the edge
of those Premunires which were then framed, remain sharp and vnblunted still
against Priests, Jesuits, and other like Runnagates, which being not content
with their own natural Princes government, seek to bring in again, that and
like foreign authority, which those Statutes made provision against; but these
things I leave to the reverend Judges of the land, and others that are skillful
in that profession, only wishing that some which have most insight into these
matters, would add some light unto them, that men might not stumble at them,
and fall into the danger of them unawares: but now to Prohibitions.

A Prohibition is a commandment sent out of some of the Kings higher Courts
of Records, where Prohibitions have bin used to be granted, in the Kings name,
sealed with the seal of that Court, and subscribed with the Test of the
chief Judge, or Justice of the Court from whence the said Prohibition does
come, at the suggestion of the Plaintiff, pretending himself to be grieved by
some Ecclesiastical or marine Judge, in not admittance of some matter, or
doing some other thing against his right, in his or their judicial
proceedings, commanding the said Ecclesiastical or marine Judge to proceed no
further in that cause: and if they have sent out any censure Ecclesiastical or
Marine against the plaintiff they recall it, and loose him from the same under
pain of the Kings high indignation upon pretense that the same cause does not
belong to the Ecclesiastical or Marine Judge, but is of the temporal
cognizance, and does appertain to the Crown and dignity.

Prohibitions, some are Prohibitions of Law, some other are Prohibitions of
fact.

Prohibitions of Law, are those which are set down by any Law or Statute of
this Land, whereby Ecclesiastical Courts are interdicted to deal in the
matters therein contained, such as are all those things which are expressed in
the kings Prohibition; as are also those which are mentioned by the second of
Edward the sixth, where Judges Ecclesiastical C. 13. 2. Edw. 6.
are forbid to hold plea of any matter contrary to the effect, intent, or
meaning of the statute of W. 2. Capite 3. The statute of Articuli Cleri,
Circumspecte agatis, Sylua Cedua, the treaties De Regia Prohibitione, the
Statute Anno 1. Edwardi 3. Capite. 10. or oght else wherein the Kings Court
ought to have Jurisdiction.

Prohibitions of fact, are such which have no precise word, or letter of Law or
Statute for them, as have the other, but are raised up by argument out of the
wit of the Deviser. These, for the most part, are mere quirks and subtilties
of law, and therefore ought to have no more favor in any wise, honorable, or
well ordered Consistory, than the equity of the cause it self does deserve;
for such manner of shifts (for the most part) breed naught else but matter of
vexation, and have no other commendable end in them, though they pretend the
right of the Kings Court, as those other Prohibitions of the law do: but the
Kings right is not to be supposed by imagination, but is to be made plain by
demonstration, and so both the Statute of the 18. of Edward the third, Capite
5. is, where it is provided no Prohibition shall go out, but where the King
has the cognizance, and of right ought to have; and also by the forenamed
Statute of Edward the sixth, which forbids that any Prohibition shall be
granted out, but upon sight of the libell, and other wary circumstances in
the said Statute expressed: by which it is to be intended the meaning of the
Lawgiuers was not, that every idle suggestion of every Attorney should breed a
Prohibition, but such only should be granted, as the Judge in his wisdom
should think worthy of that favor, and of right and equity did deserve it:
although (as I must deeds confess) the Statute is defective in this behalf
for to exact any such precise examination of him in these cases, as it is also
in other points, and is almost the general imperfection of all statutes that
are made upon Ecclesiastical causes: but (I fear me) as emulation between
the two laws, in the beginning brought in these multitudes of Prohibitions,
either against or beside law, so the gain they bring unto the Temporal Courts
maintains them; which also makes the Judges they cesse not costs and damages
in cases of of Consultation, (although the statute precisely requires their
assent and and assignement therein) because they would not fear other men from
suing out of Prohibitions, and pursuing of the same.

The Prohibitions of the law, as have been before showed, are neither many,
nor much repined at, because they contain a necessary distinction between
Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction, and imply the kings right, and subjects
benefit: but the Prohibitions of fact or of men, are both infinite and odious,
for that there is, well nigh, no matter either Civil or Ecclesiastical, be
it never so clear or absolute, but they clog it and incumber it with some
Prohibition; and the matter they contain, is (for the most part) absurd and
frivolous, as shall first appear in Marine causes, and after in
Ecclesiastical matters.

For Marine causes, it is well known, that all such bargains and contracts,
or as it were contracts, as are made by any persons either in any foreign
country, or any Haven or creek of the Sea, or any shore thereof, as far as
the greatest winter wave does run out, or upon any great river, to the first
bridge next to the Sea, for any merchandise, ship, tackle, or other negotiation
belonging to the Sea, or to any merchandise brought from beyond the Sea, is and
ought to be of the admiral cognizance, and so evermore has been since the
Court of the Admiraltie was first erected: and yet the Common Lawyers to
defeat the Civil Law of the trial thereof have devised sundry actions, and
among the rest, an action of Trouer, whereby they feign, that a ship arrived in
Cheapside or some other like place within the city, and there the Plaintiff
and Defendant meeting together, bargained upon some merchandise, or other like
seafaring matter, by which fiction they pretend, the bargain now is to be
tried in the Common Law, and not by the Civil Law, as being done in the body
of a County, and not upon the maine Sea, or any other place subject to the
Admiral Jurisdiction.

But that this fiction, or any other like qualitied to this, should have any
such force as to work any effect in Law, I will show, first by the definition
of a fiction, then by those things that are necessarily attendant thereon.

A fiction thereof is defined by Bartol (whom also the rest ^. si is qui
proemptore 3. ff. de vsucapiomb. and ibi Bartol.
of the Doctors do follow) to be an assumption of the Law upon an untruth, for
a truth, in a certain thing possible to be done, and yet not done: upon which
fiction the Doctors hold there wait two things, the one is Equity, the other
Possibility. For first, unless there because why, that which is not, should
be famed to be, and that which is, should be accounted not to be, and that
which is done in one sort, or at one time, or in one place, should be imagined
to be done in another sort, at another time, and in another place, there is no
reason a fiction should be admitted: for the Law allows no man to come to
extraordinary remedies, but where ordinary remedies fail: and therefore if
that which is in controversy may be obtained by any other means than by a
fiction, a fiction is not to be afforded: but if ordinary means cannot be had,
then fictions may be entertained to supply the L. in causa. ff. de numrib.
defect of the ordinary means, that thereby, although the truth be
otherwise, yet the effect of the Law may be all one.

So then the Law faineth an infant not yet borne, to be borne for his benefit,
for that happily without that fiction, L. qui in vtero and penult de statu
ho^^^ ff.
the poor infant should be remediless of his Filial portion, Legacy, or
other right in conscience due unto him: so Nephews and Neeces succeed together
with their Uncles and L. 1. si ^iliu^ ff. de suis and legit. l. 2. l. 3. l. 4
C. ^od. l Gal^us 29 and been and videndum ff. de liberis and posthum^ cum
filius Inst^t. de haered. ab^n^^^ato. L. veri^ est. vl ff. pro socio, L.
action. publicatione ff. eod. L. absente^. ff. de verhoru^ sign^ficat. L. lege
Cornel ff. ff. de testamen^is.
Aunts in their Grandfathers and Grandmothers goods, for such portion as should
have come to their parents, if they had lived; for that the Law presumes them
to represent the person of their parents: so he that is dead, is fained to be
alive to many constructions in Law, special if many of his equals in age, be
alive at the time that he is fained to be alive: so he that is alive and is
in captivity, for the upholding of his will which he made in liberty, is
fained to be dead the hour before he became captive: so he that is obstinat
and will not appear in Judgment, being lawfully called thereto, is fained to
be present, that neither himself should take benefit out of his obstinacy,
neither his adversary hurt by his absence and injury. Infinite more examples
might be brought of this sort; but it would be too long to run thorough them
al, and this shall suffice to have showed that the Law approves fictions, but
where there is equity for it, and the Law it self otherwise cannot have her
effect. And as the Law cannot L. Gallus fi eius ff. de liberis and posthumis.
l. fi pater sicum. ff. de adopt. Horat. de Art poetica.
proceed to a fiction without equity, so neither can it feign any thing that
is impossible, for Art evermore follows Nature; and therefore if a man would
feign disproportionable things, such as the Painter did in Horace, who made
Boares wallow in the waves of the Sea, and Dolphins wander in the woods; these
fictions in no sense can be admitted, for that they are such as neither nature
nor reason can brook. In like sort, if a man would feign one to live, who were
dead two hundred years since, so that it were not possible, that he or Bartol
l. si is qu^ proemptore number. 21. 22. 23. and s^quentib.
any of his equals should live at that age, this would not hold in Law, for
that it is above the age the Law does presume any man may live by Nature;
although the Law does presume such as dye in war for defense of their country
(for the better encouragement of those that are alive, to venture themselves in
like service for the common wealth) to live for ever; because their fame does
flourish for ever: and upon like reason the Law will not suffer any person to
adopt another for his child, who is either elder or equal in age unto himself,
or is not so far under his years, as by course of Nature he might be his
natural child indeed: so much the Law detesteth impossibilities, that it will
not suffer a man to fame that which in common Sense and Nature might not be
true indeed.

Now, if these things be true, as in all reason and show, by former precedents
they appear to be true, I would gladly see how actions of Trouer, (whereby the
Common Lawyers translate unto themselves matters of Marine trial) if they be
squared to these Rules of Fictions, can be maintained: for first to speak of
equity, which the Law requires in these manner of proceedings, what equity
can it be to take away the trial of such business as belongs to one Court,
and to pull it to another Court; specially, when as the Court from whence it is
drawn, is more fit for it, both in respect of the fullness of knowledge that
that Court has to deal in such business, and also of the competencie of
skill that is in the Judges and professors of those Courts, correspondent to
these causes, more than is in the Judges and professors of the other Courts,
for the deciding and determining of these matters. For, albeit otherwise they
are very wise and sufficient men in the understanding of their own profession,
yet have they small skill or knowledge in matters pertaining to the Civil
profession: for that there is nothing written in their books of these matters,
more than is to be gathered out of a few Statutes of former time, whose drist
was not to open any door unto them, to enter upon the admiral profession, but
to preserve the Kings Jurisdiction from the Admiral incrochment, as may by the
said Statutes appear; whereas contrarily, the Civil law has sundry titles
included in the body thereof concerning these kind of causes; whereupon the
interpreters of the Law have largely commented, and others have made several
Tractats thereof: So that, by all likelihood, these men are more fit and better
furnished to deal in this business, than any men of any other profession, as
having, beside the strength of their own wit, other men's helps and labors to
rely upon.

Besides, this business many times concerns not only our own countrymen, but
also strangers, who are parties to the suit, who are borne, and do live in
countries ordered by the Civil Law, whereby they may be presumed they have more
skill and better liking of that Law, than they can be thought to have of our
Laws and our proceedings: and therefore it were no indifferency to call them
from the trial of that Law, which they, in some part know, and is the Law of
their country (as it is almost to all Christendem beside) to the trial of a
Law which they know in no part, and is mere foreign unto them; specially when
the Princes of this Land have aunciently allowed the Civil Law to be a Common
Law, in these cases, as well to their own subjects, as it is to strangers.

Further, the auocating away of causes in this sort from one Jurisdiction to
another, specially when the cause has long depended in the Court from whence
it is called, insomuch as now it is ready to sentence, or rather is past
sentence, and stands at execution, cannot be but great injury to the subject
after so much labor lost, and money spent in waste, to begin his suite a new
again: which is like to Sysiphus punishment, who when he has with all his
might, forced his stone up to the top of the hill, and so is (as himself
hopes) at an end of his labor; yet the stone rowles down again on him, and
so his second labor (his strength being spent with the toil of the first) is
more grievous than the former was: which being semblably true in a poor
Clyent, who has his cause in hearing, there can be no equity in this
fiction, whereby a cause so near ended, should again be put upon the Anuill,
as though it were still rough work and new to be begun.

And surely, as there is no equity in it, so there is no possibility such a
fiction should be maintained by Law; for that it has no ground of reason to
rest his feet on. For if this be granted, that such a fiction by Law may be
made, then one of these absurdities must needs follow, either that a ship may
ariue in a place where no water is to carry it, or if that it ariue according
to the fiction, either the people, their houses and their wealth shall be all
overwhelmed in the water, as the world was in Noah's Flood, and Deucalions
Deluge, and so no body there shall be left alive to make any bargain or
contract with the Mariners and shipmen that arrive there; or that the people
that dwell there shall walk upon the water, as people do on land, which Peter
himself was not able to do, but had suncke, if Christ had not reached his hand
unto him, and therefore far less possible for any other man to do. So that it
may be well said (these things standing as they do) no such fiction can hold,
and that no action can be framed upon it; for as there is no Obligation of
impossible things, so there is no Action of things that neither Nature nor
Reason will afford to be done: neither is it to the purpose that the
maintainers of these fictions do say, that in this case, the place where the
contract is made is not considerable, which I take to be far otherwise; for
that, when that themselves will convey a Marine cause from the Sea unto the
Land, they will lay it to be done in some special place of a County, be the
place never so improper for such an action: for that the foundation of these
actions, is the place where they were done, as namely that they were done in
the body of such a County, or such a County, and not upon the maine sea, or
beneath the lowest bridge, that is upon any great river next the sea. And
therefore in two emulous Jurisdictions, when they are so divided, as that one
is assigned the sea, the other the land, the place of the action can in no sort
be suppressed, and another supplied in the room thereof: Quod enim vna via
prohibatur, alia via non est permittendum, and quod prohibitum est directo,
prohibetur etiam per obliquum: for if this were granted, then matter enough
would be offered to one Jurisdiction to devour up the other, and the Law would
be easily eluded: which to restrain either of these Jurisdictions to their
own place, and to provide that one in his greatness do not swell up against
the other, has set either of them their bounds and lymits, which they shall
not pass: which, as it is the good provision of the Law, so ought either
Jurisdiction in all obedience to submit it self thereunto, for that the
diminishing of either of them is a wrong to the Prince from whom they are
derived, who is no less Lord of the Sea than he is King of the Land: and
therefore, in no sort, such liberty must be allowed to the one directly or
indirectly, as that it should be a spoil unto the other; which would easily
come to pass, if when as the law allows not any man to sue a Marine by the
ordinary course of the laws of this land, yet a man will follow it by an
extraordinary. But where there is an uniformity of Jurisdiction, as that it
is all by sea, or all by land, there may a thing be fained to be done in one
place, that was done in another place, without any man's prejudice, for that in
this case, the place is not trauersable (so it be not in Criminal matters
where time and place is required, that the accuser do not wander from place to
place with the injury of the accused) for howsoever the place and the action
is altered, yet the truth of the cause remains one and the self same still:
and so far as concerning actions of Trouer in Admiral causes. Now it does
follow that I should speak of like preiudices that grow to the same by actions
of Trespass, but those will I pass over, for that in so small a Treatise as
this is, I cannot go over all: and therefore will I only put the Reader in
mind, that there are more devises rising out of the Common Law, that infest the
Admiraltie than one. But now to Wills and Testaments wherein they are impeached.

For matters of Wills and Legacies, they are so proper to the trial of the
Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm, as the professors of the Common Law
themselves, do oftentimes confess and say, they have no more to do therewith,
than the Ciuilian has to do with the knowledge of the matters of
Franktenement: and yet even these matters of Testaments and Legacies, although
Prohibitions be not so frequent in them, as they are in the rest of
Ecclesiastical causes, yet they are not quite void of them, and that in some
points, wherein the very life and essence of a Will does stand.

For whereas the ancient Romans, knowing how subject matters of Wills are to
forgerie and corruption on the one side, and suppression and concealment on the
other side, to meet with all craft and subtilty whatsoever, which might seize
on them, did most carefully provide, that there should be seven witnesses at
the least, present at the making of every Will and Testament, except it were in
time of some general plague or sickness, when so many Witnesses could not
conveniently be had together for fear of infection, or if it were in the
Country, where there are small multitude of people, and that those witnesses
should be particulerly required to that purpose; with diverse other observations
and circumstances tending all to the safe and sure making thereof: which the
Ecclesiastical Law altered afterward in sundry points, for that many true
Wills were many times overthrown for want of those precise solemnities, and
reduced the whole number of those seven witnesses, unto two only agreeably to
the Law of God, and the Law of Nations, where that number of witnesses is
allowed, as competent to prove any matter, so that the same witnesses be
honest and credible persons, such as whose faith is not doubted of. The Common
Lawyers, because themselves in sundry matters very dangerously many times admit
one witness, and give him full credit, and that in matters of great weight and
importance; (as though all should be squared to their rule, and framed to their
compass) If an Ecclesiastical Judge in the probate of a Will, contrary to
the rules of his own Law, will not admit the testimony of one witness, they
forthwith fling out a Prohibition against him, as though he had done an offense
against the Crown and dignity, in that he does not allow those number of
witnesses in the Probate of a Will, that the Common Laws of this land allow
almost in every matter.

For answer to which, if I should allege the precise form of the
Ecclesiastical Law, which to the essence of a will requires this number of
two witnesses, or else holds it not for a Will (but in cases inter liberos,
and ad pios vsus, where the only hand of the Father or Testator without
witnesses serves for a Will, so the same be known to be the Testators own
hand, or so proved by comparison) I would think to wise men I had said
sufficiently; but I will not rest hereupon, but will convince themselves, by
themselves: for, do they I pray you in their own proceedings, where a Law or
Statute requires more witnesses than one, content themselves with one witness
alone? yea, do they not in all cases where a certain number of witnesses are
appointed to prove a fact by Law or statute, furnish the cause with so many
witnesses as the case desires, or else do they not account the proceeding
void? And will they think themselves so precisely bound to the keeping of the
letter of the Common law, and will they not suffer the Ciuilian in like manner
to clean fast to the observation of the Civil Law, especially when it has
the consent of the Law of God, and the Law of Nations, and is his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Law of this land, as well as the other is his Temporal Law of
the same?

I confess it may be true many times, which one man says, specially when
there concur therewith many great and violent presumptions, and the party that
reports it is of good credit, but dangerous it is to open this gap to the
malice of men, for even so, many things shall be obtruded to the Judge for
truth, which are stark lies, and many things shall be pretended to be gold in
show, which in proof and practice will L. iuris. urandi.. Simili modo. C. de
Testibus.
be found to be no other thing, but mere dross. And therefore well decreed
the Emperor Constantine, that no one man's testimony should be heard, though he
were never so great a man in Court.

But perhaps some man will say, if credit shall not be given oftentimes to one
man's testimony, much wickedness will pass away unpunished: for reply to
which I answer, it is better to let a bad man escape, than to punish a good,
and although it be true, if a man may excuse himself by denial, no man will
be found guilty; so also it is true on the other side, if it be enough to
condemnation to be charged by one man alone, without any other witnesses, no
man shall be innocent, and therefore the admittance of one witness in causes,
and the proceeding thereupon to judgment is very dangerous.

An other like bar to this they lay in against Ecclesiastical proceedings in
matters of Testament; whereas an Ecclesiastical Judge proves a Will, wherein
are manors, lands, tenements, and other like hereditaments bequeathed,
challenging this also to be of the Crown and dignity, as though the
Ecclesiastical Judge thereby took upon him to decree which lands were
deuisable by will, and which not, or would by his probat add a strength unto
the Will, to make the devise good or bad, whereas on the contrary part the
Ecclesiastical Judge by this act does only testify, that such a person made
such a will, and that the same was proved before himself under his Test, for
his last will and testament: but for the validity of the Will it self, and
the Legacies and devises therein, whether they were of lands or tenements, or
of goods or chattels, the Probat it self works nothing, but leaves that to
the Law, Common or Ecclesiastical, according as the bequest belongs to either
of them, whether it be good and vailable in Law, or no: for it oftentimes
falls out, notwithstanding the Will be lawfully proved before the Ordinary,
yet the bequests are not good, either in respect of the person to whom the
bequests are made, or in respect of the thing that is not deuisable in all, or
in part; as by the Common Law, lands in Capite cannot be devised, more than for
two parts, but in Socage the devise is good for all; And by the Custom of the
City of London, and some other places of the land, a man can bequeath no more
than his deaths part, and if he do, his bequest is void for the rest; but in
other places of the land a man may bequeath all. By the Civil Law a man can
bequeath nothing to a Traitor, or an Heretic, or an unlawful College, or
Company (unless perhaps it be for the aliment, or maintenance of them in
extreme poverty, that they dye not for hunger, which is the work of
charity) and if he do, the legacy thereof is void to all intents and
purposes. So then, the Probate of the Ordinary in matters of land, neither
helps, nor hinders the right of the devise it self, but is a declaration
only of the dead Man's doom uttered before such, and such witnesses: which
takes his strength not so much from the Probat, as from the Law, and is
testified only by the Probat, that the same was declared by the Testator, in
the presence of the witnesses therein named, to be his true and Last Will. So
that no man herein is to be offended with the Ordinary, as presuming of a
matter not appertayning unto him: for this testification in all Law and
conscience does belong unto him, to give allowance so far unto tho defuncts
Will, as it is avouched before him to be his last act and deed in that behalf:
but rather they are in this case to thank the Ordinary, that he by that act of
his has preserved the memory of that, which otherwise perhaps would have bin
lost and perished, to the great hurt of the Common wealth, and others which
have private interest therein.

Of all matters that appertain to the Ecclesiastical Courts, there is no one
thing that the Princes of this land have made more careful provision for,
since there was any Church government in this land, than that all manner of
Tithes due by the word of God should be fully and truly paid unto their Parish
Churches where they grew, and if they were denied should be recovered by the
Law of holy Church. For first before the Conquest, king Athelstone made a Law,
that every man Polychronicon.
should pay his Tithes to God, in manner as Jacob did, who made a vow to God, If
God would bring him back again to his country, he would when he returned
home, pay tithes to God, of all that God should give him: the like did king
Edgar, and king Edmund, commanding that those which wilfully refused to pay
their tithes, should be excommunicated.

William Conqueror, (as Roger Houenden reports) in Houenden part. 2. cap. de
Decimis ecclesiae.
the 4. year after his conquest, having got some time of rest from war, and
settling of rebellious spirits, who kicked at his government at home, entered
into a consideration of the well ordering of the Church, and Common wealth by
wholesome Laws: and therefore by the advice of his Counsel, let call all the
great Prelates and Potentates of this Land, with twelve other sufficient men of
every Shire experienced in the Laws and customs of the Land, that he might by
them learn by what Laws and customs the land was governed, before himself
came to the Crown thereof; straightly charging and commanding them upon his
high displeasure, they should make true report to him thereof, without adding
any thing thereto, or taking any thing therefro: who beginning of the Laws of
holy Church, because by it, the King and his throne are established, among
other Laws and liberties of the Church, recorded this for one, which I will
verbatim set down in Latin, as it is penned by the Author.

De omni Annona, decima garba est Deo reddita, and ideo reddenda: Si quis
gregem Equarum habuerit, pullum reddat decimu^, qui vnam tantum vel duas
habuerit, de singulis pullis singulos denarios praebeat. Similiter qui plures
Vaccas habuerit, decimum vitulum, qui vnam vel duas de singulis vitulis
singulos denarios; and qui caseum fecerit, det decimu^ Deo, et si non fecerit,
lac decima die. Similiter Agnum decimu^, vellus decimu^, Butyrum decimum,
Porcellu^ decimum. De Apibus vero similiter, decimu^ commodi, quinetiam de
bosco, de prato, de aquis, de molendinis, and viuarijs, piscarijs, virgultis,
and hortis, and negotiationibus, and omnibus rebus quas dederit Dominus decima
pars ei reddenda est, qui nouem parts simul cum decima largitur. Et qui eam
detinuerit, per iustitiam Ep^i, and Regis si necesse fuerit ad solutionem
arguatur. Haec enim S. Augustinus praedicauit and docuit, et haec concessa sunt
a Rege, Baronibus, and populo. Sed postea instinctu diaboli multi eam
detinuerunt, and Sacerdotes negligentes non curabant inire laborem ad
perquirendas eas, eo quod sufficienter habebant vitae suae necessaria. Multis
enim locis sunt tres vel quatuor Ecclesiae, vbi tune temporis vna tantum fuit,
and sic caeperunt minui.

This Augustine to whom the Conqueror here refers himself, was Augustine
the Monk, whom Gregory the great about the year of our Lord God 569. sent
here into England, to reestablish the Faith decayed by the Saxons; who set down
sundry ordinances for the Church, and framed it in uniformity of Prayer and
government to that, as then was used in the Church of Rome: but long before
Augustins time, as it may by our Stories appear, (even in the days of king
^^he^ward. lib. ^nico.
Lucius, who sent to Elutherius a Bishop of Rome, for learned men to instruct
him and his people in the Faith, which was about a hundred and forty years
after the Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ) the Faith of Christ was here
preached in Brytaine, and fifteen Archbishops are by our Stories Io^elin of
Furnes in h^s book of British Bishops.
reported, one to have succeeded an other in the Sea of London, before the
irruption of the Saxons into this land; All which time it is not like the
Churches of God that were in the land, were void of this provision for the
Ministry, so Marianus Scotus.
that I assure my self the payment of Tithes was far more ancient, than the
time of Augustine; albeit the Conqueror cites there the authority of Austen,
rather than any former precedent of the Britans, both for that the doctrine of
Austen was better known unto the Saxons, among whose ancestors Austen taught
and governed as an Archbishop, than any of the Fathers of the Brytish Church,
to whom the Saxons were enemies, and their tongue altogether unknown unto
them; and beside, for that this doctrine of Austen, concerning Tithes, best
suited with the general custom that was then used thoroughout all Europe in
paying thereof.

The next Prince after William Conqueror that ordered any thing about payment
of Tithes, for oght that I have read to the contrary was Edward the first, who
at the petition of the Clergy, stablished the Articles of the Clergy, which
his son Edward the second confirmed by his Letters patents under his great
Seal, and by consent of Parliament, at the petition of the Clergy in the ix.
year of his Reign.

In Edward the thirds time, writs of Scire facias were An. 18. Ed. 3. cap. 14.
granted out of the Chauncerie, to warn Prelates and other Clerks, to
answer for Dismes there; but after the matter was well understood by the
king, the parties were dismissed from the Seculer Judges, for such manner of
pleas, saving to the king his right, and such as his Ancestors had, and were
wont to have of reason.

During the Reign of Richard the second, Parsons of An. 1. Rich. 2. cap. 14.
holy Church were drawn into seculer Courts for their own Tithes, by the
name of goods taken away; And it was decreed by the King that in such case the
general auerment of the plaintiff should not be taken, without showing
specially how the same was his Lay cattle.

By the Statute of the first of the same king cap. 14 it is acknowledged, that
the pursuing for Tithes, of right does, and of old times was wont to pertayne
to the Spiritual Court, and that the Judges of holy Church only have the
cognizance in these matters.

By the Statute of the 15. of Edward the third, it is ordered, 15. Edw. 3.
That Ministers of holy Church, neither for money taken for the redemption of
corporal penance, nor for proof and account of Testaments, nor for travel
taken about the same, nor for solemnity of Marriage, nor for any other thing
touching the Jurisdiction of Holy Church should be appeached, or arrested, or
driven to answer the kings Justices, or other ministers, and thereupon they
should have writs in the Chauncery, to the Justices when they demanded them.

In the second year of Henry the fourth, the Religious of 2. Hen. 4.
the order of the Cystercians, that had purchased Bulls from the Pope to be
discharged of the payment of Tithes, were by act of Parliament reduced to that
state they were in before.

In the 5. year of the same King it was ordered, That 5. Hen. 4. ca. 11.
all Farmers, and Occupiers of any lands or possessions belonging to any Friars
Aliens, should pay all manner of Tithes due to Parsons and Vicars of Holy
Church, in whose parishes the same were, as the Law of holy Church required,
notwithstanding the same were seized into the K. hand, or any Prohibition were
made, or to be made to the contrary.

About the 7. year of the same king, such Religious persons as had purchased
Bulls from the Pope in the days of Richard the second, to be discharged of
Dismes pertaining to Parish Churches, Prebends, hospitals, or vicarages, not
put in execution, were forbid from that time foreward, to put them in
execution, or to purchase any other in time to come.

After king Henry the eight had dissolved the Monasteries, and other like
Religious houses, and sold the Churches and Tithes thereto belonging to Lay men,
(who before that time were not capable of the same; insomuch as after the
dissolution, when the Purchasors demanded the same, they were denied to hold
plea thereof, by reason of their incapacitie) a Statute was made in the 27.
year of the same king, whereby 27* Hen. 8. cap. 20.
all Subjects of the kings Dominions, were to pay their Tithes, and other
duties of Holy Church, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, and ordinances
of the Church of England, and after the laudable uses and customs of the
Parishes and places where they dwelt, or occupied lands, and the same to be
sued for before the Ordinary, or some other competent Judge of the place,
according to the course and process of the K. Ecclesiast. Courts of England:
which statute because it took little effect, by reason of the obstinary of the
people in yielding these duties to the Laity, who had purchased them, and
that the said Purchasors could neither by the order or course of the
Ecclesiastical Laws, sue for them in any Ecclesiastical Court of this land,
neither was there found any remedy in the Common Law of this land, whereby they
might be relieved against them that wrongfully detained the same. In the 32.
following another Statute was made, wherein it was 32. Hen. 8. ^7.
enacted that all and singular persons of this Realm, and other of the kings
dominions, of what state, degree, or condition souer they were, should fully,
truly, and effectually divide, set out, yield, and pay, all and singular their
Tithes and Offerings, to the owners, proprietaries and possessors of
Parsonages, Vicarages and other Ecclesiastical places according to the Lawful
customs and vsages of the Parish and places where such Tithes or other duties
rise and grow due. And in case where any are wronged and grieved, being either
an Ecclesiastical or lay person, for the wrongful deteining or withholding of
the said Tithes or offerings, or any part or parcel thereof, the same to have
full power and authority to convent the same person or persons so detaining
the same, before the Ordinary or other competent Judge of the place, where
such wrong was done: and the same Ordinary or competent Judge to have power,
by virtue of the said Act, to hear, decide, and determine the same by
definitive sentence, according to the course and proceeding of the
Ecclesiastical law, without reservation of any right to the Temporal Judge to
give remedy by any suit or action for the recovery of the same; saving in case
where an inheritance or freehold in the premises is claimed, and the person
claiming, is disseised, deforced, and put from the possession of the same, in
which cases only, the Statute allows the Temporal Judge to take knowledge,
and that only for the regaining of the right and the possession of the
inheritance so lost.

After the decease of king Henry, king Edward his son 2. Edw. 6. c. 13.
tendering in like sort the state of the Clergy, the benefit of his subjects,
and the practice of the Ecclesiastical Courts of this Land, made a Statute,
whereby he did not only ratify, confirm, and allow such statutes as his father
had formerly made, but did further order, that every of the kings subjects from
thenceforth should justly and truly without fraud or deceit set out and pay
all manner of prediall Tithes in their proper kind, as they did rise and
happen, in such manner as had been paid within the forty years next before
the making of that act, or of right or custom ought to have been paid, with
certain forfeitures and penalties, as well against them which carried away any
prediall Tithes, before the tenth part thereof were justly divided from the
same, or otherwise agreed for with the owner thereof; as also against those
that did let or hinder the owner thereof, his deputy or servant to view, take,
or carry away the same. Inacting further that the party so substracting or
withdrawing any of the Tithes, obuentions, profits, commodities, or other
duties aforesaid, might or should be conuented or sued in the kings
Ecclesiastical Court, by the party complainant, to the intent the kings
Ecclesiastical Judge might then and there determine the same, according to the
kings Ecclesiastical Laws. And that it should not be lawful for the Parson,
Vicar, or any other owner or farmer thereof contrary to the same act to
convent, or sue any withholder of Tithes, or any other like duties, before any
other Judge than Ecclesiastical; excepting only out of the said Statute things
contearie or repugnant to, or against the effect and meaning of the Statute of
Westminster the second, the fifth Chapter, the Statuts of Articuli Cleri,
Circumspecte agatis, Sylua Cedua, the treaties De Regia Prohibitions, matters
against the Statute of Anno primo Edwardi primi, Capite decimo, and such other
matters beside, wherein the Kings Court of right ought to have Jurisdiction.

Notwithstanding all which good provision of ancient kings before the Conquest,
and modern kings since the Conquest, for the assuring of the suite of Tithes
to the Ecclesiastical Courts only, and the continual possession that the
Ecclesiastical Courts have had of the same, deduced from so ancient time as
has been before showed, and so often obtained in contradictorie judgment, as
the consultations thereupon granted do testify: yet sundry men in sundry
ages, of this Land have by wrenches and subtle denises (which are odious in
Law, and are by all godly and wise Judges by all possible means evermore to be
restrained) raised up matter out of the said statute themselves, contrary to
the true sense and meaning thereof, to draw the trial of most of those matters
away from the Ecclesiastical Courts. So that those Statutes which then were
intended for the good of the Ecclesiastical L. legata inn^^liter. ff. de
adimendis legatis. l. 2. ante fine^. C. d^ iure^ur. propter calumina^ dando.
Courts are now become the utter ruin and overthrow of the same, contratie to
the rule of the Law, and common reason, that things which were purposed for one
end, should work unto another end.

The first advantage they take against the Ecclesiastical Courts out of these
Statutes, is gathered out of the twenty seven and thirty two of Henry the
eight, where it is 27. and 32. Hen. ^
ordered that all the Kings subjects shall pay their Tithes according to the
laudable uses and customs of their parishes, and places where such Tithes grow
and become due: which, albeit is undoubtedly meant of Ecclesiastical customs,
triable at the Ecclesiastical Law, and so ever held till now of late that men
think all too much that goes beside their own n^^; ye^, there want not in
these days, which go about with all might and maine to draw away these
things unto the Temporal Courts, as belonging to the Temporal Crown and
dignity: Wherein they do wrong, not only to the kings Ecclesiastical Courts,
to spoil them ^^ their ancient Jurisdiction, but also do in (...) to the king
himself, as though he had but (...) proper Jurisdiction belonging to his
Throne, and seat of Majesty, and that which were done by his Ecclesiastical
power, were done against his Crown and Dignity* whereas they are equally
vnired in him, and his Thro^^ is no less (...) up by his Ecclesiastical power,
th^^ it is vpholden by his Temporal authority. And therefore a mere Paradox
is that, that they so constantly affi^^^, that customs in payment of Tithes
are matters of Temporal cognizance only, and not of spiritual cognition. For
as there (...) Seculer customs, such a^ ^^e the customs of Manor^ and
Lordships, where the Lord has his Rent, hi^ he^^^t, his relief and service,
and the tenant again does his homage and fealty, according to the Nature of
his Tenure, which seculer customs the fornamed statute De Regia Prohibitions
forbids Ecclesiastical Judges to deal in: So also there are Ecclesiastical
customs, such as is the payment of Tithes and other Ecclesiastical duties, to
which common Lawyers are not to put their hands, but to abstain from them, as
dedicated to the use and trial of the spiritual Courts. Otherwise would
neither the ancient authors of the Legantines and Provincial constitutions of
this Land (the eldest of which, are equal with the days of Henry the third,
and the Prouincial. c. quoniam de decimis.
youngest of them ends in the reign of Henry the fifth) ever have changed so
many several customs of payment of Tithes, as then were within the Land, and
in steed of them have brought in one uniform payment of the same, as is at
this day used, save where either the negligence of the Parsons, or the
covetousness of the Parishioners has in some point changed the same. Neither
would these statutes of Henry the eight ever have ordered the people, should
pay their Tithes after the laudable customs and vsages of the Parishes where
they grew, if the usage and custom of the payment it self had not been
subject to the Ecclesiastical cognizance: for in vain shall (...) sue for
that, the Law allows him no course to come by, of it be denied in the special
L. Finali. ff. de officio eius cui mandata est iurisd. and l. 3. ff. de pena
legata.
(...) belonging ^ that (...) i^ undoubted Law where (...) Iuri^diction
granted, (...) in like manner granted all th^se things, without which, that
authority or Jurisdiction cannot be perfected or performed.

And therefore it is without question, ^^ Tithes, by the sai^ Statut^, (...) by
the Ecclesiastical law, and not (...) so (...) the Custom whereby they are
p^^d, i^ only ^^^able at the Ecclesiastical Law. Otherwise this (...) follow
thereupon, which in all other (...) beside this of ^ur^, i^ a great absurdity,
Bartol. l. nulli C. de iudiciis. Glos. c. significanerunt de indiciis.
th^^ the (...) of (...) which the Ciuilians call (...), ^ill be (...) and
^^^oyned, which by ^ll good poli^ie, together with all her par^s emergent or
(...) ought to be (...), discuss^^, and determined before one and the self
same Judge; one, I mean not in number, but one in profession, for otherwise I
should by this assertion, bar Appeals, which is not mine intent.

Which course, if it were held here in England, causes should not be drawn
peecemaele in such sort as Medea tore her brother limme-meale, and one part of
it carried to this Cicero pro Murena.
Court, another to that, like unto the rent limbs of the child that were cast
here and there by Medea, thereby to hinder her father from pursuing of her; but
al should be ended in one and the self same Court, which would be a great ease
to the subject, who to his intolerable vexation, and eycessiue charges is
compelled to run from Court to Court, and to gather up as it were, one lim of
his cause here, and another there, and yet happily in the end cannot make a
whole and perfect body of it.

Beside, it is a mighty disorder in a common wealth, thus to iumble one
Jurisdiction with another, and the very confusion as well of the one law as the
other; for as kingdoms are preserved by knowing their bounds, and keeping
their lymits, so also Jurisdictions are maintained and vpheld by containing
themselves within the lists or banks of their authority.

Further, unless they will grant there is an Ecclesiastical custom, as there
is a Seculer Custom, and that the one is as well to be tried in the one Court,
as the other is in the other, they will make their own Doctrine in the
before-rehearsed Prohibition void, where they certain us there is a Seculer
Custom; and if there be a Seculer custom, then doubtless there is also an
Ecclesiastical or spiritual custom: for the word Seculer, is not put in that
place absolutely, Glos in Clem. vn^^a, in verbo aterna ^te^. de summa trinit.
and f de catholica.
but relatiuely, and the nature of Relatiues, is one to put another, and one to
remove another: but by the Seculer custom they but the Ciuilian, therefore they
grant him the spiritual, for of contrary things there are contrary reasons
and contrary effects: and what that which is proposed, does work in that
which is propounded, the same again that L. Fin. p^us ^^tem de legatis 3. and
ibi Angel.
which is opposed does work in that which is opponed, by which Rule, as
Temporal Lawyers are to deal in Temporal Customs, and spiritual men are
not to intermedle therein, so also Ecclesiastical Lawyers are to deal in
Ecclesiastical causes, and that temporal Lawyers are not to busy themselves
thereabout.

And that this was the intent of the king, when he first received the Church
into his protection, with all the privileges thereof, may appear hereby, that
having united both the Jurisdictions in his own person, he did not iumble
them both together, as now they are, but kept them distinct, one from the
other; not only in authorizing the Ecclesiastical Courts that were before, but
also in using the very words and phrases that the Iurisdictionaries
Ecclesiastical did use every where in their writings, even these words
whereupon men now take hold to frame Prohibitions upon, viz. (according to the
laudable customs and vsages of the parish and places where such Tithes grow)
which were the words of Innocent the third, in the Decretals upon the title of
Tithe long before these statuts were made, or any other statuts concerning the
true payment of tyths; and Linwod in the same title of tithes often uses the
very self same words and phrases that the other does: so that if these words
made no Prohibition before the statute (as I think, it cannot well be showed to
the contrary) neither ought they to do it now since the statute, for that they
are taken still in the Church business, and not in a temporal matter: whose
government, although it be under one and the self same Prince that the
Temporal state is, yet is it distinct from the same, as ever it has bin since
there has bin any settled form of Church government many common 1. Corinthians. 5.
wealth, as may appear both by the example of S. Paul; which never goes to any
temporal power to punish the incestuous person, although there were sundry
laws then both in Greek and Latin written of these matters, but does it by
the spiritual sword alone: and also by that, that in matters of Iar for
worldly causes between brother and brother, he forbids such as were new
Christians, to go to law before 1. Corinthians. 6.
Infidels, but advises them rather to appoint Judges among themselves to
decide such controversies: which, albeit in those days was meant as well of lay
Christians, as of the ministers of the Gospel, for that the number of them
then was small, and the causes of suit they had one against another were not
many, and might easily be ended by one and the self same consistory; yet when
the number of the Christians increased, and the Church got some rest from
persecution, the Jurisdiction was again divided, and as there were Seculer
Courts appointed by Princes, wherein Temporal men's causes and Lay businesses
were heard, so there were also by the same authority erected Ecclesiastical
Courts and Bishops C. de episcopal audienta t^rtis.
audiences, wherein either Ecclesiastical men's causes alone, or such as they
had against Lay men, or Lay men against them were treated of, and determined.

So that this was no new devise of Henry the eight, or Edward his son, that
when they took upon them the supremacy over the Church, as they had before
over the common wealth, they did not mishmash both the states together, and
made one confused heap of them both, but left them severed as they found them,
only affording either of them an equal proportion of protection; for that by
these two parts, the kings Monarchy is complete, and himself is the head and
chief Governor of the whole and entire body of his Realm. For this was
exemplaried unto them in all former ages since the Church and common wealth had
any loving and kind cohabitation together, as has been before remembered. And
therefore do they wrong to the ashes of those kings deceased, which by subtle
sense and strained interpretations, draw these Laws which they intended for
the benefit of the Church, and Church government, to the overthrow of the same,
as though the Positive Laws of the kingdom could not stand, if the Laws of
the Church continued and stood up right.

Upon the same words of the same Statute, (if perhaps at any time there grow
any controversy about the limits or hounds of Parishes) they draw the same by
like importunity from the trial of the Ecclesiastical Law unto the Common
Law, auouching the same also to be of the Temporal cognizance, and yet
Linwod, who lived in the days of Henry the fifth, making a Catalogue of the
principal matters, that in his days belonged unto the Ecclesiastical Courts,
reckons the bounds of Parishes for one. And very like it is it should so be,
for that Ecclesiastical men first in this Kingdom, made divisions of
Parishes, as by our own Cronicles it appears; and the first practice thereof
within this Realm, came from Honorius the fourth Archbishop of Canterbury
after Augustine, who himself died in Registro Eccle. Xp^i. Cant. Stow.
the year of our Lord God 693. although otherwise the thing it self be more
ancient, and discends from the council of Saint Paul, he gave to Titus, to
appoint Elders in every City: but that Cities and Countries again are
divided into Tit. cap. 1. v. 5.
several Parishes, it was the ordinance of Pope Dionisius, about the year 266.
and from him derived into this and other realms; and the distinction thereof
was chiefly devised that it might be known of what congregation every people
were, and that so they might be trained up in the Schole of godliness under
their own Pastor or Minister. But that now the division of Parishes does serve
to other politic uses, it comes not of the first institution thereof, which
was mere Ecclesiastical: but it grows out of a second cause, that is because
being so fitly and aptly primarily divided by Ecclesiastical men as they are;
the Princes therefore did use the opportunity thereof for Temporal services,
subdiuiding the same again into many Tythings or like smaller divisions, for
the more speedy service of the king, and better ordering of the common wealth.
Which our ancient Fathers well knowing, never called the same in question,
acknowledging therein the good they had received from Ecclesiastical men, by
this partition of Countries into Parishes: but men of later age being less
thankful than they, and loath to seem beholding to Ecclesiastical Courts for
any matter of good order and disposition, have arrogated the same wholly to the
Temporal Courts; as though the Ecclesiastical Judge could not as well discern
what two or three honest men depose and say, as concerning the limits or bounds
of a Parish, as twelve mean men of the country, who are upon like depositions
to give up their verdict. But for the limits of Bishoprics, I acknowledge
that they are Temporal, for that they were not primarily designed out by
Ecclesiastical men, and their direction, but were assigned to Provinces, or
Shires, first described and distynguished by Princes: but for Parishes, neither
reason nor antiquity concurs with them, that they should be temporal, or that
they should be usurped or challenged to be of the temporal cognizance.

And so much for those Prohibitions, which they commonly frame out of the 27.
and 32. of Henry the eight, not that there are no more but these, but that
having a taste of these, there may be like Judgment made of the rest.

Out of the statute of the 2. of Edward the 6. cap. 13. they vpstart many
Prohibitions, the first whereof in order of the Statute, although the last in
practice is the prohibition of treble damages, upon not dividing and setting
out of Tithes, or at the least, for the not compounding for them before they be
carried away: Which forfeiture they suggest, and thereupon bring a Prohibition,
and so draw the whole suit of Tithes into their Courts, contrary to the true
meanning of this Statute, which would those treble damages, in case of not
justly dividing and setting out, or not compounding for the Tithes before they
be carried away, be no less recouerable before an Ecclesiastical Judge
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law, than the forfeyture of double
value, by the letting and stopping of them to be carried away, whereby they are
lost, with the costs thereon growing, is remediable at the same Law: For albeit
the clause which is to redress this wrong, be put after that part of the
Statute, which concerns the stopping and letting of Tithes to be carried away,
yet when there is as great reason it should stretch it self to the first
branch of the provision, as to the second, and the second branch hangs on the
first by a conjunction copulative, and there is no hetorogeny or disparitie in
the matter, whereby it may not be as well verified in the one branch, as in the
other, I see no reason why it should not equally respect them both, according
to the rule of the Law; Clausula in fine posita refertur ad omnia C. 6. tit.
28. l. 1.
precedentia, maxim quando non resultaret intellectus contratius iuri, as here
it does not: for the intendment of either branch of the Statute is, to procure
by their several forfeytures, a just and true payment of Tithes, the recovery
whereof, as the precise words of the Statute in one member restrain unto the
Ecclesiastical Law; so the Identitie of reason in the other member does
confirm it unto the same Law, for where there is the like reason L. Illud ff.
ad l. Aquiliam.
or equity, there ought to be the like disposition or order of Law.

Beside if the principal cause it self be triable in the Ecclesiastical
Court, why should not those things which hang thereon be tried in the same
Court, for they are but as it were accessaries to the principal, and so not
only follow the nature of the principal, but also belong to the Court of the
principal, and are determinable where the principal is, for otherwise happily
there might fall out contrary sentences of one and the self same thing, the
one condemning, the other absoluing.

Further in that Court wherein the course of Justice already is begun, the
cause may with less labor and easier expenses be ended, being both for the
most part determinable by one sentence, than that a new process thereof should
begin before an other Judge, who knows little or nothing of the principal
matter, and therefore cannot so easily decide the accessarie.

Lastly, those which take this course, first to surmise a forfeyture, then to
draw the original suit, whereupon the forfeyture grew into question, bring in
a proceeding far different from the common style of all well ordered Courts, in
all Nations, among whom the cognusance of the cause, and trial thereof goes
before, and the forfeyture or execution thereof follows after: But in this
Hysteron proteron, the execution is in the foreward, and the trial is in the
rereward: In which doing they deal much like as Cacus the Giant dealed with
Hercules oxen, who to the intent that Hercules should not find what way they were
gone, drew them backward by the tail into his Cave; but as that devise setued
not Cacus, but that Hercules had his oxen again, so it is to be hoped the
Reverend Judges of the land, will not long suffer this subtlety to prevail,
but as it came in like a Fore, and reigned as a Wolf, so in the end it shall
dye and vanish away like a vain devise, much like the destiny of Boniface the
eight: for the reverend Judges are not only to minister Justice between man
and man, so that every man may have his own, and none be eppressed of an
other, but also they are to carry an upright and indifferent hand between
Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction, yea, though themselves be parties to the matter
in question, so that one Jurisdiction eat not up an other, as the Locusts in
Egypt devoured up all the green things of the land.

An other Rendeuous they make of the words of this Prouiso (Law, statute,
privilege, prescription, or composition real) as though all which passes
under any or these terms belongs to the trial of the Common Law, and not
to the cognizance of the Ecclesiastical Law, and that forsooth, because these
words and terms are expressed in the Statute: which is much like unto that,
as one would needs have a house, to be Master Peacocks house, because he saw a
Peacock sit upon the top thereof: But it is not the naming of a thing in a Law
or Statute, that makes it to be of the Temporal cognizance, or otherwise: but
it is the nature or quality of the thing named, that rangeth it under the one
Law, or the other. So that if the matter ordered in the Law or Statute be
temporal, the cognizance shall be Temporal, if Spiritual, then the case is
determinable in the Ecclesiastical Law: for this Prouiso is not prohibitorie,
as the last Prouiso of this statute is, whereby Ecclesiastical Judges are
forbidden to hold plea of any thing that is in the said Prouiso contained; but
it is rather directive, and shows where the Ecclesiastical Judge is to give
way to immunities, and to pronounce for them: so that for any thing is
contained in this Prouiso to the contrary, the cognizance of these matters,
specially Privilege, Prescription, and Composition, still remains at the
trial of the Ecclesiastical Law, as they did before this Prouiso was made De
praescripr. lib. 2. tit. 26. De Priuileg. lib. 5. tit. 33.
for Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, as may appear by the several
Tytles in the same Law hereon written.

And for the other words, Law and Statute therein mentioned: when as the King
has two Capacities of government in him, the one Spiritual, the other
Temporal, and his high Court of Parliament, wherein Laws are made, does stand
as well of Spiritual men, as Temporal men, and so ought to stand in both
houses, if the ancient book, De modo tenendi Parliamenti be true and
authentical, which makes the upper house of three states, the Kings Majesty,
the Lords Spiritual, and the Lords Temporal; and the Lower house in like sort
of three other, the Knights, the Procurators for the Clergy, and the
Burgesses; and his Majesty has within this Realm as well Ecclesiastical
Lawyers, as Temporal, which are no less able to judge and determine of
Ecclesiastical matters, than the Temporal Lawyers of temporal business: It
is not to be imagined, but as his sacred Majesty will have those Laws to be
held Temporal, and to have their constructions from Temporal Lawyers, which
are made and promulged upon Temporal rights and causes: So also his Highness
pleasure is, and ever has been of all his predecessors, Kings and Queens of
this Land, that such Laws and Statutes as are set out and publyshed upon
Ecclesiastical things and matters, shall be taken and accounted
Ecclesiastical, and interpreted by Ecclesiastical Lawyers, although either of
them have interchangeably each others voice in them to make them a Law.

And that the King does infuse life into either of the Laws, when as yet their
substance is imperfect, and they are as it were Embreos, is in Temporal
matters, by his temporal authority, and in Spiritual matters, by his
spiritual authority, for to that end he has his double dignity in that
place, as also the Ecclesiastical Prelates sustain two persons in that place,
the one as they are Barons, the other as they are Bishops: So that even the
orders of the house do euince, that they are two sorts of Laws in that place
unconfounded both in the head and the body, although for communion sake, and
to add more strength to each of them, the general allowance passes over them
all. And as they rest unconfounded in the creation of them, so ought to be
likewise in the execution of them: and as the Temporal Law sorts to the
Temporal Lawyers, so the Spiritual Laws or Statutes should be allowed and
allotted unto the Spiritual Lawyers.

And as the nomination of these words Law or Statute in this precedent Prouiso,
makes not the Law or statute Temporal, but remains wholly Ecclesiastical,
by reason of the Spiritual matters it does contain, and the power of him that
quickneth it, and powers life thereinto: so much less can the inserting of
these terms Privileges, Prescriptions, or Composition real, entitle the
Common Law to the right thereof, or the Professors of the said Law, to the
interpretation thereof: for that matters of these tytles so far as they
concern Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, have been evermore since
there has been any Ecclesiastical Law in this land (which has been near as
long as there has been any profession of Christianity with us) of
Ecclesiastical ordinance, neither ever were of the Temporal cognizance,
until new of late, that they transubstantiat every thing into their own
profession; as Midas turned or transubstanciated every thing that he touched
into gold.

But here it will not be amiss to inquire, (since Tithes came in the beginning
of the Primitive Church, within a little time after the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the subversion of the Jews policy, unto the Christian Church,
and Common wealth, void of all these encumbrances, as shall appear after by
the testimony of sundry of the ancient Fathers, which were near the
Apostles time) how it comes to pass (since Tithes are no less the Lords
portion now, than they were then, and in the Patriarchs time before them) that
these greeuances have come upon them, more under the Gospel, than ever they
did under the Law: for then never any Lay man durst stretch out his hand unto
them, to diminish any part thereof, but he was charged Malach. 3.
with robbery by the Lords own mouth; and in punishment thereof, the Heavens
were shut up for gyuing rain unto the earth; and the Palmer worm and
Grasshopper were sent to devour all the green things upon the earth. And for
Ecclesiastical men, it is not read any where in the Scripture, that ever they
attempted to grant out any privilege of Tithes to any person, other than to
whom they were disposed by the Law, or to make any composition thereof,
between the Lay Jew, and the Lords Levites: every of the which have been, not
only attempted against the Church in Christianity, but executed with great
greedynesse: so far worse has been the state of the Ministry under the
Gospel, than was the condition of the Priests and Levites under the Law.

The beginning whereof, although it be hard for me to find out, because there
is small memory thereof left in Stories; yet as far as I can by all
probabilities conjecture, this great alteration in Ecclesiastical matters,
came by two occasions: the one by the violence of the Laity, thrusting
themselves into these Ecclesiastical rights, contrary to the first
institution thereof; for when they were first received into the Christian
world, they were received and yielded to, for the benefit of the Clergy only,
as in former time under the Law, they had been for the use of the Priests and
Levites only: The other was the too too much curiosity of Schoolmen, who
being not content with the simple entertaynment of Tithes into the Church, as
the ancient fathers of the Primitive Church received them, would needs seek
out how, and in what right, and in what quantity, this provision belongs unto
the Church, wherein they did by their overmuch subtlety rather confound the
truth, than make that appear they intended to do. By the first of these was
brought in that great prescription, which is called the Prescription beyond the
Lateran Council, whereby Lay men held Tithes in see, without paying any thing
therefore unto the Church; and out of that issued the rest of those petty
Prescriptions, which we now have, which are nothing else but imitations of the
first. By the second came in Privileges, Customs, and Compositions, or if
they came not in wholly by them, yet surely were they much strengthened by them;
but of either of these after in their places. But for that of all these
forenamed greeuances in the Church, as far as my trading serves me,
Prescription is the eldest, and first rusht into the Church, and violated the
Liberties thereof; I will first begin thereby, and show upon what occasion it
first seysed upon the Church, and prevailed against her, and then will I speak
of the rest in order.

It is out of question, that from the time of Origin, who lived within four
score years after the death of Saint John the Evangelist, as also did Cyprian,
who was his coequall in time, and so along by the ages of Chrysostom, Ambrose,
and Augustine, and some of the purer Popes, as Urban the second, Dyo^isius, and
Gregoue the great, there was good use of Tithe in the Churches, where Christian
Religion was embraced, as may appear by every of their testimonies, that God
had not appointed it to be a provision only for such as served at the Altar
under the Law, but also was purposed by him from the beginning, to be a
maintenance for the Ministry under the Gospel: and therefore Origin in his
xi. Hemily upon Numbers, speaking of Tithes, says thus, I hold it necessary
that this Law or precept be observed, according to the letter: and upon the 22.
of Matthew, he thinks Christ's words uttered there as concerning Tithe, to be a
precept no less necessary for the use of Christians, than they had bin for
the Jews: and therefore he accounts Tithe neither ceremonial, nor
Judicial, but moral and perpetual. Cyprian in his lxvj. Epistle, advises
the Clergy of his time, since they had Tithes allotted unto them for their
maintenance, they should not absent themselves from Gods service. Chrysostom
upon the viij. of the Acts, uses this argument to persuade husbandmen to pay
their Tithes truly unto the Church, that it is good for them so to do, for
that there are continual prayers and intercessions made for them by the
Ministry. Jerome upon Tymothy says, The precept of payment of Tithes, is
as well to be understood in the Christian people, as in the Jews. Read
Ambrose, upon his Lent Sermon, and Augustine upon his xliiij. Homily, and
Gregory upon his xvj. Homily, and you shall find no less plain places for
the continuance of the payment of Tithes among the Christians, than the former
were. Add to these the practice of Dionisius himself, who by Ieromes account
flourished in the year 266. who not only divided out Parishes, drawing the
example thereof from Saint Paul, who first appointed Bishops in Cities, but
also assigned orderly to every Parish his Tithes. All which held in the
Christian common wealth, in a decent and comely sort, until the irruption of
the Hunnes, Goathes, and Vandals, upon the Christian world, who first inuading
Italy under the Emperor Justinian, did for many years so harrow the whole
Country, and specially Lumbardie, as that they left not almost a man of
excellent Religion any where vnpersecuted, ouerturned Churches, burnt
Libraries, overthrew Schools of learning, and to be short, what wickedness
did they not? insomuch as Gregory the great, being otherwise a very good man,
and one that did rely himself upon the providence of almighty God, verily
thought and taught that the end of all things was then come: but after those
fierce and barbarous Hospinland^ ^r g. n^m. (...).
people once set their face to go against France, (which had been hitherto
free from that mundation) which happenned in the days of King Theodorick, who
lived about the 650. year of the Incarnation of our Savior Jesus Christ;
Charles Martel the father of Pippin, after king of France, being then great
master of the kings house, would not (although otherwise he were a very
victorious man, and valiant Captain) oppose himself against them, unless the
vnder-clergie of France would be content to resign every Gagni^^^ lib. 4
Histor. Fra^^.
man his Tithes into his hands, that thereby he might reward the Soldier, and
support the charges of the war then present: which the poor Clergy, in
respect of the eminent danger, and for that Charles Martell himself did
solemnly vow and promise that they should be forborne no longer, than for the
time of the war, and that they should be restored unto them again at the end
of the war, with a further gratuitie for their good will, yielded most willingly
thereunto, specially the Bishops not contradicting it, leaving to themselves a
small portion of their living only, during the time of the danger. Whereupon
Charles Martell undertaking the enterprise, get a mighty great victory
against the enemies, insomuch that he slew in one battle 34500. of the
Infidels: which battle being happily atchiued, and the danger of the war
being past, the poor Clergy men hoping to receive again their Tithes,
according as it was promised them by Charles Martell, they were put from the
possession thereof, and say or do what they could, their benefices were
divided before their face, in recompense of their service, to such of the
Nobility as had done valiantly in that action, and the same assured to them
and theirs for ever in fee. And this is the first violence that ever Tithes
suffered in the Christian world, after they left the Land of Jury, and came to
inhabit among the Christians; which albeit was a nefarious act, and nothing
answerable to the late mercy that God had vouchsafed them in conquering of
their enemies, yet there wanted not like sacrilegious minds in all Christian
Lands, which did imitate this wicked fact of Martellus, insomuch as the example
hereof passed over the Alps into Italy, and mounted above the Pyrenie Hills into
Spain, and within short time after sailed here into England: in such sort, as
that even to this day sundry Monuments thereof appear euerywhere in the Land,
where any title of immunitie is challenged from payment of Tithes, reaching
beyond the Lateran Council, whith can descend from no other head, than from
this fact of Charles Martell; neither was there any redress thereof until the
said Lateran Council, before mentioned, which notwithstanding came near five
hundred years after: for this fact of Martellus was done about the six
hundredth and threescore year after the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ,
but the Council that reformed it, and was holden under Alexander the third,
was not celebrated before the year of the Incarnation 1189. neither was the
reformation thereof at that time total nor suitable to the first institution of
Tithe among Christians.

For neither could many wilful and refractarious persons, be then brought to
obey the Canons of the Council, in restoring any part thereof again unto the
Church, although they were charged so to do under pain of damnation. Neither
did all such as did then restore them, restore them to the Churches from whence
they were taken, which had been most agreeable to the ordinance of the Church
set down by Dionysius, who first divided Parishes and assigned unto them
Tithes, as has been aforesaid; and also to the Scripture it self from whence
Dionysius* took his light to divide Parishes and dispose of Tithes as he did,
by which it was not lawful for him that paid his Tithes to pay them to what
Priest or Leuite Deuteron. 18.
him liked, but he must pay them to the Priest or Leuite that dwelt in the
place where himself made his abode: but yet this liberty that was given them
by the Council then, gave cause unto the error that the common Lawyers hold
at this day (not knowing the ancient proceedings of the Church in these cases)
that before the Lateran Council, it was lawful for every man to give his
Tithes to what Church he would, which was so far otherwise, as that before
this violence offered unto the Church, there was a flat Canon, more ancient
then the fact of Charles Martellus, Leo. 4. 13. q. 1. c. Eccl.
which did precisely forbid any man to pay, or a Bishop to give leave to any
man to pay his Tithes from the baptismall Church to another: and that the
contrary was yielded to in the Lateran Council, was not that they held it
lawful to enrich one Church in this sort, with the impouerishment of another,
but the cause was the hardness of men's hearts, who scarcely could be wun by
this favor to restore that little again unto the Church, that their
forefathers had in such abundance taken away from it: and that the Fathers of
the said Council did yield thereunto (although it were an inconvenience thus
to do) was for that they did count, although they did admit that for the
present, yet there might be a better time found out after for the reformation
thereof, and so sustained the inconvenience for the present upon this reason;
that the universal Church of Christ is one body, and every particular Church
a part of that body, and so it less mattered to what particular Church they
were restored, so that they were restored at all: for that by the restitution
to one they hoped in time they might with more likelyhoode come unto the other;
for in those things wherein there is an Identitie or like representation of
Nature and condition, as is between Church and Church, is easier passage the
one from the other than is in those that are of different nature and
disposition, as is in a lay man and a Church.

Out of these ruins of these violent and presumptuous prescriptions, which
have now obtained strength of a statute in the world have issued out sundry
petty prescriptions, which also are confirmed by law and custom as the other
were; as the prescription wherein one Church prescribes Tithes against another
Church, the Law punishing therein the negligence of the one and rewarding the
vigilancie of the other: Prescriptions, wherein one Ecclesiastical body
corporate or politic, prescribes Tithes or other Ecclesiastical duties
against the Parson or Vicar of the Parish, and the Parson and Vicar again
against them: A prescription whereby a Lay man having no right to prescribe
Regul. sine posssession^d. regul^^ i^ris in 6.
Tithes (because he can in no right possess Tithes, and prescription cannot
proceed without possession) does notwithstanding by pernancie or giving some
part of his ground or pension in money in licu thereof, prescribe a discharge
thereof: A prescription wherein a lay man does prescribe the manner of Tything,
which albeit by the common Law is counted to be good by paying a thing never so
small in lieu thereof, yet neither by the Canon Law, neither by the Law of God
it self, it could ever be less than the just tenth it self; so that the
manner of Tything with them is not understood in that sense, as the Common
Lawyers do take it, by paying any thing whatsoever in place of the just tenth,
but their intendment hereby, is that no country can be bound to an uniformity
Li^wod Prouin. qu^^am verbo vn^form^^ in Glo. de decim.
of payment of Tithes to be used euerywhere: but every man is to pay Tithes
according to the manner of the Country where he dwells, that is, that one paies
his Tithe corn, and binds up the same in sheaues, another leaves it scattered
in the furrows, another Tithes it in Cocks or Pookes; and this is that, that
they mean, that there cannot be an uniformity of Tything prescribed to every
man after which he is of necessity to set out his Tyths, but that he may
prescribe some other manner of Tything against the Parson or Vicar: but against
that uniformity that the whole tithe ^^d. verbo cons^^tudines.
should not be paid, was never any prescription allowed among them, for they
evermore have been of this mind contrary to that that the Schoolmen hold,
that Tithes are part of the Moral Law, and not of the Iudieiall or Ceremonial
Law; and that in the Precept of Tithes; there is a double Ca. a nobis de
decimis in Glos.
consideration, one of the honor of God, whereby be retained tithes unto
himself, in sign of his universal Lordship over the whole world, which is
irremissable, the other of the profit or utility of man in that it concerns
the provision of the Minister in all ages, which is vndispensable.

And yet, notwithstanding all this, the Ecclesiastical Judge admits all
kinds of prescription beforenamed, and according to the proofs thercon
brought, gives sentence either to absolution or condemnation: albeit the
reverent Judges of the Land, upon an erroneous report made in the eight year
of Edward the fourth, have a conceit to the contrary, viz. That no
Ecclesiastical Judge will admit any Plea in discharge of Tithe, or the manner
of Tything, as it is in their sense taken; and therefore they hold whatsoever
the defendant does allege in his suit for a consultation, and namely that the
Ecclesiastical Judge did allow of the Plaintifes Plea and allegation, and did
admit him to the proofs thereon without denial, are idle speeches, and rather
words of course than of effect and substance. And therefore notwithstanding,
whatsoever is alleged by the Defendant as concerning the Ecclesiastical
Judges well acceptance thereof, it is counted nothing material by the
Temporal Judges, for that they have a preiudicate opinion of the
Ecclesiastical Judge in these cases, and therefore howsoever the refusal be,
or be not, they grant out their Prohibition in these cases. And yet if the
Judges Ecclesiastical proceedings might be seen and vouchsafed to be read
before them, it would be plain, there were no such cause of their hard
opinion against them; for euerywhere they do allow such and like allegations.
And if perhaps one inferior Judge should make refusal as they pretend, yet
could it not be reformed, by another in an ordinary course of appeal, but
that there must needs be brought a Prohibition out of the Common law to
redress the same? unless happily they can show, it is a general conspiracy
in the Ecclesiastical Judges, or a Marime in their learning, that they will
not or cannot admit any Plea of discharge in this case, which they can never
do. And therefore they are to be entreated to change their opinion in this
point, and do not the Ecclesiastical Judges that wrong, as to charge them
with such an imputation, whereof their whole practice is witness to the
contrary: for it is unworthy such men's gravity as theirs is, who propound
unto themselves the inquiry of the truth in all matters, thus to be
misconceiued and masked in an error, and that for so many years, and not to
be willing to hear the contrary, which is an obstinacy in policy no less
indurat, than the Papists is in Religion, who see the truth and will not
believe it. And so far as concerning Prescriptions and the first cause and
beginning thereof.

Now it follows I speak of Privileges which are immunities granted unto
private men beside the Law.

Of these, some are very ancient, such as true zeal toward the Church bred,
and the just admiration of the holy men of God for their sanctimonie of life,
their great knowledge in the word of God, their great patience in persecution
for Christ and his Gospel, the vigilancie and care they had in their Office,
stirred up both in Prince and people. So Constantine the great, being ravished
with the love of Religion, and the good opinion he had of the Ministers of his
time, erected Churches, and endowed them with large possessions, and granted
them sundry immunities, whereby they might more securely intend to the
preaching of the word of God, and the winning of souls to the Christian
congregation, wherein they labored with all their might and power, God still
adding to the number of the Elect. Neither did he this alone in his own
person, but he also gave leave to all other of his subjects that would do the
like: whereupon L. 1. C. de sacros. Ecclesiis. si qui^ authent. de Ecclesia.
the Church was so enriched within a short time, that as Moses in the building
of the Arc, was feign to make Proclamation, no man should bring in more
toward the building thereof, the people bringing in continually such great
abundance of all things necessary toward the furnishing thereof, as that
there was enough and much to spare: So also Theodosius the thirteenth Emperor
after Constantine, (although otherwise a most loving and favorable Prince
toward the Church) was feign to make a Law of Amortisation or Mortmaine, to
moderate the peoples bounty toward the Church; as did also many wise Princes
in other Nations upon like occasion, and in imitation of this Act of
Theodosius, many years after; and among the rest, diverse Magna charta. cap.
^6. W. 1. (...). 31. an. 13. E^. 1.
Princes of this Land did the like, upon the dotage of the people toward the
Religious Parsone, and specially toward the four Orders of Friars that were
then newly sprung up in the world. But yet this Act of Theodosius was done with
the great dislike of these blessed men Ierom and Ambrose, who lived in those
days, for that Ierom thus complains of that Law to Nepotian: I am ashamed to
say it, the Priests of Idols, Stage Players, Coach-men, and Common Harlots,
are made capable of Inheritance, and receive Legacies, only Ministers of the
Gospel, and Monks are barred by Law thus to do; and that not by
persecutors, but by Christian Princes, neither do I complain of the Law, but
I am sorry we have deserved to have such a Law made against us: In like
manner, and upon the same occasion does Ambrose deplore the state of the
Clergy in his one and thirtieth Epistle: We count it (says he) no injury,
in that it is a loss, we are not grieved that all sorts of men are made
capable of Wills, none excepted; how base, profane, or lavish of his life or
honesty soever he be, but I am sorry that the Clergy men only of all sorts
of people, are bard the benefit of the Law that that is common to all; who
notwithstanding, only pray for all, and do the common celebration of the
Service for all* So far they.

And yet whosoever looks into this constitution, whereby it was forbidden that
any man should pass any Lands or other immovable possession unto the Church,
without the Princes leave (for that thereby the things that are so passed, come
as it were, into a dead hand, which holds surely fast that it once
apprehends, neither easily parts with it, so that it cannot without much
difficulty be reduced and brought again to the commerce and common use of
men) shall find it was rather for the benefit of the common wealth, than for
the dislike of the Church, it was so ordered.

For if that course had been holden on still, the greatest part of the
liuelyhood of the common wealth, woule in short tune have come unto the Church,
and so Lay men should not have been able to have borne the public burdens
of the common wealth; which it concerns Seculer Princes to be careful of, and
to foresee that by overmuch bounty toward the Church they impouerish not
their own state, and loose the rights of Escheats, Primer season, and other
Privileges of the Crown in cases of forfaiture, and specially make bare their
Lay subjects, upon whom a great service of the common wealth does lie. And yet
otherwise the beneficiallest state of this Realm unto the Prince is the
Clergy, as from whom the King has a continual reuenew in Tenths, and is
deepest in Subsidy, and not the least in all other extraordinary charges
according to the proportion of their place. And therefore, as the King is to
maintain the one, so he is also to cherish the other, and not to suffer their
state in any sort to be diminished, for that all other states are made for the
service of the Church, and the Church again for the benefit of them.

But this was none of those Privileges I spoke of, for these are more ancient
than they, and granted out upon better devotion than the other: but after
this, the zeal of Religion being almost extinguished in the Christian world,
partly by the great vproars and tumults that were in every Country, by the
influence of one barbarous Nation or other into them, who pulled down Churches
faster than ever they were built, and made hauock both of Priest and people,
that professed the name of Christ, partly by the heresies that rose every where
in the Church in those days, which distracted men's minds, and made them waver
in the constancy of their Religion, it was revived again upon this occasion.

One Benedict, who otherwise had been a man of action Hospinian de Origin
Monachatu^.
in the Common wealth, (that Benedict which was as it were the Father of all
those that professed a Regular life, within the West part of Christendom; for
before his time the Monks of the West Church, served God freely abroad,
without being shut up in a Cloister) he I say finding himself, wearied with
the tumults and broils which happened under the government of Justinian, and
some years after by the incursion of those barbarous Nations before named into
Italy, retired himself into a desert and solitary place, intending there to
give himself wholly to the service of God: where when he had a while remained,
he grew so famous by his Christian exercises of fasting and prayer, and the
good and wholesome exhortations that he made to those that resorted unto him,
that within a very little time after, there was great confluence of people unto
him, not only from diverse parts of Italy, but even from sundry other parts of
the world, so that within a short time they grew into fraternities underneath
him, to whom he gave rules to live by, to the imitation of that, that Saint
Basil did in the East Church: to which his disciples submitted themselves with
all alacrity, leading a life far different from the common sort of men,
denying unto themselves all those ordinary delights that other men do commonly
take, out of meat, drink, apparel, marriage, Temporal preferment, and such
other things which wordly and carnal men seek for very greedily, humbling
themselves only to God, and the rule of their Master. Which thing bred such an
admiration of him, and of his Scholars, that not only many other orders sprang
out from them within few years; as the Premonstratenses, Clunacenses,
Templarians, Hospitallers, Cystertians, and the order of Saint John's of
Jerusalem, but even Popes, Princes, and people were wholly carried away with the
wonderment of them, insomuch as every of them did as it were strive, who might
show themselves most kind unto them; whereupon Princes built them houses, every
one in his kingdom, as Clito Ethelbald king of Mercia, buylt the Monastery of
Crowland here in England, of black Monks, under the rule of the said Benedict,
in the year 716. Popes and Princes granted them privileges, so far as it
concerned either of their particulers: the Clergy, Nobility, and People,
conferd goods and lands upon them, every one according to his ability.

In this zealous bounty of every degree toward these new sort of men, there
were two undigested Privileges granted them, both of them so hurtful and
injurious to the Church of God, as never any was the like. The one was the
annexation or appropriation of presentatiue Benefices to these Religious
houses: The other, the freeing of such lands or hereditaments, as they held in
sundry Parishes from the payment of Tithes to the Parsons and Vicars thereof;
to both of which the Scholmens divinity gave great advantage, as shall be
showed hereafter.

Either of these had their beginning of one root, that is to say, of this
false ground, that Preaching which is the most true, and most natural food of
the Soul, in a congregation that is come to the profession of Religion
already, and knows but only the Articles of the Christian Faith, the Lords
Prayer, the ten Commandments, and other principles and Rudiments of Christian
Religion, is nothing so necessary for the salvation of a man's Soul, as Prayer
is: beside, that preaching oftentimes gives more cause of Schism and dispute
in Religion, than it does of profiting and edifying the Soul: and therefore it
was not permitted by the Provincial constitutions of this Realm, that Parsons
or Vicars Linwood puin. eisdem, de offi^. Ar^hidiaconi^, et ca. ignorantia
Sacerdotum, de officio Archipresbyteri.
of Churches, should expound or preach any other matter or doctrine, than the
Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, the two precepts of the Gospel, that is,
the love of God, and the love of a man's Neighbor, the six works of Mercy,
the seven principal Virtues, the seven Sacraments, (for so many then the
Romish Church held) the seven deadly Sins, with their progeny, and this to
be done vulgarly and plainly, Absque cuiuslibet subtilitatis textura
fantastica, for so they call learned and orderly Preaching; whereas
notwythstanding Prayer is evermore profitable, every where necessary, and
never dangerous: Furthermore, Preaching only profits those, that be present
and do hear it, and attend upon it: but Prayer is auailable, even to those
that be far distant, yea, though they be in the remotest place of the world. By
which, and other like arguments, they translated away that maintenance that was
provided for the home Pastors, (who by Gods own institution, were to watch
over their Souls) to foreign and strange Guids, who never communicated to
their necessity in any heavenly comfort, but only took the milk of the
flock, and fed themselves withal. But by this pretense of theirs, ought not
Preaching to have been disgraced, for albeit Prayer be a necessary piece of
Gods service, and so necessary, that the Soul of man is as it were dead
without it; yet is it not equal to the dignity of Preaching, which God has
ordained to be the only means to come to Salvation by: for Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and without Faith it is impossible to
be saved: for Faith is a gift that purifies the heart, and makes a man's prayers
acceptable to God; and therefore neither of them ought so to take place, as
that the one should shoulder out the other, but they ought so to go hand in
hand together, as that one should help, assist, and countenance the other.

But how these annexations of Benefices first came into the Church, whether by
the Princes authority, or the Popes license, it is very disputable, and there
are reasons on both sides for to show the same.

For whereas there are reported by Ingulphus Abbot of Crowland before
mentioned, to have bin viij. Churches, beside the Patronage of some other,
annexed and appropriated to the said Abbey, by sundry Saxon Kings, it does not
appear by oght that I can find; whether they were done by the sovereign
authority of the kings alone, to the imitation of that, that was done by
Martellus, who made all Christian Kings to sin in this point, or that it was
done by any other Ecclesiastical authority, for that there is nothing extant
for the allowance thereof, save the several Charters of those ancient Kings
only: and that I should be rather induced to believe that it was done by those
Kings authority only; I am thereto persuaded, that I find William the
Conqueror, immediately upon the great victory that he got over this kingdom,
to have appropriated three Parish Churches to the Abbey of Battle, which he
buylt in memory of his Conquest. And whereas William his son had depopulated
and overthrown sundry Churches in the new Forest, Henry his brother by his
Letters Patents gave the Tithe thereof to the Cathedral Church of Sarum, and
annexed thereto xx. other Churches in one day, if the copy of that Record that
I have seen, as concerning these appropriations, be true: yea the matter was
gone so far in those days, that even Noble persons, and other meaner men, would
command Corrodies and Pensions to their Chapleines, and other servants, out of
Churches, and could not be redressed, until such time as there was made a
Statute to A^no 1. Edw. 3. cap. 10.
reform it.

On the contrary side, that I should take it to be a devise of the Pope, I am
moved thereto, that I find every of these orders of Religious men were
confirmed by one Pope or other; and as they confirmed them, so it is like they
made provision for them, and that most especially this way; and that chiefly
after the Laws of amortisation were devised and put in ure by Princes: and
thereupon it is that we find sundry sorts of annexation made by Popes and
Bishops under Linwood. c. licet bona memoria. gloss. in verb. asserunt non
ligari. de locato and conducto.
them, every one in their Diocese: as some were made so far as concerned the
Patronage only, and then had the Monks therein presentation only: some other
were made pleno iure, and then might the Monks both institute and destitute
therein without the Bishop, and turn all the profit thereon to their own use,
reserving only a portion to him that should serve the Cure there: some other
Churches did they grant simply to them, without any addition of full right, or
otherwise, and then if the Church were of their own foundation, they might
choose, the Incumbent being once dead, whether they would put any other therein,
unless perhaps the same Church had people belonging unto it, for then must
they of necessity still maintain a Curat there; and of this sort were their
Granges and Priories, and those which at this day we call Donatiues: but if it
were of another man's foundation, then was it otherwise. To this also I add
that, that the Pope every where in his Decretals, arrogateth this right unto
himself, as a Prerogative of the Apostolic Sea, to grant these privileges
to Religious orders, to take and receive Benefices at lay men's hands, by the
mediation of the Diocesan whose office it was to be a mean between the
Religious house and the Incumbent, for an indifferent rate that neither of them
should press too much the one upon the other: Gloss. in verb. de Decim.
and therefore in the beginning, the usual rate that they set down between
the beneficed man, and the Religious person was the one half of the Benefice,
for that it was not thought that the Pope would charge a Church above that
rate. But after by the covetousness of Monks and Friars themselves, and the
remissness of the Bishops, who had the managing of this business under the
Apostolic Sea, the Incumbents part came to so small a portion, that Othobon.
c. quoniam de Appropriationibus Ecclesiarum.
Urban the fifth, by Othobon his Legate here in England, in the year of
Salvation 1262. was feign to make a Legantine, whereby he forebad all Bishops
of this Land to appropriat any more Churches, to any Monastery, or other
Religious houses, but in cases only, where the persons or places to whom they
were appropriated, were so poor, as that otherwise they were not able to
sustain themselves; or that the cause were so just, that it might be taken
rather to be a work of charity, than any inforcement against Law: and that
beside with this Prouiso; as that if the new Proprietaries within six Months
next after, should not set out a competent portion for the Minister, of the
fruits of the Benefice, themselves should assign out a sufficient maintenance
thereout, according to the quantity and quality thereof; Which constitution,
because it took not that effect that was hoped, there were two Statutes made,
the one by Richard the second, the An. 15. Rich. 2. cap. 6. An. 4. H. 4. cap.
12.
other by his successor Henry the fourth, both for the conuenable indowment of
the Vicar, there to do divine Service, and inform the people, and to keep
hospitality among them.

Albeit most of these Appropriations were principally in Monks and Friars, and
such other Religious persons, yet were not Bishops Seas, and Cathedral
Churches, altogether free from them, as I have before showed in the Cathedral
Church of Salisburie, to whom Henry the first appropriated near twenty
Churches in one day: And the Sea of Winchester, which has had two Benefices
aunciently annexed to the Bishops table, the Parsonage of Eastmeane, and the
Parsonage of Hambleden. Neither do I doubt, but the like was done in other
Bishops Seas, and other Cathedral Churches, if I had as good instruction to
report of them, as I have had information to speak of these.

And so far as concerning the first effect of Privileges, whereby sundry fat
Benefices have been injuriously drawn from their own Churches, and
unnaturally appropriated to Monkries and Fryeries, and other seculer and
Religious places; which as I have said, has been partly the act of Lay men,
and partly of Ecclesiastical men. Now follows the second effect hereof.

And that is, the exemption of these Religious men's possessions from payment of
Tithes, which is a privilege of the Pope alone: for Monks aunciently paid
Tithes of Ca. ex part tua. gloss in verb. laborum de decim.
their land, before these privileges, as other Lay men did. But Pascalis the
second, casting a more favorable aspect toward Monks, and other Religious
men, than any of his predecessors before time had done, did order together with
the Council of Ments, That neither Monks, nor other Religious persons, or any
other that lived in common, should pay Tithes of their own labors: Which
immunitie Fod. in dea^ gloc. verb. laboris.
in process of time, Pope Adrian recald, so far as it concerned the rest of
the Religious persons, and limited it only to the Cystertians, Hospitallers,
Templers, and those which were of the order of S. John's in Icrusalem, leaving
only to the rest freedom from paying Tithes of lands newly broken up, and
labored with their own hands, and of their garden, and of their cattle. In
which state the matter stood until Innocent the thirds days, who although he
were in no other point of better mould than the rest of the Popes were; yet was
he in this more pitiful toward poor Incumbents of Parish Churches, than any
of his predecessors had been; who seeing hereby the inconveniences of beggary
and ignorance that grew upon sundry of the Parochian Priests, by means of
these Privileges, ordered in the second Lateran Council, holden in the year
of grace 1120. that for such lands as any of the Ca. nuper Abbates, de decimis.
said four Privileged orders, should acquire and get after the said general
Council, they should pay Tithes, or compound for them as other men did; yea
though they labored them with their own hands, or manured them at their own
charges. Which consideration also moved Henry the fourth, a king of this
Realm, to provide by Statute, first, that such of the order of Cystertians, as
had purchased An. 2. H. 4. ca. 4.
Bulls to be discharged of Tithes, should be reduced into that state, as they
were before: Then, that no An. 7. H. 4. ca. 6.
person Religious or Secular, by color of any Bulls, containing any
privileges, to be discharged of Dismes pertaining to any Parish Church, not
put in execution, should put the same in execution, or should purchase the like
in time to come.

Whereby it is very probable, that few of those lands which are now
challenged to be free of Tithe by the Statute of the xxxj. of Henry the eight
are free of Tithes in 31. Hen. 8. cap. 13.
deed: for that they are no otherwise freed by that Statute, than that they
were first freed in the Religious men's hands; so that if they were never freed
in their hands, they remain still charged with Tithes.

But between this interruption of not paying of Tithes wrought by Innocent, in
the second Lateran Council, and the dissolution of Monasteries effected by
Henry the viij. are three hundred and thirty years, and between the foresaid
Statute, made in the seventh year of Henry the fourth, and the subversion of
the Monasteries brought to pass by Henry the eight, as has bin before
remembered, are one hundred and thirty years. In which long distance of time
the one from the other, it is not to be doubted but many of those Religious
houses were built and endowed, which by no possible means could be partakers
of those privileges which were abolished before the time of their erection:
neither was there any reuyuing or renewing of these privileges by any Pope of
Rome, or Prince in this Realm, after they were thus first repealed by the Pope
and Prince aforesaid, for oght that I have read, or heard to the contrary.

So that if this matter were well understood, and the ages and orders of those
Religious persons from whom the claim is made, were rightly conceived, it
would give great light unto the Judges to discern what lands were exempted
from the payment of Tithes, and what not: for now many are pretended to be
exempted from Tithes, which never were of any of those four orders, and if
they were, yet were they not before the time of the interruption, but since.

And so far as concerning the second effect of these Privileges. Now it
follows that I speak a word or two of compositions, which are agreements
between persons litigant, whereby either party may know their own right, and
not strive again about doubtful matters. As good Laws have grown out of ill
manners, so compositions have risen out of quarrels, caused by privileges, and
other like exemption for matter of Tithe: whereof although there be no special
Treatise in the Law, as there is of the rest, yet they are so often mentioned
by the Decretals themselves, as that it is not to be doubted, but that they are
part of the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as the rest are, and that they are the
devise of the Ecclesiastical Lawyers, and not the conceit of the Common
Lawyers, the form and style of them does well show, which sauoureth wholly the
manner and phrase of writing of the Ecclesiastical men, and has no touch of the
Common Law at all. And if the devise be the Ecclesiastical men's, as all
Bishops Registers every where do show, which are full of these compositions,
why should not also the total be theirs, that every cause might have his
ending, where it has his beginning? Eorum enim est legem interpreta^i, quorum
est con^^r^.

And these are those grieuances of the Church, which I said the Schoolemens
curiosity in their distinctions, either invented, or gave strength unto them
after they were invented; but invent them all I think they did not, for that
these Acts of appropriations of benefices were somewhat more ancient than the
Schoolmen themselves are: but the rest of the Privileges, they either came
into the world with them, or insued anon after them, so that I may well say
they much strengthened this iniquity. For when that every man understood by
their Doctrine the quotitie of Tithes, or the tenth part thereof was not
precisely by Gods Law (since the light of the Gospel sprang out as the day
light unto the Christians, who before sat in darkness, and the shadow of
death) but that it was by the institution of the Church only; then began they
freely to spoil the Church, of her due Tithes, and to give away that to one
Church, that was due to another. And the reason that persuadeth the Schoolmen
to this, was that after much ado, dividing the whole Law of Moses into three
parts, the Moral, the Judicial, and the Ceremonial, they did conclude that
there were three parts likewise in the Tithe, the one Moral, which was a
necessary maintenance for the Minister, and therefore was natural and
perpetual: the other Judicial, which was the number of ten, fit as they taught
for that people only, and therefore was positive and remotiue: the last
Ceremonial, and that was the mystery contained in this quotitie, or number of
Ten, which being but a shadow only, was abolished with the Law it self:
whereby they did (infer the precise number of Ten being taken away, by reason of
the Ceremony it self) a competencie now only does remain for the Minister
out of the Tyths: which opinion has bin well confuted of late, by a very
learned man, as his Treatise thereof does well show; but I fear with less
success than the truth of ye cause does deserve, for this is a point that
touches many men's private benefit, and therefore shall have no more favor than
it needs must.

But the devise whereon the Schoolmen did build this Ceremony Thom. in
quod^^bet part. 3. art. 6. q. 6.
is this, that as all Digits under ten are imperfect, and do tend to ten as to
their perfectness; so all men, save Christ alone, are imperfect and have need
of Christ's righteousness to make them perfect: Which Abraham well knowing,
paid Tithes to Melchisedech, who was the figure of Christ, as therein
acknowledging that himself and al mankind, who were represented by the other
nine Digits were imperfect by reason Idem part 22. q. 87. art. 1.
of Original sin dwelling in them, and therefore had need to be perfected by
Christ who was figured by the tenth number.

All which that we may grant to be true between Christ and all mankind, as it
is true indeed, and that ten is the pefection of the other numbers under ten,
for that all the rest of the Digits, when they come to ten, return back
again to ten, and are multiplied by the coupling of themselves with ten: yet
where is this proportion between Christ and ten in the Scripture, that should
make this Ceremony: which if it cannot be found any where, nor any consent of
the primitive Church showed for it, as I think it cannot be, then may it with
as good authority be rejected as it is received. For albeit Thomas Aquinas
himself were t^a^med a Seraphical Doctor, that is, such a one as had a sense
in the understanding of the holy Scripture above all others of his age, and
that he did much profit the study of Divinity, with his witty distinctions:
yet is not his authority such, that it must prcuaile in cases of Divinity,
without the authority of the scripture and the consent of the ancient fathers
of the primitive Church, interpreting this piece of Scripture in that sense as
he does, which would make asweet harmony if it might be had.

And therefore as to my poor sense, better said a learned Iun^us in. 2. c. 3.
Gen^s^^s.
man of our time to this point, writing upon the Sabbath day in the second of
Genesis, which may be also proportionably understood of the tenth, for that
they were both before the Law in their very number, and were but repeated by
Moses under the Law, because they had bin approved by God before the Law in the
self same numbers: and that which he says of the Sabbath is this, that
albeit it has a Ceremonial designation of the day, that is, that it does
figure unto us our perpetual rest, which we shall have in heaven, after that
there is a new heaven and a new earth, yet there is therein two parts, the one
natural the other positive, as that God should have a seventh day of worship,
this is Natural, and therefore does remain, because it is perpetual: but that
this seventh day of the Lords worship should be ye seventh day after the
Creation of the word, this was positive, and therefore was changed by the
Apostls and blessedmen of the prsmitiue church into the seventh day after the
resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ: which as it is verified by him in the
Sabbath, so may it be in like sort vouched by like reason in the tenth,
wherein also by like semblance there are two parts, the one natural the other
positive. The natural is this; that God out of all the fruits of the earth,
the increase of cattle that are worthy of him and fit for man's use, should
have a tenth, both in the acknowledgement of his universal government over us,
and also for the provision of his ministers, and therefore this remains: and
in that sense imediatly after the dissolution of the Jews policy, the good
Christians of the Primitive Church as soon as they could get any outward form
of a Church, and peace from persecution received it in the very quotitie, as a
thing no less belonging to their ministers, than it did appertain to ye
priests and Levites of the Law: But that the Lord annexed these tyths by Moses
to the Priests and Leuits for their maintnance during the time of the
dispensing of the mysteries under the law, this is positive, and therefore
changed by the good christians in the primitive church from the Jews
Ecclesiastiques to the Christian Ecclesiastiques.

Neither can it be thought this number came from the Judicial part of the Law,
as a fit proportion to maintain one Tribe, out of the revenues of the other
eleven Tribes: for that this number or quotitie was revealed to be Gods long
before the Law, and before there was any such division of Tribes among the
people of Israel; which yet were not, but were parted afterward by Moses into
families according to the number of the Twelve sons of Jacob. And therefore it
is not to be presumed that the Law which came long after, imprinted a form
upon that, which was so long in being before there was any Law or ceremony.
But as the Apostles or prime-Christians, whenas they did first change the day
of the Sabbath by divine inspiration or otherwise, from the day of the
Creation, to the day of the Resurrection, durst not substitute any other day
into the place of the first day than a seventh; for that the Lord had revealed
his pleasure in many places of the Scripture as concerning that number, for his
day of worship, so that no other day could be appointed for his day of worship
than a seventh: So neither durst the good Christians of the Primitive Church
(moved no doubt with no other instinct than the other were, when they
translated this provision of tithes for their ministry from the Jewish Church
unto their own Church) change the number of ten into another number beside
more or less: For that God had no less manifested his will in sundry parts of
the Scripture. as concerning this number, to be a number for the maintenance of
his ministry, than he had declared his pleasure as concerning that other
number to be a day for his honor, chalenging it euerywhere in the Scripture,
in the very quotitie for his own right, and counting it robbery if it were at
any time withholden from him. And therefore it may be well thought, the
Schoolmen herein did great wrong to the Church, who by their quaint
distinctions brought this certainty to an uncertainty, which is no where to
be found in the Scripture. Which I am more bold to speak, for that I see some
have trod this path before me, and showed by good demonstration, that the
turning of this quotitie into a competencie is a thing nothing warrantable by
the word of God, but that the quotitie ought still to stand as a perpetual
right due to God and his Church. But hereof hitherto.

And so having passed over this whole prouiso of Law, Statute, Privilege,
Prescription, and Composition, I might well leave the turning of this stone any
more, but that yet there remains one Prohibition of prescription to be
handled, which in my fancy is worse than all the rest, for that it draws
away from the Parochian Church her maintnance, and transferreth it upon lay
men: and that which worse is, it makes Bishops to be instruments hereof, who
are to be Patrons and defenders of Churches, and not pillars or powlers of the
same. And yet the authors thereof do embrace it and kiss it as a golden
birth, or as if that Juno her self had been present at the Nativity thereof.
And the devise is this.

A Bishop being owner of a Manor yet not divided into Tenancies, nor having any
Parsonage erected upon it, ordeineth the one and divides out the other: here
the Bishop being seized in the whole Manor before the said division, because he
is a clergy man, is supposed to be in possession as well of the Tithes as of the
Manor it self, and therefore after creating a Parsonage, and dividing out his
Tenancies, may retain and keep to himself, and his said tenants, so much of
the said Manor discharged of tithes as him lists, and assign over the rest
for the maintenance of the Minister, and that his tenants after may challenge
exemption from tithe, as the Bishop did, for that they were exempted by his
capacity while they were in his own hand.

Neither of which is so by Law; for insomuch as a Bishop is an owner of a
Manor, and is a prime-founder of a benefice, he has no more right to the Tyth
thereof than a mere Lay Pat^on has, who for his zeal to the Church, and to
encourage other to be like affected to Gods Religion as himself is, may have
some small pension assigned him and his for ever by the Bishop out of the same
benefice, in acknowledgement of the erecting, founding, or endowing thereof:
but for any portion of Tyths to him or his, he could never retain any, nor can
to this day, neither yet can the Bishop himself, unless perhaps he will be
like to Ananias and Zaphira, Actoru^ 5.
which held part of the price of their ground from the Lord, and were worthily
punished for the same. And as they cannot detain it themselves, being
spiritual men, so much less can they pass it over to any Lay man, for that
Lay people neither by Gods Law, neither by the Canons and Decrees of the
Church, were ever capable of them: yea, it was so Ca. quamuis de decimis. and
ibi Abnum. 5.
far off, that ever any Bishops durst infeoffe any Lay man in Tithe; that who
so did it, was to be deposed and excommunicated until such time as he
restored the same to the Church again. And to say the truth, Tithes were never
Ca^^a nobis de decimis.
at any time in Bishops as in Fee, but in vetie few cases, as were the Bishop
had a Parish himself distinct from other Parishes, for sundry Bishops in
sundry places had so, and then the Tithes of the Parish did belong unto them in
such sort as they do now belong unto the Incumbents thereof: Or if the Tithe
were not within any Parish, for then in like sort it did belong unto the Bishop
of the Diocese, in whose Territory it was, albeit now within this Realm it
belongs unto the King: Or where the Parishes were vndistinguished, for then
were they the Bishops, not to convert unto his own use, but to divide among
the Ministers and Clerks which labored in the Diocese under him, in
Preaching, Teaching, Ministering of the Sacraments, and executing of other
Ecclesiastical functions, every one according to his desert: Or that it were
the fourth part of the Tithe, for then did it belong to the Bishop in Law,
toward his own relief, and the repayring of the Parish Church where they
grew, and not to confer or bestow the same, as him thought best; which
notwithstanding now also is grown out of use, and nothing left unto the Bishop
from the Churches of his Diocese, beside his Procurations and Synodals to be
paid by the Incumbents in the time of his Visitation. Beside which cases, it
cannot be found that ever any Bishop had to do with Tithe, much less to
alyen, dispose, and transfer the same as him listed, and to whom him listed.

For it is very certain, Bishops indowments themselves, in the beginning of
the Primitive Church, stood not in Tithes, but in good Temporal and finable
Lands, which gracious Princes and other good benefactors of former Ages C. de
sacro sanct. Eccl. and de Ep^is. and clericis tot. titul.
bestowed upon them, as it does appear out of the first book of the Code;
whereas sundry Laws of Constantine the great, and other gracious Emperoues,
even unto the time of Iustiman himself are recorded, both for the conserring
of Lands upon the Church, and those, such as should neither be barren, neither
charged with Statutes, or other debts of the Exchequer, as also for the
conseruing and Authent. m^lto magis C. de sacro sanct. Eccle.
safe keeping of such Lands as were in such sort conferred and bestowed upon
them: and is manifest also out of our own Stories, both in Britans time,
during whose Reign there Iocelin of (...) in his book of British Bishops.
Stow fol. 37.
are reported to have been fifteen Archbishops in the Sea of London well
endowed with possessions, and if they were Archbishops, then must necessarily
also follow there were Bishops, for that these are respective one to the other.
The like is written of the Sarons Reign, under whom the Hen. Huntington lib. 3.
Sea of Canterbury, the Sea of London, the Sea of Rochester, and the Sea of
York (for these four were first set up again after the Sarons first received
the faith at the Preaching of Augustine, Melitus, and Iustus Paulinus) are
namely reported to have been enriched with large Dominions Charta regis
^the^be ^i, and charta Will. primi. St^w fol. 77.
and possessions, given to every of them for their maintenance. And what course
has been held with Bishoprics erected since the Conquest, the ruinated state
of them and others do show, among whose ancient liuelod is not to be found
any indowment by Tithes, but such as of late have come unto their hands, and
that for the most part, by change of their good finable Lands for impropriat
parsonages. And therefore much to blame are some of our time, who (whenas their
predecessors in former ages never admitted of any impropriat parsonage into
their possessions, but only in such cases as have been before remembered) for
the name and place of a Bishop will be content to make Glaucus change with
Diomede, that is, give Homer. Illiad. 6.
their golden Armor for the others brazen Armor: or do like as Roboam did,
who in sted of the golden shields that his Regum 1. c. 1^.
father Solomon did hang up in the Temple, put in their places Shields of
brass: for the change is no better, and so well know they that procure the
same, otherwise would they never so instantly desire it.

And therefore an unsuitable devise was that, and contrary to the course of
former Ages, which was procured in the first year of the late blessed Queen,
not (as I think) by her own seeking, for she (good Lady) did in this as she
was directed, but upon some other policy; that it should be lawful for her
to take away so much fineable Lands from any of the Bishops as her pleased, and
to give them back again in lieu thereof Tenths, or Parsonages impropriat:
which has patcht them up again but with unsuitable pieces to their coat;
whereby they are both brought into obloquie, as though they detained the due
provision of the Parochian Church from it, and are set in a way ready to be
overthrown if every bird have his own fether again. Authent. de no^
alienand, aut permutand. reb Eccl. etc. si minus.


And therefore those good Emperors are most worthy of commendations, that when
they had any occasion to make change of Lands with the Church, would still
allow them the like in value or better: for a small gain it is unto a Prince
for a few thousands of increase of temporary benefices unto his Exchequer, to
draw a perpetual loss upon a Church or Bishopric: for so dear ought the
Spiritual state to be unto a Prince (upon whom God has bestowed so many
Kingdoms, and other things of price as he has done, and put such an infinite
number of people in subjection under his feet) that he would not in any case
be hard with God, but think every greatest liberality toward God and the
Church to be the best.

For certain it is the Empire and Church do not much Die. si minus Authent.
vt sup^.
differ the one from the other: for as the Empire does govern the outward man,
and frames him by outward policy to be a good and loiall subject to the
state: So also the Church frames the inward man by the word of God, and
causes him not only to be a dutiful subject unto his Prince, but also to be
an acceptable servant unto his Maker: So that there must be as well had an
awful care of those things that are consecrated to God, as there is a heedfull
regard had of those things that belong to the good of the Common state: for the
Church was not made of God for the Common wealth, but the Common wealth for the
Church. And therefore most Anno pr^^^ Jacob. Regis cap. 3.
gracious has bin the consideration of our dear Soueraign, who to stop all
importunate suits made to Bishops, for the granting away of any of their
revenues to himself, or any other, and to meet with the too too easy
facility of many Bishops, in yielding unto such suits; of his Christian and
Princely piety and care, has made a Law, whereby to protect the Churches
possessions from alienation or diminution, that they may remain and continue,
according to the true intent of their foundation to their successors for ever,
to the uses and purposes therein limited.

But here is occasion offered by the example of our gracious King to wish that
such as were authors to the King, for the dissoluing of Monasteries, and other
houses of Religion, had bin likewise counselors to him for the restoring of
all appropriated parsonages of Tithes, which were as it were in captivity
under those houses of Religion, unto their proper parishes from whence they
were taken. Which had bin a memorable work, and easy to have bin persuaded
the King, having so many great mountains of temporalities and Seas of goods
and chattels come unto his hand: so that these spiritualties would have seemed
matters of small account unto him in comparison of those other great riches and
possessions that came unto him. Which if it had bin done, how blessed a state
and Church had this bin, when every congregation should have had a sufficient
provision to mantaine a learned Preacher among them: for so was it by the first
institution, and so continued till violence and superstition changed it. But I
fear those men which began this worthy work, had not such a sincere mind
toward Almighty God in this reformation, as they ought to have had, but that
they sought therein their own advancement more than they did the glory of of
God; which I doubt me, lest God has remembered, in some of their posterity,
which being left in great state, have either so vanished away, as that their
place is scarce to be found, or else do so continue, as that their posterity
ever since has bin as it were in a minority, so that they are as though they
were not, great in place, but small in reputation: yea, the three fairest
branches or boughs that ever were in the world, issuing out of that tree,
under whose shadow all these things were done, are quite gone, and live by no
other posterity, but by their own worthy fame and glorious acts which they
did in their life time; which also now being gone, do follow them, and so
shall do unto the worlds end, for they were all three memorable worthies in
their place. So dangerous a thing it is to mixed our own ambition, or any other
carnal consideration with Gods glory. But God be thanked such is the careful
consideration of our most gracious Governor, that now is, in this behalf, that
it may be hoped, that God will remember him, and his posterity in goodness,
according to all that good that he has done for the Church, that he and his
posterity after him, may sit upon his seat so long as the Sun and Moon
indures: for certainly his godly and gracious comportment, has been such
hitherto, as that he may be verily thought to be a man according unto the heart
of God, as David was. But now to the loss that comes to the Church by these
impropriations.

Whilst the Parochian Churches stood in their essentialities, that is while
they did enjoy the natural indowments due unto their place, that is, all
manner of Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical duties, growing and arising within
the compass of their Parish, due by the word of God, they preached unto their
congregation, they prayed for them, they mynistred unto them the Sacraments,
they kept hospitality among their Parishioners, and relieved the poor, so far
as their portion would reach unto; which was a comely thing to behold,
acceptable to God, comfortable to their Parishioners, and conuenable to their
calling: but after the same were appropriated to Religious houses, these good
courses were much disguised: for albeit those Religious men, to whom these
Parochian Churches were annexed, did much pray for those congregation, as they
pretended, from whom they had the fat of the Benefices, yet they preached
little to them, kept small hospitality among them, or did any other spiritual
work belonging to any Pastoral charge; yet notwithstanding the whole
institution for which benefices in the beginning were erected, was not
altogether extinct in them, but there was some outward shape or form of the
first ordinance left them, so far forth, as that they made continual prayers
and intercessions to God for them: but when it came once into the Laities
hands, there was not so much as a footestep left of the first institution, for
they neither preach unto the people, pray for them, nor keep any hospitality
among them, but spend all the whole revenues of the Church upon their private
uses, which many times are unfit for such Spiritual provision to be spent in:
so that for the benefit of the Church, the return of them might be well wished,
albeit in so far as they are perplexed and intricated by the Laws of this
land, with private men's states, it would be hard to be performed; for the
changing of them would be much like, as if a man should move one stone in a
vauted work, such as the stony roofes of many Cathedral Churches and
Colleges are, where the taking of one stone away is the ieopardie of the whole
buylding: But yet let those to whom this does appertain, consider whither in
this it were better to please God, than man.

But now to return thither where I left: as every good Bishop, or any of his
Clergy, did wyn any country village, which the Latins call Pagus, to the
Faith; so they erected up a Church there, and appointed a Pastor or Minister
over them, to inform them in the Law of God, and to minister Hespinian de
origin Monochatus.
the Sacraments unto them: and set out for his maintenance the Tithe of that
Page, or Village, to which he was assigned Pastor; which they did in Tithes,
rather than in any other provision, both because it was the Lords inheritance
in all ages, and appointed by him for the maintenance of such as served in his
Tabernacle, during the dispensation of the mysteries of the Law, and now was
returned again into Gods hand by the expyration of the demise of them made unto
the Levites, during the said time of dispensation; and also because the people
would be the more easily induced to part with one part out of every ten, of
all the fruits of their grounds, and labors of their hands, unto the
Minister, than if there had bin any other reguler imposition laid upon them:
for certain it is, Villages and Pages came more hardly and more lately unto the
Faith, than great Towns and Cities did; and thereupon grew that name of
opposition, which was between Christians that dwelt in Cities, and the
Infidels that dwelt in Pages, that the one were called Pagans, the other were
called Christians, taking their names upon the difference of the places where
they dwelt. But from these Pages, (as I have said) came first the use and
practice of Tithes in the Christian world, insomuch as after when any Law was
made, as concerning Tithes, they held them evermore for a Parochian right
only, and in no sort at the disposition ^a. Cum contingat de Decim. verb. de
sure coi^^n g^os.
of the Bishop, but in such cases as before is rehearsed; insomuch, that if a
Bishop challenged any Church in his Diocese, he challenged it not in respect
of any fee simple he had in it, but in regard of the Spiritual Jurisdiction he
had over it. And therefore the Authors of this opinion were far out of Ab. ca.
nuper de Decim. et ca. deputati de Iudicijs number. 16.
the way, when as they thought the Bishop had like right in the Tithes of a
Church of his Patronage, to give and bestow them as he lists, as he has in
his demeanes, and other his Temporal lands, either to lease them out, or
divide them into Tenancies, as him best likes.

Neither is that case clear or without question whereby they pretend, a Bishop
being seized in a Manor, may prescribe the Tithes of the demeanes thereof, by
an immemorial prescription for him and his Tenants, and Farmers for years, and
Tenants at will, to be exonerated, acquitted, and privileged from all Tithes
growing thereupon: which if it be against an other person than himself, may
hap to be true, although perhaps also that be questionable, for that it is not
long since Lay people were capable of that right; neither could themselves by
Law of the Church at any time grant such Spiritual rights as these are, to a
Lay man, either in Feudum, or Emphiteusim, without danger of Excommunication,
Ab. ca. ad h^^ de Decimis n^mer. 4.
or deposition of their own place, as has been before showed. But if
himself, or his predecessors were Parsons there, either in the right of their
Bishopric, as has bin of late before remembered, or that the Benefice was
annexed unto their Sea, for the provision of their Table, as many Bishoprics
had some one or more benefices appropriat unto them to this purpose, then could
they not prescribe the Tithes in such sort as is pretended: For albeit no
prescription proceeds without possession, yet no man can prescribe against
himself, although he be in possession; for that evermore there must be two
persons in a prescription, the one which does prescribe, the other against whom
it is prescribed; and therefore in these cases it is never said, they hold their
Tithes by prescription, but in the right of their Church, or Parsonage. In
either of which cases, if they were Lords of the Manor, and Parsons of the
Parsonage together, it is not to be thought they would so respect the good of
their Farmer, as that they would either hurt their Church, or prejudice their
own Table, for their farmers sake: which they must do, if they suffer a
Prescription to run against the Church, or themselves, to exempt the demeanes
of the Manor from payment of Tithes, which were due both to the Church, and
themselves: For they were men, that both knew in their conscience, how much
they were bound unto the Church in this behalf; and they were not ignorant what
prejudice they should do unto themselves, if by prescription they should yield
to exempt so necessary a provision for the maintenance of their Hospitality, as
the tithes of the demeanes of a whole Manor, and their tenancies are: for no
small part of their commendation stood in those days in their hospitality,
and therefore it is not to be presumed that they would easily cut off any
provision that was fit for the same. Beside, if by either of these two ways,
the Bishop were Parson in the place, then did the fruits of the Benefice,
during every Vacation of the Bishopric, not come to the King, as they now do,
whereby the Parsonage and Manor are both consolidated into one, for that they
are now both holden to be Temporalties; but the Parsonages came to the
Archbishops of the province, as a spirituality granted to his Sea by
privilege, during the vacancie of the Seas of such Bishops as were in his
Province, as may appear by the Lord Archbishops Records of Canterbury, so that
it cannot E^ Registro Archiep^i Cant.
be thought any prescription could run in these times, being so often
interrupted by vacancies as they were. Which being well considered, the
conclusion is very doubtful, whither ever any prescription ran in this case,
neither would it easily be believed by those that know the course of
Antiquity, but that there has a Judgment passed in this part, and therefore
will I stay my self here, and prosecute this point no further.

I intended to say nothing in this treatise of the Tithes of Minerals, and
other subterraneous bodies, because I know by Law, they are holden by the like
right, as the Tithes of those things are, which grow in the upper face of the
earth; but yet because I see there is a question made of them, by some that
will make every thing controuersable, that is due unto the Church, I will
satisfy also their curiosity: And therefore, for Metals, and other
substances which are dug out of the bowels of the earth, and therefore are
called Fossilia, this is certain, that what God works here in the superficies
of the Earth, for those things that spring out of the earth, by the heat of the
Sun, the temperature of the Air, and the influence of the Celestial bodies;
the same he effects below in the depth of the Earth, for the generation of
Metals and other subterraneous bodies by the heat and cold of the earth, that
is included in Erastus tractat. de ortu Metalloram.
the bowels thereof: For by the heat, he raises up vapors and exhalations in
the matrix thereof, as the matter of those subterraneous bodies: but by the
cold, he dries, thickneth, hardneth, and indurateth the same into a Metal,
or Mineral, whereby he gives as it were a form unto it. And as the
disposition of every exhalation so compacted and drawn together is finer or
grosser, hotter or colder, so is the Metal or Mineral, or other subterraneous
body more noble or more base: yea, sometimes by reason of this diversity of
exhalations and vapors drawn together at one time, are diverse conditions of
Metals there confounded together, whereof some are noble, as Gold, Silver, and
Copper; some other are of less estimate, as Tyn, Lead, and such like. Neither
do these grow only in the beginning, but they renew again when they are dug
up, (as Trees and plants in the upper face of the earth do rise out of the
roots and stemmes of those trees which have bin cut down) if the place of
their new generation be prepared accordingly: For whereas the place of their
generation is far below in the Earth, nature of a certain modesty in her self,
will not yield to the generation of these subterraneous bodies, but in secret
places, far remote from the sight of the Sun, and the priuitie of other
Meteoricall bodies, which are under the firmament. And by that means it
happens, that these Mineral bodies are rarely known and perceived to renew
again; for that being once exposed to the light of the Sun, they are seldom
or never closed up again, by reason of the greatness of the gulf that is
made in opening of them. But yet the nature of them is such, that if their bed
were thereto prepared accordingly, they would conceive a new: Which is a thing
so notorious ff. Soluto Matrimonio, l. fructus eos.. 13. Plin. lib. 36. cap.
15. et 18. de naturali Histor.
in Quarries of stone, which are less abashed at the sight of the Sun, and the
presence of other Meteoricall bodies in their generation, that the Law it
self, and other good Authors have set it down for an undoubted experience,
that being dug up, they do renew again, by the nature and disposition of
the mould wherein they are ingendered: For some earthes do as naturally yield
stones, and other minerals out of them, as others Strabo lib. 5.
bring forth Corn, Hay, and other fruits: which if it be true in those bodies
which are in the upper crust of the Earth, why not also in those bodies which
are found and framed below in the Matrix thereof. And if these bodies do both
engender and renew, which are conceived so far below in the Navel of the
earth, why is not Tithe due of them, as well as it is of other fruits that are
in the summitie or hight of the earth. Whether is it that Gods hand less
labors in the procreation of these subterraneous bodies, than it does in the
ripening and quickening, of that fruit that springs out of the upper face of the
earth? But that is far otherwise, for here in these upper fruits, one
planteth, an other waters, and God only gives the increase: But in the other
Mineral bodies, God alone does all, for he only is the planter, he is the
waterer, and he gives the increase alone. Or is it that God has less delight
to be honored with these hid treasures of the earth, than he has to be
worshipped with the labor of the plow, or the increase of the cattle of the
field? But that this is not so, it is plain by the glorious Temple that
Solomon made, which 2. Chro. ca. 2.
had not only Cedar trees for the roof thereof, and Algummin wood for the
ornaments thereof, but also had quarrie stone for the walls thereof, and gold of
Paruaim for the beautifying of it, and for the ouerlaying of it within. And of
all other kind of Metals, gold is first remembered in the Scripture, immediately
Genef. 2. verse. 21. and 12.
after the creation of the world, so that God himself may seem to have a
special regard of this Metal above the rest, for that this alone above all
the rest, by purifying is not diminished. Or is it that God loves his
Ministers less than other men, so that he would have the Laity to have all the
precious things of the earth, and his Ministers to have no part of any other
thing, but that which is vulgar and common? But how unlike that is, who sees
not, when he sees that God has committed unto them, the inestimable treasures
of his word; in comparison whereof, both these upper fruits of the earth, and
those hid treasures below, are mere dross and corruption? and therefore it is
not like, when he has committed unto them those great matters, he would deny
unto them these smaller blessings. Or is it that there has bin paid tyths of
the upper fruit of the earth already, and therefore cannot Tithe be twice Ca.
en part de Decimis, and ibi ^b. 18.
demanded of one ground in one year, according to a new over ruled doctrine?
But that opinion is both contrary to Law many hundred years obtained in the
Church without contradiction, whereby it is ordained, that as often as the
earth fructifieth in one year, so often shall Tithes in the same year be paid
of it: and also it is contrary to Divinity and reason that it should be
otherwise. For when as God has given thee more Harvest or more Vintages in one
year, is it not both godly and reasonable, as God has increased his blessings
toward thee, so thou also should rise in thankfulness toward him? For,
where every one has receive dmore grace or more favor, there ought he to be
more thankful, lest God for lack of this correspondencie in thankfulness,
bring thy nine parts, for thine ingratitude toward him, to a tenth only. For
certainly so he is able to do by sending deluge and drought upon the earth,
by bringing barrenness upon it, by destroying that which is sprung out of the
earth already, by storm and tempest, by the grasshopper and the caterpiller:
for all this has he threatened to all those that are unthankful this way,
neither is the Lords hand more shortened now than it was then. Whereas not
withstanding to the contrary, he has promised great kindness unto such as
shall pay their Tithes truly and cheerfully, as that he will open the windows
of heaven and power out his blessings without measure upon them. Hilarem enim
datorem amat Deus. Beside this, that earth that brings out metals in the
Matrix of the earth, is not that that brings out corn and grass in the top
of the earth: for that earth that is the mother of metals, being pressed down
far into the bowels of the earth, can yield no sustenance to those fruits that
grow so many fathoms above it, to which it confers nothing save that it does
support and bear up that other earth, which nourishes the plants and fruits of
the upper earth, whose sustenance is not fet deep out of the earth, but is
sucked out of that earth which is within one cubit or two of the top of the
earth: which may be easily perceived by those fruits and trees that grow upon
hard rocks near to the top of the earth, whose food, although it be near unto
the top of the earth, yet do they flourish and stand fast, as other trees and
fruits do, which have more fat and deep mould under them. And therefore
cannot the Tything of those things which are above, excuse the Tything of the
treasures that are below, albeit the conclusion were true, that two thing are
not to be paid out of one ground in one year, for these are neither one
ground, and the conclusion it self is erroneous, and therefore I conclude this
point thus: Since Metals and Minerals, and other subterraneous bodies are in
no less Obligation to God, than other fruits of the earth are, there must be
no less tiths paid of them, than are of other fruits of the earth; for that
these are the inward fruits of the earth, as well as those are the outward, and
therefore of like things, there must be like judgment and like consequence.
And thus much as concerning the Tithes of Metals and Minerals.

And now because I am in this matter of Tithes, I will shape an answer to one
doubt that is made, as concerning the Tyths of Turues, that is, of earth
disposed and prepared for fuel, which are said not to be tytheable, and that
upon this reason: That Tyths are not paid of the earth it self, but of those
things which spring out of the earth: which opinion is true, if it be
understood of earth not separated from the body and mass of the rest of the
earth. For if Tyths should be yearly paid thereof, as it is paid of other
things that grow out of the earth, all the whole earth in a short time would
become the Clergies. But if it be meant of earth that is severed from the rest
of the mass and globe of the earth, then is it otherwise. For that earth that
is thus severed from ye other earth is no more part of that earth from whence
it is severed, than a man's hand or leg being cut from the body, is part of his
body after it is cut off from it. And therefore of this earth so provided for
fuel may Tyths as well be paid as of any other fuel of wood, cole, or otherwise
that is provided to be burnt. For there is one reason of things when they are
united together in one bobie, and another of those things when they are divided
from the same body: for so long as they are in one and the self same body, they
follow the nature of the whole, but when they are divided, then is there
another consideration of them. Seperatorum L. finali. ff. de calumuiatoribus.
enim seperata est ratio, and ex seperatis non infertur de vn^ ad aliud. Corn,
Grass, and such like, while they stand are not Titheable, although the tithe
then is in them pro Indiuiso: For while that they stand they are part of the
earth upon which they stand, and therefore so long vntithable, because the
earth it self is vntytheable. But if they be cut down, then are they to be
Tythed, because they are now no longer parts of the earth, but bodies by
themselves separated from the earth, so that now the not tything of them is
penal: Of which sort are turues separated from the rest of the mass of the
earth. Neither is this my opinion alone, but it was Prouincial. de decim. c
sancta and ibi Linwood verbo turbaru^.
Linwoods long ago, and other Ecclesiastical writers, who not only make Turfe
Tythable when it is prepared for fire, but also great rods, and small twigs,
sticks, and chips of timber, buts and roots of trees, thorns, briars, walnut
shells, and L. Ligni appellatione. 4. 5. and 6. ff. de legate. 3.
nut shells, weeds, coals and cole-brands (called Titiones, because they are so
burnt as they shall not make a smoke) cowshards, which the Law calls Editus
boum. All which a man can use to no other purpose than to burn: for where wood
lacks, these succeed in place of wood, and are called by the name of wood, and
are in like Obligation, as concerning the Tithe due therout, as wood it self
is; Vbicunque enim est eade^ ratio, veleade^ L. Illud. ff. ad ^egem Aquilia^.
aequitas, ibi debet esse eade^ iuris dispositio. And therefore not in that,
that Turues sometimes were gremiall earth they are to be discharged of tithe:
but in that they are accounted for Fuel by the law, when they are so prepared
to be burnt, they are to pay tithes in like sort, as other things applied to
that use do.

And so far as concerning the Prohibitions which arise out of this prouiso. Now
it follows that I speak something of 2. Edw. 6. c. 13.
the next prouiso, which is concerning the Tithes of barren heath, and waste
ground, and the Prohibitions thereupon.

This prouiso has two branches, the one for comparatiue barren, heath, and
waste ground, the other for absolute barren, heath and wast, for either of
which is assigned a time of 7. years, either for the payment of such tiths, as
before the time of their improuement, and converting to errable, they were
charged with, or for the free and absolute discharge of them from all manner of
Tithes for seven whole years next after their improuement ended and
determined. For so I take the Statute meant, when as it made the one Tythable,
the other not, for if otherwise they had been both in one predicament of
barrenness, the Statute had not made one free from tithe for so many years as
it does, and charged the other all that time with Tithe.

For these two kinds of grounds, although the Statute say nothing, which is
comparatiue barren, which is absolute, yet reason tells us, that is
Comparatiue that has a positive under it, and a Superlatiue above it: and
therefore that is Comparatiue waste, barren, or heath, in respect whereof there
is some over ground more or less, waste, heath, or barren, so that it has
simply and positiuely in it some condition of heath, wast, or barren: but if it
has nothing of any of these qualities in it, then is it neither heath, barren,
or waste, howsoever long otherwise it has lien unmanured, and not turned to
tillage: For it is not the turning of a ground to tillage that makes it heath,
barren, or waste, but it is the il disposition of the ground it self, subject
to these inconveniences, that causes it not to be turned to tillage; for no
man will willingly till that, where the gain of the tillage will not quit the
cost and labor of the husbandry, as for the most part it falls out in these
grounds they do not.

Barren ground therefore simply, is that, which being eared, Glos. L. licet. C.
de locato and conducto verbo sterilitates.
yealdeth not the seed again, or at the most, yields so small advantage for
the tillage, as that the tenant after that he has paid his Rent, has not the
worth of half his seed again; much like unto that ground whereof the
Scripture speaks, whose barrenness is such, as being eared and sowed,
neither the Mower fills his hand, neither the Gleaner his lap, with the yield
thereof. These grounds are not only called Sterilia of the Latins, but also
Infaecunda, Infrugifera, and sine prole, for the excessive barrenness that is
in them: and the Greeks upon like occasion term such conditioned grounds; L.
si quis vsuras. ff. de eo qui pro tutore.
(...), in which sense, money not put to usury is by the Law called barren
money, and Aristotle calls it fruitless money: for that money was not
devised thereby Arist. 1. lib. politicorum.
to increase money, as greedy Usurers in all ages have done, but that by the
means thereof men might ease the difficulties, and necessities of change of
one kind of thing for another, as a horse for an ox, a sheep for a goat, Iron
for brass, and such like: for there is nothing that may not be Arist. 4.
ethicorum. c. 1.
esteemed by money, and the use of money is the uttering of money, whereby it
is commonly said, Money is lost by the use thereof, not that money does perish
or decay by use, for we see the clean contrary to that, though money go
thorough a thousand men's hands, yet it is still of the same value, and
remains in her proper essence or being: but that the use of money is in the
laying of it out, and that by the use thereof, money passes from him whose it
was, and the property thereof goes to another, and therefore as to the first
owner it is spent, and lost: without which loosing, money naturally gains
nothing; for lay it up in a cofer or chest never so long, it will never be the
more in number, although perhaps as S. Iam. cap. 5. v. 1.
James says, It will gather a rust and canker, and that rust and canker will
be a witness against them which so hord it up from the service of God and the
common wealth, in the day of the Lord: so then, as that money is barren, that
lies still and brings out nothing, so is that ground barren that being
tilled, yields no fruit, or at the most, so little, as the gains will not
recompense the charge.

Although heath ground, and barren ground be almost Synonomies, yet to speak
properly, heath is as it were an effect of barrenness, for that there is no
ground that brings forth heath, but for the most part it is barren. And
therefore as heath it self is an unfruitful kind of shrubs, and is good
almost for nothing but for the fire; for that neither growing or cut down, it
has any beneficial use at all for the common wealth: so also the ground it
springs out of, has neither faicenesse to the eye, nor goodness to the
yield, but is commonly either a black sower ground, that has no sweetness at
all in it, or is a dry hungry soil, such as evermore cries Proverb, 12.
give, give, and never restores oght again.

Waste is that which for the unfruitfulness thereof has laien time out of
mind unmanured, in which sense it is all one with barren ground; or it is such
ground as for the charge of hedging, ditching, fencing, and tilling no man will
manure.

Our forefathers aunciently comprised all these three under one name calling
them all by the name of Noualia, that is new broken up ground not only because
they were not broken up in the memory of man before, but also for that being
eared, they yielded little or no fruit at all: and therefore the interpreters
of the Law defining what Noualia are, say that they are such grounds as before
the tillage thereof were inutilia; and example them out, in Mountains,
Marshes, C. commissum de decimis verbo i^^tilia.
Thickets, and such other unprofitable ground, as out of which before the
stocking of them up and converting them to tillage, the Church took little or
no benefit at all. And those are the same or cosen German to those which this
Statute calls heath, barren and waste; for they are one and the very self
same with them, in all the chief points, for which they are excepted out of
the Statute.

So then now, there is no further question what is heath, barren, and waste
ground, but who shall try the matter of this quality, the Ecclesiastical
Judge, in whose continual possession this trial has been until now of
late, that under color of this Statute, it has been incroched upon, as it
may appear by all the Titles of the Ecclesiastical Law, where there is any
mention of the Tithes of new broken up ground, and the Decrees of the Lawgiuers
in the same, between the Monasteries challenging them by grant, and the
Parochian Ministers of the Parish where they grew, claiming the same by right:
Or the Temporal Judges, whose is the Cognisaunce of the Title and Tenure of
the ground, as also is the setting, letting, buying, selling, and other
alienating of the same.

For the point it self, the Statute makes no mention, but passes it over
with silence; and therefore it is to be presumed that it meant, that it should
there rest, where it was before the making of the statute: for the statute was
not made in derogation of the Ecclesiastical proceedings, that were before;
but in affirmance thereof, as the whole drift of the said Statute does show.

And if the Statute had meant otherwise, it would surely have expressed it
either in the prouiso it self, or after in the derogatorie clause; where it
makes an enumeration of such things as it intended should be exempted from
the trial of the Ecclesiastical Law, and by virtue of this Statute, should
not be comprised under the same, among which there is no word of this prouiso,
or any other in the same Statute before named.

Neither is it unto the purpose, that the Common Law of this Land takes
knowledge of the Tenure and Title of Lands, and such other complements
belonging to the same; for these things that are here in question, are no part
of those Legal Essences, which the Law requires to the Title and Tenure
thereof, as is Feesimple, feetaile, and other of like nature, according to the
learning of that Law, but these are certain accidents over and beside the
Tenure of the land, which may be present or absent without the injury of the
Title: as God many times turns floulds into wilderness, and springs of water
again into dryness, and a fruitful land makes he barren for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein, and yet the Title or Tenure of the ground is not
changed, by these changes of qualities, but remains the self same that it was:
so that these things are no more subject to the ordering of the Common Law,
than it is in the Common Law, to judge and determine what mould is white and
what is black: what ground will bear wheat, what barley, what oats; for these
things are no matters of skill of law, that they need to be fetched out of
books, but they are matters of common experience which every country man can
as well skill of as the greatest Lawyer that is, and therefore the Law in this
case is not desirous of any curious proof, but contenteth it self only with
the depositions of two or three honest men, which speak sensibly and feelingly
to the point that is in hand, which is enough to direct any wise Judge in his
sentence, so that it needs not these long circumstances of twelve men to teach
the Judge what and how truly the witnesses have deposed. For if every quality
of the ground rests in the mouth of twelve men only, then should no man be
able to say out of the mouth of a witness, and pronounce thereupon, this
ground is mountain, this is plain, this is meadowe, this is errable, unless
he were warranted by the verdit of twelve men thereunto: which if it be an
absurdity to hold, then sure it is like absurd to say, that barren, heath, and
waste cannot be pronounced without a Jury; for that these things are like
obuious to sense, and like qualited as the other are.

And I pray you, when they have drawn it unto their trial, what do they in
effect otherwise than the Ecclesiastical Judge would or should have done, if
it had remained still under him? for do they give credit simply to the conceit
of the Jury, as touching that which has been declared and pleaded in the
cause before them, or do not the Judges themselves rather make a brief of all
that has been pleaded in the cause before them, and thereof make as it were a
verdit, and put the same in the mouth of the twelve for their verdit, before
they go from the bar? So that the whole weight of the cause stands rather in
the Judges direction, in such sort as it is at the Ecclesiastical Law, than it
does in the mouth of the Jury; for the Jury men for the most part, are simple
people, and scarce four of the twelve understand their evidence: so that it
may seem rather to be a matter of supersluitie than of good policy, to refer
a matter to their verdit, when as they say no other thing, than that the Judge
taught them before; Stultum enim est id facere per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauciora: for albeit perhaps some capricious fellow of the Jury, upon the
confidence of his own brain, sometimes start aside from that which the Judge
has told him, and draw the rest of his fellows, as so many sheep, after him;
yet for the most part the Judges voice is their direction, their loadstone, and
and North pole to guide them in this business.

Besides, in this Prouiso, as in some other precedent, there is a great
disadvantage offered to the Clergy, which they much complain of, and that is,
that in cases of this nature, they are compelled to suffer trial under them,
who are as in a manner parties unto the suit, by reason of the interest they
have therein, either in present, or in consequence; so that many now a days
(learning too late by other men's harms what the event in theirowne cause
will be) choose rather to loose their right, than to venture their cause upon such
partial Judges, as the 12. men are.

And so far as concerning those prohibitions as are forced out of this Statute,
for naturally they grow not out thereof: so that I might now pass over to the
other branch of my division, that is of such matters as are now held by the
Common Lawyers, to be in a certain measure only of the Ecclesiastical
proceeding, but were aunciently wholly of the Ecclesiastical cognusance; but
that the name of the Statute, De Sylua caedua, offering it self unto me in the
conclusion of this Statute of Edward the vj. gives me occasion to speak
something thereof, before I come to the rest.

This Statute as the words thereof do show, was made in behalf of the Laity
against the Clergy, for the exemption of great Woods of xx. years growth, and
upward, from the payment of Tithes; and that in three cases only, where the
wood was great, where it was of xx. years of age and upward, where it was sold
to Merchants, either to the profit of the owner himself, or in aid of the King
in his wars; so that without these cases, it seems the Statute intended no
further exemption: for Statutes are things of strict Law, and are no further to
be extended, than the words thereof give matter thereunto, specially when the
thing it self naturally was liable to ordinary course of the Law, as other
things of like nature are, and the statute comes in derogation of their
ordinary course: as in this case, great timber auntiently was no less tythable
than small trees are, and so by nature ought to be if the statute were not to
the contrary; yet notwithstanding these limitations of the same, if great wood
be cut down to any other use then to sale, as to build, or to burn to a man's
own use, a prohibition in this case lies, and yet is there no Identitie of
reason to extend it, nor any absurdity would follow, if it were not extended,
for here is neither money sought (which gave occasion unto the Lawgiuers to make
this statut of exemption) neither is it an unnatural thing for to pay Tithes of
great wood; for before this time they were paid, and by the Law of God it
seems they ought to be paid, for that he that is taught, ought to communicate
to him that teaches him in all things: and therefore since the reason that
moved the Lawgiuers to order it so in one case, cease in the other, there is
no reason of extention, and when there is not an Identitie of reason, in the
things that are in demand, there can no sound inference be brought in from the
one to the other, for of several things, there is a several reason, and a
several consequence, neither can there be framed thereof a good implication,
either positiuely, or remotiuely: neither has this interpretation of theirs
any warrant of Law for it, save that it has bin so defined and decided: but
what is that to the purpose, if it has bin wrested and wronged contrary to the
true sense of the Statute, and that by those that take benefit thereby, whose
partiality being taken away, the thing it self would easily turn again to
his own nature, and right would take place?

The reason they yield for the exemption of great woods of the ages aforesaid,
although to themselves, it be plausible, yet to others it is strange, as
namely, that great Trees are Plowd. in Soby contra Molyns.
part of the Freehold, and that men use not to pay Tithes of their freehold,
but of those things which spring out of their freehold, as out of Corn,
grass, fruit, and such other; whereas in deed the tallest Timber tree, that
is, if it were as high as the highest Cedar in Lebanon, is no more part of the
inheritance or freehold, than the lowest bramble that grows in the field; for
they are both equally part of the ground wherein they grow, and do take a like
norishment and sustenance from the same, neither do they differ in that they
are trees the one from the other, secundum magis et minus, as the Logitians
say; but in that, the one is a great tree, and the other a small shrub: and the
cause of this provision here in England for these great trees, was not for that
one was more of the inheritance than the other, but for that the one yields
more profit to the common wealth, than the other, and therefore they have made
the cutting down of the one more penal, than the other: as in like case by the
Civil Law, who so privily cutteth down, or barketh a vine, an olive, or a fig
tree, ff. Arborum furtim caesarum, toto tit.
or does any other unlawful act, whereby any fruitful tree, or any Timber
tree does perish and decay, it is Theft; and it is punished in the double value
of the hurt which is done, and if he be tenant to the ground which has done
this villainy, he loses his hold: which comes not of that, that one kind of
Tree has more state in the ground than an other has, but that the Law has
respected, the necessary use of the one more than the other.

By the Civil Law, although this word Wood be general, L. Ligni appollatione
de L^g. 3 and L. Carbonum ff. de verb. significat.
yet it is thus distinguished, that some is wood, some is Timber, which the Law
calls Materia. Timber is that which is fit to build or underprop withal: Wood
is whatsoever is provided for fuel, so that under that name there passes
Reed, Coal, Turfe, Cow dung, and whatsoever L. ligni appellatione, Ofil^us,
and. idem ff. de legate. 3.
is any where ordinarily used for fuel. Timber is of a higher consideration
than wood is, insomuch as if a man bequeath unto an other all his wood that is
in grove field, there shall not pass by this legacy such Trees as are cut
down for timber: but if they were dotterd Trees, or the owner thereof purposed
them for fuel, and so cut them out into billet, or faggot, in such sort as
there could be no other use thereof than to burn, then it is otherwise: for by
this means, of great wood, it is become small wood, as being cut out in
shides, or splinters, fit for to burn. So that in the reckoning of the Civil
Law, timber stands not only in the nature of the wood it self, but is in the
destination and purpose of the owner, who according to his good lyking, may
make that wood, which is fit for timber, fire wood, or timber: which if it were
so in account with the great Lawyers of this land, the Church should have more
Tithes of Wood appointed for fuel, and les^e suite for the same.

As they exempt the bodies of great Trees above xx. years Plowd. vt sup^.
growth, from payment of Tithes, so also they free the boughs thereof, upon
this reason, that the boughs thereof are fit and serviceable for buylding,
which although happily may be in some of them that are next to the Trunck of the
tree; yet it is far otherwise in those that are more remote from the same,
whereof there can be no other use than to burn: and therefore the Law
precisely holds, in case where wood is bequeathed, by which is meant fire wood
only, unless the Testator otherwise express his mind, the lops of timber L.
Ligni appellatione. Ofili^^ de Leg. 3.
trees, which the Law calls Superamenta materiarum are bequeathed, for that the
lops have not that use that the Timber has, that is to buyld or prop up
withal, but they serve to burn only: by which several ends, there is
several consideration and account made of them. Neither is it to the purpose
that they allege for the defense hereof, that the accessorie follows the
nature of the principal, for that rule is not true in every accessarie, but
only in such, in whom is the like reason as is in the principal, which in the
trunk L. ^tsi. C. de Praedijs minoru^.
and lop of a tree cannot be alike for buylding.

Further, how the Boughs of a tree that are of the same substance, as the
body of the tree is, should be accessaries to the tree, I see not, for nothing
can be an accessarie to an other that is of the same nature and substance as
the other is; as the leg, or hand, are no accessaries to the body, for that
the leg or hand are of the same substance that the body is: The Child, neither
while it is in the Mothers womb, neither after it is borne is an accessarie to
the Mother, for L. 1. ff de ventre inspiciendo.
while it is in the Mothers womb, it is part of her womb, and after it is
severed from her womb, it is a man or woman like principal as her self is:
But that which is an accessarie to an other must be of an other nature than the
principal is; so in natural living creatures, hair, hoofes, horns, and
finnes, and such other like excrements, are accessaries to the creature whose
they are, for that they are of a far different nature, from the bodies, out of
which they come: and so in other natural things not living, as the Earth it
self is, the trees, grass, and fruit that spring out of the same, are
accessaries thereto. Further in Civil matters, expenses and executions are
accessaries to the causes out of which they rise: and in Marriages, Dowries and
L. do^is. ff. de iure do^ium.
Iointures are counted accessaries to them, for that without Marriage, neither
ioynture, nor dowry can stand. Usury is said to be an accessarie to the
principal, not in respect that the proper subject of either of them is Money,
and so there is one substance or nature of them both, but in regard of the
dependencie the one has of the other; for he that will make challenge to Usury,
must first prove there is a principal. But for the better clearing of these
matters of accessarie and principal, we must know in bodies whose substance
is all one; There are some parts like, which the Logicians call parts
similares, some other unlike, being likewise called of them parts
dissimilares, which in no sort are accessaries one to an other, but make one
continued body of both, which the Law calls (...): Simular parts are such, as
have one substance, form, and figure, as the trunk or body of a tree is all
one in inward essence, and outward shape: Dissimular parts are those, which
have one inward nature with the other, but are diverse in outward show, as the
boughs and roots of the Tree are diverse between themselves, and different
from the body, and yet all agree in one substance, and have all the general
name of Wood, whereby they are discharged from being accessaries the one to the
other, and yet they are not under one capacity or service, or one
comprehension of Law, because they are unlike one to the other; and of unlike
things, there is unlike reason, and unlike consequence.

Now upon these grounds to exempt Timber Trees wholly from the service of him,
that is Lord as well of the tall woods, as of the low shrubs, is very hard, for
though himself dwells not in houses that are made with man's hand, nor has any
need of tall Trees to repair his Tabernacle, or prop up his dwelling: yet
since he has left such behind him, as have charge of his flock, and feed them
in word and work, until he come, and they dwell in earthly habitations, as
other men do, and there edifices and buildings, have need of repair, in like
sort as other mortal men's houses have, being all in like manner subject to
rottenness and corruption; great reason it had bin to have allowed him some
proportion of these great woods, toward his servants necessary uses, during
the time of their service here, and if not in the very tenth it self, yet in
the xxx. xl. or l. part of the same, that God thereby might have bin as well
acknowledged to be the Lord of the great Oaks of the forest, and that by him
they have there length, breadth, and thicknes, as he is accepted and reputed to
be Lord of the small brambles and bushes of the field: for as now the case
stands, God may either seem to have forgot himself, that he has not made
timber trees Tythable, as he has done other smaller woods, specially having
such occasion to use them, both in the Chauncels of Churches that are dedicated
to his uses, and also in the buyldings and repayrings of his Ministers houses,
who supply his room in their several Congregations, until he return to
Judgment; or that may well be objected against us, in allowing such things for
Tithes as us please, and disallowing the rest, as was by that ancient father
of the Church Tertullian objected against the Senate of Rome, who being
entreated by the Emperor Tiberius (for the strange wonders and Miracles he
heard to be wrought by our Savior Jesus Christ) that he might be entertained
among the number of their Gods, refused so to do, for that they heard our
Savior was a Jealous God, and did in no sort admit the society and fellowship
of other Gods; which this grave father hearing, (although many years after)
said merrily, although wisely, That God should be God, if Man would let him.

And thus far of those causes which are held to be absolutely of the
Ecclesiastical cognizance, and yet notwithstanding are ecclipsed by
interposition of sundry contrary matters.

Now as concerning those things which have been accounted but in a certain
measure of the Ecclesiastical cognizance, and yet notwithstanding have
aunciently in a manner been tried wholly at the Ecclesiastical Courts, such as
are matters of Diffamation, and matters of Bastardie, both which now a days
are much challenged by the Temporal Courts to be of their cognizance. But here
first of diffamation, then of Bastardie.

To diffame therefore is as Bartol says, to utter reproachful Bartol l turpia
ff. de legate. 3.
speeches of an other, with an intent to raise up an ill fame of him; and
therefore himself expresses the act it self in these words, Diffamare, est
in mala fama ponere.

Albeit Diffamations properly consist in words, yet may they also be done by
writing, as by diffamatory Libels, and also by deeds, as by signs, and
gestures of reproach; for these no less show the malicious mind of the diffamer
then words do.

Diffamatory words are uttered either in some scoffing or jesting manner, so as
facete and merry men use to do, to make the Linwood c. author tate verb. quacu^
que de causa i^ glos. de sni^a ex^omm.
company merry wherein they are, or they are spoken by some that have some
weakness, or distemperature in their brain, either by drink, frenzy, or
other lightness, or by any rashness in their tongue, or they are poured out
upon some rancor and malice, by some that envy an other, with intent to
diffame him, and spread abroad a matter of disgrace upon him.

If they be spoken in a testing manner to make the company Aristot. 4. ethic. c.
antepen^lt.
merry, if it be in a fine sort delivered, it is by the Greeks called (...),
and is by Aristotle held to be a virtue, although by S. Paul it is condemned as
a vice; but if it be in ^phes. 5. 4.
homely and gross sort delivered, than is it accounted to be a kind of
rudeness or rusticitie; but whether ways soever they be uttered, there is for
the most part no vantage taken of Extra de presumpt. ca. 1.
them, unless thereby there follow any discredit to the party upon whom such
jests are broken, for than are they not without blame, Noxius enim ludus est in
vitio, neither can that ff. ad l. Aquiliam, l. nam indu^.
be called jest or sport, whereby a man's good name is hurt, or any crime
imposed upon him.

The like may be said of those which speak hardly of any by the lubricitie of
their tongue, or weakness of their brain, who for that they are not thought,
to speak such words maliciously, pass for the most part unpunished, Lubricum
ff. ad l. Iul. Maiestatis l. famosi.
enim linguae non facile ad poenam trahendum est, no though a man in this case
speak ill of the Prince himself: which is so far off from that, that the
Civil Law takes hold of such words in these cases, that the Emperor himself
has said of them thus: Si id ex leuitate processerit, C. Si quis Imperatori
maledi^erit.
contemnendum est, si exinsania, miseratione dignissimum est.

But if the cause of such words be rankor or malice, then are they altogether
to be punished, for that there can be no just excuse made for them.

Such diffamatory words as proceed of malice, implie Bohic. ca. Si culpa de
iniurijs.
either matters of crime, or matters of defect.

Such as imply matters of Crime, either are such crimes as it is expedient for
the Common wealth to know, as Treason, Linwood prouinc. de sni^a excomm. ca. 1.
verb. maliciose.
Felony, Murder, Incest, Adultery, and such like, to the end they may receive
due punishment, whereby God may be pleased, and the Common wealth satisfied: Or
they are such crimes or faults, as it is not expedient for the Common Bohic.
vbi sup^.
weal to be acquainted with; as where one calls one Prodigal, or
spend-thrift: for albeit it be expedient for the Common wealth, that no man
misspend his estate, for that the Common wealth has as it were an interest in
every private Subjects state, yet this is rather his own hurt, than any other
man's, and that which he spends away unthriftily, commonly turns to an other
better subjects gain, whereby the Common wealth is relieved in one, that it
lost in an other; and for the most part there is no great corruption of manners
in the example thereof.

A great while it was before the Laws of this Land took knowledge of
Diffamations, as counting them things belonging to the Spiritual Law, so they
were duly Term* 12. H. 7. fol. 22. Regist. page 49.
prosecuted, as may appear by certain Judgments and consultations which have
issued out thereon: but now let men prosecute them never so duly, yet
Prohibitions go out on them daily, and sundry others are drawn to the common
Law Courts by action of the case; wherein they have so infranchised themselves,
as that they take upon them to confine the Ecclesiastical Law how far it shall
go therein. Which limitations notwithstanding, as far as I can conceive, are
but distinctions without differences, and so are in very deed but bare
Synonomies, that is, diverse names expressing one thing: for all the words in
the said limitation infer no more than this, that Ecclesiastical men are not
to deal in matters of diffamation, but where the matter of diffamation is only
Ecclesiastical; and yet I reverence the author thereof as a great man, and of
like excellency in this Law, as Papinian was in the other Law, and this I
think to be commendation enough, for never any Lawyer in former age had more
commendation, or eulogie of wit than himself had.

In the first of these cases, if a man proceed by ordinary C. ad L. Iullam
repetundarum. l. 1. and 2. (...) de ordin. cognition. c. dilectus. ff. de aqua
pl^^. arcenda. l. 1.. denique. L. Proc^lus. and l. fluminum in ^in. ff de da^no
infecto. ff de regul iuris. l. factum. non videtur.
course of Law, either for the punishment of the sin, as by presenting the
offender to the Ordinary or indicting him before the Temporal Judge, or by
admonishing him by any charitable denunciation, with purpose to amend him, and
to recall him from such offensive ways as he is charged to walk in: Or do
any thing in Judgment for the defense of his own cause, as in obiecting some
thing against the party himself or his witnesses, either for the eleuating or
discrediting the truth of the cause, or the testimony of the witnesses; there
can be no advantage taken against him, for he cannot be said to diffame, which
uses the liberty the Law gives him: albeit in this case some advise that a
man shall object none of these matters against another in judgment, but when
his cause necessarily requires such things to be spoken for the defense thereof,
and that the party that obiecteth them do protest he does it not with a
calumnious mind, but that the defense of his cause otherwise would not be
justified.

But if any man do any of these things maliciously, with purpose rather to
utter his own cankred stomach, than that L. Labeo de supell. legate. C. de
famosis libel. l. 1. ff. ad. l. Aquileam l. si ita vulneratus.
he would benefit the common wealth thereby, then is he punishable: for
although it be behooueful for the common wealth that bad men's faults should be
manifested, that so wickedness may be punished, yet is it not fit they should
be uttered in reproach and choler.

Of the second sort, although there be some that contain petty crimes, yet
are they many times so frivolous, as that they yield no action: for frivolous
and small things the Law regards not.

For such Diffamations as rise upon defects, if the defects be such that the
contagion thereof is to be feared, unless the people be forwarned of the
danger that may ensue thereon, as in cases of Leprosy, the Plague, the French
Pox, and other like infectuous diseases, and that it be revealed with a sincere
mind rather to cause men to refrain their company for fear of the infection,
than of any malicious humor against the party, thereby to reproach him, it is
no Diffamation. But if it be uttered in any spleen or choler against the
party defective, then is it actionable; for it is an uncivil part to C.
quando and quib. quarta pars. l. 2. lib. 10.
lay open another man's defects: but if the defects be such as it nothing
avails the common wealth they should be known; as where a man obiecteth
against another any imperfection of his mind, or deformity of his body,
which he had from his cradle, or has happened to him by any accident without
any default of his, and cannot be easily remedied; or reprocheth him with any
thing in his state or condition, wherewith he is not justly to be charged,
neither is there any just cause offered the diffamor why he should use such
disgraceful speeches against the other, than is it altogether punishable: For
that such things tend only to contumely and despite, which the Law seeks by all means to repress, for that thereby charity between man and man is
violated, and the peace of the common wealth is many times broken and disturbed.

The proceeding in these causes in the Civil Law was of two sorts: for it was
either ad publicam vindictam, or else, ad priuatum interesse, as the party
iniuried made his choice thereof.

Ad publica^ vindicta^, was when the party Diffamed, sought ff ad L.
Corneliam. l in constitutionibus.. vlt.
to have the Diffamer recant his words, or to undergo some open and infamous
punishment for his rash and malicious speeches, whereby it might be publicly
known abroad he did the other wrong.

But Ad priuatum interesse, was when he sought not the recalling of the
slanderous speeches which were given out against ff de verborum obl^gation. l
stipulationem.. plane. ff de re iudicat. L. siqui^ ab alio.
him, but esteemed his credit at some great rate (as that he would not for a
thousand pounds, or more or less quantity according as the worth and calling
of the person is, have had such speeches gone out of him) and so seeks to have
his credit salued by recompense in money, as the Judge or Jury, upon proof of
his worth and place, shall esteem it and tax it. In these Actions, he that
sued ad publicam vindictam, and had followed it so far, as that he had brought
it to a Recantation, or a public disgrace, could not have recompense of his
credit by money, save only in case of commutation: neither he that had got
his credit valued by money, could have a public disgrace also inflicted for
his satisfaction, but what way he had chosen, with that he must have rested
contented, for that ireful men's wraths otherwise would never have bin
satisfied, and the prosecution of these actions otherwise would be confounded.

These two kinds of proceedings the Princes and Sages of former ages seem to
have sorted to the two kinds of Jurisdiction that are amongst us, the one
Spiritual, the other Temporal: and therefore the Law of the Land it self
says in a cause of Diffamation, when money is not demanded, but a thing done
for punishment of sin, which is all one, as when the Ciuilians say, when it is
done ad publicam vindicta^, it shall be tried in the spiritual courts: whereupon
by argument of contrary sense it follows, that where the punishment of sin is
not required, but amends in money is demanded, there it is to be tried in the
temporal Court, for the law would that every man should have his remedy
agreeable to reason in what sort him best likes. And therefore be the fault
what it may be, that the words of ye Diffamation do sound unto, as long as it
sta^ds but in words, and the party does not take upon him to justify the
matter that is comprised under those words, and does seek but for the
punishment of the slanderous words only, so long it is to be tried at the
Spiritual Law; for the Law speaks in general in cases of Diffamation, where
punishment of sin only is required: so that where a man is called Traitor,
Felon, or Murderer, or any other crime belonging unto the Common Law, being
every one of them words of great diffamation, so the party therein seek
punishment only, and not his private interest, there the Spiritual Law is to
hold plea thereof: For where the Law does not distinguish, there neither ought
we to distinguish; but the Law has said in general, that causes of
Diffamation, whose prosecution is thus qualified, do belong unto the trial of
the spiritual Law: and therefore even those cases before remembered where the
party follows this kind of prosecution, ought by that Law to belong unto the
Spiritual court, as on the contrary side, Spiritual causes of Diffamation
being propounded to a pecuniarie end ought to be ordered in a Temporal Court.

But where any man takes upon him to justify the crime that he has objected,
there either Court is to hold plea of the crime that properly belongs to that
Court, for that now no longer words are in question, but matter is in trial,
whether the party diffamed has indeed committed that offense that he is
charged withal or no; which can be tried in no other Court, than in that to
which it does properly appertain. And that this was the Course aunciently held
in matters of diffamation between the Ecclesiastical and Common Law, it is
manifest by the Statute of 2. of Edward the 3. chapter 11. 2. Edw. 3. c. 11.
where, although the Statute taxes the perverse dealing of such as when they
had been indicted before the Sherifes in their Return, and after delivered by
Inquest before the Justice of the Assise, did sue the indictors in the
Spiritual Court, surmising against them that they had diffamed them, and
therefore in that case forbad the like suits; for that Justice thereby was
hindered, and many people were feared to indict Offenders: yet that Statute
plainly shows that in all other cases of Diffamation rising out of Temporal
crimes beside this, the Ecclesiastical Law had the cognisaunce: and that this
was forbidden, it was not for that, that words of this nature, could not be
censured at the Ecclesiastical Law, when punishment of sin only is required,
but for that it was not fit that those things which had been once ordered in
one Court, should be called again to examination in another Court: and
therefore the general proceeding in matters of Diffamation, is not there
prohibited, but the particular crossing of matters after judgment is there
reprehended.

So that, that distinction I have here before spoken of, which takes upon it
to determine when a case of Diffamation is of the Temporal cognizance, and when
of the Ecclesiastical, cannot here take place: for that it is contrary to the
former Statute or Decree that divided these cases into Temporal or
Ecclesiastical cognizance by the variety of the prosecution thereof, and that
it is contrary to the ancient practice that has confirmed this prosecution
in either Court, but specially in the Ecclesiastical Court, which has still
holden the trial of such Diffamations wherein sin has been only sought to
be punished, until now of late, that men have stepped over the banks of their
authority and confounded either Jurisdiction with the promiscuous acts one of
another; when as the Statute it self is plain, that the authors of this
Statute or Decree, whethersoeuer you call it, which set these bounds to either
law, in proceeding upon matters of Diffamation, respected not so much the
quality of the crime, upon which the Diffamation grew, as the manner of
proceeding therein, aiming in the one at public vindict, which is to be
sought out of the Ecclesiastical law, and in the other at private interest,
which is to be had out of the Temporal Law.

Neither is an Action of Diffamation, a matter of so light esteem or quality
(a man's fame or good name being in equal balance with his life) as that it
should be drawn away to be attendant on any other action that is of smaller
weight or importance than it self is: for this is one of those Actions which
for the special pre-eminence thereof, are called Actiones praeindiciales, that
is, such that draw smaller causes unto them, but themselves are drawn of none
other, but such as are like principal or greater than themselves are. So that
unless the manner of proceeding bring these causes under the compass of the
common Law, in such sort as I have before showed the coopling of them with
another matter of the same Law, will hardly bring them under the trial
thereof: For that there be few actions greater than it self is, so that if the
crime be Ecclesiastical, howsoever it touches a Temporal cause, the trial
shall be still at the Ecclesiastical Law. And the same that I say of
Diffamations rising out of Ecclesiastical crimes, I hold also to be true in
Diffamations springing out of Temporal crimes, where punishment is required
for the offense committed, and amends in money is not demanded, unless
happily that grow of penance enjoined, which the offender will redeem by giving
money to the Judge, or to the party grieved. And this I take to be a far better
limitation for either Law, having the ground of the Civil Law, and a statute of
the Common Law, and common reason it self for it, than the other devise is,
which so distinguishes this business, as still it makes it rest in the mouth
of the Judge, which cause of Diffamation is mere spiritual, and which not,
which were not to be done if there were clear dealing in the matter: for Laws
are so to be made, as that as little as may be, be left to the discretion of
the Judge, but all be expressed as far as the nature of the cause will give
leave: which albeit it be hard to do, for the variety of the cases that every
day happen, never thought on before, yet that is to be labored so far as may
be; for this liberty of leaving many things to the Judges discretion, is many
times great occasion of confusion in Judicature, saying sometimes this and
sometimes that, as his private humor shall lead him: and therefore a plain
distinction between both the Laws were best, that every man may see and say
what is proper to either of them.

And thus far as concerning matters of Diffamation. Now follows that I speak
of matters of Bastardie.

Bastardie is an unlawful state of birth disabled by divine and humane Laws
to succeed in inheritance.

Of Bastards, some are begot and borne of single women, (in which rank also I
put widows) some other of married women.

Of single women some are such as a man may make his wife, if himself be sole
and unmarried, as those that are kept as Concubines in place of a man's wife;
some other are such as a man cannot make his wife, although himself be sole
and unmarried, for that either they are already precontracted to some other, or
that they be in so near a degree of affinity or consanguinitie one to the
other, that the marriage would be damnable, and the issue thereof unlawful.

Of such as are begotten of single women, by single men, who are in case to
marry them if they will, some are called by the Civil Law Filij Naturales,
because they were begot by such as they held for their wives, and yet were not
their wives, who might be legitimat by sundry ways, as hereafter shall be
showed.

Some other begot upon single women, if they were begot in vage lust, without
any purpose to hold such a one for a Concubine, but upon a desire only to
satisfy a man's present Lust, whether they were begotten by married men or
single men were called Spurij, who for the most part are putatiue children, and
their Father is not otherwise known than by the mothers confession, which
sometimes says true, sometimes otherwise. Isidor says, they were so called
because they were borne out of purity, for that such kind of lust is
contrary to holy Matrimony, whose bed is undefiled, and therefore the other
is corrupt and abominable.

But where any was borne of a woman single or married, that prostituted her
self to every man's pleasure, and made public profession of her self to be
an harlot, such as are they whom the Law calls Scorta, these were called
Manzeres.

Those which were begotten of married women were called Nothi, because they seemed
to be his children whom ye marriage does show, but are not, no otherwise than
some feauers are called Nothae, that is, bastard feauers, because they immitate
the tertian or quartan Fever in heat and other accidents, but yet are neither
tertians or quartans, as the learned Physicians well know: but these are counted
so to be bastards, if either the husband were so long absent from his wife, as
by no possibility of Nature the child could be his; or that the Adulterer and
Adulteress were so known to keep company together, as that by just account
of time, it could not fall out to be any other man's child but the Adulterers
himself: and yet in these very cases within this Realm, unless the husband
be all the time of the impossibility beyond the Seas, the Rule of the Law
holds true, Pater is est quem nuptia demonstrant.

The most nefarious and last kind of bastards are they whom the Law calls
Incestuosi, which are begot between ascendents and descendents in infinitum,
and between collaterals, so far as the Divine Prohibition and the right
interpretation thereof does stretch it self.

The effects of these sorts of bastardies are diverse.

First, it staineth the blood, for that he that is a bastard can neither
challenge Honor nor Arms from the Father or Mother, for that he was begot and
borne out of Matrimony which is the first step to Honor: and therefore the
Apostle calls Marriage honorable, whereupon it must follow that the opposite
thereof is shame; for, albeit it be no sin for a bastard to be a bastard, yet
is it a defect in him to be such a one, and a thing easily subject to reproach.

Secondly, it repelleth him that is a bastard, from all succession descending
from the Father or the mother, whether it be in goods or Lands, unless there
be some other collateral, provision made for the same: for that all such Laws
and statutes as are made to any of these purposes, were intended to the benefit
of such as are Legitimat, and are next of kin by lawful succession, and not by
unlawful conjunction.

To Legitimat him that was a bastard, when there could no clame be made unto
his birthright but by grace, among the Romans were sundry ways; first where
the Father of the Bastard, they being both single persons, married the woman by
whom he begot the child; secondly where the father did by his last will and
Testament, or by some public instrument subscribed by witness, name him to be
his natural and lawful son, or simply his son, without the addition of
any of these two words, base, or natural, and therwithall did make him his
heir, which could not be, but in such cases only, where the father had no
other natural and lawful child left alive.

Thirdly, whereas the Prince by his rescript, or the Senate by their decree,
did do any one that credyt, as to grant them the favor of legitimation, which
was done for the most part in such cases only, whereas either the father of the
child, or the child himself, offered himself to be attendant on the Court or
Prince.

In this Realm none of the foresaid legitimations take place, as far as I can
learn, but only that which is done by Parliament, and that very rarely; for
beside those that King Henry the 8. did in the variety and mutabilitie of his
mind, 28. 8. cap. 7.
toward his own issue, I think there cannot be many examples showed: for, as
for that which is wrought by subsequent 1. Mar. 1. parliamen. cap. 1.
Marriage, being a thing auntiently pressed by the Clergy of this Land, to be
admytted in like sort, as it is used in other Lands, where the Ecclesiastical
Law takes place; it was rejected by the Earls and Barons with one voice, and
answer made that they would not change the Laws of the Realm in that point,
which to that time had bin used and approved. All these cases of Bastardie in
other Lands, whither they be such, or not such, are triable by the
Ecclesiastical Law; But here with us it is questionable to what Law, and how
far they do appertain, the Ecclesiastical or Temporal.

For the matter of Bastardie, what it is, the Ecclesiastical Law, and the
Temporal differ not, but there is a diversity between them in the
prosecution thereof, for the Ecclesiastical Law brings it two ways in
Judgment; the one incidently, the other principally, but the Common Law makes
two sorts thereof the one general, the other special: But first of the
Ecclesiastical division, then of the temporal.

Bastardie is then said to be incidently propounded, when it is laid in bar of
some other thing, that is principally commensed; as when one sueth for an
inheritance that he pretends is due unto him by his nativity, an other
crosses him therein, by obiecting against him bastardie, with purpose to
exclude him from his action in the inheritance: here the bar is in the
incident, because it comes exclusiuely to the action of inheritance, but the
action for the inheritance it self was in the principal, for that it was
begun in consideration of the inheritance, and not with intent to prove
himself legitimate; which happily he never dreamed of when he first entered
his action for the inheritance. In which case he which is charged with the
bastardie, may require himself to be admitted to prove himself legitimate,
before the Ecclesiastical Judge, and to be pronounced to be such a one, Ad
Curiam enim Regiam non pertinet agnoscere de Bastardia: Glanuill Lib. 7. cap.
13.
Against which the Law of the Land does not oppose it self, but acknowledge it
to be the right of the Church. And yet to avoid all subtle and surrepticious
dealing in this behalf, it has 9. Hen. 6. cap. 11
set down a wary and cautelous form of proceeding, by which the same shall be
brought unto the Ordinary, and such as have interest in the suit, may have
notice thereof, and time to object in form of Law against the proofs and
witnesses of him that pretends himself to be Mulier, if they so think good:
and what shall be certified herein by the Ordinary, as concerning the
nativity of him that is burdened to be a Bastard, (that is, whither he were
borne before or after his Glanuill Lib. 7. cap. 15.
Parents marriage) shall be supplied in the kings Court, either by Judging for,
or against the inheritance.

But Bastardie is then taken to be principally propounded, when either one
finding himself to be grieved with some malicious speech of his adversary
reproching him with bastardy, or himself fearing to be impeched in his good
name, or right, does take a course to clear his nativity, by calling into the
law, him or them by whom he is reproched, or fears to be impeached in his
right and credit, to see him, to prove himself legitimate, and to allege and
object against it, if they oght have, or can, to the contrary: which if either
they do not, or doing to the utmost what they can, can bring no good matter
against his proof, but that it stands still good and effectual in Law to all
intents and purposes whatsoever (although perhaps hereby he shall not be able
to carry the inheritance, both for that it apperteineth not to the
Ecclesiastical Law, to Judge of lands, tenements, or hereditaments, and also
for that there is a precise form set down by statute, how suits of this
nature shall be recovered) yet if no oppositor or contradictor appear herein,
and the suit was only taken in hand against such, as either openly reproched
him, or secretly buzzed abroad slanderous speeches, as concerning his
legitimation: it is not to be doubted, but by an accident also it will be good
for the inheritance it self, for where a man's legitimation, is sufficiently
proved, thereon follows all things which naturally thereto belong. But if
any man urge the form of the statute, 9. Hen. 6. cap. 11.
being interessed therein, then must it necessarily be followed, for that
otherwise it would be thought, all that was done before, so far as it may
concern the inheritance, although it were but in a consequence, were done by
collusion. This kind of proceeding has bin much more in use in former times
than it is now, and never any opposition made against it: but now it goes not
altogether clear without contradiction, as many other things are offensiuely
taken, which notwithstanding have good ground, and sufficient warrant for them.

And so far as concerning the Ecclesiastical proceedings in this business:
Now to the temporal sorts of them.

General Bastardie is so called, because it comes in incidently, and is in
gross objected against some that sueth in a matter principal, to disappoint
his suit. This suit because it is of the Ecclesiastical cognizance, it is sent
by the Kings writ to the Ordinary with certain additions for more perspicuitie
of the inquiry thereof; as that whether he that is charged with the Bastardie,
were borne in lawful Matrimony, or out of Matrimony, or whether he were
borne before his Father and Mother were lawfully contracted together in
Matrimony, or after. All which the Ordinary makes Lib. Intrac. fol. 35.
inquiry upon by his own ordinary and pastoral authority; for that matters
of Bastardie do originally belong to the Ecclesiastical Court, and not to the
Temporal Court: And as he finds the truth of the matter by due examination
to be thus, or that, so he pronounces for the same in his own Consistory,
and makes certificat thereupon to the kings Court accordingly; and as he
pronounces, so the temporal Judges follow his sentence in their Judgments,
either for or against the inheritance that is in question.

Special Bastardy they say is that, where the Matrimony Bracton.
is confessed, but the prioritie or posterioritie of the Nativity of him whose
birth is in question, is controuersed; which to my thinking, if I conceive
aright, is no other thing than the general bastardie, transposed in words, but
agreeing in substance and matter with the other: for even these things which
they pretend, make special Bastardie, are parts and members of the general
bastardie, and are either confessed or inquired upon by virtue of the Kings
writ in the same: For first for the Matrimony that is here mentioned, it is
there agnised both by the plaintiff in pleading of it, and the defendant in the
answering thereto, and therefore the plaintifes plea is thus; thou art a
bastard, for that thou wast borne before thy parents were lawfully contracted
together in Marriage, or before their marriage was solemnized in the face of
the Church; to which the defendants reply is, I am no bastard for that I was
borne in lawful matrimony, or that I was borne after that my father and mother
were lawfully married together, in both which you see, there is a marriage
confessed, and the question only is of the priority or posteriority of the
nativity of him that is charged withal, whither it happened before, or after
his parents marriage, which as they hold is the other member of special
bastardie: and yet this prioritie or posterioritie of nativity, by virtue of
the Kings writ, comes no less in inquiry to the Ordinary in the case of the
general bastardie, than they make it to be trauersable in the special
bastardie; and therefore the writ to the Ordinary for general bastardie is
conceived in this manner. viz. Inquiratis Lib. Intrac. fol. 35.
vtrum praedictus A. pars rea, genitus vel natus fuit ante matrimonium
contractum inter talem patrem suum, et talem G^anuill Lib. 7. cap. 15.
matrem suam, vel post. So that either they must consesse there is no such
bastardy, as they make show there is, diverse from that that is tried before
the Ecclesiastical Judge, or that themselves do confound the members that
should divide the same, and make them one, or the other, as them list; for both
simply they cannot be, unless they be distinguished with other notes and
differences, than hitherto I find they are. But to say the truth, if these
things be well weighed and considered, special Bastardy is nothing else, but
the definition of the general, and the general again is nothing but the
definite of the special: for whosoever is borne out, or before lawful
Matrimony, he is a bastard, and he again is a bastard that is borne before or
out of lawful matrimony, so that these things to be a bastard, and to be borne
out of lawful matrimony are conuertible one with the other: so then as it were
very hard to make a divorce between these things that are so near in nature
one to the other, being conuertible terms one to the other, so hard again it
were in policy to disioyne these things in trial, that are so near in
affinity one to the other, because they are the same in substance and nature
as the other are, and therefore eodem iure censeri debent, 1^. q. ca. 2.
cogno^imus.
then ne continentiae causaru^ diuidantur, which is no less absurdity in Law,
than it is a grosnesse in other learning, to deny a principle, or general
Maxim of the profession.

And so far hitherto as concerning the reasons and arguments, that may be
brought against this special Bastardy. Now it rests that I show by ancient
precedents, both these sorts of Bastardy have appertained to the Ecclesiastical
Courts only, and the first precedent is in the incident, the other in the
principal: and the precedent is no less ancient than Henry the seconds time,
as that which happened under Alexander the third, about the year of our Lord
1160. and the case is this.

A certain man of Norwich Diocese called R. H. had issue Ca. Lator. ext. qui
filij sunt legitimi.
I. H. who had a son called C. H. I. H. deceasing before R. H. his father, C.
H. succeeded in his Grandfathers in heritance, his said Grandfather being dead;
but M. H. brother to the said Grandfather, pretending the said I. H. was a
Bastard, draws the said C. H. into the Temporal Court upon the inheritance,
whereupon C. H. called the said M. H. into the Bishop of Norwich his Court, for
the trial of his nativity; but the Bishop long protracting the cause, C. H.
appealed to the Pope, who delegated the same cause to the Bishop of Excester,
and the Abbot of Hereforde, with order, That if the said M. H. should not
within two Months, prove that which he objected against C. H. that then they
should Intimate the same to the seculer Judge, before whom the inheritance was
in question, that he should not stay any longer upon the question of
legitimation, but proceed to Judgment in the cause of the inheritance. Which
president though it be long before the Statute of Bastardie made by Henry the
6. and so no writ went from the temporal Court for the certificat thereof: yet
it shows that the Temporal Judges in those days did not proceed to judgment
in the principal cause, before the incident were decided by the Ordinary; and
that they counted bastardy then to be of the Ecclesiast. cognizance; and that
it was lawful for him that was pretended to be a bastard, to appeal from his
Ordinary, if either the Ordinary detracted the determination thereof, or were
suspected of parciality.

And thus far of the incident. There is an other much like precedent to this in
the same Kings days, but that is in the principal, for that the inheritance
came not first in question, but the legitimation it self, and the case is as
follows. A certain man called Raphe, kept one Analine, the wife of one Ca.
Causam. ext. qui filij sunt legitim^.
Allin, by whom he was supposed to have begot one Agatha, who also being
married, had a son called Richard; Raphe going beyond the Sea, left Richard
and his Mother Agatha in possession of all his goods and lands; but news being
after brought, that the said Raphe was dead beyond sea, Frauncis the brother of
the said Raphe, spoiled the said Richard of the possession of all the goods and
lands he had of the said Raphe his grandfather, for that he did pretend the
said Agatha his niece and Mother of the said Richard was not borne of lawful
Matrimony, so that neither she her self, nor her son ought to succeed the
brother of the said Frauncis, but that the inheritance thereof did belong unto
himself: whereupon the said Richard being thus spoiled by Frauncis his great
uncle, obtained letters of restitution to the Bishop of London, the B. of
Worcester, and the B. of Excester, under this form; That before they entered
into the principal cause, which was this, whether the said Agatha were borne
in lawful Matrimony or not, they should restore the said Richard to his
Grandfathers inheritance. But the Bishop of Rome after understanding by the
said Delegats, that the plea of inheritance within this Realm, did not belong
unto the Church, but unto the King, recald that part of his rescript, which
concerned the restitution of the said Richard to his inheritance, and gave
order to the foresaid Bishops, to proceed in the cause of legitimation; willing
them to inquire whether the said Agatha were borne of the said Aneline in the
life time of her husband Allin, and when she dwelt and cohabited with him, as
with her husband, or whether the said Raphe, father of the said Agatha, kept
the said Aneline openly and publicly, while the said Allin yet lived; And if
they found it to be so, then they should pronounce her the said Agatha to be a
Bastard, for that Aneline her Mother could not be counted to be a wife, but a
whore, which defyling her husbands bed, presumed to keep company with an other,
her husband yet being alive: But if they found it otherwise, then they should
pronounce her the said Agatha to be legitimate. All which was done after the
death of the said Raph and Aneline, as the Decretall it self shows: Neither
was there any authority that opposed it self against that proceeding, but
held it to be good and lawful, though it were in terms of special Bastardy,
for then that which they now call special Bastardy, was not borne. Besides
hereby it appears, that the Ordinaries then did not only proceed in cases of
Bastardy incidently, that is, when a suit was before begun in the Common Law,
upon a trial of inheritance, and that by writ from the Temporal Courts, but
even originally, and that to prepare way unto inheritance, or any other good
that was like to accrue unto a man by succession, or to avoid any inconvenience
that might keep him from promotion, as may appear by this practice following.

Priests in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the 3. Constitut. Oth^n.
innotuit de vxovati^ a Beneficijs amouendis.
yet married secretly, and their Children were counted capable of all
inheritance, and other benefits that might grow unto them by lawful Marriage,
so that they were able to prove that their parents were lawfully married
together by witnesses, or instruments: which many Children did, either upon
hope of some preferment that by succession, or otherwise was like to come unto
them, or to avoid some inconvenience that otherwise might light upon them for
the want of that proof, some their parents yet living, others their parents
being dead, and the proceedings before the Ordinary was holden good, to all
intents and purposes, even in the Common Law, for otherwise they would not have
so frequented it: for as yet there was made no positive Law against Marriages
of Priests, or Ministers, but the Church of Rome then plotting against it, for
that by that they pretended the cure of Souls was neglected, and the substance
of the Church wasted and dissipated, did by Otho then Legate a Latere to
Gregory the 9. order by a Constitution, that all such Ministers as were
married, should be expelled from their Benefices, and that their Wives and
Children should be excluded from all such liuelyhood, as the Fathers had got
during the time of the Marriage, either by themselves, or by any middle person,
and that the same should become due unto the Church, wherein they did reseed,
and that their children from that time forth should be disabled to enjoy holy
orders, unless they were otherwise favorably dispensed withal; which
Constitution although it wrought to that effect, to bar Priests for that time
of their Marriage, until the light of the Gospel burst out, and showed that
that doctrine was erroneous, yet to all other effects, the proceeding in the
case of Bastardie stood good as a thing due to be done by holy Church. And
therefore Linwod coming long after, in his Catalogue that he makes of
Ecclesiastical causes, recites Legitimation for one among the rest, for that
in those days there was no dispute or practice to the contrary.

And thus ^ar as concerning those things wherein the Ecclesiastical Law is
hindered by the Temporal in their proceedings contrary to Law, Statute, and
custom aunciently observed, which was the third part of my general division.
Now it follows that I show wherein the Ecclesiastical law may be relieved, and
so both the laws know their own bounds, and not one to ouerbeare the other as
they do at this day, to the great veration of the subject, and the
intolerable confusion of them both, which is the last part of this Treatise.

The means therefore to relieve the profession of the Civil Law are two. The
first is, by the restoring of those things which have bin powerfully by the
Common Law, taken from them, and the bringing of them back again unto their
old and wonted course: The other is by allowing them the practice of such
things as are grieuances in the Common wealth, and fit to be reformed by some
court, but yet are by no home-Law provided for.

The first of these stands in two things, whereof the one is the right
interpretation of those Laws, statutes and customs which are written and
devised in the behalf of the Ecclesiastical Law. The other consists in the
correcting and supplying of such Laws and Statutes that are either superfluous
or defective in the penning, made in the behalf (as it is pretended) of the
Ecclesiastical profession, but yet by reason of the imperfect penning thereof,
are construed for the most part, against them.

The right interpretation of the Laws, Statutes, and Customs pertaining to
the practice, stands as is pretended in the Judges mouth, who notwithstanding
has that authority from the Sovereign, and that not to judge according as
him best likes, but according as the right of the cause does require.

The supply or reforming of that which is overplus, or defective, is in the
Parliament, so notwithstanding as that the Prince evermore breaths life into
that which is done.

Laws, Statuts, or Customs, are then best interpreted whenas the very plain
and natural sense of them is so sought after, and no foreign or strained
exposition is mixed with them; for that turns Justice into wormwood, and
Judgment into gall: then that the Judge be no^t to subtle in his
interpretation, but follow such exposition of the Laws, as men of former age
have used to make, if they be not plainly absurd and erroneous, for often
shifting of interpretations breeds great variance in men's states, among such
as have busy heads, and much discrediteth the Law it self, as though there
were no certainty in it: with which although the sage Judges of our time cannot
be charged, for oght that I know, yet (I cannot tell how) men much complain
that laws are far otherwise construed in these days than they were in former
ages: which as it is an ordinary complaint in the Temporal Courts, so it is
not without cause, much lamented at in the spiritual Courts where the
interpretation upon the three Statutes of Tiths made by King Henry the eight,
and Edward his son, among sundry other inconstancies of other Laws, has such
great variety of sense and understanding in sundry points thereof, as that if
the makers thereof were now alive and the first expositors thereof sat in place
of Judgment again (the Statutes being measured by the interpretation they now
make of them) would hardly acknowledge them either to be the Statuts that they
made, or the other did after expound, and declare: for every of these Statutes,
and the sense that was given of them, was wholly for the benefit of the Church,
according to the tenor thereof, but as they now receive explication, they are
not only not beneficial unto the Church, but the greatest hynderance to the
same that may be; for the words are made to iar with the sense, and the sense
with the words, neither is there kept any right analogy in them: and therefore
the Reverend Judges are to be entreated (because they challenge unto themselves
the opening of the statuts alone, albeit peradventure that be yet sub Iudice,
where the Statute of Ecclesiastical causes is to be interpreted) that they
would recall such exorbitant interpretations as have of late gone abroad upon
these Statutes, and restore them to their ancient sense and understanding. No
man can so cunningly cloak an interpretation, but another will be as cunning
as he to spy it out, and then the discredit will be the Laws. A small error
(says Aristotle) in the beginning, is Lib. 1. Poli^i^.
a great one in the end, and he that goes out of the way a little, the longer
he goes on, the further he is off from the place his voyage was to: and
therefore the spedier return into the way again is best. The old Proverb is;
He that goes plainly goes surely, which may be best verified in the
exposition of the Law, if any where else; for commonly men offend no where more
daungerously than under the authority of the Law, and therefore one says very
well, that There are two salts required in a Judge, the one of knowledge,
whereby he may have skill to Judge uprightly; the other of conscience, whereby
he may be willing to judge according to that as his skill leads him unto:
both which being in the grave Judges, it is not to be doubted, but they will
be easily induced to revive their own, and their predecessors
interpretations, and reduce such exorbitant expositions as have escaped out
thereof unto the right and natural sense thereof: which if perhaps they shall
be loath to do, for because it makes for them, or for some other like
partial respect, then humble supplication is to be made unto his Majesty,
himself will be pleased to give the right sense of those things which are in
controversy between both the Jurisdictions: for his Majesty by communicating
his authority to his Judges to expound his Laws, does not thereby abdicate
the same from himself, but that he may assume it again unto him, when and as
often as him pleases. Whose interpretation in that is to be preferred before
theirs, first that his interpretation is impartial as he that will not weaken
his left side to make strong his right (for so are these Jurisdictions as they
are referred unto his politic body) but will afford them equal grace and
favor, that he may have like use of them both either in ^ 1. number. 8. C. (...)
L. 1. number. ^ C, eod. l omnes popu^^ ff. de in. stit. and iure.
fortaine or domestical business as occasion shall serve: then that his
Judges interpretation makes right only to them between whom the cause is, but
his highness exposition is a Law unto all, from which it is not lawful for
any subtect to receed, neither is reuersable by any, but by himself, upon a
second cogitation; or him that has like authority as himself has: and
therefore most fit to be interposed between Jurisdiction and Jurisdiction,
that the one party be not Judge against the other in his own cause, which is
both absurd and dangerous.

And let this suffice for the right interpretation of Laws and Statuts: now it
follows that I speak something of the supplies that may be made to the
defects that are in the same.

It is not to be doubted, but it was the full mind and intent of the
Lawmakers, which made those three Statutes to infeoffe the Ecclesiastical
Courts in the inheritance of all those causes that are comprised in those
Statutes, save those that are by special name exempted, and did by the said
Statute, as it were deliver unto them full and quiet possession of the same,
for even so sundry branches of the said Statute do show, as I have elsewhere
made it manifest: and that there has grown question upon many points thereof,
and that the professors of the Ecclesiastical law have been interrupted in
the quiet possession thereof, comes of the imperfect penning of the same, and
not of any just title or claim that may be made by the porfessors of the other
Law thereunto: but this is a thing not only proper to these three Statuts, but
also Common to all other Statutes which are writ of any Ecclesiastical causes
within this Land; which notwithstanding may be remedied, if it seem good unto
his sacred Majesty and the rest of the wisdom of ye land assembled together at
any time for the making of wholesome Laws and the reforming of the same, by
supply of a few words in some places or periods that are defective, and yet
keeping the true meaning and sense of the same.

As for example in the statute of the two and thirtieth of Henry the eight in
the wherefore, near the beginning of the same Statute, the Statute ordering,
that all persons of this Realm and other of the Kings Dominions shall truly
and effectually set out and pay all and singular Tithes, according to the
lawful customs and vsages of the Parishes where they grow and become due:
because there is a question made where these customs and vsages shall be
tried in the Ecclesiastical or Temporal Law; if these or the like words had
been added to the same (to be proved before an Ecclesiastical Judge after the
form of the Ecclesiastical Law, and not elsewhere) the whole matter had bin
clear for that point.

And whereas again in the end of the same Statute, there be some good words
tending to the appropriating of these matters of Tithes and Oblations and other
Ecclesiastical duties to the Ecclesiastical Courts; as that the remedy for
them shall be had in the Spiritual Court according to the ordinance of the
first part of that Act, and not otherwise: yet because there is no penalty to
that act, busy men easily make a breach thereinto, for that Laws without
penalties, for the most part are weak and of no force: if therefore this or
the like supply were made (if any man sue for these or like duties in any other
Court, than in the Kings Ecclesiastical Court, the party so suing, to forseit
the treble value of that which he sued for to be recovered in the kings
Ecclesiastical Court, where it ought to have been commenced by the way of
Libell, or Articles, the one half thereof shall be to the king, the other to the
party grieved) many of these suits would easily be met withal. Neither is it
to the purpose, that this is matter of money and Lay fee that should be in this
sort forfeited, and therefore is not Regularly to be sued for in the
Ecclesiastical Court; yet because the cause is Ecclesiastical, upon which the
matter of forfaiture arises, it may be very well allowed, Ne continentiae
causarum diuidantur: and for that ordinarily every Jurisdiction that is
wronged, may defend it self with a penalty: beside, we do by the like right
in the Ecclesiastical courts, recover expenses of suits in Law, fees of
Aduocats and, procters and money for redemption of sin, so that it will be no
strange matter to have this kind of suit allowed unto the Ecclesiastical Court.

Further, whereas there are in the Statute of Edward the sixth, chapter 13. in
the beginning almost of the said Statute, two clauses under pain of for
faiture, one of treble value, for Tithes carried away before they were divided,
set out or agreed for: The other of double value where the Tithes were hurt or
impaired by the party stopping or letting him that had interest thereunto to
carry them away, or by withdrawing or carrying them away himself; and the
same, is ordered by a clause in the second branch thereof reaching unto them
both, for that a clause put in the end of two sentences, streacheth it self
indifferently unto them both, if there be no more reason it should belong to
the one than the other, as there is not in this case (for if it were not so,
the first penalty had no order set down, how it might be recovered) that the
same shall be recovered according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Law: to which if
there were added this word (only, and not elsewhere, or otherwise) and they
martialed in their right places there were nothing more sure or strong.

Moreover, whereas in the first prouiso of that Statut it is decreed, that none
shall be compelled to pay any manner of Tithes for any Here ditaments which by
the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, or by any Privilege, Prescription, or
composition Real, are not chargeable therewithal; whereby it is doubtful in
what Court the said Exemptions are to be alleged: if there were inserted these
words, or other of like nature (the said Laws, Statutes, Privileges,
Prescriptions, or Compositions Real to be alleged, argued, trauersed, and
determined before the Ecclesiastical Judge only according to the form of the
Ecclesiastical Laws, and not elsewhere) upon like for faiture of treble
damages, as is aforesaid, it would make this point sure unto the
Ecclesiastical Law.

Over and beside this, whereas in the same statute there is a discharge allowed
to barren, heath, and wast ground, in some for not payment of tithes, in other
for the manner of payment of them for the space of seven years after the
improuing and converting of them into Arrable ground or meadowe; it would make
the matter plain, which law should have the pronouncing thereupon, if there
were added these or the like words (so the same ground be proved in form of
law in the Ecclesiastical Court to be barren heath and wast.)

Lastly whereas in the said Statut among other limitations of causes wherein the
Ecclesiastical Judge is not to deal by virtue of ye said statut, there is one
in these words, near the end of the said statut (ne in any matter whereof the
Kings Court of right ought to have Jurisdiction) which limitation is so vage
and large, that therout there may be forged as many diverse kinds of
Prohibitions, as the Poets fained Vulcan ever made thunderboults for Jupiter.
And therefore it were very well and co^sonant to the good meaning of the said
statut, this vagenes were restrained and reduced to a more certainty of matter
by these or like words, By any ancient law or statut of this land.

And so far as concerning the imperfection of the said three Statuts, and how
they may be amended and made reducible to the first meaning and intent of the
makers thereof, by some small supply, alteration, or change of words, the
sense and groundwork standing ever ye same, according to the wisdom of his
Majesty and his great counsel assembled in parliament.

Now it follows I show wherein the practice of the Ecclesiastical Law, under
which I comprise the Civil Law so far as it is in use among us, may be
increased to the benefit of the subject and the enlargement of the profession
without the prejudice of the common law. And that I may first begin of the
piety of Fathers toward children, and children again toward their parents,
which is the beginning of all common wealths, for even Nature it self has
taught that not only in the most brutish people that be, but also settled it in
ye sauagest kind of beasts that are upon the earth, the one to cherish that
which it self has brought out, and the other to love again that which has
brought it out: and yet, what Law is here in England, which provides for the
one or the other, unless it be the statut of the eight of Elizabeth? and that
is but for poor folks children only (where otherwise they should be a burden
to the Parish) but for the Parents themselves, or other children that are cast
off, either by the negligence or the unnaturalness of the one toward the
other, there is no provision at all. Yet by the Civil Law there is a
purueiance made, whereby both the Father is compelled to acknowledge his child
(if ff. de agnoscend. and alendu liberis vel parentib. C. de al^ndis liberis
vel parentib. ff. de ventre inspiciendo, custodie^doque partu. ff. de offi^io
proconsu^is. l. nequic. quam. de p^ano.
there be any variance between the husband and the wife upon any Jealousy or
suspicion of Adultery, if the same cannot be proved by the woman's own
confession, by witnesses, by the act it self, or some other violent
presumption) and to norish and maintain the same; but if the fault appear
against her, and it be so sentenced by the Judge, then may he as well refuse
the one as the other: but for other children upon whom there is no such doubt,
the Parents may be constrained to maintain, cloth, and feed them, and to set
them out a Portion of their goods, so that either the state and faculty of the
Parents will bear it, or the children have not deserved to the contrary,
wherefore they should not in that sort be provided for. And as the Father in
this sort is bound unto the Child, so the child again is obliged unto his
Parents to prouid for their sustenance, so far forth as their ability will
reach unto: for it is very unnatural the Parents should want, so long as the
children have means to relieve them. In both which cases, if either the
Parents refuse to admit of their Children, or the Children again refuse to
yield comfort unto their Parents, the Judge may interpose his authority, and
inioyne each to maintain other according to their ability, and as to his
discretion shall seem meet, which if any of them should deny to yield unto,
the Judge may by Distress of their goods taken and sold to the value thereof,
compel them to perform his order: and yet that only in case of Maintenance,
and not to discharge debts wherein either of them stand bound unto their
creditors.

A man here in England dying and leaving his wife Executrix, she after
marrying, carries away all his state unto her second busband, who gives and
spends thereof as him lists without any regard of the children of the first
husband, by whom all, or most of those goods came, insomuch as many times those
children when they come to age, and are to goabroad into the world, they have
nothing to begin the world withal, whereby many of them come to beggerie, and
others to more fearful ends (for necessity as the Proverb has it, is a hard
weapon) neither is there any means in this common wealth to relieve this
mischief, for oght I can learn: but by the Civil Law there is very good
remedy, for by that Law neither the woman suruiuing her husband, neither the
man C. de secundi^ nuptijs tot. tit.
suruiuing his wife, having issue between them during the Matrimony have the
property of those goods, which either of them brought one to the other, and
are left behind by the defunct; but the property is the childrens of the
deceased, and the use or benefit his or hers only which does survive, during
his or her natural life: which course if it were taken here in England, many
poor fatherless and motherlesse Children would be in better state than they
are, for then howsoever their present state were hard, yet their future would
be better, when they should be secured to enjoy their fathers or mothers right:
neither could such men or women which marry, or are married with persons of
this sort, much complain if this Law were established here, for so should they
have, though not a perpetuity in an other man's state, yet a long and
beneficial fruition thereof, even so long as the party in whom they were
interessed did live: but for the return thereof unto the right owners, the Law
is so scrupulous, that if the husband or wife do remarry, it will have him
that is to marry the widow bound with good suerties for due restitution of the
defuncts part, unto the children of the former marriage.

An other inconvenience there is in Executors in this land Cosen german to the
former, which goes altogether uncontrolled, whereby I guess there is no Law in
this land to correct it. And that is, the trifling of Executors in paying of
Legacies and bequests, under pretense of debts unknown, which they make show
they must provide for, upon danger of their own indemnitie; whereby many
Legacies are never paid, but stand as it were suspended until the day of Dome.
Against this abuse the Civil Law has two remedies; One by exacting bond of
the Executor, that he shall pay the Legacies L. 1.. 1. 2. and 3. ff. vt
legatorum nomine caueatur.
without fraud or deceit, according to the will of the defunct; The other, that
if he refuse so to do, then the Judge may put the party complaynant in the
possession of that which is demanded: for it is not enough for the Heir or
Executor to L. haec autem ff. si cui plus quam per Legem falcidiam. ff. de
regulis iuris L. vani timoris.
pretend a debt, to the end that he may stay the legacies which the testator
has given, in his hand, but he must make plain and manifest unto the Judge,
there is such a debt owing, and that the suit thereupon is either already begun,
or very like to be begun in very short time, without fraud or collusion,
otherwise many of those pretenses and threats may be vain and elusory. And in
case there be any such just cause of fear in deed, or there be any such suit
in truth commenced upon the same, the L. Nisi si dolo. si Legatarius ff. si cui
plus quam per legem falcidiam licu^rit.
Executor may secure himself by bond or suertie from the Legatorie, that in
case the debt be euicted of him, he shall repay to the Executor what he has
received: wherein, although it may be said, it is safer for the executor to
secure himself by keeping the Legacy still in his hand, than to trust upon
suerty or other caution, for that these provisions many times are frail; yet
since this kind of dealing is injurious to the Legatorie, and the withholding
thereof, for the most part, has no honest defense, but is grounded upon deceit
and covetousness, it were behoosefull for the Common wealth, such ill dealing
were redressed: for so men's Wills, which are their last Ordinances, (than the
which Princes have granted no greater benefit to men, than that in their life
time they may dispose how their goods shall be bestowed after their death) shall
have that end ff. Si quis omissa causa testament. L. nam facit totum, l. 4 ff.
de haeredib. instituend. l. paterfamilias.. 3.
the Testators themselves intended: which if they had known in their life time
their Executors would not have performed, they would never have put them in
trust as they did. Beside, hereby the names of Executors which now are charged
with manifold imputations, by the ill dealing of some, shall by this means be
unburdened and restored unto their former credit, which was, to discharge the
trust that by the Defunct was reposed upon them: for the Will of the defunct
cannot be defrauded without great sin.

An other mischief there is in Executors and Administrators, not only
uncontrollable by the Law of this Land, but rather allowed and justified by it;
and that is when they have once got the authority into their hands, and
praised all at the lowest rate, they will sell away all at the highest price
they can, and answer the poor Children, and Legatories, for whose good they
were appointed Executors, at the value in the Inuentarie only, contrary to all
right and reason: for by the law, an Executor is to sell ff. de reb. eoris qui
sub tutela sunt sine decreto no^ aliena^dis, vel obliga^dis. tot. tit. and ibi
Bartol in rubrica.
nothing of those things which are left unto the Children, or Legatories, but
such things only, which by keeping cannot be kept, or which being kept, will be
charge able to the inheritance: or otherwise the Testator were so indebted,
that his state must needs be sold, for the satisfying of the Creditors: or
lastly, that he himself ordered by his Will something should be sold. But for
such things as may be kept, and by keeping will not be the worse, he oght
precisely to preserve them, specially where the Testator has bequeathed any
thing in kind. And if he sell oght of those things which he ought not to sell, he
may not sell it but by the decree of ye Judge interposed upon ye same, and upon
just cause proved before him: wherein if it appear after, ye Judge was abused,
by any false allegation and corrupt testimony, the sale is void, and the Minor
when he comes to his full age, or within 5. years after, may reuerse and recover
that which is thus sold by collusion, out of the hands of him to whom it was
sold, as being done against the authority of the law. And that it may be better
understood, how precise ye law is in this point, and what things it allows
may be sold without ye decree of the Judge, and what not, I will set down the
words of the Law it self, speaking of Tutors and governors of Puples; whose
place Executors and Administrators do supply, so far forth as they have ye
tuition and gouerna^ce of minors during their vnderage, C. de administrat tuto
^m, vel curatoru^, l. lex qu^.
faithfully translated. And it is a law of Constantin the great, reproving a
former law of Seuerus the Emperor, which gave leave to Tutors and Curators to
sell away all the gold, silver, precious stone, apparel, and other rich
moueables the Testator had, and to bring the same into money, which turned
greatly to the hinderance of many Orphans: whereupon Constantine after he had
first ordered, nothing should be sold of the pearl, precious stone, naperie,
vtensels of the house and other necessary stuff and ornaments of the same,
says thus. Neither shall it be lawful for them (meaning the Tutors or
Curators) to sell the house wherein the Father died, and the child grew up,
wherein it is woe enough to the child not to see his ancestors images not
fastened up, or else pulled down. Therefore let the house, and all other his
moveable goods still remain in the Patrimony of the child, neither let any
edifices or buildings, which came in good reparation with the inheritance,
ruin or decay by collusion of the Tutor: but rather if the Father, or he
whosoever the minor was heir unto, left any building in decay, let the Tutor
both by the Testimony of the work it self, and the faith of many be
compelled to repair it: for so the yearly rent will bring in more profit to
the Minor, than the price of the things being deceiptfully sold underfoot,
will do the Minor any good. Neither does this law only make provision against
Tutors, but also against immodest and intemperate women, which many times gage
unto their new married husbands, not only their own state, but even the state
and lives of their children. Further, it crosses the course of putting the
childrens money to usury (notwithstanding aunciently it was thought, therein
consisted all the strength of the Patrimony) for that course is seldom long,
scarcely continual and stable, and that thereby many times the money being lost
the childrens state come to nothing: and therefore his conclusion is, The Tutor
should sell nothing, without the order of the Judge, saving the Testators
ouerworne apparel, or those things which by keeping could not be kept from
corruption, and such cattle as were superfluous. Whereby it appears how
careful that age was to give way to Executors by sale of the Testators goods,
to make gain of the Orphans; neither is this age better than that, but that
which was feared then, may be provided for now, by like authority as was then.

In this Land a man dying, leaving Legacies to his children, and his wife
Executrix, or dying intestate, and she taking administration, and in her second
marriage bringing all her first husbands state, and her childrens portions unto
her second husband, and then dying, there is no remedy against the second
husband, to recover the said Legacies or porcions due unto the children out of
his hands, because he is neither Executor nor Administrator, and that he came
not to those goods by wrong, but by the delivery of the Executrix, with whom
he married: but yet by the Civil Law there is, and L. si and me ff. de rebus
creditis si certum petatur.
that by this claim, that the said goods came unto his hands, and that it is
no reason any should be made rich by my goods against my will, for Legataries
have no action against any as Administrators in their own wrong or hinderers
of the performance of the last Will of the deceased, but Executors only, and
they then alone, when the party having it, holds it by wrong and not by Lawful
delivery, which in this case is otherwise.

By the Law of this Land, there is no provision to preserve the state of a
prodigal person from spoil, which neither has regard of time, nor end of
spending, unless the Father provide for this mischief in his Will, or by some
other good order in his life, but he is suffered to wast and spend his goods
until there be nothing left (as though the Prince and Common wealth had no
interest in such a subject, to see he did not waste his state, and abuse his
goods) whereby many great houses are overthrown, and many children whom the
Fathers carefully provided for, never leaving raking and scraping all their
life time, that their children after them might live in great plenty and
abundance, come to great shame and beggerie. But the Civil Law has remedy
for it: for the ff. de euratori^. furioso, and ali^^ extra minore^ dando.
Law counting such a man that is in this sort impotent in his deeds, howsoever
he be otherwise sensible in his words, to be half mad, and to be a young man
in his manners, how old soever otherwise he be in his years, sets a Curator
over him for the preserving and well ordering of their state, no otherwise than
if they were children or mad men indeed, who so long have power over them and
their goods, until they come to sane manners to which if they once return ye
curators office cease.

The like they do to a widow or sole woman which lives riotously, having
neither regard of her fame, nor of her state. L. et mulieri. ff. eod.


I find an old practice aunciently used in the Ecclesiastical courts, for
restraining Executors or Administrators for dealing couenously alone in an
Executorship or Administratorship, when there are more Executors named in a
Will than one, or more Administrators deputed by the Ordinary in an
Administration than one, which were well if it were recald and brought back to
his former use again. For now, as things stand many times one capricious
fellow named an Executor in a Will, or appointed Administrator by the Ordinary
with some other well meaning men, getting a start in this business of the rest,
ingrosseth all into his own hands, and without priuitie or concurrence of the
other, sells, releaseth, and disposes all at his own pleasure, contrary to
the mind either of the Testator, or the Ordinary, who would not have named so
many in the Will or Administration, but to the intent that all might or should
execute and administer, and one communicate their acts with another. The
contrary whereof is many times very prejudicial and hurtful, to those that
are to take benefit by the said Will or Administration, who for the want of the
due performance of this kind of proceeding, are defrauded of all that which in
right or reason should have come unto them, either by the Testators good will,
or by the benefit of the Law. And yet there is no remedy for this in law, so
far as I know, for that al these making but one person in law, the Law yields
no action to the one to sue the other: but yet the ancient practice of the
Ecclesiastical Law has remedy, which would redress all this mischief, if it
were called again to use, and might go without controlment, as the equity of
the cause does require. And the remedy is this, that such other of the
Executors or Administrators as are in this sort interuerted from the execution
of the Will or Administration by the subtlety of any like Executor or
Administrator, should crave the assistance of the Judge, and will him by virtue
of his office, to call in such practick Executor or Administrator, and to
command him under pain of excommunication, he proceed no further in the sole
execution thereof, but co^municat all his acts and dealings with the rest of his
Coexecutors or Coadministrators: which if it were so ordered, would make many
men's Wills and Administrations better performed than they are, and a great sort
of poor Orphans states more sure and certain, than commonly they are in such
executors or administrators hands.

And certainly in this case, there is some good use of Superuisors in dead men's
Wills (whom many men merrily jest at, calling them candle-holders, as though they
could do nothing else in the execution thereof, but hold the candle while the
Executors tell the Defuncts money) if they might be permitted to put in practice
that authority which the Law gives them, and that is when they find any
Executor deal fraudulently in the execution of any Testators Will, wherein they
are named superuisors, or do ingrosse all the state of the Defunct into his
hands, as has bin before said, they call him to a particular account, that it
may be seen how the administration stands, and each executor may co^municat to
other their particular receipts and disbursments: which if any shall refuse to
do, then may the superuisor make thereof complaint unto the Judge, as though ye
ff. de administratione tutoru^. l. 3.. 1.
same man dealt not truly in the execution thereof, who though perhaps in the
beginning could not take bond of him for the true execution of the Will,
because the Testator had made choice of him, and therein approved his faith, and
that no man required caution of him for any Legacy in the will bequeathed, (in
which case ye Judge might take bond of him for security of such legacies as are
bequethed in the will, yea though his faith has bin approved by ye Ordinary, as
has bin before remembered) yet may ye Judge in this case, if he find him justly
susspected of fraud and deceit, remove him by the learning of that Law. For
neither the Testator himself, if he were alive Instit. de suspectis tutorib.
vel curator. toto tit.
again, would endure him in this case, but would blot his name out of his
Will, neither ought the Judge to suffer him, whose care is to see that dead
men's Wills take their effect, according to the Testators meaning. All which, the
law has provision for, and for infinite things else of like good order in these
cases, if they might be suffered to put them in execution without impeachment.

And so far as concerning those things wherein the Civil and the
Ecclesiastical Law might be relieved without prejudice to the common Law, for
because they have no practice thereof: and yet do not I bring forth these as
the only causes wherein the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law may be licenced to
deal in, over and besides the practice of those things that they have
already, but that these are few among many other which might be sorted out, if
so be there were any hope for the further enlargement of the profession. But
now to the necessity of the maintenance of the civil and Ecclesiastical Law
in this Realm, as they are now practiced or ought to be practiced, which was a
thing first propounded, but last put in execution in this work.

Albeit that which has been already said as concerning the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law may well imply the necessary preservation of them both
within this Land, yet because it was a thing I promised to show in the
beginning of this Treatise after I had gone over the rest of the parts of my
division, I will in a word or two, make plain the necessity thereof.

And therefore for a ground of all the rest, I will assume this for a matter
confessed, that every man knows, that every well ordered Common wealth stands
on two parts principally, the public part, which consists of the Prince and
people, and the Ecclesiastical part, which stands in Sacris and
Sacerdotibus. And therefore well said the Emperor, In authent. quo^ oportet
ep^os in princ. col. 1. Auth. de non alienand. and reb^^ Eccl. c.. 1.
Two of the greatest things that God ever gave unto the world (meaning earthly
things) was the Empire or seculer government whereby the outward man is ordered
and made, as Aristole says, bonus ciuis, that is, a good and loyal subject:
and the Priesthood whereby the inward man is ruled, and is made, as the said
author testifies, bonus vir, that is, a good and virtuous man, which are two
wonderful effects of the whole government in general; neither can the one of
these be wanting, but the other will be ruinated and brought to desolation.

Secondly, no man is ignorant of this, but in politic government two things
sway the whole state, the one is peace at home, and the other is war abroad:
which as they have their seasons, so they have their causes and effects, the
one from council at home, the other from discipline abroad; neither can the
one or the other of these be maintained, but by their private and proper Laws.

Beside, in peace who sees not, there is as much need of vent by sea, for to
benefit the common wealth by, either by importation of those things that we
want at home, or by exportation of those things that we abound with; as there
is provision to be made for the increasing and preserving of those things that
we have rising and growing by land in our own country, neither of which can be
had or inioyed without their proper laws fit and appertaining to either
policy. And what Law is there that orders these businesses but the Civil
law only, which gives a form to Navigations, and all occurrents that happen
by sea, whether they be in or about the Navigations it self or the contracts,
or as it were contracts, that are made in, upon, or beyond the same.

As a Legal form is requisite in peace at home, and Marine affairs abroad,
that every thing may have his due effect according to the right thereof, so
also it is necessary in warlike exploits upon the Sea that every action have
his limits and bounds, whereby Justice may be ministered: which if it be to be
observed where lawful war is held between Prince and Prince, that every one
be not left unto his own lust, much more is it expedient to be put in ure in
Piracies and other Sea-robberies, where the innocent is spoiled, and the
spoiler is enriched. The redress whereof is not, but by the Admiral Law, to
whom the Princes of this Land have granted that authority.

For the often commerce of Princes with Princes, and the negotiation that one
state has with another, there is nothing more necessary, than frequent
Embassages, whereby intelligence may be had what danger one State intends to
another, and how the same may be prevented by Leagues or otherwise, and how the
same may be made and maintained: I know not what Law serves better for all
these ends and purposes than the Civil Law.

In matters that appertain to the souls-health, the Preacher teaches out of
the word of God, wherein the right service of God stands; he ministers the
Sacraments unto the people, and instructs them in other fundamental points of
Religion: but it is the Ecclesiastical Law that compels men to the due
observance hereof, and punishes the transgressors.

All men grant, that there is a provision to be made for the minister, for that
it is against reason that any man should go to warfare on his charges: but it
is the Law of the Church that sets out this provision, and yields remedy for
the recovery thereof, if it be denied.

Nothing is more due unto the dead, that that their last Wills should be
observed; for that it is such an ordinance as a man has not in his power
again, when God has once called him hence, neither is there any thing that
Princes have more graciously granted unto their subjects, than that in their
life time they may dispose of that, which after they are dead, is none of
theirs; and yet shall take place when they are not, as though yet they were
theirs: in which provision the Civil and the Ecclesiastical Law, are above all
other Laws most Religious.

Christening, Wedding, Burying, whereby a man enters into this world,
conuerseth in the world, and returns again unto the earth from whence he was
taken, and so after passes to glory, and everlasting bliss, are every one of
the Ecclesiastical cognizance.

How many men of great skill, such as few Princes have greater in all kind of
learning, are of this rank, not only in the society of them that profess
this knowledge here in the chiefest city of the Land, but also in both the
universities and in sundry other parts of this Realm not strangers, or
forreiners, but home-borne subjects of the same says, of the same Religion, of
the same kindred, and family, of like allegiance to the Prince, and service to
the common wealth, as other his good subjects are, even those that oppugn this
profession chiefly? whose practice, if it be overthrown, or provision
lessened, not only those that are now present, and make profession of this
knowledge shall be feign to turn their copy, but those that are futurely to
come, will change their profession, when they see there is no reward or
estimation belonging thereto: for it is Honor that nourishes Arts, and no man
will follow that profession that is out of count, and credit; but every Father
will say unto his son in like sort as Ouids Father said to him, when he saw
him addict and give himself wholly to Poetry, Studium quid inutile tentas? It
was aunciently said of the profession of these Laws, Dat Iustinianus honores;
but now it is so far off from that, that it confers Honors, as that it is
almost a discredit for any man to be a Ciuilian in this State, and the
profession thereof does scarce keep beggerie from the gate.

As God does dispose his government by Justice and mercy (whereof
notwithstanding mercy has the supreme place in the Lords Tabernacle, as that
which was put above upon the Arc, wherein were the two Tables Exodus 25.
of stone, in which the Law was written, to which James 2.
Saint James alluding, says that Mercy tryumpheth over Judgment) so the
Princes of this Land to the imitation of that heavenly representation, have
appointed two supreme seats of Government within this Land, the one of
Justice, wherein nothing but the strict letter of the Law is observed, the
other of Mercy, wherein the rigor of the Law is tempered with the sweetness
of equity, which is nothing else but mercy qualifying the sharpness of
Justice: to either which Courts they have sorted men fit for their skill and
education to manage the same, that is, to the seat of Justice, the professors
of the Law of this Land, who may be thought best to know the Justice of the
same: but to the other they have assigned the professors of the Civil law, for
that a great sort of titles of that law, are titles of equity, as whatsoever
is Ius praetorium, or Ius adilicium, with them is matter of equity; so that
they might seem best able for their skill in these tytles (of which no other
Law has the like) to assist the Lord Chancellor in matters of conscience. Who
though he be a man, for the most part, chosen by the Prince himself, out of
the rest of the Sages of this Land, for his special good parts of learning and
integrity above the rest (as now the Honorable person is that occupies that
place, who is as Tully said of that eloquent Orator Marcus Crassus, non vnus ex
multis, sed vnus inter omnes prope singularis) so that they might be thought
for their great and eminent wisdom in all things appertaining to their place,
able to direct themselves; yet because it is, Diuinitatis potius qudm
humanitatis, omnium rerum habere memoriam, and in nullo errare, as one well
says, It was prouidently done by Princes of former ages, to join to these
great personages, men furnished with knowledge in these cases of conscience;
wherein if they should at any time stick, they might be advised by them that
are assessors with them, what they find in the Law proportionable to the case
in hand, that thereto they might square their decree, or order accordingly;
whose variety in these cases is such, that hardly there can fall out any case
in practice, but there will be some law, in that learning, conformable unto it:
which opportunity of men furnished with this knowledge for that seat, his
Majesty shall want, unless the study of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law be
maintained, which also for the cases of equity and conscience therein, is
called of the old writers, Aequitas Canonica.

And what reason gave occasion to the precedent Princes to place men endowed
with the skill of the Civil Law, in the court of Chancerie, the same also
ministered to them minds to commit unto the self same men, the ordering of
their Courts of Requests: for that therein, for the most part, are handled
poor miserable persons causes, as Widows and Orphans, and other distressed
people, whose cases wholly rely on piety and conscience, as a fit subject for
that Law to deal in; which also will take a maime, if the study of the Civil
Law be not vpholden.

So then, to deny a free course to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law in this
Land, in such things as appertain to their profession, or to abridge the
maintenance thereof, is to spoil his Majesty of a part of his Honor (whose
glory it is to be furnished with all sort of professions necessary for his
state, and beneficial for his subject) to weaken the state public, and to
bereave it of grave and fage men, to advise the State in matters of doubt and
controversy between foreign Nations and themselves, to disarme the Church of
her faithful friends and followers, and so to cut the sinews (as much as in
them lies) of Ecclesiastical discipline, and to expose her to the teeth of
those, who for these many years have sought to devour her up: and so now would
do it, if the merciful providence of God, and the gracious eye of the Prince
did not watch over her.

And so far of the necessity of these two professions, and generally of the
use and disuse of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law in this Land, and wherein
it is ouerlaid by the Common Law, and how it may be relieved, if it seem good
unto his Majesty, and the wisdom of this Realm. All which I have written not
of any purpose to derogate from the credit of that Law, under which I was
borne, and by which I hold that small maintenance that I have: for I reverence
it as a necessary Law for this state, and make such reckoning of every of the
professors in his place, as becomes me: but that it pitieth me, and not only
me, but all those that tender good learning, and have no preiudicat mind
toward the Common Law, to see two such Noble Sciences as the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law are, so to be disgraced, as that there is no more reckoning
made of them, or their professors, than if they were matters and men of no
worth, and fit or apt for no service in the common wealth: and yet
notwithstanding, the use of them is so necessary, as that the common wealth
cannot want the service of them in matters of great importance to the State,
which (if the profession should come to a downfall, as it is like shortly to
do, if it be no more cherished and made of than it is) will be sooner seen by
the want of them, than is now perceived by the having of them; and then
perhaps, will the State lament for the loss of such a goodly Profession, when
it will be hardly recovered again, as the children of Israel did for the
Tribe of Benjamin, when they had in one day slain well nigh the whole number
of them.

FINIS.

