FAVLTES FAVLTS, And nothing else but FAVLTES.

AT LONDON Printed for Ieffrey Chorleton, and are to be sold at the great North
door of Paul's Church. 1606.

To the most worthy, the most virtuous and godly Prince, Henry, by the grace
of God, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and Heir Apparent
of the Realm of great Britain, France, and Ireland.
YOur Soldier (most gracious and worthy Prince) has once again betaken him
to his Pen; he has, to avoid idleness, endeavored with Domitian to catch
flies, he grasped at greater matters, then his ability was able to reach unto.
He meant to have mounted the Alps, that stumbled by the way at a sorry
Molehill. But I see it is Soldiers luck, for when they hope to effect
wonders, they conclude with just nothing. I dare not therefore present these
trifles as worthy your gracious view, I know they are too slight for your
greatness, and too mean a present for so high renown: Shall I offer them yet
under the examples of the Widows mite, or, the handful of water that was
offered to Alexander. Me thinks the conceit is grown too stale, when every
bastard Poet has already worn it threed-bare: no, I present them with a
Soldiers faithful heart, that is still armed to the proof, to do your Grace
all humble and dutiful service. If my lines be of little worth, your Graces
name is of great worth, and enough to shrowde both them and me from the
prowdest contemner. The rude Poet Cherilus, had nothing worthy to be noted in
his verses, but only the name of Alexander: And I confess my fruits are too
untimely to be gathered in the age of this ripe and plentiful harvest. I have
therefore with Cherilus the better to adorn them, humbly presumed of that
gracious favor, that has already tied me with all duty and zeal, to lay my
hands under your Highness feet.

Your Graces most humble and dutiful soldier: Barnabie Rich.

To the Gentlemen that are disposed.
GEntlemen, if I have fitted your humors with this fantasy, much good do it
ye, I would it were for you: if it be offensive to some queasie stomach, it
proceeds rather upon some distempered humor in the party so offended, then
of any fault of mine: and yet to speak truly, I meant not to please all. For
when I first undertook the subject, I knew it could not be handled without
offense: but as I have not detected any one particularly of mine own
knowledge, so if any man upon a guilty conscience will accuse himself, his
fault be upon his own head: should we forbear to speak against vice, because
the vicious will be offended? if that might once be brought to pass, it were
high time to follow Tarltons advice, to pull down the Church, and set up the
Alehouse. And how many inferior officers would then fall to decay: amongst
the rest, the poor hangman would miscarie for want of maintenance, but let
them comfort themselves, vice must be corrected, and sin will be punished.

And for the hangman me thinks I durst warrant him work, so long as there is a
Pope in Rome, or a Papist in great Brytaine.

Now for mine own part, that have taken upon me to speak of so many faults,
let me first manifest mine own, I confess I have iested at abuse, and I have
a little scoffed at those that do use themselves to make a scoff at virtue.
In the setting down whereof I have imitated the Painter, who applies colors
but according to his picture. So in these discourses, I have kept a Soldiers
Decorum, expressing matter of little regard, with words and phrases best
befitting the subject. And where I have to deal with more serious
circumstance, I have tempered my style with words and terms thereafter.

B. R.

A Fig for all that Envy can invent,
On fearful steps true honor never treades,
I come not to implore Lucina's help,
To bring my Muse a bed with fantasies,
Nor steal Iiestes in clouds to make you game,
Nor do I seek by gawdes to purchase fame.
I wade into the world as one unknown;
Young in disguise, and yet in years more ripe:
I can discern an Ape, though clad in silk,
And temper wit sometimes to serve a turn.
To what imprission I have wrought it now,
The wise may judge, for fools I care not how.
Faults, and nothing but Faults.
All things best in time and season.
AS that enterprise which is endeavored in a seasonable time, is most like-to
conclude with a good and happy success: so to undertake (whatsoever) not
fitting the instant, shall never get passage through the hearts of men; but
rather be spurned at, and utterly despised. And for him that shall read a
Lecture of Abstinence, when men be in the midst of their cups, should have
ill audience: and where men have betaken themselves to rest, the sound of the
Trumpet, and the clattering of Armor does rather interrupt their quiet, then
augment their courage. An Orator at a table, being requested to speak of
Eloquence answered; Those things that are fit for the place and time present, I
am ignorant of: and that which you require, I know at this time would be out of
season. Thus every thing is made graceful, or disgraceful, according to time
and place. My hardiness then may be reputed overmuch, that dare take upon me
to find Faults in so dangerous a time, when there is no man willing to hear
of his own miss; when he that should but look into the sins of the mighty
Giants of the world must neds perish, when he that should but search out their
evil that will wallow in wickedness, and yet will not be controlled, is
thought unworthy to live in a wel-gouerned Commonwealth: Augustus well pleased
with fault finders.
yet the good Emperor Augustus was never angry with accusers, but thought it
necessary, that where there were store of vices, there should likewise be many
to find fault.

And Alexander understanding that some had breathed out bad reports against
him, sought no revenge, but said: That it belonged to Kings, to do well, and to
hear ill. It has bin a custom in some parts of the Indies, that when their
King or any other great commander amongst them were dead, if any man came
against him, to charge him with any notorious vice, or to oppose any faults
against him, he was denied burial, which amongst them was esteemd to be a
greter infelicity, then if a man were deprived from the joys of heaven.
Pasquils pillar
Pasquilles pillar was tolerated in Rome, to reprehend all sorts of sins,
till they touched the Pope with his Clergy. many restrained more for fear of
the world, then for fear of God.
The Lacedaemonians thought it a necessary point of policy, that there should
be such reprouers, whereby to repress enormitie in those for fear of worldly
shame, that otherwise neither remorse of conscience, nor any fear of their
gods, could have restrained or kept in compass. The like conceit was had amongst
the Thurines, where it was thought the wicked were rather restrained for fear
of worldly shame, then for any fear or dread of God. Every man had free
liberty therefore to speak, either for the general good of his Country, or
to reprove any man's private enormitie, till in the end they made a law, that
no man should find fault at any abuse, unless at Adultery.

Amongst other fictions of the Poets, there is one feined of Momus, who for
reprehending the lewdness of the Gods, was therefore thrown from the heavens
hedlong to the earth, where he was driven to wander like a vagabond, no man
daring to render him relief, for offending of Jupiter. He has still continued
in common contempt, especially in the Courts of Princes, and in the Palaces of
great and mighty men, amongst whom Fault-finders could yet never get grace,
where Adulation (better fitting their humor) is crept so close in their
bosoms, that smoothing Flattery is more dearly esteemed, then reprehending
Verity: Satyrists not inconvenient.
I do not altogether dislike of our Satyrists and Critickes of these times,
that do chide at vice; but I cannot allow them so to aim at any one
particularly, nor so to point at any man's private miss, that when they seek
to shadow him under some disguised shape, they do but shroud him in a Net.
Let them reprove sin, but not in such a sort that every man may understand
by whom it is meant: we are rather inclined to find faults then to commend
things that are Those soonest find fault that tread most awry.
well done we desire to hear of imperfections of others, but we cannot abide to
be ill spoken of our selves: and how curious we be to search into other men's
follies, and how careless again to amend our own, and who will so readily
accuse others for treading awrie, as those who sithence they were borne, could
never go upright.

An example of great charity.
Histories make mention of a renowned Abbot called Moises, who being willed to
give his verdit upon a Friar of the brotherhood that had offended, he came in
with a great sack of Sand on his back, and being asked what he brought with
him, answered they were his finnes, which being so burdensome for himself to
bear, was therefore unfit to censure of any other man's faults: but now there is
nothing more conversant amongst us, then this reprehending and mocking, and we
are so apt and ready to control, that it might seem that neither the mouth
were wide enough, nor the tongue ready enough, to reprehend and reprove those
follies in others, that do most abound in our selves.

I remember a merry jest of two prating companions, especially noted for their
many words: the one of them growing a little sick of a fever Jordan, the
other came to see him, who after his departure being met withal by a second
friend, that was likewise going to visit this sick man, and knowing the other
to be newly come from him, asked of him how he did: the other answered, in no
danger of death, for I find he has not forgot his prating: the other coming
where the sick man was lying on his bed, after some comfortable words, told
him whom he met withal: it is true said the other, he was here to see me, but
he so tired me with his prattle, that I was glad when he was gone.

We can epsy other men's faults, but not our own.
The world is grown to that pass, that we can laugh at our own imperfections
in another, but we cannot see them in our selves. It should seem we are better
sighted a far off, then we be nigh at hand: for at home we be as blind as
Moales, but abroad we have as many eyes as Argus. The sum of all is, there is
nothing more displeasing unto us, then to be told of our own faults: and
nothing better pleasing again, then to hear of other men's: The world is grown
to this pass, and he that seeks not to please the world, shall never thrive
in the world, and he that studieth to please all, spends his time in vain.

And although I have not endeavored my self in framing an Idea of Vtopian
perfections; yet I have adventured to graspe at abuse, but under generalities
in such sort, as I have not aimed at any one man particularly, neither to open
his shame, nor yet to blazon his infamy.

Please all please none.
If any man shall seek to wrest my generalities to any private application,
they should do me wrong, when I have not sought so much as to blast any man's
good name; I have shadowed follies, but yet under covert terms, and I have
ouerpassed many things in silence, because the world is given to see too much.

If men will misconster, the fault is theirs.
We imitate the Disciples of Theodorus, who complained that his Scholars were
accustomed (how plainly soever he spoke) yet still to misconster him, and how
expressly soever he could write, they would yet wrest his sense and meaning to
their own expositions. There is nothing well said, that is not rightly
understood; neither is there any thing well done, that is wrongfully
interpreted.

A gauld Jade.
If any man upon a guilty conscience should find himself agreeued, the fault
is not mine, me thinks it were better for him to amend his miss, then to
publish his shame.

They have found out new mines of new fashions.
There is nothing more formal in these days then Deformity it self. If I
should then begin to write, according to the time, I should only write of new
fashions, and of new follies that are now altogether in fashion, whereof there
are such abundant store, that I think they have got the Philosophers stone to
multiply, there is such a daily multiplicitie both of follies, and fashions.

In diebus illis, Poets and Painters, were privileged to feign whatsoever
themselves listed: but now, both Poet and Painter, if he be not the Tailors
Ape, I will not give him a single halfepenie for his work: for he that should
either write or paint, if it be not fit in the new fashion, he may go scrape
for commendation, nay they will mock at him, and hiss at his conceit.

Prevention.
But amongst an infinite number of faults, I am not yet resolved with which of
them I should begin, nor what text I might first take in hand, and it may be,
some will therefore tax me to have but little wit: and no force, let them not
spare, I will be aforehand with some of them, there is a figure with the
Logitians, they call it Prolepsis, or Prevention, and I learned it long ago,
of the Boy that taught his mother to call whore first. And I will now sit in
judgment of all those that my memory can readily produce, and I doubt not,
but to be before hand with some of them.

Iestmonger.
As for the humorous they have been alredie brought to the stage, where they
have plaide their parts, Every man in his humor.

Amongst the rest therefore to begin withal, Rome for a Iestmonger, that will
rather choose to loose a friend, then to loose a jest, and are quite out of
love with their own wit. If their unsavory gawdes do not produce
laughter: and sometimes when they do think wisely to give some pretty nippe,
God knows, their words do rather tickle, then pinch, and give the more
occasion to be laughed at for their folly, then otherwise to be commended for
their wit. Yet many of them are so full of merriment, that a man would think
Nature had hatched them into the world to be derided of all companies where
they become.

Some wanting wit to coin conceits of their Will steal other men's iestes.
own are driven to commit felony, to steal from other men; and putting them
in execution, the effect may so fall out, as it did with Esops Ass, who
counterfetting the little dog, would play with his Master till he was surely
bangd: So there be among them that will get iestes by heart, that have gathred
a Commonplace book out of Plays, that will not let a merriment slip, but
they will trusse it up for their own provision, to serve their expense at some
other time: and this they esteem to be as good as a suit of Satin, to grace
themselves withal, and are in hope by these pleasures (if they be not placed
at the upper end of the table) yet to get a room above the Salt.

Broad iesters.
Some making profession to be pleasant, do by that means purchase themselves
certain liberty (amongst their friends) to say what they list, whereby many
times they set abroach such matters, which being not able to run through,
they are driven to help themselves by raising laughter, the which they
perform with that kind of grace, as is rather to be loathed, then liked.

Slouenly iesters.
Some other by vnreuerent demeanor at a table, otherwhiles by a brutish and
unmannerly kind of eating and drinking, and sometimes by belching, out filthy
and dishonest words and tales, whereat if they can make Modesty to blush,
they think they have gotten the gole, and do so much esteem the better of
their own wits, and will further fashion themselves to such uncivil and
uncleanly demeanor, that their rude and boistrous conversation, shall so smell
of the Plow, and the Cart, as will abhor any man's nose to sit nigh them, that
have but smelled of civility. But this bourding and carterlike jesting, is
more ready to turn a wise man's stomach, then to make him laugh.

No feast with out a fool or a flatterer.
It is not worthy to be called a feast, where there is not a Iester and a
Flatterer, to cheer up the guests; the one to rail and slander, the other to
smoothe and flatter: for as the body must be balanced with excess, so the
mind must be recreated with these slavish delights. And where these two do
meet, they are still at great expenses: for you shall hear them spend such a
deal of idle breath, that both Zoylus and Gnato would have played bankrupt, if
they had been half so liberal of their windy commodity. And yet in the
midst of their prodigality, you shall not see them spend one dram of love upon
a wise man, but only amongst their favorites and friends.

Parasite.
Of the self and same Grape be these supple-mouthed Parasites, those that can
pamper itching sensuality, that to please humors can carows with Alexander,
abstain with Romulus, eat with the Epicures, fast with the Stoics, sleep
with Endimeon, watch with Crisippus, laugh with Democrites, weep with
Hiraclites, that can cover vice with the name of virtue, that can call
Impudency, Audacitie, that will convert Rage into Courage, Wiliness into Wit,
Obstinacy into Constancy.

I think Flattery at this day be in as good request Tobacco and Flattery,
both smoky vapors.
as Tobacco, two smokie vapors, yet the one purges wisemen of their wit,
and the other fools of their money. And no marvel though Flatterers are so
acceptable, when men for the most part can flatter themselves with an
ouer-weening, to be what they are not: this makes them so willing to give ear
to Flatterers, of whom they think they are praised, when they are but
flattered, for so much as false praise is nothing else but flat mockery. Men
are willing to be flattered.
And we are grown to think so well of our selves, that we account him, either
to be envious, or proud, that will not soothe and smoothe us up in all our
follies, so great is our vainglory, that when we be commended far above
our desert, yet we rather attribute it to the abundance of good will, Fit to
be flattered.
then to the fraud of him that flattereth.

Too many in these days.
But it has been, and is, proper to men of all sorts, to suffer themselves to
be coyd and clawed with this tickling of Flattery. Alexander not free from
flattery.
Alexander was not freed from it with all his courage, neither yet Dionisius
with all his cruelty. And Themistocles being asked what words were best
pleasing unto him, answered: Those that recount my praise. Our ears are more
in love with the melody of words sounding to our own praises, then with any
other music: and therefore many times (like as by the voices of Mermaides)
they are the cause of drowning him that sets them open to that deceitful
harmony. And how many are there, that knowing themselves to be palpably
flattered, do yet love him that flattereth fastest, and hate him that speaks
but the truth? And who does not blush to see the gross flatteries of our
Parasites of these times? how they will extol and commend many things in great
and mighty persons, making them believe they excel in many things, wherein
they have no skill at al: commending that again, which might rather be thought
to be Deformities then Conformities, in a man of mean estate. And he that will
be Thraso, shall never want a Gnato: but beware of the baits of Flatterers,
who with sugared words creeping into men's bosoms, do but imitate the Butcher,
that claweth the ox with his hand, that he might have the more conuenience to
knock him on the head with a Beetle.

A good requital of an Emperor.
The example of the Emperor Sigismund is not to be forgotten, who hearing a
shameless fellow to call him God, stroke him on the ear, to whom the Parasite
said, Why do thou strike me, Emperor? To the which he answered, Why do
thou bite me, Flatterer?

Flowers of courtesy.
God have mercy Sigismund for this trick, and I would all our Parasites of
these times might be so recompensed: Better to hit a Parasite on the ear, than
to lend him thine ear
for it is better to hit them on the ear, then to lend them an ear; for he
that lends his ear to a Flatterer, is like a sheep that lends the Woolfe
her teate, and does more often subvert and overthrow the wealth of a kingdom,
then an open enemy.

But see here a company now presenting themselves, that I cannot say are
affected, but I think are rather infected with too much courtesy; you shall
know them by their salutations. For first with the kiss on the hand, the body
shall be bowed down to the ground: then the arms shall be cast out, like one
that were dancing the old Antike, not a word but, at your service, at your
command, at your pleasure: this old protestation, Yours, in the way of
honesty, is little cared for: every Gull was wont to have it at his tongues
end, but now it is forgotten. And these Flowers of courtesy, as they are full
of affectation, so they are no less formal in their speeches, full of fustian
phrases, many times delivering such sentences as do bewray and lay open their
masters ignorance: and they are so frequent with the kiss on the hand, that a
word shall not pass their mouths, till they have clapped their fingers over
their lips. But he that is so full of creeping, and crowching, either he
means not well, or his wit will not serve him to mean well, for this common
affability, does lightly bring with it an ill intent, and but according to
the Proverb, Much courtesy, much craft.

Fashion-monger.
But will you see how I am pestered with a finicall company that comes in now
all together, throwing upon me, birds of a wing, and it is fittest for them
to fly together: here comes first the Fashion-monger, that spendes his time in
the contemplation of suits. Alas good Gentleman, there is something amiss with
him, I perceive it by his sad and heavy countenance: for my life his Tailer
and he are at some square about the making of his new suit, he has cut it
after the old stamp, of some stale fashion, that is, at the least of a whole
fortnights standing.

Fantastic.
But what call you him a Fantastic, that follows his fellow so close, a
fool I warrant him, and I believe he has robbed a Iackanapes of his iesture,
mark but his countenance, see how he mops, and how he mowes, and how he
strains his looks. All the Apes that have been in the Parrish Garden these
twenty years, would not come nigh him for all manner of complements.

His head the storehouse of wisdom.
Malecontent.
Here comes now the Malecontent, a singular fellow, and very formal in all his
demeanours, one that can reprove the world but with a word, the follies of the
people with a shrug, and sparing of his speech, gives his answer with signs
and dumb shows, pasing his steps with sad and sour countenance, as if he
would have it said; Lo, yonder goes the melancholy Gentleman, see there Virtue
and Wisdom despised, this is the man, that does carry a whole commonwealth
in his head, that can manage the affairs of a State, and fitter to be of a
Princes privy house counsel, than the best Acter that ever played Grauets part
at the Theater.

State Ape.
But good luck now in Gods name, I hope we shall hear some news, for here
comes a fellow that can give us intelligence from France, Flaunders, Spain,
and Italy, from the great Turk, and I think from the Devil himself; it is
one of these State-Apes, that are ever hunting after matter of State. He uses
to frequent the Exchange, and you shall meet him in the middle walk in Paul's
at ten of the clock, and three of the clock: and after the vulgar salutation
of, God save you sir, the next shall be an Interrogatory, I pray sir, what
news do you hear from Spain? how be our Countrymen entertained there? be
they not troubled with those of the Holy house? They deserve to be well used,
for they have made corn almost as good cheap in Spain as it is in England;
they report the like of all other victual: And among the rest of all other our
commodities that flies into Spain, they say our cast iron ordonaunce finds
such entertainment, and is so daily befriended amongst the Spaniardes, that
it is thought our clymate is too cold to keep it in, but it will seek
adventures in Countries nearer the Sun.

These tricks they have, both to groape men's opinions, and to gather such
other news as they can inform, and with these intelligences they go from
place to place; for they are nosed like Catullus, they can smell a feast; and
they know well enough, that men are so inclined to hear novelties, that a few
news well couched, is a better payment for a dinner or a supper, than
eighteen pence to give unto an Ordinary. These men have a special gift,
either to Metamorphise, or to Paraphrase what news soever.

And what great Ambassador can be sent from any foreign Prince or Potentate,
but before he has delivered his message, yea and before he has put his foot
in at the Court gates, but you shall have one of these Newes-mongers that will
not stick to tell, both what his arrand is, and what shall be his answer.

Here comes a spruce fellow now, and if he be not alied to the Fantastic,
yet I am sure the fool and he are so near a kin, that they can not marry,
without a License from the Pope. Would ye know who it is? Mary sir, it is a
Traveller, not of those sort that endeavor their travels, but of purpose to
grow into the hieway of Experience, for the better service of their Prince or
Country: but of those whipsters, that having spent the greatest part of their
patrimony in prodigality, will give out the rest of their stock, to be paid two
or three for one, upon their return from Rome, from Venice, from
Constantinople, or some other appointed place. These fellows in their
iourneying do so empty themselves of the little wit they carried out, that
they can make no better return than their minds full fraught with far fetched
follies, and their heads over burdened with too many outlandish vanities; if
at his return he has but some few foolish Phrases in the French, Spanish, or
Italian language, with the Baselos manos, the Ducke, the Mump, and the Shrugge,
it is enough; for they take much travel upon them, to see fashions, but none
at all, to learn virtue: This is a strange kind of travel, to make
profession, to loose their credit at home, to learn follies abroad. What
trust can there be in a traveler, who is still watching for a wind, whose
feet are ever fleeting, whose faith plighted on the shore, is turned to
perjury when they hoyse sail?

Trauailers may well speak of wonders.
Travelers are priuileged to lie, and at their return, if they do hitte into
a company that never traveled toward the South Pole, beyond Gads hill, you
shall hear them speak of wonders, his talk shall be of Laws, and Customs,
Provincial, and Politic. What civility does abound in the parts where he
has been, he will tell how conversant he has been with great Princes, and
how provident he has found them in governing their estates; and almost at
every pause that he has drawn his speech to a full period, the next strain
shall begin with this Duke, or that Prince: So that Dukes and Princes are as
rife at his tongues end, as, What lack you sir? or, What would you have
bought? is to a prentise of Cheapeside.

The greatest Virtue.
But whom have we here, one, two, three, four five? One, two, three, four,
five, and nothing else but, one, two, three, four, five? A Dauncer.
O ho, I understand him now, this is one of the Skipping Art, that is newly
come from the Dancing School; this fellow had rather tread a trick of one
and twenty follies, than to perform one action that might increase wisdom:
And yet to speak truly, there is no great harm in his wit, but it will
serve him well enough to talk of the turn of the toe, of the caper above
ground, of the lofty trick, and he has some smacke of judgment in vawting,
tumbling, and in dancing with the Iebie horse. And he will speak of Plays,
Players, and who be the best Actors, and lightly he is acquainted with her that
keeps the best Brothell-house.

Oh for a Pipe of Tobacco.
But O for a Pipe of Tobacco! passion of me, how have I forgotten my self, that
have vented so much idle breath without a pipe of Tobacco? I know a number of
my good friends that would not have spent half this prattle without taking of
ten Pipes at the least.

The soueraintie of Tobacco.
O sovereign Tobacco! that art a medicine for every malady, a salve for every
sore: twill cure the Dropsy, the Gowt, the Rhume, the Cold, the Ache of the
head, a Pin and Web in the heel, it will make a woman that is barren to
bear six children in one night; it is wonderful in operation, and they say
it will make a lean man fat, and a fat man lean. But I know it has made
many wise men to become fools, and it has made some fools again to become
wise men.

It cannot be denied, but it makes men sociable, and he that can but take a
Pipe of Tobacco, drink Bottle Ale, and play a game at Noddie, is a companion
for a knight: But let these fantasies pass amongst a number of others, I will
not call them follies, but Gods blessing on his heart, who said, that Thought
was free.

Now some will say, these are but small Faults to be spoken of, they are none
of the seven deadly sins, and therefore the least drop of a Popes Pardon may
dispense with all this. And what can I do but confess a troth? and for this
pleasant imperfection of Pomp, Pride, Adultery, Gluttony, Drunkenness, and
such other, if I should but speak of them, there be those would nicke me by
and by, and come over me with, Physician help thy self. And to speak truly, I
could find in my heart to be very proud, if I had where-withall to bear it
out.

Three sorts of Bavvdes. One to the Usurer.
But for this sweet sin, that is of greater antiquity then the game at Maw,
(ye know what I mean I am sure) if I should find fault at that, I should
offend you, and him, and a great many others of my very good friends, that I
would be loath to displease. I could yet find in my heart, to chide a little at
some sorts of Tradesmen, that do gather their greatest gain from the sins
and abuses of the people. Among the rest, there are three sorts of Bawdes: but
because we will be a little mannerly, we will call them Panders. The first is,
a Broker, a Pander (indeed) to Usury, and a necessary instrument for the
Usurer, whereby to accomplish a great deal of (sir reverence of you) K, N,
auerie.

The drunkard as precious to the Vintner, as the unthrift to the Usurer.
The second sort be Vintners, panders to Drunkenness, many of them keepers of
hospitality for the Prodigal, for the Riotous, for the Epicure, and
receptacles many times for shameful purposes, where the vicious has more
often recourse than those of honest life.

If there be a Walker, that does still use his stations from Tavern to
Tavern, reeling and tottering, that his two supporters will scarce bear up
his drunken carcass out of the kennell, yet who can blame Tom Tapster to
undertake in his behalf, and to auowe him for a man of as honest conversation,
as ever came drunk out of a tippling house.

Such Vintners do know their own dishonestie.
I confess, I do sometimes love to smell to a cup of good wine my self: but
when I come in amongst good company to spend my pint, or my quarte, some of
these Pandering Vintners are so suspicious of their own honest dealing, that
they will not suffer us to send a servant, to see out of what vessel our wine
is drawn, but we must take it as they will bring it, mingled and brewed, fitter
for him that comes to call for a Chamber with his female consort, than for
any man whatsoever that has money to pay.

Can you blame me now to be angry with this bastard kind of Vintners? God's Blood,
he that will not brabble for his liquor, and his Wench, has no spirit in the
world.

Well worth a good liuerie.
Shameless Panders.
I have spoken yet of a third kind of Pander, and those be such as do keep
Burdelles and Brothell houses, but it is not possible to entreat of these
matters with terms so seemly and modest, as to the natural shamefastnes of
honest ears is requisite: but this I can advise you, there is no such trade,
as to keep a Brothell house. And these affairs in times past, have been
especially endeavored by women, but to save her from the Chariot that runs
upon two wheels: it is more safety for her to have a husband, who creeping
into some livery coat, (which may be obtained well enough for money) will be
such a countenance, as neither Constable, Headborough, nor the prowdest
Officer in the parish dare meddle withal. And being conveniently provided of
house-roome, the next provision, to have some Lais to be a Lidger, and
sometimes to lodge two or three wenches together, one perhaps a Widdowe,
another a man's wife ruune away from her husband, and for the third, riddle me a
Riddle, What is she that is neither Maid, Wife, nor Widdowe? Well, let her
pass for a woman, these will bring in company, and company brings in wine,
sugar, orenges, limonds, venison, sturgeon, fat capons, fat quails, and
many good cates besides.

Do you ask me how I know this? why they themselves care not who knows it:
But here is the question, May not a non est woman lodge men and women all
together in one chamber, night after night, but they must be naught together?
Now fie upon these misdeeming people that are so full of suspicion. But as long
as they are not able to prove rem in re, let them suspect still and spare not.

Drunkard.
Me thinks the Drunkard and the Epicure should likewise be of this college, for
Drunkenness and Incontinencie have ever drawn by one line: and it is no
disgrace, but rather a glory, to see a man after so sweet an encounter of
cups, to be carried away to his bed upon men's shoulders, where he may lie to
recover new forces. But some do distinguish the first cup of wine to be of
thirst, the second of merrinesse, the third of temptation, the fourth of
foolishness, and all the rest of beastly drunkenness. An other writes that
the wine has three grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness,
and the third of sorrow.

Fruits of drunkenness.
At Banquets there is nothing so much followed as filthy drunkenness, nor nothing
more embraced then sensual concupiscence; for when the fume once begins to
ascend to the brain, the mind is oppressed with idle thoughts, and wanton
cogitations, it is a spur to the tongue, to contentious quarrelling,
slanderous backbiting, to insolent speeches and beastly talk.

Epicure.
The Epicure a bird of the same feather, and fittest to march in equal rank
with the Drunkard, whom a man cannot say to be born to live, but rather to live
to eat and drink, whose felicity does especially consist in pampering the
paunch; to whom a fine conceipted Cook in a kitchen is better respected, than
ever was Plato or Aristotle in the Academy of Athens, I am glad I have rid my
hands of this beastly generation. But what monster is this? Covetousness.
The hateful, pernicious, detestable wretch Covetousness, look to your
selves, you that do love your selves, for this beast does never come in place
to do any good.

This is the curre that thinks nothing to be unlawful, where either gain is
to be gotten, or gold to be gathred. This is the canker of the commonwealth,
that eats and deuoureth the gettings of the poor. This is the viper that
poysoneth the ears of Princes, teaching them to set aside all just and
honorable dealing: it is Covetousness that makes no conscience in gathering
of gold, nor in spilling of blood; holding nothing to be unlawful that
brings in gain. And how many have we that be of the Trochiles kind, that
do cleanse the jaws of these devouring Serpents, that eats up the means
that the poor have to live by, and that reues the sweat from the Laborers
brows. They heap together abundaunce of wealth with pain, with travel, with
perjury, with oppression, with usury, with the wronging of neighbors, with the
curse of the poor, which they leave again to unthrifty heirs; no less
prodigal in spending, than their fathers were miserable in gathering; by how
much they are advanced to greatness, by so much the more they are cursed of
the poor people, and daily vengeance denounced agenst them, by as many as do
but hear of their names.

The covetous miser is then most ready to devour, when he makes semblance of
greatest love and amity: he makes no respect, either of frind or foe, with
as little regard either of the virtuous, or vicious.

I am sorry for this experience.
When he begins to give precepts of good counsel, his advice is then most
dangerous, for if it bring not poison in the mouth, be sure it has a sting in
the tail. But would you know my experience, from whence it does proceed, I
will not stick to tell you; It is now more than forty years ago, since
there were some few that called me Landlord, and I warrant you, I was as proud
of that Lordly name, as my young Master would be if his father were dead. But
so long as I was known by one foot of land of mine own, Lord how I was
haunted with these gaping spirits that have purses at command to purchase
revenues, yet not one penny to lend an honest friend.

A necessary caveat.
They came to me with many good instructions, teaching me to be wary of my
expenses, and to take heed of unthriftiness: and when they were in best hope to
make purchase of my land, then were they most busy to whisper in my ear,
principles of good husbandry. Well, they had it amongst them, and much good
do it them for me. But I am taught to say, Beware of these covetous purchasing
fellows, take heed of these men that live upon Ten in the hundred; that
will give a man a whole thousand pounds worth of good counsel, but will not
lend him sixteen pence, without such a pawn as they will be sure to gain by:
they will stretch their tongues, but they can hold their hands. A man may
sooner wring a thousand tears from such a misers eyes, than one penny out of
his purse, but they are made wise too late, that are made wise by their own
harms.

A counterfeit Soldier.
But see now, here comes a Soldier, for my life it is Captain Swag: it is even
he indeed, I do know him by his Plume and his Scarffe; he looks like a
Monercho, of a very choleric complexion, and as teasty as a Goose that has
young Goslings, yet very easy to please, but with a handful of Oats. He
looks like Haniball, the great Captain of Carthage, and good reason too; for
he that Easy to know the roar of a Lion, from the bray of an Ass.
should but hear his Table-Talke, and how he will discourse among ignorant
company, would think that the Nine Worthies were but fools in comparison of
his worth: He will talk of more proportions of Battles than ever Langius,
Vigetias, or Machiauell did know of. He will atchieve greater victories, but
sitting at a dinner or a supper, than ever did Alexander, when he conquered the
whole world. And he will discourse of greater exploits and more haughty
attempts, than ever were performed before Troy. And what Town so strong or
Citydale so well fortified that he will not surprise, but with discharging
some two or three volies of oaths: for there is not a greater Testimony of a
Captains courage, than to swear as if he would make his Audience to tremble,
and heaven it self to shake, but with the very breath of his displeasure. At a
word, he will attribute the actions of a whole army to his own virtue and
worthiness, and will bear fools in hand, that neither strong Sampson
amongst his Philistines. Nor valiant Hercules against his ugly Monsters, were
half so fierce and terrible. Now he that has but a weak faith, and cannot
believe these miracles, must be terrified with the Stab, as Caligula threatened
the air, if it rained upon his Game-players, and yet every flash of lightning
made him creep under his bed for fear.

I have almost lost my self in this intricate laborinth of abuses, but he that
should particularly discourse of these matters, had need to have tongue
enough, but because we stand in greater necessity of the truth, then we do of
words, we will proceed with the more brevity: if any man would seek to
accuse in taxing men's imperfections with too much severity, I answer, that he
that will endeavor to wipe away blemishes, must first lay them open.

The unknown disease is most doubtful to be cured, and the less it is sought
into, the more dangerous to be healed. We do seek to cover vices, which the
less they are thrust out, the more they eat and fester within. But wayward
children are rather brought asleep with rocking, then with rating: we will
therefore interlard our sour taunts with sugared counsel.

Lying and slaundering.
But with what patience might a man temper himself to speak of these most
execrable creatures, that do endeavor themselves in nothing but in lying, and
slaundering, whose poisoned breath is more pestilent then the plague of
pestilence it self; whose deprauing tongues, are more persing then the point
of a sword, and are whetted still with scandelous and lying reports?

It is holden more honest, openly to reprehend, then secretly to backbite: for
as the soul is more precious then the body; so it is a greater offense to
take away any man's good name, which refreshes the soul, than to defraude him
of his food, that sustaineth but the body. And as the Philosopher says: Men
are not borne only to live, but they must likewise endeavor to live well. He
adds further, It is a just thing, that every one be as well advised what he
says, as what he does, because amongst noble minds, an actual wrong is more
easily tolerated, then an injurious word preiudicing our honor, by a
slanderous and lying report, always esteeming the blow of a sword to hurt but
the flesh (and may easily be plaistered) but a word suggested to infamy as a
blemish to the reputation, that no salve is able to recure. But as there is no
happiness without hazard, no goodness without temptation, no honor without
envy; so there is no virtue without detraction.

The reputation of a liar.
A reputed liar yet has some reputation: for Theophrastus being asked to whom a
man might best commit a secret, answered, To a known Liar, because, if he
should disclose it, he should not be believed.

There is no better Antidote against this poison of detraction, then patience;
and how well assured, and well recompensed is that patience which is of long
suffering, knows how to bear and forbear.

Patience.
Patience is but a dry plaster, but it is a tried medicine, and it armeth men
to the proof against all assaults whatsoever.

I prescribe no other counsel, then what my self do follow, that for mine
own part (amongst all these slaves of imperfections) the liar and the
slaunderer, does least offend me, because I know that a thousand imputations,
injuriously furnished, by a thousand detracting slanderers are not so grievous
to a man of wisdom, as one matter of truth avouched by him that is of an
honest reputation.

What should I speak of Pride or Vain-glorie, the one has deprived the Angels
of the joys of heaven; the other has replenished the world with Knights.

Pride dangerous in all estates.
Pride has been the overthrow of many flourishing Cities; Vainglory
infecteth commonly none but fools.

There is not a more dangerous vice then pride, if in a Prince, it ruins the
love of his subjects; if amongst subjects, it breeds neglect of duty to
their Prince; if in any Statesman, it draws contempt both of Prince and
subject.

It is a misery to be proud, and poor, to be reuengefull, and dare not
strike; to be sick, and far from succors. But pride is commonly drawn in by
prosperity; for worldly Prosperity is a spur to wickedness, and it
carries men voluntarily to the Court of vanity.

Prosperity begets pride.
Prosperity is puffed up with Pride: it is full of presumption, and sleeps
in such security, that Philips Boy, who every day cloied his master with the
clamor of Mortalities, can hardly awaken it: there cannot be a more excellent
touchstone, whereby to discover the dispositions of men, then is the
superfluity of wealth, and the extremity of want; the springtide of
prosperity, and the low ebb of adversity: For although the matters of
themselves are indifferent, yet the managing of them is it that gives light.
Prosperity pampereth us in pleasure, it makes us to forget God, and to repose
our greatest confidence in the vanities of the world. Adversity makes us
contemptible in the eye of the world, it is the mean whereby we are taught to
know our selves, and to draw us to God.

Adversity more precious to the soul than prosperity.
Prosperity so swells us in pride, that we forget our selves: it blinds
our understanding, that we are not able to discern a friend from a flatterer,
nor to judge whether these which do fawn upon us, be more in love with our
selves, or with our fortunes.

Virtue never tried but in adversity.
Adversity makes us humble, it clears the understanding, and gives us eyes
to discern between friendship and flattery, and to make assured trial
between a frind and foe. Adversity may be both Judge and Jury.

Poverty not greatly cloied with friends.
What have I said? may Adversity judge between a friend and foe? I never heard
that poverty was cloyed with many friends. And Adversity, if he once begin to
want, shall never want a foe: they will say a friend is tried in time of need;
but I say still, that Need is it that makes a friend a foe. He is a fool that
wants friends, and if he want no wealth: But he that has poverty to cast up
his accounts, and is become Needs Ambassador, to beg, or to borrow, if he
find a friend to help and supply his want, I say such a friend is precious,
and more rare to be found, than Platoes Commonwealth, Moors Eutopia, Ciceroes
Orator, or Baldesers Courtier.

The friendship of this time.
A friend, in this age, is more ready to lend his conscience than his coin,
more apt to enter into any exployt of vice, than to relieve the necessity of
his friend that wants.

In a cause of quarrel he is but of slender account, that cannot carry with
him, ten, twenty, thirty, or forty that will take his part, and will
adventure their lives, be the quarrel never so unjust: but let him be in want,
not one of those forty will lend him his purse.

The mightier thy friend is in his own estate, by so much thy danger is the
greater to prove him for money: And yet how many are there in these days that
would abstain from heinous and hurtful offenses, if they had not confidence
in the favor and rescues of their great friends, to boulster and bear them
out in their wickedness.

Friends being of the world, their friendship has also his corruption of the
world; and friendship nowadayes stands upon these limits, that is, not to
correct one another for their vices, but rather to cover and dissemble, and to
suffer community of evils.

What requird in friendship.
The first effect of that faith and virtue which ought to be considered in the
election of friends, is to give counsel; yet some do rather desire to dwell
in the lust of their particular desires, than to be advised by a friend: And
for good counsel, we use to take it as we take Tobacco, if we draw in at the
mouth, we strait blow it out at the nose.

True friendship is not to be found, but amongst the virtuous, and grows
between them through the affection which they do equally bear unto virtue:
But we are better known the one to the other by our faces, than by our
virtues; and I would to God we were not better known by our follies, than we
are by our faces. It is an easy matter to speak of virtue, and to tell of her
excellency; but to translate her out of words into deeds, is not conversant
with many: and no wonder though so few do look out after her, for she is
grown poor, and who would follow a beggar? But in her greatest want, she is
not without her recompense, for if there be no body else to reward her, she
still paies her self with a certain contentment, which may sooner be felt
than expressed by words. And let us praise virtue how we list, and let us
write whole volumes in her commendation, yet if it extend no further than to
the things on earth, I say there is not any thing so wretched and miserable as
man.

Honor is the reward of virtue, and ouelie virtue must open the gates before
honor can enter.

The Pope has suspended virtue from Rome.
The Romans builded two Temples joined together, the one being dedicated to
virtue, the other to honor, yet seated in such sort, as no man could enter
that of honor, except he first passed through that of virtue.

But it should seem the Pope has made a new dedication of those Temples, as
he has done of that builded by Marcus Agrippa caled Pantheon; and because
he could never bring virtue to become a Papist, he would therefore leave no
monuments of her in Rome.

The Papist of more expedition than the Alcumist.
I could take occasion here to speak of them that will make men believe that
they can make gold; but to whom they promise abundance of wealth, of him they
ask a great deal of money: me thinks the Papist and he should be of near
affinity, the one professes to make gold, the other to make God: but I
commend the Papist to be the more speedy workman, for he can dispatch up
his God, but with speaking of five words, the other cannot perfect his gold in
the spending of five loads of char-cole.

But Lord, how have I forgotten my self! I was bidden to day to a dinner,
where will be a great meeting of good company, I must frame my self to be
sociable amongst them, I must flatter and lie, and learn to make curtsie
after the new fashion, I must prepare mine ears to hear of strange
discourses, and where such store of matters are so often debated; no marvel
though reason be something abated.

Table-talke.
One will prove by natural reason, that fire is hot: another, after the
setting of the Sun, will tell a tale of the shadow: a third will avowe it of
his credit, that Hercules was a tall fellow with a Club: an other will clap
himself on the breast, and tell you twenty lies, as, how kind and loving he
has been to his wife: an other swears a tale is as well beautified with
detestable oaths, as an Oration is with figures.

Now for some others that will rejoice in their own abominations, making
vaunts of their adulteries, fornications, drunkenness, and other like
Sodomicall sins, taking as much pleasure in the boasting and brauing of it,
as they did in the acting: I say, that a man committing an ill, may be said to
be but simply wicked; but after, to glory and rejoice in his evil, is of a
cursed spirit, and worthy to be detested of all honest company.

Matters of small worth.
What should I speak of othersome, that at such meetings, will enter into
disputations, of approving and defending matters of so little worth, as they
are not worth the speaking of? yet where this short Text, Dixit insipiens,
might suffice for authentical authority, they will spowt out their
Syllogismes, their Majors, and their Minors, framing their Arguments with as
great vehemency as if they were disputing about matters of faith. Now if there
be a good Trencher-man amongst them, that can help himself with the
advantage of time, he betakes him to his teeth: If he can but say, This is a
good cup of wine, who would desire a better conclusion?

Perhaps there may be some one or other amongst them better learned than the
rest, who hearing this resolution, and finding the cup to be empty, will aptly
apply this axiom set down by Aristotle, Corruption vnius, est generatio
alterius, and calls to one of the wayters to fill in a fresh pot.

A man might speak of a number of other trifling matters (fitter to be laughed
at, than to be repeated) that commonly falls out at these merry meetings, at
feasts, at Ordinaries, or other places of good fellowship: but let them pass
amongst the number of Faults of little or no importance; and for my own
part, I think a man were many times better to dine or suppe with bread and
cheese quietly in his own house, than to go to those places where there is so
great frequent, unless he knew his company the better, for God bless them all I
pray God, there are such a number crept into this order of Knighthood, that a
Gentleman may think himself to be highly favored, if he can but find a
place to setle himself at the side-table; for the high board is still taken up
with those of the decayed order.

Husbandmen.
I think it were best for me now to take a little breath, but I have yet a
short journey to make into the country, I must go visit the servants of
Christ, those that live by the plow and the cart, that can gather gold out of
the dirt, and can reap commodity from the very excrements of filth it self.

Well gotten goods.
Husbandry has evermore been of great account in all times and ages, and the
husbandmans increase is the blessing of God; for he can but eire, sow, harrow,
dung, dig and delue, but it is the blessing of God that gives the increase:
the best gotten goods then (I say) is that which is gotten by husbandry.

Husbandry breeds up cattle for the relief and sustenaunce of man, it
makes provision of skins, of wool, hemp, flax, and such other like,
sufficient, in the first age, for the apparrelling of man; this superfluity of
coloring, dying, with so many several sorts of weauing and transforming,
serves but for pomp, and is a great deal more than Nature has need of.

The husbandmans pride, and his wit, are very near alike, yet they will
calculate of dearth and plenty, and will prognosticate to day, of corn,
cattle, butter, cheese, and such other, what price they will bear for a year
or two to come. Their greatest speculation is in observing the seasons of the
year, and if it happen to hold dry two days more than they think is
enough, or that it rain but two hours too much, the next market day they will
raise the prises of all manner of victual.

The poor in the country shall never thrive that do dwell too near the rich,
for the wealthy have still money enough at command, to buy, when the poor
must sell good cheap, to pay his Landlords rent: And when the rich men hoord
up their store, to make scarcity and dearth, the poor must serve the market
to relieve his present want.

The rich man's joy is but vanity.
These drudges be they that do draw their whole contentment from a little dirt
and dross, so shutting up the treasure of Gentry within the limits of their
miserable pelf, that if God has but blessed him with some few horns about him,
I mean his pastures well stored with cattle, and a teeme or two of oxen to
plow his land, with the kow pasture well replenisht with milch kine; you shall
see such a pesant to stand more on his reputation, than a Gentleman endued with
as much knowledge as the seven liberal Sciences can afford him.

The malapert clownes that have no virtue of the mind to crake of, but of
their oxen, of their sheep, and how many hogs they have in their backeside,
that are so choked up with the carkes and cares of the world, that they can
not relish those things that savor of wit, to whose ears the lowing of a kow
is better pleasing, than a Lecture of Logic. Let them vaunt of their Gentry
what they list, but if they be so respected, I am sure it is amongst plowmen,
amongst shepherds, amongst clownes, or amongst churles, such as they be
themselves.

This comfort is yet left, Nature her self has hansomely provided for them;
for as she brought them innocents into the world; so at her appointed time, she
takes them away again, as arrand fools as she first brought them in,
without any great alteration, unless perhaps a little pride and a great deal
of ignorance.

Those sins that were wont to be called, the sins of the City, because
Townsmen had especial trade and traffic with them, as Pride,
Voluptuousness, Excess, Incontinencie, Drunkenness, Perjury, Usury, and such
other, are now as frequent, and as well entertained in the Country, as if they
had bin there first bred and brought up.

A guilty conscience.
Mary for Conscience, I pray you commend me to it, you that know where to find
it, for my own part, I know not where to seek after it, neither in the City,
nor in the Country: and it makes no matter, for it is a nice thing to deal
withal, this same conscience. And men that are wise, will run through the
affairs of the world, and not so much as once think of it.

A guilty conscience is evermore a severe accuser, and to the impenitent
person, a most terrible Judge.

A bad conscience is a scourge, nay it is the executioner, which burns, which
beats, which tormenteth the mind, and that with so much the more horror, by
how much the life is prolonged.

The woolfe that could measure his conscience.
Now who in the name of God would be combred with such a Conscience, that does
thus vex and torment a man that has a little regard to Godward? Me thinks
men might learn wisdom from amongst brute beasts, they might remember the
Woolfe that was enjoined by his ghostly father, to fast, and for four and
twenty hours to abstain from flesh, or at the least to eat no more then in
his conscience did exceed the value of three halfe-pence. The Woolfe departing
homewardes meeting with a sheep and her lamb, and having an appetite unto his
dinner, and remembering what his ghostly father had enjoined him unto, valewed
the sheep in his conscience to be worth a penny, and the lamb a half penny,
and without any further scruple, devoured them both. And he that will live in
this world, and cannot learn of the Woolfe, how to square out a good
conscience, shall never grow fat.

It is but our own deeming, or misdeeming, that makes the conscience good or
bad; this lesson is not new, Creed quod habes and habes, the priest taught it
long ago to the young scholar that came to borrow a horse. Now he that can
wisely persuade himself, that his conscience is good, has this for his
comfort.

A good conscience.
A good conscience is the Correctresse of our affections, the Schoolemistris of
our souls: It is a bridle before sin, whose testimony is better than a
thousand witnesses, when every man's soul is fed with hope or despair
according to the testimony that is witnessed by the conscience.

Let Conscience go, for you may perceive he is best at ease, that has least
to do with her; yet there be some that will boast and brave so much of it,
that all things well known (if a man did stand in need) he might buy more
conscience and honesty too at Sturbridge fair for a hundred of Colchester
oisters, than a hundred of them were able to furnish.

Honesty like to die.
Honesty they say, lies sick of a consumption, pray God help him, for Charity
is waxen cold, and fuel again is grown dear, we must therefore keep the
smaller fires, for necessity is not only without law, but she her self is
likewise the law of Time.

Vice has so long time been covered with the name of Virtue, and Virtue is
again poluted, and counterfeited in the habit of Vice: Mercy that ever has
been accounted gracious, and does most nearest resemble the divine Nature,
yet being used out of time and season, she loses her grace, and may rather
bear the name of foolish pity, then of mercy: It is no less cruelty (says
the Philosopher) to punish no offense, then not to punish any: It is then a
great virtue in him, that can be wise and merciful both together.

Liberality.
The like again may be said of Liberality, for as those that build, be not all
good workmen, so those that give, be not all liberal; for many lay hold of
other men's goods, and are lavish of that which is none of their own. Some
other will give to him that has no need, and leave another in wretchedness,
whom they ought to reward. Some other again on the sudden, will so empty the
fountain of Liberality, that they are not able again of a long time to use
it.

Alexander does best fit us with examples of true liberality; for he ever
considered the worth as well of himself that was to give, as of him that was to
receive.

An exercise aptly rewarded,
Amongst other presidents, there was one brought to Alexander, of such
dexterity, that with one pease he would never fail to strike off another, (as
men do play at shouel-aboord) the length of a long table. Alexander esteeming
of the slight to be but vain, and to serve for no manner of purpose that was
good, bestowed his reward accordingly, and gave the party a bushel of peason:
A fit recompense (indeed) for so idle a toy.

The Amorist
But I am still interrupted, I think now by one that is in some Lunacie, or
else he has been scared with spirits: alas how ghastly he looks, now fie upon
love, it is an Amorist, for twenty pounds, his Mistress has lost her little
Dog, or else her Munkie is lately dead, and he mournes in black as
Hortentius did for the death of a Lampray.

The misery of an Amorist that has a coy Mistress.
Alas poor fool, I do pity him, I think Dame Folly her self will simper to
see her servant in this perplexity, how many nights watching, how many days
weeping, how many hours suing, how many times sighing, and yet how little
profiting, to see a fool serve that Saint on his knees, that honors the
devil in her heart, to think that the old painted face of Proserpina, to be
the same that it was when she came to be Plutoes wife.

Love is like an Ague fit, sometimes hot, sometimes cold, sometimes glad,
sometimes sad, my lovers head troubled with unquiet thoughts in the night, with
jealousy in the day, mocked by his companions, pitied of his friends, derided
of his enemies, scorned by his foolish Mistress.

I cannot believe that ever Virtue was a Potarde in that we call Love, yet this
folly does many times assault the brauest minds, and Cupid has made a breach
in the camp amongst the squadrons of armed Soldiers.

The folly of affection I see is wonderful, yet are the errors of beauty
much more admirable, when in her self she is but a painted Sepulcher, and in
her actions the diminisher as well of natural as moral reason.

With like happiness Lovers possess their Mistresses, as Vatinius did his
Consulship, whose honor, neither frost, nor spring, neither Winter nor Summer,
did ever behold (as Tullie partly ieasted) whose countenance of favor
depending on instants, has but a days breeding, and a years repenting.

Love sir reuetence.
In love, what sees the eye? lasciuiousnes; what hears the ear?
lasciviousness; what utters the tongue? lasciviousness; what thinks the
heart? lasciviousness; what inureth the body? lasciviousness.

And call you this love? I, it is love sir reverence, I have heard of many that
were mad for love, yet I never heard of any that were wise in love. I have read
of Conquerers whom Love have made effeminate, but I never heard of any whom
Love has made truly valiant, I know where wisemen have been besotted by
fancy, but I could never learn where fancy made a wise man.

If men would dispose their eyes as warily, as women can display their beauties
garishly, they should borrow bird-lime from the fowler, and catch the birds by
compass in his own nets. But he that treads that desperate laborinth of
Love, is in ordinary destiny of a wise man to take the habit of a fool: of
a careful man to become negligent, of a valiant man to become so weak, as to
stand in awe of a foolish woman's word: of a provident man, to loose all
policy: of a young man, to become withered, of a freeman to become miserably
bond, of a mild man to bear the burden of an Ass, of a religious man to
become an Idolater, of a rich man honored, to be a poor man scorned, of a
patient man, to be a revenger of the filthy causes of his Minion: in brief,
to forget God, and to neglect the knowledge of all goodness.

More hair over her brows then would serve three or four honest women.
I think my Lady her self would laugh, to see an Amorist that is kindly
besotted, how his Angels must fly to fetch new fashions from Venetian
Curtesans, to please his demie honest Mistress. Then she must have a Mask, to
cover an impudent face, a Periwigge to hide a loathsome bush, a Buske to
streighten a lascivious body. And for painting, it is as general amongst a
number of women (that would feign be accounted honest) as it is to the most
noted and common strumpet.

His loose legged Mistress, must spur forward his wit, to set abroach pretty
conceits; and if his brain be not too barren, he must indite loving lines, and
amorous verses in the praise of his Mistress: He must borrow colors from
Lillies, and red Roses, to beautify her cheeks, her teeth must be of Pearl,
her breath Balm, a Pallas for her wit, The worst part shall be her soul.
a Venus for her chastity, her tongue the tongue of an Adder, her tail, worse
then the tail of a serpent; he must learn pretily to lispe out, sweet
Mistress, kind Mistress, he must kiss her pretty hand, the handle of her
fan, her Nosegay, the nether skirt of her Petticote, he must play with her
little Puppie, he must adore the point of her Busk, the seat that she sits on,
the ground that she treads on, yea the very strings that serves to tie her
shoes.

Base Vassals, more base then baseness it self, the very shame of men, and
the stain of manhood, go learn with Sardanapalus to spinne, and for those
women that will retain such servants, God make them honest, for I am sure they
will never be wise.

What we call love.
But let us speak a little of Love, for so far as I understand, that which we
call Love, is so far from love, that I rather think it to be a doting
frenzy, rouing and running headlong upon impossibilities, engendered first
between Lust and Idleness: his associates and chiefest companions, are pain,
trouble, anger, rage, fury, doubt, grief, languish, threatening, despair,
uncertain hope; his surest good, base weakness, his fruits are laborsome
adventures, nay rather, loathsome misaduentures.

To speak truly, that which we call Love, stands upon too many nice
circumstances, when filthy lust, and inordinate desire, do evermore march
under Loves Banner, and do make the name of Love their Bawd, to cloak and
boulster out their fleshly appetites.

The Amorist is seldom seen to take delight in ouerworne antiquities, or in
unseemly deformities: an argument that they are rather in love with the body,
then the mind, and that their love is both earthly, and fleshly.

The effect of love is faith, not lust, delightful conference, not detestable
concupiscence. He therefore said well that said, Love was Divine, for love
indeed is a subject of greater excellency then to join earth to earth.

I cannot think the society between man and wife may be called love, because
it gives opportunity to lust, and it has too much trade and trafique with
carnal desire: I think a man should love his wife with as great zeal and
feruencie, as he loves himself: and he cannot be said to love (but rather to
hate himself) that does not so respect his love and duty to God, as to curb
his braine-sicke affections, that they raunge not after sensual pleasure, not
to pamper, nor to please himself with the vain delights of a fleshly
appetite, that leads from the divinity of Love, and draws to
loathsomeness, and to the destruction of the soul. Now the husband, that
should love his wife in this sort, that should seek to bridle her from her
foolish vanities, a hundred to one, she would never love him again, and all
the women in the Parish would protest against him, and swear, that he were
neither loving nor kind to his wife.

Why then we may perceive the excellency of love, is where God is a party, or
where it has relation to things that are divine.

True love in deed.
This prescribed commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thy
neighbor as thy self, is it that draws nearest unto love, between man and
man, but this love cannot be said to be terrestrial, when it has his
original from the Commandment of God. But would you know what is true love
(indeed?) the love of God, who loved us undeservedly. And this love was well
expressed by our Savior in the day of his passion, when neither the torments
of his body, nor the wickedness of his people, could restrain him, not only
reconciling those to his grace, that were present, or already passed, but to
love those, that were yet to come, and hereafter to be borne, was a love never
heard on before nor sithence, but in the person of our Redeemer.

The love of Christ.
Our liberty and absolution depends upon his condemnation. He was condemned
by the sentence of men, and we absolved in the judgment of God. Here is true
love indeed, and the property of his affection does never alter toward his
chosen: for he pitcheth his Tents about them to defend them, and his ears are
ever open to hear them, if they appeal to him in their adversities, and he
accompanies them with his holy Angels, to guide and direct them, that they
run not astray.

There is no doubt but there are some that do meditate on this mercy, and that
have grace again to consider of this inestimable love of GOD toward man, that
indeuoureth again with all humility and thankfulness of heart both to love and
fear: and for his sake to be both of a loving and charitable disposition
toward their neighbors.

Love must be divine.
Here is love now truly expressed in his own nature, and this love must be
both celestial and divine, when God is at the one end of it.

Women's faults.
We have hitherto spent the time in delivering of those faults and follies that
are conversant amongst men. And I think if a man were made al of eyes, as
Argus was, he could not look into the one half of those vices that now do
infect the world: But is there any escape to be found amongst women. Men you
see are full of Faults, but amongst women (some will say) there is but two
Faults, and those are, they can neither do nor say well. But this (as I take
it) is rather to be objected in the way of merriment, than to be received for
a truth. But this is true, there has bin both good and bad women from the
beginning; but for those that have been accounted ill, they were never half
so detestable in times past, as they be at this hour: nay, those women that
now would be accounted good, and would be angry if there should be any
exceptions taken to their honesty, are more Courtezan-like (to the show of the
world) than ever was Lais of Corinth, or Trine the famous Curtezan of Thebes.

What new fangled attires for the heads, what flaring fashions in their
garments, what alteration in their ruffes, what painting of shameless faces,
what audacious boldness in company, what impudency, and what immodestie is used
by those that will needs be reputed honest, when their open breasts, their
naked stomachs, their frizled hair, their wanton eye, their shameless
countenance, are all the vaunt errors of adultery.

With these sleights and shows they have made Emperors idle, as Anthony,
strong men feeble, as Sampson, valiant men effeminate, as Hercules, wise men
dissolute, as Solomon, eloquent men lascivious as Aurelius.

What is become of that age, when simple beutie was best beseeming an honest
woman, when bashful modesty enclosed in a virtuous breast was their best
lewre, whereby to induce an honorable reputation? they were then beloved by the
virtuous, by the wise, by the learned: but now most commonly, by the
lascivious, by the idle, and by those Hermaphrodites, that are not worthy the
name of men.

Thucidides will needs approve that woman to be most honest, that is least
known, and in whose praise or dispraise there is no report at all, but it is
not possible for any woman so to behave her self, but she shall be
misreported; and the more honest in life, so much the sooner infamed, when it
is the common practice of every known strumpet to scandalize and slander
that woman, which she in her own conscience thinks to be most honest because
it helps to cover her own abominations (as she thinks) and the more to
blaze it forth, she shall not want the assistance of her Ruffians, her
Apple-squires, and of those brothell queanes, that lodge, that harbor, and
that retain her, and such as she is, in their houses for commodity and gain.

Nay, they have the slight, even then most diuelishly to infame, when they will
make show most honestly to excuse. And under the pretense of flying reports,
which they will say has been told them by others, they will spread their
own venom, complotting and devising those untruths, that never were heard
nor thought on.

Report of no authority whereby to censure women.
Many good and virtuous women are by these sleights most shamefully infamed, I
cannot therefore admit that report should be of any credit, whereby to
deem of women's goodness: I have (me thinks) a better mark whereby to
discern between the good and bad, and I have gathered it by observation. An
harlot has more friends than an honest woman.
I have seldom seen an honest woman to have many frinds that will take her
part, that will speak for her, that will quarrel for her, that will fight for
her; there be not many that will bestow gifts on her, that will lend her money,
that will send her in daily provision of capons, conies, partriges, pigeons,
wine, sugar, spice, and such other acates, both costly and dainty: you shall
not see an honest woman thus supported, unless by a father, a brother, or by a
husband.

I have not known an honest woman much frequented, with one, with another,
with a third, and so with twenty, every day a new; I will not speak of
nights, for so I might put all surmise-quite out of question. Nor I never
heard of women greatly cloyed with honesty, that would harbor such as these,
that will defend them, excuse them, shut them up in a chamber; but I begin to
blush, I Will say no more: you may quickly guess a Strumpet by her multitude of
friends, in the court, in the country, in the city, in the town, in the
east, in the weast, in the north, in the south, in all the quarters of the
world. She has adopted fathers, adopted brothers, adopted coosins, adopted
friends, adopted servants, adopted partners, and such a number of other like
adopted companions, that she has more (called by the name of friends) to
undertake in her behalf, than twenty honest women. Then she has her Cutters
that must undertake her quarrelles, Ruffians, Roysters, Swashers, Swearers,
Thieues, Robbers, Shifters, and the whole fraternity, that has set aside
all fear of God, and shame of the world.

Do you ask me how she should induce this large acquaintance? I say, beware
of the sleights of an harlot, she has a tongue to train, eyes to allure,
tears to excuse, looks to atract, smiles to flatter, imbracements to provoke,
frowns to delay, beckes to recall, lips to inchaunt, kisses to inflame, a
body to perform, and all these to poison.

She had need to have many suitors, for her expenses are great, and therefore
she retains none longer than their crowns will last; but she plumes them one
after another, till she has left them neither feather nor flesh on their
backs; and as she wears them out one after one, so she disperseth them
again, some to the Physician to seek for help, some to the Spittle, that are
past recure: Some to Weeping Cross to bewail their own follies: Some to
raise new rents by the high way side: Some she sends to the Compter, some to
Newgate, some to the Gallows, and all to the Devil, if they have not the
better grace to repent in time.

Frine the Curtesan of Thebes.
Histories make mention of many famous Curtezans, that it should seem had great
taking; for amongst the rest, this Frine spoken of before, reputed to be but a
common curtezan, after Alexander had rased the walls of Thebes, proffered the
Thebanes, to repair them at her own propper charges, but only that she might
be suffered to ingraue this inscription upon the wall, Alexander rased it, and
Frine raised it.

It would be a tedious task for me now to take in hand to speak of Faults as
they happen to fall out between the married, sometimes by a misdemeaning
toward his loving wife, otherwhiles by a malicious woman toward her kind
husband. But as the occasions are innumerable that fall out between them, so
the strifes and debates arising by those occasions would be no less infinite
to be described.

But it should seem these contentions falling out between man and wife, are
not new: for there is a Record of one Gorgias, a famous Orator that was
shrewdly combred with an unquiet wife, who in an Oration exhorting the Greeks
to peace and concord, in the midst of his Oration was interrupted by one
Melanthus, who crying unto the people, said, My Lords and Masters, do you
not see this Gorgias, who with his eloquent Oration, would exhort us to
concord, being a number of people, and yet he can not persuade a quiet peace
in his own house, where there is but himself, his wife, and his maid that
do live in continual strife and debate.

The Athenians to prevent dissentions which might fall out between men and
their wives, appointed certain Magistrates whom they called Reconcilers of
the married.

The Spartans in like manner had certain set officers whom they called
Harmosyus, who had in charge to correct and chastise the pride and insolency
of married women. But Varro reasoning of women's infirmities says; that the
fault of the wife is either to be taken away, or to be endured: Now he that
has discretion to take it away, bettereth his wife, but he that has patience
to endure it, makes himself better.

A vain question by a great Philosopher.
By this we may perceive, that the discords falling out between married men and
their wives, are grievous offenses, and so burdensome for many to endure, that
Theophrastus a great Philosopher made a question, whether it were expedient for
a wiseman to marry, or no. And Thales one of the seven Sages of Greece, being
demanded in his youth why he did not marry, answered, because it was too
soon: and after, coming to more riper years, being asked the same question
again, answered, that then it was too late; in this sort covertly proouing
that it was not expedient for a wise man to marry at all.

Marriage commanded by God.
Marriage is not only commended, but it is also commanded, and by whom? by the
Almighty himself, who has created us, and who has said, It is not good for
man to live alone: And what greater honor than that we owe to our Parents,
being expressly commanded, Honor thy father and mother; yet this holy
institution of wedlock is more worthily dignified, Thou shall leave father and
mother, and cleave to thy wife: when a man betakes himself to wife, he gives
no occasion to be slaundered, but rather just occasion to be honored.

Marriages in these days how they are made.
Marriages in these days, are rather made for fornication than for continency,
not so much in hope of issue, as for gain of money, more for lucre than for
love: neither is there any respect had to the quality, so they may embrace the
quantity; for nobleness and virtue, alas it is no portion, when a thousand
crowns are rather embraced, than two thousand good conditions.

But the world is grown too too wise, and Parents are too wonderful provident
in these days, that in knitting up of marriages will carke and care for
childrens children, before they are borne, yea many times long before they are
begotten.

I think there is not so arrant a drudge, but if she do bring a portion, she
shall have a husband: neither is there so seely a Clown, but if he be able to
make a jointure, he shall soon have a wife.

Well, I have no daughter to marry, and I am glad of it, for I perceive it
riddes me of many encombrances, but if I had, and that I were of ability to
give bountifully, I would sooner bestow my money to buy her alittle wit,
than to buy her a lump of flesh, that is but lapt together in a fools skin.

A foolish father.
O how foolish is that father, that will bestow his well nourtured daughter in
marriage with such a sot, that has nothing in him but a jointure: these
parents do little considder what a grievous fault they commit, in bringing
their children to a loathed bed; and yet these faults amongst parents are too
common.

The fruits of our Marriages
These marriages are preparatiues to fornication and adultery, and how many
inconveniences do daily fall out, by occasion of these marriages; the world is
so full of examples, that I may therefore be the more sparing: let him that
will needs marry (as near as he can) make choice of her that is rich, to the
end that the necessities of this life may be supplied. Let her be nobly borne,
the better to minister to his reputation, and to join honor to his
posterity. Let her be young, that she may the rather delight him: and that he
may have no occasion to find marriage loathsome, let her be fair, the better
to content his desires, and to contain him from strange affections: but in any
case, let her be wise, honest, and virtuous, to the end he might with the more
security repose his estate upon her government.

A great error in Parents.
There is nothing wherein Parents do so much err, as in bringing up of their
children, that are more desirous to see a child live, than to see him
virtuous; but what a misery is this, to see a father live in wretchedness all
the days of his life, to the end he may die rich, to leave a light headed son,
that will spend more in one week in riot and prodigality, than the father
could scrape together in one year with all his sparing misery? If thy son
be good and virtuous, a little is enough: if he be foolish and dishonest,
alittle is too much.

There is not a greater reproach to a father then a wicked son, because the
faults of the children are justly imputed to the Parents that had no better
regard to bring them up in their infancy.

Holy the Priest was not punished for any fault himself had committed, but
because he winked at the sins of his children.

A good law
The Heluetians had an ancient Law, that if a yongman had received sentence of
death, the execution thereof should be done by his father (if he were living)
that the father might, in some sort, be punished for the negligence he used
in the education and bringing up of his child.

And the law called Facidia was much to that purpose, by which it was enacted,
that the child should be, for the first offense admonished, for the second
punished, for the third hanged; and the father should likewise be banished as
partaker of his fault.

It is said, that youth never reigns well, but where age does hold the
bridle: but this is certain, I never saw that child, which was let run with
the reine in his own neck, but when he came to ripeness of years, he
rather proved a Thorn in his fathers side, or rather a dagger to his heart;
heaping grief and sorrow to his own soul, either by a misled life, infamous
and detestable in the eye of the world, or by an unnatural, disobedient, and
undutiful demeanor toward his father himself.

But Lord, how many incombrances are incident to parents that are vexed with
the practices of amorous daughters! for whilst they are providing dowries to
bestow them in marriages of such as they like, and think fittest for them,
they provide themselves of Paramours, such as they list to fancy: But for him
that should take to wife, her that has been her fathers wanton, were not such
a one well sped? he should be sure to have Gaul to his Sugar, sour soppes to
his sweet meat, he were better to marry a milke-maide, then to marry a
fathers fondling, one that is called her fathers joy, his jewel, his dearling,
that is brought up in pleasure, in pride, in idleness, in audacious boldness,
(for that is grown to a fashion) and this is the cause, that women in these
days have forgotten to blush.

It may be that such a one will bring a great portion, but let him that shall
marry her, make full account, that her vanity will far exceed her marriage
good. And for every hundred pounds in money, she brings a thousand vanities, a
thousand fitts, a thousand follies, a thousand fancies, a thousand new-fangles.

As Knights grow poor, Ladies grow proud.
To day she must keep her chamber, sick of a quotidian fit of folly, to
morrow the Coach must be made ready, she must amongst her acquaintance to
listen out for new fashions: the third day alas, she breeds child, and then we
must look about for dainties; and far fet, and dear bought (they say) is
fit for Ladies: the Proverb is old, and it may be true, that as knights grow
poor, Ladies grow proud. But this foolish nicitie that is in this common
request amongst women it is got into the bone, and it will never out of the
flesh; and let it stick there still, for a nice conceit best becomes a pretty
soul. She did well express it that wept so bitterly, to think how much
ashamed she should be at the day of judgment, when she should stand stark
naked before so great an assembly, as she heard say would be there present.

I have run my self beyond my bounds, my purpose was, but to have spoken a
little of these faults, that are committed in knitting up of these wicked and
ungodly marriages, and that in such a general sort, as almost there are no
other made.

Undutiful children.
I have a little glaunced by the way, at the folly of those fathers, that do
love their children with more affection than wit.

If I should now take upon me to speak of the ingratitude of children toward
their parents, I might write a greater volume then my leisure might well permit.

But they say it is a wise child that does know his own father: I say again,
that in many places he is a wise father that does know his own child. And
there is not a better Item, whereby to discern a Bastard, then to see a brat
unnatural, and unkind to him that is taken for his father. Nature her self
has taught this, and Nature cannot err: And therefore that son, that both
against the law of God, and the law of Nature, becomes ungrateful to him
whom he supposes to be his father, if he be not a Bastard, I say he is worse,
and pity the earth should bear so ungracious a burden.

I will conclude with this caveat to careless parents, beware of those that
do gape for your lands after your death, and desire the managing of your goods
during your life.

But it is true, Nature may be perverted, and there is no knowledge in the
world which is not corrupted, nor any learning, art, or science, which is not
abused: It were too great a presumption in me to meddle with Divinity: no, it
is too high a style for a Soldiers pen, and I have learned long since, Ne
suitor vltra crepidam.

Divinity.
Yet to speak a little with humility and reverence, I will not implore the
assistance of the Muses, or Apollo, but of the high and most mighty God.

Whatsoever is certain of it self needs no demonstration: then in
Divinity, the dignity of the subject may suffice, for where the object is
God, the groundwork is infallible, still permanent and irreuocable.

Divinity has been from the beginning, yea, the word was before the world,
for the word was God. Divinity is a heavenly law confirmed by antiquity,
sealed by God the Lawgiver, written and set down by the finger of God, and
delivered by those that were inspired by his holy spirit. It has pleased God
from the beginning to raise up Patriarchs and Prophets, to teach and govern
his people: and after, in the Kingdom of our Savior, he ordained the
Ministry of the Gospel, appointing it perpetual to the end of the world, and
has further taught us to pray, that laborers might be thrust into the
harvest.

But I am sorry now to speak of our Ministry, and but according to the
truth, how many do make themselves blind, by seeing too much, such as can
set the holy Scriptures at a jar, who curiously searching out the virtue of
words, do carelessly subvert the words of the truth.

What is it that they cannot utterly overthrow with their fiery blasts of
thundering words by Ingins of Definitions, Distinctions, Divisions, Silogisms,
The demigods of these latter days that dare take in hand to war against
doctrine.
Figures, Allegories, then they have so many Generals and Specials, with such
glosing, and expounding, that they will presume even to measure gods word, and
his works with their Logical Sophismes.

One holds of the Letter, an other would have us to search out the meaning
contained in the letter, another stands upon the bare word, another of the
sense, another of I know not what, but it is a miserable and ungracious study,
that does nothing else but learn how to err.

The purity of divinity is enspired from above, and not to be comprehended by
dividing, defining, compounding, nor by any other Sophistical contending.

Disagreement among cleargy-men.
In a great part of the world (even at this day) Mahomet is worshipped, who was
the Author of a very foolish Religion, and the Jews are yet looking after
their Messiah: but amongst us Christians it is strange to see, what
disagreement there is amongst our Cleargie-men, about rites, about ceremonies,
about worshipping, about apparel, about Discipline, and about I cannot tell
what. Yet this is especially to be wondered at above the rest, that they do
think by these contentious matters, to ascend into heaven, for the which in
times past Lucifer was thrown down into hell.

I might speak of others, that can content them selves with knowing untruths,
without searching out of the truth; but he that will be a steward of much, must
yield an account for much, and of him that has received five Talents, the Lord
will look for an increase of five Talents.

The authority of the ministry.
The Ministers of Gods word are these Stewards of God, appointed to dispense
his holy Ministeries. They are the Ambassadors unto us with glad and joyful
tidings, they bring unto us the word of our salvation, they are our fathers
that do beget us unto Jesus Christ, by preaching the Gospel of peace, they are
the light of the world, to shine before men in all godly example, of love, of
charity, of humility, of temperance, of chastity, of sobriety, of integrity
of life, of honest conversation, and therefore worthy of double honor.

Such they should be, and of such without doubt there be a great number. And
for mine own part, I protest I know a great many more that be good, then I do
of those that be bad. And I would to God, that those of the better sort would
themselves look into the demeanor of some that are a slander and reproach to
that honorable function, that can bait his hook with gravity, till he has
caught a Benefice, and then the Surplesse must serve to cover a most ungodly
carcass.

Those vices are most of all dangerous, that are masked under the visour of
Virtue, and there is less hope in these counterfeit holy Hypocrites, then
there is in the Publicane or Harlot: but for their sakes that be good, I will
speak no more of those that be ill.

I might likewise spare my labor in speaking of Philosophy, because the
study of wisdom is Of Philosophy.
now out of fashion. And although there are not many faults to be picked out
against the Philosophers of this age (the number being so small) yet I will
glaunce a little at some errors committed by those men that have been
especially extolled and renowned for their Philosophy.

Philosophy is a strict inquisitor of the soul, and it will diue into many
natural causes, but the cause of all causes, Philosophy knows not.

The Philosophers that have so much busied themselves, to search out the causes
and beginnings of things, could never find out God, the Creator and maker of
all things.

Philosophy could never find out God.
They could speak many good words concerning manners and conversation amongst
men, but of God they spoke nothing but dreamingly, neither dreamed they of him
but ouerthwartly: how many grievous incounters have there been amongst the
Philosophers themselves (and that of the grauest sort, concerning the
principles of natural things whereof there are many matters, that do yet hang
before the Judge not fully decided?

Thales Milesius, one of the wise men of Greece, beginning to look into the
generation of al things, for the soul he thought it immortal, for the world
he concluded it to have his beginning by water.

Fabeling of this Philosopher.
Anaxagoras, trusting in his own opinion, fabled, that the Sun was composed
of bright iron, and that the heavens were of stone, wonderfully knit together
lest they should fall.

Euripides his scholar, he feignes that the Moon had valleys and mountains
in her, and that the mind was the beginner of all motion, concluding that all
creatures had their creation of earth, fire and water, whereunto had he added
the other Element of air I think it would neither have bin dissonant from
reason, nor repugnant from true Philosophy.

For the creation of the earth, Archelaus will have it of liquid water,
inflamed by the heat of fire, and by resolution turned into dust.

Heraclitus, he thinks all things to have their original of fire, concluding
with Aristotle, that the generation of one thing is the corruption of an other.

Democritus, Crisippus, with the rest of their coherents, imagining somewhat,
but yet concluding nothing, they refer the original of the world to a little
Nothing, and making up a Something of this Chaos, conclude it to be the subject
of corruption, wherein they harped on a truth in their error, confirming the
vanity of our Metaphisickes, who wading past their reach, concluded something,
they knew not what.

Vulgar Philosophers, seeing the marvelous works which bruit beasts do
perform, affirm and hold no cause of marvel, because they do it by a
natural instinct.

Galen seeing a young Kid, but newly fallen from the damme, which being set
upon the ground, it began to go, as if it had been told and taught that
his legs were made to that purpose; and for further experience setting before
him sundry platters, with wine, water, vinegar, oil, and milk, after the kid
had smelt to them all, he fed only of that with milk; which being beheld by
diverse other Philosophers, they all cried out with one voice, that Hippocrates
had great reason to say, That souls were skillful without the instruction of
any teacher.

Galen again woondering to see the frame of man's body, considering of the
several parts how they were seated, every one applied to a proper use and
office by it self, after admiration he grew to conclude, it was not possible
a vegetiue soul, neither yet the temperature could fashion a workmanship of
such singularity, but it was first undertaken by a most wise understanding.

In the time of Aristotle it is recorded of certain children, who immediately
after they were borne, spoke certain words distinctly and plainly, yet
afterward were silent as other children of their age; the Philosophers of
that time, not being able to conjecture the natural cause of this effect,
imputed it to the devil. Aristotle much offended with this construction
undertook of himself to search out this secret of Nature, which although he
labored with great diligence, was not able to apprehend.

No matter to wonder at.
Plato admired how it might come to pass, that of two sons begotten by one
father, the one should have the skill of versifying, without any teaching, and
the other toyling himelfe in the Art of Poetry, could never beget so much as
one verse.

I see no great cause why Plato should so much wonder at that, when Nature
has evermore excelled Art, yet I know there has been contention about this
superiority, some upholding Art, some other maintaining Nature.

Affinity between Art and Nature.
But to speak a little of the affinity between Art and Nature, we are to
consider with the Philosophers what Nature is. Tully in his Offices has this
saying, If we follow Nature as our guide, we shall never err, esteeming
Nature for a god, by whom our chiefest good fortunes do happen unto us.

Aristotle's Interpreters divide Nature in two forms, calling the one Natura
Naturans, and the other Natura Naturata, this nature which natureth, is that
which Tully accompteth for a god.

Then if Art be compared with that which perfecteth al things, it should strive
with his Founder, but compared with his Equal, it perfecteth that; so that
Nature is it which presents the subject, and Art it that perfecteth the
subject.

But Art perfecteth Nature in some things, and Nature excels Art in many
things, and yet have these two so striuen together, that in Protogynes table
were as fair grapes in colors, as in Natures gardine they were in substance;
for Nature indeed not only affects the sight, but also the senses, when Art
in setting out of colors presents a Shape without a Substance; but so are
these two knit together: that if Nature allow no fuel, Art can make no fire:
and if Nature allow no colors, we can have no painting.

Nature what it is.
The Philsopher would needs tie God to the laws of Nature, who was the first
creater of Nature, which is nothing else more of it self, but whatsoever it
pleases God to command.

God created Nature, and gave it a law, which law he will have it likewise to
follow; but whether may we more wonder at the Philosophers for the insight
they had in natural things, or for the blindness in the knowledge of Him that
was the Author of all things, who the more they labored by their Philosophy to
comprehend, by so much the sooner they lost themselves, so that one of their
most profound Clerks called Symonides, desired by Cicero the Tyrant, to
inquire what God was, and demanding but one days respite, was in his deepest
imaginations so confounded, that seeing the farther he sought, the more he
failed, was enforced to stay his attempts, and to subject his opinion to the
inscrutable essence of the most Highest.

Philosophy in these causes concerning God, is not able to render any reason,
because they are not martialled under her jurisdiction. And for the
Philosophers, albeit they were men of excellent wit and learning: yet being in
a time overwhelmed with errors and blindness, they could not behold the
perfection of truth.

Aristotle that was especially extolled amongst An unfit answer by Aristotle.
them for his knowledge in natural things, demanded from whence it should grow
that the riches and wealth of this world, for the most part, was rather enjoyed
and possessed by the wicked, than by men of more honest reputation; unto the
which Problem he answers himself thus: Because Fortune being blind,
cannot know, nor make choice of what is best.

An unworthy answer by so great a Philosopher, for according to the rules of
natural reason, the solution of this demand is this, that the lewd sort,
through craft and subtilty are more apt to beguile in their buying and selling,
and can exact their profit, by perjury, extortion, and by many other lewd
and ungodly devises, which the honest and well disposed would stagger at, in
respect of honesty and conscience.

This is partly confirmed by our Savior Christ by the example of the Steward,
who being called to an account by his Master, reserved a round proportion of
the goods to his own use; which wisdom, though it were faulty, yet Christ in
this sort commended it, saying; The children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light. But these natural Philosophers, because
they could not reach into the height of Divinity, devised so fond and ill
ioynted a cause, as Lady Fortune, to whose power they might impute good or
badde success.

This Fortune, as she is feigned by the Poets, is painted blind, standing on a
ball, and turning with We ascribe many things to blind Fortune that do belong
unto God himself.
every wind, but it is a more easy matter to wipe her away, then it is to
paint her, for take away ignorance from men, and Fortune presently vanishes
away.

Some of the Philosophers will needs have it, that all occurrents (whatsoever)
are governed by a fatal destiny, and this fate or destiny they do call God.
As Crisippus first speaking of a spiritual power governing the whole world,
concludes it to be the destiny, the eternal purpose and decree of all things.

That would bereave God of his providence.
Some others would make God himself to be subject to the wheel of destiny:
amongst the rest, Seneca makes a pretty hotch-potch, in these words. An
irreuocable course carries away both humane, and divine things: the Maker and
Ruler of all things, decreed destinies, but now he follows them, he
commanded once, but he obeys forever.

Poets have feigned, that Giants in times past have advanced themselves
against God, to pull him out of his throne, by the point of the sword, how many
of those Giants are yet remaining, that do struggle and strive (as much as in
them lies) to wrest his Scepter out of hands, and to deprive him of his
providence; and with Seneca, will ascribe all the chances of this world, to
Fortune, Fate, or Destiny.

Who is so foolish to think, that the affairs of mortal men are carried
headlong, or do happen, as it were by chance-medley: he is (no doubt) in a
pitiful case, that will not acknowledge the Creator of all things, to be most
fit to have the government of all things, and that God, to whose absolute
perfection nothing is more agreeable, then to be both able and willing, to take
the care and charge of his own workmanship: the chances and changes of this
world, is first determined from heaven, the ebbing and flowing of all humane
affairs, are only depending of this Moon. The rising and falling of
Kingdoms are still governed by this aspect: It is he that rules, guides and
governs all the rolling Spheres of heaven, the manifold courses of the
Stars and Planets, the success in alteration of the Elements: and to be
short, of all the things whatsoever in heaven or earth. O blind mortality
that will strive against the stream, and have not wisdom to discern of this
great Worke-master, that at his pleasure pulls down and sets up! And if
without presumption I may speak, it makes a sport at human affairs,
determining and disposing at his own pleasure, the plots and purposes,
enduoured and set down by the wisdom of men.

They are much deceived, who would persuade the affairs of the world to be
turned about by chance, or uncertainty, when every thing by an immutable
law, folows the order preordained and established by an eternal appointment.
Will you then say, what course shall I take? Shall I do nothing but leave all
to this preordinate destiny? Alas good man, thou art even now in the ready
path that leads unto it, and drawn into this high way likewise by destiny,
that is to say, by the appointment of God.

Art thou inclined to virtue? God knows it, and furthers thee do thou
addict thy self to vice, he knows that also, and suffers thee: there is left
in man only a free will to struggle and strive against God, but no power to
perform it.

We must not yet think that God is variable, but attributing all things to his
eternal foresight, we must acknowledge him to be stayed, resolute, and
immutable, always one and like himself, not wavering nor varying, but firm
and constant in all his determinations, preordained and set down before the
foundation of the world.

Would thou yet know why the vengeance of God ouerskippeth some, and
lights again upon othersome; and do thou seek with Aristotle to know the
cause?

An excellent answer of Euclides.
Let me answer with Euclides, who being asked of many things concerning God,
answered fitly: other things I know not, but of this I am assured, he hates
curious inquisitors: I may likewise answer safely in this cause, I know
nothing, but this I am sure, Gods will is a cause above all causes, and he that
seeks any other, is ignorant of the divine nature: for when God speaks, it
becomes man to hold his peace; and when he vouchsafes to teach us, it
becomes us to believe.

But of whom do thou demand this question but of God? to whom all things are
lawful whatsoever he likes, and nothing likes him, but that which is lawful.

I will not presume to wade any further into the secret judgments of God, who
forbearing the ungodly in their wickedness for a season, pays them in the
end with more grievous punishment than that which is objected to our eyes, or
that which is inflicted upon the body.

A notable example of gods judgments.
But would you see one example of the secret judgments of God? Titus the
Emperor had intelligence what Christ had prophesied of Jerusalem, that one
stone should not be left standing upon an other: see now the secret
judgments of God, that the same man that persecuted the Christians at Rome,
goes now to Jerusalem, to revenge the death of Christ upon the Jews that had
crucified him, drawn heereunto (without doubt) by his own passion but
ouer-ruled by God to be the executioner of his Justice, who many times loses
the reins of blood to run upon blood, drawing one sin to do execution on
an other, one murderer to kill another, one wicked City to afflict another,
and one proud nation to chase and persecute another.

Seven liberal Sciences.
For the seven liberal Sciences, Grammar, Logic, Arithmetike, and the rest,
if I should take upon me to speak in their commendations, I might happen to
speed as he did that would needs take upon him to speak in the praise of
Hercules, and to that purpose had whetted the strength of his wit to have made
a long Oration. But a Philosopher hearing this needelesse commendation very
prettily interrupted him, and asked him, Why who discommends Hercules? and I
do think there is not a greater argument of folly, then for a man to
undertake the praise of that which is more excellent of it self, than any
other commendation a man can render unto it.

For those that are professors of the Arts, if there be any that are of a
contentious wrangling spirit, they are unto such a one, like a sword in a mad
man's hands, more apt to do hurt than good.

Grammar.
The Grammarian, his subject is but words, teaching us to bring the diverse
parts of speech in one congruitie, and to this purpose they do many times,
tire, and martire themselves more than needs.

Logic.
Logic teaches how to sift out the troth from a number of falshoodes, how
to frame an argument; it sets down rules and precepts how to define,
distinguish, divide, conclude, and how to judge and argue.

But there be too many, that with this little mist of knowledge will seek to
pervert and deface all knowledge, and sometimes by wresting the weapons of
reason, will manage them to the confusion of Reason it self.

Rhetoric draws men's minds to one self opinion.
Rhetorike by her rules does beautify the speech with pollished words, fine
phrases, and gracious colors, whereby to stir affections, which is fitter to
adorn a leasing, than to set forth a serious troth, which the Apostle well
proves, where he says, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach, and
that not in wisdom of words lest the cross of Christ might prove in vain.

Better to cover a leasing than to set forth a truth.
Which words the Apostle used, to the end the Gentiles should not think his
exhortation to be but a well cowched leasing, such as their Orators were
accustomed to persuade by the force of their Art, for those have most need of
artificial speeches, who with pleasing words do go about to cover dishonest
deeds.

The countryman is more afraid of the serpent that lies hidden in the grass,
than of the wild beast that feeds openly on the mountain. The mariner is
more endaungered by hidden shelues than known rocks, and more perrill in a
secret ambush, than in a ranged battle.

Truth best naked.
A naked tale does most truly set forth a naked truth, and verity then shines
most brightly, when she is in least bravery.

A good cause brings credit, it needs not the help of Art; and to use
superfluous eloquence in a matter of sufficient excellency, is a greater show
of a pregnant wit, than of a perfect wisdom; yet eloquence is one of the
greatest graces, whereby the popular sort are best persuaded, and think that a
man has much wisdom and knowledge, if he can speak with great eloquence,
and has a sweet tongue with pleasing words.

Aristotle writ with such slender ornament of words, with such simple manner
of deliverance, and with such obscurity of style, (but yet his Axioms,
Problemes, and all his sentences being opened, they held such lineaments and
proportions of rare admiration, that some ignorant expositours would needs
conclude, that Aristotle had delivered his writings in this sort, but of set
purpose, rendering this reason, because he would that his works should pass
with the greater authority, he writ under Riddles.

They might have said the like by Plato, who with no less harsh brevity
obscureth his reasons, and many times darkeneth his writings by the ill placing
of the parts of his tale; but yet Cicero praising his eloquence, said, That if
Jupiter should have spoken Greek, he would have spoken as Plato did.

Music.
Music has his proceeding from the concordance and agreement of soundes; I
would I could praise it but half so well as I love it, but yet for all that,
for him that has his head troubled with too many crochets, I would rather wish
to have his cunning than his wit.

Arithmetike.
Arithmeticke proceeds but from a unite; yet by addition, multiplication, and
the rest of her parts, it comprehends things that be infinite.

Geometry.
Geometry has likewise his proceeding but from a prick, but the knowledge of
it is excellent, and serves for diverse purposes, both for peace or war: But
we have Geometritians in these days, some that if they can but draw three
lines with a Compass, will vaunt themselves to have as much cunning as ever
had Euclides.

Astrology.
Astrology, for the Science it self, it is a high mystery; Mary amongst the
Professors there is great variety, I will not speak of incertainty, because
there is one thing certain which I my self can assure: and that is, whilst
the Astrologian is calculating for others, he knows not what is hanging over
his own head.

The Letter.
The Letters are the first instruments of the arts, and Grammar, Logic, and
Rhetoric are only entries into the rest of the Sciences, and may be called
the Arts of well speaking.

Learning in general.
Learning is the Ladder whereby to climb to heaven, it raises men from earthly
vanities, to the contemplation of things celestial and divine: A man that is
enlightened with knowledge, grasps after universalities, and Science it is that
stretches it self to the heavens, it meditates of eternity, and makes steps
whereby to ascend to the throne of Glory.

He is but a beast that knows no more the^ what is common to beasts.
A man without Learning, is but an immortal beast, he has being with blocks,
life with plants, and sense with beasts: but as Aristotle says, that the
reasonable soul partaking of the same general nature with the Angels, is
ashamed to behold her self placed in a body which has but fellowship with
beasts. And as Socrates has defined, a man that is destitute of knowledge, if
he be amongst the best, he may be said to be a man amongst beasts; but
amongst the learned, the best you can repute of him, is to be but a beast
amongst men. There is nothing then so much to be sought for, as this knowledge
of Arts, for that is the maine Ocean of celestial light, from whence all
knowledge does derive it self: And Science does illustrate the mind with all
understanding that is requisite or behoouefull either for body or soul: This
is it that makes the eyes of the mind so christaline and clear, that by it
we have all total knowledge, either humane or divine.

Men for their excellency in learning accounted gods.
This is it that many times beyond the limits of humanity, men have been
reckoned amongst the fellowship of the Gods, for when there was any man found
to be excellent, whether in Science or Arms, or in influence of wit, or had
any other singular or sovereign quality of the mind, which made him
serviceable unto the Commonwealth, him they deified and yielded him divine
honor.

What gods the Romans have worshipped.
The Romans have worshipped Jupiter the Adulterer and Rauisher; they erected an
Altar to evil Fortune, in one of their mountains at Rome, and they have
invented gods in hell, and have worshipped and honored devils, under the titles
and names of Dis, of Pluto, and such other.

Flora a public curtizan, and a woman, whose body was abandoned to all lust
and alurements of the flesh, was canonized and honored with an Image or
Figure, for that all the goods she had gotten with the filthy use of her
body, she bequeathed to the Senate; for which fact they gave her divine
honor, and celebrated her feast every year, wherein as a special ceremony,
there was liberty for all young men to be naked, and to exercise their pleasure
with the first woman they did find.

Rome full of gods.
Marcus Varro writes, that Brasilius the Philosopher found at Rome two
thousand eight hundred gods, which carry no small possibility of troth; for
the Pope and his disciples, do yet every year consecrate (at the least) three
times so many: they have learned since of the Gentiles to dedicate their
Churches to the Saints, as they did their Temples to their Pagan gods. But
it is written, that Xerxes did once burn all the Temples that were in Greece,
because he thought it a most ungodly thing, to shut up gods in houses, and to
imprison them in stone walls.

Learning the riches of the mind.
But as I have already said, it is Science joined with virtue, that is, the
riches of the mind, and this treasure of the mind is it that makes this
difference between a man and a beast. This mind, I say, that being enlightened
with knowledge, is able to compass the earth, to eleuate the Poles, that can
mount up to the heavens, and can travel from house to house, from sphere to
sphere, from planet to planet, that can diue into the sea, and sincke to the
gates of hell, that can circuit the whole world, distinguish of all time and
ages, and all this in a moment.

Learning poorly requited.
But this travel of wit is yet the most thriftlesse and unprofitable exercise
that a man can endeavor, for where finds it reward or recompense? The Swain
that follows his handie work, is paid at night for his days labor. The
Cobbler that sits and clowtes a shoe, receives his penny for his patch: but he
that does toil and tire himself to dig the Mine of wit, may reap good
words: and (I say) he that reapeth them for satisfaction, his pay is good, he
speedeth not amiss; and yet he that is still fed with words, shall sterue
with wants.

The conclusion is, knowledge is precious, and yet true felicity consists
not in the knowledge of goodness, but in a good life, not so much in
understanding, as in living with understanding.

Historiographers flatterers.
May we speak a little of Historiographers, their office is as well to record
faults, as worthy Acts; their pens have not spared to describe the times and
ages past, and no prince has escaped, but his behavior has been published,
either to his glory or reproach: But our Hystorians in this age that cannot
flatter, cannot thrive. I must accuse them of palpable offense, who in relating
their histories, should tie themselves to exact truth. But some of them have so
powldred their writings with such variety of discourse, as he is but a
single-soald reader, that cannot perceive they have flattered, (I will not say
fittoned.) Look but into our English Chronicles, and see what descriptions
they have made of Pettigrees, not so much to set down a truth, as they have
done to please greatness.

Many worthy fictions feined by Poets.
I might likewise speak of Poetry, and of the fictions of Poets, that have
many times induced to honest recreation, and under commendable resemblances,
they have discovered the customs and conditions of men, impropriating many
things to the actions of men, evermore extolling of the virtuous, and imbasing
of such as do seek their felicity in vice.

They feigned Prometheus to have stolen the fire from Jupiter, because he was
the first that instructed the Egyptians in a form of civility: and Atlas for
the wonderful skill that he had in Astronomy, was feigned to bear the
heavens on his shoulders.

When they sought to blame or deface the vicious, the better to make men
abhor them, they transformed those of dissolute and licentious life into
brute beasts. In this sort still comparing men good or bad, according to the
good or bad properties that were in them. For this vain of Poetry, it is good
if it be in good men's handling; it has been prohibited in many common
wealths. But Socrates admonishes, that if any man be careful of his honor,
let him foresee that he has not a Poet to his enemy, because they have not so
great a grace in praising, as in il speaking.

But yet for all that, to blaze the praises of my friend, I could wish a Poets
pen, who with a drop or two of Ink, can exalt him whom they love, and leave
him famed and renowned to posterity.

Many excellent Poets at this time, the worth of their own works their best
commendation.
I could find in my heart to praise Poetry, and to commend a great many of
Poets that I am acquainted withal, and many other likewise that I know, by the
excellency of their lives, but their own works are a better commendation
then I am able to apply. And although I cannot render them that due honor
according to their worth, yet I will carry them that renerend regard
according to their wit.

Bastard poets.
But we have such a number of Bastard Poets in these days, that would seem to
be retaining to the Muses, but alas they do Minerua wrong, they pester the
Stacioners stalles with such unprofitable stuff, that learning might seem to
be the Mistres of ungodliness.

A number of vain and foolish books.
Some convert all their reasons into rhyme, and because they can set down a
Balductum verse, do think they have recovered Virgils vein in Poetry.

Poets turned Parasites.
Some will write a whole volume, neither in rhyme, nor reason: some others
inclined to a more pleasing vain, will run through a large discourse, all of
mere flattery: But what a number of Pamphlets have we by our new writers of
this age, whereof the greatest part are nothing else but vanity: and how many
have written (but they will say not of vainglory) and yet their books are
full of ambition.

O how many others might I speak of, that do labor with the mountains, to
bring forth Mice, that do seek to draw the Lions skin upon Esops Ass, and
Hercules shoe upon a childs foot! but they do well to suit the world with
books according to the fashion; for rude limping lines, are best befitting a
lame halting age: writers are not so vain, but readers (for the most part) are
iij. times more foolish. For he that is but in a blew coat As foolish readers
as there be of Poets.
with a cognizance, if he can but make courtesy after the new fashion, and that
his wit will but serve him to play with his Mistress little dog, he dare
take upon him to censure any thing. And these rash readers will make such
expositions, as the Author himself never thought on, and they will dispraise
many things that they could never conceive; and they will praise again, what
they never understood. Ignorance never spares to commit Sacrilege: these Paper
monsters therefore are fittest to fill the dull conceits of the multitude with
admiration, amongst whom a strained style is in better account, then the best
labored lines. A good title better than a good book.
Yea, the Printer himself, to make his book the more vendible, does rather
desire a glorious Title, than a good Book: so that our new written Pamphlets
of these times, are not much unlike to a poor Inn in a Country town, that
is gorgiously set forth with a glorious sign; but being once entered into the
house, a man shall find but cold intertainment, as well of homely lodging, as
of bad fare.

They are but resemblances to the Apples that are said to grow about Sodom,
which being pleasant to the eye, do vanish into smoke, or into soot as soon
as a man does but put his teeth into them: and like the small bells of the
Choribantes, that may make a little tingling noise, but they are good for
nothing but to trouble the brain.

To speak truly, I have many times been deceived with these flourishing
Titles that I have seen pasted upon a Post, for bestowing my money Every thing
may be employed to use.
in haste at my better leisure looking into the book, and finding such slender
stuff, I have laughed at my own folly: but I have yet made use of them, for
what will not serve for one thing may well be employed to another. I learned
that of the Lion, who being advised to discharge the Ass, and the Hare, as
unprofitable in his camp, the one for his simplicity, the other for his
timeritie, answered, that notwithstanding they were unfit for the fight, yet
he would make use of them, the one to serve for a Trumpetter, the other to be
employed as a Purseuant. And I never met with so vain a book, but that I could
gather something out of it for mine own instruction, if it were but to bless
my self from his humor that writ it.

Foolish books good to set Printers a work.
But let them go with their books, they are but small faults, they are good
yet, if it be but to set the Printers a work, that otherwise should be idle,
and I think they do little harm, unless amongst that sort of people, that
are themselves as vain as the books: but I will now wade into matter of some
more importance, not to detect any faults that I know, yet such as have been
known in times past, and therefore now good if they could be shunned.

As the body cannot guide it self without eyes; so a Commonwealth cannot be
governed without Maiestrates, but such as ought to be clear sighted: for the
body gives more credit to the eye, then it does to the ear, and men are
rather moved to one good example which they see with Doing better then saying.
their own eyes, then a thousand words testified by reports, and therefore
whosoever he be that commands, from the highest to the lowest, must win
his opinion from well doing, and not by well saying.

It was not pronounced without great Mystery where God commanded in the book
of Deuteronomie, that such as should aspire to the administration of public
government, should be wise and Noble.

Authority is the Touchstone whereby to try the perfection of any man's
virtue: for in authority, the virtuous do manifest their goodness, but the
wicked will so much the sooner lay open their vice.

A covetous Magistrate most pernicious.
Covetous persons (amongst all other) are most pernicious to be admitted to
administration of Justice: and the counsel that Iethro gave to Moses, amongst
other things, was, that he should not give any public office of justice unto
any covetous person.

They have more ambition and pride whereby to govern; then wisdom or policy
wherewith to govern.
The most ignorant are ever aptest, to believe that they are most worthy of the
chiefest promotions; and because they did never manage any affairs of
importance, they know not what burden and difficulties are thereunto incident:
how many have sought to advance themselves to bear rule and government by
their wealth (which indeed is but the nurce of vice) who once placed in
authority, have made port sale, both of Virtue and Justice, seeking still to
enrich themselves by the ruins of the Commonwealth, increasing as fast in
their wickedness, as they did in their wealth.

Where the Magistrate is good, the people are not lightly ill; so that the
goodness, or illness of the Commonwealth does much consist in the Magistrate.
It is not then without great consideration that the multitude should pray for
the Magistrate: But he that is honored more for his power, then he is for his
purity of life, may speak (as it were) in the person of God, This people
honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.

It has ever been a thing detested amongst the multitude, to see an
unworthy man, that is either inclined to pride, to covetousness, to
oppression, or other such like, to be advanced, or so favored, that he should
sway at his own pleasure without impeachment, no man daring to examine his
wrongs and oppressions; such greefes have turned to great inconvenience: for
prevention whereof, the antiquity have used to banish those for certain years
that have so aspired; yea sometimes though they were not to be charged with
any public crime or offense.

Aristophenes foreseeing this danger of greatness, what a mean it might prove
whereby to attempt the usurpation of tyranny, devised a tragedy, raising
Pericles from hell, wherein he exhorted the Magistrate not to nourish a Lion in
their Cities; for if they fall to cherishing of him whilst he was little,
they must of necessity obey him when he was grown great.

Where exceptions of persons are respected, there justice must needs be
corrupted. And nothing can be permanent that is corrupted, and therefore the
greater he is that offends, by so much the more deserves to be punished: and
the more authority a Magistrate has to command, the less liberty he has
to offend.

It may be called a happy government (as Plato says) where the ambitious are
not suffered to bear rule. And it is no less pitiful again, where abuse is
not redressed by the care of the Magistrate, and where those that are oppressed
dare not complain.

Authority is by many desired, but by few well executed. And although it were
known that our Savior Christ was accused by false testimony, yet those that
sat in judgment would rather condemn justice, then displease the wicked.

Luxurious magistrates are the cause of commotions.
Injury and oppression used by those that have been in authority, have turned
to Commotions, Rebellions, and Reuolts, and there is no broile more noisome and
hurtful to any weal public, then that which falls out between the
Magistrates, and the Commons, about government: for if we should advisedly call
to mind Hystories of Antiquity, it would appear that there has not been any
government so happily founded, which has not been shaken again through
dissension, and discord, rising and falling out between those of ancient
Nobility, and the meanest sort of the rascal and peevish people.

The mutiny of the Switzers.
The pollitike government of the Switzers was changed by a general mutiny of
the multitude, who for the tyranny of their Princes and Magistrates freed
themselves by murdring all that took upon them, either the dignity or title of
a Gentleman.

It is a tickle state that is founded on the multitude whose good opinion is
woonne with what they see, and lost again with what they hear.
The multitude of the people, the greatest part of them, are ignorant of the
best things; they are evermore desirous of change, hating still what is
present: amongst whom the counsel of the wise were never heard without
danger, neither can there be any thing profitably ordained by the confused
fury of the multitude.

And although popular love be light, yet their hatred is heavy: and it little
auailes to have walls and fortresses, where the hearts of the people are
estranged.

Dionisius the Tirant being guarded with many armed Soldiers, was asked by
Plato, why he had committed so many offenses, that he should be so imprisoned
with so many squadrons.

The fear conceived by subjects has bin cause of mutation, and the fear of
the Spanish Inquisition, was the first cause of Netherlands reuoult: subjects
have reason to fear that are kept in fear without reason: and he that is feared
of many, is hated of many, and he had need to have a large wind, that will
sail against the Tide.

Aristotle thinks, that the common good of the multitude is rather to be
preferred, than the private profit of some few. And yet he wishes rather The
good of the multitude especially to be preferred.
to abolish the humorous passions of the multitude, than to favor it. And
Diogenes seeing the people to throng out of church door, preased as fast
against them to get in, and having once entered he said, It was the part of
wisemen to be always contrary to the multitude.

Nobility best to rule.
The vulgar people, through their dull wits, and brutish nature, can not
perceive what is profitable, either to themselves, or to their country, but the
noble mind is not only the worker of present profit, but also through great
foresight, preuents imminent danger: Furthermore, the common people have no
taste nor feeling of honor and renown, neither in the defense of their
country, or of any courage or hardiness of stomach; where on the other side
the noble blood is inflamed with renown, abhors dastardly cowardlinesse,
and in defense of a common profit, attempteth great and dangerous enterprises:
but it is necessity that makes more wise men amongst the multitude, than any
other doctrine that reason can persuade.

It has been questioned, whether that government be better where there is a
naughty Prince and good ministers under him, or where the Prince is good, and
the Magistrates evil. Marius Maximus leans to the first; and a pillar of
Philosophy has set down this for a Maxim, how that commonwealth is best
and most assured where the Prince is ill conditioned, rather than that where
the Ministers are corrupt and badly disposed.

But there be many other of great authority, A good prince will suffer no
power under him to oppres.
that will in no wise consent, when former experience has so many times taught,
that evil men be oftener corrected by a good Prince, than an evil Prince
amended by good men; but this is certain, there can be no worse government
than that that is managed by opinion.

Opinion is a bar, it still cleaves to the mighty.
Seditious estates with their own devises, false friends with their own
swords, and rebellious commons with their own snares, are ouerthrown.

Either Riches or Poverty when they are in extreamitie, do bring the Common
wealth to ruin, for excess is ever unassured, and in danger to be shaken.

A most especial thing to be regarded.
Amongst many ears in a well governed commonwealth, there has been great
respect had to these idle begging people, whose liberty of running about has
produced many inconveniences; sometimes in the time of sickness, they have
spread the infection by their licentious liberty of gadding from place to
place; othersome again, under the pretense of begging, have searched out the
secrets of Cities and Towns, have laid them open to an ennemy, have poisoned
waters, and have sometimes fired Cities, as the city of Tire, and other
Cities in France have well experienced, and it is strange that here in our
Country we have so long escaped these practices, when such multitudes of sturdy
rogues have bin suffered so ordinarily to pass, by two, by three, by four;
yea sometimes by six and more in a company, under the pretense of begging
Soldiers, that never crossed the Seas (the most of them) to come where service
was: I speak not this to the annihilating of charity, which God knows is too
cold already, when those that are poor and needy indeed, grown decrepite
with age, with impotencie, with sickness, with grief, and are not pittyed,
but suffered to lie in the open streets, pining away without any relief.

But it is no great reproach, to see a poor man, that has spent his blood in
the defense of his Country, that is able to bring good Testimony of his honest
service, and being returned home, hurt, maimed, lamed, dismembered, and should
be suffered to crouch, to creep, to beg, and to entreat for a piece of
bread, and almost no body to give it him.

Well, God be thanked of amendment, they say there is better order taken, and
there is great hope it will be as well executed.

How many Princes have felt the smart of this.
I will not speak of Faults committed amongst Officers, that in times past, for
the most part, by seeming, have been transported into private gain, for if
Princes themselves did advisedly considder how much it would redownd as well to
their own commodity, as to the benefit of their subjects, to look to these
Horse-leaches, that have sucked their own gain, by the ruins of Princes, and
the wrack of commonwealths, they would become as vigilant as Vespasian, who in
the beginning of his government, gave the greatest Offices and Dignities of
Rome, to those that were especially noted A fine policy used by Vespasian.
for oppression and wrong. And when he was asked, why he did so, seeing
authority given to the wicked was a mean to make them worse: He answered,
that he served his turn with such Officers as with spunges, which when they
had drunk their fill, were then fittest to be pressed.

The time was
That government must needs be happy where places of office and authority were
given to such men as knew how to execute them as they ought: and unhappy again
have those Commonwealths ever proved, where those have been preferred that
were better skilled in taking, than in executing.

Offices boght and sold^
Alexander Seuerus both punished and deposed as many as had bought their
offices, saying, they sold deerer by retale, than they bought in the gross: I
will not say that it is prejudicial unto the Commonwealth, that Offices
should be bought and sold for money. But this is true, that Princes ought to
be very circumspect by whom they are managed, because, being to continue in
the same during their lives, the holders are the less subject to correction.
And being bought and sold for money, they are the more subject to corruption.

Offices that were wont to be painful toiles for men of honesty and care to
be heedefull of, are now become gainful spoils, executed by those that
endeavor their own commodity, exacting their own gain, by the spoil both
of Prince and Country. But in that Commonwealth where Officers are made to do
their duties (and no more than appertains to justice and right) they will
give as much to be rid of an Office, as they will do now to buy an Office.

The policy of the estate not to be meddled with.
Policy is a special part of government, and the state and policy of the
time is not for private men to deal withal: and Policy that is legittimate,
first begotten by Wit, and then fostered by Honesty, is not to be neglected,
but that which more respects profit than it does the sovereign Policy
prescribed by Gods law, is it which the Apostle speaks of, The wisdom of
the fiesh is enmity to God. Policy that is more for profit the^ honesty.
He does not say an enemy, for an enemy might be reconciled, but enmity it
self can never be reconciled, and therefore he adds further, The wisdom of
the flesh is death: And although the name of Policy at the first sight does
carry a great and glorious show, yet being estranged from that Policy before
spoken of commanded by God, it does not reach unto that perfection of true
christian government that many have seemed to persuade.

The drift of worldly Policy is to do little good, but to the end to do a
great deal of harm; for Policy and Profit have ever marched arm in arm
in one rank: and how many Princes have bin abused (yea and sometimes
dishonored) under those plausible pretenses.

Profit being divorced from Honesty, begets but a bastardly progeny, and
it is a very dangerous doctrine, to teach that Profit may be separated from
honesty, when there is nothing profitable, unless it be honest.

He therefore that makes division between profit and honesty peruerteth
Nature; and he seeks but his own shame, that seeks but his own profit.

The policies of men must give place to the policies of God.
All Policy therefore is to be rejected, that tends not to public profit,
or that prefers the vain policies of men, before the infallible policy
revealed in the word of God: for these Politicians (for the most part) do
never consider, that the principal things that do bring miseries and disorders
to whole Countries, and Kingdoms, are such offenses, as are counted directly
against the Majesty of God.

Look into histories, and you shall find no statesmen more pestilent to a
Commonwealth, then these Politicians, that squared out their government by the
rules of their own wits. Look into the two Catoes, the one with his frantique
accusations disturbing the whole Commonwealth of Rome, and the other going
about ouer-wisely to protect it, did utterly subvert it yea, and Cicero with
all his eloquence, was as troublesome amongst the Romans, as Demosthenes was
amongst the Athenians.

There be many other of these great politicians which might be named, that with
their peevish disciplines have disturbed the quiet of states, (so that in mine
opinion) there is not a more pestilent thing then this plague of policy, which
diuides it self from the policy prescribed by the rule of Gods word.

Every man borne for his Country.
When the humor of preferring our country before any other thing was had in
request, there was no man so mean, but if he could endeavor his Countries
good, his reputation was advanced, and his wisdom was not suffered to go away
emptie-fisted: then men might speak freely, so they spoke truly: but after the
Politician, he that has but a Mammon for his God, and Machiuell for his
ghostly father, had once gotten the mannaging of Commonwealth affairs; they
have so prohibited this liberty of free speaking for their Country, with their
prescription of, Quod supra nos, nihil ad nos: that the means whereby the
Romans, the Grecians, and many other flourishing estates, wrought their
greatest woonders, in aduauncing their Commonwealths, were long sithence taken
away under the color of Policy, and pregnancie of wit.

We are priuileged by our Country, and under the ensigns of her authority, it
is not only lawful for us to spend our lives, but it is like behoueful to
undertake any thing, that may be for her safety, and the good of our Prince.

Curtius, for the good of his commonwealth, leaped into the Gulf, Sceuola
burned his hand, because he missed the killing of Porcenna: Horatius fought
against the whole army of the Tuscans, whilst the Bridge was broken behind
his back.

But these days are past, for many that did then Where honor is taken from
desert, there virtue is taken from men
strive who should exceed in Virtue, do now contend how the one might excel the
other in Vice: and that feruencie of zeal that we should bear to God, to our
Prince, and to our Country, it is grown cold, and it is converted to this
old Adage: Every man for himself, and God for us all: (as they would have
it) but I say, If every man be for himself, the Devil for us all, for so we
shall find it.

I must here crave your gentle patience, that you would please to give me leave
to Lie a little, and yet a little time would hardly serve my turn, for if I
should lie, but according to the truth (I mean if I should tell all that is
reported) a whole Resme of Paper would not suffice my little wit to set it
down at large: but if they be lies, they shall cost you no money, you shall
have them cheap enough in conscience, I will not ask with the Lawier, for
every lie a Fee; no, keep your money till you have need of Lawiers help.

They be as of other professions, good and bad.
For mine own part, I have had little to do amongst Lawiers, but for those few
that I do know, and have had to deal withal, I dare protest them to be
Gentlemen of that honest life and conversation every way, as there is no
exceptions to be taken against them.

The Text that I have now taken in hand, is to speak of Faults. The innocence
then of those that be good, must not be a shelter to those that be bad: and all
the ill that I have to speak is but by report, but Report is a lier, and let
him be so still. A man for all that may tell a lie by report; I will prove it, I
hope the Lawiers themselves will uphold the cause that are driven in their
proceedings at the Bar, to vent a great number of lies: but as they take them
by report from their foolish Clients; here is now all the difference, the
Lawier is well feed for his lie, and I sell you mine for nothing.

The Law intendes to give every man his right.
Then first I acknowledge the Law it self to be worthy of all honorable
repute, being leuelled and proportioned according to the first institution: for
the end whereunto Law has relation, is to profit the good, to perfect the
commonwealth, to relieve the oppressed, to minister justice, neither is there
any vice, which is not by Law bridled; yea, where God himself was not known,
Law ministered equity, and the power of excess by it has been restrained.

By Law good disciplines are prescribed, the Commonwealth governed, and all
policies to the maintenance of peace, both begun, continued, and ended. In
the commendation of the Law, what can be said more? They have relation, first
to Religion, next to Determination, thirdly, to prescription and custom, and
pleas whatsoever having past the asperitie of the Law, may yet be ordered by
conscience: So that if aught be neglected by error, may yet be relieved by
equity in the Court of Chauncerie.

But if the Law be certain, why should judgment be delayed? if bent to do
right, why are so many poor men wronged? if grounded on conscience, why should
it be partial?

But I reprove not the Law, nor yet find I fault at the honest Lawier, but alas
how should they choose but err, when their accusations be but other men's
reports, and their whole pleadings, nothing else but hearsayes, maintaining but
what their Clients will inform them.

But this does not excuse all; for there be many others by whom the Law that of
it self intends nothing but right, is yet made the very instrument of
injury and wrong: they have Law to overthrow Law, and there is no Law, be
it never so legitimate or truly begotten, which with wrested gloses, and
subtle expositions they cannot bastardize.

There is but one right, and that is suppressed with many wrongs
They make their plea according to the penny, not according to the truth, when
amongst them he that has most money, has commonly, most right: they coin
delays for private advantage, they make straight crooked, and crooked right:
they are open mouthed against the poor man's process, who shall sooner find
his purse emptied, than his suite ended. And where they should be the
Ministers of light, they hunt after continual darkness, concluding the
truth within a golden cloud. They are pugnantia inter se, when amongst them
there is no agreement, but what they confirm to day, to morrow they will
frustrate: this clause annihilated by this Judge, that distinction by another.
And although the text of the Law of it self be brief, yet they obscure it by
their too many glosings, and how many are there that do John a Nokes and John
a Style.
check the course of Justice by dilatory pleas, and how many Petty-foggers that
do nothing but set men at variance; and a pox take John a Nokes, and John a
Style, for those two fly companions are made the instruments of a great deal
of mischief.

And woe again to all those Lawyers that are but like to Aesopes Kite, that
whilst the Mowse and the Frogge were at controversy for superiority in the
Marsh, he devoured them both.

When a man comes to commense a suite, in the beginning he shall be
entertained with a hope to obtain; and being entered, they consume him by
delays, and whilst he has means to bear out the charge, they assure him
his right is good, but when they have spent him, that he is not able longer to
give, they do pronounce Sentence against him: and he that is not well stored
with money wherewith to corrupt, shall want no sorro w whereof to complain.

Not a Saint in heaven medicinable to end controversies.
How many miracles are assigned to Saints, to whom we do go in pilgrimage! we
protest vows, yield worship, and of whom we do crave gifts. Women likewise
are not without their women Saints, as Lucina, whose help they implore when
they would have children; and Juno, of whom they do beg to be revenged on
their angry husbands: there is almost no kind of grief, that has not his
Physician amongst the Saints, which (as it is imagined) is an especial cause
why Physicians can not gain so much as Lawyers, because there is no
controversy, be it never so little, so just, or so honest, that has either he
Saint, or she Saint to defend it.

They say it is an argument of a licentious commonwealth, where Physicians and
Lawyers have too great commings in.

Many worthy men professors of the law
As I have not endeavored any private accusation, so I will not enter into any
particular praise; I might else in this place, without any suspicion of
flattery, take occasion to speak in the commendation of many worthy Professors
of the Law, not only of some that sit Roahed on the Bench, but also of others
that are Pleaders at Bar.

The Professor of the Law has Relation to lead him, Conscience to direct
him, Justice to counsel him, and Honor to reward him.

All happiness may be said to be in that commonwealth, where Laws be not
only good, but wbere they are likewise duly observed and kept, without
wresting.

The material cause of the Law is, that it consistes of such cases, and for
the correcting of those disorders, as accustomably befall in the Common wealth,
not of things impossible, or such as do but seldom times happen.

The final cause is to order the life of man, and to direct him what he is to
do, and what to forbear.

Many laws a sign of many faults.
What else are the great number of Laws amongst us, but authentical Registers
of our corruptions? and what are the manifold Commentaries written upon them,
But a very corruption of the Laws themselves, and what do they witness unto
us, But as the multitude of Physicians do in a City, that is to say, the
multitude of our diseases.

Good Laws do proceed from the wickedness of men, for it is offenses that do
beget laws: for where there is no law, there can be no breach of law.

Good law unexecuted, were better unmade, yet sharp and rigorous laws, were
rather made to terrify, then to destroy men. And, the seat of a Judge, that
is too severe, seems to be a Gibbet already erected.

Many laws commodious to the prince.
Those Princes that have Policy to attire Avarice and Cruelty, under the
pretense of establishing laws, they do thereby exact their own commodity: for
where there be many Laws, there must be many offenders: and the multitude of
transgressors, are the riches of the Prince, when they make forfeyture, as well
of their goods, as of their lives.

War a grievous plague.
War is the Minister of the wrath of God, when he is displeased, no less
grievous to the world (where it lights) then the loathsome plague of
pestilence.

The fruits of war.
The effect of War is, the destruction of countries, the desolation of noble
houses, and the sacking of opulent Cities.

The Action depends upon fortune, or misfortune, upon oportunities, delays,
expeditions, frowardness, and untowardness of a number of vain headed
followers, if discipline be not the better respected.

War is a minister of Gods Justice, either for contempt of himself, of his
religion, or the wicked life of worldlings, so that it is the sins of the
people that vnsheatheth the Soldiers sword.

God is not the Author of ill, but the chasticer of abuse. He holds the
hearts of Princes, and orders them to his will.

Soldiers must serve the Prince.
The Souldior with all obedience is to perform the will of his Prince: for if
power were not to maintain their proceedings, the Prince should be dispossessed
of his estate, cruel hands would be laid on his royal person: to conclude, in
peace the Soldier is a restraint to the rebellious, and in war makes subject
the prowdest resister.

Arms are but a corrector to the disorder of peace, they are the Physician to
a decayed estate.

A just war.
The Wars undertaken by Princes, either in defense of their right, or for
matters in claim, may be reputed to be both just and honorable; but in Civil
wars, all things are full of misery, yet nothing more miserable then
victory.

Civil wars most miserable
Let him be accursed (says Homer) and live with no Nation, nor Tribe, who
stirs up domestical dissentions, or seeks after Civil wars.

The motives that draws on civil war.
Wealth and riches have afflicted the manners of all ages, and what other thing
has engendered civil fury, then over great felicity?

The motives that draws them on, are commonly Faction, Sedition, and Tyranny.

Wars have had their beginning with the world, and they will never have an
end, so long as the world lasts.

The Surfets of peace, is it that brings on wars, and what peace can be so
surely knit, which Avarice and Pride will not easily undo.

There was never yet any kingdom free from the practice of ambitious heads,
that lay in ambush for a Crown.
We are more ready and willing to conquer Kingdoms, then we are to subdue our
own affections; and war depending on the desire of gain, and worldly glory,
the sweetness of command, together with the gain of a Crown, will serve to
cover any kind of injury: and wars are not so much arreared to defend a
right, or to resist an injury, as they are to encroach a wrong, and to invade
an innocent.

It is the sins of the people that draws the Soldiers sword, and when it
pleases the Almighty to punish by war, all the things upon the earth are
ever pressed to fight under his banner, yea even the ambitiousnesse of Princes,
to punish themselves one by another.

They may much deceive themselves, who under the shadow, either of their
mightiness, wisdom, or policy, either in consideration of their long
continuance of peace, do imagine still to make the same perpetual, neither
can we Plead prescription against the justice of the Almighty, who limiteth
the bounds of all estates to his appointed time of correction, the which they
can not pass.

There is nothing then more necessary immediately The knowledge of wars most
necessary.
after the knowledge of God, then to know how to manage our marshall causes,
when, as well Prince, Country, Religion, Law, Justice, Subjects, and al
together, are under the protection of Arms. Osorius seems to confirm it in
these words, He that takes away the knowledge of Arms, works the overthrow
of the Commonwealth. And Cicero again leaves this Item, We must not lay our
Arms aside, if we desire to live in peace. Plato, that that Princes Crown can
never sit close who once neglects the knowledge of Arms.

This saying of Tacitus is not to be forgotten, No man is sooner brought to
ruin, than he that fears nothing, for retchlesnesse is the common entrance
into calamity.

Unskillful men fitter to furnish a funeral, then to maintain a fight.
To this I might add, There is nothing more rather to incite an enemy, than
where he finds sloth and negligence: for where the orders and discipline of
War is neglected, it is not the multitude of names in a Muster-rowle that
avails, when, the greater the number of men is, the more is their disorder
and confusion. More Armies have been overthrown through want of skill, than
either for want of strength or courage.

It therefore behooveth those that desire to live in Peace, to provide
themselves of all things appertaining to the War; for in every Action it is
odious to err, but in War it is most dangerous of all other, when there
needs but one fault to overthrow an Army, whereon may depend the wrack of a
Kingdom, and the loss of a Princes Crown.

Soldiers are full of faults.
The Faults that are imputed to men of War, are not to be excused, and how
should it be otherwise, when in the first election they are rather chosen for
their vices, than for their virtues: when a Letter of favor is of more worth
to prefer the swaggering Captain, than either honesty, experience, or any
other care of reputation.

This sparing of princes does most hurt themselves.
Captains are chosen, that have no respect to Honor, but such as do seek to
enrich themselves with the general spoils of War. And if we did advisedly
consider of every circumstance, they are not altogether to be blamed: when
Princes are grown, in nothing more sparing, than in those expenses wherein
they should extend their greatest bounty, I mean to Soldiers, whom they do
still curtoll and scantell to a threed-bare alowance, and yet they cannot get
that little but with loss, and most times kept so long without pay, that they
are driven, either to steal or starve.

A soldiers best reward is ingratitude.
This want of Pay, is the original of all disorder, it breeds mutinies amongst
Soldiers, disgrace to the Commanders, and it gives encouragement to an enemy
that does vnderstrnd it. It is the occasion of treason, of selling of Towns,
betraying of Fortes; and to be short, the breach of all discipline; for, what
reason has that Prince to punish, that does not pay? And who can blame
Soldiers to help themselves in the time of war, that are little respected in
the time of Peace. This want of Pay is a just excuse to set them all a
scraping, as well from friends as foes.

The Soldier he fleeceth the Husbandman, who is driven for fear to forsake
his labor. The Captain he cousoneth the Soldier, and both of them (commonly)
consumers of the Citizen.

The want of pay, the cause of much mischief.
Nay the Prince him self escapes not scot-free amongst them, for if they do
not cousin him of his pay, they will yet deceive him of his service: for that
Soldier does never perform any great enterprise, that loves not his Leader:
and how can he love him, whom he knows does oppress him? neither can that
Captain exploite any thing of worth, that is not assured of the love and
obedience of his Soldier.

A prince can not want soldiers.
The Commonwealth have as great need of valiant men to defend it, as it has
of good Laws to govern it. And Caesar was wont to say, that there were two
things which do uphold, maintain, and enlarge an Empire, that is to say, Men
of war, and money: and for the skillful Souldior, although the prince does
stand in no doubt, nor dread of war, yet he is a grace unto him, and ought to
give him countenance, if it were but in respect of Majesty. Tacitus adds
again to this: It is certain, that mighty Empires are not kept by sooth, but
by weapons in the hands of the experimented Souldior.

An honest Souldior in the time of peace, is an honor to his Prince, and in
the time of war a great defense.

The skillful Captain can treat of peace and war, both together; but he
never knew how to make a good peace, that never knew how to make war.

In the choice of a General, it is requisite he be endued with experience, and
martial skill, otherwise there is small hope of victory, unless God do
fight for him, as he did for the Armies of the children of Israel. And yet they
ever chose the wisest, and most skillful men amongst them to be Commanders.

All chosen soldiers.
I could wish, that those that should have any great command amongst Soldiers,
should be men of good revenue. And although I do here yoke wealth with virtue,
yet I do make it but her handmaid, for the exercise of liberality is many
times as necessary as knowledge and experience. And Captains being men of
honor, and able to live, being well informed of the infamy growing of
disordered Military prowlings, and Pilfries, should study how to keep their
Companies as complete as might be, and not excessiuely to rob them, as in
times past the custom has been.

The relics of the Beadles whippe (me thinks are unfit to be made Soldiers;
but our Soldiers in these days, are become protested enemies to all sorts of
Poultrie, as Capons, Hens, Chickens; nay, they will not spare the Cock
himself, if he come in their walk. But if they meet a flock of Geese, it
shall never be said when they are gone, but that they durst say, Bo to a Goose.

When Rome honored her Captains with triumphs, and solemnities, she did not
only reward the courage of the Triumpher, but also their justice, with which
she maintained her army in peace and concord, together with the which she
performed her enterprises.

It has been holden for great happiness, where the sword and all other weapons
of war, are turned to plow-yrons; and I could acknowledge it for a great
blessing, if it might be so brought to pass, but the malice of men has made
them so necessary, that they can not long be spared.

Cicero says, An unjust peace is to be preferred before the most just war,
and I reverence the Author that writes, They that contemn peace, to seek for
honor by war, do many times loose both peace and honor.

An assured peace (says another) is better than a victory that is but hoped
for: And it is truly said, the prayers that are exhibited in the behalf of
peace, is far more happy for the Commonwealth, then the noise of Drums and
Trumpets, sounding the alarums of war.

Good to be warriors, but not war lovers.
I must confess, that these war lovers, are like Physicians, that could wish
the City to be full of diseases, whereby they might be employed for their
own gain. And it may be, that some of our warriors have sought to advance
themselves by that profession: but he that would gather a Catalogue of those
that have suffered ship-wracke upon that hope, had need to have a long scroll.

Valiancie has an eye to war, war again the like to peace, peace to the
prosperity of the Commonwealth: but this prosperity is it that sets an
edge, both of sloth and negligence: for as peace is the parent of prosperity;
so it is the nurse of pride, and the trainer up of all careless security: and
in the time of peace there is no wickedness that wants example.

Peace the nurse of all iniquity.
But peace breeds plenty, so it armeth Cape apee, all sorts of sins, and as
War has his associates, Sword, Fire, Famine, and Murder; so Peace has his
copartners, Pride, Pleasure, Idleness, Lust, Sensuality, Drunkenness, Gluttony,
Voluptuousnes, and so many other enormities besides, as were but curiosity in
me to hunt after.

After Rome began to discontinue her wars, vice forgot not to reenter into
custom.
Peace draws the very corruption of manners after it, and there is nothing
that brings so sweet and easy a subjection to vice, as the season and idleness
of Peace, it enfeebleth the minds of young men, it makes them become
Hermaphrodites* half men, half harlots, it effeminats their minds, and
nuzleth them up in all folly, it gives old men opportunity, to travel, to
turmoile, and to tire themselves, by oppression, by extortion, by perjury, by
usury, by bribery, by craft, by subtlety, and by all manner of ungodliness,
to scrape for my young masters son, who is then sporting and dallying with
his wench, whilst his father is thus in his money harvest toyling for wealth:
then comes in some glosing Expositor, and he expounds this miserable scraping
of pelf, to be a zeal, to be a pity, to be a fatherly care to provide for
his house, for his children, and for his family, according to the rule of the
Apostle.

In the time of Peace, the prowling Merchant finds liberty to carry away
corn, beer, butter, cheese, leather, lead, tin, ordonance, cloth, and al
commodities of especial importance: and they return us again, wine,
reisins, figs, orenges, and many other trifles that might very well be
forborne.

The ill more in number than the good
By this we may perceive, the vices that are hatched up in Peace, are in far
greater number, than the enormities that accompany War: and therefore if the
affairs of War do not busy a Statesman, the diseases of Peace will so
turmoyle him, as he must be still vigilant to discover the diseases of the
commonwealth daily drawn in by this security and surffet of Peace: and I
think the world will never be so reconciled, but that those that be good,
shall find more ill than they shall be able to redress.

Dissimulation in the time of Peace wors than war.
I might speak of many other dangers depending upon Peace, especially where it
is grown so careless, as to neglect all preparation of War: Philopomines
says, That in the time of Peace, it is then best to prepare for war: But we
have a better instance, Solomon notwithstanding he was promised a peaceable
government by God himself, and was called in the Scripture Rex pacificus, he
yet forgotte not to furnish his garrisons with greater provisions than his
father David had done before him, though he were still turmoyled and tired in
the war: and the deceitful enemy under the color of Parlies, of Truces, and
of treaties of Peace, has effected that which he could never perform by open
war.

Truces many times patched up the cause of many ensuing dangers.
Believe not thine ennemy, says Ecclesiasticus, for with his lips he
sweetneth, and in his heart he betrayeth thee, to make thee to fall into the
dike, and weepeth with his eyes, but if he light upon a fit occasion, he will
not be satisfied with thy blood.

I have now wouen this web of Peace and War, I have made a short medly of all
together, if it be good for any thing, I care not; I hope it will prove either
hot or cold, and then it may be employed to use, either fit for summer or
winter.

A Proverb truly approved.
I am not half so well acquainted among Courtiers, as I am amongst Soldiers,
yet I was a young Courtier, and I have approved the Proverb, A young Courtier,
an old Beggar, I could commend his judgment that first set it down, but I
would he had proved but a lying Prophet.

I am now to speak alittle of Courtiers, and it is but according unto that
little experience I learned long ago; if I hit the truth, it can be but
chance medley, and then I hope I shall entreat a Pardon of Course: if I fail
of mine aim, it is time to leave shooting, for a good Archer is better known
by his aim, than by his arrow.

A Princes Court.
A Princes Court is like a glorious gardin, planted and replenished with
several sorts of pleasant flowers, whereof some are spoiled in the bud by the
Caterpiller, some reserved in the blossom, to content the eye of the beholder;
the Be gathers honny from the one, the Spider draws poison from another,
every one making use, but according to his own nature.

It fares so with Princes Courts, some repair thither, hoping of preferment
by their virtuous endeavors, and to grow in favor by their good deseruings:
other incited by vanity, make their resort to satisfy their humors, with
alittle foolish bravery, spending their time in voluptuous excess* So that, as
the Court is a School of Virtue, to such as can bridle their minds with
discretion; So it is a Nurse of Vice, to such as measure their wills with
witless affection.

In the Courts of Princes, favor prevails with many, by occasion, not by
desert, by opinion, not by worthiness, where Gentlemen must be delicate,
Ladies amorous, the Prince himself studious, and though not seeing all
enormities, yet compassed about with many that be enormious.

Let Trian prescribe good Laws for eternal memory, where are they sooner
broken than in the Court of Trian, Let Aurelius store his Court with wise men,
yet even there they do wax dissolute.

The Court is fitter for Aristippus, then for Aristides, for Crisippus then for
Cato, for Damocles than for Calisthenes.

Court flattterie.
In Court every man must be flattered in his folly, every great man's vain shall
have a follower; if Phaleris will torment, Perillus will invent; if Aemilius
will martire, Paterculus will minister; if Alexander will be stately, Phocion
will be humble; if Domitius foolish, Hippodamus will be frantike.

A noble man's nod, a banquet for a fool.
By these steps of soothing, our Courtiers seek to climb; and if a noble man
do but vouchsafe him a nodde; he waxes so drunken with joy, that he that
should but mark his demeanor, would think him to be new raised again with
Lazarus, to live another age in the world.

In the Court of a wicked Prince, fornications, Adulteries, Rauishments, and
such other, are young Courtiers sports; honest men are there oppressed, Ribaulds
preferred, simple men scorned, just men persecuted, presumptuous men favored,
flatterers advanced.

Such saints, such relics.
Ahab being a wicked king, was so ill attended, that Eliah thought only
himself to serve God, and that all the rest of the Kings servants and
followers, were Idolaters and Worshippers of Baal.

If Honors were to be compassed by vices, as in old Rome they were by Virtues;
who should have more advanced to honor, in one year, then Rome had of good
men in a whole age.

In Court the itching ears of the Vainglorious must be scratched by
Sycophants: and he that cannot make the Devil a Saint, it is high time he were
with God, for this is no world for him to live in.

The meaner sort of Courtiers must learn, to creep, to crowch, to flatter,
to make a scoff at Virtue, to buy and sell breath, and to blush at no disgrace.

A proud Court makes a lean Country, and these Moathes of the Court, they
are the woorst vermin, that can be in a commonwealth.

These beging Courtiers that are spying out of suites to the hurting of the
commonwealth.
How many will Diue into a Princes ear, and under the pretense of common good,
do obtain those suits, that are but for their own private gain: How many
again that live perfumed in the Court, sleeping in sensuality, secured under
the protection of greatness, that are still gaping after suits, grasping at
Monopolies, the very plague soars of a commonwealth, that do oppress a
Comminaltie, to maintain the voluptuous pride of one private man, to uphold
his inordinate expense with the purses of the poor.

Goods ill gotten will stick to the soul.
Some will say, That goods ill gotten, will soon decay: but that Proverb is not
true, for they shall find that the goods that are thus raked from the
commonwealth, will stick close to the soul, whatsoever they do to the body.

How many again that do poison the ears of Princes, that have no other
means to make themselves gracious in the eye of the Prince, but by stirring
him up to wicked and ungodly acts, as Lucane Curio stirred up Caesar.

Princes favorites.
He that is favored by a Prince, he must be soothed in his pleasure, praised
in his follies, commended in his vanities, yea, his very vices must be made
virtues, or else they will say we forget our duties, we malice greatness, we
envy his fortune, and how shall we be checked by the Parasites that follow him?
And for those that are highly prized in a Princes favor, what cannot they
effect? they can fly without wings, they can disguise the truth without
controlment, they can fight without hands, they can conquer without weapons,
they can kill a man behind his back with a word, that they durst never look
on the face with a sword, and they have reigned more kings in their privy
Chambers, with their smoothing flatteries, then have been overcome in the open
field, with their armed enemies.

Nobility fittest for a princes Court.
Honorable Nobility, are the fittest ornaments wherewith to garnish a Princes
Court: For Nobility is a most glorious and excellent Image of ancient
progeny, most commonly replenished with excellent virtues.

But Nobility (in many places) has little left but the bare name, and that is
distained too, by her own deseruings.

Every stock and lineage is beautified by virtue, but virtue is not
beautified, nor set forth by any lineage.

It is true Nobility, which as on a chief pillar is stayed upon virtue, but
where that pillar is overthrown, there Nobility must likewise fall to the
ground.

We follow not those steps that bring unto honor, but we trace out those
tracts that lead unto pleasure or profit; and we rather desire to be rich,
then to be wise.

If we were as covetous of our proper honor, as we are greedy of other men's
goods, the canker of Infamy could not so devour our renown and reputation.

Gain and glory did yet never march in one rank, no more did profit and
honor.

Danger and honor do follow one an other, and wisdom, and modesty, second
them.
We have in these days variety of Scutchins, sundry sorts of Arms,
multiplicitie of dignities and honorable titles, but true Nobility is it that
springs from Virtue.

Salust writing to Cicero, vpbraided him to be descended from a base kind of
people, but himself was extracted from a noble progeny: to whom Cicero made
answer, that Salust indeed was descended of noble raze, but he was the first
that had debased the Nobility of his house. And for himself he was descended
(indeed) from a people of obscure condition, but yet he was the first Gentleman
of his stock.

They chase from them the professors of virtue.
There is nothing to counterpeise the balance of a noble name, but how many
little worthy persons have there been in times past, that would feign have
gone current for six shillings eight pence; yet if they had been brought to
the balance, they would have weighed too light by a great deal more than the
common allowance of two grains, but if they had bin tried by the touch, we
might well have said, All is not gold that glisters.

That greatness to be commended that consists in goodness.
The title of Nobility to a good man is of great excellency; but to an ill
man, of no less infamy.

It is likely that good should come of good, and virtue is most succeeding in
noble blood, and the worthiness of honorable ancestors craves a reverend
regard to be had in their posterity.

Honorable Nobility is fittest to counsel kings, and to take upon them the
great affairs of the state^ Our Noble men are inflamed with the desire of
glory and renown, and the inferior sort do think themselves most happy
and blessed, when they are governed by the wisdom and virtue of Noble
personages, that commonly manage their authority with magnificence, for as it
is witnessed in the Proverbs, Prou. 29.
Where righteous men are in authority, the people rejoice: but where the
wicked bear rule, the people sigh.

Nobility fittest to counsel kings.
Honorable Nobility is then most fit to counsel a king, and the care and
study of good Counsailors is still to endeavor those things that shall
concern the honor of God, the preservation of the Kings royal person, and
the furtheraunce of the good and benefit of the commonwealth: and in the
midst of their most weighty affairs, not to lean too much to the policies
of worldly wicked men, that they impugn the wisdom and policy ordained and
decreed by the Almighty himself.

Unfit for counselors.
There is nothing more unbefitting in a Counsailour than passion, to be hasty,
to be angry, to be choleric; for anger, rage, and fury have never bin known
to govern well.

Covetousness is the poison that marreth all, but Covetousness in a
Counsailor is the mother of extortion, of oppression, of bribery, alienating
all compassion into merciless cruelty, dishonouring the reputation even of
the greatest personages, making them to be reputed amongst the base and
miserable minded.

It teaches to buy or sell all things for money, and to neglect no manner of
means that brings in gain.

A law amongst the Thebans.
The Thebanes established a Law, forbidding, that no man should be admitted
to the administration of any manner of government in a commonwealth, except
he had first left off buying and selling, of retayling, or transporting for
the space of ten years.

An excellent virtue in a Counselor.
There is not a more excellent commendation, that may be given to a Counsailor,
nor any thing better pleasing to God and man, than to have him compassionate of
the poor oppressed suitors, that follow him, giving them dispatch with such
convenient expedition, that their long and tedious suings be not more hurtful
unto them than any wrongs they have formerly endured.

Here leaving the Muses to their Helicon, I yet once again implore
the assistance of the heavenly Power, that I might speak a little of Kings and
Princes, with that humble and dutiful reverence, that is appertaining to their
greatness, and but fit for me to meddle with.

As the Law when it was first given, with thundering, lightning, and great
terrors unto the people from Mount Sinay; so likewise when the children of
Israel required a King, he was first given with the like tempest of thunder,
which so feared the people, that they cried unto Samuel, to pray for them, that
they might not die.

Here is to be noted the authority of a King; for as the voice of the Law is
terrible to the wicked: even so is the King, for he is ordained to take
vengeance, and has a sword to punish offense.

The Prince executes not his own authority, but the judgment of God, and
whosoever resisted the Anointed of the Lord, resists God himself.

Kings the great ministers of God.
As God has ordained Kings and Princes to bear sovereign authority upon the
earth; so he has dignified them with names and titles belonging to himself,
as well to put them in mind of their own duties toward God, as also to stir
up and continue the love and obedience of their subjects toward themselves: So
that whether the King be good or bad, he is yet notwithstanding the gift of
God, and either the Ministers of his mercies, or of his judgments: for if the
Prince be evil, he is ordained for a scourge to wicked and unthankful people,
to punish their sins.

Kings and Princes must be obeyed.
Subjects may in no wise charge their Princes with any crimes at their own
pleasures, for the power of Kings comes from God, who holds the hearts of
Princes in his own hands, and rules them according to his own pleasure.

A King does not administer his own, but the affairs of many, observing duly
those Laws whereof he is both founder and ouerseer.

In mine opinion they are much ouerseene, that will prescribe laws and order
of life to Princes, who are Lords over Laws, and may inioine them to others.

Good Kings are to be wished for (where they want) but howsoever, good or bad
they must be obeyed; for if Jupiter be angry, he must send a Storke to
devour.

In the word of a King, there is power, and who shall say to his Prince, What
do thou?

The prerogative of princes
Princes may shake off their own errors, by blaming other men, and so they
may assume their servants foresights to their own praise.

The good will of a Prince may easily be obtained, but as quickly blown forth
again with the wind of slander: and therefore Cicero admonishes to speak as
reverently of Kings and Princes as we do of the gods.

The office of a King.
The office of a Prince serves to suppress tyrants, and to uphold the meanest
subject in his right, against the greatest power that would oppress him.

A Prince must hear the complaint of his Subjects, if either the regard of his
own glory, or the estate of the public weal be dear unto him: for that is
the most absolute and behouefull thing appertaining to a Prince, and is no
less precious unto him then is his Empire.

Most happy is that Prince, and borne (no doubt) for the good of his Country,
that neglects not that special care toward his subjects.

A Prince to be just in himself, is honor to his person; but to minister
right to his wronged Subjects, is a general good to the whole Common wealth.

The office of a good King toward his people, should be as a father toward his
children, but not as a Conqueror toward the vanquished.

As there is nothing more miserable to a Prince then to be compelled; so there
is nothing more rather to break the heart of subjects, then when he will not
be entreated.

There is nothing more gracious in a Prince, then mercy, but yet overmuch
lenity breeds contempt.

The King that treads the steps of clemency, becomes old, and leaves his
inheritance to his posterity; but the Prince that governs with rigor and
cruelty, is seldom set to live long.

Thales being asked what rare thing he had seen, answered, An old Tyrant.

Wherein princes are most deceived.
Princes most commonly are in nothing more deceived, then in bestowing their
rewards; but especially when they give upon other men's commendations.

Of what princes have least store.
Princes have not so much scarcity of any other thing, as they have of that,
whereof they should be most plentifully stored, which is, Of such as should
tell them the truth.

Comparison between a good prince and a bad.
The differences between the Prince that is virtuous, and the other that is
vicious consists in this.

The first strives to enrich his subjects, the other to sack and spoil them:
the one spares the honor of good women, the other triumphs in their shame:
the one takes pleasure to be freely admonished, the other dispiseth nothing so
much as wise and virtuous counsel: the one makes most account of the love of
his subjects, the other is better pleased with their fear: the one is never in
doubt of his own people, the other stands in awe of none more than of them:
the one burdeneth them as little as may be, but upon public necessity, the
other gnaweth the flesh from their bones but to satisfy his vain pleasures:
the one in the time of war has no recourse but to his own Subjects, the
other keeps war but only with his subjects: the one is honored in the
time of his life, and mourned for after his death, the other is hated in the
time of his life, and registered with perpetual infamy after his death.

A cruel Prince will make a slaughterhouse of his Commonwealth: A vicious
Prince will make it a stews, a prodigal, will suck the marrow of his
Subjects, to glut some five or six Parasites that will be about his own
person, disguised in the habit of fidelity.

A good Prince will not dedicate the Common wealth to himself, but will addict
himself to the Commonwealth. And because no man asks account of him in his
life, he will therefore be so much the more stirred up to ask the straighter
reckoning of himself.

There be many other worthy prescriptions set down by that worthy Emperor
Aurelius, that I may ouerpasse, and will give a little touch of things
necessary and behouefull to be spoken of.

A King must not be vnnished of treasure.
The expenses of a King is great, and therefore he must be well stored, and still
prepared with treasure, to bear out the charge. It is he that must defend his
Realms and subjects, from the spoil and rapine of foreign forces: It is he
that must be provident in the time of peace, to have all things in a readiness
against the time of war. Can he then be unprovided of treasure? Wars not to
be maintained with empty coffers.
Or shall his subjects grudge and murmr against him, if he supply his wants by
Taxes or Subsidies, which are warranted by the word of God, and which the
Prince may take with a very good conscience, for the bearing out of his
expenses, which do concern the common good and safety of the subjects: Many
examples in the Scriptures to warrant it.
the king must defend all, and there is no reason but his wantes should be
supplied by all.

A necessary consideration for princes.
There is yet a matter of great importance for a Prince to consider of, that
under this privilege of taxing his subjects for his needful and necessary
affairs, he does not oppress them for any vain or idle expenses; for what
is he that dare prescribe limits or bounds to a King? what he should take or
leave of his subjects. If he have not a good conscience of himself, if he have
not a charitable disposition toward his people, of his own princely nature,
who dare cross him in his courses, or tell him of those faults wherein he
offends? or what Subject (that knows his duty) dare speak against a
princes prerogative?

It was not without cause therefore, that Chrysostom with such admiration did
say, Miror si aliquis rectorum potest saluari. And Apolonius says, that the
treasure taken by a Prince from his subjects by tyranny, is more base then
iron: for being wette with the tears of the people, it cankereth and becomes
accursed.

Subjects must not resist.
That Prince therefore that will exact more then enough, between god and his own
conscience be it; but the subject is to make no resistance. Our Savior Christ
has left us example, for he himself paid that was imposed upon him: and when
the Scribes and Pharisees demanded of him, whether it were lawful to pay
tribute to Caesar, he did not impugn it.

Kings have need of great privileges.
Kings and Princes had need of great privileges, their cares are many, and
far exceeding the common capacity of the simple multitude. A Princes royal
Robe does cover many cares, and their guardes are not able to defend the
assaults of troubled thoughts.

Better for a Prince to be Irus for contentment, then to enjoy the Empire of
the whole world. For whilst he sees all pleasures, he enjoys none, and in
the midst of his sugared dainties, he suppeth up sorrows, every day tired
with suitors, troubled with Damocles, every night subject to broken sleeps,
troublesome thoughts, and uncouth dreams.

A Kings dainty dishes are always sawced with suspicion, and there is reason;
for although amongst Chamber counselors that are still buzzing in the ears of
Princes.
the vulgar, too much jealousy sauoureth of little wit, yet more hurt comes of
the light belief of Princes, then of mistrust: amongst the rest, Thales
admonishes Kings and Princes to suspect him most, that is most busy still to
be whispering in his ear.

Aristotle advises, that a Prince ought earnestly, and above all things, to
have care of things divine, he renders this reason; For those subjects do
hope that they shall suffer less justice from that Prince whom they deem
religious, and who fears God: and less conspiracies are complotted against
him, as having God him self for his help and succor.

The blessedness of the time present.
Let me now speak but a word of the time present, and let me speak truly of
our own happiness, here within this Empire of great Britain: with what zeal
and feruencie has our royal King reestablished that Religion of the Gospel,
the which although he found it here ready planted to his hand, yet with how
many ingins has the Pope and the Devil sought sithence, to undermine and
overthrow it, and are yet every day endeavoring, if his Majesty himself were
not the more firm and constant.

He has then blessed himself, his Realms, and Dominions with the light of
the Gospel; and if the happiness of peace be a blessing, we likewise enjoy it
by his happy government. To prop up all with great security, he has made
choice of a most wise, discreet and godly disposed Counsel, the Pillars
(indeed) of a happy Commonwealth.

To conclude, if there be felicity in peace, in prosperity, in pleasure, in
plenty, we enjoy all by his wisdom and providence: if there be any thing
wanting, it is but thankful hearts to God, and to our King, that has blessed
us with those foysons, that we are glutted, and almost ready to burst; but let
us take heed, that with the churlish Nabal, we harden not the heart of David
against us.

The cruelty of one man toward an other.
Let us now look into the particular dealing of one man toward another, and we
shall find such plenty of fraud, linked together with violence, as if one
were brought into the world to subvert and root out another: and I think the
world would suddenly perish, if wrath were not by mercy appeased.

We are afraid to do well.
We speak of Honesty, but it is with half a lip; and for Vice, we seem to
shut it out at the broad gate, but we privily take it in again at the Wicket:
we make a gappe where the gate stands open, and we seek to enter by force,
where the high way lies by favor. We desire to come to Christ by night with
Nichodemus, that no body might see us for fear of worldly losses, and it is a
point of wisdom to take Christ in one hand, and the world in another, and to
make some outward appearance a little to satisfy the world, if it be but with a
dumb show.

A man for fashions sake may inroll himself in the Muster book of Jesus
Christ, but in the day of service, he may rank himself to fight in Satan's
camp.

Ill feasting with God.
It is enough for us to cry, Lord, Lord, but not to do any thing that is
commanded by the Lord of Lords: if we do think of God, we think him easy
enough to be pleased, we know how to drive him off, and to gain time, till we
have a more fit opportunity.

Man is made of body and soul, and the body is then in his most flourishing
estate, when the soul is best obeyed; but the body rebelling, and waxing lazy
and sluggish, the soul then begins to faint: but the soul being immured in
the durtie prison of the body, feels not her own evil, but in the evil
that she there indureth.

Reason that should rule, is but enclosed in the narrow compass of the head,
all the rest of the parts of the body besides are left to affections: Anger
reigning in the fortress of the heart, Pride, Lust, Concupiscence, and such
other possessing all the parts of the body; our eyes, whose office should be
to direct our steps in a right course, are they not our geratest stumbling
blocks? what enemies more malicious to us than our ears, that are still wide
open to wickedness? The tongue, is it not more apt to speak ill, than good?
our hands, our feet, and all the rest of our other parts, more nimble and
ready to vanity than virtue.

The distemperature of our own humors.
Every Idea of folly is become our summum bonum; our necessary and natural
members (first created as the ministers to the Soul) are now become the
disturbers of our innocence, our brain in stead of wise precepts, are cloyed
with idle imaginations: our eyes the dreamers of our discretions, are made the
blindness of the insight of our souls.

The misery of man.
What is man? a body subject to a thousand diseases, a thousand harms, a
thousand dangers, weak, frail, fraught with miseries within, wrapped with
wretchedness without, always incertaine of life, evermore assured of death.

Again, who is so found or healthie of body, but has a diseased mind, and
then if he were put to his choice, had not rather to have a sound mind in a
sick body, then to be tormented with continual grief of mind in a
healthful body?

The waves and storms of our affections raised with every puff of wind, does
so toss and turmoile us up and down, that the best Pilots are driven
sometimes to strike sail, and Reason it self is well near driven to forsake
the Helm.

The greatest things in the world do climb but to fall, and he that climbeth
most high, his fall is greatest, they have their times, an age to win, and an
hour to loose, we compass the heavens, the earth, and the sea, with our
foolish thoughts, compass our selves whiles we live in six foot of air, and
being dead within an ell of ground, and who has been so much admired for his
might, which has not been as much contemned in his fall?

See the change of times, a man now happy, strait happelesse; now compassed
with friends, now overcome with foes; this day rich, that day poor; at Morn
a Prince, at night a Peasant.

Our reputation but as it pleases the foolish people.
Our worldly honor hangs on brittle Balance, and our reputation runs as
the conceit of the common people will afford, sometimes Caesar renowned in the
Senate, accounted a Pater patriae, no small time Emperor, beloved of Brutus,
saluted by Cicero: now Caesar a Tyrant, slain in the Senate, Hostis Patriae,
bereft of his Diadem, no Pater but Predator, from an Emperor to a dead
carcass, gored with his friends own knife, unkind Brutus, exclamed on by the
declaiming Cicero, O strange mutabilitie!

Notwithout wisdom the world is reported to be Sphericall, for it is still
turning, and with great judgment Fortune is said to be blind, for she is still
flitting, and when we think to have the surest footing, we are even then most
subject to declining.

It were good if every man would mend one, but that will not be performed, for
we imitate nothing but what we do see; and when we do see, setting up that
light that might give us example.

Let thy Conscience be Commander to call Reason to account, whether she has
subjected her self to sensual appetite, and let Conscience examine thy Will,
whether her desires have been chaste, or as a Harlot she has lusted after her
own delights. He that could call himself to this account, and could advisedly
consider of that eternity to the which the Soul is prepared, he would never
seek to patch a piece, and to lengthen out his hopes with such frail and
transitory stuff that he never thinks of death, till the one of his feet be
already in the grave.

Death it is that loses us from the chains of bondage, it only sets us
free from calamities, and it brings us to the harbor of happiness. God
grant us whilst we do live, so to live, that our life might serve him; and
when we die, our death might set him forth, that our life might die in him,
our death live to him, and that both life and death might glorify him.

FINIS.

