THE EXCELLENCY of good women. The honor and estimation that belongs unto
them. The infallible marks whereby to know them. By BARNABE RYCH soldier
Servant to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Malui me diuitem esse, quam vocari. LONDON Printed by Thomas Dawson, dwelling
near the three Cranes in the Vinetree, and are there to be sold. 1613.

TO THE GREAT AND GRACIOUS La the Lady ELYZABETH, the renowned Daughter of
JAMES, the mighty King of Great BRITAIN.
GReat and gracious Lady, let it not seem strange (with all humblenes I
beseech it) that an unworthy soldier should offer lines to so worthy a Lady:
the dignity of the subject is it, that armeth with boldness, for to whom does
more properly belong the patronizing of those things that are inciting to
feminine virtue, then to your Highness, in whom Modesty is seen to march with
Majesty, Mildnes with Magnificence, Gratiousnes with Greatness, and where bright
shining Virtue, is an Attendant to wait upon Dignity.

Of whom might I then make better choice to protect the worthiness of women,
then of her that is the most worthy amongst women.

I assure my self that all virtuous women will privilege mine endeavors, if
any be offended, they are but such as are unworthy to be pleased.

The warrant that I have of your gracious disposition does more imbolden me,
then the hope that I have of mine own vntutered pen, yet with all humblenes
and duty, bequeathing my worthless lines to your worthy protection will rest

Always to your Highness most humbly devoted BARNABE RYCH

TO THE NVMBERLES NVMBER OF HONORABLE Ladies, virtuous Gentlewomen, and to all
the rest of the mild, modest, and worthy sex of womankinde.
HOnorable and worthy Dames, as well wives widows maids, of all estates and
degrees, whosoeeuer or wheresoever with all humblenes and knees be^ded and
bowed to the ground let me beseech your patience, that have undertaken a
subject of that excellency as would have required a more pregnant and excellent
wit then I do acknowledge to be in my selfethe, brightness of the sun is best
discerned by her own beams, and the excellency of women is not to be
expressed, but by their own merittes if I have therefore set up too dimne a
light to blazon your perfections, let your own virtues shine in that wonted
oryentall brightness, as from your first creation (at all times and in all
ages) has so illumined the world, with those high and rare perfections, as
men may well admire but never be able to extinguish. Thus desiring still to
live in your graceful love and favor will rest the most assured at your
comandements.

BARNABE RICH

The Excellency of good Women.
WHen the Devil at the first began his temptation in Paradise he attempted the
woman, telling Her she wanted but one thing to make her self like God: I would
be loath therefore, either vain ly to magnify or vily to imbase the dignity
of women. That I might then speak of this subject without partiallity, and but
according to a truth, I will not implore the assistance neither of Apollo
neither of Pallas, nor yet of the Muses, but will humbly beseech the help of
the ever living God.

For the woman of honest life, glory and admiration attends on her, it is
therefore every man's part not only to reverence her, but also to defend her
honor and estimation.

But the better to make trial of women's perfection in general, let us examine
their first creation, wherein is to be noted the substance whereof they were
formed which was of the purified metal of man.

The place where they were created, which was in Paradise.

The time of the creation which was The last and therefore the perfectest handy
work of the Creator. The cause why they were created, which was To be a
comfortable assistant to man, that a man by marryage of a good woman might
pass through the laborsome toils and turmoyles of this life with the more
ease, having so good an assisa^t to the which doubtless God had respect when he
said It is not good for man to live alone, let us make him a helper.

To this the Prophet Malachy does likewise witness when he says. Though God
at the first had abundance of spirit yet he made but one woman of one ribbe
for the help and comfort of one man.

Why then a man that wants a friend for pleasure a servant for profit, a
counselor to advise him, a co^forter to cherish him, a companion to solace
him, a helper to assist him, or a spiritual instructor to inform him, a good
and a virtuous wife does supply all these occasions And therefore I think
there is neither religion nor goodness in that man, that loves not an honest
and a loyal wife.

Here we see there first institution, and where unto they were made, but if I
should now take upon me to speak of the excellency of those women that have
from time to time aspired in the deep capacity of Arts and sciences and have
so sarr exceeded in all manner of knowledge (that men have not only had cause
to praise, but also to wonder at them) I might heap together a greater volume
then every man's leisure would serve to peruse.

But leaving the multitude and to speak but of some very few that are
regestred in histories to their perpetual praise we do read of Nicostrata
called also Carmenta, for the eloquence she had in versifying, of Lasterna and
Axi^thea two worthy dames most highly renowned amongst the scholars of Plato.

Of Arath^a that wrote forty several books, who read openly in the schools
and (as it is written in hystories) had 150. Philosophers that were her
scholars.

^her is yet mention made of Aspasia that instructed Pericles of Lelia Sabina,
so renowned in Rome for her letters of Amatasnuta, and others like learned in
the Latin, but wherein have women been inferior even to the best men, If we
should look into a virtuous life who more famed then Aemelia, Claudia, Tusia,
Nicaulia? for govern meant, who more provident then Zenobia; for wisdom Saba,
that opposed Solomon; for actiuitie in war Pentasilea, for poesy Sapho, for
policy Zoe: for poetry, Thalia, for rethoricke Hilerna; for oratory Cornelia,
for eloquence Hortensia.

Let us now see amongst the elymentall gods is there not for matter of war
as well the goddess Bellona, as the god Mars? for science and wisdom, is there
not a Pallas as well as Apollo? for poesy or versifying are not the nine Muses
as famous as Phoebus?

Further more these virtues of Justice Temperance Fortitude, Patience, pity,
Mercy, Charity, Humility, and many other like, are all of the feminine
gender, yea the Church of God is compared to a woman and figured forth in
femall shape.

But leaving hystories that are infinite in example of women's worthiness, if we
did but look into every ordinary calendar, we should find out as many vigils
of holy women, as feasts of devout men.

By this we may see the Excellency of good women; that were never yet so
scarce to be found as in the time of Elias, that thought him self to be left
alone to serve the living God.

But let us yet draw nearer to this confirmation: when our savior himself had
his abode here upon the earth who conspired against him, who sought to
persecute him, who tempted him, who condemned his doctrine, who would have
stoned him, who said he had a Devil with in him, who would have intrapped him,
who practiced his death? none but men Herod Annas Chaiphas, Scribes Pharisees
unbelieving Jews, yea Judas himself that was one of his own Apostles.

Now contrary wise, who loved him most entirely who embraced his doctrine, who
confessed him to be a Prophet, who enterteyned him into their houses, who
ministered unto him even of there own substance? only women, Mary, Martha, the
woman of Samaria, Ionna Susanna, and many others.

It was a woman that poured a box of precious ointment on his head, they were
men that murmured against it and were offended that so great cost was bestowed
upon him.

It was Pilate a man that condemned Christ, and delivered him to the Jews to
be crucified: It was his wife a woman, that willed her husband To have nothing
to do with that Just man.

They were men that carried him to be crucified compelling him to bear his own
Cross, they were women that followed to the place where he was crucified
bitterly weeping and lamenting his death.

What would you more they were women that still visited his sepulcher after his
buryall, and it was a woman to whom he first appeared after his resurrection.

It were needles to in large any further how many worthy women have constantly
suffered death under tyrants for the name of Christ.

I do not inserte these presidentes with any pretense to impeach men, or to
do them wrong, but according to a testified truth, to do women right.

And yet to speak truly women are commonly more abstinent from all manner of
uncleanness then men either are the most of them curbed in with any other
bridle then what they willingly put upon them selves. And that is the zeal of
virtue and the desire of good name which to every honest woman is more precious
then gold or silver or any other gemme.

It grieueth me now to think that there should be a woman found, to be
accounted dishonest, or that any of them should so far stray from that
Excellency where unto she was created, to be reputed ill. And yet in the holy
scriptures there is mention made as well of a Dalila as of a Debora, of a
Iesabel as of a Judith.

And it is impossible indeed, that any good should be without the co^mixture of
ill, because there is no contrary without his contrary, there could be no
right if there were no wrong. And what were health if there were no sickness,
what happiness, if no misaduenture, what were love if there were no hate, and so
of good if there were no ill.

And as a discord many times makes the music to be the more sweet, so the
woman of lewd life makes her that is good to shine the more glorious.

There be a number of women in these days that of my conscience are both good
and honest, and I am sure that they themselves are desirous so to be acounted,
and yet if we should judge of them by their outward show, as they use to pranck
up them selves in their light and gaudy attire we should judge them to be more
Curtizan like then ever was Lays of Corynth or Flora of Rome.

It is a hard matter therefore in this age to distinguish between the good
woman and the bad but now as there belonges no shame to him that in wreathing a
glorious garland, is sometimes enforced to borowe a handful of flowers from a
neighbors garden: even so, to adorn the subject that I have taken in hand and
the rather to beautify so worthy a matter, I have borrowed the help of a
learned divine, who in a sermon by him preached in the praise of good women,
first borrowed his text out of the book of Proverbs the 3. Chap. and the 14.
verse where Solomon speaking of a virtuous woman, says she is like a
marchantes ship etc.

If their be any therefore that will presume to find fault with this
description now ensuinge, or that will think the praises that are given to
those women that are good, are over exceedinge, or the dispraises of the ill
are too reprehending, let them understand that although it were set down by
the hand of Solomon, a man (yet such a man as God himself had approved to be
the wisest amongst men) yet it was the finger of God that first directed it;
who by the hand of Solomon has set down the true notes and marks whereby to
distinguish the good women from the bad, the virtuous from the vicious, the
godly from the ungodly.

The first in the 10 verse of the foresaid Chap. of a virtuous woman he says
Her price is farrnemore precious then pearls: And proceeding still in her
praise and commendations in the 14. verse he says she is like a merchants
ship.

He first prizeth her what she is worth esteeming her to be more precious then
pearl, then he likeneth her to what she does resemble and that is To a
merchants ship.

And as he sets down her value what she is worth and her resemblance where
unto she is like, so he gives certain notes and knowledge of all her
qualities how she behaueth her self as well within door as without, and first
toward her husband She will do him good and not evil all the days of her
life.

Then he gives other notes, what be her exercises and how she spendes her time
She seeks wool and flax and labors cheerfully with her hands: he
forgets not to give us special marks of her speeches, whereunto they tend
and how she behaueth her self in her own house amongst her family.

She opens her mouth with wisdom, the law of grace is in her tongue.

She ouerseeth the ways of her houshoulde and eats not of the bread of
Idleness.

This description of a good woman thus set downeby Solomon, was not done
without great consideration for he thought it not only necessary to show what
she is but also where unto she is like, that we might the rather find her out
by some sensible resemblance our savior Christ used the like when he resembled
his Disciples to salt and sometimes likeneth himself to a Vine, to a
Cornerstone and figureth his blessed body to Bread.

He likeneth the kingdom of heaven to a Husbandeman, to a Grain of
mustardseed, to Leaven, to a Nett, to a Merchant, to a King and all these with
many other like, thus resembled for certain properties and similitudes,
wherein the one is like unto the other.

Now a good woman says Solomon, is like unto a ship: but what shipp? Like unto
a merchantes ship that brings in.

The Harlot is like to a ship too, but not like a marchantes ship, but in truth
like a Pyrat a Rouer, a Frebuter and like such a ship as lies still in wait
for rapine and for spoil.

An honest tradinge merchants ship is far different: and it was well noted by
him that has formerly set down the wife to be the ship, and the husband to
be the merchant, and the husbands word to be the Routher to the shipp, by the
which she must be turned, guided and directed, she must be a stirringe ship
quick of stirrige, ready at a word of her husband, she must not be immovable
like some womenne that a man were as good to remove a house, as to remove them
from their wills, but a good woman is like a shipp but not like a house.

She must be directed by discretion, and still shape her couse both by compass
and by card. I do not mean at a pair of playinge cards: for she that
directes her course that way is but an unprofitable ship for an honest trading
marchante.

The compass and the card that an honest woman is to use, is her countenance
and her consideration, which must be modest and virtuous.

She must be balanced with Sobriety and Gravity that she be not over set with
every light puff of wind, she must not set sail to every gale that blows,
but to the wind of wisdom, the wind of her husbands breath, for that is it
that must direct her in her right course; she must not be too high cargde, nor
to tant Masted for the surest safety is to bear a low sail.

She must not sail but by lead and by line still sounding the deapth and
foreseeinge the danger, she must look out for Rocks, Flattes, Shelfes and
Sands: and discovering any peril within her kenning to give her husband
warning, and (as much as in her lies) to help him to avoyde it.

A further note is here left unto me, that as a woman is thus like a ship
considered in her proper virtues, so she is likewise compared with her Owner
and there she is like a ship indeed, for who so ever marries a wife may well be
called a Merchant venturer, for he makes a great adventure that adventures his
credit, his reputation, his estate, his quiet, his liberty, yea many men by
marriage do not only adventure there bodies but many times their souls.

As the ship her self therefore must be very deliberatiue, and never sail but
by sounding, lest by her vnheedines she runs her self a ground: so he that
goes about a wife had need to look as well about him, least he make such a
choice that for one days pleasure, he does purchase repentance all the days
of his life after.

They say a man should rather choose a wife by his ears then by his eyes, but
for those that will needs adventure of such women as have been notoriously
known to be infamed, and being truly informed of them before hand, will yet
needs marry them, they are like the foolish Mariners Act. 27. who because they
took not counsayl in the haven which Paul had advised, were enforced after
they put to sea to resolve upon a wrack.

A marchantes ship to be acounted well conditioned must have many qualities:
but I say he is but a desperate merchant that will adventure of a ship that is
not stauch

She is not a good merchants ship that is too tender sided that will stoop to
every puff, that does but beat upon her quarter, and is so leward, if she
do but bite a little at a Bouline, that she will hold no course but with the
wind in her poope.

All these be ill conditions in a ship but especially in her that longes to a
merchant.

It is the property of a good ship to answer her Helm readily and not to be
heard of stirreage but to feel the Routher quickly and thereby to be turned,
ruled and directed in the course that she should hold, for that ship that is
not year of stirrage is apt to run into many perils even so that woman that is
not ruled by her husbands word but is cross and contrary to his directions is
a dangerous wife and runs her self many times into shame and infamy.

But a good woman says Soloman is like a Merchants ship a worthy come^ndation:
And although the words have been many times repeated yet they cannot be too
often itterated for amongst all other ships that crosses the seas the
merchant is most profitable both for himself and his country, for she is a
ship only for trade and traffic to enrich him, by which example a good woman
is taught in all her endeavors to respect her husbands profit.

And as the merchants ship is thus commodious, so of all other she is most
peaceable upon the sea, for she was built for peace and not for war, for
marchantes are in nothing more sorry then to hear of wars but amongst all
other things an honest true trading merchant cannot endure to hear of a
Pirate, that lives not by honest traffic but by common spoil, and as the
ship of a Pirate, (which is the true resemblance to an adultrous woman) is both
loathed and shunned by the honest trading merchant, so the time has been that
a wicked woman well known to be infamed, was no less abhorred by those that
were honest but here good women are to learn, that a merchant will in no wise
consort nor have to do with a Pirate, but as he does detest and abhor her so
he seeks by all possible means both to avoid and shun her, it should be
so amongst good women, if it be not so the greater is her blame that will admit
of a C^rtizans company.

Again the marchantes ship is a painful ship she must not be still
ridinge at ancker, or ready to run into every port or Hauer, but as she must
be obseruatiue to watch both wind and tide so to winn her voyage with the more
expedition, she must some times be content to beat it out at the sea it self
although but with a bare and a very scant gale.

And a good woman is laborious, like the marchantes ship that seeks to bring
in, she brings in by her good foresight, by her care, by her diligence, and
by the wisdom of her government.

She sees that her merchandise are good, her candle is not put out by night.

She rises while it is yet night and gives the portion to her household and
the ordinary to her maids.

She puts her fingers to the wheel and her hands handle the spindle. pro.
3.

Now a good sauer is not only a good getter but like wise a good bringer in.

The adultrous woman, she brings in too, but by so many filthy means, as
were shameful to be set down.

And as she brings in by cosening, by cheating, by gaming, and by shiftinge,
not by painefullnes but by Idleness, not by godliness, but by deuillishnes, so
she spendes it again as shamfully in dyssolution, in prodigality, in pride,
in vanity just like the Pirate, that when she has scoured the coast, and
committed a number of spoils with as many passengers as she meets she
consumes it again in the next harbor, in riot, in drunkenness, in
voluptuousnes, and in all manner of extraordinary beastlines: here is yet
again to be remembered, what has been already learnedly taught us out of
this text of scripture, for here is now to be considered, that although a
virtuous woman, in many things may be resembled to a ship, yet there be some
particular qualities belonging to a ship, that a good woman must not have and
that is, one ship may belong to many merchants and one merchant may be owner
in many ships but this is a special note of the unchaste woman, for she cries
still the more the merrier: a merchant, never sayleth but with a convenient
company no more then will suffice to handle her sails and to tackle the ship
as necessitied requires.

But the Pirat, is still double and treble manned, yea and so over pestred with
men, that she has more then she is well able to stowe: And all this she uses
as well for offense as for defense and against none so much as against the most
honest trading merchant.

So the adultrous woman does still play of the advantage, and she shall have
ten for one to take her part against any woman that is honest.

Let me but crave pardon to set down what I my self have observed in this
case.

I have seldom seen an honest woman (which is here resembled to a marchantes
ship) to have many friends to (...) for her, that will quarrel for her, that
will fight for her, or that will be at any great costs and charge by any
means to support her unless it be a father, a brother, a kinsman a husband or
some such like.

But Thucidides will needs approve that woman to be most honest, that is least
known and I think indeed that the most honest woman is least spoken of, for
they do please the least in number, and virtue was never graced by the
multitude, now to speak mine own knowledge I have not heard of those women to
be over much cloied with honesty, that are continually frequented with comers
of all sorts and to have adopted fathers adopted brothers, adopted sons,
adopted partners, adopted servants, adopted friends, and such a number of
other adopted companions as those women of approved honesty are seldom seen to
be acquainted with: do you ask me how a dishonest woman should induce this
large acquaintance.

The lips of a harlot (says Solomon) drop like the honny comb her mouth is
more soft then oil but her end more bitter then wormwoode and sharper then a
two edged sword, her feet go down to death and her steps do lead to hell
pro. 5.

I say with Solomon, beware of the slightes of a Harlot, she has a tongue to
train, eyes to allure, looks to atract, tears to excuse Smiles to flatter,
Inticements to provoke, Frowns to delay, Beckes, to recall, Lips, to
inchant, kisses to inflame, a body to perform, and all these to poison.

And as she inticeth them thus by her slightes so she disperseth them again
at her pleasure, for some she sends to the physician to seek for help, some
to the spittle that are past cure, some to weeping Cross to bewail there
expenses, some to the prison there to lie and languish, some to the gallows to
end a wretched life, and all to the devil if they have not grace to repent in
time.

These wanton countenances, these immodest behauiours these impudent domeanures
be they not allurements to make themselves known, if in steed of these
amarous glances, these yielding gestures and these enticing tricks, they would
but show a sober demeanure a modest regard, and a virtuous disposition these
lecherous pigions, that do so much follow the haunte would forsake the
douehouse.

O how many worthy women are their now in this age, that might give example,
that can so temper themselves in all their enterteinementes that they cut of
all hope from the vicious minded.

The virtuous woman girdeth her loins with strength (says Solomon) that is,
she setleth her mind with staiednes and continency, strength and honor are her
clothinge and in the latter day she shall rejoice but for the harlot she
wayteth not the way of life pro. 5.

We may see here the difference between the good woman and the bad, the one
Solomon cloatheth with honor and estimation the other he confineth in the high
way of death.

There is now one other quality that a good woman must in no wise borrow from
a ship and that is too much rigginge, and it is a great deal of charge and to
very little purpose that is bestowed on some ships in superfluities in the
paintinge of Caage works like the painting of women's faces that being worn of
with wind and weather leaves loathsomnes behind to those that do behold it and
then what Flags what Ensigns what streamers, and what pendants that serves
for no use but for pride and bravery.

But if I should speak of the vanities that are used amongst a great many of
women now a days perhaps I might offend some and I would be glad to please
all: but how many gentlemen have consumed them selves by vphoulding their wives
pride? how many Lordships are sold to vphould ladyships? and what is it that
does make so many Citizens and trades men, so commonly to play Banckrout, but
the excessive pride that is used by their wives.

By this pride of women Hospitality is eaten up and good houskeeping is
banished out of the country and how many Items are still brought in for the
bodies excess without any consideration of the poor souls nakedness.

But me thinks it could not be ill taken for me to set down how the Prophet
Esaias dallies with the wanton gestures of the vain women that were in his days
at their stretched out necks their wandering eyes, their walkinge and their
mincinge as they go in the streets.

Then he sets down a whole Royal Exchange full of vanities, so many to be
rehearsed as I will forbear at this time to deliver, they that are desirous to
know the^, let the^ look into the 3. of Esaias from the 16. to the 24 verse
where they shall find that the wanton disposed women that were in that age
has left presidents to those that are inclined to lightness now.

It has been a question, whether chastity joined with vanity, does deserve any
commendations, but I will not dispute, because I will not offend: yet I do
think that this overmuch affected folly does live with no less susspected
honesty.

She is an ill huswife therefore of her credit and reputation, that will do
any thing, to bring it into construction, that will give any signs or shows
of lightness, whereby she may be suspected, because a woman that is once
tainted in her honor, must be driven to a hard course of recovery she must
rub of the skin to wipe out the spot.

Now besides this garishnes in apparel what are these paintinge of shameless
faces, this audacious bouldnes in company, these impudent gestures without
modesty these wanton looks, these enticing shows, what are these and many
other things that might be yet spoken of but the vauntcurrers of adultry.

There is mention made of a cannon in the civil law where it was ordained
that if a man did offer violence to any woman were she never so virtuous or
honest, yet atired like a strumpet, she had no remedy against him by law.

But this excess that is now used in apparel does certainly bring three
things with it the first, Offense to God the second, It gives hope to the
vycious, and thirdly It brings destruction to the husband.

But the virtuous woman houldeth it a matter of conscience, to attire her self
no more costly then may well stand with her husbands estate and ability, she
is loath to bring him into debt or to set him on the score for her pride and
bravery.

She does her husband good, and not evil, all the days of her life, says
Solomon.

But she does her husband little good that makes him to hang on the score,
as well to his own hinderance as to the undoing of other men, and but to
maintain and vphould her pride.

But as the sin of Adam began at Eve, so the ruin the confusion the
extortion the oppression yea and the sacrilege of many a man begins at the
pride of his wife.

Every Lady of the Lake, if her husband have no tennantes of his own to gripe
and wringe yet if he can but creep into an office, or have any thing to do in
the common wealth he must prigge, he must proule, he must catch, scrape and
scratch (by all shifting means) to maintain his wives pride and licentious
manner of life.

Cornelius Tacitus in his Annals makes mention how the Romans, when they used
to send any officers, or other ministers with authority into any of their
Provinces, they would not suffer them to carry their wives with them; A reason
is rendered, because in the time of peace, women do allure and corrupt the
manners of men, by their pride and vanity, and many times by their enticing
prouocations the course of justice is checked and perverted, and most injurious
wrongs committed: and in the time of war, they do hinder the service by their
temerity and fear.

And it has many times fallen out, that when after accountes have been taken
of those that have bin thus authorized, there has more shameful matter
appeared against those that have extorted, bribed, and exacted, by the
instigation of women to maintain their pomp and pride, then could be approved
to proceed by any other occasion.

It is written of Epaminundas, the great commander in the Athenyan wars, who
having committed to prison a base fellow, euicted for his loose and lascivious
manner of life, was solicited by Polip^^ia^ a captain that ^^dd long time
been a seruitour under Epaminundas for his enlargement, but Epaminundas that
was highly displeased with this Base conditioned fellow, would in no wise be
wone to set him at liberty, till in the end a wom^n that was openly known to
be a common Curtizan, under took the suite who coming to Epaminundas she
obtained his liberty, and had the prisoner presently delivered unto her, which
being understood by Polipodias, in an angry fit he challenged Epaminundas of
great unkindness that would deny him so slender a suite, and would surrender to
a woman so generally infamed; to whom Epaminundas said.

Content thy self Polipodias, for if thou could advisedly consider of the
matter, thou would not let to confess that the suite was fitter to be
granted to a Curtizan then to a Captain.

By this I do note the impudency of these common creatures, that dare insinuate
themselves into any presence, be they never so great nor never so good and dare
adventure to undertake any suite be it never so base or never so shameful, and
by this again I do further gather, that this kind of cattle shall prevail,
when those that be honest shall have a denial, I am afraid there be too ma^y
of these women suitors in these days if all were known.

But to speak yet a little of the pride of these times I might bouldly avouch,
there is more treasure spent and consumed in that only sin then would serve
to support an army in the field.

The sums were infinite to be set down that are spent in vanities, but if I
should speak of the vanities in a particular manner, it were out of mine
eliment, my wits would not serve me.

But alas for pity, how woe begone is that poor woman, that is out of the
Taylers trim, that is out of the Imbroiderers trim, that is out of the
Haberdashers trim: but she that is out of the Atiremakers trim, she is
ashamed to show her face, she thinks her self unfit to converse with honest
company.

And there is no remedy, but my Lady must be coacht she can not go to church to
serve God without a coach: she that her self and her mother before her, have
travailed many a mile a foot, can not now cross the breadth of a street,
but she must have a coach: I would not debar those Ladies or Gentlewomen, of
any thing that might either ease or please them: those (I mean) that from
there infancy have been trained up by there able and worthy parents, in a
more dainty and delicate manner, then those other again that never knew what
gentilitie meant, for I make great difference between her that has been
nurtured up in virtue, in sobriety, in modesty, and in the fear of God, from
her that had no better tuteringe then in servitude, and in those base
functions, that they do but be durty a dignity that is bestowed upon them who
knowinge themselves to be but Home Spunne Cloth would yet be reputed to be of
Scarlet die.

It is truth, nature is sometimes helped by Art but those creatures are made
imperfect as well by nature as by traininge up: and how education is able to
alter, we have been taught long since by Licurgus whelps.

Those women that be of high parentage, and honorable education, being from
there infancy trained up in a discipline more noble and excellent, they cannot
in common judgment, but prove more admirable as well in the beauty of the body,
as in the gifts of the mind.

Where the other again of base education that have not ^ad there minds
manured with discipline nor themselves trained up in the study of knowledge
they must be therefore the more imperfect, but especially in those things that
should beautify the mind.

A further note is yet left unto me, that as he is not to be accounted the
best merchant to the common wealth which brings in toys and trifles, and
such other fantasies as are both vain and needles, but that brings in such
commodities as may best serve necessity, neither is she always the best wife
that is must adorned with new fangled vanities, but she that indeuoureth most
to do that which is most needful.

And as those ships that are sometimes the fairest to show, are not always
the fittest for use, neither are those women the more to be esteemed, but much
the rather to be suspected that do prank up themselves with too many murlimues.

Yet in great and worthy persons, such as are of ability and estate, the use
of ornaments are not condemned for silk and silver and gold it self were
created by the living God and not only for his own glory but likewise for
necessities sake, and may well be used by good and godly persons.

It is written of the daughter of Augustus when on a day being attired above
her accustomed modesty, whereat her father taking no great pleasure, yet for
the present gouerninge his judgment with silence till the next day when
finding her in habit more convenient to his liking O (said he) how far more
seemly is this attire for the daughter of Augustus, then that which she ware
but yesterday, so much to the disguising of nature: to whom she answered (and
that with reverence) then sir, I used my time to please my husband, and now I
stand to satisfy my duty toward my father.

The like example was used by that virtuous woman Hester, when she protested
to God that the sumptuous attire which sometimes she used, carried no other
purpose then to feed the likinge of that great king Assuerus, that had chosen
her for his own.

And Iudeth, when she stripped her self out of her sackcloath, into more
glorious garments, and decked herself with so many rich ornaments, was it
for any other cause then to perform a service to the glory of God.

It is not the Frocke, therefore that makes the Friar the more devout, nor the
garments of every woman a true confirmation of incontinency of life.

This therefore may well be avowed by the rules of Christian sobriety, that a
woman, neither exceeding the decency of fashion, nor going beyond the limits
of her own estate, nor surpassing the bounds of her husbands calling, I do
not think but such a woman may wear any thing.

Provided always, that she braues it not out with other men's goods, that
she hanges not in the Mercers books, in the Goldsmithes books, in the
Taylers book, maintaininge her pride with other men's purses like Aesops Iay,
that decked her self with other birds feathers

This beauty which is so much esteemed amongst women should be a Looking
glass, whereby we might a far off, display the Majesty of the creator, and
from thence should pass with the wings of our cogitations to the
contemplation of the highest fair, which is the invisible beauty of the
almighty God, from whence as from a fountain all smaller rivers derive their
beauties.

And as beauty is a blessing to a woman, so she should learn of her mother
nature to hide it, who covers every fair and precious thing under shelles
barks rocks yea and in bottomless deapthes, and not to lay it open as a thing
common.

Precious things are not every day set to open sale, and beauty lays open
her riches, not only in the Eliments, but likewise in the compounds, not only
on the superficial parts of the Earth, but even within the bowels thereof
where she hordeth them up as in a safe treasury: the beauty of the mind is
much more worth then the beauty of the body, the invisible of better esteem
then the visible.

A beautiful woman knowinge her own perfection* should so much the rather
guide her self by the zeal of honor and the bridle of shamefastnes, and not
to violate so unspeakable a treasure with any signs or shows of immodestie.

A beautiful woman being robbed and spoiled of those excellent ornaments of
Modesty, and Bashfullnes, she remains naked both in price and honor and is
so much the more to be hated and detested.

The beauty of the body, is but a sliding shadow that quickly vanishes away,
we should therefore turn our eyes to the beauty of the mind which is
indeed, the sovereign light that is free from all change.

If beauty it self be thus vain and brittle, what is then this borrowed
beauty. and first how many vices are hidden under these pai^ted faces, what
deformity covered with vailes and masks, what crooked minds under straightened
bodies, what violating of honor under counterfeit sh^wes of comlines neither
can it be called, a natural or bodyly beauty in them, who having torn the
sanctified vailes of shamefastnes have offered the use of their intemperate
bodies to common prostitutio^ (though not verbally in words) yet under the
shows of their gaudy and garish attyres.

For this painting of faces, I think it exceedes so much the more in many
women to please the eyes of men which they think are the sooner drawn to a
liking by some appearing beauty wherein they sometimes exceed so far, that in
stead of making themselves lovely, they many times become loathsome and
odious, not only in the conceiptes of all honest men, but even to those to
whom they be most desirous to please and content.

But she that is not ashamed to falsisie those exterior parts of the body is
much to be suspected that she will make little conscience to adulterate the
inward beauty of the mind* how many women are there in these days that do
employ all there studdies and bend their whole endeavors, but only to the
adorninge of there bodyly beauty, as if they had been created by God, but
only to make themselves appear to be gaye and beautiful.

And how many worthy women be there again in these days in whom the outward
beauties of there bodies do but express the inward beauty of the minds.

Nature has ordained in all good and virtuous women this affection of shame
fastnes, which serves as a restraint to withhould them from those artificial
abillimentes that do either smell of vanity, or breed suspect of honesty: for
Bashfulnes is it that moderates there thoughts, makes them modest in their
speeches, temperate in their actions, and wary in all their deliberations. The
blush of a woman's face is an approbation of achast and honorable mind, and a
manifest sign, that she does not approve any intemperate actions, or any
other lascivious speeches, and demeanours that are either offered to herself,
or to any in her presence.

The woman that has forgotten to blush, it is an argument, she is past grace,
for Shamefastnes is not only a bridle to sin, but it is likewise the common
treasury of feminine virtue.

We have hitherto heard, that a woman is likened to a ship, the veruous to a
ship of marcha^ts: the vicious to a pirate or a robber: and there are many
things that are like the one the other, but every similitude is not the thing
it self that it resembles the Devil is like an Angel of light, and copper is
like gold, yet all is not gold that glistereth, and if evil women were not
sometimes like to good, which indeed they be not, they could not deceive so
many men as they do.

Let us now see likewise what the virtuous woman does, for being, is known by
doing as the tree is known by his fruit.

She seeks woolle and flax, and labors, she puts her hands to the
wheell etc,

Solomon pointed her a house-worke it should seem, she must not be a gadder
about the streets but a Home huswife: and although her degree be such, that
she puts not her self to bodily labor, yet She over sees the ways of
her household, she must see to her children her servants and her family.

And a virtuous woman though she bring in nothing that is of her own
earning, gotten with her own hands, yet (as it has been worthily noted)
great things comes in by her: she brings in by her diligence, by her
wisdom by her government and by her good foresight she brings in with her
eye.

The Harlot is of an other condition, for she rather seeks to spend in
vanity, then to bring in honestly, and what is lewdly gotten is commonly as
lewdly spent.

As the certain marks of a virtuous woman, is to be a good huswife, and to
keep her own house, so one other especial note of the adulterous woman is:

Her feet cannot abide in her house, but now she is without now in the
street, and lies in wait at every corner: Pro. 7.

A dishonest woman is hardly kept within her own house, but she must be a
ramping, and a roysting about to make herself known: but it should seem by
the process of the text, Genesis 31. that Jacobs wives, Rahell and Leah, were
none of these fisking dames, that did use to run about to seek out
acquaintance: for although Jacob himself kept the fields amongst the cattle,
yet his wives were still abiding in their fathers house, for when Jacob was
warned by God, to make his return amongst his own kindred: He sent and called
Rahell and Leah to the fields unto his flock: he sent, and the messenger
found them, for they were not to seek, but the paths of a Harlot are
moveable, they are hard to be found (says Solomon) It was not so with them,
for they were not so suddenly sent for, but they were as readily found, and
came away with as great speed: and such expedition was made by their willing
readiness, that Laban followed seven days iourny, before he could overtake them.

By this it might appear, that Jacobs two wives Rahell and Leah, were no
gadders amongst their gossips: only Jacobs daughter Dinah, in a gadding iourny
to take the gaze, made an ill voyage and came home with shame enough.

And Jacob himself, though he were a good man, yet he had his infirmities,
for as he loved one wife better then an other: so he loved one son more
dearly then an other, which amongst the rest of his children caused that
malice and despite, as might have cost the life of Joseph.

And as Jacob was not free from these infirmities, so he was subject to other
several crosses: first Laban beguileth him: then his most dearly beloved wife,
was a long time barren: his son Ruben defiles his bed, and commits incest
with Bilhah, his daughter Dinah was ravished in the idle iourny she made to
visit the daughters of a strange people.

But if I should speak of the disorders of his children in general, I might
amplify much more then properly belongs to the subject that I have taken in
hand: but these are examples for our learning, to teach us to walk warily, and
to be very circumspect how we govern our selves in the affairs of this
uncertain world, where our affections are apt and ready to lead us astray.

The matter that I would make evident is, that the holiest men may sometimes be
wronged by a disloyal wife: and here is yet a further note to be observed: for
Rahel and Leah that had been trained up in a generous manner by Laban their
father, (and were both of them as well perfected by nature as by nurture)
continued the honor and dignity of their sex to their dying day; but Bilhah
that was a woman of a more servile estate and condition, she wronged Jacob,
defiling his bed with one of his own sons: the hystory is very well
known, and by the circumstances we may boldly conclude, that whatsoever he
be, that will take such a wife as has been trained up in a base education,
let him be sure she will show her self no less base in condition.

But to return to our former purpose, we have heard that the woman of honest
life, keeps her own house: She over sees the ways of her household, but
the other, her feet can not abide in her house: but she sits in her
doors, enticing the passers by, to enter, but her guests that go in are in
the depth of hell. Pro. 9.

Depart from her therefore, thou that are wise, keep thy self aloof from
her, and come not near the doors of her house

Amongst these instructions thus left unto us, there is yet one other note set
down by Solomon, what the virtuous woman does: She eats not the bread of
idleness.

To speak truly, she that is so negligent to look into her household
affairs, that her diligence does not counteruaile her meat, she is unworthy
to eat at all, but our women now are grown to be so dainty mouthed, that the
ordinary food that their mothers were brought up withal, is now become too
base for the daughters.

All must be dainty, though sometimes creditors do wring for it, yea, and
their own husbands sometimes for company: like Eve the wife of Adam, who
amongst all the trees in paradise, none would serve, but that which was her
husbands bane.

I do not speak against Hospitality, or good housekeeping: for bounty is never
repugnant to honesty, but does always rather accompany it.

The matter that I reprehend, is this prodigal nicity, that is good for
nothing, unless to verify the proverb, Far fetched and dear^ bought is good
for Ladies.

These women's minds that are not ruled by the bridle of Shamefastnes, they do
set their whole desires of those things which do best befit their own
pleasures and delights, and do hunt after nothing else, but after such things
as do give way to their own contents, and that is, to love variety as well in
meats, as in all other things, to desire novelties, to follow delicacies, and
are common guestes at banquets, and are apt and ready to frequent tables, that
be furnished and pestred with too many superfluities: the which do naturally
incline to concupiscence, for this diversity of nourishing meats (being so
much the more increased by sweet and pleasing odours and perfumes) it carries
them headlong to the highest degree of Intemperance: for where Sense bears
sway, and without the Curb or Bridle of Virtue, is made predominant: there
Reason is made a Slave, and is ledd into a delight some kind of Lethargy, to
the end it should not be able to discern that error.

Such is the way of an adulterous woman (says Solomon) she eats and wipeth
her mouth, and says, I have committed no iniquity.

Me thinks Solomon in these words, has painted out the perfect picture of a
harlot, as she sits at her table.

She eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have committed no iniquity.

She eats, but not of the labor of her hands, or of her own honest
endeavors: but she eats the bread of idleness, and not of idleness alone, but
of that which is brought in by sin, by wickedness, by deceit, and many times,
by filthy abomination.

Yet she sits and simpereth amongst the unfortunate fools that frequent
her, and (alas says she) I am innocent, free from ill thought, I am not
vengable, I am not malicious: I am loath to offend any, I never did wrong,
alas I am harmeles,

And thus she wipeth her mouth and says, I have committed no iniquity: when
in truth there is nothing in her but malice, there is nothing in her but
mischeife, there is nothing in her but dissension, but lying, but slandering,
but stirring of strife, but drawing of quarrels, but setting of men together by
the ears, but cosening and cheating to maintain pomp and prodigality: and
pomp and prodigallity vphoulden again thereby to draw in Fools to be cosened
and cheated.

O beware therefore, of the subtleties of a Harlot, beware of her hypocrisy,
beware of her dissimulation, beware of her when she once begins to
counterfeit holiness.

Solomon scoffeth at those holy Harlotes, and she that offered her self to
every man's lust, he sets out for ademy-saint with peace offeringes to God.
Pro. 7,

Take heed (says he) of the woman that is smooth of tongue for looking out of
my window in an evening, I saw a young man passing through the streets, and
behold a woman met with him, that was of a Harlotes behavior, smooth of her
tongue and subtle in her heart: so she caught him and she kissed him with an
impudent face, and said unto him: I have peace offeringes: this day I have
paid my vows, and I am come out to seek thee, and now I have found thee,
come let us take our fill of pleasure, I have decked my chamber with rich
ornaments: I have perfumed my bed, all things are prepared: let us therefore
spend the time in love and daliance.

This description is made by Solomon in his book of Pro, Cap. 7. from the 10.
to the 24 verse.

One other note of the virtuous woman: She opens her mouth with wisdom,
and the law of grace is in her tongue

The woman of modesty opens not her mouth but with discretion, neither is
there any bitterness in her tongue: she seems in speaking, to hold her
peace, and in her silence she seems to speak.

Her very countenance does preach modesty, sobriety bashfullnes, continency,
temperance, stayednes humility grace and goodness:

A Harlot is full of words She is babbling and loud (says Solomon) Pro. 7.

She is bold, she is impudent, she is shameless she is immodest, she will
blush at nothing, she is presumptuous, she is a disgrace to womanhood and fit
for no company but for the lascivious, yet again the virtuous woman will do
her husband good and not ill all the days of her life.

But the wicked woman is a reproach to her husband, and she does him more
injury, then all her good is able to counteruaile, he shall find it in his
purse by her prodigality, by her pride, by her vanity: for she makes him
still fitter to crave new credit, then to pay old debtes

He shall find it in his credit and reputation, for he is mocked scorned and
derided, by as many as know him and is pointed at as he passes through the
streets.

To conclude a virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that makes
him ashamed is as corruption in his bones. Pro. 12.

We do see that a virtuous woman is compared in the scriptures to be like unto
many things: for sometimes she is likened to a marchantes ship, sometimes to
a lilie sometimes to a garden of pleasant flowers, sometimes to a spring of
sweet water: David likeueth her to a fruitful vine and here she is compared
to a crown.

We may see, a virtuous woman is like unto many things: but as Solomon has
said pearls and precious stones are not like unto her: she is inestimable.

These notes of women thus formerly spoken of, are given us by Solomon, whereby
to distinguish the good from the bad, for as I have already said there has
been both good and bad and that from the beginning.

And as saint Paul, writing to the Corinthians, says there must be Herisies
that they that are proved may be known

So say I: amongst women there must be bad amongst the good that those that are
good may be the more glorious.

As virtues then had their being in the world: so vices did necessaryly
accompany them and have the like increasing or decreasing the one as the other.

It cannot therefore be said: that vices do more abound at this present then in
former ages, but we must confess the like of virtues, that are more exceeding
now then in times past they have been for what is there remaininge under the
heavens that is not perfected.

I dare bouldly avouch, there is no art no science no occupatio^, nor
handicraft, nor any other profession what so ever, but there is innovation, and
from age to age, all things are perfected bettered and drawn to a form of
greater excellency then ever our preadecessours understood of.

And as by this continuance of time, goodness is made better, so ill is made
worse: and as good women are more virtuous, so ill women are more vicious.

From hence I would conclude, that as the world was yet never destitute of good
women, but that from age to age it was still replenished, and that in most
abundant manner: so I am persuaded, that at this present hour, good women are
not only as plentiful as they have been in times past, but that they are
now more superexcellent, then ever they were before, not for that the good
women of former ages, did omit any goodness that then was known, but because
our predecessors were ignorant (indeed) of many things appertaining both to
good and ill, that is now frequent and conversant almost to every understanding.

We have now learned from Solomon, the true notes and marks of a good woman,
both what she is, and whereby we may both know and find her.

And we see it is not she, that can show the most impudent face, it is not
she that can dance the most loftiest sinquapace, it is not she that is too
lavish of her lips, or to loose of her tongue, it is not she that has
forgotten to blush, nor to be ashamed at any thing, it is not she that is
either too coy, or yet too courteous: why then? modesty is it, that is the true
mark of every good woman, and she that has once lost that virtue, she has
lost her evidence, she has nothing to show that she is a woman, but rather a
mo^ster in the habit or shape of a woman, odible in the sight of God and
hateful and detestable before all good men: if there be any that will impugn
these testimonies thus set down by Solomon, they can be none but such as will
impugn the verity of the holy scriptures: for if the scriptures be true
Solomon was the wisest that ever was amongst men: and out of the depth of this
wisdom he has given us these notes which he has left unto us in his books
of Proverbs, a book first inspired by the spirit of God, a book Cannonized
allowed and received by the Church.

The infallible marks of a virtuous woman then, as they are set down by
Solomon are these, she must have modesty, hashfullnes, silence, abstinence,
sobriety: she must be tractable to her husband, She does her husband good
etc. She must not be a vain talker She opens her mouth with wisdom.

She must be careful of her family She ouerseeth the ways of her household,

She must be full of exercises: She eats not the bread of idleness.

Now the woman that is impudent, immodest, shameless, insolent, audacious, a
night walker, a company keeper, a gadder about the streets, if such a woman may
be nu^bred amongst those women that be good, then Solomon was a Fool, that
has avowed the contrary, and then the scriptures are untrue that has
testified of his wisdom, and God him self is a promise breaker, and was not
true of his word when he said unto Solomon.

I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart so that there has been
none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall arise the like unto thee.
1. Kin. Cap. 3. if there be any therefore that will yet make cauels, to the
contrary, they do but bewray themselves and such vain contenders, are not
worthy to be answered, I will therefore here make an end and rest my self
with silence.

FINIS.
Epilogus.
These harmless lines, that never did conspire,
In any sort, to slander or detect:
I hope shall not be tortured on the rack,
Nor wrested to a misconceiued sense.
I strike at Sin, yet sing bright Virtues praise,
If Gauld back jade, with self misdeeming eye,
Will search so near, to rub his festred sore:
The faults not mine, his error is the more.
What song so sweet, if Saints themselves would sing,
But Currs would bark, and Snakes are apt to sting.
The sum is this, I little force the spite,
That scrues awry, what I have forged right.
FINIS.

