OF the foolishnes of men in putting-off the amendment of their lives from
day to day, A godly and profitable treatise for the present time; Written in
the Latin tongue by that reverend and worthy member of Christ his Church in
this age, John Riuius.

Newly translated by Thomas Rogers.

Ecclesiast. 5, 7. Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off
from day to day: for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and
in thy security shall thou be destroyed; and thou shall perish in the time of
vengeance. Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsel, and are to be sold at his
shop at the west end of Paul's Church.

To the most noble Prince, and Lord, Maurice, Duke of Saxony, Elector of the
sacred Empire, Landgraue of Thuring, Marquis of Misna, etc. his most gracious
Prince: John Riuius, wishes S.
AMong all evils, well-nigh infinite, which, to the astonishment of every man,
have taken strength this day in the world, the security of men, in delaying
the amendment of their sinful life, is not the least; which when I remember,
and call into mind, which often I do, I am not a little amazed. And surely
for so much as the life of man (as holy Job does witness, and experience does
confirm) is but very short; and a Christian should evermore consider that
presently he either must or may die, (for our Savior wills us to watch
continually, to be ready against death,) the foolishnes of men in prolonging
repentance from day to day, may well make all men to wonder; unless they
be of the sect of Epicures, supposing the soul to die with the body, and
after death no part of man to remain. For otherwise, he which has any care
of his own salvation, and believes there be after death both rewards for the
godly, and punishments for sinners, cannot choose but, not only for his own
part continually think of repenting, while sins may be forgiven: but also
in respect of others, marvelously muze at their folly, which neglect a thing
so profitable, and so necessary; and the more a great deal, for that no man
living is sure he shall live, I say not until night, but an hour more, no not
a minute or moment of time.

But to say nothing of the younger and lustier sort, who think they may have
whatsoever they hope for, though fondly, and foolishlie they do so: what do
doting and bald men in their old age, when they should spend the time which
they have to live in none other cogitations, and works, but such as pertain
unto the attainement of salvation? Surely they think as little of death as
young men do: and so defer the amendment of their life, and never think
while time is to repent, as though they could promise many years more to
themselves; which thing notwithstanding they should rather wish, than hope for.
Yea, which is more wonderful, and shows more plainly the dotage of old
men, they blush not at four score years of age, to marry wenches under
sixteen years. What more? I am ashamed, it greeueth me to say it, so I may
live, and so I may have Christ merciful unto me. Then what? wantonlie,
delicatelie, riotouslie they spend the time, they love, they make good cheer,
they play the whore-masters, they are sweet in ointments, they take their
pleasure; and as an old man in the Poet says: Because my days be short,
which I have hear to live;
To women, wine, and pleasant sport,
my self I mind to give.


The same do our old men in words commonly, in deeds openly say, and
confirm by their life. Neither do they, which commit these heinous offenses,
even with hoare heads (for why should I be afraid to speak it) make any
great accoumpt with themselves, or care of reforming their manners; but are
Christians in name only, but in deed and life nothing so.

To come to the crooked old women, which have had many husbands, what do
they? Surely even they too, when they are most old, and full of wrinckles,
make death a banquet (as the Poet says,) that is, they be not afraid to
marry yet again: whereas in deed, if they were touched with any care of
their salvation, they should do better, if with Anna the Prophetisse, of whom
Luke. 2, 36, 37. makes mention, they never went out of the temple, but served
God with fasting and prayers night and day. I speak not of the younger women,
for whom, according to the sentence of Paul, 1. Tim. 5, 14. 1. Cor. 7, 8, 9.
it is better that they marry then to burn: but of old, and aged women, who in
respect of their years can bear no children. For they, after the manner of
doting old men (of whom I have spoken) bid honesty farewell, and care little
what becomes them. Such a mischeef is in example. They allege for
themselves solitarines and poverty* and other (as they think) just causes at
those years and likely: but pretend they what they will, yet shall they never
prove their intemperancie good either before God, or men, howsoever they
cloak and cover the same.

We dally too much with our selves, we do yield too too much to our
weakness, or lust rather; we suffer our selves over easelie to be snarled by
the allurements of the flesh; we cast not away the tenderness of our mind, we
resist not the snares, and ingines of Satan by continual prayer; we tame not
our body with abstinence, and fasting. Hence come the tears, as it is said;
and this makes such old marriages, in those years which call for a new life,
and a new conversation. For it were time then, not to think of the short time,
which is to be spent, but of the life to come which alwaie shall endure. When
think you they will begin to amend, and have regard of their salvation? When
will they repent? When will they prepare themselves unto death, which marry
even when they are going to the grave? Either I am deceived, or this is not the
way unto heaven, as the Tragical Poet does say.

Alack, alack, whether is the godliness of Christians gone? How few are they,
if there be any at all, which call into mind the shortness, and uncertainty
of this life; death always at hand; the judgment seat of Christ; the last
judgment; everlasting felicity in the heavens; the torments and cursed state
of hell? Neither the regard of the kingdom of God, and of an happy life
does stir up unto godliness; nor the fear of hell, and everlasting destruction
either reclame from offending, or terrefie from sin. Neither do most men
give credit to the word of God, and religion; or if they believe it, through a
vain hope of Gods pardon toward the obstinate, and such as persevere in sin;
they most foolishlie do flatter themselves: neither do they endeavor by
little and little to cast off wicked custom, which in manner is turned into
another nature. Slothfulnes and security has invaded them, being drunk as it
were with prosperity; they are lead away and fed with a false and foolish
hope of longer life.

Many also through confidence which they put in the Popes pardons; in the
superstitious woorship of S. Barbara; and in a Friars cowle, think nothing at
all of amending their life. Furthermore, some are spilled either through wicked
company, and too much familiarity with ungodly persons; or by the Sermons of
indiscreet men, by such I mean, as preach much of the forgiveness of sin for
Christ his sake, and of Christ's righteousness; but either nothing at all, or
very little at all of doing and following the will of God; and of the
sanctification of the spirit, wherebie we be renewed unto good works.

To be short: No man contemning earthly, breaths and sigheth after
heavenly things; no man is touched with the anger of God against wickedness; no
man blusheth at the violating of Gods commandments; no man is reclamed either
from filthiness through shame; or from sin, through the fear of God. So that
every man's life is polluted with great sins, and wickedness.

And although I grant, what Seneca in a certain place writes, that Hereof
our elders have complained, hereof do we complain, hereof they which live
after us will complain, namely that good manners be overthrown, wickedness
does reign, the world waxes worse and worse, and falls into all
ungodliness: though I grant this, I say, yet I dare affirm that in this
corrupt, and wretched age of ours, all manner vices have so increased, that
hardly greater wickedness cannot be. For what sin or wickedness at this day
is wanting, which if it reigned, this age might be said to be the more
ungodly for that respect? When as in deed we can neither patiently abide to
hear our sins laid before us; nor quietly suffer to be reprehended: or if
any can, it is as much as if a tale were told to a deaf man (as the saying
is). For no man amendeth his life or manners; no man reformeth his wickedness by
contrary virtues; no man heals his sins past, no not with the least good
works.

I am greatly afraid least in that day of the great judgment, our
outrageous wickedness; our lust, covetousness, dishonestie, pride, riotousnes
will be condemned by the egregious and most excellent virtues of Heathen men; as
by the abstinence of Aristides, the innocence of Phocion, the holiness of
Socrates, the alms deeds of Cimon, the moderation of Camillus, the honesty,
justice, and faithfulness of both Catoes; and who can recite all of them? Yea, I
am afraid, the sobriety of the Turks, will condemn our gluttony, and
dronkennes. Yea, and Sodom, Tyrus and Sidon, will there lay before our face
our extreme wickedness even in this new light of the Gospel; so that in the
day of judgment it shall be easier for these, then for us: as our Savior upon
like occasion threatened certain towns, as Luke records.

So that it plainly appears, how far we be in deed from right Christians,
though we desire to be compted so. For in vain takes he the name of a
Christian to him, that does not lead a life aunswerable and agreeable to
Christian profession; and (as Paul says) worthy of God. Had we any wit, the
very name of a Christian would make us blush, and be ashamed to violate the
commandments of God.

O would to God, that at the length, though late, we would repent, and turn
unto God with our whole heart, and not destroy our selves by deferring our
amendment; the which manie-times God punishes both with sudden death,
unawares, and also with everlasting destruction: that in deed it stands us
upon to have in mind continually both death and hell, and the tribunal seat
of Christ; and to think that the ears of our conscience be stricken both with
the terrible sound of that trumpe, summoning unto the last judgment; and with
the dreadful voice of the judge, condemning the wicked and ungodly mates unto
the fire which never shall be quenched. Now if these things do nothing move the
obstinate, I see not what hope at all is left: and whether there be any he
does know, who knows all things, even God alone.

But omit we vain, and unprofitable complaints. Therefore (to return to our
purpose) for so much as the security, and wickedness of men in prolonging the
correction of their sinful conversation, is so great: I have thought good, to
seek, out according to my poor skill, some remedy for that matter, and to
communicate the same with the ruder sort, if any whit it may profit others.
For at the first I wrote the same for my private use, that alwaie I might have
before me that, which might waken me, as it were out of the sleep of too much
security. Happy I say much happy is that man, which stands in no need of
such a remedy against the old man; nor of such a remembrance to cast-awaie
sloth. But, as I said, the song which I sang to my self, I have thought good
to impart with the simpler sort, for so much as I know in some respect it may
do good; least with Aspendius the Musicion, as the Proverb is, I sing within
to my self. For my desire is by all means to profit others.

Which my labor I have thought good to dedicate to you, most gracious Prince,
and that in none other respect, but to leave a public monument of our
obedience toward you. Accept therefore these things in good part, after your
wonted goodness, and protect us, as you do.

At Misena, on S. Michaels eve, in the year from the incarnation of our
Savior Christ, 1547.
Translated the 23. of February. 1581.
Cap. 1.
A Preface unto the discourse following.
WOuld they, which desire to be taken for Christians, so much abhor and shun
the manners, as they do at this day, detest the name and profession of
Epicures, and Sadduces! doubtless they would as zealously not only fly from
all evil, but also follow virtue, as now they obstinately persist in sin,
and live in wickedness; yea, they would as carefully observe the laws of the
most righteous and almighty God, as they live securely, without all fear of
his Majesty. But in very deed, our life, deeds, and conversation, does
show, that we more abhor, and fear the odious name of a wicked Epicure, or
Sadduceie, than we do the nature.

For what? Think ye, they believe the soul is immortal, who live in manner
as Beasts? or be they persuaded, there be either rewards for the godly in
heaven, or punishment in hell appointed for sinners, who in every thing dread
not to violate the commandments of God; and run altogether headlong into
sin, even as though they did either think that God were but a vain and
fained thing; or believe that when the body dies, the soul likewise
perishes, and comes unto nothing?

Notwithstanding, be it, that some, who God knows are very few, do both
fear God, and doubt no whit that in time to come he will either punish, or
reward every man according to his desert: yet what is he whom the fear of
Gods justice does reclame from sin, or bring to amendment of life?

Wherein we have just occasion offered, to lament and bewail the condition of
us all, and to marvel at our foolishnes, blindness, and madness, who, in such a
shortness and uncertainty of this present life, so behave our selves, that, no
not in crooked old age, when the vttermoste day of our life cannot be far
off, much less in our youth, while we are lusty, do we take any care of
reforming our manners.

I therefore calling this folly, or madness rather of men, in deferring the
amendment of life, into mind, have thought it good to search out the causes,
why in a matter of such importance, as the salvation of the soul is, we are
so rechlesse, and secure. For these being found and brought forth, it will be
an easy thing, as I think, to find a remedy for this evil.

Cap. 2.
The first cause why man does not repent.
IN my judgment, the principal and cheifest cause hereof, is our
incredulity. For did we believe those things which are written in the sacred
Scripture, of the judgment to come; of the voice of the Archangel, and Trumpe
of God; of the tribunal seat of Christ, before which all the sort of us are
to appear; of the pains of the reprobate; of the endless condition and
felicity of the righteous; of the resurrection to come both of body and
soul, to an assured part either of glory, or of shame; did we believe these
things, I say, not to be a vain, or old wives tale, sure I am, we would study
to lead an other kind of life, and not diferre the amendment of our life, so
as we do from day to day.

For who is there so wicked, but will either quake in body, or shake in mind
and heart, when he considers the judgment to come? At which judgment all
men must give an account before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, not only
of their words and deeds, but also of every thought and cogitation; where
every man as I may say, shall plead for his own life.

O horrible judgment to the ungodly. A description of the judgment to come.
The remembrance whereof at no time should slip out of our mind. For, as he
says, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the
sinner appear? The son of God himself shall sit a Judge upon all mankind
that have been from the beginning of the world: then will he be severe,
sharp, not entreated, which now is an advocate for sinners with God his
Father. All men shall be summoned to give an account of their life spent, vea,
the hearts of all shall be opened; every man's conscience shall accuse, reprove,
and condemn himself. Last of all, God severely, yet righteouslie, shall
punish the wicked, and of his mercy preserve the godly, that is, will reward
every man according to his works, as Paul does say.

Neither at this judgment shall wicked deeds only be judged, as adultery,
whoredom, incest, witchcrafte, murder, backbiting, theft, robbery,
sacrilege, quaffing, riotousnes, dronkennes, usury, and such other sins;
nor every idle, scurrilous, vain, filthy, beastly, light, fond, foolish,
rash, immodest, and babbling word only (and such like) wherewithal the godly
ears are justly offended; but also the secret will, ungodly wishinges, and
cogitations, with the wicked affections of the mind, striving against the law
of God, as anger, hatred, dissimulation, enmity, spite, envy, euil-wil,
disdain, covetousness, desire of that which is an other man's, and such like.

Therefore who believes, that one day there shall be a judgment, and will not
by the remembrance thereof either be reclaimed, if he have been wicked; or
detained back, if he be inclined to fall into sin? Well said one of the
ancient Doctors, Whether I eat, or drink, or whatsoever else I do, me
thinks I always hear this sound in mine ears; Arise ye dead, and come
unto judgment. As often as I call into mind the day of judgment, I shake
again even at the very heart, and all my body over; and so forth.

If the flesh then provoke any man, whether it be unto lechery, and vile
pleasure, or unto gluttony, and surfeiting; or to any other vices and
wickedness: let him remember the day of the last judgment. If either
prosperity puff up the mind (as commonly it does;) or wealth make hautie,
and cruel; or honor, worship, or authority engender pride in any man; let
him forthwith remember the judgment of Christ: If either anger unto
reuengement, or envy unto disdain, or covetousness unto couen and theft, or
the world unto ambition, pride, or belly, cheer, or the Devil tempt thee unto
blaspheming the name of God, and to other sins and wicked facts; think
straight way of the voice of the Archangel: believe how thou must plead thine
own cause before the bench of Gods judgment, and from thy very heart, do thou
fear the heavy sentence of that Judge, who doubtless will condemn the wicked
unto everlasting fire.

Would to God, oh would to God, this day of judgment were at no time
forgotten! then would every man do his duty. Both Magistrates then would
seek the wealth and welfare, defend the liberty, and maintain the laws and
rightes of the people committed to their charge: and Subjects then would give
lawful obedience to their Magistrates, and at no time either repine at their
Governors, or withhold tribute, or custom; but willingly would render all
fear and due honor unto them. Both Husbands then would love their wives, Ephesians.
5, 33.
even as themselves: And also wives would fear their husbands, Ephesians. 5, 22.
and be subject to them, as unto the Lord. Then would Parents bring up their
children in instruction, Ephesians. 6, 4.
and information of the Lord, as the Apostle teaches: and children in the Lord
would obey their Parents, Ephesians. 6, 1, 2
and honor them with all humility. Servant then would be obedient unto them
which are their Masters, Ephesians. 6, 5.
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of their
hearts, as unto Christ: as the same Paul does admonish: and Masters would be
more mild and gentle toward them, Ephe. 6, 9.
knowing that even their Master also is in heaven. Pastors then would have
that care of the Lords flock, which they ought to have. Rich men would supply
the lack of the poor. Widows would continue in supplications and prayers
night and day. The poor would patiently endure poverty, sith it has
pleased the Lord to allot the same unto them. He which has a wife would so
deal, as if he had none: and he that is unmarried, care only for those
things which may please the Lord. To be short; There is no man but would do
his duty, did he always remember the day of the last judgment, at which
time God will ask an account of us of our whole life, and of every deed,
which we have done, and so appoint either punishment, or reward, according to
every man's desert.

In the time of a great plague, Cogitations of men when they are sick.
when death is before men's eyes, we see how all men (be they not dissembling
Christians) are careful to reform and amend their manners. What then? Be
such when thou art whole, as thou were being sick.
Ought we not at all times, every hour, yea and every moment, to think of
the amendment of our life; to be touched with a true, and bitter sorrow for
our sins, and to pacify the wrath of God by repentance; especially seeing,
in respect of uncertain chances, death continualie is imminent, and hangs
every hour over the heads of all and every of us, as we are certainly to
think. Therefore who so is wise, will have such a care, as I have showed, as
men commonly have in a great pestilence: at which time, as it were wakened out
of the sleep (of security,) they are wont to take care, and to think how to
change their wicked lives; how to fly and avoid sin; how to follow
righteousness and godliness; finally, how to please God by repentance, who is
displeased through our sins. Let every man then persevere so, when he has
escaped the plague, as he purposed to be when the sickness was hot.

All men acknowledge, that the hour of death is uncertain, yet is it most
certain that one day we shall die.

Now what foolishnes is it, to fear death, which every moment hangs over
our heads; and in the mean time not to think of amendment of life! But thus
it is. In adversity, as in the time of the plague, of famine, of war, of
Earthquake, of any grievous and dangerous sickness of the body, we can
acknowledge the just anger, and displeasure of God against wickedness: but when
things flow forth according to our hearts desire, we blush no whit to abuse
his goodness, and liberality, neither do we call into mind, neither death
ready to take us every hour; 1. The. 4, 16.
Nor the last judgment, nor the voice of the Archangell, whereof Paul makes
mention writing unto the Thessalonians: Nor the Trumpet of God: nor of Hell,
either the everlasting punishment, or the unquenchable fire, nor finally that
utter darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The memory whereof,
should be fresh in our mind, both when we rise from our beds in the morning,
and when we go unto bed in the evening; both when we dine, and when we suppe,
when we are washed for health sake, when we deal in matters that are serious:
yea and when we do recreate our mind with honest sport.

But these things, to wit the last judgment; the Lords tribunal seat, the
voice of the Archangell, the Trumpet of God, the everlasting torments of hell,
these, (I say,) are but a mere fable to the ungodly. And as the Ethnicks in
old time esteemed all fained whatsoever the Poets mentioned of Tartarus, of
Phlegeton; of the Judges Minoes and Rhadamanthus, of the place and region of
the wicked, and of the pains of the ungodly (whereof sprang that of Seneca,
saying; The Poets have battered and terrified our minds with vain fears: So
very many count all toies and fables, yea and think all but idle threats
which at this day we read in the sacred Scripture concerning Hell;
everlasting death; Hell fire, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; and
touching the covniting hereafter of the soul and body, either unto pain or
glory. Whereas contrariwise, these things strike a marvelous terror without
doubt into the godly, and such as fear God, yea being but named, as the Poet
says.

Thus you have the first, and principal cause, as I think, why we so
defer the amendment of our life, as we do.

The remedy against this cause you shall find afterward, in the tenth Chapter.
Cap. 3.
The second cause why we do not repent us of our wickedness.
NOw let us go unto another cause, which is to wit, a great, yet a false, and
uncertain hope of pardon at Gods hand.

Through this hope Satan the continual enemy of mankind, deteineth man in
wickedness; and by laieng daily before his eyes the mercy and lenity of God,
forbids him to dread his justice.

But as God mercifully does pardon the penitent; and like a father forgiueth
such as return from vice unto well-doing: so does he leave them neither
unpunished, nor unrevenged, who obstinately persist in wickedness. So that in
vain do they hope for pardon, which repent not from the heart.

Notwithstanding by proposing this vain hope, the devil does so bring it
about, that man becomes secure in naughtines, and never takes any care at
all of amending his life, but utterly despises the riches of Gods
bountifulnes, Romans 2, 4.
and patience, and long sufferaunce, not knowing that the bountifulnes of
Godle^ death him unto repentance, to use S. Paul his words unto (...) Romans.

Here that would be remembered, which John the Baptist, as it is recorded by
Matthew, Mat. ^, 1, 2
does say; Repent ( your former evil conversation) for the kingdom of heaven
is at hand: so would that also which the Lord in Esaiah speaks, Esa. 66, 2
Unto whom shall I look? Even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my words. Christ says moreover by Luke, Lu. 13, 3, 5
Except you amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. And Peter in the
Acts, Act. 3, 19
Amend your lives therefore, and turn, that your sins may be put away.

I omit six hundred places of Scripture, tending to prove, that no man should
have hope, or trust to have their sins pardoned, but he which repents. For,
as I said, in vain does he look for pardon, who does not repent from his
heart. And although there is no time too late to ask forgiveness at Gods hand,
as plainly appears by the example of that Thief, of whom the Evangelists
make mention, (For, God desires not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way, and live): yet who knows not, how dangerous a
thing it is to prolong amendment of life from day unto day? For as the Poet
says, No man so in Gods favor is,
That to live an other day he can promis.


Death takes men oftentimes when they little think thereof, insomuch that
they have no space to repent, and amend their lives.

Here I will not recite what Pliny, in his natural History, speaks of
sudden death, because in these days nothing is more common. Many years are
not passed, since two old men, dwellers in one town together, having on a
certain night had unlawful copulation with two harlotes, whom they haunted,
died both of them sude^lie, the one of an Apoplexy, the other thrust through
with a Dagger. Now in what danger their souls were, let every man consider
with himself for his profit.

I am not ignorant, that good men as well as wicked, may suddenly be taken; and
that, though the righteous (as he says) be prevented with death, Wisd. 4, 7.
yet shall he be at rest: notwithstanding, how horrible is it for an impenitent
person suddenly to be overtaken after such a sort* How many have we heard of,
murdered through contention, even when they have been at good cheer! How
many slain foorth-with, taken in adultery! How many at the Dice and Cards
suddenly dispatched, even of such as they have played withal! That I speak
nothing of them, which falling from their Horse, have brake their necks; which
through Shipwreck have perished suddenly; which finally either by the fall of
houses, or other chances have been bruzed into pieces!

Therefore, albe God would the repentance rather then the death of a sinner, as
undoubtedly he would: yet is it a dangerous thing, in respect of uncertain
chances, to defer the amendment of our life, in hope of Gods mercy. For thou
art in time to repent, while thou art yet alive, while thou art strong, while
thou art in health.

But thus it is. The young man gives himself to pleasure, Young men love not to
repent.
to belly cheer, to wine, to riot; and promises himself many years, and a
long life; and therefore never thinks of reforming his manners, but deferres
that matter until he comes unto age: yet is he not sure whether he shall live
to be an old man. For who among many thousands, attaineth to old age?

Now being an old man, Old men unwilling to amend.
what does he then? To morrow it shall be done, says he, and still to morrow
it shall be done: and so willingly he deceaueth, and vainelie does flatter
himself, because no man, as I have said, can promise that he shall live till
to morrow; naie, there is no man sure that he shall live till night.

In the mean season, Death suddenly oppresses him that deferreth, and
prolo^geth the reformation of his life, as every day almost we have examples
given, yet do not other men's harms make us to beware: so mightelie does
Satan draw on, and feed us with a vain hope of Gods mercy, and of a long
life.

And although it neither ought, nor in deed any way can be denied, that the
true penitent sinners at all times do find favor at Gods hand; and that a man
never, no not at the point of death should despair: yet who is so foolish,
that may have that which is void of all danger, and will choose that which is
joined with great hazard even of the soul! Therefore to be out of all doubt,
let us, while time is, think of amending our lives, and not defer the same
from day to day, especially because we are not sure to live till to morrow.

Now concerning the mercy of God, let us remember continually what Cyprian,
in a certain place does say on this wise; As much as God is good, and
merciful, in that he is a Father: so much is he to be feared, in that he is a
Judge: so will it come to pass that the fear of Gods vengeance will reclaim
us from sin; and the vain hope of his mercy in too much security shall not
deceive and corrupt us.

In this vain hope of Gods mercy, The obstinacy of Popish Priests.
how miserabley do those Popish Priests deceive themselves, who all their
life time keep concubines; and under the pretense of a single life, play the
whore-masters, are never punished; nor yet think of changing their wicked
manners, nor of putting their concubines quite away from them! Yea,
notwithstanding they know well their own filthiness, and wicked life: yet blush
they not day by day almost, to do the divine service, to come unto the
mystical and divine table, unworthily to eat the Lords bread, and to drink
the holy cup unworthily. Oh how horrible, yea how dangerous is it to live in
such state of life, wherein if death suddenly should strike thee, That which
the Auctor speaks unto Priests: he speaks first unto all which do as they
do.
thou were utterly cast away! In vain therefore do they flatter themselves
with hope of Gods mercy, which keep concubines in such sort, and with
hardened hearts persist in wickedness, never minding either to put away, and
forsake their harlots; or to change their wicked lives by hearty repentance;
and to ask forgiveness of their lewd behavior at Gods hand with tears and
sighing.

But, some will say, they ask God mercy oftentimes; and oftentimes they
beseech his goodness to forgive them. For after their evening prayer, say they
not every day welnigh? Convert us, O Lord, and turn away thy displeasure
against us. Yea, and in the end of their Mattins too, do they not say? Lord
have mercy upon us. And at other times, that God would have mercy on them,
spare, and forgive them: they pray, do they not?

I hear you. Prayers of Popish Priests what.
But with what earnestnes of mind, with what heat and zeal of spirit they
do so, I will not dispute. Be it, they pray unto God zelouslie, earnestly,
and with a most hearty affection; what then? what good do their prayers,
unless they put away their concubines, with intent never to take them again;
and unless they persevere in a purpose, and mind, to live chastely ever
afterward; in a study of amending their life; and finally in continual sorrow
for their wickedness committed? Now, because they do not this, as their
deeds plainly show, who doubts, but either they think those things
written concerning the day of judgment, to be but a fable; or that they
flatter themselves too too much with a vain and false hope of pardon at Gods
hand?

O horrible face of the Popish Church! They which as well by example, as by
prayer, should rule; govern, and teach others; eue^ they so behave themselves,
that others in them be marvelously offended. Comparison between the Lay
people, and Popish Priests.
When the Lay people come unto the Lords table, with what reverence, as it is
meet they should, with what fear, and trembling, with what zeal do they
approach? what preparation do they make before they confess their sins, and
desire absolution! what care do they take that no scruple remain in their
conscience and mind! how certainly, and firmly do they purpose to amend
their manners, and to reform their life!

Now what do the Popish Priests? Forsooth (as one of their own crewe
reports) they from the wicked embracement of an whore hasten unto the altar,
and that commonly, unpunished, without blushing. They are touched neither with
a care of amending their lives; nor of putting away their harlots; neither
conceive they any sorrow at the remembrance of sin. To be brief, in name
only and word, they be Christians, but in deed and truth they appear plain
Ethnickes. What then? some may demand, is there no hope of salvation of
such? Surely, to speak my conscience, they, who are such, as I have
described, can have no hope of mercy before God, for so much as the Auctor of
the Epistle unto the Hebrews does affirm, Hebr. 13, 4.
that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; Gal. 5, 21.
and Paul says, They which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of
God. Wherefore if the Papists believe it to be true, as it is, which the
Apostle has said, what hope can they have to be saved, abiding in such
filthiness of life? especially seeing they neither unfeignedly repent, nor will
put away their concubines. But if they do not believe it to be true, then
falselie do they usurp the name of Christians, and are not to be numbered
among the godly: but should be to us, as our Savior does say, Matthew. 18, 17.
As Heathen men and Publicans.

How then do Bishops tolerate such ungodly fellows in their Churches? Yea
and why allow they such to preach unto the people? yea, why for money do they
permit them to have harlots? The matter is manifest; so that it cannot be
denied; and so foul and abominable, that it neither ought, nor may be
excused. And although they deny that they are altogether ungodly; because
they have the name of God in honor: yet manifest is it that they are not
godly, because they follow those things which are clean contrary to
godliness, as Hilarie speaks of such like. And they are namlie those, who,
being not grieved at this filthiness, and wicked life of their shauelings, show
plainly that they abhor the honest and undefiled bed, as the Apostle says,
that is; the honest and lawful marriage of the ministers of the holy Church.
Oh horrible case to hear oh wretched and miserable state of Christian people!
Come Lord Jesus, come, and help thy Church, which now a long space has had
those pastors under the popish tyranny: which are utterly in a manner
destitute of all Christian faith.

They believe, will some say, to have salvation through Christ. Go to, for we
will not strive much about that point, let us think it be so. What? Believe
they that, which the Apostle says, Whoremongers shall not inherit the
kingdom of God? Ephesians. 5, 5. Gal. 5, 21.
They believe so, I think; neither may we suspect the contrary. Now
for so much as they are of that number (for that must needs be granted which no
man may deny) which Paul, or the holy spirit rather by Paul says, shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven; how can they promise themselves salvation
through Christ? then believe they, both that they shall be saved; and that
whoremongers, as they are themselves, shall be condemned. Oh immortal god, what
blokishnes is this! what blindness of heart! what darkness of mind! See they not
what contrarieties they speak? For if they have an assured trust that they
shall be saved (for that is it which we call belief;) the^ that is false which
Paul unto the Ephesians does write: Ephe. 5, 5.
but if it be sin, as it is, to say so, they can have no faith or trust that
God the Father is merciful to them, and pleased through Christ. Then what is
their belief? what makes them to promise to themselves salvation? what faith
have they?

What force our conclusion has; even a blind man may see, as the common
saying is. For the Apostle does propose and affirm, Ephesians. 5, 5.
that No whoremonger shall inherit the kingdom of God. The whole world makes
the Minor, and says with one consent, Popish Priests are such. Hereof do the
right Christians conclude, that no Popish Priests with their concubines, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. All men, though they have but mean skill in
Logique, see that this conclusion follows of the former propositions, which
are manifestly true, and granted even of our adversaries. For this argument is
made in right mood and figure. Popish Priests therefore with their harlots
have none hope to be saved; neither do they believe, as they falselie report,
albeit they feine certain vain dreams to themselves concerning faith. But
some will say, It may be, that they who to day are wicked, to morrow, or
when God thinks good, may repent, and acknowledging their faults, live the
time which they have to spend in the fear of God: and therefore we should not
so quickly despair of any man's salvation.

I know it well, but it appears how these fellows are onte to return unto
godliness; and how vnfeindlie they repent. For what one of many thousands have
you seen heretofore, which coming unto himself, has either cast off his
whore, or determined never to have company with her hereafter? I speak that
which is well known, and what we at this day do not only see with our
eyes: but also even well nigh feel with our hands, if so I may say. Not one
of a thousand scarce, can you find, which from his heart at any time
purposes to amend, or to put away his concubine*

But to let these things go, The deformity of the Popish Church.
how abominable in the mean while (be it spoken in the fear of God), and
deformed is the face of the popish Church; wherein the pastors and rulers of
the christian flock, do openly to the great offense of the Church commit
wickedness; wherein whoremaisters adhorte unto chastity; impenitent persons
unto repentance; they who are defiled with all impuritie unto holiness! And
these things are done, not in villages only: but in towns also and cities;
nor in a few regions only, but in every land beside; and in all places where
the Pope has dominion; yea the very Bishops themselves loking on, winking
thereat; what say I, winking thereat? permitting, and approving the same; who
because they do not severely punish this wickedness, as by their office they
are bound, but as I said before Page. 26.
for money permit them yeerelie to have harlots, by these their pardons and
dispenatio^s: beside that, it is a special provocation unto sin (as one does
say,) they embolde^ the^ the more in wickedness; and prick forward, and give
such the head, whom they should bridle; yea they bring it so to pass, that
living in open wickedness, they think they sin not; and so for their own
commodity they give them occasion obstinately to persist in sin: of which,
as of all their office, they shall one day render an account.

What I pray you, The office of Bishops in punishing lewd Clergy men.
may some demand, should Bishops do in this case? I will tell you. They must
(as the Apostle teaches) not wink at such wickedues, much less allow, and
maintain the liberty of whoredom, but first admonish, improoue, rebuke;
afterward, if these do no good, remove them from their charge and government
of the congregation where they are placed; the^ banish them from the temples
and sacraments; afterward being condemned to the pit of hell, to excommunicate
the^ from the company of the godly, and finally, as Paul says, deliver
them unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. These things they should do, if their mind
were to execute their office vprightlie, and to be allowed before God the
judge, who will ask an account of them for all their doings. Chiefly and
above all things they should show themselves an ensample of good works, as
Paul admonishes Titus, Tit. 2, 7.
and be to them that believe, an ensample in word, in conversation, in love,
in spirit, in faith, and in pureness, 1. Tim. 4, 12.
as he warns Timothy. But at this day, the Bishops for the most part,
show themselves to be such, as they suffer the Clergy to be: whereby it
falls out, that what by the license, and what through the example of Bishops:
that they sin more wilfully, and boldly. For as one says; That is thought
to be well done, which is done by example.

But for so much as Priests, How manifold occasions be offered unto Popish
Priests to repent.
having so many occasions to repent, and to forsake their wickedness (for they
both visit such as are extremely sick; and hear confessions of sin; and
comfort the troubled conscience; and absolve from wickedness, and reach forth
the body of the Lord; and minister extreme unction; and are present
oftentimes, when men give up the ghost: beside, they sing Dirges, wherein it
is often repeated, that that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and
heaviness, a great day, and a very bitter; and often mention is made of the
dreadful judgment, of everlasting damnation, and of the thief repenting at
the last gasp; finally, wherein request is made, that neither torment of
death may touch, nor chain of the damned may bind: furthermore, they attend
on the Hearse, and follow the Corse; and with great ceremonies bury the dead,
and commit the body to the earth: beside this, walking in the temple they
oftentimes read Epitaphes, and verses both written and graven upon Tombs and
Sepulchers; wherebie occasion is given to remember not only the dead: but
also death it self imminent every hour, and also the last judgment and
tribunal seat of the Lord, to omit other things: and yet more then all this in
that sacrifice of theirs, for the dead, they hear of the coming of Christ, of
the resurrection at the last day, of the sound of the Archangell and trompet
of God, and many other such things) yet for so much as by all these they cannot
be brought unto repentance, one of these two things must needs be true, that
either they think whatsoever they read in the sacred Scripture touching the
judgment to come, is but a fable, and (as Epicures do) persuade themselves
that the soul dies with the body; or that they flatter themselves too too
much with a vain and false hope and confidence of pardon at Gods hand.

A remedy for this cause you shall find afterward in the eleventh Chapter of
this book.
Cap. 4.
A third cause why we defer the amendment of our life.
A Third cause, why we so drive of the ame^dme^t of our life, as we do, is
our custom of sinning, which now has almost gotten to be an other nature.
For as it is very hard for a man to bridle his nature: so the strength of
custom is almost invincible, and therefore not vnrightlie called an other
nature: Custom another nature.
Neither was it ill said of one, that those vices be hardly cut away, which
grow up as we grow.

We all know how daintelie and wantonlie parents bring up their children, Ill
education of children.
even from their cradels. They are used to delicious fare, and pleasures from
their tender years. They abstain neither from foul and filthy speech, not
from wicked and blasphemous oaths; to the dishonor of God. They ruffell it out
in their gorgeous apparel of diverse colors, Soldier like, with their parted
breast, and their pained hose. They do all things proudly, boldly,
impudentlie; but nothing modestly, and shamefastelie. They neither do honor
their parents; nor reverence their elders, nor bear with their equals:
breefelie, what they mind, they think they may do. Neither shame of the
world, neither fear of God can drive them from wickedness. They have no care of
religion and godliness toward God, much less of ciuilnes and honesty toward
man.

What need many words? Parents now a days by their evil behavior so
corrupt their children, that no correction can make them to be good. Duty of
Parents.
Whereas in deed their part is before their children, neither to say that
which were filthy to be spoken; nor to commit that, which might not honestly
be done: but rather to lead such an honest and virtuous life, that their
children by them may have a pattern how to live well, and by looking upon
their sayings and doings as into a glass, learn even from their infancy,
both what is to be done as good, and what to be avoided, as wicked and
abominable. For whosoever teaches that by outward behavior, which he
detesteth in his children; while he chides them, he accuses himself of sin
and wickedness. And with what face can he rebuke his children for doing amiss,
who has marred them himself, by his wicked example? with what countenance can
he mislike naughtines in them, the which another as severely may rebuke in
himself? Wherefore let parents remember, that necessarily they are to lead
an upright, and honest conversation; that of necessity they are to foresee,
that no point of dishonestie, nor filthiness appear in their life, and that to
these ends that with more authority they may punish their children when they
go astraie, that they be not blamed for those vices, which they rebuked their
children for; and finalie that their chiding may be to purpose, and not
lightly set by of their children, through their own default. Hitherto
belonges that of the Poet, How of a father can thou take the face, when thou
by mo vices, do thy self disgrace? and how for loosenes can thou beat thy
child, Thou an old man being thy self more wild?

So does that in another Poet of Nausistrata, Nausistrata.
who blamed her husband because he chid his son for being in love, when he
knew himself guilty of greater wickedness With what countenance, says she,
will ye chide him? And which Antemona brought forth in Plautus, Antemona.
Is it meet, says she, that a father should give such example? Art thou not
ashamed? But let us hear that young man among declaimers, that accused his
father of madness; My riot, says he, I impute to my father. I was not brought
up straightly enough in awe, nor in a well governed house, which might order
the manners of a young man aright, and withdraw him from vices, whereunto, in
respect of his age, he is inclined. My father in a sort has enticed me unto
riotousnes, etc. Tobias.
So did not Tobias that godly man loved of God, who as the story of him does
witness, both instructed his son, even from his infancy to fear God, and to
abstain from all wickedness; and also by his good life proposed him an example
how to serve the Lord: and studied to show himself such in the sight of his
son, as he desired his son should be.

In these days when children be committed to Schoolemaisters, Schoolemaisters.
especially to be accusto^med to vprightnes and honesty, and to be brought up
in godliness, good manners and learning; what is don? I am ashamed, and loath to
say it; yet will I speak rather necessarily then willingly. Scholemasters
for the most part (for all be not such) what to get favor, and to avoid the
displeasure of parents, bring up their Scholars too nicelie, and too
wantonlie, and as it were loose the raines of discipline, neither driving them
by correction from wickedness: nor alluring them by counsel unto well doing.
They neither teach them Christianity, nor instruct them in godliness; nor
train the^ up to modesty, and virtue. Mischiefs that grow by evil
Schoolemaisters.
Naie, they show themselves neither pure and holy to their scholars, neither
mild and affable, as fathers; but over careless and dissolute, as companions.
Hence arises contempt in them of their masters; hence come they headie and
proud; hence do they loathe all goodness, hence intolerable stubbernes. What
should I speak of their prodigious attire? of their unseemly apparel? of
their ietting up and down with Daggers by their side? What should I mention
their prodigal and riotous expenses, winked at by their masters? or their
often, and well nigh daily rioting, banqueting, gossiping, quaffing, plaieng,
dancing, reuelling all the night together? to add nothing more filthy. I
name that which is well known, and those things which are so certain. that
they cannot be denied; and so shameful, that they may not be excused any kind
of way.

And for so much as Schoolemaisters, Duty of Schoolemaisters.
(whose duty were with all endeavor, diligence, and severity, to bring down
the boldenes, to tame the wildenes, and to bridle the wantonness of youth, both
by instruction, admonition, and correction,) do suffer the youth committed to
their trust, to be corrupted, and carried headlong into all vice and wickedness:
what hope is there (of their amendment) when they come unto riper years, and
to man's estate? For it is unlikely, that either he will live honestly, when
he is old; which led a wicked and filthy life, when he was young: or that he
which was naughtelie brought up in his childe-hood; will in his manhood be
brought unto good order. Such a matter it is to be accustomed to a thing from
tender years, as the most excellent Poet does say. And as another Tragical
Poet writes, The mind easelie forgets not,
What long time since, it learnd and got.


Oh that cities would consider the waightines of this matter, Choosing of
Schoolemaisters.
and yield in no wise neither to affection; nor to affinity and kindred; nor to
the commendation and suit of their familiars, in choosing Schoolemaisters!
Surely at every man's letter of commendation, a Schoolemaister should not be
appointed: especially because it is much to the benefit of a co^mon-weale, to
have a godly and learned teacher, that will train up children in religion;
Liberal. manners Liberal knowledge
teach them civility; and endue them with liberal both manners and discipline.

Notwithstanding, how in this point now a days men offend, no tongue can
express. For now there is no place for godly and learned Schoolemaisters,
whose honest life, commendable behavior, and faithfulness is well known.
Unlearned Sciolies do every where so creep into the freendship and
familiarity of mighty men, and so persuade the^ that they alone are thought
to be meetest (when they are as meet for that office, as the Ass is for the
harp, according to the common saying) to govern Schools, and to bring up
children. And for their doctrine it is such as no wise man will give a straw, or
a burnt thread therefore: their ignorance is very gross, notwithstanding they
can hide the same marvelous cunningly. And for that in respect of their
ignorance and rudenes they carry none authority, the which a learned man does
easelie attain, they lose the raines of discipline to much, and maryong minds
with their cokring, that youth may the more willingly choose the^ for their
teachers. But, that I may return to my purpose, seeing that parents
themselves, with teachers, and masters do nussell young children in wickedness,
give the^ the head to do what they list; and have no care at all of governing,
and restraining their desires: what marvel, if hardly, or not at all they can
leave those vices in their old age, whereunto they were accustomed in their
youth! custom so comes to a nature. And although, when the day of judgment
comes into their mind, they think of repentance! yet custom has so marred
them, that, whether it be unwillingly or against their knowledge: they fall
evermore unto worser wickedness, and like fools never cease to prolong their
amendment more and more. Now what good members of a Commonweal shall we
think they will prove in their old age, which in their youth are so
corrupted, through their parents means; and so ill brought up, through their
masters negligence?

For whence come so many adulterers now a days? Fruit of ill education.
so many corrupters of maide^s; so many ruffins; so many bawds; so many
unthrifts and prodigal cousins; whence are there so many dicers; and such a
number of most wicked citizens? but even from this fountain, as it were of
ungodly and evil education of children? For they had need of a purgation
which lay the vices of this age upon the Gospel. It is not the Gospel which
causes such wickedness; it is wanton and ill bringing up, it is negligent and
careless magistrates: that I say nothing of higher Princes, which must bear
the blame. Magistrates office.
They who are in authority should most severely punish and correct sin, not
wink thereat. If the Julian law of adulterers, Punishment of adultery.
which with death puuisheth adultery, and violaters of marriage; neither
suffers the wickedness of whoredom to go unpunished: Punishment of open
offenders.
if I say, this law were again established; and if they which abuse the name
of God, and spue out blasphemy against his holiness, and swear by the cross,
by the wounds, and blood of Christ; which when godly Sermons are making, be
quaffing; plaieng; gadding idly up and down; which obaie not their parents,
nor give them due honor; which are mankillers, and murderers, and thieves,
dicers, rauishers, church-robbers, and Usurers; if iuglers, coseners,
dronkards, gluttons, and prodigal unthrifts, if ill speakers, backbiters,
braulers, forsworn persons, idle talkers, and liers; finally, if they which
are apparentlie wicked, were not wincked at, but severely punished, neither
would there be such large scope for vice and wickedness; nor all men should cry
out as they do now, of the loosenes of this world.

Let every magistrate therefore think upon his office, and persuade himself,
that when Christ shall return to judge the world, he must yield an account;
and learn of Paul, that he bears not the sword for naught. For he is the
minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil, as the same Paul
writes unto the Romans. And for so much as Paul does witness, that the
Law is not given to a righteous man, but to the laweles and disobedient, to
the ungodly, and to sinners, to the unholy, and to the profane, to
murderers of father and mothers, to manslaiers, to whoremongers, to buggerers,
to manstealers, to liers, and to the perjured; and because in his office the
magistrate is a minister of the law, doubtless he cannot be negligent, or
slack and dissolute in punishing, without great sin.

Wherefore such as bear authority, and rule in the Commonweal must
remember, that loosenes of behavior, and wildenes must be tamed, and bridled
by every good means, and that me^ must be terrified from vice and wickedness,
from naughtines, and from all deceit, and deadly and heinous crimes through
the fear of punishment. Unless they do so, they make themselves guilty of
horrible sins, and shall answer for the faults of others. For, as the Poet
says: He that may restrain wickedness and vvil not,
Does will men to sin, and spare not.


I am afraid the seuerenes of Ethnickes in punishing sin, Pagans more severe
in punishing sin, then Christians.
and cutting off malefactors, will be a witness against our negligence and
slothfulnes in that point, at the day of judgment. They had their punishments
appointed by laws for offenders; there lacked no commisioners to cite them
unto judgment; they had examiners and judges; finally, they had executioners,
which with all severity punished wickedness. And so by that means wild heads
were enforced to abstain from il doing; to bridle desires; to tame their
concupiscence; and not to rush headlong into all wickedness, even through the
fear of punishment. But now a very blind man (as the saying is) may see, how
outward and civil ordering of manners is decayed, by reason of impunitie, and
liberty which is granted, in that such as are in authority, do either
negligentlie forgive all, or not severely enough punish malefactors. None
correct whoremongers, and deflowrers of maidens, no nor adulterers, and other
more heinous offenders, so greuouslie as they should; none punish either
disobeiers of parents; or despisers of their superiors; or backbiters of their
lawful Magistrates; None repress of apparel, either the prodigality for
cost; or the pride for color, and finenes; or the lightness for variety; or the
impudency for the monsterous new facions: None do forbid that infinite
expenses upon banquets; pompous and princelike feasting; outrageous quaffing;
contentious drinking; nor continual sitting at belly cheer; none do appoint
punishment for dicers; usurers; ingrossers; forestallers; back-biters; nor for
such as for-sweare them selves; nor for curssers; not yet for blasphemers. I
say nothing neither of those common Stews in many towns; nor of the
liberty which popish Priests have to keep whores; nor of the impunishment of
all sins for money, where the Pope has to do.

It is the part therefore of all in authority to meet with these mischiefs;
and without delaie to punish offenders, that others may take heed. What
correction or discipline is used.
For in correcting they must have regard unto these three things, either to
amend him whom they punish; or to make others to beware of committing the like
wickedness, by his punishment; or finally, that such as are well given may
live the more safely, the wicked being cut off.

Little good hitherto has been done by laws; therefore the matter must be
gone about another way, to have the better success. For, as the Apostle says,
the Magistrate bears not the sword for naught. Let him then, when occasion
serves, draw out the same, let him strike therewith to the cutting away of
sin, and let him have a care that he be not blamed for negligence in that
behalf, that in respect of discipline we be not worse than the very
Ethnickes, nor give occasion to the enemies of Christianity to think ill (as
they do) of the Gospel, and of our profession, because of our life and ill
behavior. For what? Can the Turks believe that religion to be good whose
professors they see with their eyes to be of all men the most wicked, and
profane? They will object, and cast in our teeth so many whore-maisters; so
many ruffins and spend-thrifts; so many dronkards; so many adulterers; so
many Epicures; that we may be ashamed to hear so much. They will inueigh
against our wickedness, they will lay in our dish luxuriousnes; they will tell us
of our lechery. And thus for our behavior sake, both religion it self, and
Gods word is ill spoken of; and as Paul says, The name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through us.

And although, to judge rightly hereof, in every age there has been
riotousnes; sumptuous feasting; costly dinners and suppers; surfeiting;
dronkennes, who redome, adultery, oppression, injury, neglecting of well
doing, and other such wickedness, which every man in his time has found fault
withal, as Seneca does say, and no age that has been void of sin:
Wickedness never at such ripenes.
yet loosenes of life, neglect of order and discipline, outrageous wickedness,
has in this our age so increased, and got strength: that it appears even
Atheism and Epicurisme has invaded the life of man, and as it were bears
dominion among Christians; laws take no force, lust rules altogether.

For these evils therefore it were the part of magistrates both spiritual,
and temporal, to find some remedy, as they whom God has exalted, and
preferred by strength and honor, Both for to rule the public weal,
And subjects keep in awe:
And for to watch both night and day,
That each live under law.


That with all study and severity, they cut off wickedness; and both cherish
and defend the good, and through the fear of punishment terrify the bad, and
make them not only to favor religion, but also to advance the same by their
well doing.

I say therefore once again, let magistrates remember their duties: and what
wickedness they cannot utterly supplant, let them punish; and though they are
not able to make men good (which belongs unto God alone:) yet endeavor they
withal industry that we come not again unto Paganism, and prove worse than
Ethnickes. Above all they should enact and look that parents bring up their
children in the fear of God, and from their youth teach them godliness, and
good manners.

And for so much as the well bringing up of children is much to the behoof of a
Commonweal, for there-vpon consists the safety of Cities, magistrates
must have a special care hereof, and see that parents do their duty in
bringing up their children aright under correction. If this were done,
wickedness would not take such root, as hitherto it has: which otherwise by no
laws can be avoided. Comparison betvveene laws and good education.
And whereas the laws do punish wickedness, and ill factes already committed,
and good education keeps a man from doing any thing worthy punishment;
again, for so much as laws reform what is done amiss, but education quite
remooueth the same; it plainly appears, that this does more good to the
Commonweal, than laws do. That I add not, how they which have naughtelie
been brought up, do afterward cast off all fear, and reverence to laws,
wherebie punishments are appointed to transgressors.

And therefore it has been the cheifest study of wise governors, The
cheifest care of Magistrates
not with what punishment they might afflict the wicked and transgressors; but
how to bring it to pass, that their Subjects may commit nothing worthy
correction. And because they trusted it would be accomplished through the good
education of children from their youth, either by their Parents, Masters, or
Tutors, they took no small care about this point.

But from this digression now return we unto our purpose.

With this Chapter compare the twelfe Chapter of this book.
Cap. 5.
The fourth cause why men are loath to repent.
A Fourth cause of procrastinating the reformation of our wicked life,
Prosperity.
is wealth and prosperity. For it makes men drunk oftentimes with sweet
fortune as it were, and so secure, that seldom they think of God, much less
of amending their lives. Therefore was it well said of an ancient wrighter:
Prosperity mother of Security.
Of prosperity springs prodigality; and of prodigality, as all other
vices, so espciallie impiety against God. And Seneca affirms that men's
minds are luld a sleep with too much felicity, as it were with a continual
dronkennes. Hitherto pertains that of Paul unto Timothy, 1 Timothy 6, ^7
where he wills him to Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, 18.
that they do good, and be rich in good works, etc. And if true it be which
Publius said: Fortune makes him extremely foolish, whom she favors: then
it appears evidently, how prosperity does not only make men secure, but
is the mother of all wickedness. For hence it is, that we perceive not the wrath
of God against sin, which we ought continually to fear; hence does
drousines so occupy our minds, that we neither dread the vengeance of God,
nor think that we shall either die, or appear before the judgment seat of
Christ.

Our Savior in the Gospel after Luke, Example of extreme security.
does by an elegant similitude paint forth as it were this security of
welthie men; where that rich man, whose ground had brought forth fruits
plenteouslie, never thought of amending his life, nor of repentance, nor yet
of helping the poor; but fixing his cogitations upon building greater barnes,
and of gathering his fruits into them, thought thus with himself: Luke 12, 18
19.
I will gather all my fruits, and heap my goods together, and I will say to
my soul; Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease,
eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But, in this security, and opinion of
continual felicity, which the churl conceived in his mind, what says God
at the lenghth? Even thus he says, 20.
O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee.

Thus you plainly see, how the rich man, while he dreameth of a secure and
quiet life, of dyning, and supping, and faring deliciouslie, and living
delicatelie; while he thinks all was well, Sudden destruction came upon him,
as Paul does say. Therefore the holy Scripture bids us to VVatch
continually, and evermore to be ready against the coming of the Lord. A
goodly admonition, did we set therebie. But as it fell out in the time of Noe,
When as they did eat and drink, marry and were married, so upon the sudden
were taken all away by the flood. And as they all suddenly were destroyed
with fire from heaven, when Lot was departed from among the Sodomits: so every
man's last day of life comes upon him unawares, when he looks not therefore.

When S. James would drive away this security from rich and fortunate men,
Iam. 5, 1.
what says he? Go to now ye rich men, says he, weep and houle, for your
miseries that shall come upon you. 2.
Your riches are corrupt; and your garments are moth-eaten. 3.
Your gold and silver is cankred. 5.
Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in wantonness. Ye have nourished
your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

Here call into thy mind that rich man in the Gospel, Luke 16, 19
who after his delight in wearing purple, and fine linen, and in faring well
and delicatelie every day, being dead, is now in hell tormented. For wealth,
pleasure, and overmuch prosperity would not suffer him to think of amending
his life.

Hitherto makes that of our Savior in Matthewe: A rich man shall hardly
enter into the kingdom of heaven: and, It is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God. Our Savior, as Mark records, expounding the same, does say,
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
kingdom of God! It makes also to this purpose, that Christ calls riches and
pleasure of this life, thorns, which cheake the seed of the word, and make
it unfruitful.

This then is the cause, Why God sends affliction. Heb. 12, 6
why God sometime sends adversity; and, as he says, chasteneth whom he
loves, namely that they may shake off security, and both be stirred up to
fear and call upon God, whom oftentimes in prosperity they forget; and be
also compelled to confess their sin, to repent, and to thirste after
heavenly things, despising earthly. For in them which have the world at
will, there does reign a marvelous security, which is nombred among the
deadly offenses; and their minds be invaded with sloth and carelesnes, and
with a certain nummednes and sencelesnes, whereby they neglect heavenly
things; finally idleness, faintnes, rechlesnes, vnwildenes sleepines, and if
you will have it so, (for by all these names I see I cannot sufficiently
express what I think) drowsines takes them in such sort, that they have no
mind to do well, nor to live honestly. Such is the greatness of this vice.

The Scripture also shows, that prosperity makes men not only secure, but
blind also, and ungodly manie-times: which made Moses to say: When he waxed
fat, he spurned with his heel thou art fat, thou art gross, thou art laden
with fatnes: therefore he forsook God that made him, and regarded not the
strong God of his salvation. They provoked him with strange gods, and so
forth. State of David a secure sinner.
This made David, having overcome his enemies on all sides, when he was quiet,
and thought all things well, not only to fall into adultery: but also to
defile himself with the murder of an innocent man. And he, who in the
persecution of Saul behaved himself well, in prosperity proved wicked. So
greatly has he to look that he fall not, which thinks he does stand. Yea
after he had committed those sins, how secure was he for a long space? For,
though there hung no danger over his head, for so much as God is merciful, he
went as well as the best unto the tabernacle, he kept the Sabbath and other
holy days; he was at sacrifices making, and offered gifts; to be brief, his
mind was without care. But, when God by the Prophet Nathan denounced
vengeance, State of David a penitent person.
and punishment, and stroke him with fear and terror, then at the length
coming again unto himself, he considers what he had committed, and waieth
the greeuousnes of the sin, and therefore conceaueth much sorrow through the
remembrance thereof, and plainly confesses his offense, and humbly craves
pardon of God, and desires to be washed from his sin, to be cleansed from his
wickedness, to have the filth of his uncleanness wiped away: yea, he neither
refuses reuengement, which God had threatened; nor prays to escape the
punishment, which he had deserved.

Would to God the like security were not in us, who for the most part live
so without care, as if all were well; we neither confess our sins, nor yet
fear the sharp judgment, and heavy hand of God against wickedness. So far
be we, from weeping so abundantly, as we have greeuouslie transgressed, as
that holy Martyr of Christ Cyprian does say.

But to return unto our matter, and to conclude in few words: No man can be
saved, but they whose sins be forgiven. And no man's sins be forgiven,
except he ask forgiveness. No man does ask forgiveness, but he who desires
to come into Gods favor again. And no man desires that from his heart, unless
he be touched with a sense and feeling of his wickedness. And no man is sorry
for his wickedness, but he that confesses them, and perceaueth the wrath of
God against sin. But this does not a secure man, for he is touched with no
care of his salvation. He to whom all things fall out prosperously, and is
(as he says) dronken with sweet fortune, is such a person. Therefore it is
evident, that wealth and prosperity is a cause, that men have no care of
amending their manners.

A remedy for this cause read afterward in the thirteenth Chapter of this
book.
Cap. 6.
A fifth cause why man will not repent.
A Fifth cause of deferring the amending of our manner^ from day unto day, is
hope to live long. For, although none, no not the young man is assured, as he in
Cicero says, that he shall live until night: yet there is none so old, but he
thinks he may live one year mo. The Poet brings out an old man, exclaiming
on this wise: Can ye wish me, being an old man 65. years of age, in mine old
days to become a married man, and to take an old doting woman to wife?

But now in these days men well nigh eighty years of age do marry young
girls scarce fifteen years old. So that they are of opinion that they may
live as long as lusty young men, as it plainly appears.

Some perhaps will think it folly and madness for old men to become wooers:
neither will we reason for, or against them: this only I note, that such as
at that age take virgins to wives, notwithstanding they are old and dote, yet
are they lead with a vain hope of undoubted long life. So that this hope is
the cause, why no man well nigh will earnestly think either of amendment, or
of an account to be given unto the hiest judge of his life spent.

Every man deferreth, and, as much as in him lies, puts off so profitable and
necessary a matter. I am afraid the very Heathen hereafter in the last
judgment will lay in our dish this extreme negligence, in that either at no
time, or not earnestly enough, we think of reforming our manners, and
amending our life. Whereas many Heathen used continually, before they gave
themselves to sleep at night, to weigh with themselves, according to
Pythagoras precept, what thing they had done, either well or ill. Which thing,
Virgil, speaking of a good and wise man, expressed on this wise: He does not
turn his eyes to take,
the sweet and wished sleep:
Till what he did the day before,
he ways with motions deep
Of mind: what did I pretermit?
what did I in due time
Thinks he? what not? unseemly this
unwisely that same crime
Why have I done? what over slipped?
in fond opinion
Have I stood? or helped the poor,
and wished my deed undone?
Or would I ought, which I should not?
why, wretch, did I delight
In gain, more then in godliness?
by word, or eke by sight,
Have I offended any man?
why to my nature vain
Do I obeie? and reasons lore
why do I so disdain?
Thus pondring all things in his mind,
from morning until night,
Which he has said or done, forthwith
he takes much delight
Of doing well; and praises all
which unto virtue tend:
But what he vainlie said or did,
does much his mind offend.


Seneca likewise speaks somewhat concerning this custom, which I can not
choose but mention. He therefore in a certain place, speaking of calling the
mind every day unto an account, says as follows: Sextius.
It was Sextius wont every night when he went unto bed, to ask his mind,
What vice of thine have thou reformed? what tentation have thou resisted?
wherein art thou the better? And straightway; What goodlier thing the^ after
this form to examine the whole day? Oh how quiet, how sound, and how free
is the sleep which follows after the examination of man's time spent! when
the mind is either commended for doing well; or warned to beware of
wickedness, and man will be his own watchman, and like a severe Censor, Seneca.
bring his own life into question? This power do I use, and debate the matter
with my self from day to day. When the ca^dle is out, I fast the whole
day, and measure all my deeds and sayings. I neither do hide any thing fro
my self, nor ouer-passe any thing in silence. Why should I fear any of my
faults, since I may say, look you do so no more, for this time I forgive
thee. At such a disputation you were too fierce, do not henceforth encounter
with the unskillful. You look of such a man too boldly, and therebie you did
not amend him, but offend him. Look hereafter, not only that what you speak
be true, but also that whom you do rebuke, will patiently hear the truth
when it is told him. This and much mo things to this purpose speaks Seneca,
which would to God we would fix in our minds, and follow: yea, and acquaint
our children with this godly custom. For did we so doubtless, either I am much
deceived, or we should study to live more aunswerable to our Christian
profession, than we do.

But what do we know? we feast merrelie together, we furnishe our boordes
with most dainty dishes: yea, we spend not the day only in quaffing, but the
whole night also in riotousnes; (and what horrible vices of all sorts tend
upon that kind of life, we all know) and before willingly we give over,
drink overcomes us, and so we go drunk to bed (what say I we go?) naie,
many times, because we can neither stand stedelie, nor go but totteringlie, we
are lead: and many times plucked from the board, and laid in bed, where we
lie buried as in a grave, (for I can not otherwise better expres the same)
overwhelmed with wine, and sleep, and this is a daily custom. Scarce once in
a year, do we enter into an accoumpt with our selves of our life misspent, and
ask mercy for our offenses; sildome it is that we purpose to come again into
Gods favor. And when we do so, little too we mind to continue in those things
which we have set down: so far be we from examining our consciences before
we go to rest, and from considering how we ought to live, or with sobs and
tears, and striking our breasts, prostrate upon the ground, from asking
forgiveness of the Lord; from vowing a new life; and from endeavoring to abide
and persist in that mind and purpose to live well.

Yet for all this we are not afraid, in such a cursed state of life to sleep,
and to snort too in security; wherein if sudden death should strike us (as no
man is sure that he shall rise in the morning, when he goes unto bed) we are
utterly damned, and cast away. But little do we think of these things, so
greatly do we flatter our selves, through a vain hope of longer life. Now
for so much as commonly we see, many are deceived through such hope; how
childish be we, naie, how mad rather, which think our selves, by a special
privilege, exempted from the number of such?

Read the foureteenth Chapter of this book, for the remedy against this
cause.
Cap. 7.
A sixth cause which alienateth men's minds from repentance.
THere is an other cause, why many, under the dominion of the Pope,
especially, such as are welthie and rich, do put off their amendment from
day to day. And that is not only the trust of remission of their sins,
which they receive by the Popes Bulls, Popes B^. Pardons.
and Pardons; but also a vain and false hope of deliverance from the pains of
Purgatory, by annuarie sacrifices, and masses, and by the prayers of Monks and
Friars; as also by the alms and good deeds of their friends alive, as by
fasting, praying, watching, wandering in Pilgrimage, and such like. For some
not only affirm, that the Popes pardons are of power to obtain forgiveness of
sin; and are not ashamed to stand in it, that moneie is no sooner thrown
into their offering basen, but forthwith a soul flies out of purgatory into
heaven: but also are persuaded, that by other folks merits and works, the
dead are helped, which thing Hillarie writing upon Matthew, does deny. And
Hierome agreeing with him, as even in the Canon law he is cited, says: In
this present world we may help each other, either by prayers or council: but
when we shall appear before the judgment seat of Christ, he affirms that
every man must bear his own burden. To be short, as death it self finds
a man, so God judges him.

What an horrible security is it therefore, to live in sin and wickedness,
and never to think thereof! were they touched with any care of their
salvation, they doubtless would observe some mean in sinning, and evermore
think of the last day of their life. As, to open my mind by particulers, he
which bears hatred against his neighbor, would be reconciled, according to
the commandment in the Gospel; Whoremongers, and adulterers, would remember
that God will judge them, as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does
say; Murderers, and sorcerers, and all liers, would never forget, how their
part is in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, as John in the
Revelation writes; Covetous persons, dronkardes, and railers, would bear
continually in remembrance, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God,
as Paul writing not only unto the Corinthians, but also unto the Ephesians,
does testify; Rich men would be sure to have in mind, that our savior
says, How hard a thing is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
kingdom of God? Finally, each of us would be mindful of that everlasting and
unquenchable fire, which Christ in the Gospel threateneth to the wicked, and
their fellowe-sinners; and every man for his part would fear those words
unto the foolish virgins, I know ye not; those also unto that idle servant,
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth; and those too, of him which lacked the wedding garment,
Bind him hand and foot; take him away, and cast him into utter darkness; and
to be brief, that unto the wicked, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire.

Oh too too obstinate are they whom these things do not move; plainly
Epicures, which believe them not; extremely wicked, which contemn them; very
mad men, and unmindful of salvation, which regard them not. Such are they,
which by purchased pardons, do think they have got liberty, and freedom to
commit wickedness, and through this vain persuasion drive off to amend from
day to day.

An other cause of deferring and prolonging repentance is, for that many are
persuaded, if they may worship S. Barbara, S. Barbara.
they shall never die unpenitent, and without receiving the holy Communion.
For this superstition of the worshipping of Barbara, has possessed the minds
of all worldlinges, where the Pope has to do. And therefore a fast is
consecrated to her every year to be kept: and Painters have set her forth in
the likeness of one holding a cup, and holy bread in her hand.

Furthermore, many have a great care, and long a fore do provide, that when
the hour of their death shall approach, they may be adopted into Saint Francis
family, S. Francis.
and buried when they are dead, in the habit of a Franciscane. For this opinion
is rooted in all their minds, that the devil has no power upon them, which
can attain thereunto: inasmuch as the Monks do impart upon them, together
with their habit, all the merits and good works of their whole order, as
namely Masses, Church service, prayers, preachinges, meditations, fastinges,
abstinence, vigils, pilgrimages, and such like. For Monks hereby, leaving
always that which is sufficient unto salvation, if any thing happily do
remain, and be superfluous, as lightly there is, that they communicate with
other, not Gratis, but for moneie. So that, as I have said, this also is a
cause, why men, that have bought the good deeds of Monks, and the communion of
godly merits, at no time do think of amending their life.

But in this place it is needeles to refell, either this manifest error of
popish pardons; or the doting superstition of worshipping Saints; or this
wicked opinion which many have of commucating merits; especially, because
both others have done it before now, and we also in many places ere this, have
oftentimes confuted them.

A remedy for this cause, read afterward in the fifteenth Chapter.
Cap. 8.
Of other like principal causes why we repent not.
THus you have as I think, the chiefest causes why we neglect, and prolong
the ame^dment of our life. There be also other causes hereof, but they are
inferior causes, as usual living, company, and dealing with the ungodly and
wicked, Wicked company.
which are touched with no fear of God, much less do pursue godliness, or
live purelie and innocentlie. They who have any care of their salvation, must
with all endeavor avoid the company, and familiarity of such men. For, truly
was it said, Ill words corrupt good manners. And an ancient Greek writer
says, In living with the wicked, thou will prove wicked.

Here I would have Parents to remember, that they are to use great diligence,
in keeping their children from the company, and familiarity of the wicked;
and in marking what youth, and of what conversation they be, which are joined
to them in much familiarity, or that live together with them; or finally,
which do seek their company. For such is a man, for the most part, as is the
company which he uses. And surely, well was it said of one, He that
touches pitch, shall be defiled with it.

But hear what an adversary of ours does say: We take our manners from such
as we company withal. And as some diseases come to the body, and infect them
which touch it: so the vices of the mind pollute them which are next. The
dronkard draws his familiars unto the love of wine. The company of
lascivious, do effeminate even the strongest man. Covetousness spueth forth
her poison upon her company. Such is the force of virtue, and of the virtuous
on the other side: and so forth.

He therefore that desires to live godly, holilie, and to keep him self
pure, and whole from all infection of wickedness, which every Christian should
desire to do, must fly and avoid the company of the wicked. For they which
addict themselves wholly to keep company with such, and abide with them from
day to day, making merry, feasting, eating and drinking together
continually; they sildome or never will think of amending their life, neither
can they be driven easily from their pleasant fellowship.

So that although they frequent godly Sermons, are admonished by good-men in
authority; yea, and themselves too, through the fear of Gods indignation,
do desire to reform their manners, and that earnestly: yet, I know not how,
they drive off from day to day, and can neither unfeignedly repent, nor at
any time come home again. In the mean while, when they little think thereof,
sudden death many times strikes them unawares. For, as every man is sure to
die: so the hour of death is uncertain. And therefore we are willed in the
scripture to watch, and to be ready against the last day of life. Hitherto
makes that of our Savior in Luke, where he says, Be ye prepared therefore:
Luke. 14. 40.
for the son of man will come in an hour, when ye think not.

Read the sixteenth Chapter of this book.
Cap. 9.
An other cause of deferring repentance.
THere is another cause, why many of the common people do prolong and defer
the correction of their life. For there be some, and those very zealous too,
for we may not think otherwise, yet not circumspect enough in this point,
which in their Sermons lay open the mercy of God, the remission of sins,
and such other things tending unto our redemption, they urge full zelouslie:
but of newnes of life in Christ, of holiness, and quickening of the holy
spirit, they speak either nothing at all, or very little. For, according to
the doctrine of Paul, he that would be counted a Christian, must die to sin,
live to righteousness, cast off the old man with all his works, and put on
the new, and so walk, live, and prove worthy the Gospel of Christ.

Again, God gives the holy spirit to such as believe and call upon him,
which may raise new motions in the heart, and as it were regenerate the will
of man, and drive him unto all duties of godliness, and to all virtues seemly
for a Christian; and finally, to a life aunswerable and agreeing to the
profession of the Gospel. Of which we have spoken at large in an other place.

Oh how much are the minds of simple people offended by these and such like
speeches! Be thou, say they, an adulterer, a fornicator, a covetous person, or
defiled with any other vice or wickedness; believe only, and thou shall be
saved. As for the law, thou need not fear it: for Christ has fulfilled
the law, and satisfied for the sins of mankind. These words without
peradventure, do much offend the ears of the godly, and open a gap to the
committing of wickedness, and are a cause that men do not think of amending
their manners, but persevere obstinately in vice and wickedness; yea, and to
say the truth, animate such as are ill bent unto all impiety, and, as I may
say, cut off all occasion of repentance.

How much better did Paul, Preaching of Paul.
who, as Luke in the Acts records, did not only preach unto Felix, and to
Drusilla his wife, the faith which is in Christ; but disputed also of
righteousness, and temperaunce, and of the judgment to come, in so much that
Felix trembled thereat. Yea, and the same Paul again in the Acts witnesses,
how that he showed unto the Gentiles, not only that they should repent, and
turn to God; but over and besides, do works vvorthie amendment of life.

Thus you have the causes in a manner, why we are wont to prolong, and defer
the correction of our life. Now do we purpose to show what remedy may be
found for this mischief, all be in part we have it already.

The seventeenth Chapter of this book, is to be read for remedy of this cause.
Cap. 10.
A remedy against incredulity, which is the first cause why man does not
repent. Of which before Chapter second.
AGainst this incredulity therefore of ours, concerning the judgment to come,
the pains of the wicked, and immortal happiness of the godly, the authority
of God our Lord and savior Christ (unless we had rather to be counted, than in
deed be Christians) will prevail out of doubt, if we remember, and set, as it
were, before the eyes of our mind, those sayings which are contained in the
holy scripture concerning this matter. As that is (of many to recite a few) in
the (...) after John* The hour shall come, says he, in the which all that are
in the graves shall hear his voice. And they shall come forth that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life: but they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation, etc. Again he says, This is the will of him
that sent me, that every one which has the Son, and believes in him, shall
have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. Furthermore,
in the Gospel after Matthew, speaking of the last judgment, among other
things, our savior tells of the sentence he will pronounce upon the godly
on this wise: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world. And on the other side of the wicked,
he says; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. And a little after: And they shall go into
everlasting pain, and the righteous into life eternal.

O horible sentence of the Judge condemning the wicked unto everlasting fire!
Now, if the fear of earthly Judges do astonish malefactors; how should they
stand in fear of the celestial Judge? or how should their gilty conscience
terrify them? If thou art so afraid of the Judge in this world, from whom
notwithstanding thou may appeal; how much more ought thou to stand in
dread of that Judge, to whose verdict thou must stand?

Depart from me ye cursed, he says. How horrible then will it be, from God
himself, who is the sovereign, and excellent happiness, to be separated; from
the fellowship of the righteous, and holy spirits to be debarred; to be
excluded from the eternal blessedness of the celestial kingdom, which is such
and so great, that neither words can express; nor the mind comprehend; nor
all the cogitations of man conceive the same: and not only so, but to be sent
unto extreme torments in hell, and condemned unto everlasting fire, the heat
whereof is so extreme, that our fire in comparison thereof is but ice, and so
continue worlds without end among the devils, void of all hope of better
state.

What? think you, that men would live so wretchedlie as they do, if they
remembered these things? But they remember not what Peter in the Acts of the
Apostles witnesses, that Christ is ordained of God a Judge of quick and dead;
whereof Paul in like sort unto Timothy makes mention. Again, unto the
Corinthians, he says, For we must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done in the body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. In which
judgment, as testifies the same Paul, He will lighten things that are done
in darkness, and make the councels of the heart manifest, so that all men shall
behold the same. The which how horrible it will be to the wicked, no man can
sufficiently either tell, or conceive.

For, if in this life, a wicked man, whose wicked and shameful vices and
wickedness are to be ripped up, and repeated in the face of a great multitude of
men, would wish rather to be swallowed up of the earth alive, then have so many
witnesses of filthy life to appear in sight: how think ye our minds shall be
troubled, when the hearts of the wicked shall be opened, and all our cogitations,
councels, and doings, brought before the sight of the whole world, of the
Angels of God, and of all the Saints in heaven? If here we deem it a miserable
and wretched thing to be led unto prison; how miserable will it then seem, to
be thrown into everlasting torments? If it be horrible to be punished in this
world, either with banishment, or death; what will it be hereafter to be
banished worlds without end, from the celestial kingdom; and body and soul
to be put to everlasting death? If it be most comfortable for the godly, to
hear God bidding them to inherit the kingdom prepared for them from the
foundation of the world* how horrible do we think that the sentence of the
Judge will be to the wicked, condemning them unto everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels? If we believe these things of the judgment to
come, of the reward of the godly, and due punishment of the wicked, are true:
why do we so live, as though there were neither heaven nor hell? If we do not
believe these things, why will we needs be called and counted Christians?

Let us therefore shake off security, which possesses our minds, together
with that sluggishnes, cowardnes, and blockishnes, and drousines which have
invaded us. We argue not about nifles: but about the salvation of the soul,
the possession of the kingdom of heaven, about everlasting life and blessedness.

Wherefore now I say, now while we live, and are in health; while we may be
forgiven; while he is our advocate, which will be our Judge, let us endeavor to
amend our lives: and never defer we the same till our sins forsake us,
before we forsake them. Let us always remember the day of judgment, and the
horrible voice of the Judge, bidding the wicked depart from him; also the
pains of hell, and the everlasting fire let us never forget. Finally, let the
shortness of our life, the certainty of death, the uncertainty when we shall
depart be evermore in mind: to the end that no man may promise him self so
much as one day, no not one moment of life. To which effect it was well said
of Seneca: It is uncertain in what place death will wait for thee; therefore
wait thou for death in all places. And therefore the more uncertain, and
short man's life is: the more, while we may, we are to think of repentance.

Cap. 11.
A remedy for the second cause, why we repent not^ mentioned before in the
third Chapter.
FOr (to say somewhat against the second cause) why should thou defer the
amendment of thy life, in trust and hope of Gods mercy? I grant, Christ when
he came, called sinners, but, unto repentance for their life misspent, not unto
liberty to sin.

The Lord graciously (as he is merciful) does forgive: but such as repent;
nor them which obstinatlie persist in wickedness.

Christ bare our sins in his body on the tree, says Peter. I know he did:
but what adds he? That we being delivered from sin, should live in
righteousness.

Christ gave himself for us, says Paul unto Titus. No man denies that: but
what follows in the same place? That he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works.

Christ has washed us from our sins through his blood, says John in the
Revelation. I knowledge it: but not that we should again defile our selves
with sin and wickedness.

We have an advocate with God the Father, says John, even Jesus Christ: Not
unless we repent, and so run unto him for help.

But you will say, I will hereafter bewail my sin. But how know thou,
that thou shall live one minute of an hour; much less so long a time as thou
vvilt prefixe for thy conversion? Call into thy mind, what God, unto that
Rich-man in the Gospel, which in his great prosperity promised long life to
himself, does say; O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee. Thou have much to fear, least the like happen to thy self.

I hope (thou say) it will be better with me then so. But what if your
hope deceive you? then may some one exclame and say, O vain and deceitful
hope! Now if that should come to pass (which God forbid) thou art utterly
damned, and voluntarily throwest thy self into everlasting destruction. Yet
you can not deny, but it may fall out so, our life is so uncertain. Then
what a folly is it, by procrastinating repentance, to bring thy salvation in
hazard, which thou may be sure of, repent thou never so soon? Why then
foorth-with do thou not amend, rather then with such danger of thy
salvation, to feed thy vain hope?

God is merciful, me thinks you say. So is he righteous too. Why then
stand thou not in fear of his justice, whose mercy thou do trust unto?

I desire not the death of the wicked, says the Lord by the Prophet. True; but
what follows those words? But that the wicked man turn from his way, and
live. Therefore turn you unto the Lord (as Joel adhorteth) with all your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Turn you unto
the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness; as the same Joel speaks. Hitherto makes that of Ezechiel, If
the wicked man will return from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live, and shall not die, And a little after, Have I any desire that the wicked
should die, says the Lord? or shall he not live, if he turn from his ways?
Hitherto belongs that of Esaie, Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. The Prophet
shows how that God is gracious and merciful, but toward them which repent,
and acknowledge their sin. Therefore do thou speedily repent, turn again
unto the fear of God, ask forgiveness of thy sins with tears, and sighing,
be thorowlie out of love with thy self for wickedness perpetrated and
committed; leave thine own way, and turn unto the Lord thy God; and then
assure thy self of salvation: despair not, neither doubt thou of Gods mercy
and favor. In the mean while; remember the saying of our Savior, That joy
shall be in heaven for one sinner that conuerteth, more then for ninety and nine
just men. Yea, let this above all the rest, prick thee up unto repentance;
considering, both how greatly the very Angels desire thy conversion, and how
much they rejoice when thou do amend.

But that in the Psalms likes thee passing well, where it is said, Thou, O
Lord, art a pitiful God, and merciful, slow to anger, and great in kindness.
Seeing you say so, hearken what in the same book of Psalms is written,
Thou hate all them which work iniquity. Again, The face of the Lord is
against them that do evil.

Some will yet say, it is in the Gospel after John, that He which believes
in the Son, has everlasting life. But what says the same John in an other
place? He that commiteth sin, is of the Devil. And, He that says, I know
God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him.

John Baptist witnesses of Christ, saying, Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. But what says he beside? Repent. And,
Bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

You urge further that of Peter in the Acts, saying, We believe through the
grace of the Lord Jesus to be saved. But mark you not what in the same book
is written? Amend your lives therefore, and turn, that your sins may be put
away.

Does not Christ in the Gospel after John say, God so loved the world, that he
has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life? But does he not say in Matthewe also?
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does my Fathers will which is in heaven.

You believe I am sure, that which Paul says, That Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners: believe also, that neither enchaunters, nor
whooremongers, nor murderers, nor idolaters, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
proud persons, nor dronkards, nor railers, nor the factious, nor envious, nor
euil-willers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. For if you believe, that
Paul, or the holy spirit rather by the mouth of Paul, does speak the
truth: you see plainly that you can have no hope of mercy at Gods hand, or
assurance to be saved, living awicked and filthy life. For, as faith through
the Gospel, acknowledges God to be merciful to the penitent: so does it know
that he is angry and displeased with such as obstinately proceed in sin.

There is no cause then, why through hope and confidence of pardon at Gods hand
thou should prolong thy conversion, and flatter thy self. Repent, and come
into the way again: and then, doubt thou no whit, but thou may make thy
self a large promise of Gods favor and kindness. And as no man can truly
repent, but he which hops to be forgiven, as it is well said by Ambrose: so
none may hope to beforgiuen, which does not unfeignedly repent.

This one thing I will ad now out of Jesus the son of Sirach, before I
proceed unto the rest: Eccle. 5, 4.
Say not, says he, I have sinned, and what evil has come unto me? 5.
For the Almighty is a patient rewarder, but he will not leave thee unpunished.
Because thy sin is forgiven, be not without fear to heap sin upon sin.
6.
And say not, the mercy of God is great; he will forgive my manifold sins.
For mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down upon
sinners. 7.
Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day. For
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in the time of vengeance. Hitherto
Ecclesiasticus.

Cap. 12.
A remedy against the custom of sinning, which is the third cause of
deferring repentance: as above in the fourth Chapter has been showed.
But custom of sinning does hinder thee, that thou can not amend, and
return from sin unto godliness. For commonly it falls out, that look what
a man has been used unto from his youth, he pursues in his age. Because, as
Cyprian says, that is not quickly, and speedily laid off, which is grown
to ripenes through long use.

For when will he learn to be a good husband, which has spent his time in
riottousnes, and dainty fare? And he which glittereth in brave apparel,
gloriously set out with gold, and purple, will hardly attire himself after
the facion of the simple sort. It cannot be, but that with forceable
intisementes, as the manner is, wine must inuit, pride puff up, anger set on
fite, covetousness unquiet, cruelty prick forward, ambition delight, lust bring
down headlong, and so forth. So that it may seem very hard by any means
to alter custom, which in a manner is become another nature. Notwithstanding,
if you love your own welfare, you must endeavor yet.

But, you will ask, how you may so do? Even if you cast off that by little and
little through good custom, which you have got through evil custom: and if you
labor to pluck up that by good custom, which evil custom has ingraffed.
And nothing is so hard (as Seneca does say) which the mind of man cannot
overcome. VVhat-soeuer the mind went about, it has brought to pass.
Wherefore to break this almost invincible strength of custom, you must
address your mind chiefly thereunto, and not strive and labor only by
force to overcome the same. And yet you must strive withal, if you would
weaken, and pluck up, and root out a thing which is fastened, and sticks to
the roots.

Wherefore, set there-vpon courageously, at the least wise begin upon good
hope, endeavor with a sure trust in God, and doubt thou not but thou shall
blessedlie go forward. For before thou begin, thine old custom perhaps will
seem invincible, but when you come unto the trial, straight-waie that, which
you thought would hardly be done, will seem nothing so, or at least not so
difficult. So oftentimes that which at the first we think heavy, when we
once go about the same, proves light. Briefly, what the most excellent Poet
speaks of Mnestheus companions to this effect, Their good success does make
them bold
and stout. They able are
Because they seem to be. Nothing
their courages can dare:


Think without peradventure, will fitly be applied to thee. Only, as I have
said, go about the same with a courage, hope well, and every day thy care,
and mind to live godly, will like thee more and more; and the love of virtue,
than which, as one truly says, nothing is more beutiful, nothing more fair,
more lovely nothing is, will marvelously inflame, and ravish thy mind. And in
the end thou will use much ioiful gratulations to thy self for addressing to
reform thy manners. Such a pleasure, and every day more profit then others
shall you reap thereby. So that you will confess that to be true which our
Lord and savior Christ, said unto his Disciples in these words, Ay yoke is
easy, and my burden light.

Hitherto belongs that which Hierome in a certain place does write: Too much
custom of sinning, says he, makes tie way to virtue seem hard and
vnc^mfortable to us: but alter this custom once, and you shall find the way
to rightiousnes, to be a goodly and pleasant way. So says he no less truly,
then elegantlie.

And if Stilpho the Philosopher, which thing Cicero does testify, Being
naturally inclined unto wine, and women, did by learning so bridle and subdue
his nature, that no man saw him drink at any time, nor yet beheld any
appearance of wicked lust in him: Why may thou not through Gods assistance,
tame by little and little, and, as I may say, cast of a wicked custom, yea,
though it be much ingraffed, and very old! An Ethnike subdued his nature,
shall not a Christian overcome custom? especially, if earnestly he bend him
selle thereunto; if continually he look to himself; if after a sort he
offer violence to himself, and yield not to weakness; if in consideration of
man's imbecillitie he call for Gods assistance by earnest and ardent prayer; if
by alms, and liberality upon the poor, he seek after the favor of God;
finally, if he make petition that the holy Spirit, which may raise up new
motions in his heart, and prick forward his study and endeavors to live well,
may be given him.

But proceed we to the rest.
Cap. 13.
A remedy against the fourth cause of prolonging repentance, spoken of before
in the fifth Chapter.
THey whom riches and prosperity do make secure (for this was the fourth
cause of prolonging repentance) should often call into mind that horrible
voice of our Savior, extant in the gospel after Luke: VVo be unto you that are
rich: for you have received your consolation. VVo be to you that are full, for
you shall hunger. VVo be to you that now laugh, for you shall wail and weep.
Neither let them forget, what God said unto the rich man in the Gospel: O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Let other examples
be remembered also, of such, whom before we cited, as were either drowned
suddenly by the flood; or consumed suddenly by fire in Sodom. So would both
those rich men, whom the servant of God James bids, to Weep and houle,
for the miseries that shall come upon them; and that fine glutton also, who
being buried, was tormented with the flames of hell fire.

Let us then from our hearts cast of security; let us not forget God in
prosperity; let us fear the wrath of that Judge, before whose judgment seat
we are all to stand, to plead our own cause, our own conscience accusing,
and bearing witness; either with us for well-doing; or against us for our
wickedness.

It falls out for the most part, that prosperity puffs up the mind, that
rich men are proud, that wealth makes men headstrong. We should therefore
continually use well our good fortune and prosperity: we should look again
and again, least this temporary happiness bring us unto eternal misery, and
destruction.

What is then to be done? That Paul writing unto the Corinthia^s, shows in
few words: Hereafter, says he, let both they which have wives, be as though
they had none; And they that weep, as though they wept not; And they that
rejoice, as though they reioiced not; And they that buie, as though they
possessed not; And they that use this world, as though they used it not; For
the facion of this world goes away. In which words the Apostle shows, that
we must have either no care at all, or that our least care should be either of
wives, or of prosperity or adversity; or finally of riches and wealth of
this world: but that our chiefest, yea, and only care is to be cast upon
heaven, and heavenly things.

Not without cause did Paul command Timothy, to Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God. And David in the Psalms does say, If riches
increase, set not your heart thereon. Riches are not simply condemned, the
which godly men have possessed: but the trust in riches, and the pride and
hautines which arises from riches, is condemned. For wealth commonly, and
prosperity, are wont to make men have stomachs, and hie minds. Hence that
in the Comedy, Because wealth is increased, their minds are exalted.

He therefore which has gathered riches, and enioieth the world at will, let
him both yield thanks to God for the same; and take heed that he insult not,
and wax high minded; yea, and also let him again and again too, evermore
bring his fortune into suspicion: but above all use he diligence, that through
security (as many do) he forget not God; and that he never leese the sense
of Gods vengeance against sin, nor have his mind either occupied with
idleness, nor invaded by negligence.

Of which unless he beware, it is doubles to be feared, least leaning too much
upon present happiness, he be carried away with a false joy; and least
flattering himself with hope of long prosperity, the fear of God being
quite removed, in the mean while he be oppressed: as commonly the death of
death comes upon us, when we little look for the same.

Let us therefore place before the eyes of our mind that saying of the Apostle,
When they say, Peace and safety, says he, then shall come upon them sudden
destruction. So then, as the same Apostle warns us, let us not sleep, but
let us watch, and be sober. Never let us say, we shall have peace, evil shall
not come upon us: or as they did of whom the Prophet Esaie makes mention, who
said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement:
Though a scourge run over, and pass through, it shall not come at us.

In the old, and also in the new Testament we may find many, both
testimonies of Gods displeasure against wickedness; and examples of punishments
upon the ungodly, by the reading whereof, every man to his profit may shake
off carelenes in prosperity. For it is not our mind in this place to allege
all, least our book do grow ouer-big. Let it never be forgot, which Moses
mentions of mankind, which was drowned by a flood in the beginning of the
world; of the utter consuming both of Sodom and Gomor by fire; of the manifold,
and extreme calamities of the people of Israel; of the often carrying them into
captivity by barbarous nations for their contempt of godliness; nor finally,
which ecclesiastical histories do write, of the over throw, wasting, and
destruction of Jerusalem. For all these things are written (as Paul writing
unto the Corinthians does say) To admonish us, upon whom the ends of the
world are come.

Now what punishment the Lord has laid upon particular men for their
wickedness, it were long (as I have said) and needeles to show. I will allege
but one for example sake: When that noble and dearly beloved of the Lord,
David I mean, at what time he was through much prosperity secure, had fallen
into the filthy sin of adultery, and increased the greatness thereof, by the
murdering of an innocent man; with what miseries and calamities did God
afflict him, yea, after he had repented, and was restored into Gods favor
again? For God plagued him both with the death of his Son newly borne; and
with the rebellion of his own children; and by his woeful flight from
Jerusalem; and with violence offered to his concubine by his own son; and
with defection of his subjects; and finally (to omit other things) with a
great slaughter of his people. So horrible and hoar is the wrath of God against
wickedness.

If so holy a man, no not after his repentance and coming into Gods favor,
as the books, wherein the Acts of the Kings of Israel be contained, do
witness; if, I say, so holy a man after his repentance escaped not unpunished
for his sins committed: what think you shall betide them, which are touched
with no grief of their wickedness? which securely do sin, and proceed from
one sin unto another; finally, which with obstinate hearts persist in
ungodliness?

Let us therefore cast off al slouthfulnes, and that sleepie and drousie
security, when we have the world at will; let us live in the fear of the Lord;
and make sure our salvation with fear and trembling; let us not suffer our
selves to be entangled with the wicked intisementes of the flesh; and finally,
by continual prayer, let us resist the tentation of Satan.

And thus much for this point.
Cap. 14.
A remedy against the fifth cause of deferring amendment of life, contained in
the sixth Chapter of this book.
THey which in hope of long life, do procrastinate the amendment of their
life, do utterly of purpose deceive themselves; and vainelie do hope for
that, which greatly they desire: whereby, witting, knowing, living, and seeing
with their own eyes their destruction, they perish, which is the extremest
folly that can be.

If these men are nothing moved with that which Philosophers (wise men I mean
among the Heathen, yet void of true religion) have left in writing, touching
the shortness and uncertainty of this life, as he was, who said that Man is a
bubble; and he too, who called man, A dream of a shadow: yet let Job, that
man so beloved of God, move us, which witnesses that Man is of a short
continuance; let the servant of God James move us, which says, that the life
of man is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away; let the son of God, our Lord and savior Christ, who cannot lie, move
us, who bids us, VVatch, for we know neither the day, nor the hour.

Finally, if you think it most true, let even common experience move us.
Oftentimes thou art with such as are grieuouslie sick, without hope of
recovery; thou art present when they give up the ghost; thou hear the very
pangs of death; thou beholdest them upon the bear; thou followest the coarses
unto the grave; thou see them laid into the earth; thou hear the pitteous
cry of mourners; thou read Epitaphes engraued on tombs; thou meetest many
in mourning weed: all which things should stir up thy mind to remember the
shortness of this life, and how death is nigh at thine elbowe.

If the death of others, whom we know not, cannot move us; yet let us be
moved through the death of our friends and familiars; let our own dangers, and
grievous sickness, whereinto we fall oftentimes move us. And we, that consider
not our own infirmity, through the troubles of others; let us confess our
frailitie, and mortality of mankind, at least wise through our own weakness
where-withall we are tempted. Which thing if we would do, we shall perceive
there is no cause why we should flatter our selves with a vain and deceiptful
hope of longer life.

But, some will say, I may amend my self, and repent when I am old: in the mean
space I will take my pleasure. So you say: But who is sure he shall live till he
be old? Think thou, which neglectest, and ouer-passest the offered time, and
occasion to repent; think thou, I say, to have the like opportunity when
thou think good, for thine own behoof? Thou art deceived, surely thou art
much deceived, if thou think so. God of his mercy, which desires the
conversion, rather then the death of a sinner, when he thinks good, calls
thee unto repentance; and, as he in the Revelation says, Stands at the door
and knocks. Therefore do thou open when he knocks; hearken to him that
calls; whether he calls follow him; and, never despise the riches of his
bountifulnes, and patience; least for thine hardness, and heart that cannot
repent, thou heap unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, as Paul
writes unto the Romans. Let us bear in mind what the same Paul unto the
Corinthians does say: We beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee. Behold now the accepted time; behold now the
day of salvation. By which words the Apostle shows, that the time which God
offers for repentance, is not to be ouer-slipt; and that like occasion is
not always given. Hitherto belongs that unto the Galathians: While we have
time, let us do good. And not untruly said an old writer: He which has
promised pardon to him that repents; has not promised another day of life
to him that dissembleth his sins. Take heed therefore, that by
procrastinating repentance, and that through hope of longer life, thou
wittinglie and of purpose, do not tempt the Lord, whose goodness inuiteth thee
unto repentance. The which we are forbidden by an express commandment of God
in Deuteronomie. Deu. 6, 16.


It falls out many times, that men are killed suddenly, even in brauling,
playing, and quaffing together; so that he can have no time to ask mercy at
Gods hand for his wickedness: when as we in the mean while, through the
singular goodness of God, have time and space to return unto godliness. Wherefore
let us not abuse this so great mercy of our most gracious God, who looks and
longs too, as it were for occasion to show mercy upon us. Amend we our
sinful lives, least being suddenly prevented with death, as the Church does
sing, we seek time to repent, and cannot find the same. And certainly, He
which has promised pardon to him that repents (as euen-now I said, and must
often say) has not promised another day of life, to him that dissembleth his
sins.

But, as some say, in the time of sickness, a sinner may repent. He may do
so, I grant: notwithstanding, mark how many impediments come then in the
way, which very hardly can be avoided. For, to say nothing of the care
which the sick has of making his vvil; of provision for his wife, and
children; of the pain of sickness, and such like, which may seem of small
importance: how does Satan bestirre himself then, what engines does he set to
bring the poor soul unto desperation, through laying his manifold offenses
before his eyes? For then chiefly, if ever, he rippeth up, and brings into
remembrance whatsoever evil a man has either thought, or wild, or said, or
done; and such faults, as of themselves are great and heinous, he does make
much greater then they be: and by all means does study to withdraw him from
hope of salvation, and to drive him unto despair for his manifold and great
offenses. Hitherto belongs the grief of a guilty conscience; the great
fear of death before his eyes; the woeful and bitter cogitation of Gods
judgment seat; the dread of a severe sentence, which will sore dismaie, and
trouble the mind; the horrible remembrance of the pains of hell: and who is
able to repeat all the impediments, and causes which let men, that they cannot
so much as think of repenting at that time?

Do not therefore, do not, if thou be wise, defer the amendment of their
life, till the last day. For that is a very dangerous matter: that I say
not, how such a repentance, for so much as of necessity it springs, and is
extorted, through the fear of damnation, rather then taken in hand of pure
zeal, is of small force to get pardon.

But no repentance is too late before God. I confess so much. For, At what
time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord. And, as the Prophet in another
place, God desires not the death of a sinner, but that he repent and live.

But what if sudden death take thee unawares; that thou can have no time to
lament, and to repent thee of thy sins? For all men should look for that,
which may happen unto all men. Let the unlooked for destruction of them, upon
whom the tower in Silo fell, as Luke records, come into your mind. What if
suddenly you should leese your wits and understanding; as we see many do? The
which if it should fall out (as it may happen) then gone were all hope of
repenting, which the sinner had placed in prolonging the amendment of his life.
For that may betide thee, which has happened to others: that you may think
you are not exempted from that which is common to all men. For a true saying is
that of Publius, That may happen to every man, which may happen to any man.

Cast away therefore all hope of long life, then the which undoubtedly nothing
is more vain, and fleeting; neither do thou dream of occasion, nor appoint a
time wherein thou will repent; nor finally, do not thou nourish thy
foolishnes, or madness rather in deferring the reformation of thy sinful life,
through this deceiptful hope. Were thou wise, thou would repent at that
time wherein thou may offend. For if thou mind then to repent, when thou
can sin no more, doubtless thou do not leave sin, but sin thee.

Furthermore, it is to be feared, least seeing when thou may thou will not
repent, that when thou would, thou may not. For the judgments of
almighty God in punishing man's wickedness, are unsearchable. For as his wont
is of his goodness and mercy, to give them space of repentance, which are
prepared ready, and willing to receive mercy; yea, and in the mean while
with much patience and lenity to bear with sinners, until they return from
their wickedness: so when he sees any man utterly bent unto ungodliness, and
deriding Gods long suffering, and so worthy damnation, then cease he to hold
such a one back from falling into destruction, and so (according to the phrase
of scripture) blinds the desperate, and hardens the obstinate: neither
does he look any longer for his conversion, nor offers occasion for the
damned to repent. For God has appointed a time and manner for each man, the
which no man in wickedness may ouer-passe; and God will not prolong his
punishment, and pain of sin. The which should stir up all men to repent
without delaie, and to prepare themselves to receive the grace of God.

But for so much as we have spoken sufficient hereof, let us hasten unto other
things.

Cap. 15.
A remedy for the sixth cause of deferring repentance, declared before in the
seventh Chapter.
THey, who through the opinion, which they have in Popes pardons, do defer
the correction of their life, do trust to a weak staff, and depend upon a
tottering wall (as the saying is.) So do they in like sort, that worship Saint
Barbara, and will be buried in the habit of a Franciscane. For in all the
scripture what may be found concerning these toies? What in all the old
Testament? In the Euangelical doctrine what? What in the works of the
Apostles? To conclude, which of these things was observed in the primitive
Church; or else by a general judgment and consent of the Church at all times,
received and allowed, as a thing available, and necessary to salvation?

Therefore, who does not before death bewail his offenses, he, albeit he have
a thousand Bulls and Pardons, shall never be saved. And therefore, unless thou will be in doubt of thy salvation, omitting these vices, thou must earnestly
repent thy wicked life, and be heartelie sorry at the remembrance of thy
sins; thou must with tears and prayers, beseech God to be good unto thee;
finally, thine only refuge must be to run unto the merits of Christ, in a
strong hope that God the Father will be merciful to thee for Christ his sake,
whom for us he has delivered unto the death. So will it come to pass, that
God will have mercy on thee, forgive thy sins, and for his Christ's sake
receive thee into favor. For, we have him our advocate with God, which prays
for us, and does reconcile his heavenly Father, who by reason of our sins
and wickedness, is offended with us, and makes him both merciful and quiet, as
John in his first Catholical Epistle does teach.

So then regard thou neither the Popes pardons; nor the worship of Barbara; nor
the habit and weed of a Franciscane, wherein there is no hope at all to be
saved. Run thou unto Christ himself, who is our mediator and advocate, as I
said; the throne of grace; the propitiation for the sins of the world; and
the Lamb killed from the beginning of the world, as in the Revelation it
appears; briefly, who is our righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
as Paul unto the Corinthia^s does witness.

Wherefore (to return unto the purpose) prolong not the amendment of thy
sinful life for any Bull or Pardon from the Pope; especially, seeing our
life is so short, and the hour of certain death so uncertain. The which
death, for so much as in respect of uncertain chances, it is always nigh,
and may in this very moment ouer-take a man unawares; doubtless, as one says,
can not be far off. How dangerous therefore is it to live in such a state,
wherein if sudden death should strike thee, thou were utterly damned?

Then to avoid this danger, see that always thou live in the fear of God;
acknowledge thy wickedness; fly unto the mercy of God; ask pardon; and hope
and look too for salvation at Gods hand for Christ his sake. Beside, make thou
often recourse unto the minister of the Church; and crave consolation, and
absolution from him. And, that thou may be stirred up unto the remembrance of
the promise of pardon, and be confirmed more and more of Gods mercy to
usward, make often recourse unto the Lords table; and, according to Christ's
institution, both eat that body, which some-time was a sacrifice for the
sins of mankind; and drink the blood shed forth for the remission of our
sins: and so being mindful of the Lords death, yield thou hearty thanks
to God for his so great benefits, and with a grateful mind sing thou Psalms to
him, both with thy self at home, and with others in the congregation of the
faithful.

Cap. 16.
A remedy for the seventh cause, specified before in the eight Chapter.
AS much as thou can (to come unto other things) avoid evermore the
company of the wicked; and join thy self unto the society of the good. And,
as one councelleth, have conversation with such as may make thee better; and
admit them into thy fellowship, whom thou may reclame from vice unto virtue.

For it is behoouefull to mark what company one uses, and who are his daily
companions. For, as by the familiarity of wicked men, we are infected, as with
a certain contagion: so by daily acquaintance of the godly and virtuous, we
are in manner corrected and amended. Seek therefore the amity and friendship
of these men; but have no dealing at all with those. Solomon in his Proverbs
commands the same thing. Yea, and Paul writing unto the Corinthians, does
so dehort us from living, and having to deal with the wicked, that he would
not have us so much as to eat and drink with them. If any, says he, that is
called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or
a dronkard, or an extortioner, with such one eat not.

I grant, diverse other causes there be, why he would have such to be avoided,
either because we may seem in no sort to allow the sins and wickedness of
these men; or that such whom all men do so avoid and shun, through shame of
the world, may repent. Notwithstanding, it is not the least cause, that the
contagion of wickedness do not redound unto such, as are joined unto them in
friendship. For, as a little leaven makes a great heap of doa to swel; so the
example of one wicked man does corrupt and infect a great many.

And although it be hard and very difficult, to for sake their acquaintance
and familiarity, with whom a man merely, a long time, and iocundlie has
lived: yet earnestly thou must endeavor, and labor with carefulnes by all
means to depart, and pluck thy self from their company. If thou but from
thine heart once mind the same, without doubt thou will find better success
then thou art ware of. And for so much as, according to the Greek proverb,
The beginning is as good as half: and, as Horace does write, He which has
begun, has half done: set upon the same at the least, and despair not of
the success through consideration of the difficulty.

Now, as commonly it falls out, if thou think of the bankets, the
feastinges, the reare-suppers, the reuelinges, and such like fond and childish
things which thou have used with them; and if thou against thy will remember
thy companions, and merry mates, call into thy mind forthwith the shortness
of this life; the nighnes of death; the last judgment; the tribunal seat of
Christ; hell fire, and everlasting damnation. And so, as the saying is, Thou
shall drive out one nail by the force of another. If these things come into
mind, and thou think thus with thy self: My cup-mates and companions inuit
me unto them; their suppers, dinners, and potations, do allure me: But what
do I? Credit me, would thou say but thus much with thy self, what do I?
foorth-with, both reason would overcome thy lust; and thy will would listen to
reason adhorting unto the best.

Therefore, as I say, thou must take a space to deliberate, and make some
delaie. When any such thing, by the suggestion of Satan, comes into thy
mind, throw away thy weakness of mind, and loase not the bridle by and by to
thy lust, for then thou will run as the Devil would have thee.

Do thy companions inuit thee to the Tavern? Call thou into thy
remembrance, what our Savior in a certain place does say; Take heed to
your selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
dronkennes; what Paul does write, Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess;
And, Neither dronkardes, nor gluttons shall inherit the kingdom of God: what
Peter says, Be sober and watch; finally, what the Prophet Esaie writes, VVo
unto them that rise up early to follow dronkennes. Remember that the
authority of God, and of his Apostles must be obeyed; and not the minds of
ungodly persons followed: that thou art to hearken to thine Angel adhorting
thee unto all goodness; and not to obeie the Devil, pricking thee forward unto
wickedness; finally, that thou must resist the evil spirit, and not grieve the
holy Ghost.

Wherefore do not thou, I say; do not thou destroy thy self, for the
sweet company of thy cup-mates; but so much as in the lies, withdraw thy
self from their familiarity; and make thou more accoumpt of everlasting
salvation, then of a little short pleasure.

Cap. 17.
A remedy against the last cause, which holds men from repentance, entreated
of before in the ninth Chapter.
NOw to prescribe a remedy for the last cause, think alwaie with thy self,
that he unfeignedly does not repent, neither that he either is, or may be
counted a true Christian, that goes on forward in wickedness; neither that he
has true faith, which continues in sin against his conscience, and
commits any outrageous wickedness.

Let us not then be Christians in name only, being far from the nature;
neither let us in words boast of faith: but let us truly and unfeignedly
repent, turn unto the Lord with our whole heart, and reform our sinful
conversation by well doing: yea, let us study by good works to blot our
wickedness as it were out of the mind of God, and through hope of Gods
assistance, not through our own strength endeavor we to live godly,
righteously, innocentlie, vprightlie, holilie, chastely, soberlie,
temperatelie, profitablie to the Church of God, friendly unto man, and, as
Paul does say, as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Furthermore, beg we of our heavenly Father, through our Lord and savior
Christ, that he would impart upon us his holy spirit, which may rule,
govern, instruct, sanctify, erect, comfort, and quicken us, according as
Christ has promised in the Gospel, that our heavenly Father will give the
holy ghost, to them which ask it at his hands. And yet in the mean while
let us not resist the holy Ghost, by yielding to wicked affections contrary
to our conscience; neither yet expel and grieve him, to use the words of Paul.

Let us walk in newnes of life, not insinfulnes; Let us give up our bodies a
l^ing sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God; let us crucify the flesh with the
affections, and the lusts thereof; let us keep our selves unspotted of the
world; Let us be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness; Be we followers
of God, as dear children; and walk we worthy of the Lord, as it becomes
Saints, supporting one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of
the spirit, in the bond of peace; let us be gentle one toward another, and
merciful; let us love our enemies, bless them that curse us; do good to them
that hate us; and pray for them that hurt us, and persecute us. Let us give to
the hungry meat, to the thirsty drink, to the needy relief, to the
harborles lodging, clothing to the naked; let us visit the sick, admonish the
wanderer, teach the ignorant, council the troubled, comfort the afflicted; let
us reconcile them which be at variance, despise honor, refuse promotion,
abhor covetousness; finally, let us endeavor evermore to tame and subdue our
ingraffed naughtines, together with wicked affections; and let us not only,
take heed to ourselves, least at any time our hearts be oppressed with
surfeiting and dronkennes; but also prepare we our selves in like sort unto
prayer, by abstinence and fasting. And, among so many subtilties and
batteringes both of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, let us with earnest
prayer call for the help of God, that we be neither in prosperity proud, nor
out of heart in adversity. What so ever we do, let us do it to the glory
of God; let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. Furthermore,
let us be such, as may offend no man; but rather by good example provoke
others unto godliness and well-doing. And last of all, let us pray continually,
and in all things give thanks; let us set our affection on things which are
above, and not on things which are on the earth.

These be hard things, thou say. I know that; yet meet for Christians, and
necessary to salvation. Let us then give diligence, to cast away this
nicenes of mind; let us not pamper our selves so as we do; neither veeld to
our weakness; nor finally, of purpose make the grace of God in vain to usward.

Let us not only, not wittinglie run headlong into wickedness; but stoutly
beside resist the Devil, when he drives us to sin, and never cowardly let
us yield unto him. And so what is there so grievous, but thou will judge it
light, so thou may attain unto everlasting life, and heavenly loies? For
well and wisely was it said of Paul, I count that the afflictions of this
present time, are not worthy of the glory, that shall be showed unto us.
Hitherto makes: The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard,
neither came into man's heart, has GOD prepared for them which love him.

For how great a thing is it, which no force of words can express, not
cogitations comprehend, namely, to be a citizen, and inhabiter of heaven; the
heir of God, the coheire of Christ; to possess the kingdom prepared for the
godly before the foundations of the world; everlastingly to behold the most
sovereign good; to enioie the most comfortable contemplation of Gods heavenly
countenance; to abide in the society of Angels; in the company of Saints; in
the number of the righteous; with continual Hymns and Psalms, together with
all the holy Angels, and Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs,
and with all the godly, now enjoying blessed immortality, and eternity, to
praise God, even the fountain of all glory.

What? Are not all the miseries and troubles of this life, compared to the
glory to come, even to be judged of no weight; nor meet to deserve so great a
reward as is appointed for them; that in very deed we may be ashamed of our
nicenes and security?

And who is there, calling to remembrance the kingdom of heaven; everlasting
life; eternal happiness; the exceeding great and infinite joy; the fellowship
of Angels; the society of all the Saints, which departing in the fear of God,
do enioie felicity worlds without end: I say, who calling these things to
remembrance, will covet to live upon earth, and not with Paul rather, desire to
be loased, and delivered out of the prison of the body?

Let us not then deem those things hard, which our savior Christ so often
beat into the heads of his, for the attainment of this so unspeakable
happiness: especially, since contrariwise, they which observe not the
commandments of God necessary unto salvation, are not only bereued of the
felicity whereof we have spoken, but are cast headlong into hell among the
damned; where they are tormented everlastingly; with extreme pains appointed
for the reprobate; judged to hell fire, and perpetual death; thrown into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; plagued with most bitter
pains and torments, which ever shall endure, and that in the society and crew
of Devils and damned souls, without all hope of better state: that is, they
shall continue worlds without end in despair, which more grieuouslie shall
vex them then any torment, or then all torments beside.

Now, whom would not these things terrify from sinning, as the fear of hell;
the pains of which there is neither end, nor measure: everlasting death;
unquenchable fire; unspeakable torments; the fellowship of Devils; the
society of the damned; horror; anguish; trembling, both everlasting for
continuance, and unmeasurable for greatness, such as neither man's mind can
conceive, nor any mouth declare! I say, what man is there, but will be terrifed
by that day of wrath, as both the Prophet, and Paul in his Epistle unto the
Romans calls it, that day of trouble and heaviness, of destruction and
desolation, of obscurity and darkness, of clouds and blacknes; at what time he
will reward every man according to his works?

O that the cogitation and memory of these things were continually fresh
before the eyes of the mind! undoubtedly then, either I am much deceived, or
men with more diligence would observe Gods commandments; they would study
earnestly both to abstain from sin and wickedness, and also to live
vprightlie, and virtuously all the days of their life.

Moreover, what if here in this world virtue sometime be rewarded, as
wickedness, and il behavior is punished? And to say nothing of the conscience,
whereof we have spoken at large in other books, let us bring out those things
which in a manner we do feel with our hand, much more see with our eyes. For,
that I may begin with the most usual vice, what evils do not follow dronkennes
and gluttony? For, as he in the Story of the world does say, Hence comes
palenes of the face, hanging cheeks, sore eyes, palsy in the hands, ouglie
dreams, and unquiet sleep in the night. Hence proceed stinking breathes,
hed-aches, weak memories, dull wits. Hence are ingendered grievous diseases, as
ache of the iointes, goutes, the falling evil, as both Physicians do affirm,
and daily examples testify.

Now, touching whoredom, how in this our age do we behold the same to be
punished with the French-pocks; as also other immoderate venerie with the
palsy; with the blearednes of the eyes; with the quiuering of the sinews!

As for luxuriousnes, does it not bring many a man unto need, and beggerie?
Adultery, is it not sometime punished, and they which commit the same always
after infamous? Besides, the angry man, does he not oftentimes get hurt, and
the proud man hatred?

What shall I say of Envy, is it not a punishment to him which is given
thereunto? does it not eat up, and consume the envious? As rightly did one
say, The Sicilian Tyrans did never find,
A greater plage then envy to the mind.


So did another, Th'enuious man does pine away in pain,
To see another flourish well, and gain.


Now to speak of covetousness, is it not evermore tormented, as with desire of
getting, so with fear of forgoing? For that which a covetous man has, will not
content him: and that which he has, makes him to fear, least he loase the
same.

Thus you may see, how that vice and wickedness are often punished, yea, in
this world. Now, if these things do nothing move us, yet should the
everlasting torments of hell, threatened to the wicked in the holy scripture,
stir up every man with all earnestnes of mind to amend his naughty life
without delaie, if we believe those things to be true, and not a fable, which
the holy scripture teaches, both of the eternal life of the godly, and of
the punishment of the wicked.

Cap. 18.
What means a godly man may use, by the example of the Author, to stir up
him self unto a godly life.
HEre I will briefly declare, if happily it may give occasion to others in like
sort, to amend their life, what it is where by I am greatly incensed, and set
on fire, to follow virtue and godliness. For thus many times I do reason with
my self: What Riuius, what if at this very instant of time, thou should
leave this world, in what state should thou be? Art thou well prepared to
die? For albe thou reposest thy confidence, as it is thy part to do so, in the
infinite mercy and goodness of God, have you not need for all that to stand
infeare of his justice? How many thousands of Christians; how many young
men, old men, of middle age, women, wives unwedded: finally, of all degrees,
of all ages, and of all kinds, whose sins are neither for number so many,
nor so heinous as thine, and yet are damned to everlasting torments? O
horrible judgment of God, yet a righteous judgment. How many Jews are in
hell; how many Idolaters are punished with perpetual pains? The which had
escaped those pains, had they been converted unto the faith of Christ, as we
are through the goodness of God, seeing they lived far more vprightlie in the
world, then we have done? O cursed ingratitude of ours; O the hardness of our
hearts! I say, what if it were said unto thee, as it was said unto Ezechias?
Put thine house in an order; for thou shall die, and not live: what would
thou do then? I think thou would crave longer life, that thou might
bewail thy sins, repent, and ask God mercy. Why then do thou not that
day by day, all thy life long, which thou would do at such a point?

By these cogitations, as I say, I am wont marvelously to be inflamed to
live well; to fly sin, and to requite mercy at Gods hand. Let others then,
as like this wont, place the same before their eyes.

Cap. 19.
How men should address themselves to live well.
THere is none almost, but thinks enemies should be forgiven before death
comes; let him now then forgive: none but desires Gods favor; let him now
then seek the same: none but would think to amend his life; let him now then
amend. Finally, do that while thou live, and art well, do that through
trust in God, which thou would wish to do at the point of death.

That is, particularly to express the same, repent continually; fear the
Lord unfeignedly; love him heartelie; trust in him alone; in adversity call
upon him; in prosperity thank him, alwaie see thou praise, extol,
acknowledge his goodness; sing Psalms to him; let him alone be evermore in thy
prayers, in thy cogitations, and in thy desires. Commit thy self to his
goodness, and submit thy will to his. Follow his example in doing well to all men;
and endeavor to be like him in loving thine enemies.

Furthermore, be thou in troubles, patient; in peace, modest; in thy office,
diligent; in thy living and apparel, temperate. Be thou toward thy neighbor,
righteous; toward the poor, liberal; in thy dealing with others, mild, and
courteous. Put up injuries, pursue peace, love chastity, shamefastnes,
sobriety; and in all things show thy self vp-right and vncorrupt.

And, forasmuch as these things cannot be attained by the only power of
nature, fly thou unto the Lord for help and assistance, acknowledging thy
weakness, and the infirmity of man; pray God both humbly and continually, to
impart upon thee his holy spirit, the which Christ has promised, that the
Father will give to them, that desire him. If therefore thou crave that the same
spirit may be given thee of God, and shed upon thee abundantly, to use the
words of S. Paul, through Jesus Christ, thou shall find that what things of
thy self thou could not do, through him thou shall bring to pass. Only
be not thou thine own foe; neither do thou voluntarily loase the bridle to
thine affections; and with all endeavor look that thou feed not thy wanton
humor. For the holy Ghost does not assist cowards, sluggardes, and such as
idlelie sit with their arms folded together; but those which work, and labor
earnestly to tame their natural wickedness; yea, he deemeth such worthy his
aid, which continually do strive with the wicked affections of the mind.
Let us not then do as that countrie-man did, as the tale is, who, his cart
sticking fast in the myte, cried unto God for help, but stood idlelie
himself and would not help at all.

Above all, be thou terrified from sinning, and stirred unto a godly life,
through the presence both of God, who every, and no way can be avoided; and
of his holy Angel, thy keeper, and guider, yea, and the beholder, and witness
of all thy doings. Now, if thou would for no good, that any man should
come in, when thou art committing any foul, and dishonest fact: how much more
ought thou to abstain therefrom through reuenence and shame of God, and
his Angel? Fear thou to have man privy to thy fact: and art thou not
afraid in the presence of God, whose eyes beholding all things no man can
escape, to commit that, which thou would not do in the sight of man!
Especially, seeing he one day shall be thy Judge, which now beholds
whatsoever thou do!

A certain Philosopher councelleth us, So to live, as though we lived in the
sight of all men: so to think as though one might behold the most secret
cogitation of the heart. Again, says he, So do all things, as though some
man saw thee. It is doubtless good to appoint a keeper over thy self; to have
one upon whom thou may look back, whom thou may suppose is privy to
all thy cogitations. A great part of wickedness is left undone, if one be
present when a man is about to sin. Thus councelleth an Ethnike, which I
would have every man suppose to be spoken to himself.

If therefore thou enterprise any thing which is filthy and wicked, before
thou go about the same, thus reason with thy self: what is that I do?
Shall I commit that in the sight of God, which for my life I would not have any
man to know? Should I drive away the Angel appointed to ouer-looke me by this
crime: which would not loase the friendship of a mortal man? Shall I grieve
the holy spirit; to make the evil spirit rejoice through my falling? Has
Christ redeemed me with his precious blood, that voluntarily I should give my
self into the bondage of Satan? Has he redeemed me from sin, to the end I
should run headlong into wickedness? Has he therefore made me an heir of
heaven, that through mine own default I should forgo the same? Where is now my
zeal to Godward? where is my reverend fear of his majesty? where is my
faith and godliness? Is this the thanks I give to my God, for his so
innumerable benefits? Is this the thanks I do yield to Christ for my
salvation? Do I thus submit my self to the direction of the holy spirit?
With this holiness do I approach unto the Lords table? Look I for the coming
of Christ after such a sort? Shall death lay hold on me in this state of life?
Shall I go unto the judgment seat of God in this pickle? Shall I suffer mine
affections to prevail; the weak flesh to overcome; sin to reign in my
body? Am I so void of stomach, and courage, that I can-not resist the
motions of the mind? Do I behold the better, and yet choose the worser still?
These and other things (for who can recite all) think daily with thy self;
so will thou not easily do that which is not seemly.

Then, to come unto an end, whatsoever thou go about, persuade thy self,
that God is present (as in deed he is) and beholds all thy doings; and
therefore stand thou in awe of him, and let the reverence of him withdraw thee
from wicked enterprises. For (as the Poet says,) He witness is, and Judge also,
He so does view the heart of man,
That every thought he well does kno,
And him deceive no creature can.


This also will further thy zeal to live well, if continually thou think with
thy self, how thou art the son and heir of God, in the spiritual
regeneration, and, which is the greatest honor, the brother, and heir annexed
with Christ. For who will not be inflamed mightelie unto godliness, and with a
Christian fear, and shame abhor sin, when he shall call into remembrance,
how that God is his Father? Do not therefore, I say, do not forget this
benefit at any time; love him, worship him, serve him, honor him ouermore,
who has made thee his son by adoption; and never do any thing which may
displease him henceforth. Fulfill thou his will, obeie his commandment, keep
his laws. Think with thy self, that not only the participation of his
inheritance; but also the imitation of his virtue and goodness does belong unto
thee: so that although thou can not by imitation attain unto that
singularity of goodness which is in the Father: yet endeavor thou earnestly to
come nigh the same, and think it a most shameful thing to degenerate
therefrom. And if at any time unwittingly thou co^mittest somewhat contrary
to thy Fathers mind (as great is man's frailty,) let it much grieve thine
heart; punish thy self therefore, think no pain grievous enough for thee,
who have offended so merciful a Father; and never be quiet in mind, and at
rest, til thou have recovered thine offense with greater good deeds, and
pacified thy Father by unfeigned repentance. So far should thou be from
sinning voluntarily, and from committing any sin against thy conscience.

And, who so remembers how that he is the son, and heir of God, the
brother and heir annexed to Christ, doubtless, will be terrified from sin and
wickedness, not so much for fear of the last judgment of everlasting
torments, and of hell fire, which never will be quenched; as for fear of
displeasing his so loving Father; and will endeavor to live godly, to offend
no man, after the example of the Father, to do well to all men, not so much in
hope of reward in heaven, and of eternal joy, as through a certain great,
and unspeakable love which he bears toward God the Father.

He which believes, as Paul says, that his body is the Temple of the holy
Ghost dwelling in us, easelie refraineth from sin, and polluteth not
himself with filthy lust. Finally, who out of doubt thinks that he is
adopted into the fellowship of Saints, will not neglect to emulate the virtues
of the Saints, namely, zeal toward God, and love toward man.

Cap. 20.
The causes why we proceed not in well doing, having purposed to live in the
fear of God; with the remedies for that infirmity of man.
But, some will say, what may be the cause, why, minding sometimes to live
chastely and soberlie, and godly, after the will of God, we do not constantly
fulfill, which wisely we purposed?

To answer in few words, the principal cause is, the natural wickedness that
is in us, and the proanesse which we have to sin, which cleaves to our bones
and bowels; that is to say, the very flesh that we bear about, which has a
grievous and troublesome combat, and a continual fight in a manner, with the
inner man, as witnesses Paul. So that we must resist the same, when it
inticeth us unto lust, and filthy pleasure, unto the vices of the throat and
belly; unto lasciuiousnes and wantonness, and unto other vices and dishonest
factes: and furthermore, we must bridle the same by godly cogitations,
exercises, watching, abstinence, and also tame and bring it under by continual
sobriety and temperance.

This made our savior Christ to will us, To take heed, least at any time our
hearts be oppressed with surfeiting; and Paul both to bid, that we be not
drunk with wine; and also to forbid gluttony and dronkennes; and Peter to
command us, to watch and be sober. With this we must join continual prayer,
and earnest calling for the assistance of God, without which all our endeavor to
tame the flesh, and to suppress the force of the same, is vain, and to no
purpose.

Now having as well as we can subdued the motions of the flesh, there be
moreover the world, and the Diuil, deadly enemies, with whom we have
continual warfare; for they will not suffer us to abide in our godly purpose of
living well. For the world stirs unto ambition, pride, and riottousnes; unto
anger, hatred, envy, impatience, backbiting; and ministers occasion to fall
unto other vices, which no man is able to number, they be so many; it marreth
by evil examples, and corrupts with offenses.

The Devil for his part never cease to bring and drive man to contemn the
word of God; to mistrust his promises; to conceive amiss of him; to persist
obstinately in wickedness; to blaspheme; to impugn the known truth; to play
the hypocrites; to be superstitious; idolatrous; and unto other infinite and
cursed wickedness.

What is now to be done in this case, do thou say? Surely, we must
valiantly resist these enemies; we must take a courage unto us; and by earnest
and zealous prayer crave the help of God; through confidence whereof we should
never give over the battle. Touching which point, let us hear what S. Paul
writes unto the Ephesians: Finally my brethren, says he, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God: that ye
may be able to stand against the assaults of the Devil. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principallities, against powers, against
worldly gouerners, the princes of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in the hie places. And by and by showing the armor by
name, he bids us, to stand, our loins girde with verity, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, taking to our selves the shield of faith,
wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. He wills us to
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God: and adhorteth, to pray always.

Thus you see the armor, which we must use against our adversary the Devil,
who intermitteth no day, nor hour, nor yet any moment, but continually
lays at us, and raungeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, as Peter says. Let us therefore having on this armor of Paul,
resist him valiantly, and, he will fly from us, so says James. Let us call
upon God continually for help; pray we God, that he will not lead us into
tentation; beg we at his hand, to be delivered, through Christ from that evil,
which is evermore an enemy to mankind. Above all, let us take diligent heed,
least wittinglie we rush upon sin, and destruction, whereunto Satan drives
us, and favor our own weakness: but with a courage, let us resist the Devil,
and desire of God the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would
strengthen our weakness. And for so much as the Devil does not alwaie set upon
us openly, but some-time secretly, and by undermining, and oftentimes (as
one says,) Does flatter, to deceane; does laugh, to hurt; and does entice us,
to kill us: Let us use diligence, that we may circumspectly avoid the snares
which he has set, and prepared; and give him no occasion to assail, and kill
us on the sudden.

Where manifest fear is, says Cyprian, the weak is the more easelie taken.
Let us therefore cast from us all sluggishnes, and our too much security; let
us fear, that under every stone, as the common saying is, there is a
Scorpion; and as though all were safe, and at a good stay, let us not be
secure. No man comes sooner to destruction ( as that Heathen says) then he
which fears nothing: and the most usual beginning of misery, is security.
Think not foorth-with thou shall have peace, or that thou art quit from all
danger, if thou have once obtained victory over thine enemies. Thou must
evermore keep the battle, and be ready to fight: as well said Cyprian, In the
world we are continually to wage battle with Satan, continually we must fight
against his darts, and assaults. We are to encounter, says he, with avarice,
with lechery, with anger, with ambition; we have an eger and continual fight
with carnal vices, with the enticementes of the world. Hardly can the mind
of man go against every one, with much a do it resists, being besieged, and
round about environed with the army of Satan. If avarice be laid flat on
the ground, lust rises up; if lust be quenched, anger moves; pride, puffs
up; dronkennes, allureth; ielosie, parts friendship, and so forth.

And, as we ought not to insult, if we get a conquest: so must we not despair,
or fling away our weapons by and by, if we be overcome. What must we then
do? Surely to recover our honor again, we must set upon our enemy with
more courage; and with a new power make amends for our former faintnes, and
foil: after the example of that noble warrier, whom Virgil makes mention of,
which being beaten to the ground with great force, nothing terrefied with the
fall,

Went to the fight more fierce again,
which did his courage fresh renew:
And shame did make him fight amain,
So did his prowess which he knew.
Albeit we must not encounter with the enemy, trusting to our own prowess,
but to the power of God.

Thus you have the causes, why we do not persist in our purpose of living
godly, after the will of God. For, as I said, one cause is, the wickedness
ingraffed in our flesh, and our proanesse unto sin: another is the world,
offering infinite occasions and causes daily to offend; the last is, the Devil
who continually is thinking of our destruction, and ouerslippeth no minute of
time, either by open force, or by secret fraud, to overcome us.

O God, father of our Lord and savior Christ, proceed we beseech thee in
helping us, in this hard, and continual war which we have with so many
enemies; and for so much as of our selves we are unable to resist, confirm,
and strengthen us with thy holy spirit, that we may both repress the motions
of the flesh, and never be corrupted with the allurementes of the same; and
also valiantly, resist as well the world offering so many occasions
continually to sin, as the Devil casting all sorts of darts to hurt us, and
using all means to bring us to destruction. And, that we may not only
abhor sin and wickedness, through a servile fear of Gods wrath and
everlasting death, which the law does bring, terrefying us with the anger and
judgment of God, and striking men with the terror of hell: but also, and the
more a great deal, may be crowned through childrens fear, which arises from
faith, with a certain honest shamefastnes, and through a religious reverence
toward God, to commit nothing at any time, which may offend our most loving,
and best father: Also which may make us so of our own accord to do well, and
to fly from sin, and so keep us through love and charity in our calling,
that when unwittingly we shall commit any offense, as great is our weakness, it
may bring such a sorrow and grief to our mind, that both we may willingly
enioine a punishment to our selves, and be loath to live; for that we have
offended so merciful, and gracious a Father.

Finally, O eternal Father, grant for thy son, our Lord and savior Christ
his sake, that in such shortness of life, and uncertainty of death, we put not
of the amendment of our life, and defer the same from day to day: but may
with speed endeavor to return unto well-doing, confessing our sins, and
unfeignedly repent, and through repentance, pacify our heavenly Father; and
with the Publicane in the Gospel humbly, striking our breast, crave mercy of
God; and finally will, and do those things which are grateful, and acceptable
before God: that we may amend our wickedness by well doing; reform vices with
virtues; and through Gods assistaunce spend the time which we have to live in
this world, godly, religiously, innocentlie, purelie, soberlie, and
temperatlie, to the profit of the Church, the benefit of mankind, and the
discharge of our duties; and that in such minds, and godly determination we
may continue even til our lives end, Amen.

Cap. 21.
A brief repetition of that which has been said; with a short conclusion.
THus much I thought good to write of man's foolishnes in putting of the
amendment of this life.

The matter which I have handled, has enforced me to utter those things which
will be as to the godly, comfortable; so to them which would seem, but are not
unfeigned Christians, unpleasant. For we have spoken much, and abundantly of
the shortness, and uncertainty of life; of death in respect of uncertain
chances daily hanging over our heads, and many times dispatching men before
they be aware; the which all good men do wish, and desire of God in their
godly prayers, but the wicked do abhor. Also we have spoken of the general
resurrection, of the coming of Christ, of the last judgment, when all men
shall be summoned to give an accoumpt of their life spent; which day will be to
the wicked horrible, but comfortable to the godly. For then, their redemption
draws near; then is the time, as one said in the Acts, of comfort, and
refreshing; and, as it is in Tertullian, the day of Christian triumphing.

Furthermore, we have told both what rewards be appointed for the godly, and
what punishments ordained for the wicked. For the godly shall be exalted up
unto glory, and live a blessed, and everlasting life in heaven. For who is
able to express what a felicity it will be, always to behold God, and to
enioie the most comfortable contemplation of his heavenly countenance, to
behold him even as he is, whom now we do see through a glass darkly, as
Paul says! to abound with all good things? finally, to enioie so many
pleasures and delights, as may be neither conceived in mind, nor expressed
by words?

On the other side, the ungodly shall be thrown headlong into hell, to be
afflicted with unmeasurable, and everlasting torments. No eloquence can
describe by words, nor wit conceive the smallest part of the pains which the
ungodly are to endure in hell being condemned through the righteous judgment of
God unto everlasting fire.

Last of all, we have uttered diverse other things, which, as I said, will
please the godly right well; but trouble the wicked: as of the sense of Gods
indignation against sin; of casting of security when we have the world at
will; of unfeigned repenting; of reforming our manners; of amending our lives; of
our continual fight with mighty enemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil;
and diverse such like things, which are needles to be repeated in this place.

Sharp these are, and sour to blood and flesh: notwithstanding, as I am
persuaded, very profitable. For, as one in Curtius does say, Physicians do
heal sore maladies, with sharp medicines; and as Cicero writes unto
Octauius, No medicines applied unto wounds, do so grieve, as they which are
most wholesome.

Now the eternal God, father of our Lord and savior Christ, give grace, that
this our book, how so ever it be written, may in this corrupt and wretched
world, yet somewhat keep the godly in their calling, and confirm them in
well-doing; if any of zeal, and wel-liking thereof shall read the same:
furthermore, that it may offer some occasion to the wicked, to reform
themselves; and that the salve which is here prescribed to such as are sick,
and almost past recovery, may have strength to help and heal them. This he
grant, without whose help, all the labor of man is vain, and to no purpose,
even God almighty, and most righteous, to whom be all praise, honor, and
glory, now, and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
A Table wherein ye may find all the Chapters, which are contained in this
book.
A Preface unto the discourse following. Cap. 1. Page. 1. The first cause, why
man does not repent. Cap. 2. Page. 4. The second cause why we do not repent
us of our wickedness. Cap. 3. Pa. 15 A third cause why we defer the amendment
of our life. Cap. 4. Pa. 35. The fourth cause why men are loath to repent.
Cap. 5. Pa. 55. A fifth cause why man will not repent. Cap. 6. Pa. 64. A sixth
cause which alienateth men's minds from repentance. Cap. 7. Pa. 71. Of other
like principal causes why we repent not. Cap. 8. Pa. 79. An other cause of
deferring repentance. Cap. 9. Pa. 83. A remedy against incredulity, which is
the first cause why, man does not repent. Of which before Chapter second. Cap.
10. Pa. 86. A remedy for the second cause, why we repent not, mentioned before
in the third Chapter. Cap. 11. Pa. 93. A remedy against the custom of
sinning, which is the third cause of deferring repentance: as above in the
fourth Chapter has been showed. Cap. 12. Page. 101. A remedy against the
fourth cause of prolonging repentance, spoken of before in the fifth Chapter.
Cap. 13. Pa. 107. A remedy against the fifth cause of deferring amendment of
life, contained in the sixth Chapter of this book. Cap. 14. Pa. 115. A remedy
for the sixth cause of deferring repentance, declared before in the seventh
Chapter. Cap. 15. Pa. 125. A remedy for the seventh cause, specified before in
the eight Chapter. Cap. 16 Page. 129. A remedy against the last cause, which
holds men from repentance, entreated of before in the ninth Chapter. Cap. 17.
Pa. 135. What means a godly man may use, by the example of the Author, to
stir up himself unto a godly life. Cap. 18. Pa. 146. How men should
address themselves to live well. Cap. 19. Pa. 149. The causes why we
proceed not in well doing, having purposed to live in the fear of God; with
the remedies for that infirmity of man. Cap. 20. Page. 159. A brief
repetition of that which has been said, with a short conclusion. Cap. 21.
Page. 169.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the. 39. Page, and in the fifth line, for, My father in a sock, read, My
father in a sort.

In the. 122. Page, and in the second line, for, Defer the amendment of their
life, read, Defer the amendment of thy life.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, for Andrewe Maunsel, dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Paret.


