A FRIENDLY CAVEAT TO IRELANDS CATHOLICS, concerning the dangerous Dream of
Christ's corporal (yet invisible) presence in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

GROVNDED UPON A LETTER PRETENded to be sent by some well minded Catholics:
who doubted, and therefore desired satisfaction in certain points of religion,
With the answer and prooffes of the Roman Catholic Priests, to satisfy
and confirm them in the same.

Perused and allowed for Apostolical and Catholic, by the subscription of
master Henry Fitzsimon Jesuit, now prisoner in the Castle of Dublin.

With a true, diligent, and charitable examination of the same prooffes:
wherein the Catholics may see this new Roman doctrine to be neither
Apostol^^^ll nor Catholic, but clean contrary to the old Roman religion,
and therefore to be shunned of all true ancient Roman Catholics, unless
they will be new Romish heretics.

By John Rider Deane of Saint Patrickes Dublin.

ROMANS 10.1.2. Brethren, mine hearts desire and pra^^r to God for Israel, is,
that they might be saved. For I bear them record, that they have the zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge.

DVBLIN Printed by John Frauckton. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE S. CHARLES BLVNT, BARON MOVNTIOY: KNIGHT OF THE most
noble Order of the Garter: Governor of her Majesty's Town of Portesmouth and
Isle of Portesea: Lord Deputy of the Realm of Ireland, and General of all
her Man forces there. And to the rest of the privy Council.
DVrt de Pascolo in aulico suo politico, page 146. right Honorable, being a
wise courtier and a friendly Councellor, advised al petitioners to Princes and
to men of State, not to tender their suits in unseasonable times, Sed id
deferat auribus eius, nullo alio negotio defatigatis ne labor vel sit
imperfectus vel Inanis. Pascolus his counsel is good, yet I may not follow it:
he was an old Courtier seasoned with experience, yet his direction at this time
I may not embrace. For if I should not present these papers unto your learned
and honorable censures, before such times as your heads were free from public
cares, and your persons at rest from her Majesty's service, I should sooner
write ten such; then find time to present one such. And though the day
affoords no leisure to survey it, yet often it falls out, that cares in the
day banish sleep in the night: And as it fell out with the great Monarch of
whom the scriptures record, Ester. 6.1.
Noctem illam duxit Rex insomnem: so it may happen that though your leasures
will be little in the day, so your sleep may be less in the night. And as that
mighty Prince called for his Chronicles when he could not sleep: so your
Honors and VVorshippes would be pleased to peruse this small treatise, when
your common cares banish desired rest. And though Nocturnae lucrubrationes (if
violent) be most dangerous yet being moderatly used they cause (as we imagine
the watch to wheel the faster, and the clo^ke to strike the sooner. Two
reasons have emboldned me to present it to this ^o. Senate: the one that
without check of ill disposed, it may boldly and plainly show to the world
with what wresting of Scriptures, wringing of fathers, and alleging of fables
and munkish miracles, the Queens subjects have been so long deceived by Romish
Priests, and yet under the color of Catholic religion: The second reason is,
that your Honors seeing the manner of our combat, may witness to all men,
that if they be beaten with their own weapons, they have no cause to brag of
any victory to their favorits, In his Tra^ tado paranaetico, page 8. 9.
nor complain of any injury against me. For I have dealt with the Roman
Priests, as the Pilgrim Spaniard exhorted the Princes of Christendom to deal
with the Castilian king, That if ever they would tame the proud, bloody, and
insolent Spaniard, they should fight with him at home in his own country in
Spain: for one blow at home, does more discourage his subjects, daunt his
Mercenaries, male conteth his confederates, and displotteth his purposes, then
twenty overthrowes abroad: the one is visible, and therefore sensible and
terrible, but the other is so masked by lying Friars and Popish Pilgrims, and
seditious Seminaries, that the king of Spain has ten foiles abroad, before
the subject hears one truth at home. This course I have taken with the
Priests, because I would discover the weakness of popery to the best minded
Catholics: I have gone home to them to their own doors, fought with them
within their own lists, at their own weapons, in the presence of their best
friends, with their own translations, Fathers, Popes, Canons, Texts, and
Glosses: and if they be foiled at their own weapons, then the best minded may
see the weakness of their own cause. And whereas this small labor has many
enemies of several peevish humors, some condemned the whole work of it,
before ever they saw one word in it: others threatened it death before it had
life. In the first remains envy and indiscretion, for such as will censure
before they see, are like such wise men as will shoot their bolt as soon at a
bush as at a bird. In the second remains malice, against which, and whom if it
cannon defend it self with canonical scriptures, ancient Fathers, and the
practice of the Primitive Church, as becomes a true Apostolical Catholic:
then let them use their old wooden arguments, and burn it as an heretic.
But seeing it had enemies before it was borne, I know it will have more now it
is abroad: because books are like ships at sea: for as the one is subject to
all weathers, so the other to all censures. Therefore in trembling presumption
I entreat your Ho. favors, shield, and protection, that though it were
condemned before it was and may be now rent before it be read: yet that before
it be iudiciallie condemned, it may plead in your presence like a subject for
it self, and according to the equity of the cause, and the quality of the
evidence, receive your Honors learned and grave sentence (yet with all
favor.) Which if you grant, though the work be simple, I doubt not of the
good success, if truth may take place. The which patronage of the cause, and
pardon for my boldness being obtained, I will not cease to praise God for
those honorable victories against the insole^t Spaniards, and perjured rebels,
in this your Honors godly and politic government achieved: but also daily
pray that you may not only suppress rebellion, but aba^don superstition:
plant in the Church truth, and in the commonwealth peace: for subjection
without religion is but temporizing: and till religion be seated in the heart,
look for no sound subjection generally and perpetually in the land: For Peter
told truth when he said, Fear God honor the king: and the lack of this fear
of God and true religion, has spent England so much blood, and the Queen in
her gracious reign so much money, as the tenth part of both jointly at one
time employed, would have conquered Spain, and sacked Rome. The Lord bless her
Ma. under whom you most happily and prosperously govern, and grant that the
worlds doom and her death may meet in one day.

From my house in saint Patricks close, Dublin this 14 of Sep. 1602. The Lords
most unworthy servant I. R.

To all Roman Priests, and all other of any other Romish order, untruly
surnamed Catholic Priests: and to every of them within the kingdom of
Ireland,
IF the Irish Testament (a godly laborious and profitable work to Gods Church)
had not imbusied the Printers Press: long before this time, my Friendly
Cauea^ had presented it self to your friendly censures. I have only handled
the first position, and could go no further in the rest, till the Printers
return from London with new letters: and whereas there be some faults escaped,
impute them not to the skillful Printer, but to the stumpeworne letter: for as
weapons vnsteeled cut not, so letters overworne print not. I have laid down
your prooffes and speeches touching the first position, not adding,
diminishing, or altring one syllable or letter: but as I received them by a
courteous Gentleman (I think a Priest) and as master Henry Fitzsimon
subscribed the same, approoving them to be Apostolical and Catholic: so I
have delivered them, your Preface concerns nothing the matter in question
only the Preface I scilence, till I know your further pleasure, because it is
too biting and bitter, relishing rather of malice then matter. But if you
mislike with this scilence, upon the least notice, my next Treatise shall
manifest it to the world by way of a Postscript, to which I will annex a
Rescript. And whereas your letter directed unto me at first, was subscribed in
stead of your names, Catholic Priests. I have therefore not knowing your
name, Read Vincent. ^^rinens adversus haereses, a^ you shall what (...) the
(...).
given you still the same titles. But I must tell you plainly, you have only
the names without the truth of the thing it self: which vain usurped titles
you must cast off, until you can prove your doctrine Catholic: for a
Catholic opinion without an Apostolical warrant, is fit^er termed vpstart
heresy, then Catholic divinity. Sermon 140. de tempo. fol ^97. col. 3.
But this is most sure, that you have forsaken the verity of Christ's Gospel,
and the faith of the Primitive Church: to prove it but in this one point of
our question. Augustine says, Ideo Dominus absentavit se corpore omni
ecclesia, etc. Therefore the Lord (Christ) absen^ed himself touching his
bodily presence from every Church, and ascended into heaven that our faith
might be edified. Brag now no more of Ch^^sts corporal presence to be in your
Church: if you do, we with Augustine will say you have no true Church. And
again, as you will have a corporal presence, so you teach the communicants to
receive Christ with their mouths corporally, not with their faith
spirituallie: Super Ioh. Tract. ^6. page 174. col. 4.
contrary to the opinion of Augustine, showing the manner how Christ is to be
eaten in the sacrament four times together says spiritualiter, spirituallie,
spirituallie. And you cannot show one ancient writer that speaking of the
manner of our eating Christ in the Sacrament, Fide non dent^. Read Aug super.
Ioh. tract. 25. 26. and 50. The third b^^^e, cap. 3. de interp^ eta^dis
scripturis, page 102. Colo^^ print. 1588 ^hen it seems some gross ^alts
^emain still
that says once corporally. And therefore seeing this ancient Father
condemns your faith, and contradicts your doctrine, forsake new Romes
heresy, and return to old Romes religion. But you will say, it is shame for
me to b^lie the holy Sea, whose doctrine is Apostolical, and their life
Angelical. My prooffes shall be your own friends. Lindanus speaks of an
ancient complaint of Agobertus Bishop of Lions, who said, Antiphonarium magna
ex part correximus, amputat^s qu^ superfl^a, leuia, falsa, blasphema,
plantastica multa videbantu^. We have the most part corrected the Antiphonarie,
^^^ting off those which seemed superfluous, light, false, blasphemous, and
many fantastical things. Behold now the purity of the do trine of the
Church of Rome, who dare venture his soul upon such san^^e superstition? nay,
wicked and damnable heresy and irreligion. And for the life of your Clergy in
Rome, hear some of your own friends speak their knowledge. Read Concilium
delectorum Cardinalium, Council. Tom. 3. page 823. there thus you shall find it
speaking of Rome. In hac etiam vrbe, meretrices vt matronae i^cedunt per vrbem
seu mula vehuntur, quas affectantur de media die nobiles, Cardinalium
familiares, Clericique. N^lla in vrbo vidimus hanc corruptionem praeterquam in
hac, omnium exemplari. That is to say, in this city of Rome the curtisans or
common whoores pass through the streets or ride on their mules like honest
matrones. And in the midst of the day, the Noblemen, the Cardinals dear
friends, and Priests attend upon those whoores. We never saw such corruption
but only in this city of Rome, which is an example to all other cities. The
Popes own Cardinals being appointed by Pope Paul the third, anno Dom. 1538.
to visit the clergy and the stews, return this shameful commission. But
perchance you will tell the Queens subjects, that these whoores dwell in some
blind Alley, but the Popes court and palace are a most holy sanctuary of
saints. No says Lu^tprandus your own Proctor, lib. 6. cap. 6. into ^a^^ens^
palatium sanctorum quondam hospitium erat, nunc est prostibulum mer^^icum. The
very Popes palace at Lateran sometimes was the harbor of holy Saints, but
is now become a filthy stews of common whoores. Now you see the Popes
religion, and the Popes life; the one false, the other ^ewd: forsake both,
defend neither, for if you do, Primasius ad Romans cap 2. will tell you Nemo
periculosius peccat, quam qui peccata defendit. No man sins more
dangerously, then he that pleads in the defense of sin. Bern. in all his five
books de considerat. Sermon 33. upon the Cant. page 141.
And your friend Bernard tells the Pope Eugenius to his face, that for his
supremacy and usurping both swords, he holds them non Apostolico^ure, not by
Gods law And that his priests in show serve Christ, but in deed Antichrist. And
else ^here he painteth out the Popes Clergy, that there is with them ^^triu^
Nitor, etc. they be trimmed like whoors, attired like plaiers, and served like
princes: but in life they are murderers, whoormaisters, bribers, and deceivers,
And if the Pope then was an usurper of his supremacy. and condemned for his
Ambidextership: what man of any reasonable sense, would embrace this religion
that is so false, or commend this Romish clergy whose lives are so filthy.
And now Gentlemen, I wonder you inform not the subjects of the dangerous plots
the Pope and Spaniard practice against the^: the one has drawn them to
ydolatrie, and the other inciteth whom he can to treachery. And if Spain
might have his will of this kingdom (but he is liker to loose Spain then
conquer Ireland) the subjects should be used as the Dukedom of Millain and the
kingdom of Naples are by the Spaniards handled: Popery seeks to bring
Ireland to Spanish slaverie, from English liberty.
all the Nobility and Gentlemen upon pain of death are forbidden to dwell in
Castles: and the citizens in high streets, but back-laines: and no man to wear
a weapon, but a knife of three inches long, yet tipped with a French posie, No
point. This should be the miserable state of the Irish under bloody Spaines
government. Now for conclusion, let me entreat you as August, did his Readers,
Noli meas literas ex tua opinione vel contentione, In his Preface before the
third book de Trinitate.
etc. neither reprove nor correct these labors according to your own private
opinion, or contentions humors, but correct and confute the^ lectione divina,
by Gods word, and then you shall have my good leave and love (and my best
furtherance to the State that after you have replied to this, it may be
printed, as also your persons for further conference protected) and the like I
desire of you, that when you find the text and truth against you, you seek not
any lying gloss or Romish shift to help you, rather contending for victory
then verity. The Lord open your eyes that you may see the truth, that you and
we jointly and joyfully may preach only Christ crucified, without man's
inventions, etc,

Your loving friend, so far at you are Christ's and the Queen. Job. Rider.

A FRIENDLY CAVEAT TO IRELANDS CATHOLICQVES, CONCERning the Dangerous Dream
of Christ's corporal^ presence in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: grounded
upon a letter sent from the Catholicques, etc.
To the reverend Fathers, the holy Jesuits, Seminaries, and all other Priests
that favor the holy Roman religion within the kingdom of Ireland.
HVmbly prays your Fatherly charities, F. W. and P. D. with many other
professed Catholicques of the holy Roman religion: that whereas of late they
have heard some Protestant Preachers confidently affirm, and (as it seems unto
our shallow capacities) plainly do prove, that these positions here
underwritten cannot be proved by any of you, to be either Apostolical or
Catholicque by canonical Scripture, or the ancient Fathers of the Church
which lived and writ within the compass of the first five hundred years after
Christ's ascension: which assertion of theirs, has bred in your suppliants
great doubts touching the truth of the same: unless your fatherly accustomed
charities be extended presently to satisfy our consciences in the same, by the
holy written word of God, and such Fathers of the Church as aforesaid, which
being so directly and plainly proved by you (as aforesaid) may be a speedy
means to convert many Protestants to our profession. Otherwise, if these
points cannot be so proved by you, upon whose learned resolutions we greatly
rely, then not only we, but many thousands more in this kingdom of Ireland,
can hold these points to be neither Apostolical or Catholicque. And thus
having showed some of our doubts, we desire your fatherly resolutions, as you
tender the credit of our religion, the convincing of the Protestants, and the
satisfying of our poor consciences. And thus craving your speedy learned and
fatherly answers in writing, at or before the first of February next, with a
perfect quotation of both Scripture and Fathers themselves, not recited or
repeated by others for our better instruction: and the adversaries speedier and
stronger confutation, we commend your persons and studies to Gods blessed
direction and protection.

Positions.
1 That Transubstantiation, or the corporal presence of Christ^ body and
blood in the Sacrament, was never taught by the ancient fathers that ever writ
in the first five hundred years after Christ's ascension, but a spiritual
presence only to the faithful believers. 2 That the Church of God had not
their service in an unknown tongue, but in such language as every particular
Church understood, 3 Thirdly that Purgatory and prayers for the dead were not
then known in Gods Church. 4 Fourthly, that images and praying to Saints were
then neither taught by those Fathers, nor received of the Catholicque Church. 5
Fifthly, that the Mass which now the Church of Rome uses, was not then
known to the Church. 6 Sixthly, that there ought not to be one supreme
Bishop over all the world, and that Bishop to be the Pope of Rome: and that
the said Pope has not universal jurisdiction over all Princes, and their
subjects, in all causes Temporal and Ecclesiastical.
The Protestant Preachers affirm, unless you prove the premises by canonical
Scripture, they cannot be Apostolical: and therefore bind not the conscience
of any. And if they cannot be proved by the said Fathers, then they be
neither ancient nor Catholic: And therefore to be rejected as men's inventions.

Provoked to prove either by Scriptures, or Fathers, Catho. Priests.
which lived within the compass of five hundred years after Christ's
ascension, that the Primitive Church and Catholicques of this time are of
consent touching these Articles.

1 That Christ is really in the blessed Sacrament. 2 That Scriptures should not
be perused by the vulgar. 3 That prayer for the dead and Purgatory was
believed. 4 That images were worshipped, and prayers made to Saints. 5 That
Mass was allowed. 6 That the supremacy of the Pope was acknowledged.
GEntlemen: Rider.
the cause of this your provokement was a quiet and mild conference upon these
positions, master W. N.
with an honorable Gentleman (and a special good friend of yours concerning
religion) wherein he confidently assumed, that the Jesuits and Roman Priests
of this kingdom, were able to prove by Scriptures and Fathers, these
Positions to be Apostolical and Catholicque. And that the Church of Rome and
the Roman Catholicques in Ireland now hold nothing touching the same, but what
the holy Scriptures and primitive Fathers held within the first five hundred
years after Christ's ascension. Now if you in this conference for your part,
have made such proof by the holy canonical Scriptures, and such Doctors of
the Church as aforesaid, I have promised to become a Roman Catholicque: if you
have failed in your proof (which I am assured you have done,) he likewise
before worshipful witnesses has given his hand, to renounce this your new
doctrine of the church of Rome, and become a professor of the gospel of Christ.

This was the occasion and manner of your prouokement, which J hope the best
minded will not mistake, not you misconster, being only provoked by your
friend, 1. Pet. 3.15
yea and faith (if you refuse not Saint Peter's counsel) to be ready alwaes to
give an answer to any man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you. In your first line you change a word, ( and for or,) which greatly
alters the Catholics question, and is far from our first meaning. For we
hold with Christ's truth, Ioh. 20.31.
that unless the written word of God first warrant it, we are not bound in
conscience to believe it, though all the Doctors and Prelates in the world
should swear it. And this was demanded of you, not as the demaunders doubted
that the canonical Scriptures were insufficient to prove any article of
faith; but only, that all men might see and so be resolved, whether the
Protestants, or the now Roman Catholicques join nearest to Christ's truth,
and the faith of the first primitive Fathers. For that faith which can be
prooved to be taught in Christ's time, and so received and continued in the
primitive Church for the first five hundred years after Christ's ascension,
must needs be the true, ancient, Apostolical, and Catholicque faith. And that
other faith that cannot be so proved, is but base, bastardly, and counterfeit;
and I trust in Christ, that the Reader easily shall perceive before the end of
this small Treatise, that this your opinion touching Christ's carnal presence
in the Sacrament, (and so in the rest of the other Positions) was never taught
by Christ, nor once dreamed on by the ancient Fathers, but invented and
deviled a thousand years after Christ, by the late Church of Rome: grounding
their proofs only of an empty sound of syllables, without Apostolical or
Catholicque sense: enforcing both Scriptures and Fathers to speak what they
and you pleased, not what the holy Ghost and the Fathers purposed.

But first, here you wrong your self much, your cause more, but the simple
people most of all, in altering the state of the question: for our controversy
is of the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament: whether he be there
corporally or spirituallie. The Catholicque Priests subtly alter the state
of the question.
And you (no doubt in your conscience knowing it impossible to prove your
carnal presence) alter the question (very deceiptfully) from the manner to
the matter: That Christ is really in the blessed Sacrament: A thing never
denied by us, nor ever in question betwixt Protestant and Papist; for both you
and we hold Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, but you carnally and
locallie: we misticallie and spiritually; you by Transubstantiation: we in the
commanded and lawful administration.

But here you forget your grounds of divinity, and rules of Logic, in making
an opposition betwixt spiritual receiving and real receiving, opposing them
as contraries, whereas the opposition is not betwixt spiritual and real, but
betwixt corporal and spiritual: for spiritual receiving by faith is real
receiving, and corporal receiving by the mouth, is also real receiving: So
that the Scriptures and Fathers that here you allege, be altogether
impertinent to prove your carnal presence of Christ and his new conception,
of bread; not of the blessed Virgin; by a sinful Priest, not by the holy
Ghost. For Christ willing I will make it plain unto you, that you have showed
little divinity, and concealed much learning in this? only hudled up a number
of texts of Scriptures and Testimonies of Fathers out of Eckius Common-places,
and other like Enchiridions, and never read the fathers themselves, which at
first was requested.) And thus trusting other men's reports, and not your own
eyes: you have wronged your self, weakened your cause, and abused the simple. For
if you had diligently read and thoroughly weighed these Scriptures and Fathers,
you might have seen and known that these confute your erroneous opinions, and
confirm them not.

But this you should have here prooved for the Catholicques satisfaction, (in
which you have altogether failed.) That after the Priest has spoken over and
to the Bread and Wine, Rhem. test. 1. Cor. 11. Sect. 9.
Hoc est corpus meum, and used powrefull words over it and the^, which you call
your consecration: that presently the substances of Bread and Wine are gone,
not one crumme or drop remaining, but wholly transubstantiated, transnatured,
and changed into the very real, natural, and substantial body and blood
of Christ, which was borne of the Virgin Marie, The. Test. ^^th. 26. Sect. 4.
and nailed on the cross, and is now in heaven: and yet in the Sacrament,
whole, alive, and immortal; and that this body of Christ must be received
with our corporal mouth, and locally descend into our corporal stomachs.
Which body so made by the Priest, is offered by the Priest to God the father,
as a propitiatory, merciful, and redeeming sacrifice, by which the Priest
applies (as he says) the general virtues of Christ's passion to every
particular man's necessity, either quick or dead, for m^tters temporal, or
graces spiritual, for whom and when he lists and for what he pleases. Your
carnal presence shall be first handled. The second point, which is your
propitiatory sacrifice, shall be handled in the title of the Mass. This is
your Roman ^^e learning which you should have prooved: but how your own
proofs (being duly examined) disprooue you, let the learned judge. But now to
your first proof out of the sixth of John, to prove your opinion touching the
first position.

Ioh. 6. verse 51. The bread which I will give is my flesh. etc. Catho.
Priests.


Ioh. 6. verse 53. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, you shall have no life in you.

Ioh. 6. verse 55. My flesh is meat truly, and my bloudes, etc.


Gentlemen you mistake utterly Christ's meaning, Rider.
wresting Christ's words from the spiritual sense in which he spoke, to the
litterall sense which he never meant, ancient Fathers never taught, Primitive
Church of Christ for one thousand years at least after Christ's ascentio^ never
knew or received. For the words and phrases be figurative and allegorical,
therefore the sense must be spiritual, not carnal,

For this is a general rule in Gods book, ancient Fathers, yea and in your
Popes Canons and glosses, that every figurative speech or phrase of Scripture
must be expounded spirituallie, not carnally or litterallie, as anon more
plainly you shall hear.

But that the simple be no longer seduced by your Roman doctrine, expounding
this 6. of John grammaticallie, and carnally, contrary to Christ's meaning,
constraining these places to prove your carnal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, when there was no Sacrament then ordained. J will set down (GOD
willing) Christ's meaning truly and plainly which you shall nor be able
either by Scriptures or ancient Fathers to contradict.

1 First, I will plainly deliver the occasion why Christ used the Metaphor of
Bread, calling himself Bread.

2 Secondly, according to which of Christ's nature* he is our living bread,
whether as he is man only, or God only; or as he is complete God and man.

3 Thirdly, how this bread must be taken and eaten, whether by the mouth of the
body or the mouth of the soul.

4 Fourthly, the fruit that comes to the true eaters thereof.

5 Lastly, the reasons shall be alleged out of Christ's own words, to prove
that your round Wafer-cakes upon your supposed hall^ wed Altars, are not that
true bread (Christ's flesh) which Christ here speaks of

1. Occasion
The question was moved by some Bellie-gods that tasted of Christ's banquet,
and bounty (in feeding five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes)
whether Moses or Christ were the more excellent and liberal in feeding men.
1 FIrst, they commend Moses from the greatness of h^ place and person, being
Gods Lieutenant to conduct Israel out of Egypt.

2 Secondly, they commend their Manna from the place whence it came, which was
the heavens as they supposed.

3 Thirdly, they commend the bread from the virtue of it; which was, it fed
their Fathers in the dry sandy and barren wilderness, and saved them from
famine, and therefore they thought that no man was greater the^ Moses, no bread
to be compared with Manna:

Now Christ by way of opposition and comparison, confutes them: opposing God to
Moses, and himself to Manna.

1 First, denies that Moses was the given of that Manna, but that God was the
author. Moses only the Minister.

2 Secondly, that it came not from the eternal ki^gdome of God, which is
properly called heaven, but from the visible clouds improperly called heaven.

3 Thirdly, Christ denies Manna to be the true bread, because it only
preserved life temporal, but could not give it: but this bread (Christ) does
not only give life corporal, but also l fe spiritual in the kingdom of
grace, and life eternal in the kingdom of glory.

4 Fourthlie, this bread Manna ceased when they came into Canaan, and (...) no
more be found: but this bread (Christ) does feed us ^eere in this earthly
wilderness, Joshua. 5.12.
and reigns for ever with his triumphant Church in our everlasting and
glorious Canaan the kingdom of heaven.

5 This bread Manna, and so all corporal meats when they have fed the body,
they have performed their office, they perish without yielding profit to the
s^^e: but this bread of life (Christ) is the true bread, Ioh. 6.54.
which once being received into the soul, does not only assure and give
unto it eternal life, but also (...) the body like assurance of resurection
and salvation, so that the soul must first feed on Christ, before the body can
have any benefit by Christ; contrary to your doctrine, which is, that the
body must first feed on Christ carnally, then the soul shall be thereby fed
spiritual ie.

And because they were so addicted in Moses time to Manna: in Christ's time to
his miraculous loaves, respecting the feeding of their bodies, not the feeding
of their souls: Th refore Christ deborted them from food corporal to food
spiritual: Ioh. 6.27.
Labor not (says he) for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that
endures to everlasting life, which the son of man shall give unto you, etc.
And thus much touching the occasion, why Christ is said to be the true bread
of life. which as far excelled Manna, as the soul the body, life death:
eternity time: and heaven earth.

3 Point.
NOw let us see according to which of Christ, natures, h^ is called out living
Bread, whether according to his manhood or godhead, or b^th. Christ calls this
b ead his flesh, and Christ and his flesh are al one, and therefore Christ and
his flesh are all on^ and the same bre^^; and as our bodies are fed with
material br^^d, so are our souls fed with the flesh of Christ, and this flesh
he will gi^e for the life of the world w^^ch flesh is not Christ body
separated from his son^e (as some of you imagine and untruely teach) not
Christ's body and soul separated from his divinity, but even his quickening
flesh, which being personally united to his eternal s^irit, was by the same
given for the life of the world, not corpora^lie and really in the Sacrament as
you untruly teach: But in the sacrifice of his body and blood once o^ the
cross, as the Scriptures ^ccord: for the flesh of Christ profits not, but as
it is made quickening by the spirit. Neither do we participate the life of his
spirit, but as it is communicated unto us by his flesh, by which we are made
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: as has b^n showed before. Which
holy mystery is represented unto us in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
the truth thereof assured and sealed in the due administration and receiving
of the same.

So this true bread (spoken of in the sixth of John) which has this spiritual
quickening and nourishing power, i^ complete Christ, God and man, with all his
soul ^^ving merits. And neither Manna in the wilderness: nor your ^o^^d
Wafer-cakes upon your supposed hallowed Altars. Manna it could not be, for it
cea^^d many hundred years before. Your imagined and transnatured bread it
could not be, because the Sacrament was not then instituted. And (...) to the
third point.

The manner how this true bread (Christ) must be eaten.
THe meat is spiritual, 3 Point.
and therefore the manner of eating must not be corporal; for such as is the
meat, such most be the mouth: but the meat is spiritual, therefore the mouth
must be spiritual, as before you have heard, Fide non d^nte, In the ep^stle to
t^ Reader.
etc. which thing being there handled before out of holy Scr p ure^, Fathers,
and your Popes Canons, I will only refer you thither, where you may
(unless you be maleconte^ts t^) be fully satisfied touching the true manner
of eating Christ: where you may find proved out of Gods book, that coming to
Christ, believing in Christ, abiding in Christ, dwelling in Christ, and to be
clad with Christ, and to eat Christ, are all one, so that out of every one
you might frame this or the like unanswerable argument.

Whosoever dwells in Christ and Christ in them, Ioh. 6.5 35.
only eats Christ's flesh and drinks Christ's blood. B t the true bell evers
only dwell in Christ and Christ in them: therefore the true believers oneli^
we Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood.

The proposit on is Christ's own words, Ioh. 6 56. Eph^. 3.17
of which it were damnable to doubt. The assumption is Paul's, Let Christ dvvell
in your hearts by faith: therefore the conclusion cannot be denied. And so to
the fourth.

The fruit and profit that redoundes to the true eaters of this bread of life,
which is Christ.
Many rich benefits we have by eating Christ in the manner aforesaid: that is,
4 Point.
by apprehending, applying, and appropriating unto us whole Christ with his
benefits; I will only name one or two, and refer you for the rest to the
sixth of John. Ioh. 6 41.54.50.51.
He that eats this bread, I will raise him up at the last day to life
(concerning hi^ bodi^,) and he shall never die but live for ever. (concerning
his soul)

But an opposition being made betwixt this true bread Christ, and this
Sacramental bread, (as was betw^xt Christ and Manna,) it will be clear, (nay
impossible) that your consecrated bread should be the bread of life which is
spoken of in the sixth of John:

1 Your consecrated bread never came from the heaven of heavens: therefore it
is not the true bread of life spoken of in this place.

2 All that eat of this true bread (Christ) are saved, but many that eat of
your Sacramental bread are damned: therefore it is not that bread spoken of in
the sixth of John.

3 Your bread only enters the bodily mouth, and is received into the
stomach of the body, and so passes the way of all excrements: and therefore
is not the true bread.

4 Your bread cannot for ever preserve temporal life, much less give it, but
not at all life eternal: and therefore it is not the true bread of life spoken
of in this sixth of John.

Ioh. 6.54.50.
Now seeing that Christ had not all this time when he made this sermon in the
sixth of John ordained his last Supper, and therefore not the bread in the
Supper: And seeing this bread can neither assure the body of the receivers of
resurrection, nor their souls of salvation, it cannot be that this bread in
the Sacrament was the same that Christ spoke of in John: And therefore your
proofs brought to prove your carnal presence of Christ by these texts, be
impertinent, savouring (by your leave) of smaal reading in the Fathers, and
less understanding in the Scriptures.

But that all men that read this, may see your errors, and so beware of your
new dangerous doctrine, J will bring Augustine and other Fathers, to disprooue
you in plain terms for misalleadging these texts.

Agustine brings forth (as it were upon a sta^e) the three Evangelists,
matthew, Mark, Aug. Tomo quar^ de consensu Evangelistaru^: lib. C^p. 1. math. 26
mark 14. Luke 22. Ioh. 6. These three Evang. ^andled (as it were) the body of
Christ, John the soul and divinity of Christ. Lyra in psalm. 110.
and Luke, delivering the doctrine of the Sacrament; but when he came to John,
he says: Johannes autem de corpore and sanguine Domini hoc in loco nihil
dixit: John in the 6. of his gospel spoke nothing of the Lords body and blood.
I wonder with what face you can brag to follow the fathers, and no me^ nor sect
more opposite to their faith and facts then you. There Aug. has tract your
credit, sal^e it how you can. And your own Doctor Lyra condemns your
erroneous opinion which will apply these as spoken of the Sacrament, his words
be these; Nihil direct pertinet ad Sacramentalem vel corporalem manducationem,
hoc verbum: Nisi manducaueritis, etc. Nam hoc ve^bii fuit dictum diu antequam
Sacramentum Eucharistia suerit institutum. Th s saying of Christ (unless you
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood,) does nothing directly
appertain to the Sacramental or corporal eating of Christ in the Sacrament.
For Christ spoke this long before he ordained this Sacrament. Therefore no
sound argument (says he) can be grounded upon that litterall exposition of the
Sacramental communion, and ^e gives a reason vnaunswereable. Nam primo debet
^^istere in rerum natura. For first the Sacrament must ^e ordained, before it
can be a Sacrament. But you here would have Christ's carnal presence in the
Sacrament before it be a Sacrament. And then Lyra concludes, De Eucharistia
Sacramentali quae no^dum suit tam alia sententia p^oferri non potuit, quae
dicitur. Nisi manducaueritis, etc.

Therefore of this place, there can be made no good sufficient argument, touc
ing the sacramental communion, unless (says he) some curious Heriticquet
will take these words spoken by Christ to be spoken propheticallie.

Quod no^dumed, non datur priuileg^^. Lyra. eodem loco.
Now s^^eth your own Doctor, if you take this chapter of the ^^xt of John
litterallie (as you d) then it is impossible and absurd, because you will have a
carnal presence in the Sacrament, before there be a Sacrament; if
prophetically, then your own champion calls you curious He etiques. And to
prove your litterall exposition, gross, false, and absurd: He produces ag
inst you two famous examples, the fast of the Thief on th cross, Luk 13.41
who by his lively faith performed the tenor of this text, yet never
communicated Sacramentallie; And Judas, who communicated under both kinds, and
yet failed in the mea^ing of this precept. Lib. 4 did 9.
And then shuts up the m uths of all Latteralists and Heretics that bold th s
spoken of the Sacrament, alleging Thomas Aquinas his draught out of
Augustine, Non manducans manducat, and manducans non manducat. He that eats
not Sacramentally, may yet eat Christ spiritually by faith, and so did the
Thief on the cross, and was saved. Some eat the Sacramental bread but not
Christ, (which is the inward grace of the Sacrament:) as Judas did and was
damned.

many more Fathers shall you have to second these agai st y u if these satisfy
you not.
Thus you are condemned by two learned Fathers, that you ignorantly, or malicio
sly, or both, mistake and misapplie the sixth of John, to speak of the
Sacrament before the Sacrament was instituted.

Now you shall hear Augustine tell you, that th^s sixth of John is to be taken
figuratiuelie, and allegoricallie, and therefore spirituallie, meaning that the
speeches and phrases which Christ used be borrowed and translated from the
body to the mind, you are not only taxed by Aug. to be ignorant in the
circumstance of the text, but also in the sense of the text which is a gross
thing in divines.
from eating and drinking to believing, from chamming with the teeth, to the
believing with the heart. So that what eating and drinking is to the body,
that believing is to the s^ule. And as bread and flesh be meat corporal for
the body; so Christ our bread is made spiritual for the soul. And as
corporal meats are tak n with the corporal mouth so are spiritual meat
(Christ crucified with all his benefits) received with faith, the mouth of the
soul. And therefore to teach all post^rities low to expound these words of
Christ, he gives a general rule perpetually to be observed in GODS church:
Saying: Dedoct Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16. The second proof out of the sixth of
John.
Si praeceptiua locutio est, etc. if the Sciptures seem to command an
horrible or vile fact, the speech is figurative: and then alleges your
second proof that you bring out of the sixth of John for example Except you
eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have no life
in you. Fac^^us and flagiti^m videtur iubere, Christ (in this place) seems to
command a wicked and horrible act. Figura est ergo, It is therefore a
figurative speech, commanding us to keep in mind that his flesh was crucified
and tormented for us. Now examine Augustines exposition. To eat corporally,
reallie, and substantiallie Christ's flesh with our material mouths, and to
drink his precious, substantial, real blood with our bodily lips, is a
horrible thing: Therefore Christ's words be figurative. So that by Augustines
own words your litterall sense and carnal presence is wicked and horrible,
howsoever you cloak it with fained titles, to blind the eyes and deceive the
hearts of simple Catholics.

And if you would but read the fifth chapter of the foresaid book, you should
see his Christian caveat he gives to Gods Church touching this point. In
principio cauendum est ne figuratam locutionem ad litteram accipia^ etc. First
of all you must beware that you take not a figurative speech according to the
letter: his reason follows, for the l^tter, (that is, the litterall sense)
kills. But the spirit, (that is, the spiritual sense) gives life. For when
one take the figurative speech for a proper speech, we make the sense carnal,
neither is there any t^^ng more fitly called the death of the soul.

Thus you see Aug. teaches ((...) you would learn) that if the speech be
proper, the sense must be litteral^ and carnal: but if it be figurative, it
must be mystical and spiritual: and alleges this your own text for the
same. So I would wish you either follow Augustines doctrine, or else cease to
use Augustines and the rest of the fathers names: for to usurping their names,
and perverting their doctrine, you abuse the Fathers, Ber. Sermon 3. in ps: Qui
habitat. Fol 63 Col. 2.
and deceive the Catholics. Your Bernard also in later times condemns your
absurd and unchristianlike exposition of this your own text, Unless you eat
the flesh of Christ, etc. He asks the question. Quid autem est mand^^are eu^^
c^^nem, and bibere sanguinem? nisi communicare passionibus eius, and ca^
conversationem imitari quam gessit in carne: What is to eat Christ's flesh and
drink his blood? but to communicate with his passions, and to imitate his
holy conversation in the flesh. And then follows: Vnde and hoc disignat
illib^tum illud Altaris Sacramentum, vbi Dominacum corpus accipimus: vt ficut
viditur ^l^a pan^s fo^ma in no^ intrare: sic noverimus pe^ eam quam in t^rris
habuit conversation in, ipsum intrare in not, ad habitandum per fidem in
cordibus nostris. Whence also this (text) signifies that pure Sacrament of the
Altar, where we receive the body of Christ: that as the fo^me of bread is seen
to enter into us, so we sh^l know Christ enters into us to dwell in our hearts
by faith, by that holy and godly conversation that he had being in earth.

Now examine Bernard your own Abbot though liv^ng in the palpablest time of
the gro^est superstition: yet he utterly condemns your exposition of this
place, and shows you that it does not signify Christ's carnal presence in
the Sacrament. But as the Sacrament cons^steth of an outward sign and inward
grace: so bread the outward sign enters into the mouth, and Christ which is
the inward grace, enters into our hearts by faith. So that your own Author
tells you, it is bread that enters the mouth, it is Christ that enters the
heart and that by faith, not by teeth: by believing, not by chamming or
swallowing. So that this your Bernard teaches you, that this your text must be
taken for the diviner part of the Sacrament, which is Christ with all his
mercies, to the souls and hearts of the believers, not to or in the
blasphemous mouths, and stinking stomachs of Jnfidells, wicked men, dogs,
cats, or other beasts, as your own books most wickedly record.

And if your litterall exposition were true, Gross absurdities follow the
Priests expositions.
the^ none could be saved but such as eat your consecrated Christ made of
bread: then infants that die and communicate not should be damned. Captives
that from their cradle ^^^e under Tyrant, and those that before Christ: in
Christ's time: and in the first thousand years after Christ, before your new
consecration was stamped, are damned. And contrariwise, all that eat of your
consecrated Oste be saved, be they never so blasphemous to God, traitorous to
their Prince, and injurious to their brethren.

But that both these extremes that spring from your litterall e^^os^tion
contrary to scriptures and fathers be false and horrible to christian ears: no
godly man may doubt, unless he will deny Christ and his word: the ancient
Fathers, and the Primitive church, and you shall never give the Catholics
that have hanged their precious souls upon your bare sayings, due satisfaction
in this, without public and penitent recantation of this.

You follow neither scriptures not Fathers.
If with the Fathers you would but observe duly the circumstances of the fifth
and sixth of John, you might see, it cannot be meant of the Sacrament, and
therefore you are deceived in the Scriptures, because the Sacrament was not
then ordained. Again, by the judgment of Augustine the speech is figurative,
and therefore the sense spiritual. And so Agustine stands with us against you.

Old Lyra says, that the sixth of John. Nihil direct pertinent, etc.
speaks not one word directly and pertinentlie of the Sacrament. The Father
says, nihil, nothing, directs directly, yet you against Scriptures and Fathers
will wrest the^e texts indirectlie, and impertinentlie, to speak of the
Sacrament before it was a Sacrament.

If we should commit such palpable errors against Scriptures, Fathers, and
common sense, you would call us common sots without learning or sense, plain
murderers and soul slayers, from which sin the Lord deliver us both.

Now I will ask your conscience this question, how durst you cut off Christ's
words by the waste? Verse. 51.
meant you plainly in that? surely no: for if you had recited the whole verse,
it had marred your market: you only set down the middle of the sentence,
concealing the beginning of it, and curtalling the end of it, and so thinking
that to serve your turn, and blind the eyes of the simple. But God willing I
will discover the truth, which you seek to cover, and let the simple people
see how far and how long you have deceived and misledde them, to the great
peril of their souls, with wresting the scriptures, and wronging the Fathers.

Christ's whole sentence was this. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven, if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever: and this you cut
off. Then follows your proof. John. 6.50
The bread that I will give is my flesh: then you curt all the rest: which I
will give for the life of the world. If you had dealt plainly, and delivered
Christ's words to Gods people without substraction, as Christ delivered them
unto you, then the people even the simplest of them, would not have so long
been deceaved by you. For the former part of the verse, and the later
concealed by you, expound Christ's mind, and bewray your errors.

Let me but reason with you out of the first part of the verse, from the
property of this bread here spoken of by Christ. First it is living bread,
and gives eternal life to the receivers: yours does not. This came from
heaven, yours did not. Who so eats of this cannot be damned: but many eat of
yours, and die eternally: and therefore the very properties of this bread show
plainly, that it cannot be meant of your singing-cakes, as has been prooved
before unto you. Because they have no life in themselves, and therefore can
neither give life, nor preserve life unto others. The later part of the verse
concerns Christ's flesh, which is this true bread. And thus out of Christ's
words I prove that the flesh of CHRIST spoken of in this place, cannot be the
flesh of CHRIST which you would have given in the Sacrament.

Christ's flesh promised in the sixth of John, was only given on the cross:
but the Sacrament was not the cross. Therefore in the Sacrament the flesh of
Christ was not given: So that these arguments grounded upon Christ's own words
which you concealed, confute you and your carnal presence in the Sacrament,
For your sacramental bread neither came form heaven, not your imagined flesh of
Christ made by the Priest cannot be this flesh here spoken of. For it was
offered once not often as you teach, and that by himself, not by the Priests,
upon the cross, not in your Mass: and that for the plenarie remission of the
sins of all believers no for the temporal benefit of some particular person,
quick, or dead, as the Priest pleases.

The third proof of the Catholic Priests out of the six^h of John, to prove
Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament. Catho. Priests.
Verse 55. My flesh is meat truly and my blood is drink truly:
Rider.
IF you should ask your boy in his Grammar rules a question, if he answered
not in the same case, or by the same sense of a verb that the question i^
asked by, you will count him a filte Grammatist. But if you ask your Sophister
a question in quid, and he answer in quale, you will tax h^^ for an improper
and impertinent answer. But most of all, if a great Divine be asked a
question, to prove the manner of a thing: and he neglecting or ommiting that,
as t^o hard or impossible for him, proves the matter that was never demanded
or doubted of, what will the Reader think of this matter, this man, and this
proof? surely he must say, either he understands not the state of the
question, or else he is not able to prove the question: and so uses this
shameful sh^ft in steed of a sufficient proof.

All the Catholics in this kingdom expected to be satisfied by your a^nswere
touching the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, whether it be carnal
or spiritual: and whether he must be eaten by faith spirituallie, or the teeth
carnally. And your answer is as improper and impertinent, as tither
Grammatist or Sophister, for you leave the manner of Christ's presence which you
should prove, and bring the matter of his presence which was never in
question, saying; My flesh is meat truly, etc.

How this your answer does relish of learning let the learned judge. When
all the Catholics in the kingdom hang their souls on your saying: Are these
your contentments you give them? If they ask you how they must eat Christ's
flesh and drink Christ's blood, then you tell them: my flesh is meat in deed,
and my blood is drink in deed. Do you answer their question or satisfy
their conscience or resolve their doubts? alas no. Thus you have dealt,
dallied, and deceived a long time Christ's people with these your improper,
impertinent, unprofitable, nay untrue aunsweres, and yet you will be called
Fathers, Doctors, and what not.

But I pray you tell me why you added not the next words of Christ? you thought
they were against you. But if you had dealt as men having Gods fear before
your eyes, you would not have stayed there: for the next verse plainly
discovers your bad dealing with the simple people, for that answers their
question, and that would satisfy all good Catholics in this point. For if
you ask there the holy Ghost this question: how must Gods children eat
Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood, he will answer you: that whosoever
dwells in Christ and Christ in him, eats Christ's flesh and drinks Christ's
blood: but the faithful only dwell in Christ and Christ in them, therefore
the faithful only eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood: whether it be
in hearing the word, in baptism, or in the Lords Supper, as you have heard
before. Jf you had added this verse, it had overthrown your carnal presence in
the Sacrament, and your orall eating of Christ with your mouth, teeth etc, But
as you wrong the Catholics with an impertinent answer, and as you abuse them
by keeping back the next words of Christ which expounds his own meaning: So
here you abuse your holy Father the Pope, and your dear mother the Church of
Rome, (...) expounding this text contrary to the Roman sense: for you take
this flesh of Christ which is our tree meat, to be the flesh which was borne of
the virg^^ and suffered on the cross, but the Popes and church of Rome say
contrary: for these be the words of the Canon: Did. 2. de consec page 4^4.
canon dupliciter. Col. 4. Read the gloss and you may see your error at in a
glass.
Dupliciter intelligitur caro and sanguis Christi, vel spiritualis illa atque
diuina: de qua ipse ait, Caro mea vere est cibus and sanguis meus vere est
potu^^ nisi meam ca^nem etc. Vel caro mea ea quae crucifi^a est, etc. The flesh
and blood of Christ (says your own Church of Rome) must be considered two
manner of ways, either for the spiritual and divine flesh spoken of by
Christ, my flesh is meat in deed, etc. and except you drink his blood, etc. or
else for that his flesh which was crucified, and that his blood shed by the
sharp lance of a cruel soldier: so that here you forsake your Roman
Catholic faith, and become Apostates from the Church of Rome. Thus you abuse
the Catholics, in making them believe you teach as the Pope teaches, and you
do not: therefore either the Pope or you must err grossly, teaching
contraries. But that all men may see, that not only this Pope, Jnnocenti
^^^tertiu^: lib 4. cap 14. de ^a^^amento Altars. page. 179.
but also other Popes have held the contrary opinion to your new broched
heresy. I will all^^dge him that you dare not contradict, that is, Innocentiu^
t^rtius that first begat your abortiue Transubstan^^tion. De spirituali
commestione Do^^nus a^^, N^^i m^nducatveritis, etc. The Lord Christ when he
s^^ke of the spiritual ^aring said: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, etc. Lo, here is another Pope against you. For you late Jesuits,
Semynaries, Rhemists, and Priests, take this as ^poken of Christ's flesh in the
sacrament, and they take it for ^^at spiritual and divine flesh of Christ,
whereon all the faithful fed by faith, as well before Christ's incarnation, as
since his ascension.

I would bring more witnesses against your vn^^ue expositions and allegations,
The Pope your Father, and Rome your mother witness against you Priests and the
rest of their degenerat children.
but that I think it sufficient that the Parents Testimony is the strongest
Evidence against their degenerat children. And after, the Pope alleges
Augustine and the Canon. Quid parat deutem and ventrem, creed and ^^^^acasti,
and then concludes against your carnal eating of Christ's flesh most strongly:
Qui credit (...) Deum, comedit ipsum, Caro Christi nisi spiritualiter comedatur
non ad salutem sed ad iudicium mandutatur.

Why (says your Pope) preparest thou thy teeth to eat and thy belly to be
filled? believe and thou have eaten, he that believes eats. For the flesh of
Christ is not eaten to salvation, but to destruction, unless it be eaten
spirituallie. And there in the next chapter, the Pope gives this marginall
note: Christus est spiritualis Eucharistia; Page 180.
Christ is our spiritual Euchariste, not our carnal food in the Sacrament. And
in the same page he says, Cibus est non corporis, sed animae: this is not meat
for the body, but for the soul. And if it be meat for the soul, then it
must be received by faith, not the mouth, spirituallie not carnally.

You see now the Scriptures, Fathers, Popes old and new, the Text and gloss
of your dear mother the Church of Rome against you. And least you should
cavil, I have alleged the Books, Chapters, Distinctions and Pages. And if
you will still tell the Cathol^ques that these places by me all^^dged be not
true, then I tell you, all your own Authors and prin s be false: for I
allege Father, Pope, and Canons of your own print; and if you doubt, look
unto your own books and prints, and you shall find them so verb^^^^, Printed
Anno. 1599. Imp^^sis Lazari Zet^^ter^.
unless your late Index expurgatorius has blotted out the truth, as in many
things it has.

But I will of these your former improper and impertinent testimonies out of
the sixth of John conclude, and urge no further but this one argument against
you and them, and then let the indifferent Reader judge whether you have not
deceived Gods people by misunderstanding the holy Scriptures or no:

Whosoever teaches that there is a carnal real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament before consecration, is a liar, a depraver of the truth, and a
deceiver of the people. But some late Popes, the new church of Rome, with the
college of Cardinals, new creat^d Jesuits, Semynaries, and all the Romish
Priests now in Ireland ^^^ch, This is unanswerable.
that there is a carnal real presen^^ of Christ in the Sacrament before
consecration.

Therefore some late Popes the new Church of Rome, with the college of
Cardinals, new created Jesuits, Semynaries, and all the Roman Priests now in
Ireland be liars, depravers of the truth, and deceivers of the people. The
mayor or first proposition is your own doctrine: for you teach that before Hoc
est corpus meum be pronounced, there is no consecration. The assumption or
later proposition is as clear, for your persuade the simple people to believe
that these texts out of the sixth of John prove a carnal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, a year before Hoc est corpus meum was by Christ pronounced,
or the Sacrament by Christ instituted. Therefore the conclusion, that you be
liars and deceivers of the people, is inevitable.

Thus the Catholics of this kingdom by the rules of your own religion you
have deceived, in teaching Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament, a year
before either Sacrament or consecration in the Sacrament, were instituted. And
that your leaden divinity without care or conscience you thrust upon the
simple people a^ sound doctrine. But if there were no other error or heresy
held and taught by you but this one point, it were sufficient to make all the
Catholics in this kingdom, nay in Christendom, to forsake your opinion,
considering your ignorance or malice presuming to justify that which holy
scriptures, ancient Fathers, Gods Church, (yea and the particular Church of
Rome, with their Bishops, Archbishops, and Popes) for a thousand years after
Christ's ascension never spoke or heard of, and therefore it is no old faith
taught by them: but a new heresy invented by you. But now to the rest of your
proof.

Math. 26.26. Christ took bread, did bless it, Catho.
and brake it and gave it to his disciples, and said: Priests.
take and eat, this is my body, This is my blood of the new Testament which
shall be shed for ^^ame for remission of sins.


GEntlemen: this is your proof out of Christ's own words, Rider.
and this was delivered by Christ own mouth at the time of the institution o^
the Supper, and the night before his blessed passion, and either this must
help you, or else you are helpless: but Christ willing I will plainly show
this your proof to be your reproof, and I pray God for Christ his sake, that
the eyes of your understanding may be opened to see the truth, and your hearts
touched to receive and confess the truth: and renounce your errors, and so
cease to deceive Gods people and the Queens subjects, least a worse thing come
unto you:

All the doubt and controversy of this question betwixt us, dependes on this
Text which you say must be taken properly and litterallie: we say,
Sacramentallie, improperlie, figuratiuelie, and misticallie. And our opinion
(God willing) shall be proved by Scriptures, ancient Fathers, and Popes, and
the old Church of Rome.

But this is strange, that men of your great learning, (as the Catholics
take you to be) will deal so child shlie and weaklie in so weighty a matter.
Be not offended that I say you handle this childishlie: for in Schools he
that alleges for the probation of a proposition, the proposition it self:
for the probation of a text, the text it self, is counted childish, and it is
a childish point of Sophistry, and a fallacy to be used among young
scholars, not to be practiced among simple Catholics.

The Catholics demand of you how you prove Christ's carnal presence in the
Sacrament: and you bring in Hoc est corpus meum, which is the proposition
whereupon all this disputation and contention depends. Ioh. 19.^7
After the same manner a man may prove the blessed virgin Marie to be John the
Evangelists mother, and say still notwithstanding any text brought against him,
as Christ said, Ecce matter tua: Behold thy mother, say what ye will, the words
be Christ's words, therefore they must be true, they need no interpretation,
Christ is not a liar. And if a man ask a confirmation, and say, how prove you
this proposition of Christ to be true litterallie and in deed as Christ spoke
it? This is a lo^se kind of Logique
You bring in for confirmation of the proposition the proposition it self, and
say Ecce matter tua: Behold thy mother. Thus when the Catholics demand of you
to prove your proposition of Hoc est corpus meum, whether it must be taken
corporally or spiritualite, grammaticallie or misticallie, then you bring the
proposition it self, and say, Hoc est corpus meum to prove Hoc est corpus
meum: Jn Schools it is called Petit^o principi^.
and so you would prove idem per idem. which is very childish, and a begging
of that as granted which is yet in question betwixt (...) and undetermined:

But you should have prooved by other places of Scriptures, that Hoc est corpus
meum changes the nature and substance of bread and wine: and you should h^ e
proved by the Scriptures, Esaias 7.14
that the Prophets foreshewed th s strange conception of Christ to be conceaved
of bread, as well as they did foreshew his conception of the virgin. And you
should have prooved by the Scriptures that it is not only a Sacrament, but a
sacrifice, not only Eucharisticall but as well propitiatory: and not only
profitable to the quick, but also to the dead: nay, not only for plagues
among men, but murren and diseases also among beasts. Cum multis alijs qua
nunc, etc.

Now show by the Scriptures that Hoc est corpus meum has such a sense, that
the simple people may repose themselves more securely upon your opinion and
proofs. But till you prove it (which you can never do) they must know, you
have and do deceive them with false expositions against verity, antiquity,
authority, yea and consent of the old church of Rome.

And here I am sorry I must tell you so plainly, that you wrong greatly and
grievously Gods truth, and the Queens Subjects, in thus misalleadging this
(...)

1 First, by Addition of a word.

2 Secondly, by misunderstanding and misapplication of another word.

3 Thirdly, by omission, nay plain subtraction of a whole verse.

For the first, which is: Addition, Addition.
you add this particle (a) which is neither in the Greek, nor in your Roman
Lattine Bible, no nor in your Rhemish Testament, nor ever seen in any Doctor
of antiquity, and this ^^llable alters the sense and perverteth C^^^^s
meaning, and is added by you to maintain that which the Text otherwise could
not have any show to bear.

Secondly, you misunderstand and misapplie this word (Blesss): M^^lapplication.
for we say it signifies to give thanks with the mou^h, and you say to make
crosses with the fingers: we say it was spoken by Christ to his Father, you
say it was spoken to, over, or upon the bread and chastise, ^he. ^ost. 1. Cor.
^. Sect. 9.
and that he used power and active words upon them: we contrary will show out
of the word it self, that it has no such signification.

One part of the original word (in Greek) signifies in English (Speech)
uttered with the mouth, not a magical crossing of, or with fingers. And the
other Greek word which must be judge betwixt us, does signify to land, to
praise, and to bless: and blessing, praising, and thanksgiving are all one, as
anon you shall beer Christ himself so to expound it, and all the Evangelists
and Paul agree in one congruence touching this matter against you. How bless
and bl^ssing are used in Scrip^^res
But first I will show the simple how diversely this word (Bless) is used in
the Scriptures.

To bless God is to praise him, and give him thanks for all his mercies, as
you have in Luke: and the disciples continued in the Temple landing and
blessing God: Luk 24.53.
I hope you will not say they crossed God with their fingers or consecrated him
to make him more holy, b^t praised him with their mouths. For if you take
ble^^ing of God in that fingered sense, then see the absu^^^^es you fall into.

Joh. ^ 18. ^oh. 4.84.
First, aganst Scriptures, you must hold that God the Father is not a Spirit,
but has a bodielie share that may be touched and crossed with our corporal
forget^: if this you hold you join with those auncie^^ heretics of Egypt,
Anthrop^morphita.
who held that God had a body and members as man had.

And the second absurdity (nay blasphemy) is this, that you should make GOD
(who is holi^esse it self) the holier by your crossing: but I hope you will
not take blessing in this sense, but joy^e with the Disciples and us, that
blessing of GOD signifies praising of GOD, or praying to GOD: What it is for
one man to bless another. Cen. ^.27. Genes. 48. Numb. 6.23.
for one man to bless another, is nothing else but to pray for them, and to
beseech God that he would bless them, that is, defend them, protect them, and
be merciful unto them: Let your Highpriests of Rome, and you low Priests of
^^cland, learn of Aaron Gods High Priest, how to bless Gods people: and so
cease to deceive them any more.
So Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob the sons of Joseph. And so the LORD
commanded Moses to speak to Aaron, and to his Sons, saying. Thus shall ye
bless the children of Israel, and say unto them: The Lord bless the and ^eepe
thee, the Lord make hi^ face to shine v^on thee, and be merc^full unto thee,
etc.

A Christian pattern not only for Priests, but also for P^st^urs and Parents
daily to practice, the one for his flock, the other for his family: yet both
in the Lord. and from the Lord. Which blessings are derived from Gods mercies,
and hang not on the ends of Priests fingers. Again, you see blessing is praying
with the mouth, not crossing with the fingers, as you vainlie and foolishlie
make your Ghostly ch^^dren believe, that if you cross them with your two
fingers and a thumb, they are pardoned for their sins post, and preserved
that day from future dangers and evil spirits. Which fingered blessing of
yours is as powerful to pardon sin, and fear away spirits, as three sups of
the Challice is to cure the chinne-cough. This blessing was commanded by God
to be practiced by Aaron the High Priest, and the rest of the Priests upon Gods
children, but how far your blessing differs from this the simplest may judge.

For first, God commanded this blessing: the Pope your blessings. This was by
mouth only, yours with some mumbling words and charming crosses with your
fingers. This blessing was a prayer to desire God to bless: and you teach,
that in your breath and fingers there is a power and a certain working or
impression of some blessing upon them by means of your said mumbling and
crossing. But your Priests agree with Gods Priests, and your blessing with
fingers, with Gods Priests blessings with prayer of the heart and mouth, even
as well is truth and falsehood, light and darkness, superstition and
religion, Christ and Belial. And if the Catholics will but diligently read
this commandment of GOD, given to the High Priest and Priests in this place,
touching the manner how they should bless Gods people. I am resolved that few
Catholics in this kingdom hereafter will kneel at your feet, or begat your
hand any finger benediction or crossing, because it has no warrant from Gods
word, and therefore ten thousand of them not worth a farthing. How the Priests
bless the sacrament.
You cross the cup or Challice with a set number of crosses and gestures:
sometimes blowing over the Chalice, sometimes crossing it, sometimes hiding it
that none must see it, sometimes lifting it up that all must see it: then
joining and disioyning of your thumb and two fingers, with many more such
Apish toies, childish tricks, and charming prokes, which have neither
foundation nor relation to Christ's actions and institution.

But we in administering this holy Sacrament, How the Preachers of the gospel
bless the bread and the cup.
confess the greatness and grievousnesse of our sins, that can no otherwise
be pardoned but in Christ, bloud^^ and bitter passion: and we give thanks
to God for Christ's blessed obedience to the shameful death of the cursed
cross, by which he has, satisfied Gods wrath, and wrought our reconciliation
in the blood of the same, and continue this Sacrament as be instituted and
commanded in reverence and rememberance thereof, without addition, alteration,
or subtraction. And pray that our unworthiness and want of faith hinder nor
our spiritual union and real presence with Christ, which is offered in the
word of institution, and sealed in the right receiving of the Sacrament. This
is the force and effect of this word (Bless): the true use whereof Christ by
his practice delivered, the Primitive Church, Fathers, and we imitate. Now
whether your blessing in the Sacrament, and your blessing by crossing the
people, or ours come nearer to Gods word and Christ's practice, let the best
minded to Gods truth judge, and then with GODS truth join. Thus much for your
Addition, misunderstanding, and misapplication. Now to your Omission or
Subtraction of a whole verse.

You bring for proof of your carnal presence, Omission or Subtraction.

You cover two errors in concealing one ver. which is a wicked policy.


the 26. verse and the 28. verse of the 26. chap. of math. But you over skip
the 27. verse betwixt them both, which if you had added, it had expounded
Christ's meaning of this word (Bless) and overthrown your own crossing, and
discovered and discomfited other errors of yours: which are, the receiving of
the communion in one kind, of bread only: and only the Priest must drink
of the cup, and not all the communicants, which are contrary to Christ's
institution, and the ancient practice of the ancient Popes and church of Rome,
as shall be showed hereafter Christ willing.

The verse that you omit of purpose is this, And when he had taken the cup and
given thanks, he gave it to them saying, drink ye all of this: Now Christ in
this verse expounds his own meaning of blessing in the verse before, showing
what he mean by blessing, after he took the bread by the word of giving of
thanks after he took the cup: So by Christ's own exposition, blessing and
giving of thanks are all one, or else Christ did rightly consecrate the bread
by using the word blessing, but not the cup by using the word of giving of
thanks: Nay, if blessing and giving of thanks were not all one, then neither
Luke not Paul have rightly penned Christ's institution, nor Matthew nor Mark
of the cup because neither Luke nor Paul ever used the word bless, either in
taking the bread or cup, but the word of giving of thanks, nor Matthew nor
Mark ever used the word Bless in receiving of the cup.

I pray you read the three Evangelists and Paul in Greek, and you shall see as
in a glass your errors, an^ shall find Matthew and Mark expound Christ's
meaning in your overslipt verse, in giving of thanks in taking the cup, what
he meant by blessing when he took the bread: and read also Luke and Paul in
Greek, and you shall find that they never used the word Bless, as abouesaid.
So then Luke and Paul expounds Matthew and Mark: nay. Matthew and Mark in
your concealed verse expound themselves.

^ar. 8.6.7
If you will read the eighth of Mark in Greek, you shall find these two words
used by Christ before his miracle of seven loaves and a few fishes, and you
shall see there the word of thankesgiving put down first, Blessing and giving
of thanks are all one.
when he took the bread and then the word Bless put down when he took the
fishes, and there was a^ great a miracle wrought in the multiplication of the
loaves after his thanksgiving, as of the fishes after his blessing. And matthew
speaking of this miracle as Mark did, math. 1^.36.
did only use the word of thanksgiving, and not the word to bless at all.
Whereby you may see by Christ's practice, that blessing and thanksgiving are all
one, and they signify to pray and praiese with voice, and not to cross with
the fingers. Peruse your own latten Bible, Benedixit by your latten
translation is expounded by sanctificante. Genesis 2.3.
and you shall see that ^^red is it must be taken in no other sense then sancti
scauit is. Thus the simple may see how greatly you have erred in these three
points abouesaid.

And I wonder that master Henry F^^rsimon, a Gentleman so well learned (as the
Catholics account) durst put his hand to these gross errors (which most
safely I keep with me) allowing them to be both Apostolical and Catholic,
whereas they are most antichristian and heretical. And me thinks, that all the
Priests are greatly in this to be blamed, that will persw de others to follow
them, and they will neither follow Christ's truth, the Apostles writings, the
Greek not latten text, nor the ancient practice of the P imitiue Church of
Rome. But now to the test of the body of the text and controversy.

Wherein first let us examine whether your two propositions, this is my body,
and this is my blood of the new Test^ment, etc. be proper or figurative:
litterall, or Sacramental. For if they be improper, borrowed figurative and
Sacramental, they prove neither your Transubstantiation; not your carnal
real presence, but even plainly disprooue them. Augustine de doctr. christi^n^,
lib. ^. cap. 16 page 23 Paris^^. 1^80.
Saint Augustines ^ul^ before recited, if you would be ruled by it (but neither
Scriptures nor Fathers can rule you, but you will over rule them) would
presently satisfy you, that these two propositions must be figurative: the
latter you confess, but the former as ye you will not. His words again for the
Readers good I will repeat and they be these: If the scripture seem to command
any vile or ill fact, ye speech is figurative, as, Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you: Facinus
vel flagitium videtur tubere, ^^ther can use S. ^^^^d or confess your erro^:
the ^^^st ^^poss^le, the second were commendable.
Christ seems to command a wicked act, (that is, carnally and grossly to
eat Christ's flesh, etc. it is therefore a figurative speech, So that Augustine
thus reasons against you. To eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood
corporally, is a heinous thing, therefore Christ's words be figurative: so
that if to eat Christ's flesh with our mouths, and tear his flesh with our
teeth, as also actually drinking of his blood be heinous and wicked: why do
you so eagerly press the litterall sense of the^e your two propositions,
against truth against faith, and the ancient Father.

^ead it: it co^taines but 6. or 7 line^.

The marginall note there, co^demes your litterall sense.


Agustine in that short 19. chap. of the same book immediately going before,
wishes always the interpretation of these and all other figurative speeches
to be brought ad regnum charitatie, to the kingdom of charity, to have their
true exposition. Now if you expound this litterallie and properly, you
forsake Agustines rule, charities kingdom, and the Apostolical and Catholic
exposition. It is but small charity to devour the food of a friend, but to
eat and devour corporally and gut^urallie the precious body and blood of
our Christ and Savior, Augustine would have you catholics, but you will be
Capernatis and Canibals.
it is no charity Nay (says Augustine) it is plain impiety, and a wicked
and a most damnable fact. And so to prove the action lawful, the kingdom of
charity has ever taken these and the like propositions to be figurative and
the sense to be spiritual. Therefore if you will be loyal subjects of
charities kingdom, show your subjection to her charitable and Catholic
exposition, otherwise you will stand indicted of spiritual and uncharitable
rebellion.

Ambr. lib. 4 de Sacramentis. cap. 5.
Ambrose is of the same opinion with us against you, saying, Fac nobit (inquit)
oblationem ascriptam nationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and
sanga^^is Domine nostri Jesus Christi: make unto us (says the Priest) this
oblation, that it may be allowable, reasonable, and acceptable, which is a
figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Ambrose presently
after, says, the new Testament is confirmed by blood, in a figure of which
blood, we receive the mystical blood: By these words the Reader may see, that
Ambrose and the Church in his days, took it not for the natural body of
Christ, but for a figure of his body, and therefore cease to brag hereafter
to the simple, of Ambrose and Augustine, set they are not of your opinion.

^^no^. Papae lib. tartius cap 12. Fol 148 and there shall you see the foolish
and fantastical reasons the Pope gives for those said crosses. Aug. in
enarratione Psalm. ^ page 7. col. 1. Printed at Paris. anno. 1586
And in the Canon of the Mass, you have these ^^^ds of Ambrose in that part
which begins (Quam oblationem) but you deal deceitfully with Gods people: for
you leave out these words, quod est figura corporis, and there dash in fine red
crosses, and still teach the people, it is Catholic doctrine and the old
religion, but these iuglings with the Fathers must be left, or else good men
that follow those Fathers, will doubt that Gods spirit has left you.

And Augustine elsewhere says, Christ commended ^^d delivered to his disciples
the figure of his body ^^d blood. And Origin says, not the matter of bread but
the words recited over it does profit the worthy receiver, this I speak (says
he) of the typical and figurative body, which is in deed the Sacramental
bread: Upon the 15. of matthew.

Augustine confuting Adimautus the Heretic, that hold that the blood in man
was the only soul of man: answered, it was so figuratively, August. tom. 6
contra Ad^^. cap. 12.
not otherwise: and to prove it he uses this proposition of Christ, Hoc est
corpus meum, this is my body, saying, Possum etiam interpretari illud
praeceptum in signo posi^^^ esse: non enim dubitauit Dominus dicere hoc est
corpu^ meum, cum singnum daret corporis sui. I may ((...) Augustine) expound
the precept of Christ figuratiuelie: ^or the Lord doubted not to say this is my
^o^^e, when he ga^e the figure of his body. Augustine says Ho^^^st corpus
meum is a phrase figurative, you say no, but it is litterall. Now let the
Catholics take this Friendly Caveat to he^^^, for they have no reason to
follow you, that forsake the Fathers: and he^re may you see that our expositi^n
is ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical, yours new, private, and (...) all.

Terta^^ lib 4. contra^ M^recon. page ^23. line 26.
Tertull^^ an ancient Father says, Acceptum panem and d^stributum discip^lis,
etc. The bread which was taken and given to his disciples Christ made his
body, by saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my body, what could
be more spoken of them for us against you. And Hierome calls it a
representation of the truth of Christ's body and blood, Hierome super 26. math.
Ambrose on Cor. 11.
and not the body and blood. And Ambrose seconds his former sayings in these
words: In ed^^do. etc. in eating and drinking the bread and wine, we do
signify the flesh and blood which was offered for us: so that they do but
signify the flesh and blood, they are not the flesh and blood. And Chrysostom
says, Christ in h^^a. vp^n Hebr. and s^per. Cor. 11.
Offermus quid^^ sed ad recerda^^^nem, and afterward, Hoc autem sacrificium
exempl^^ est ellius, etc. We offer in deed but in rememberance of his death,
this sacrifice is a token or figure of that sacrifice, the thing that we do is
done in ten emberance of the thing that was done by Christ before, etc. Here is
a manifest ^^ace against you, which you shall never answer. Chris. in h^n 11.
^^rk. ^^^ent Al^^. on pa^^go. lib. 1. cap. 6 page 18. line vlt. and page 19. l^ne
1.
And elsewhere be says, in the so^e sanctified vessels there is not the body
of Christ in deed, b^^ a masterie of the body is contained.

And Clemens Alexandrinus who lived 1300. years ago says, Comedite corns
meas and bibite sanguinem ^eum, etc. E^t ye my flesh and drink my blood,
meaning hereby under an allegory or figure, the meat and drink that is of
faith and promise. And the same reverend Father in his second book and second
chapter of his Pedagogs, and 51. page, and line 21, 22, 23. has these words:
Ipse quoque vine vsus est, nam ipse quoque homo, and vinum benedixit, cum dixit
accipite, bibite, hoc est sanguis meus, sanguis vi^^s, etc. For our Lord Christ
red wine, and blessed wine, when he said, take drink, that my blood, the blood
of the vine, (the word) which is ^^ed for many for the remission of sins,
does signify allegory allie the holy river of gladness.

Out of which I note: First, it is sarguis vitis, the blood of the grope
properly, and that is wine. It is called Christ's blood ^acromontallie, and by
way of signification. Secondly, it appears to be figura^ne in this word
(shed) for the blood of the grape (which is ^^^e) was not shed for many, but
the blood of Ch is it. But you will save it is true, before consece^tion, but
after consecration it is Christ's very natural blood No says Clement
immediately following, Qued autem v^num esset quod benedictum est etc. And that
it was wine which was blessed, he shows again, when he says to his
disciples. I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, etc. Read Clem nt follow
Clem.
Out of which premis^es I note three things: First that that which you call
consecration, this learned Father calls it benediction. Second he, that after
consecration the nature of wine remains still and it is not changed as you
imagine. Thirdly. that the phrase is figurative and not proper. Peda ^u Inc.
22. page. 476
And ve^^rable Beda one country man tells you that in England in his time, the
text was taken figuratively. The solemnities of the old Passover (says he)
being ended, Christ comes to the new, which the Church is des^ous to
continue in remembrance of her redemption, that in stead of the flesh and blood
of a LAMB, he substituting the Sacrament of his flesh and blood in the figure
of bread and wine, might show himself to be the same to whom the Lord swear
and will not repent, etc. Beds calls it not the natural body of Christ that
works our redemption, but a rememberance of our redemption and a figure of it.

Thus the indifferent Reader may see that Augustine, Ambrose, Origin.
Tertullian, Hiorome, and Clemens Alexandrinus, Beda, and many others, which I
omit for brevities sake, all of them being ancient approoved w^iters, and all
of them of your own Prints, do hold with us against you, that your
propositions be not proper but Sacramental, improper, significatiue,
representative, allegorical, and figurative, which greatly wounds the body
of your cause, and will weaken your credits with the Catholics.

But you will say these testimonies of these Fathers, though of your own
Prints, yet they prove nothing against you, unless the Church of Rome should
receive and allow that exposition of the fathers to be Catholic. If you
should so reply, surely it were a weak replication and subject to many
exceptions, and you would wring (I cannot say wrong) the church of Rome, that
she should hold a doctrine against all the old Doctors. But if you will thus
reply to bleate the eyes of the simple, yet will I frustrate your expectation:
for now I will show you that the ancient Popes, and the ancient Church of
Rome held at these Fathers did that the proposition (Hoc est corpus meum) to be
significatiue and improper, and therefore figurative against your opinion. You
shall hear the Church of Rome deliver her own mind with her own mouth,
Did. 2. do consecratione canon:
which you cannot deny, her words be these: Ipsa immolatio carnis quae
sacerdotis manibus fit, Ch^^^ti p^ssio, more crucifixio dicitur, non rei
veritate sed significante misterio: That offering of the f esh which is done by
the hand of the Priest, Hecost: page 434. You cannot deny but this Pope was a
Protestant. And if this canon be Catholic, then it your carnal presence
antichristian.
is called the passion, death, and crucifying of Christ, but not in exactness
of truth, but in mystery of that which was s gnified: and the gloss there
makes most plain against you. Dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie vt sit
sensus, vocatur corpus Christi id est significat corpus Christi: It is called
the body of Christ but improperly (that is figuratively) that this be the
^ence^t is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifies the body of
Christ.

J will allege in this case other Popes, and the says of the Church of Rome
in another age, whereby the Reader may plainly see, that the ancient P^pes
and ancient Rome had the true succession in doctrine which we stand now on,
not that false succession of the place, and a rotten worme-eaten chair that
you brag of: the gloss speaks thus against your litterall sense of Hec est
corpus meum: De consecratione did. ^ Panis est in altar, Glossa ibid page.
43^. Not possible by their own confession that bread should be the body of
Christ.
Hoc ta^^^ est impossible, quod panis sit corpus Christi: yet this is
impossible that bread should be the body of Christ.

Now gentle Reader see the wrong the late Popes and Priests offer to the
Catholics of this kingdom: they would have them embrace that fot faith, which
the old Church of Rome held for heresy: that for poss b litie, which she says
is impossible. Why, would you have us to believe that which you your selves say
is impossible. This, all the Jesuits and Priests in Christendom cannot
answer.

If you say these two Popes and the Church of Rome then taught the truth, why
do you now dissent from the old Roman faith? If you say the Popes and
Church of Rome then cited, you will be counted an heretic: and therefore in
Gods fear confess the truth with us and the old Church of Rome, and deceive
the Catholics of this kingdom no more, with this litterall sense of Hoc est
corpus meum, which you borrow from the late Popes and late Church of Rome, and
is a new error dissenting from the old Catholic faith.

did. 2. can: Corpus Christi. page 4. 8. col. 4. You cannot d^nie this Pope to
be a protestan^ in (...) point.
And I will add one other Popes Canon, Corpus Christi quod fuexitur de Altari,
figura est, dum panis and ^inum videntur extra: veritas autem dum corpus and
sa^gu^s Christi in veritate interins creditur. The body of Christ which is
taken from the Altar, is a figure so long as the bread and wine are seen
vnreceived, but the tru^^^ (of the figure) is seen when the body and blood
are received trul^^, inwardly and by faith into the heart.

Now the gloss in that place expondeth the te^t and says. Corpus Christ's est
sacrificium corporis Christi, alias falsum est quod dicit, the body of Christ
in the text signifies the sacrifice of the body of Christ, otherwise it is
false.

Out of which I note, that the Church of Rome calls the outward Elements
Christ's body, that is, a figure of his body, being not received though
consecrated.

Secondly that the body of Christ, whereof the Sacrament must be a figure, The
Popes gloss against the Popes text
must be received by faith into the soul, not by the mouth into the stomach:
Now the gloss says, the text is false, unless, etc. But I leave the ^a^re
to be reconciled by you, who be the Popes friends, yet this I say, Maledicta
gloss qua corrumpit textum: And G^la siu^ another Pope more ancient then these
against Eu^. ^^ of this o^^^ion.


These three Popes and the Church of Rome in those days (it was before the
birth of your Transubstantiation and your carnal presence) jumpt with all the
old Fathers, and the Primitive Church that liv^d the first six hundred years
after Christ and say it is called the body of Christ, the flesh of Christ, the
passion and death of Christ, but not rei veritate, not in deed and truth, but
mistically, significatiuelie, improperlie, figuratiuelie and by way of
representation, and that it is impossible otherwise to be the body of Christ.

Yet when we speak of figures in the Sacrament you mock us. When we say the
phrase is figurative, therefore the sense must be spiritual, you deride us, as
misinterpreters of Scriptures and Fathers. But if your leisure and learning
would afford you but fa^our to read with a holy devotion, the canonical
Scriptures, and the ancient doctors of Christ's Primitive Church, that left us
these lessons for our learning, you should see that we learn what they
taught, and do what they said and you follow not what they commanded, because
you know not what they have recorded.

Now briefly I will acquaint the Reader only with the times when these Doctors
lived, and the places where they taught this doctrine, and then we shall set
whether this your litterall exposition of Hoc est corpus meum be Catholic or
not.

Clemens Alexandrinus was divinity Reader in the famous city of Alexandria
in Egypt, In the year of our Lord, 170 Origin was his scholar, If you will
read advisedly these fathers, you shall see plainly your own errors.
and succeeded Lecturer in (...) same place. 204 Tertullian Divinity Reader in
Carthage, in Afric, 206 Ambrose Bishop of Mellaine in Italy. 370 Hierome
Divinity Reader in Stridona in Hungaria; and sometime in Slauonia. 387
Chrysostom Bishop of Conctantinople in Graecia. 406 Augustine Bishop of H^ppo
in Affricke. 42^ Venerable Beda a famous learned man in Eng- 570
And thus you may see, that neither Alexandria, Carthage, Mil^^s, Strido^a,
Constantidople, Hippo, no^ Rome which are famous C^t^es. Nay, which is more
neither Egypt, ^^alie, Hungaria and Slavo^^^, not England, which are ^^mous
kingdoms. Nay which is most of all, the three parts of the world, Asia,
Affricke and Europe never heard or had such a litteral exposition, of Hoc est
corpus ^^um, for at least eight hundred years after Christ, Vincentius ^^ner
sus Hereticos. That (...), truly ^atholicke faith ^e. Quod semper vbique and
ab^omn^bus est e^^ditum. Quastio. 4 de ^a^stentia corp^ris Christ's en
^ucharilia page 154. S^ ^h^^ your ^eligion is none of Christ be^a^s^ it (...)
not war ^^^u^ed by the ^oso^ll of Ch is it.
and yet your Jesuits and priests w ll have their doctrine to be Catholic,
which cannot be, unless it were at all times, and in all places, and of all
persons received: for so your Vincentius defines Catholic doctrine. And
he^^e you see that for the three parts of the world, and for many hundred
years after Christ at was not known. And therefore it is neither Apostolical
nor Catholic.

And a late Friar and friend of yours, old Father Josephus Angles b^ings in
Cardinal Ca^^tans opinion writing upon saint Thomas Aquinas in this manner,
Per Evangelium non possunt catholici heretic^^, convincere ad intellegenda
verba hac (hoc est corpus meum) proprie: sed tenendum hoc esse salum ex
authoritate eccles^^, qua ita verba consicrationis declarat. That is, the
Catholics cannot convince or In^urce the Hereti^kes by the Gospel to
understand these words, (h^c est corpus meum, this is my body) properlia, but
this exposition must be fetched and hold from the authority of the Church,
which so expounds the words of consecration. See I pray you, what one of your
learned Friars reports out of one of your skarlet Cardinals of Rome: that you
cannot prove by Christ's Gospel these words, (this is my body) to have a
proper and litterall signification. So that CHRIST Gospel condemns your live
all and proper exposition: and so your carnal presence of Christ must be
maint^^^ed from and by the authority of the church Rome though Christ and his
Gospel say no.

Alas, with what conscience dare you teach the Catholics this heresy, Super
quaest. 75. Articl. primo. Fol. 230 Printed at Venice. 1593.
which by your own confession has no warran^ from Ch^^sts Gospe^? And
Cardinal Caietane himself writing upon your saint Thomas Aquinas speaks to
the same purpose, that the Scriptures speak nothing (express) expressly of
Christ his c^rnall presence in the Sacrament, but only in these words (hoc est
corpus meum) which words (says he) are two ways expounded: first, properly:
secondly, metaphoricallie. But (says he) the master of the sentences is to
be taxed, Lib. 4. did. 10.
who held too much with the figurative interpretation. And there you shall see
that he blusheth ^o^ say, that your litterall sense, is not from the Gospel,
but from the church of Rome.

And if your Roman Church may be both party, witness, and judge, there is no
doub t but th verdict must sound on your side. And there the Cardinal handles
Duas novitates valda mirabiles, which being dull e examined parturiuns m^^tes,
etc. with many other forgeries and fooleries to maintain your carnal kingdom
of your Breaden-god. Thus much concerning your two consecratorie propositions,
which by the testimony of Scriptures and Fathers be figuratiuelie to be
expounded as we say, not properly and litterallie as you untruly teach. But
yet you perchance will demand the reason why Christ called it his body, if
it be not his body: Let me first ask you another question, and then I will
resolve you this: Gen 17. to. 11. Romans 4.11. Exodus 12.11.
Why did God call circumscision the covenant, when in deed it was not the
covenant, but (as god himself says) a sig^^ of the covenant. Why did God call
the Paschall lamb the Passover, when it was but a sign of the Angels passing
over the houses where the blood of the lamb was sprinkled? one answer will
resolve both our questions. It is the usual manner of the holy Ghost in all
Sacraments both of the old Testament and new, Wheresoever the holy Ghost
speaks of Sacraments the phrase is tropicall me to yo^^micall and figurative,
attributing the name of the thing signified to the sign signifying, as in
these examples the phrase adds a dignity to the sacrament, but changes not
the nature of the sacrament
to term the visible sign by the name of the thing signified, as
circumscision is called the covenant, the Lamb is called the Pas^ouer. In
Baptism i^ called the fountain of ^egeneration, and bread Christ's body, and
yet in deed th y are but outward signs, and to the faithful only seals
gra^^d by the holy Ghost, with the names of the things they represent and
confirm, the more to (...) me and sti^^e up o^r affections, and to edge our
zeal with a religious preparation to receive the same, and to life up our
hearts and souls by faith, to behold, consider, and feed upon (Christ
crucified) the thing signified. Yet for your further satisfaction, I will
entreat Augustine to answer you doubt who says: Aug. epistol. 22. ad
bonifatium:
Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem ^arum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt
non haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, ex hac autem similitudine plerunque
etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt, Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum
sacramentum corporis Christ's, corpus Christ's est, sacramentum sanguinis Christ's
sanguis Chri^ti est, ita sacramentum fides fides est: In English thus, If the
Sacrament had not some certain similitude and likeness of the things whereof
they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all. And of this similitude
many times they have the names of those things themselves, as the Sacrament of
the body of Christ is after a certain manner the body of Christ, and the
sacrament of his blood is after a certain manner his blood, So the Sacrament of
faith (or Baptism) is faith. Out of which we may note: first, they are but
Sacraments, or similitudes of the thing signified not the things themselves:
secondly, that bread and wine are the body and blood of Christ b^^ secundum
quendam modum, after a certain manner and shows, how by an example, as the
Sacrament of faith is faith, so the Sacrament of Christ's body is Christ's body,
but the Sacrament of faith is not faith naturally, substantiallie by a change
of substance, for by change of quality or use, therefore the Sa^^ ^t of
Christ's body is not changed into the ^^^tance of Christ's body, but only in
quality and ^^se, is Theodores says in his first dialogue: Theodoret dialog
2. cap. 24 page 113. and dialog. 1. cap. 8. page 54. read them I pray you.
not changing nature, but adding grace unto nature. And the ^^^e Father in his
second dialogue explaines this more plainly, saying, the mystical signs after
sanctif^cation, Non recedunt a sua natura manner enim in pure substantia and
figura etc. they depart not from the^ nature, but remain in their former
substance, (...) figure, and may be seen and touched as before: Out of which
ancient learned Father I observe these necessary points for the Catholics
instruction, and your confutation: First he says, Post sanctificationem,
Consecration vnknovvn to Theodor. therefo e it is a new term.

The change is in the name honor and use, not in the nature Father answer
this f^str. or confess the truth.


after sanctification, then your new comed term of consecration was not known
in the Church of God, but sanctification and benediction. Secondly, I note cut
of this father, that though the Sacraments have gotten a new divine quality,
yet they have not lost their nature they had before, as you untruly teach.
Th^rdlie, I observe that he confuted by the example of bread and wine in the
Sacrament, certain Heretics who held that Christ's body was changed into his
deity after his ascension: for this is the Fathers proof against those
heretics. That as bread and wine are truly bread and wine after
sanctification, as they were before sanctification, even so is Christ's body as
truly a body now after his ascension, as it was before his ascension. So now
the Priests of new Rome cannot say that the bread and wine have lost their true
natures and properties in the Lords supper after sanctification, unless then
will also say with the Heretics, that Christ has lost the nature of a true
body now after his ascension. And Chrisostom^ seconds Theodores saying Ante
Sanctificationem, (...) ^sost. ad Caesarium Monach. Mark this well yet Priests
and Iesuets
etc. Before it he sanctified we call it bread bu^ the divine grace once
sanctifying it by the ministry of the Priest it ^ delivered from the name of
bread, and counted worthy to be called the Lords body, though the nature o^
bread continue there still. Out of which I note (...) the father calls it
sanctification, not consecration. Secondly it is called bred before
sanctification and is brea^ in nature after sanctification. And l^rdly after
sanctification it is called the Lords body yet it is not the lord body in deed
because the nature of bread remain And therefore in that it is called the Lords
body, it mu^^ be so Sacramentally figura^^u^ly and improperly. And Gelasius
your own Pope whom you dare not contradict such plainly No^ defiant esse
substantia panis (...) natura vini. What can you say to th^se pregna^te
proofs to satisfy the doubtful catholics.
There scaceth not to be the substance o^ bread and the nature of wine. But you
here will obtrude your oulde slanderous objection, that we accep^ of the
Sacraments no better then bare figures. No, we acknowledge a change and an
alteration, but not o^ the substance but of the use. Is not this a marvelous
change wrought by the holy Ghost in the due administration of the Lords supper
according to Christ Institution that of commen bread and wine such as daily we
feed our b^^ches with, is made the dreadefull and reverend mysteries of Christ
crucified: where by we neither look upon the bare naked elements as common
creatures, but as sanctified food: And in such sort that even as the b^ead does
nourish our bodies, and the wine does comfort our spirits: so truly, reallie,
and unfeignedly does the heavenly food of his body crucified, and his blood
shed for our sins, by faith in the time of the holy Supper, feed and
nourish our souls into everlasting life: and so is made and sealed our real
conjunction with Christ, not by his bodily and local discention into our
stomachs, but by (...) spiritual ascension to him by faith. This is our ^^nne
touching these figurative propositions, war^ed by Scriptures, Clem. Alex:
Theod: August. with many not never heard of consecration but of santification
and Benedection.
and witnessed by the auncientest others. Hitherto has been plainly and
directly ^ooved, that your two propositions be figurative, (...) proper.
Secondly, that the substances of bread (...) ^ime remain after consecration,
and therefore there can (...) no such carnal presence of Christ by
Transubstantation under the forms of bread and wine as (...) deem. Now I am
come to your two maine pil^ that support and underprop your carnal presence,
which if the^ fail you, then your foundation is santif^^, and your building
will not be able to abide the least (...) of Christ's breath. The first is
consecration: the second transubstantiation: for unless there he consecration,
there can be no transubstantiation, and then no car^^l presence of Christ in
the Sacrament. And then neither your mass nor mattes worth two piece And so the
^oules then in your imagined purgatory may cry, and yell for lack of a dirge
and a mass of Requiem. But l^^t I must tell you, the word is new, neither used
by Christ or his Apostles in the institution of the sacrament, ^or heard of in
any ancient Father, for many hundred years after Christ. Again, you never
read in any a^^e (...), sacred or profane, that consecration should signify
to change one substance into another, for the nature of the word will not bear
it. Now seeing by Christ ^or his Apostle Paul, it was not used, nor ancient
father ever took it in this sense. Again, the nature of the word (...) no such
signification: I see not but you deserve much blame in binding the Catholics
consciences to believe that which is against divinity, antiquity, and ^omon
sense. Now Gentlemen pardon me, to demand of you but this question, what words
be they that co^se^^^? that is: which turn the substances of bread and wine
unto the natural and substantial body and blood of Christ.

Me thinks I hear you Jesuits and Priests calling me a fool for demanding
such a question, considering (as ye pretend) that the Church of Rome and her
learned men have ever from Christ's time held with one consent one manner of
consecration, with a certain set number of words without addition or
alteration, Such fathers as lived next to Christ's time, should know best the
practice of the primitive church, and these fathers you refuse, and chose
others a thousand years younger, and therefore they be of less credit Gala. 9.
and therefore my question is frivolous and needless: and no doubt you make
your Catholics believe so, but alas you deceive them, it is not so: for I
will show you many several opinions amongst your learned men, yea Popes
themselves one contrary to another. I pray you let me and the Catholics of
this kingdom therefore be certified and satisfied by Gods word, and the
practice of the Primitive Church for the fi st six hundred years, which be the
words of consecration that works this miraculous alteration of substances,
which if you cannot prove (as I am sure you cannot) then the Catholics have
good cause to look to their consciences, and to follow you no further then you
follow Christ according to his word. For if any man, nay all men, nay if an
Angel, nay all Angels, should come from heaven and preach otherwise then
Christ and his Apostles have taught, let him be accursed. If Angels, nay all
Angels from heaven, must not be believed bringing contrary doctrine to Christ
and his Apostles, will you then bindle the Catholics of this kingdom to
believe you only coming from Rome and Rheme, whence you being new doctrine
not only contrary to Gods truth, but to the Fathers of the Primitive Church.
And to begin with Guide in his Manipulo curatorum Guid^ cap. 4. page 23. 24.
25. But more you (...) see on the cantels or sleights of your masso concerning
the neces^^tie of the crosses, word of the canon of the mass, and the priests
intention.


Who says there be four several opinions amongst the learned Rabbis of Rome,
touching the words of consecration.

The first fore (says he) will have besides the words of the.^. Evangelists
and Paul, the intention of ^he Preiste ( a and so says your mass book) and
the precepts of the Church to be duly observed, jumping with your said
Masse-booke: that unless the Priests intention be to consecrate, there is no
consecration, though he use all Christ's words, and Paul's. And if the priest
omit pracepta ecclesia, that is, the commandments of the Church of Rome in
his consecration, ^^ttalissime pecearet, he sins most deadly, and is to be
punished most grievously. But Abbot panormitaue do celebratione messarum page.
220. is of another mind saying, Etiamsi sacerdos celebres vt Deus perdat
aliquem, (...) been consecrat. Notwithstanding the priest say Mass with
intention that God would destroy some (...), yet does he consecrate well. In
he canteli prin. at Venice. 1464
What Christian heart does not loath this divelish intention, and hellish
religion.

Here let all Catholics mark, that this first opinion holds that Christ's
institution is not sufficient without the priests intention. At the people are
not sure of the priests intention, so they are not surs of Christ's carnal
presence and so commit ^dolatr^t ^^o worshipp^^g bread bei^^ not consecrated.
(For if his head be otherwise occupied, he consecrates not) and the due
observation of the precepts of the Church, which partly consist in words,
partly in gestures, etc. so that by this opinion, those that simply and
plainly (for the first eight hundred or a thousand years next after Christ)
used the form of Christ's institution only, never consecrated rightly: no
not Christ himself, nor Paul, and so till of late days there was no
consecration, Transubstantiation, or carnal presence.

So that this opinion prooveth your own transubstantiation and carnal
presence, not to be either Apostolical or Catholic, but new, invented, and
fantastical The second opinion in of master Doctor Subtilis (for so he call^
him) and he statlie contradicts the former opinion, and says, that all he
words from qui pri^^^^ to Simili modo in the Canon of your mass book are
necessarily required to consecration, and therefore the former Doctor, If you
say Christ's institution were sufficient, then your canon o^ your m^sse is
super sludus: if you say it is not sufficient, without your mass caug^ then
Christ's institution were imperfect. Which to think is blasphemy.
flint short. But Gentlemen, you know that the Canon of the mass was not made
by one Pope, nor by ten Popes, b^t in many hundred years it was in patching
together, I hope you will not sa^e that those Saints and Martirs of God from
Christ's time, to the making of that Idolatrous Canon of the mass, being
many hundred years, had not the right consecration, when they practiz d
Christ's institution.

Alij d^xerunt, there is a third opinion of diverse Doctors which held contrary
to both the former, but because it is but fabulous and not worth reading,
therefore I will seilence it, as not worth the writing.

But Guido his opinion is flat contrary to them all, and says pre^sely, that
hoc est enim corpus menin does consecrate without any more help. So Guido is
contrary in opinion to the former three opinions, and every of them all
contrary one to another, Here now the Catholics may see the consent and
unity of the late Church of Rome touching consecration: Yet I will bring you a
learned Prier which has tossed this question like a tennisball. Josephus
Angles in lib. 4. sententiaru^. Printed by king Philips previledge. 1573. page
108. and 109. de essentialibus Euch.
This Friar says in his conclusion: Christus Jesus his verbis, hoc est enim
corpus meum Eucharistiam confecit, etc. Christ Iosus in these words for this is
my body, old consecrate the Euchariste, and so has continued still by the
custom of the Church, etc. But presently in his Appendix he ^heckes that
opinion and says, yet it is to be believed, that Christ consecrated with other
words then these that he used in the institution, and there be many of this
latter opinion says he, as Innocentius, etc. so that it is a palpabl^ discord
amongst them touching the very words of consecration.

And in the same page he delivers two other opinions, one of Thomas Aquinas,
the other of Scotus, Two other contrary opinions.
the one contrary to the other, which (if you want the book) I will show you.

And in the same page he shows, page 109. Soto says, if Qui pridie being the
Priests words, be not used as well as Christ's, Tuncincentiun est, etc. Then it
is uncertain whether therebe any Transubstantiation at all. What wise,
catholics will believe this your uncertain doctrine.
that hoc est enim ^erpus meum be the words of Christ, and that Qui pridi^ be
the words of the Priest, so that Christ's words without the Priests words work
nothing, or are nothing worth. And the same Fries delivers the opini^on of
Doctor Soto touching the intention of the Priest in consecration of the cup,
but checks his Doctorship in his immediate conclusion very sharply (I will not
say shamefullie) saying, Magister Soto he in locu sibi repugnat: Master So^o
in this place disagreeth with himself: and old Cato tells us that he that
disagreeth with himself, cannot agree with any.

page 113 Read the place.
But in the next pages he sets down six several opinions touching the form
of consecration, one contrary to another, and all of them held and maintained
very stiflie for the truth, whereof five of them must ^iceds be false. But I
assure you there is none, of them of Christ's institution, and therefore neither
true Apostolical nor Catholic. If they were not fabulous and frivolous, I
would p^^ them down verbatim. But if you lift to fe^ their errors, I have
truly quoted their places, you may see them without same, and I trust you with
not read them without dislike.

Now let me entreat you to hear some other of your friends speak, that lived
in: another age, that the Catholic may see your uncertainty in this point,
that none of you all know what to say, nor what to believe, and the reason is,
because you have denied and refu^ed the clear waters of Gods truth, and
therefore drink of the puddels of men's inventions, which are nothing else but
fables and lies, without ce^taintie or verity.

Giabriel Biel. loct: 36.
Gabriel a learned man on your side says, Christus potuit sine verbo tanquam
verus Deus substantiam pacit^ and vini consecrare, vel potuit verba quadam
secreto prefer, and per illa consecrare vel per hac verba, hoc ^st corpus
meum, Mark this you Priests and Iesuets.
consecrare potuit, vel potuit prius consecrare, and postea distribuere: vel
primum distribuare, and postea consecrare: Quid autem horum fecerit ex sacris
scriptari non constat: Christ as being very God, might consecrate the bread
and wine without any word: Behold I pray you the uncertainty of your
consecration and therefore ceasso to deceue: Petrus de Aliaco: in 4. lib. sent
Q. 5. Mark this good Reader. How blasphemous this is, let the learned ^n
christ Judge. Bonaventura in. 4. lib. Sententiarum did 8. q. 2.
Or else he might speak certain words in secret, and by the (...) consecrates
or else might consecrate by these words This is my body: or he might first
consecrat, and after deliver: or else first deliver, and then consecrate th^^
which of all these he did, by the holy scriptures it appears not. But Petrus
de Alliance crosses them all and says, that Christ consecrated before these
word of hoc est corpus meum, for (says he) Quia nisi (...) fuisset corpus
Christi, Christus non vere dixisset he i^ corpus meum. If it had not been
Christ's body before Christ could not have said truly this is my body. This
now touches your freehold, for he says plainly unless consecration go
before these words, this is (...) body, both Christ and priest should lie.
This trample your consecration in the dirt.

And your Antididagma printed at Collen, with the approbation of all the
learned Doctors in that age says prec^selie, that the ba^e words of Christ's
institution without the words of the Canon of the Mass, ar^ not sufficient to
work consecration. And Bonaventura is not ashamed to say, that if we will
right (...) consecrate, we must not seek to the Gospel o^ Christ, but to the
Canon of the Mass. Now Scot^ (though he be master Doctor Subtilis) is put to
(...) dumpes what to do, in this doubtful case of consecration, when there
betwentie several opinions one contrary to another, and all contrary to
Christ's truth, i^ the end this is his resolution. Quod ergo est confilium? di^o
quod sacerdos intendens facere quod facit ecclesia, legens distinct verba
canonis a principio vsque ad finom, vere conficit noc est tutum alicui reputare
se valde, peritum inscientia sua, and dicere velo vti praecise istit verbis pro
consecratione. The matter being so doubtful, what then is your advise? I say,
that the priest intending to do whatsoever the Church does, and reading the
words of the Canon distinctlie and plainly from the beginning to the end, does
verelie consecrate: neither is it wisdom for a man to account himself very
skillfull in his knowledge, and to say I will use (without all doubt) these, or
these words to work consecration. Here your champion Scotus cares not a point
for your three Evangelists, nor the Apostle Paul: for reading of the Canon
distinctly is sufficient: Oh damnable heresy, that renounceth Christ's
institution, and follows man's invention. And the words of your Masse-booke
are distinct, secret. and attente. And also it must be pronounced vno
spiritu. nulla pansatione inter posita. If the foresaid cautions be not
performed by the priest, your consecration and application is marred, and not
worth a pin. Now Gentlemen: these be your Doctors, and this is your doctrine:
here be twenty several opinions of consecration in several ages, and none
tells the truth. Have you used Gods people and the Queens subjects
Christianlie, in persuading them that all Churches, and all fathers, in all
ages, with one consent, have embraced this your opinion touching consecration,
for Catholic without discord or discention? I tell you no, for in this you
have cracked their conscience, and do hazard their souls to maintain your
superstition. But perchance you will persuade the Catholics, that though
these Doctors grossly erred, yet the Church of Rome ever held one manner of
consecration, but that is as untrue as the rest. For I will show you plainly,
Palse witnesses examined a sunder must needs be taken tripping and found
liers, for bovv should ye agree in that ye know not, nay in that which is
not.
that your late Popes and Church of Rom^ since three hundred, or three hundred
and seventi^ years last past, knew not what to hold, ^or what t^ affirm
touching the form of consecration. An^ therefore in this your new doctrine
there is neither ^^tie, antiquity, universality (not verity) with which
terms you so long have deceived the people.

Distin. 2. de Consecratione sub figura in sine.
The Pope and Church of Rome (as this Canon testifies) was of opinion, that the
Priest must recite verba Evangelistarum, beginning at qui pridie, etc. in h^^
ergo creatur illud corpus. The Priest must recite the whole words of the three
Evangelists, beginning at the day before he suffered.

Out of which we may see that this Pope will hau^ the words of the three
Evangelists, which contain the causes and effects of the whole institution,
and not b^ est enim corpus meum only, etc.

Again, there is used a most shameful and blasphemous word, Creatur, unless
you will have Christ to be come a creature, and the Priest to become a creator
your master the Pope was too forgetful that this ha^^ not been dashed into
his Index expurgatorius.

But I must allege another Pope to con radict this Popes opinion. De Conse.
distinct 2. Canon quia corpus, page 432.
In another age there was a Pope, who with the Church of Rome, held that there
was an invisible Priest that consecrated and changed those visible creatures
into the body and blood of Christ, no^ by virtue of those known words, Hoc
est enim corpus meum, nor by all the words of the three Evangelists, a^ the
other Pope did, but secreta potestate, by a secre^^ and hidd n power, which you
visible Priests know^ not. This Pope will have an invisible Priest to make a
visible sacrifice: and you Jesuits and Priests will have a visible Priest, to
make the invisible body and blood o^ Christ. What is more contrary and absurd
then this? This Pope has brained your hoc est enim corpus meum, ^eing your
ordinary consecration, and records all over Popes and you Jesuits and Priests
for heretics, If this lisc^^ of P^^^^, ^n ha^^^t ^rovvled in a^^^^ known
tongue, the Catholics had forsaken Pope. Preiste, and Rome, long since.
(...) holding that hoc est corpus meum does consecrate.

But yet I will b^e so bold to ask this Pope this ^^estion, Who is that
invisible Priest? where is that ^riest? what is his secret power? does it
consist in spea^ng or crossing, or both, or in neither, or in some other dumb
shows. The holy Scrip ures teach no ^ch Priest speak of no such secret
power, and so ^his is a fable as is the rest, and no sure foundation for ^he
Catholics to stick too, therefore I wish that (...) well minded Catholics
of this kingdom would (...) believe this uncertain vani^ie, but stick to
Christ's written verity.

I will add one Pope more, whose opinion I know (...) will not gainsay, for if
you should, I must come ^^on you wi^h an old school point, Contra negantem
^citia non est disputantium. De sacre Aliaris mysterio lib 4. cap. 6. page.
105. 66.
This is Pope Innocentius ^e third of famous memory, under the warmth of those
wings, your transubstantiation in the Synod of Laterans was hatched, at least
one thousand and to hundred years after Christ's ascension: This Pope words
three several opinions touching consecration, ^d one contrary to another. The
first hold, it is made (...) Benedixit: The second sort teach, that after
bene^tion, when either it by the Priest made some print on the bread, as it
were by crossing and some word spoken o^ter and to the bread, then hoc est enim
co^pus meum conse^^^s whosoever says nay. And this sort ho^ is that it is
(credibile) credible, that Christ first de ivered the bread, and then
consecrated the bread, which things make your fingring and blowing upon or over
the bread more palpable, because one must hold the Elements while you enchaunte
them, rather then consecrate them. The third opinion crosses both the other,
which is, that Christ consecrated vertute divina, by his divine virtue, and
afterward laid down for posterities a form, after which they should bless or
consecrate.

Thus there were three several opinions that this Pope spoke of, yet it
seems he liked but one of them, which was the second, which he seems to
justify in the chapter following.

Magister Sent. lib. 4. did. 8. fol: 56. which are alleged out of A^roses
But mag^cter Sententiarum comes nearer the matter, and asks a question to
make the matter plain, corsecrati^ quibus fit verbis. Attend quae sunt verba
accipi t^ and comedite, accipite bibite, etc. with what words it consecration
made? give attention, these be the words, Take ye, and eat ye all of this,
this is my body, take ye and drink ye, this is my blood, drink ye all of
this.

Here you see that this master checks Pope and Prelate, for none of all these
twenty and odd opinions ever put in these words, Take ye, eat ye, take
ye drink ye, as the words of Christ, but as the words of your Canon. And
that these words be not necessary parts of Christ's institution, but only
show the use of the institution, but that is neither Canonical no^ Catholic.
And if you list at your leisure to read Cardinal Fr. Constantius Sarvanus his
work, Printed at Romes. 159^. page 144. 145. 146.
entitled Summa Theologica, dedicated to this Pope Clement the right now
living, you shall see that he repeats other several juries that are now among
your Roman Prelates ^^uching consecration as contrary as these, and therefore
as absurd as the former.

Now Gentlemen, how can you salu^ this sore, and reconcile these jarres.
Doctors, Schoolmen, Canonists, Text and Gloss, Popes, and great Prelates
dissenting most shamefullie about consecration, none of them relying upon
Christ ^l^ine institution, and therefore be hold their des^rved confusion.

Now blame not us for discovering your discords, and for forsaking your errors,
but blame your Doctors, Schoolmen, Friars, Monks, Legendaries, Canonists, your
Popes Canons, and your own Massebook, these are come to our hands, we have
read their works, and discovered some hundreds of their heresies, and sent
them to the view of the Catholics But howsoever you blame us, God and the
world will blame you, in keeping the people from reading Gods book, and good
writers, which would instruct and confirm them in true religion, and revoke
them from your gross superstition. Thus much concerning the uncertainty,
absurdity, and blasphemy of your consecration. Now the true Apostolical
consecration is this, when the elements of bread and wine are set apart from
their common use, and applied to a holy use, according to Gods word.

And when the lawful minister has taught the prepared co^municants the
grievousnes of their sins: What true consecration is which the Gospellers
teach.
the ^^^nes of Gods wrath: the sufficiency of Christ's ments fully to appease
the same: the nature of the Sacrament, which is a commemoration of that
passion, the office of faith to appprehend and apply Christ^ me^^s promised in
the word, and tendered in the due administration of the Sacraments, then is
there I say, a right consecration of the Sacrament. Now whether this
consecration of yours, is warranted by Christ his words, let the indifferent
Reader judge, and with the true^h and a^^cion^ opinion join.
Transubstansiation Yet we contend with you not for names and words live for
(...)
Thus much concerning you^ imagined and new stamped consecration. Now to your
second, pillar, which i^, transubstansiation. First, I must tell you in this, as
in the former, that the term is new, lately invented and co^pounded by your
selves, and as your consecration was never found in the new Testament, so
transubstansiation was never found, in the ^^^^us old. No, I do not remember
that in all my Grammatical travels and studies, that ever, ^ead it. I can s^^w
you Dictionaries many, and Grammers ^^^e of diverse pri^^^ and in diverse ages,
printed in several Universities of Christendom, but none of them makes
mention of this word transubstantiure, much less of the sense, which is to
change substances of several kinds, one substance into another. But briefly,
as the word cannot be found in Gods book nor ancient Doctor: so the sense
has neither warrant from holy scriptures, no^ Catholic writers.

For this is your opinion, that after consecration (which yet you know not what
it is) the substance of bread and wine should be converted into the natural
body and blood of Christ, the accidents of bread and wine, as witness,
foundnesse, breadth, weight, fa^or and taste of them only remaining.

You may as soon and to as good a purpose, prove a transaccidentation as a
transubstantiation. But as there is no change of the former, so not of the
latter, but a mere Friars fable, and therefore frivolous. And whereas the
Fathers use these words, change, conversion, mutation, transelementation, they
always expound themselves in their several works, that it is a changing of
the use, not of the substance: neither can you show any one father that ever
meant such a change, of one substance into another: for every change of one
thing into another, carries not with it at all transubstantiation of one
substance into another: for there may be a change without conversion of
substances, but conversion of substances cannot be without a change: for there
is as much difference betwixt change and transubstantiation, as betwixt the
general and the special: for change is the general, and contains under
(...) transubstansiation: but not contrariwise.

And as there is a change of substances, so there is a change of accidents, to
wit, of qualities, of times, of places, of habits, and such other like things,
according to their natures, and to the predicaments under the which they are
comprehended. These Logical ru^^nuats I hope you have not forgotten.

Our regeneration is a change, not substantial, We confess a change of name,
and of use, but only during the action, not after to be a sacrament, no more
then water in the fond after that baptism is finished by the minister.
but accidental, that is: it is not a change of the substance of our bodies
and souls into any other substance, but the change i^ in quality: which is,
from vice to virtue, from sin to righteousness, etc. and this our change now
in question is sacramental, not substantial, of the use of the creatures, not
of the substance.

But if you will needs have a change of substances, speak like scholars, and
tell me for my learning, in what predicament I shall seek it, and yet I think
I shall never find it. But I will not be tedious in transubstansiation,
seeing the great Rabbynes of Rome can no more agree upon this, then they could
about consecration, as also because we have confuted it in such places, where
we prove bread to remain after consecration: for so many fathers as prove
bread to remain after consecration, confute transubstansiation, I will one^i^
give the best minded Catholics just of the rest of your late School-doctors,
by alleging one Grand-captain in stead of the rest, whose words be these.
magister Sent. lib. ^. did. 11. page 58.
Si tandem queritur qualis sic illa conversio, an formalis, an substantialis,
vel alterius generis, di finire van suffici^: But if it be asked me (says
this your great Moderator) what kind of change is made in the Sacrament,
whether it be formal, or substantial, or of any other kind, I am not able
to define it unto you.

Will you hear your own friend Cuthb. T^nustall Bishop of Dirrh^m deliver his
opinion, de mode, de Eucharistia lib. 1 page 46.
quo id fieret fortasie satius erat curiosum quemqu^ suae nelinquere
coniectutae, sicut liberum fu^t ante concilium Lateranum. Of the manner of this
change or conversion how it might be done, perhaps it had been better to leave
every man that would be curious to his own opinion or conjecture, as it was
before the Council of Laterane left at liberty.

Is this your antiquity, universality, and consent you see it is a jarring
noveltie, void of verity. Why then will you take upon you to teach that which
you never learned, and persuade the Catholics to believe that which the
chiefest on your side makes a doubt of? nay, all of your side cannot prove:
nay which is in deed but a fable without truth, for one thousand and two
hundred years after Christ never heard of. And therefore seeing it is neither
Apostolical not Catholic, Absurdities follow the granting of
Transubstatiation.
no man's conscience is bound to believe it. Now J will only show some
gross absurdities that follow the granting of it, and so proceed to the rest.

This fable of transubstansiation overthrows sundry articles of our faith,
and therefore it is abominable. Josephus Angles page. ^^0. conclusioness cunda.
spiritually. Jf your doctrine of transubstansiation were true, then the Lords
supper were no Sacrament, and the reason is this, for every Sacrament
consists of the outward sign, and the inward ^ing signified, and they must
both still remain during ^e outward action of the Sacrament. Now if bread
which is the visible outward part of the Sacrament be changed into Christ's
body, then there is no sacrament, because there remains but one part of the
Sacrament, which is the thing signified, and then you utterly deceive ^he
people, which ^o^l them it is the Sacrament of the Altar when it is no
Sacrament at all. Again, another

Another unreasonable absurdity will follow, that

Again, of his own body shall be in many places

See now the fruits of your fained transubstansiation, not f^ll four hundred
years old, and yet forsoeth you teach it is Apostolical and Catholi^ke,
whereas it lackes one thousand and two hundred years of that age.

Lib 4. sent. fol. 257. Innocentius 3. de. sacro Altaris mysteria lib. 4 cap.
^0. per totum. Distinct: de consecr, distinct 2. canon. 1. page 429.
But he that list to see the shifts and wranglings of your Schoolmen to uphold
this rotter Romish heresy, let him read Guillermus, and Innocentius the third,
a Pope, parent, and patron of this fable, the first Canon of the second
distinction, where you shall find in the Gloss there, varia sunt opiniones.
That in the Popes Court and in his Consistory, there be diverse opinions
touching transubstansiation, yet the denial of it, or the contradicting of the
Popes opinion, was then Denial of Transubstantiation, in Rome was no death.
no death, though in those merciless days of Spanish Philip, and Romish
Marie, it was made the thirteenth Article of our faith, and it had been less
danger to have denied those twelve old articles of our old faith, then this
one of your new faith; for the one was dispensed with for money, but the
denial of the other was punished with death without mercy. But you will
reply and say, notwithstanding the dissentions aforesaid, yet Christ's words be
true, he cannot lie, he has said, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body,
therefore it is his body.

We confess these words to be Christ's words, and therefore true, but the
litterall sense is yours, and therefore false. But that I will not be tedious
unto you, I could show you as many several opinions dissenting about the
meaning of hoc: est: and corpus, as I have done in the premises: but that the
Catholics shall know there is no such unity not verity in your doctrine, as
you confidentlie (but untruly) have taught them, therefore I will give them
but a taste till some other time, only pointing you and them to their Authors
and places, and then read advisedly, and judge without partial affection.

This Friar you heard lately recited your several (...) touching
consecration: Iosepus Angles de Essentialibus Euch. page 114. 115. 116.
now hear him with your patience to deliver his and other several opinions
touching the exposition of these three words severallie, hoc, est, corpus.

The first opinion is, that this demonstratiue pro^oune hoc, must be referred
not to the bread, but to the body of Christ, that this should be the sense, 1.
Iosepus
hoc (...), etc. id est corpus: est corpus meum. That is, this my body, is my
body: but how absurd this is, let the young Sophisters in the Schools give
their censures.

But the second opinion is of Bonaventura, 2. Bonauentura.
who says this, pronoune hoc, must be referred to the bread ^^^t must be
converted into Christ's body, but not to Christ's body.

The third opinion is Occhams, 3. Occam in lib. 4.
and he is of opinion with the first.

There follows three other learned men's opinions contrary to all the former,
1. S. Thom. 2. Ricar. 3. Scotus. Nec pa^em nec corpus sub ratione corporis, sed
corpus Christ's sub ratione entis vel Indiuidui, etc. lib. 4 page 182 de sacro
Altaris mysterio, cap. 17
and say flatly that this demonstratiue hoc, must not be referred to note
either the bread or the body of Christ, but that this might be the sense, hoc
eus vel hac substantia, quae continetur sub speciebus, etc. This thing or this
substance which a contained under the accidents of bread, is my body: but how
well these opinions with their strange Logical manner of reasoning will
content the learned Priests and Jesuits, I would feign know? for this I am
(...), they sound not either of divinity or learning. But this Friar for a
farewell concludes, page 118. prono^^n hoc, nihil. This pronoune hoc signifies
nothing, till the last syllable vm, be pronounced.

Pope Innocentius the third says, that hoc signifies neither bread, nor
Christ's body, because the whole words of consecration were not spoken: unless
says he, you will say the Priest consecrates at this word Benedixit, Hoc,
nihil demosstrat. In the same page mark this you Jesuits and priests.
he blessed. But the Pope says, he signifie^ nothing, and his reason is, that
the Priest shows (...) notes nothing, because he uses hoc est, etc. not b^
way of demonstration, but by way of cursorie repetition: so then, this Pope
will have this sense, hoc e^^ corpus meum, that is, nothing is my body. But in
the three of the last lines of that chapter, his wisedom^ changed his mind and
said, this is my body, that is, wha^ soever is under the forms of bread is my
body. I^ not this think you deep divinity for a Pope? You may see herein
how the Pope uses shameful shifts t^ cover his sensible errors, and to
deceive Christ's litt^ flock.

In his Marc. Anton. Con.
Stephen Gardner living bu^ lately, seeing every man opinion expounding what
hoc should be, heed slikes (...) them all, and says, it signifies iudiuiduum
vagum, as i^ Christ had said, This (but what it is I cannot tell, but i^ must
of necessity be somewhat) is my body.

De consec. did. 2. can. P morem. Glossa ibi them.
But I will conclude with your own Popes Cano^ and Gloss, which you hold for
Canonical, though in deed heretical, solet quari quid demonstratur per
pron^^^ men hoc. It is a common question what is meant by ^hi^ pronounce this,
whether bread, or the body of Christ not bread, for that is not the body of
Christ: nor yet tho^ body of Christ, for it appereath not that there is any
transubstansiation, till the words hoc all pronounced, yea the last syllable
^m. To this question this must be answered: That by the word this, nothing is
mean^) but it is there put materially without any signifi a^ion at all. See
now whither you are brought, or rather whither have you brought Gods people,
from ^^deth to falsehood: if hoc signifies nothing, where then is your
transubstanstation. For if in (...) word which should first work in the change
there be no mention of bread, how c^n that which is no wa^ comprised in them,
be changed by them, and so you sp^ake against your selves. Again, as you are
rent in sun^^ opinions touching hoc, so also are you touching ^^er when you saw
that est would not serve in his propet Evangelicall and Apostolical
signification, What est signifies, there is great variance amongst the Romish
Prelates. Est i. Fit. Est, est verbum anuntiativum non constetutium. Est 1. erit
Josephus Angles i^ loco praedicto. page 115.
then you gave him a new exposition. For Bonaventure seeing that est (as Christ
and Paul meant it) would not fit their purpose, then he of purpose expounded
it by fit, vt fit sensus, panis fit corpus meum, that it might be thus in
sense, The bread is made my body. Yet Occham he likes not Bonaventures Fit,
because he thinks it is too gross and too false: and therefore he will
expound est by erit, that it may carry with it this sense: this shall be my
body, but (says he) it is a very rash and brainsicke opinion, and alleges
as brainsicke a reason, as there you may see.

Yet Caietanus the Cardinal de Encharistia cap. 7. page 104. col. 2. C. D.
denies est to have any such signification, unless it be in metaphors and
parables. But lest that I should be too offensive unto you, I could del ver so
many several opinions of yours, touching the praedicat corpus: one says it
must be meant of Christ's body glorified, no says another, that is false:
but it must be understood of his body, as it was before his passion. And a
third opinion objects certain doubts against both the former,

Magister Sententiarum lib 4. distinct. 12. page. 60. delivers four several
opinions, de fractione and partibus.

Now Gentlemen, I appeal to your consciences (if they be not cauteriated)
whether you have dealt well with the ignorant Catholics of this land, in
persuading them that in all your doctrine there is consent without jarres,
antiquity without innovation, and universality without limittation, whereas
there is nothing but iarres, discords and dissentions, in your consecration, in
your transubstantiation, and in every word almost, nay perticle, as hoc, and
est, be so wrested by your construction, that you have brought both their
prope^ significations to plain destruction.

Is this exposition Catholic? what ancient father ever expounded it so? let
the Catholics know, o^ else they with us, will judge, neither you nor you
doctrine Catholic. Will you follow a foolish Friar an ignorant Abbot, a late
vpstart Pope or Priest tha^ writ (and wrested) within these four hundred
years and forsake Scriptures and the ancient Doctors o^ the Church? Now let
the indifferent minded Catholics be judges whether you or we have antiqui^^
consent and verity on our sides. And who differs from Scriptures, and fathers:
from, and amongst themselves not only in one point of religion, but almost in
^verie point and particle of doctrine. Thus much concerning your discords
amongst your selves, and ^l against the ancient Apostolical and Catholic
truth.

Now to conclude this matter, I will show plainl^^ by scriptures, Hoc est
corpus meum expou^ b^ scripente.
that hoc est corpus meum can have no such sense as you teach, which is: that
bread is not by this or any other words transubstantiated or changed into
Christ's body and blood, but that bread remains after sanctification, or (as
you say) consecrat^on, and that the scriptures speaking of Christ's body and of
the bread, speak distinctlie, not confusedly, that is, they do divide them,
not confound them giving to e^ther of them their several nature and property,
yea after consecration. And whereas we have now heard too much of the jarres of
your late Popes and writers void of unity and verity: Now let us hear the
holy scriptures expound hoc est corpus meum, plainly and truly by the
Evangelists and Paul, who knew best Christ's meaning. Upon whose exposition all
Christians may and must only rest satisfied inspite of Pope and popery.

Debt. math. 26 26.
ANd first we will prove it from the difference of the sign and the thing
signified, The scriptures when they speak of bread they speak actiuely, He gave.

D^tur. Luc 22.19
But when they speak of Christ's natural bod^e, they speak passiuelie, Is
given.

^regit. Luc. 21.19
When they speak of bread, they speak actiuelie, He brake it.

^^ngitur. 1. Cor. 11.24.
But when they speak of Christ's body, they speak passiuelie, Which is broken.

^^s. mark. 14.22
When they speak of bread, they say, To you,

Pro vobis. 1 Cor. 11.14.
But when they speak of Christ's natural body, they say, For you,

Dedit. mark. 14 12
Likewise when they speak of wine, they speak actiuely: He gave,

^^^nditur. Luc. 11.20.
But when they speak of Christ his blood, they speak passiuelie, Is shed,

^it. math. 26.27
When they speak of the wine, they say, To them,

Pro multis pr^rebis. Luc. 22.^0 math. 26.26.
But when they speak of Christ's blood, they speak, For you, or, for many,

I^ mea^ commemotationem. 1. Cor. 11.24.
When they speak of the cup, they speak, In rememberance of me.

I^ remissionem peccatorum. Mat. 26.28.
But when they speak of Christ's natural blood, they speak, For the remissione
of sinn^.

So when Christ speaks actiuelie, as, he gave, he brake, it is always
spoken of the sacrament But when be speaks passiulie, which is given, which
is broken, which it shed, and for you, not to you, then he sp^akes of his
natural body given and broken on the cross. And this rule is a plain and
sure rule to direct v^in and to the true understanding of hoc est corpus meum,
This is my body, In which plain paths of the holy Scriptures if you would
walk, Bread and wine remain afer consecration by C^ri^t his testimony,
therefore tra^substanst^^tion is a f^rged and false fable, invented by new
Rome to support your new heresies of Christ's carnal presence.
you might be preserved from wandering.

Thus you see how distinctlie Christ disioynes them, sundring them with their
several properties, the s gne from the thing signified, not confounding them
as you untruly teach, yea and after that Christ uttered h^c est corpus meum,
which you call your co^^ecration. Now let us compare the phrase and words that
the holy Ghost uses in both the new Testament and the old, and then you will
say they are so like, that they are rather borrowed of the old testament, then
instituted in the new, and so of necessity seeing they are be^^. Sacraments,
and of like words, and ordained by one Author, and to one end, they w^st needs
have one sense, so that the one will best expound the other, and the one being
Sacramental and relative, the other cannot be Grammatical and proper. As it
is said in the old Genesis 17 10.
Testament of the sacrament of circumsition, hic est pactum meum, this is my
covenant. So it is said in the new math. 26.26.
testament by the same spirit, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, but as by
those words like to these in s^llables, sound, and sense, there was no
transubstansiation of the piece of flesh of the foreskin that was cut off, into
Gods covenant made with his Church, so there is no natural nor miraculous
change made of any part of the bread or wine into Christ's body and blood.

Exodus 12
And as it was said of the Paschall Lamb, h^c erit vobis in memoriam, this
shall be to you a rememberance, so it is said of the Lords Supper, 1. Cor.
11.24. Exodus 24.8.
Do this in rememberance of me

And as it was said in the old Testament, hic est sanguis faederis, This is
the blood of the covenant, yet was not the covenant but a sign of the covenant.

So is it said by Christ himself, Luc. 22.20.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, yet the cup was neither the
Testament, nor the blood, but a sign representation, (...) rememberance of
Christ's blood.

And the new Testament is an obligation or bond therein God for his part binds
himself with most see covenaunts: and seals it with word, oath and
sacraments, that he will receive into his protection and favor the believer
and penitent. And the believer and repentant of their parts, bind themselves
(...) like indented covenants, to perform unto his saved Majesty, Romans 1.5.
a lively and steadfaste faith with holy obedience.

Now the cup or the wine in the cup, is a representation or commemoration unto
us of this cove^^nt of grace made in the new Testament, as the Paschall Lamb
and the blood of beasts were signs of Gods covenant in the old Testament. This
may s^^fice for the plain and true understanding of these words, this is my
body, and this is my blood, being ^^ pounded according to the holy
scriptures. Now to your first proof out of saint Paul,

1. Cor. 11. This is my body which shall be delivered for you: whosoever does
eat unworthily. Catho. Priests.
etc. shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ.


A Most learned writer in the like case, Rider. Athenaus D^pn^sophist. lib. 12.
brings in an Athenian history of Thrasilaus (a fr^ntick man amongst the
Greeks) who whenever ^e saw any ships arrive in the harbor thought them all
his own, and took an Inventorie of their wares and bad the^ welcome home very
joyfully, as if they had bin his own servants and ships. After the same manner
(pardon the comparison) you deal in the proof of this question. for
wheresoever you find in scriptures or fathers, hoc est corpus meum, this is my
body, or, this is my blood, or, my flesh is meat truly, etc. or, except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, etc. or, the bread
which I will give is my flesh, or the like tropical or sacramental phrase,
which ever carries with it a spiritual sense, presently you clap hands, lift
up Stentorian voices, and cry to the Catholics against us poor heretics,
that all these texts of Scriptures and testimonies of Fathers are on your side,
and prove your carnal presence: and condeme our opinion as heretical and
damnable, and then you register in your note-books (as in an Inventorie) all
these proofs for your own proper evidence, when as God knows, you are
neither Owners, Merchants, nor faithful Factors. And it shall be directly
prooved, that these texts of Scriptures and testimonies of Fathers, belong no
more to the proof of your carnal presence, then the Merchants ships and goods
of Athens belonged to frantic Thrasylaus. But now to prove that I speak,
that the Catholics may see, (yea and let master Henry Eytsimon truly
censure) we speak nothing without proof, I will begin to examine your
slips and sl^ights in this place of the 1. Cor. 11.

First, you bring a piece of a verse, so much as you think by the sound of
your ear will fit your purpose: then you cut off the beginning and ending of
the same verse, which would expound the Apostles meaning, and overthrow your
opinion. Then you join a piece of the 17 verse with the 24. verse, and
overskip the 25 and 26 verses, whi h (all that you left out, and cut off) does
first deliver Christ's institution: secondly, expounds his own meaning in
every particular point that is in controversy betwixt us: and thirdly,
overthrowes your opinions. Now, what moved you thus to mangle, cut off,
disioynt, and dismember this place of Paul (as you did with the text before)
let the Reader after my examination of your errors, judge.

But first I must deliver you this general rule observed of all sound Divines,
that all the Evangelists and Apostles doctrine, being pend by one spirit, do
agree in the matter of the Sacrament, one expounding another, as partly you
heard a little before. So that the three Evangelists must not be expounded to
contradict Paul, nor Paul expounded to contradict them, but all duke and truly
in the spirit of humility, being examined according to the Canon and rule of
the word of God, you shall find neither darkness in speech, nor difficulty
in sense, but that the simplest may know Christ's meaning.

You should have begun at the 23. verse, and so to the end of the 29. verse,
and that had been plain dealing. Christ's institution penned by Paul delivers
us four observations. First, Christ his action. Secondly, Christ's precept.
Thirdly, Christ's promise. Fourthlie, Christ's caution.

1 Christ's action, He gave thanks, brake bread, and took the cup, etc.
2. Christ's precept. 1. Take ye, eat ye. 2. This do as often as ye drink
it, and both, in rememberance of me. 3. The minister must show and preach the
Lords death till he come.
3. Christ's proud^e. 1. This is my body which is broken for you. 2. This is
the new Testament in my blood.
4. Christ's caution or caveat, Whosoever shall eat this bread or drink this
cup vnvvorthelie, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Thus you see plainly without any dismemb ing or curtalling. Christ's action,
precept, promise, and caution delivered out of the text,

Out of which place I observe for the Catholick^ better instruction and your
confutation, two things against you in this your skipping and curtalling of the
text. First, the comforts you conceal from them by this mangling of the text.
Secondly, the errors you still hold them in, in concealing the most part of
the text, first by following your Latten translation, and neglecting the holy
tongue (the Greek), wherein the holy Ghost pend this institution. You
translate, Which shall be delivered for you, for, which is broken for you. Ou^
of which I note, first you change the tense, that is in the Greek, that is,
the present tense, for so we have it, and you follow the Latten translation,
which is the future tense, Euallage.
and therefore not so comfortable. Christ uses a sweet figure of the time
present for the time to come, to assure our souls and consciences that
whatsoever Christ promises, is as surely to be performed (in his appointed
time) as if it were already done. And this tense Christ used to take all
doubts from his disciples, who in respect of their unworthiness might justly
have doubted, that Christ would not have died and shed his precious blood for
them, they being such unprofitable servants, and miserable sinners. But to take
away that doubt from them and the Church, now he assures both, that whatsoever
is promised by him, is as sure to be done, as if it were already done And this
staieth Christ's Church and every particular member of the same from distrusts,
doubts, grudgings, etc. in and under their several crosses, because they know
there is a joyful Iubile, and freedom for them purchased and prepared, and
shall as surely be accomplished, as if now it weere performed.

Now your altring of this particle, (is.) depriveth us of all this comfort.
Again, you following still your corrupt Latten translation, say, delivered for
you, whereas you should say as the Greek is, and as Christ says, Broken for
you, for this word broken is more Emphatical and piercing then delivered, for
it is one thing for a man to be delivered or to be betrayed for me, another
thing to be broken in pieces for me. Out of this I observe first the greatness
of my sin: secondly, the kindness and exceeding love of my Savior.

In the first, that Christ's birth and life (though both innocent) was not
sufficient to cleanse my sin. In the second, Christ would undergo shameful
buffets on the face, pricking of thorns upon his head, piercing nails into
his hands and feet, a bloody spear into his blessed side, before man's sin
could be satisfied, Gods wrath appeased, Satan, death and hell conquered:
this our living Christ would have his body broken for us, he would not leave
one sigh in his soul for our s^kes, nor one drop of blood in his body vnshed
for our sins. These comforts are expressed by this word broken, which are
not, nor can be gathered by this word delivered. Another comfort is concealed
from the Catholics in omitting the 25. verse, in these words, The new
Testament in my blood. Math. 25.40. Heb. 2.12.13.17. Ioh. 10.27.
Out of which every man may gather these comforts to himself by particular
application. First, that I am not a stranger to Christ, but one of his younger
brethren, and not only well known unto him: but also as well beloved of him:
which appears in this, that he did not only remember me in his last will,
but also most freely and liberally bequeached unto my soul and body most
precious Legacies, where we may find them registered and most safely kept in
Gods book, and daily pronounced in our Creed, as remission of sins of both
guilt and punishment: peace of conscience in this life: at the latter day
rising of my body from death and dust: and afterward life eternal both to
soul and body. These Legacies be bequeathed and contained in this Testament,
which he has not only sealed outwardly with Sacraments, but also inwardly
with his blood by faith, to assure us of the performance of his promise, and
therefore he adds in me blood: so that all other Testaments, Wills, B^ls or
Pardons, which are not sealed with Christ's blood, but with lead or wax, are but
counterfeit labels st^^cht to Christ's testament. by some false forgeries of
p^^ured N^^^ies, wherein they do falselie promis^ remission of sins and the
kingdom of heaven. Acts 5.3
These deceivers must be told, as Peter told Ananias: Why has Satan filled thy
heart that thou should lie, not only unto men, but also unto the holy
Ghost? In Ananias heart there was a wicked conceit, in his practices a wicked
deceit, and for his reward a sudden death. You Chaplens of the Pope, do tell
the poor people many ways to have remission of their sins besides Christ's
Testament, and Christ's blood, (which I will deliver particularly if I be
urged) but you are deceived, and so you deceive them, and because you would
keep them still blind, that they should neither see your deceit, nor their
own danger, therefore you kept this comfortable clause from them, The new
Testament in my blood, without which there is neither remission of sins, nor
saving of souls. Another comfort you conceal from the devout meditation of
every good Christian, which is, In rememberance of me.

Suetonius Plutach.
We read in histories after Julius Caesar was slain, Marcus Anthonius made an
Oration to the people of Rome, in which he showed Caesar's love, and pointed out
very Rhetoricallie Caesar's bounty to them while he lived, but in the heat of
his speech he made a pause, and showed the^ Caesar's robes sprinkled with his
princely blood, shed by the bloody hand of his cruel and malicious enemies:
which when the Cittiezens saw, (remembering h^s love) presently they ran
upon the murderers and slew them. Did the Citizens of Rome (being Pagans)
revenge Caesar's death upon his enemies, only remembering his love and
liberality? Then with what Christian courage and spiritual manhood, ought we
that profess to be Christians, revenge our Christ's death upon his cruel,
bloody, and malicious enemies, which so merciless put him to death? and these
enemies be our sins, for he died for our sins: which, Romans 4. the last
verse.
let us mortify, nay murder them: let us kill surfeiting by abstinence,
adultery by continency, cruelty by mercy, hatred by love, covetousness by
alms, superstition by religion, etc. These and the like consorts of sin put
our Caesar (Christ) to death. Therefore when we hear not Marcus Anthonius, but
any man of God out of the book of God, preach unto us Christ's bloody passion
that died in our quarrel, and shed his blood for our sins: let the
rememberance of his precious death and merciful deliverance, put us in mind
to revenge his death, by killing our sins which slew our Savior, and
endeavor to serve him with all thankfulness in a life spiritual, who has
delivered us freely from death eternal. Now see what comfort the Catholics
loose for the lack of this Apostolical rememberance of me, and this comes
by your omitting of that you should not pass without expressing the true
tenor of it, as you received it of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11.22.
for the profit of his Church. Thus much touching the spiritual comforts
concealed from the people by your skipping of Scriptures: now let us see what
errors purposelie you seek to cover by this course.

First, if you had put down these words, Errors.
In rememberance of me, and, till I come, these two had overthrown your
carnal presence, for if the bread and wine must be received in rememberance
of Christ, then bread and wine are not Christ substantiallie, corporally, and
by way of transubstantiation. And if Christ be risen, as the Angel said, math.
28.6
and as we in our Creed confess, and that we must receive this Sacrament
(...) his rememberance till he come, then Christ being not come, but to come,
is not, nor cannot be carnally and bodily under the forms of bread and wine,
as you fondly imagine.

And these words (do this in rememberance of me) condemns all your Masses,
that be said in rememberance of He-Saints and Shee-Saints, Missale. Printed at
Venice. 1494.
and no Saints, a^ your Popes, Bishops, and in rememberance of Pilgrims,
Mariners, women in travaill, and mutten o^ beasts. So that all the foresaid
Masses said or sung in rememberance of Saints, persons, or diseases, be
abominable, unless you will say (which were damnable to think) that those
Saints, Popes, Bishopes, Pilgrims, etc. died for you. But I will cease to
speak o^ those abominable abuses, until I come to the controversy of the
Mass, and yet then nothing but what shall be found in your own books, whose
chapters, leaves, pages, if not lines, shall be quoted truly without fraud or
affection. Another error you would cover in leaping over the 26. verse, in
these words, you do show the Lords death till he come: Chrisosto^^ Tom. 4.
Hom. 27. upon these words: Facietis commemorationem salutis vestrae and
beneficij mei. This showing of the Lords death consists in preaching and
expounding some scripture, wherein the communicants must be instructed of the
horror of their sin, the greatness of Gods love, the price of the precious
merits of Christ^ blessed passion, which is the remission of sins, and our
reconciliation to Gods favor, through his bitter and bloody passion: And this
condemns your foolish May games and Puppet-plaies, in your va^^e showing of
Christ his death by such idle gestures and dumb shows, without any
glorification of GODS name, o^ edification of Christ his people, that I dare
boldly say, and so God willing will plainly prove that from your first
Introibo ad Aliare Dei, which is the beginning of your Mass, until you come
to the last hoe, see missa est, there is nothing but magical superstition,
heresy and idolatry, without verity or antiquity. Now let the Catholics
judge what wrong is done them, when in stead of a comfortable declaration of
the Lords death, they have a histrionicall dumbe-shew, without true
signification or sense warranted from Christ's truth. And whereas you exclaim
against us, for allowing tropes and figures, and Sacramental phrases in the
handling of this controversy: if you had not concealed this phrase, This cup
is the new Testament is my blood, the Catholics might have seen your error,
and that we in so doing, only immitate Christ, whom you should rather follow
then the precepts and doctrine of men, whose precepts are no warrants for you
nor me to build our faith upon: nor for the Catholics to imitate. And you
with us must either say that Christ used a double figure, or else most absurdly
confess, that not only the wine is transubstantiated and changed into
Christ's last Testament: but that the challice or cup is transubstantiated into
his last testament, and is his testament substantiallie, properly, and
reallie, the accidents of the challice only remaining: that is to say, the
height, depth, weight, color, etc. Now if you cannot deny a figure in the
challice, how dare you for the like or worse inconvenience deny it in the
bread. This you thought to omit, hoping thereby to cover this your error. But
it was ill done to deceive the Catholics, who so liberally relieve you, and
so dearly have loved you. And whereas you translate challice for cup, telling
the people that the challice consecrated by you, is holier then other usual
cups, and that Christ used in the institution a challice and no usual
drinking-cup, I say in saying thus, you show your self ignorant in the Greek
tongue, Poterion.
wherein Christ spoke it, and the Evang. writ it: for they all, and so has
Paul but one usual word which signifies a usual drinkin^ cup, and no charmed
Challice, as you ydlie and vain^ inform the Catholics.

And now to your 27. verse, which you would co^ple to your 24. verse, which
thus you recite ve y co^ruptlie, who so does eat unworthily, etc. shall be
gu^tie of the body and blood of the Lord, but if you ha^ meant plainly and
truly, you should have reci ed a^ the Apostles words in this manner: whosoever
shall ^a^ this bread and drink this cup of the Lord vnvverthel^^ shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Bread ramaines after Consecration and therefore no carnal presence, and
likewise the Cup and therefore no^ Transubstansiation in either.
Out of which I observe, that you would cover, an^ conceal that which
overthrowes your carnal presence: for if bread remain after consecration,
the^ there is no carnal presence, but bread remaine^h afte^ consecration,
therefore there is no carnal presene. And because this verse shows to the
world that ther^ is bread after consecration, therefo e you cut off the part of
the verse, which is very deceitfully done. An^ leave this word bread out after
consecration to blin^ the eyes of the simple. And also you cut off the ne^
words, to cover other two errors, the words be these Or drink the Challice of
the Lord vnvvorthelie. Out o^ which I note, first, that you keep this back,
hoping thereby to establish your half communion under on^ kind, that the
Catholics might think that the receiving of bread were sufficient, because
(you say) Christ's body must needs even by the necessity of concomitancie
have blood in it, Concomita^cie suine what younger then your Transubstantiation
both forged by your selves never known in Christ's Church for a 1000 years at
least, And therefore they are to new to be Catholic and no stra^g to be true.
and therefore it is no need to receive the cup: which if it be true, (but I
a^sure it is most false) then Christ was deceived in his wisdom, and the
Apostles and primitive Church in their practice, which I hope you da^e not say
for sin and shame. And therefore give over these irreligious practices of
Additions, Subtractions, Interpositions, and vain expositions, with new
Inkhorne-termes of ^^mitancie, and confess Christ his a melent and A^^olicall
truth truly.

Thus much to give the Catholics a taste of the (...) you offer them, in
lulling them a sleep in the ^^e of ignorance and superstition, whereas they
^^ld be most willing and ready to obey the aun^t, Revel. 14.6. Romans 1.16. 2 Thessalonians: 1.8.
powerful, and everlasting Gospel of Jesus ^ist, if you d d not mislead them
by your wilful ^^ors, and keep back from them the reading of the ^^ptures,
which holds them and hardens them in ^^usancie. But take heed, least you by
this ignorance (which you keep them, and the disobedience to the ^ospell in
which you letter them, you with them and (...) them, hazard not that doleful
taste and torment ^ep^ted for wilful ignorant Recusants of Christ his ^ospell,
where it is said: Rendering vengeance in fla^ng fire to the^^ that knevv not
God, nor obey not the gos^^ of Jesus Christ. Now Gentlemen, if you be authors
^f their sins, you must be partakers of their punish^^^t; which both the Lord
in mercy prevent. The Text is the Lord, not Christ, the writer mistook at the
Author I blame not.
Now flows another part of your proof drawn out of part of the 27. verse,
in these words: Shall be guilty (...) the body and blood of Christ:

Out of these words some late writers since your ^^ansubstansiation was
invented, would prove two ^ine questions that are in controversy betwixt you
^^d us.

1. The first, is your carnal presence of Christ in ^^e Sacrament.

The second, that the wicked do eat the body ^^d drink the blood of Christ

In handling and aunswering these, I shall hardly ^ver the one from the other,
but as you infer, that the granting of the one confirms the other: So must
in confuting the one destroy the other, and so one answer will serve to
confute both.

Rh^m: Te^t: 1. Cor: 11: Sect 16.
Thus you record to the worlds wonder, (and Rome and Rhemes shame) against God,
Christ, Scriptures, and Fathers, that ill livers and Infidels, eat the body
and drink the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, and your reason there
follows: that they could not be guilty of that they received not, and that
it could not be so heinous an offense, for any man to receive a piece of
bread or a cup of wine though they were a true Sacrament. First, old father
Origin shall answer you, who says, Origin super Math: 15, page 2^.
^ st verus cibus quem nemo malus potest edere: It is true meat which no wicked
man can eat. Here Origin condemns the Rhemists, Romanists, and all late
Priests and Jesuits, for holding this opinion i^urious to Christ's death, and
all true Catholics says.

But you may object against Origin, and say, the Rhemists laid down their
opinion, and gave reasons to confirm it: But where is Origens reason by which
he proves ^^s former position, that no wicked man can eat Christ's body?
Super Math. 26.
forsooth it is in his Comentarie upon your text, brought forth of matthew in
these words: Panis quem silius Dei corpus suum esse dicit, verbum est
nutritori^^ animarum: the bread which the son of God said to be his body, is
the nourishing word of our souls.

Out of which this we gather, that seeing this bread or meat is the
nourishment of our souls, and not of our bodies, he spoke of the heavenly
part of the sacrament. For we know in common sense, that bread and wine cann^t
nourish the soul, but the body, and I have proved by scriptures and Fathers
before, that the hand and mouth of the soul, is a lively and justifying
faith, which you and all your side cannot deny but the wicked want Now if the
wick^d have no mouth nor stomach to rec^^^ this spiritual food, and digest
it, as the foresaid Fa^ (...) have affirmed, why do you say, that the wicked
and Infidels can eat the body of Christ, wanting both hands, mouth, and
stomach?

And the scriptures call wicked men dead men: Now you know dead men cannot eat
meat corporal, Chrysostom. Hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
no more can the wicked which are dead spirituallie, eat meat caelestiall. And
Chrysostom says, Let no Judas stand to, no covetous person, if any be a
disciple, let him be present, for this Table receives no such as Judas or
Magna, for Christ says, I keep my Passover with my disciples.

And to conclude with Augustine, Tract. 26. super lib. page 175. Qui non manet
in Christo and in quo non mane^ Christus procul dubio, etc. He that abides not
in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, out of doubt eats not spirituallie
his flesh, nor drinks his blood, although carnally and visiblie he press
with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but rather
eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing to his judgment, and the
reason follows, Quia i^mundus, etc. because he is unclean in heart, and
presumes to come to the Sacrament of Christ, which no man can worthily
receive, Math. 5.
unless he be pure and clean in heart: as Christ says, Blessed are the pure
in heart for they shall see God.

Out of Augustine I observe against both your opinions these things:

First, he makes a difference of Christ's flesh, and the Sacrament of Christ's
flesh, for they be two things, and to be distinguished with their several
substances and properties, and not to be confounded or transubstantiated one
into the other, and so the nature of bread perish, as you untruely imagine and
teach.

Secondly, that the wicked receive and grind with their teeth and swallow
with their throat the outward Sacrament, that is, the outward vis^ble creatures
of bread and wine, to their judgment or condemnation, because they presume to
come without a clean heart and conscience purified by faith. Acts. 15 9
But the godly eat the heavenly part of the Sacrament: which is Christ with
his benefits, because they dwell in Christ (by faith) and Chrih in them (by his
spirit) as has been plainel^ handled before.

And now I will be bold to urge your own Pope ^ decrees against you: Part 3.
distinct 2. cap. 65.
Qui discordus a Christo etc whosoever dissenteth from Christ, does neither
eat his flesh nor drink his blood, but the wicked distent from Christ,
therefore they neither eat Christ's flesh no^ dr^^ his blood. And cap. 69.
following quie unque panem etc. Whosoever eats this bread the Lord, shall
live for ever, but the wicked live nor for ever, therefore the wicked eat not
this bread the Lord.

Now Gentlemen, I would feign see how you can disprooue these Fathers and old
Popes, and satisfy the Catholics in this case: but I shall have a f^t place
to speak of the unreasonableness of this opinion in the title of the Mass,
where I must show to the Catholics, the Popes, Priests, and Jesuits
shameful opinions, that you think it no inconvenience not only for the
wicked, but also for all such bruit beasts, as cats or dogs, rats or mice, hogs
or swine, to eat the blessed body, and drink the precious blood of Jesus
Christ: This you blush not to print, but I protest, my hand shakes and my heart
quakes to write it, because it is so monst^ous and beast ^e a blasphemy to
that blessed body and that precious blood, that suffered and was shed for my
salvation.

Now for this second part of your Rhemish note upon this place, Chrysostom. Tom.
3. Hom. 60. and 61. de lum^n^^bu^ iudigne divina and sancto mysteria praecipu^
de caena Domin^ and de baptismate.
which is, How can a man be guilty of Christ's body, if he touch not Christ's
body? I had rather Chrysostom upon this text in one of his works should
aunswe e you then I, his words be these: Nam si Reg^am contami^antes purpuram,
similiter puniuntur, sicut, etc. For if he that has disteined, violated, or
polluted the ^^gs robes, whether it be of purple or some other ^^ter, shall be
as severelie in justice punished, as if he had rent the^: Even so it shall be
with such as receive ^he Lords body unpura mente, with an unprepared and
^^lean mind, they shall be punished with equal torments with such as nailed
him to the cross.

Out of which I observe, first, that Chrysostom condemns your carnal
presence and corporal eating, in ^^ing you they must be eaten with the mind,
not with the mouth: but of this we have sufficiently spoken of before.

Secondly, by comparison, he shows you how you may be guilty of treason
against the kings person (though he neither touch nor hurt his person) in
offering disgrace but to his garments his person being abse^t And as he that
contuineliously receives the princes seal (though of wax) is guilty of the
Majesty of the Prince, not which he receives, but which he despises: so he
that eats this bread, and drinks this cap of the Lord without due
preparation (as aforesaid) considering they are seals of Christ's promised
benefits, purchased in his bitter and blessed passion, commits high treason
against Christ: though in deed in substance they receive but bread and wine.
And as a man may be guilty of treason in renting, defacing, or ^^pping the
kings picture, seal, or coin, though the king be not locallie in place: so
the wicked in the Sacraments which are Christ's seals, which being abused by
them, they are guilty of Gods judgments, though Christ be not enclosed
locallie in the bread and wine.

And what Chrysostom speaks hear of the Lords Supper, the same he does of
Baptism, and says, a man may be as well guilty of the Lords body and blood
in contemning Baptism, which is but a seal of (...) washing in the blood of
Christ, though he never washed but in water, and alleges Paul, Heb. 10.1^.
saying, Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye^ shall he be worthy which
treads under foot the lonne of God, and counts the blood of the testament
as an unholy thing, etc. These Fathers have answered you and I hope will
satisfy fully the indifferent Reader.

Now three sorts of men are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The first
are plain Atheists, that are without God or godliness in this present world
and such eat this bread unworthily, and therefore are guilty of Christ's
body and blood.

Three sorts of men guilty of the Lo: ^die.
2 The second sort have a historical faith, and a general knowledge, and
believe that whatsoever is taught in Gods book is true, but they lack
apprehension and application to make a particular and holy use of the same, and
therefore if such come and eat of this bread, they are guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord.

3 The third sort have a lively apprehending and applying faith, yet in their
life they slip and fall, yea sometimes very grievouslie, yet they awake and
weep with Peter, and repent for the same. All these are said to eat
unworthily, but the first two sorts unto their condemnation.

The third sort for their faults, frailties, negligences, and undue
preparation, are in this life of the Lord corrected, least with the world they
should be damned The two first sorts eats only the outwardelements: the
last sort eats the body of Christ and drinks the blood of Christ. And now
to your second proof out of Saint Paul.

1. Cor. 10.16. The challice of benediction which vv^^ bless, Catho. Priests.
is it not the communication of the body of Christ? And the bread which we
besse, is it not the participation of his flesh?


GEntlemen, ye wrong the Apostles text: Rider.
first in your abuse of words, Verse. 21.
secondly in mistaking the sense. Your words be these, The challice of
benediction: Paul's words in Greek that must be judge betwix^ us, and which we
do follow (if we will follow Christ) are these. The cup of thansgiving. And
the holy Ghost so expounds his own meaning after, calling it peculum Domini,
the cup of the Lord. But you are much to be blamed of all good men, because you
had rather follow some late corrupt translation, and use some superstitious
Inkhome-termes lately devised, and so forsake the old Apostolical phrase
which the holy Ghost uses in that holy tongue, and in which it is still
recorded for our instruction^ either confess your ignorance in the Greek, or
your malice against the truth, that the Catholics be no longer seduced by
you, that long trusted in you and to your doctrine.

Again, you say, The bread which we bless, we say to Paul said, and the
holy Ghost pend, The bread which we break: Alas, alas, what sin do
you commit in thus seducing Christ's flock, and the Queens subjects, who
hitherto have builded their says v^pon your ba^e words.

Is this plain dealing with Gods heritage? are you Catholic Priests? I pray
you certify the Catholics what tongue or translation has it thus as you pen
it, The bread which we bless: I tell you plainly, (yet in charity) that
you do belie the Text, falsify the tongue, and seek to keep the people in
blind ignorance, and superstitious palpable darkness, to their everlasting
condemnation, unless the Lord recall them, and they repent them. Paul words
are these in Greek, and so your own Ieromes translation has them: The bread
which we break. But you are so besotted with the crossing of your fingers,
which you tell the simple people is the true Catholic blessing, that you
forget and forgo the true blessing of the cup, which is the Apostolical
thanksgiving to God for ou^ redemption purchased in Christ's blood, whereof the
cup i^ the true sign.

Again, we say as the holy Ghost indicted it, and Paul writ it, The communion
of the body of Christ: you say as no learned man or the Greek text ever said,
the participation of his flesh. Thus much I have showed how untruly you deal:
First, in abusing the words of the Apostle: secondly, in seducing and
deceiving the Catholics. Let here the charitable Catholics judge how you
will abuse their ears with fables, that dare thus falsify the plain text.

Error in the sense of the Text.
Now I come to show how you mistake the sense of the words in the text, seeking
by indirect wresting to make the text prove your error, which it denies in
flat terms and truth. For I assure the Catholics, that not one word,
sil^able, letter, or title of this text once sou^d^ of your carnal presence.

Rhem. Testament. 1. cor. 10. sect. 4.
You follow the Rhemist, who in this place thus expounds the words of the
Apostle, The cup which vvi^ bl^sse, that is to say, the challice of
consecration which we Apostle^ and priest by Christ's commis^ion do consecrate.
etc. and afterward it follows, the Apostle expressly refers h^ benediction
to the Challice, and not to God, making the holy body and the communicating
thereof, the effect of the benediction Now let me entreat you to answer ^e
and the Catholics, but these necessary qvestions drawn out of this your
own opi^ion.

1. First, by what scripture do you prove that you ^ee Apostles?

2 Secondly, by wha^ scripture do you prove that you are Priests?

3 Thirdly, by what scripture do you prove your commission to consecrate
Challices?

4 Fou thly, by what scripture do you prove, that the holy blood of Christ
is an effect of your benediction of the cup?

5 Last ie, by what scripture prove you that this blessing or thanksgiving is
re^e^^ed to the Challice and not to God?

V^l sse you prove these points by canonical scriptures to be true, Apostles
ye are not. Gall 1.1. 1. Cor. 9.1. 2. Acts, 9.15. Romans 1.1.
(which you shall never do) they bind no ^an^ conscience to believe them or
you. Against the fi st I thus object, that you are no Apostles, and thus I
prove it. A true Apostle mvst be called by Christ immediately, and that you
are not. He must see the Lord Jesus in the flesh, wh ch you have not. He must
have his immediate commission from Christ to preach every where, which neither
Priest, Semynarie, Jesuit, Cardinal, no^ Pope can have, as your own
consciences full well does know, Gall 2. Ephesians. ^.
and therefore you are not Christ's Apostles. The true Apostles were equal in
authorit e, you disdain i^, nay more, you have made against this, a new
article of the Popes supremacy, and whole vol^^es of Cardinals Primacies,
Jesuits Excellencies, and Priests Soveraignties.

But I will say to you, Ter tuia^ contra. Marcion.
as Tertullian said to Marcion the heretic: If you be Prophets, foretell us
some things to come: if that you be Apostles, preach every where, and agree
with the Apostles in doctrine. For whosoever preach not the same doctrine the
Ap^stles did, have not the same commission the Apostles had. But you late
Priests and Jesuits preach not the sa^^ doctrine the Apostles did: Jesuits and
Priests be no Apostles.
therefore you have not the same commission the Apostles had. The mayor has no
difficulty: the minor is so plain it needs no proof the conclusion is
inevitable.

Priests ye are not.
We read of four kinds of Priests in Gods Booke^ three of them in the old
Testament, and one in the new. First, Because ye will not offer the flesh of
beasts.
The first after the order of Aaron: and one other after the order of
Melchisedechs and the third af^ther the order of Baall. After Aaroa^ order you
will no^ be: And after Melchised ch: you cannot be: And concerning the third
order, I would you were as fre^ from the ydolatrie of that salt order, as you
would be free of the imputation of their heresies. Secondly, none after
Melchisedechs order but Christ only.


Now 1. Pet. 2 9. Exodus 19.6.
Saint Peter in the new Testament seueth down a fourth order of Priests, which
is a kingly o^ royal Priesthood, but that is spiritual, not carnal^ inward,
not outward, common to all believers, no^ proper (as you imagine) to any
natural order, or ecclesiastical function. For this is sound divinity, whi^^
you shall never disprooue: that the office of ^acu^cers and sacrificing, is
either singular to Christ, in respect of his sacrifice propitiatory only
upon the cross: or else common to all true Christian^, in respect of their
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving: The name and office of
Priests, abused by Priests.
neither shall you ever find this word Sacerdo^, ever applied in the new
Testament to any Ecclesiastical order and function of men. And therefore you
deceive the people by this name of Priest which is no more proper to you, then
to every bele^ving Christian. But it is likely you will give me occasion to
speak of this in the controversy o^ your M ss^, and therefore J will here be
the brief in this place.

Thirdly, in what place of scripture did Christ gro^ you commission to
consecrate challices, or to ma^^ ^^ie challice more holy by your charmed
consecrati^n, then Christ's cup was in his blessed institution, which did none
of your consecration, for this the Catholics must know by the premises
formerly handled, that your consecration is not like to Christ's consecration:
for either Christ's blessing or thanksgiving, with the whole action of Christ in
the institution, was sufficient to consecrate or insufficient: if you will
afford Christ that favor that it was sufficient, then yours is frivolous.

And whereas we use the same sanctification Christ did, how dare you say ours
is defective, without blasphemy to Christ's institution? But this your usurped
title of sanctity which ye attribute to your selves, in making the people
believe that you can make one cup (water s^lte, or season) more holy then an
other, by your fingred blessing: is untrue and a pharisaicall brag. This
maintains your Priesthood in glory, pomp, and worldly estimation, but
has brought many of s^elie Catholics to beggerie, ignorance, and gross
superstition.

Fourthlie, by what scripture can you prove that Christ's holy blood is but an
effect of your consecration, or benediction of the cup? If Christ's blood be an
effect of your cup benediction, then your cup benediction is the cause of
Christ's holy blood. O hellish and damnable divinity: as if a sinful ignorant
Priest could by his magical consecration, make the holy blood of Christ my
Savior, which was shed on the cross for my sins. Now Catholics look to
your selves, I mean to your souls: You cannot prove it either by scripture or
fathers.
for this is the doctrine of Rome and Rhemes fitte^ to be taught in hell by
fiendes, then maintained in earth by Priests. Fifthlie and lastly, by what
scripture do you prove, (nay by what ancient Father) that this blessing or
thanksgiving is referred to the cup or challice, and not unto God: scriptures
you have none, and fathers of the first six hundred yeare^ never heard of it.
And that the Catholics may le^ the antiquity and verity of this out
doctrine, and the noveltie and heresy of yours, I will only produc^ but two
learned Fathers with us against you, and forbear to allege the rest, till
you give me furthe^ occasion.

Chrysostom. super 1 Cor. 10.
Chrysostom upon this place, calls it the cup o^ blessing, because when we
have it in our hands, w^^^ admiration and a certain horror of that
vnspeakable^ gift, we praise and bless him, because he has sh d h^^ blood,
that we should not remain in error: and has not only shed it, but made us
all partakers of it. (...) like sort did Photius and Oecumenius expound thi^
word, Photius and Occumen^us.
which we bless, which having in our hands bless him, which has
graciously given us his blood: that is, we give him thanks, or which we prepare
when we bless or give thanks.

Now the Catholics may see by the ancient fathers (whom your selves do brag
of) that they condemn your cup blessed exposition. And the Catholics may see
as in a glass, that we join with the scriptures and fathers in the true
sense of these words The cup which we bless: and that your exposition i^
erroneous and superstitious, and therefore to be rec^nted by you, and shunned
by the Catholics, and my reasons be drawn out of the foresaid fathers, not
made on my own fingers.

1 Fi st, he says that benediction, blessing, or thanksgiving, is referred to
him that shed his blood for us: I hope you will not say the cup shed any blood
for us.

2 Secondly, this father says, that blessing God and praising God is all one:
and therefore when we say, the cup of thanksgiving, we follow Christ, Paul, the
Greek text, and the old fathers. And when you translate it, The challice of
benediction, it is flat contrary to Christ Paul, verity, and antiquity. And
there is as great difference betwixt your opinion and the old fathers faith, is
betwixt praising with mouth, and crossing with fingers: nay, as much as betwixt
your superstitious challice and our soule-saving Christ: for so, if you mark
the fathers words, the difference stands.

The text it self offers us three things in a comfortable distinction, and you
would confound them with your new imagined transubstansiation.

1 The first is Christ's body crucified, and his blood shed, with all his
purchased benefits,

2 Secondly, our communion and fellowship, which all believers have in that
crucified Christ, and those soul saving merits.

3 Thirdly, the outward seals of those benefits which are called, the cup
which we bless, and the bread which ^^e break to witness to the world, and
to confirm to our selves, the fruition and possession of all those benefits.

Now if I should say, that the bread and cup being outward seals, were our
communion with Christ: the wicked would laugh at my folly, though the godly
would pity my ignorance in the truth or my malice against the truth: and
the reason is this, because the seal be things outward, and the communion of
Christ's body and blood, be things inward: the one sensible, the other
spiritual and intellectual: and as much difference it betwixt them, as there
is betwixt outward and inward: sensible, and intellectual: so much difference
there is betwixt the outward seals of Christ's body and blood and his body and
blood.

And if the seals cannot be changed into the communion of Christ's body and
blood, but remain st ll in their several natures and substances, every one
performing his several distinct office, much less can they be reallie and
substantiallie changed into Christ's body and blood, which are things more
remote, but mos^ impossible. And if you had added the next verse the Apostle
had made it plain in showing you a doubt^ communion sealed in this Sacrament.
The first, our communion with Christ and his benefits. The second, ou^
communion amongst our selves, 1. Soli.
which both are proper only to gods church, 2. Omni.
and to every one of gods church, and all ways to gods Church. 3. Jemper.


Now let the learned Judge whether you or we, misconster scripture, wrest
fathers, deceive Christ's flock and the Queens subjects and peruerte the true
meaning of this Text. And now to the next.

Catholic a Priests. This council consils of 318. fathers.
The second Proof by Counsels and Fathers.

Concilium Nicen: cap: 14. Anno: 363. No rule or custom does permittae, that
they which have not the authority to offer the sacrifice, should give it to
the^ that offer the body of Christ.


Rider.
GEntelme^ you are possessed with a threefold erro^ which is the cause when you
read the scriptures Counsels, and fathers, you misunderstand the^ your first
error is, when you understand that spoken of the outward Elements, with these
three Sophistical points you pervert all the fathers you bring for this
purpose and deceue the Catholics.
which is meant of the inward invisible grace. Your second error is when you
refer that to the visible parts of the body, which they intended to the
invisible powers of the mind and soul. Thirdly, your former two errors beget
a third eror which is your mistaking the state of our question: And so whereas
you should prove the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacraments: you offer to
prove the matter but of that we have spoken before.

Thus if you will read the scripturs, fatheres and Counsels with these.3.
cautions or derectio^s, you shall easily see how far thus long you have gone
from the truth and misled the Queens subjects.

Now with Gods permission we will proceed to the ^e examination of your
proof, as it is alleged out of your own Colen print, Ex officina Iohannis
Quin^d Typographi, Anno Domini, 1561. which you cannot deny, it is in the
first Tome and the fourteenth Chapter, and the two hundredth fifty five page of
the first edition, and the Chapter begins thus: Peruenit ad sanctum Concilium
quod in loci^ quibusdam and ciuita^^us presbyteris Sacramenta Diaconi
porrigant. Then follows your fraction (very abruptly) in the midst of a
sentence: Hoc neque regula neque consuetudo, etc.

The sacred Council is aduertized, that in certain places and Cities the
Dea^ons do reach and give the sacraments to the Priests (all this you leave
out, and then follows your weak warrant) Noe rule or custom does permite etc.

I pray you what one word of this proves your Carnal presence? Let me know
it for my learning and the Catholics better Instruction: if you would gather
out of this word Sacrifice: then you are deceued, for that Council in another
place calls it Sacrificium Eucharisticum a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, not propitiatory.

And if out of these words The body of Christ: the council expounds their
meaning in that which you omit, and purposely conceal, when they call that
Sacrifice, and the body of Christ by the name of Sacraments given by the
Deacons to the priests: for the Deacons delivered them after Consecration to
the priests and still were Sacramenta, Sacraments, not the body or blood of
Christ made of bread and wine by the Priest: for the Sacrament and Christ's
body differ as much, as the lamb and the Passover, circumcision and the
covenant, the washing of new birth and regeneration, for the one is the outward
seal, the other the inward grace, and here is another error of yours of the
second and third kind, in referring that to the mouth which is proper to our
faith: and still mistaking the matter for the manner.

Catho. Priests.
Concilium Ephesiuum in Epist. ad Nestorium: We approach to the mystical
benedictions, and we are sanctified, And this had 200. Fathers.
being partakers of the holy body and precious blood of Christ.
THis your proof is truly quoted, page 535. and the Epistle begins thus,
Religioso and Deo amabil^ consacerdoti Nostorio, Rider.
Cyrillus, etc. The Council calls it a mystical benediction, no miraculous
transubstansiation. And this neither proves your opininion, nor disprooues
ours: for you say, ye are made partakers of the holy body and precious blood
of Christ, and so say we: but you say with the late church of Rome, that you
are made partakers of that holy body and precious blood, by your mouth,
teeth, throat, and stomach; And we sey with Scriptures, fathers, and the old
Church of Rome, that we are made partakers of Christ's body and blood, by the
hand, mouth, and stomach of our souls, which is a lively faith in Christ
crucified: as you have heard before. And thus you refer that to the visible
parts of the body (as your mouth, teeth, and stomach) which the scriptures
and fathers meant of the invisible powers of the soul, as our Euel^e he faith,
being the spirit all hand, mouth, and stomach thereof. And here is your
error of the second k nde. And so your two testimonies out of those two
Councels, are proofs neither proper nor pertinent brought only to dazell the
eyes of the sim^le, and o^m^^e the minds of the weak. But I refer^e the the
ba^nesse of you^ curse, and the weakness of your proof^s, (nay your
disproofes) to the censure of the indifferent Reader. Only giving the Reader
this note by the way, that these Councels were called by the Emperor, not by
the Pope, nay the Pope was not president in these Council, but other Bishops
chosen by the Emperor. And in the Council of Nice the Popes Legate had but the
fourth room, no better account was made of him. For in deed he then was no
Pope but an Archbishop. Thus the Reader may see that these Councels be against
you. And now to your testimonie^ out of the fathers,

The flesh is fed by the body and blood of Christ, Catholic Priests,
Tertullian de resurrectione caruis, floruit 200.
that the soul might be fat in God.
OVt of this, thus you frame an argument (as sometimes an old Roman friend of
yours did,) to maintain your carnal presence. The soul ^led by that which
the body eats, Rider.
but the soul is sed by the flesh of Christ, therefore the body eats the
flesh of Christ in the Sacrament.

I might as fitly invert this argument upon you, as ^learned man of our side
once inverted it, saying. As the soul feeds upon Christ, so does the body:
but the soul is fed by faith, therefore the body is fed by faith, which is
very absurd and improper, yet as partinent and as proper as yours.

And here you should remember the old distinction of the fathers spoken of
before. The Sacrament is one thing, and the matter of the sacrament is another
thing. Outwardly the body eats the sacrament, and inwardly the soul by
faith feeds on the body of Christ. As in Baptism the flesh is washed by water
(as that old father says in that place) that the soul may be purged
spirituallie: so our bodies eat the outward Sacrament, that the soul may be
fed of God. Again, it (...) not general is true, that whatsoever the body
eats, the soul is fed by the same. And if you would propound but
particularly this instance of eating oneli^ in the Sacrament, then the
argument proven nothin^ standing upon mere perticulers.

Moreover, the body and soul are fed by the sam^ ^ear in the sacrament, but
not after the same manner For the body is nourished by the natural property
of the Elements which they have to nourish: But the soul by the sacramental
and supernatural power, a^ they are signs and scales of heavenly graces. An^
we grant that the soul is sed by the precious bodi^ and blood of Christ, but
not after a carnal manner, a^ you say, but spiritualitie by says.

Again, a mean Scholar in Gods book, may se^ this phrase is figurative, and
therefore the sense spiritual. For how can a soul be sat in God? will ye^ say
it is a corporal fatness, such as is proper to bodies? I think ye will not,
I know you should not then this place is in pertine pille brought, neither
savoring of sense, ^or^n^reable to that you allege it. For if you would have
read the same Father in the sam^ book following, be would have told you so,
for (sait^ he) the word which was made flesh which is Christ Devorandus est
(...), page: 47: printed (...) pa^^^: 1580.
^uminandus intellell^ and f de aspere^^^. This Lord Christ must be swallowed
whole by heauing, must be meditated upon of remembered by understanding, and
digested by faith Now you see Tertullian of your own Parts print aunsweres
you, and exp^nn^s himself. And seeing no man can better expound Tertullian his
meaning then Tertullian himself therefore have brought him from your own
Catholic Press of Paris to condemn all Jesuits and Priest that sh ll set a
litterall since upon an allegor^^ll phrase only to deceive the simple plain
Catholics and to abuse the godly learned Fathers, by an ignora^^ and fo^tish
construction. And now to the rest of you^ proofs that follow.

And in bless us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, Catholic
Priests.
that we might he nourished by that, by which we have been red^emed.
A Blind man may see that you never read this in Cyprian your self, Cyprian
de Duplici Marts floruit: 249. Rider.
or else that you understand them not. For Cyprian says not, God has left in
his flesh: but Reliquit nobis edendam carnem suam, ^ubquis bibendum sanguinem,
etc. he has left us his flesh meat, and his blood to drink. I pray you
pardon me to ask you which is the nominative case to the tube, is Deus? no,
but if you had begun seven lines sooner, as you ought in deed to have done,
at Nemo ma^em charitatem habet, etc. you should have found the right nominative
case, that there might have been not only a grammatticall concord, but also a
Theological harmony, and then the sense had been plain. For it was he that
died for his enemies, that left us his flesh, etc. And that was Christ, not God
the father. But you begun (after your accustomed manner) in the midst of a
sentence, mistaking the nominative case to the verb; and so lay down heresy
for divinities for God the father has neither flesh nor blould. But if I
should help you with a charitable construction, by attributing that to
Christ's Deity, which is proper to his humanity, yet you still have wrested
the father and abused the Reader.

But thus Cyprian is to be read^ Christ truth left us his flesh to eat and his
blood to drink: so we confess it, we believe is, and we teach it: but to be
eaten and drunk spirituallie by says, not corporally, nor ^^turallie, as you
imagine. For this is the inward invisible Grace of the Sacrament that you
propound.

Now how this flesh and blood of Christ is to be e^ten, or how Christ's flesh
and blood are naturalli^ substantiallie, and reallie under the forms of bread
an^ wine, which is our question, you cannot prove b^ Cyprian: and so still you
propound the matter to v^ when you should prove the manner to us: and here
(...) your error in the third kind, (if not in more) before specified.

Cyprian de Cana Domini nu. 9.
And here you bring a testimony out of Cyprian where he speaks not
properly of the sacrament but of the threefold Martyrdom, which he gathere^
out of the death of Christ: and therefore you show (...) great weakness in
running to that Tractate, wherea^ you might have spedde better (if you had
list) neere^ home. For if you had read or would read tha^ Father upon his
Treatise of the Lords Supper, he would have either changed your mind, or
hardened your heart, but howsoever, discoverd your errors.

And that the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of Christ's blood, is not a
gross corporal swallowing of his blessed flesh and precious blood, What it is
to eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood.
as you deem; but that Esus carnis Christ's, est quaedam aeuiditas, and quoddam
desyderium manendi in ipso, etc. The eating of Christ's flesh is a certain
egernesse and a certain desire to abide in Christ, etc. And three lines before
this he says. Our abiding in him is our cating of him: and the drink is a
certain incorporation into him.

And in the latter end of the Treatise, you shall find that Father touch the
point in question betwix us: How Christ must be eaten.
haec quotiens agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fid^, syn^ora panem
sanctum frangimus and partimus, etc. As often as we receive these holy
mysteries, we whet not our teeth to bite or chew, but break and divide this
holy bread by a sincere faith, etc. And four lines before that (says he)
Edulium carnis Christ's de facatis animis, etc. The food of Christ's flesh must
be eaten with purified minds, says not with washed mouths. Impij nec se
iudicant nec sacramenta diiudicant. ibid. n. 13.
And ^ttle before that, he says, the wicked lambunt pe^^, etc. lick the
rock, but neither suck honey nor ^^e, etc. that is to say, they eat the
Sacrament, but (...) the inward grace of the Sacrament. Thus I hope ^e
indifferent Reader is satisfied that your proof is (...) pertinent to the
matter in question, and therefore ^^eweth the weakness of your cause,
Transubstansiation is but in deed a fable.
and the wilful^esse of your minds, that will seek so stiflie to main^^ine
fables with wresting fathers: for Cyprians place ^^at you bring, handles the
invisible grace of the Sa^rament. And in this place which I bring, he touches
(...): manner how that grace is to be received, that is, ^ith faith as we say,
not ^eeth as you teach, etc. And (...) Cyprian agrees with himself, and we
with Cyprian ^^yne against your carnal opinion. And thus having ^^nswered
Cyprian with Cyprian, and showed you your ^^^e sight and mistaking of Cyprian,
I will come to ^^e examination of your next proof.

There is no doubt left of the verity of the flesh and blood of Christ, for
now by the assurance of our Lord, Caththo^ Priests.
and certainty of our faith, Hyllarius de Trinitate lib: 4. and 8. floruit:
370.
it is his true flesh and his true blood.
GEntlemen: now we must needs commend you, for you give testimony with the
truth and us, against the late church of Rome and your selves, ^ow you come
near the quick in deed, Rider.
and therefore ^peake both the truth, and truly. This is the manner ^w Christ
must be eaten, by faith, but you should (...) added the next line following, Et
haec accepta at^^ exhausta id efficient etc. and these, (that is, sancti^^^d
bread and vein) being thus by faith taken and thus ^^ple bring this to pass,
that Christ is in us, and we ^ Christ: so now you say with Hyllarie, that
Christ dwells in all them that receive him by faith. Your own proof is one
our side.
An^ so by this your own warrant you witness to the world, that there is no
place for the corporal receiving of Christ by the wicked, (as Rome teaches
it) because Christ dwells not in them, nor they in him. And so because this
your proof proves our part of the matter in question against your selves,
that Christ i^ to be eaten or received by our faith, not by our mouth or
teeth, I will address my self to the examination of your next proof.

Catholics Priests.
Nothing remains in the world of the body and blood of Christ, Athan: lib.
de Passione Imaginis Christ's cap. 7. florni^: 375.
but that which daily is made by the Priest on the Altar.
GEntlemen: I perceive you are soon weary of well doing: in your last proof
you confessed a truth with us, even against your selves: But now you leave
fathers and bring fables, and so produce one fable to prove another fable:
Rider.
that is, you produce one fable of the crucifying of the image of Christ, and
the miraculous abundant gushing of water and blood out of the image his side,
Like opinion like proof.
that cured all diseases in all parts and places of the world, to prove your
carnal presence of the Sacrament, by your fained transubstansiation.

When fathers help not, you bring fables.
For answer to which, first I say, that you should fitter have placed this
proof in the rank of your fained miracles following, or in your question of
images hereafter. But to cover the fooletie and forgerie thereof, you couch it
amongst the ancient Doctors and Fathers of the Church, thereby hoping (...)
have him pass with more credit. But I will show first, that you have not dealt
well nor truly with the Author of this fable, not with the Catholics of this
kingdom, because you have left out such wor^es as would wound both your credit
in this case, and spoil (...) cause: besides, your Translation is nothing ^^nd.

You leave out in your two lines these four words, ^oc si per manus, and
spiritualiter: you left out qua^^ because belike it was but an Adverb of
likeness, and (...) because omne simile is not idem, you thought it ^ere
better to leave it behind, then to bring it to your hurt. Secondly, you leave
out per manus, for your ^^bout says, per manus sacerdotum, by the hands of
the Priests, and you leave them both out, and say, per sacerdotem, least the
people should think and say, if only the Priest made it, then it can neither
have flesh nor blood, and so the miracle were ^^^red.

And therefore it were better to leave out per e^a^^, (...) to say per
sacerdotem, by the Priest, for then might be understood, not only all the
members of his body, to intentions of his mind, but also all the gestur^s and
motions of both, required to the conception of such a wodd^n Savior.

And lastly, you leave out spiritualiter, s^iritualle, he says not
ca^nallie, and therefore this pr^ofe is very vnschollerlike alleged: when
our question is of a presence carnal, you produce a presence spiritual: this
word makes for us, but that we s^orne (and know it sinful) to bring in such
forgerie (for proof) in a question of divinity. For this you should have
brought in thus, which is daily made by the Priest spirituallie. Now how this
proof fitteth you, let others censure: shame makes me scilent.

This fable contains seven chapters of the crucifying of the image of CHRIST
done by the Jews for envy to CHRIST: who no sooner pierced the Image his
side, but Continue exiui^ sanguis and aqua, The word is Hydria, which you may
ses John. 2. verse. 6. contains two or three measures or firkines a piece,
which shows it to be a notable loudlie, and lewd legend.
forthwith gushed out both water and blood in such abundance, that they filled
many vesseles with the same, and this blood was carried into all the parts of
the world, through Asia, Affricke, and Europe, and cured all manner of
diseases. Upon sight of which miracle the cruel Jews repented, and were
baptized: and presently there was a holy Quinto Idu^ Nouemb.
day made in rememberance thereof, which was kept with no less solemnity then
the feast of Easter, and the Nativitie of our Lord, as the Author says. Then
in the seventh and last chapter comes in your proof, which concludes a peace
amongst the Chargie, touching the truth of Christ's blood: for now says the
Author, there can no other flesh nor blood of Christ be found in the world,
then that which is daily made by the hands of the Priests spirituallie upon
the Altar. But this your proof is not truly translated according to the
Latten, but because it is a loud lie, I will neither reprove you for your
defective translation, nor correct it for any man's direction: for I see no
reason to bestow a true translation, upon a false miracle or forged fable.
Other circumstances, as, where this image was said to be kept and brought
forth, Like Translation like truth.
etc. I refer the curious Reader, to the foolish and forged Author. B^t that
all the Catholics of this kingdom may see the reasons that move me to think
it to be a fable, be these: all of them gathered out of Athanasius.

So several places and persons falsely chale^g to themselves that every o^e
has a proper piece of Christ's cross. Athanasius printed at Paris. 1581. page
534, etc. So our Jesuits and Priests now, would persuade the Catho.
The first reason, is the occasion: for no small error sprung up in those days
touching the blood that issued says of Christ's side on the cross: one sort of
Priests said, that they had the right blood, and another sort of Priests in
other cities said, that they had Christ's very blood that assured forth of his
side: and so the content on among the Priest^ grew to be very hot (as it is
this day betwixt you Jesuits and Priests about other matters) whereupon the
whole Clergy met together (...) Cesaria in Cappadotia, for the appeasing of
this dangerous broile. The reverend Fathers were no sooner ^et, but vpstart Don
Petrus Bishop of Nicomedia, and said: ^everend Fathers, I have a little book
here of Athanasius, which I greatly desire to present to your fatherhoods
view and consideration: Sancta Synodus respon^e: place been, and vt legatur
optamus: The holy Synod unswered: we are very well pleased, and desire it
may be read. Thus concerning the occasion: which (...) a solemn Synod, to
appease a foolish supersticion contention amongst the lying covetous Priests of
that age; when every hedge-priest would persuade the simple people, that he
had in his vial the very blood of Christ, which was of force to pardon their
sins.

The style of this agrees not with the book which Athanasius work contra
Idola: a mean Grammarian may see it and discern it: and therefore it cannot
be his work.

Athanasius writ a most sharp tractate against Idolatry,

It was taken to be Athanasius work, only upon Petrus ^ishop of Nicomedia,
as you may see in the title page, ^34. and therefore is not his work by open
confession.

The time bewraies the forgerie: for this thing should Sigebert in anno. 755.
under Constantine he fifth, yet colored with Athanasius name, as writ^^ by
him, that was dead four hundred years before this matter happened, and
therefore plain and palpable forgerie.

Action quarta synodi 2. Ni^e^ae. tom. 3.
before the second Council of Niceu^ as a preparatiue for the planting of
images in Churches: in which Council it was accordingly performed: and this
fable registered in the same, as a sui^ foundation for such a building: and a
fit proof for such a proposition.

Now let the indifferent Reader peruse at his leisure but the seven chapters of
this Treatise, and he shall scarce read one line without a lie. Yet
superstition blushed not to in sert this fable into this fathers work. But if
we should render such proofs, and preach such fabulous stuff for sound
divinity to the people, you would call us sots and soul slaiers. But for
Christ's sake and the peoples salvation, confess your errour^ and forsake
them, with these lying fables: it is no shame to forsake sin, but it is
dangerous when sin forsakes you. And so to your next proof.

Catho. Priests. Damascen lib. 4 de fide orthod. cap. 14. floruit. 391.
Let us approach in ardent faith, laying our hands in manner of a cross, and
let us receive the body of him that was crucified.
YOu leave out ei: for it is in the father, Acced^mus ei, let us come and
approach to him, which is in heaven, Rider.
not on your Altar, or in your miraculous accidents; Damascen flatly shows
the impossibility of your carnal presence.
and then shows the manner how: in ardent faith: not with mouth, teath, and
stomach. So this father is against your self, for the manner of receiving of
Christ, which is spiritual, not corporal. And in the same chapter, the same
father says, Carpu^ Christi. etc. that Christ's body being united to the
godhead, descended not from heaven to the earth, and therefore cannot be in
your sacrament corporally and carnally. And as fire and heat be in a burning
coal, so, (and more) neerelie are Christ's humanity and divinity joined
together, so that he which shall touch the coal should taste of heat, and he
that should eat Christ's humanity, must also eat Christ's divinity: which is
damnable to think, for a man to eat and devour his God. But because this
your imp^rtinent proof is your apparent disproofe, I will proceed to the next.
Cath. Priests.


This bread is bread before the consecration: but when it is consecrated, of
bread it is made the flesh of Christ. Ambr. de sacrament^s, lib 4 cap. 4.
fl^ruit. 40^

ALl this we grant to be true, but you come not to the point, whether Christ's
flesh be made of bread by way of transubstansiation: that is, by the changing
of one nature or substance into another, by hec est corpus meum: this is our
question, Rider.
but you dare not touch it, because you cannot prove it. But seeing you recite
fathers by pieces and patches, taking that you think will fit your purpose,
and leaving that which would cross your course or weaken your cause: I will
for the truth sake, and the Catholics good add that out of Ambrose, which I
am sure some of you would wish out of Ambrose. If you had read a few lines more,
you should have heard him tell you another ^ale, In the same chapter.
and have expounded himself in this place, his words be these: Si ergo tanta
vis est in sermon^ Domini Jesus, vt inciperent esse qua non erant, quanto magis
operatorius est, vt sint quae erant, and in liud commutentus? If there be such
a force in the word of the Lord Jesus, that the things which were not, began to
be, how much more can it work this, that they shall be the same they were,
and yet be changed into another thing? And then brings in an example, how a
thing may be that that it was, and yet be changed. Tu ipse eras, sed eras
vetus creatura, etc. Thou t^ self waste: but thou wast an old creature: afte^
when thou wast baptized, thou begannest to be a ne^ creature: will thou know
how, a new creature? eve^ one says the Apostle, that is in Christ, is a new
cre^ture. Learn then how the word of God is accust^med to change every
creature: and when he will (...) alters the course of nature, If you had read
(...) known this, you would never have alleged the ^ther, for his example is
this: as he that is baptized su^fereth no material substancial or corporal
chang^ though he be borne a new spirituallie, Vide did. 2 de consecr. cap.
quia corpus. page. 432.
and put o^ Christ. But he his changed not loosing or altrin^ the body or
soul which he had: but in attaining the grace which he had not. And so the
change is acc^dentall, not substantial, as from vice to virtue. So (...)
substance the bread and wine are the same they we^ before, but in accident or
quality, they are turned l^ to another thing, of common bread, made a
Sacr^ment.

Chrisost. ^n Math. hom. 83.
So Chrysostom amplifying the change of bread (...) the Euchariste, he adds
immediately withal: Sic ^tium in baptism: even so there is the like change
(...) water in baptism, as of bread in the Lords Suppe^ but that is not of
substance, but in quality, respec^ or use, and so in this.

Dialog. 1. cap. 8.
And this change is not in casting away the substanc^ of bread or wine, but in
casting grace unto them: (...) Theodoret says, Non naturam ipsam transmutans,
s^ naturae adijciens gratiam: not changing nature, but ^^ding grace to nature.
Ambrose de sys qui Initiantr^ cap. 9.
But who can better expoud A^brose his meaning then Ambrose himself? who sait^
Ante benedictionem, etc. before the blessing of the he^venlie words, it is
called another kind: after the wor^ of consecration the body of Christ is
signified: do^ not say, is the body of Christ, but signifies the bod^ of
Christ. And else where: In comedendo and potando, etc. (...) eating and
drinking we signify the body and blood ^^at were offered for us. And again
he says, Ambr. 1. cor. 11.
Quod (...) figura, Ambr. de Sacramentis lib. 4 cap. 4.
etc. which is a figure of the body and blood of the Lord. But of this we have
sufficiently spoken before.

And thus now the Reader may be sufficiently satisfied that the change is not
natural, but mystical, not of substance, but of accidents and qualities. And
so bread remains in substance, but is changed in mystery. And so is bread
made the flesh of Christ, not by your miraculous transubstansiation, but by
mistical and Apostolical benediction or sanctification, not in changing the
nature of it, but adding grace to it, as beforesaid. And thus Ambrose has
answered Ambrose. And if you would read him without partial affection, he
would withdraw you from this your imagined opinion. But now to that which
follows. Catholic Priests.


Not only the Sacrament, but the body of Christ is propounded unto us, not
that we should touch is only, Chrisost. hom. 51. in cap. 4. Math. floruis.
410.
but that we should eat it.
GEntlemen: it is in the 51. Hom. of the 14. chapter of Matthew, not in the
fourth: though it cost me great labor to find the place, Rider.
yet I blame not you, it might be the writer, not the Author: and if it were
the Author, it is but the slip of his pen, and therefore in discretion
pardonable.

But you allege it very impertinentlie and improperlie: still prooving the
matter never denied: Still you run from the manner to the matter
and skipping the manner which I urged, and you should answer. But if you had
read a few lines more, Chrysostom would have told you the manner how Christ is
to be received, not by your mouth, teeth, throat or stomach: but Magna cum
fide, mundo cum cord, with great faith and a clean heart. You stopped before
your full period, This father is wholly with us, and therefore unadvisedly
brought in by you.
which is in you still a great fault: and will keep still the Catholics by
this your means in great blindness and doubts: who believes when they hear
you allege one sentence of a Father, that all his works are suttable to
that, judging him to speak on your side by the sound of the ear, not by the
touch of knowledge: whereas if you would read a Father your selves from the
beginning of a controversy to the end, though it were painful unto you, yet
it were profitable unto you and the Catholics, then you should see the thing
plainly by the father expounded, which is by you often and too much wrested.

Read this father upon the seventeeth Homily upon the tenth of the Hebrews,
and 1. Cor 11. Hom. 27, and you shall find him there condemning your carnal
presence, mass, with your sacrifice, whereby you may perceive in this point
your opinion new and doubtful: and our religion old and certain.

But though this place be impertinent to prove the maine, which is our
question, yet it proves with us against you, that Christ must be eaten by
faith spirituallie, not by the mouth ^arnallie, and that overthrows one of
your chief pillars. And so to to your next proof.

Catho. Priests.
We ought rather to believe in Christ, and humbly to learn of him, Carill in
Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 13. floruit. Anno. 423
then like drunken sots to cry out, how can he give us his flesh?
GEntlemen: I wonder you bring in this for your proof: al^sse: this is nothing
pertinent to our matter in hand, we cry not how can he give us his flesh?
Rider.
For we know that he gave his flesh for us substantiallie on the cross:
misticallie in the Sacrament: and spirituallie in his word. And therefore this
might have been rather well spared, then ill applied: ^y by your leave, there
is no such sentence in that ^lace, as you preciselie allege: some such sound
of ^ords he has, but no such carnal sense. But read ^e chapter through, and
these marginall quotations, Ciria lib 4 cap. 14.21.22.24. lib. 11. cap 26.
(...) you shall plainly see how you are deceived. For what ^oever he speaks
in all those places, is nothing else (...) to confirm and explain our
spiritual union with Christ our head: and for that purpose brings in for
ex^mple, the near and natural union and conjunction of ^^e vine and the
branches, head and members, and so of Christ and all believers. So this being
less pertinent ^hen the rest, shall have a more short (yet a sufficient)
an^^ere then the rest.

The bread which descended from heaven is the body of our Lord, and the wine
he gave his disciples is his blood. Catho. Priests.

THis place in deed is in his third Tom. page 142. Hieron. ad Hedib. Q. 2.
floruit Anno 424.
There was a learned and godly woman proposed twelve questions of divinity to
Hierom: wherein, and of which she desired resolution: For in those days, it was
lawful for women and all men to ask doubts touching religion: Rider.
and for their further instruction and consolation might read Gods word, and
freely confer touching matters that concerned their salvato^. And this
greatly blemisheth your Roman doctrine, that will have neither men nor women to
read divinity, and the reason is the, least they should see your errors, Mark
this ye Catholics.
and forsake your profession. For this is your strongest tenure, to keep them
in blindness with idle ceremonies, dumb shows, and Latten service. But I
trust in Christ shortly to see most of their eyes opened, that will discover
your privy plots, and discourage your haughty stomachs, and generally
forsake your new religion, being in deed but man's invention.

This is the second question of the twelfth, but you omit some words, and cut
off some, which obscures the matter. But if a little charitable chiding would
make you more painful in your books, and less careful to please men's
humors, I could find in my heart to bestow it upon you, but prameniti,
pramuniti: you are now fore warned, I hope you will be hereafter better armed,
or better minded: which I wish with all my soul as to my self. But your
proof is thus in Latten, Siergo panis qui de caelo descendit, corpus est
Domini, and vinum quod discipulis dedit, sanguis illius est novi Testamenti qui
pro multis effusus est in remissionem peccatorum, iudaicas fabulas repellamus,
etc. If therefore the bread that descended from heaven be the body of the
Lord, and the wine which he gave his disciples, be his blood of the new
testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, then let us cast
away all Jewish fables.

Here you omit Siergo, and novi Testamenti qui pro multis effusus est in
remissionem peccatorum. If therefore: and of the now Testament which is shed
for many for the remission of sins: All this you have left out, which was
ill done.

What now can you gather out of this, to prove that Christ's body is made of
bread, and his blood of wine, no substance of either creature remaining, but
only Christ's carnal presence as he was on the cross? Surely here is not
one word, syllable, or letter to prove it, but the contrary. You wronged the
father so to mangle him: yet as you deliver him, it prooveth nothing of the
manner of Christ's presence that is in question, but the matter never in
controversy: for says she to this learned father, if therefore the bread
which came down from heaven be the body of Christ: so she speaks of Christ's
divinity, that came down from heaven: (for his humanity did not) and our
question is of his humanity by transubstansiation in the Sacrament: so that
this proof nothing sorteth your purpose. And the blood here spoken of, is his
blood of the new Testament shed on the cross, not is the Sacrament: once for
all, not for any that pleases the Priest. And therefore as she said, Iudaicas
fabelas repellamus, let us cast away Jewish fables: So in Gods name for the
love of Gods truth, and of the peoples salvation, cast ye from you all
Munkish fables, and forged legends, that have misled the people into this
blind superstition, and join with us to teach Christ's precious flock. the
old Apostolical and Catholic religion, commanded in Gods word, and
practiced in the primitive Church: that you with us, and we with you, and all
in the Lord, may now in this plentiful vintage so labor in the Lords vinyard
(his Church) according to our talents received, that every one of us may
deliver his talent with advantage of many souls: and then we shall be
partakers of that sweet saying, Well done, then good and faithful servant,
enter into thy masters joy. Which God grant to us both, And so to the next,
as follows. Catholic Priests.


The mediator betwixt God and man Jesus Christ, with faithful heart and
mouth we receive, August. contra Aduersar. legis and prophetarum: cap. 9.
floruit 430.
giving us his flesh to eat and his blood to drink. Although it seem more
horrible to eat the flesh of man then to kill: and to drink the blood of man
then to sheed it.
AVgustine writing against that pestilent adversary of the Law and Prophets,
who objected, that because Abraham by adultery with Agar brake the Law,
therefore either the Law was not good, Rider.
or else the universal promise made to God by Abraham was of none effect:
Paris print, page 264.
confuting him by scriptures and reasons, tells him that the promise was made
in Isaac, not in Ismaeli, and disprooveth him for disliking such figures,
similitudes, and comparisons, as it has pleased the holy Ghost to use for the
plain expressing of the near union and conjunction that is betwixt Christ and
his Church. And says, what will this pestilent adversary say, when he
hears Pau^ speak? they shall be two in one flesh, he will scorn and deride
it. Ephe. 5.
But it is a great mystery spoken of Christ and his Church. For says
Augustine, we understand by the two sons of Abraham, and the two mothers, two
Testaments, though in respect of times and ceremonies, diverse, but in respect
of the substance all one and the same. And also by the near union and
conjunction betwixt man and wife, we understand our natural union with Christ,
and that without any obscenitie or absurdity, mangre the beards of the
adversary. Then follows your proof, even in the midst of a sentence very
vntowardlie, I will not say negligentlie. And yet you omit one word (Sicut)
which though it be small in show, yet it is in this place of great consequence.

For as you allege Augustine, it is nothing material to confute the
adversary of Gods grace. Thus Augustine speaks, and so you should have said,
Sicut mediatorem Dei and hominum: as the mediator betwixt God and man, etc. And
thus after your wonted manner, you leave out the point material, and begin in
the middle of a sentence, leaving out beginning and ending, neither respecting
what went before, whereof, and wherefore he spoke the thing: nor what follows
after to prove and disprooue the thing so spoken of. And this your neglecting
the coherence, makes you fail in the sense and in^erence, For this word
(Sicut) which you leave out, shows plainly that it is a similitude, and I
hope you know that similitue, be no Sillogismes. And as there was no o^^^eritie
or absurdity in the similitude of m^^^^^^ (they t^^^^ shall be one flesh: so
in li^^ case he^^ i^ no absurdity or inhumaine Caniballisme, in this
similitude of the Sacrament, used to express our union with Christ: for though
it seem more horrible to eat the flesh of man, then to kill man, and to drink
his blood then to shed it: yet we without horror or absurdity, eat the flesh
and drink the blood of the Mediator betwixt God and man Jesus Christ. And if
the adversary in Augustines time, or you Romanists now, would know how this
may be so done without slaughter of Christ, sin to our souls, or offense to
the world, Augustine tells you in that place, fideli cordi and ore, with a
faithful heart and mouth.

So that now you see Agustines scope, and your drift, clean contrary the one
to the other: for Augustine brings it as a similitude to express our
spiritual union with Christ by faith: you wrest it as spoken of the corporal
and gutturall eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament,
under the forms of bread and wine with our mouths and stomachs. Many places
you have unfitly, and in deed untruly alleged: yet showed in none of them
less learning and true meaning, then in this. For this is your great fault,
that wheresoever you see or hear in Scripture, Father, Council, or history:
Corpus and sanguinem Domini, or such like words or phrases, presently you
infer (and so persuade the Catholics) that there is Christ's carnal presence
in the Sacrament, never examining the circumstance of the place, or the end
wherefore they be alleged.

And thus you err not knowing (or wilfully contemning) the state of the
question, the sense of the holy writ, and judgment of the ancient Fathers.

I am sure you never read this place of Augustine your self, but snatched it
out of some late ignorant and foolish idle Munkish or Franciscan Euchiridien.

And my reason why I think so of you, is drawn out of Augustine himself. For
a few lines before this your proof, he calls the Sacraments Sacra signa,
holy signs (not the things themselves as you do) and so distinguishes that
which you confound. And within three lines after your proof, if you would have
read him, you should have heard him record to your great discredit in this
case, that this your proof is (as other former examples are) figurare dictum
secundum sacrae fides regulam: that it is spoken figuratiuelie, according to
the rule of sound faith and religion.

August in his place as in the places formerly alleged, is against you still.
Now let the Reader judge betwixt you and me, whether of us is in the right.
Augustine says, the Sacraments be sacra signa, holy signs, and so say we:
But you Iesuiets and Priests say no, they be the things themselves. Augustine
says it is spoken figuratiuelie, and so say we: you say no, but properly.
Augustine says, that this opinion is squ^red out for pattern to Christ's
Church, by the straight rule of sound faith, and so say we: and as you allege
your prrofe, you say no: and make a flat opposition betwixt Augustines says
and your faith. And yet you will brag of Fathers, and that they all speak on
your side, and you all follow their sayings: when they neither speak for you,
nor you imitate them. And so though we follow scripture, fathers, and primitive
Church, yet you call us heretics. And you that wrest scriptures, falsify
fathers, that have neither with you, consent, antiquity, nor verity, yet will
be Catholics.

And thus if a man should have hired you to have brought a place out of
Augustine against your selves, you could no better have fitted yourselfe, or
your setter on, then in this: who very plainly delivers the manner how
Christ's body and blood is to be eaten and drunk: that is, with a faithful
heart and mouth, not with our material mouth, teeth, and stomach, as is you
untruly teach. And thus hoping the Catholics will less trust you in the
rest, that have so groslie deceived them in this, I will proceed by Christ's
assistance to the examination of your next proof. Catho. Priests.


In what darkness of ignorance, in what sluggish carelessness, have they
been? Leo epist. 22. ad Clerum and plebem Constantinopolitanae vrbis floruit
Anno. 466.
as not to have heard by bearesay, nor by reading to have found, which in the
Church of God is so plain, as that the mouths of children do tell, the body
and blood of Christ to be truly in the blessed sacrament.
GEntlemen, you mistake the Epistle: it is in the 23. Epistle, page 74.
beginning in the 12 line, printed at Lovaine, 1575. and seeing it is both your
own proof, and your own print, Rider.
if upon due examination it make against you, This Leo was the 13. Archb. of
Romes and twenty more succeeded him before any usurped the name of Pope.
you must think God deals with you, as he did with Balaam, who when he made
account for gain to have cursed Gods people, then God put into his heart, and
uttered by his mouth a blessing to his people. You made account to have here
overthrown the truth, established error, and strengthened your credit: and
God has put into your heart, and you have subscribed with your hand to
confirm the truth, confute your own error, and discredit your selves: and
more to the worlds wonder, and the soil of your Roman faith, even by a Bishop
of Rome: against whom you can take no exceptions. So that now the Catholics
shall see that your carnal presence was not known to the first bishops of Rome
for the first five hundred years, and therefore it is not Catholic. Nomb.
23.8.
And you shall see how untruly you not only quot him, but allege him, nay
wrest and infore him to speak that after his death, which he never meant
during his lif. So that from the first to the last, you deal neither truly
with the book of God: not the works of men. Matthew. 15.6.
And as Christ said to the Scribes and Pharesees; You have made the
commandment of God of no Authority by your Tradition. So you Jesuits and
Priests have made neither Scripture, Ancient father, Council, or Pope of any
Authority, by your new and false constructions, addicions, and subtractions,
etc. But now to the examination of your proof.

But I will first show to the Catholics the occasion, why Leo writ this: and
there they shall see how greatly you are deceived in mistaking Leo: and much al
use their simplicity and the credit they repose in you.

The occasion why Leo writ this Epistle was this: That whereas the error of
the Manichees had greatly infected the Church of God throughout all
Christendom: They denied Christ's manhood, and taught that his body was not a
true body but a fantastical body.
he in a charitable manner sent Epiphanius and Dionisius, two public Notaries
of the Church of Rome, to the Clergy and people of Constantinople: requesting
them, that such as professed these damnable heresies, might not only be
excommunicated from sermons and sacraments, but also be banished from their
Cities for fear of further infection. For (says he) such as believe not
that Christ has taken our nature and flesh upon him believe neither the
verity, nor virtue of Christ's passion and resurrection. And then comes in
your proof, which properly must be applied to such heretics, as deny Christ
his manhood to be borne of the blessed virgin: and hold that his body is not
a true body, but a fantastical body, and not to us that believe both.
Again, you have not truly translated this place: for thus it stands in the
Author. In quibus isti ignorantiae tenebris, in quo hactenus desidiae torpore
^acucre, vt nec auditu discerent: and afterward. Vt nec ab infantium lingui^
veritas corporis, and sanguinis Christi inter communis sacramenta fidei
tentatur? In what darkness of ignorance, in what sluggish carelesnes, have they
remained, as not to have learned by hearesay (not ^eard by hearesay as you
translate) that the truth of the body and blood of Christ among the
sacraments of our common faith, is not kept back even of the tongues of
infants?

It seems you had this out of some man's notebooke by hearesay, not by your
proper and diligent reading of the Author himself: and my reasons why I
think so, be there: because you mistake so much, and translate so untrue. Yet
will not I take exceptions to every particular fault.

1 First, you say it is in the two and twentieth Epistle, it is not so, but in
the three and twentieth, and therefore I think you never read the Author.

2 Secondly, you say, heard by hearesay, the Author says, Learned by hearesay.

3 Thirdly, you translate lenguis for mouths: it should be tongues. Yet if the
rest had been true, J would not have excepted against this.

4 Fourthlie, you change a Nowne into an Adverb, vere for veritas, truly for
truth: and transpose it also ou^ of that proper place to alter the sense of
Leo the Bishop of Rome, which is great wrong to the dead Author, and living
Reader.

5 Fiftlie, you change the singular number for the plural, sacrament for
sacraments.

Sixtlie, you quite leave out two words of great consequence, communis and
fidei.

7 Seventhlie, you add this word (Blessed) which is not in the Author.

8 Eighthlie, you point it not right, considering the Author spoke it only
by way of interrogation.

Which premises, are faults great and gross, which shows plainly that you
never read the Author himself, but borrowed them forth of some other man's pap^
s, and therefore you sin grievously in persuading men's consciences to take these
things at your hands for truth, and faith, when in deed you tender them
nothing, but things wrested from all faith and truth.

Now Gentlemen, do you deal plainly with the world in bringing this place
against us? did ever any of us deny that Christ was borne of the virgin
Marie, and and conceived by the holy Ghost? you cannot charge us with it. Did
ever any of us teach that Christ's body was fantastical, neither did you
ever hear it. Then in this as in the rest you wrong us, deceive the
Catholics, and abuse Leo sometime Pope.

But I will show you plainly, that this Bishop of Rome, and this your
proof, confutes and confounds your own opinion, and confirms ours.

Read page. 7. 8. on the same Epist. where he bringes in the Sacraments of
Redemption and of Regeneration.
First Leo says, the truth of Christ's body and blood is in both the two
sacraments, as well in Baptism as in the L rds Supper: and as he is reallie in
the one, so is he reallie in the other: and what presence of Christ is in the
one sacrament, there is the like presence in the other, as has been prooved
before. But least this would mar the fashion of your transubstansiation, and
carnal presence, therefore you translate it sacramentum, in the singular
number, not sacramenta in the plural.

Secondly, ^ou have left out two words, communis fide^: of common faith:
because no man should see it was then a Cotholick opinion, to believe that the
t uth of Christ body and blood, was as real e in Baptism, as in the Lords
Supper, yet in both spirituallie, in neither corporally.

But you will say I abuse the Reader, because Leo never spoke of this word
spiritual, or spiritual e, and therfo e I wrong both the Author and Reader. I
answer as El^^s the Prophet answered Achab the king, when he told Eliah that
he troubled Israel, no (says the Prophet) (...) i^ thou and thy Fathers house
that have troubled Israel, 1. Kings. 18.17.18.
(...) that you have forsaken the commandment of the Lord, and follovved
Balaam. So Gentlemen, it is not J that wrong the Author that is dead, or the
people that yet do that it is you and your confederates that follow Balaam of
Rome (God keep you free from fo lowing Balack of Spain) and that the Reader
shall see I will prove that Leo joins with us, and we with him, and both of
us with Christ's truth against your trash, I will make him speak in his own
defense, and utter that which you concealed It follows imediatlie after your
proof, in the next immediate words after this manner: In the same page.
quia is illa mesticad stributione spi itualis alimoniae hoc impartitur, vt
accipientes caelestis cibi, in carnem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus est,
transeamus. Because that in the mystical distribution of that spiritual food,
this is given and received, that we which receive the virtue of that heavenly
meat, we pass into his flesh, which was made our flesh.

Gentlemen, this you should have added to your former, for the Author joined
them together, the one to accompany the other in Gods service, and in deed the
latter to express the former. But now let us out of this, but compare the old
doctrine of the old Bishops of Rome, and the doctrine of the modern Popes
and his Chaplens.

1 The old Bishops of Rome said, the food in the sacrament was spiritual and
heavenly: the late Popes, Jesuits, and Priests say, that it is carnal and
material.

2 The old Popes said, the distribution of that spiritual food was mystical:
you say presbiteriall.

3 They said in old times, that the worthy receiver^ of this spiritual meat
were transformed into Christ his flesh. The late Popes and you his ^echoes say
no: But the sacramental bread and wine are transubstantiated and transnatured
into Christ's flesh and blood.

4 The Bishop of Rome brought in this, to proo^ Christ's humanity conceived by
the holy Ghost, an^ borne of the virgin Marie, against heretics, wh^^ taught
that Christ's body was fantastical, And yo^ allege the same place to prove
Christ's humaniti^ to be made by a sinful ignorant Priest, and that of bread
and so contrary to Scripture and Creed, will recreat Christ of a new matter,
which is as blasphemous an^ heretical.

So Tertull: contra Marcion lib. 4.
5 The old Bishops and Church of Rome held that the Sacraments could not be
true signs of Christ body, unless he had a true body, and because the were
true signs, therefore Christ had a true body. An^ the late popes and Papelings
teach, that Christ's body is made a new of the signs, and so counfoundeth the
signs with Christ's body, and in deed maintains an^ heresy as gross as the
Manicheans. For they held tha^ either he had no body, or a fantastical
body. And you hold that there be no signs in the Sacraments, but that they
are transubstantiated into Christ's body and blood. John. 6.
And so Christ's body is daily made of a piece of bread, which must needs be a
body fantastical (...) not a true body as our Creed witnesses. And as in
the manner of eating Christ's body, you disagree not much from the Capernaits:
so in this case you differ not much from the Manicheis.

Isale. 5.3.
Now will I say as the painful owner of the vineyard said. Now therefore oh
you Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray you, betvveen me
and my vineyard. So, oh you Inhabitants of this worshipful City of Dublin,
and you loyal subjects of Ireland, and all the learned and well minded of both
England and Ireland, judge I pray you charitablie (yet truly) betwixt me and
these my adversaries, And if you refuse to censure us and this our conference
according to the truth, i. Sam. ^4.13.
then I say as David said to Saul: The Lord be a (...) betvveen thee and me: so
the Lord be judge betwixt us, whether of us have more truly, and with ^^^^ter
sincerity of truth, and conscience, behaved our selves (in this matter) for
his glory, discharge of our own consciences, instruction and salvation of the
Catholics. Catho. Priests.


Thus much for the fathers, as a skantling or taste, leaving the surplus to the
curious Reader. I might have recited Martial Epist. ad Rurd^galenses, cap. 3.
Anaclet. Epist. general: Dionisius Arcop. cap. 3. page. 3. who lived within
the compass of the first hundred years: I think your meaning was 500 years,
otherwise it cannot be true.
but I observe I pray you observe verity.
brevitie, as by the next proof shall appear.
GEntlemen: Martial neither in this place, nor in the ten chapters
following, says any thing against us, but for us, and as I think altogether
against you. For Martial reproves those that honored such Priests, as
sacrificed mutis and surdis statuis, Rider.
to dumb and deaffe images (which neerlie touches your freeholde) and
deswaded them from it, Martial.
saying Nunc autem multo magis sacerdotes Dei omnipotentia qui vita^ vobis
tribuunt in calice and panc honorare debetis: For now you ought much rather to
honor the Priests of Almighty God, which give you life in the cup and bread.
This is that which you think knocks us in the head. But first let it be
examined, and then censured.

1 First, you must prove that you are Priests of Almighty God: which you
shall never do; as has been plainly prooved.

2 Secondly, you must prove that you give life to the communicants, in the
cup and bread, which is impossible. And unless you prove the premises, the
allegation is Impertinent.

3 Thirdly and lastly, if the Priest could give life in the cup, wine or
bread, then it were clear that the substance of bread and wine remained. And
that would knock out the brains of your miraculous transubstansiation. Now
masters, in alleging Martial you are brought into a labyrinth, get out as
you can. For if you ever had read Martial, you would never have alleged him
in this case: for in the end of the same chapter, he shows to Sigebor^, and
to others newly conveited from ydolatrie, ad s^nceram fidem, to true religion,
that Christ is sacrificed three manner of ways.

First, by himself on the cross once for all.

Secondly, by the cruel Jews, who cried, Crucify him crucify him.

Thirdly, per nos in sui commemorationem; by us in rememberance of him. Thus
Martial tells you that in rememberance of Christ, is not Christ. Now if you
will needs sacrifice Christ after Martials opinion, you must choose one of these
three: after the first if you would you cannot: after the second, I am sure ye
will not: and after the third you ought, but do not. Thus your proofs mend, as
sower Ale does in Summer, worse and worse, even like a conie in a net: or a
bird amongst limetwigs, the more they stir, the faster they stick. But you
cannot help it, seeing the cause is bad, how can your proofs be good? But in
Gods name leave wresting of Fathers, deceiving of Catholics, and come to the
confession of your faults, and recantation of your errors: and you shall
glorify God, edify his people, and save your souls, which God grant for
Christ's sake.

Aaclete.
For Anaclete, I have not seen him, and therefore cannot censure him: but if he
be ancient, he will speak with us if he be a late writer, he is a weak
witness: and at first excepted against: and unless he lived within the first
five hundred years after Christ, he must neither help you, nor hurt us.

And for Dionisius Arcop. because he speaks not the word for you, Dionisius
Arcop.
therefore I have no reason to speak are word against him. And whereas you say,
the^e fathers you have brought as a scantling or taste: I tell you ^^inlie,
scant a taste of any truth. And the fathers you have not brought with you, but
left them behind you, because ye know they would witness what they should,
no^ what you would. Then you say, you will leave the Surplus to the curious
Reader: by your leave, it is better to be curious then careless. For if the
Reader had not been more careful then you were, it had been inform^ Chaos, and
as Ovid he said, Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. page. 1.
^udis indigestaque miles, nec qui^ quam nisi pendus m^^^. But now to the rest.

The third proof. That the chief Protestants did believe the real presence,
Catho. Priests.
and alleged all the Fathers for the maintenance thereof.
THis truly is vvorthie admiration, Luther (...). 7. D fens. verb. cana fol.
391.
that none of the fathers, whereof there is an infinite number, but did speak
clean contrary to Sacramentaries And though the fathers all with one mouth
affirm: yet the Sacramentaries harden themselves to deny them.

And they would never utter this (that Christ his body is not in the blessed
Sacrament) if they had any regard of the Scripture: Idem fol. 390.
and were not their hearts full of infidelity.

I truly, would give the frantic Sacramentaries this advise, Idem. ^b^ fol.
41^
that seeing they will needs be mad they should they their parts rather
wholy then in part: therefore let them make short work, and raze out of
the scripture these words. This is my body which is giv^n for you. For
touching their faith it is allone, if th^^ they keep it. Christ took bread and
gave thanks, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples saying, take, eat, do
this in rememberance of me. For this prooveth sufficiently, that bread is to
be eaten in rememberance of Christ. This is the whole and entire Supper of the
Sacramentaries.

Luther Tom. 2. fol. 263.
In vain do the Sacramentaries believe in God the father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost: seeing they deny this one article as false, of the real
presence, vvheras Christ does say, This is my body.

Luther in (...) ad Ioh. Harnagiu^ Typograph Argent.
The whole opinion of the sacrament, the Sacramentaries began with lies, and
with lies they defend the same.

GEntlemen: you know Luther was a Munke, and though he recanted Popery, and
utterly; condemned your Transubstansiation as a fable, Rider.
having neither scripture nor Father to warrant it: yet he stuck fast in
another error, De Cons. did. 2. canon. prem en glossa, tertia tenet page. 429.
fitly named Luthers heresy was on ^ome before Luther was borne.
Consubstansiation, which error he also sucked from the Pope^ own breast, as
you may see in his distinctions. For you in your Transubstansiation teach, that
of the substance of bread and wine is made by the Priest the very natural
body and blood of Christ; no substance of either remaining, but only the
outward forms.

Luther by his Consubstansiation says, that Christ's body and blood be
received together in the bread, under or with the bread; both substance and
accidents of bread and wine remaining.

Now I pray you, how fitteth this your purpose? you will say in this, that
Luther held a real presence. True, but Luther denied your real presence as a
fable. And yet his opinion was far wide from the truth. We regard not
Luthers censure against us, for Christ his spiritual presence, no more then
you do for his condemning of your Transubstansiation. And Luther is more to
be commended, then all the Popes, Cardinals, Priests, and Jesuits in
Christendom: who with Augustine, though he did err, yet, would not persever
in errors, as you and they do, least he should be an heretic, Ad ^^ctorem
Tom. 1 page. 1.
and therefore in his Epistle to the Christian Reader, says in this manner:
Ante, omnia, ^ro (...) ^^cteram, and ore propter Dominum nostrum Jesuits
Christum, vt ista legate cum iudicio, imo and cum multa miseraluus, and sciat me
fuisse aliquando Monachum. Before all things, or first of all, I beseech the
godly Reader, Quid aqu^^^ petipotuit
and I beseech him for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, that he will read these
my works iudiciallie, and with great compassion and pity; and let him know
and understand that I was sometimes a Monk. As if he should say: if I have
erred, or do err, impute that to my Monkerie and Popery, which in deed is
but a sorge of bles, and a legend of lies.

B^t because you say Luther held a real presence: therefore you conclude
against us with his testimony, because you call him a chief Protestant, The
Priests think every real presence to be their Transubstansiated real
presence.
persuading the Catholics, that either some chief Protestants be of your
opinion touching your real presence: or else that there is a^iarie amongst our
selves touching the same. And because few of you have read Luther (as appears
by your omissions, transpositions, and your imperfect translation) and
therefore in this point, know not exactlie the difference betwixts your selves,
Luther, and us, I will plainly and truly set down the three several
opinions touching this question; that the Reader may see wherein the differnce
one from another on agreement one with another consists. The manner (Christ
willing) shall be by question and answer, as follows.

Question.

WHat is given in the Lords Supper beside bread and wine?

Aunsvvere.

First, you say, the body and blood of Christ.

Secondly, Luther says, the body and blood of Christ.

Thirdly, we say, the body and blood of Christ.

Quest. How is Christ's body and blood given in the sacrament?

Auns. You say corporally.

Luther says, corporally.

We say with scriptures and fathers, spirituallie.

Quest. In what thing is Christ's body and blood given?

Auns. You say, under the forms or accidents o^ bread, the substance being
quite changed, the accidents only remaining.

Luther says, in, with, or under the bread, neither substance nor accidents
changed, but both remaining.

We with scriptures and fathers say, Christ's body and blood are given in his
merciful promise, which tendereth whole Christ with all his benefits unto the
soul of man, sealed and assured unto us in the worthy receiving of the
sacraments.

Quest. H^w must Christ's body and blood be received?

Aun. You say, with the mouth.

Luther says, with the mouth and faith.

We say according to the holy scriptures, that Christ must be received by
faith: and there long and d^ell in our hearts: for whatsoever Christ gives by
promise, must of man be received by faith.

Quest. To what part of man is Christ's body and blood given?

Auns. You say, to your bodies, which is absurd.

Luther says, both to body and soul, which is impossible

We say, to our soule^: for the promise is spiritual; the things promised,
spiritual; the means to receive them, spiritual: so the place into which it
must be received, must needs be spiritual, not corporal: not that the
substance of Christ's body is united to our spirits: but that those precious
benefits purchased for us in the crucified body of Christ, must be united to
our spirits by faith. This doctrine is Apostolical, sound, and Catholic,
upon which we boldly may venture our souls and salvations.

^ Quest. To whom is Christ's body and blood given?

^ Auns. You say, to the godly or godless, believers

Luther says, both to the godly and godless.

(...) say, only to the godly believers, as heretofore has been prooved.

^ Quest. What do the wicked eat in the Lords supper?

^ Auns. You say, accidents of bread, and Christ's body.

Luther says, the wicked eat bread, both substance and accidents, and the
body of Christ also.

We say, the wicked ea^e nothing in the Lords supper, but bare bread, and
drink nothing but mere wine, being the outward elements of the sacrament. As
for the inward grace of the Sacrament, which is Christ crucified with all his
merits, they eat not, they receive not: because they have neither a lively
faith to receive him, nor a purified heart by faith to intertaine him. And
therefore they only eat as ^udas did, and as Augustine said: Tract. 59.
super John page. 205.
Illi manduca^ant pa^em Dominum, illi pa^em Domini contra Dominum. The godly
eat bread the Lord: the wicked only the bread of the Lord against the Lord.

^ Quest. What is it to eat Christ's body?

^ Auns. You say, carnally to eat Christ's flesh with your bodily mouth, etc.

Luther says, carnally to eat Christ's flesh, and spirituallie to believe in
him.

We say, with the Scriptures, that to believe that all Christ's merits are
ours, and purchased for us in his passion. This is to eat Christ's body, as
has been already prooved.

Quest. What is it to drink Christ's blood?

Auns. You say, carnally to drink his blood.

Luther says, carnally and spirituallie.

We say with the scriptures: it is to believe that Christ's blood was shed on
the cross for our sins.

Quest. How is bread made Christ's body?



Luther says, by Consubstansiation.

We say, by appellation: signification: or representation, as aforesaid.

Quest. Where is Christ's body?

Auns. You say every where. Both of you err, for then Christ should not have
a true body.

Luther says, every where.

We say, according to Scripture and Creed, only in heaven.

Quest. How is Christ every where?

Auns. You say, according to both natures. But both of you speak Monkerie and P
perie.

Luther says, according to both natures. But both of you speak Monkerie and P
perie.

We say with Scriptures and Fathers, as has been proved; only according to
his Godhead.

Now gentle Reader, you see the agreement and difference that is betwixt the
Papists, Lutherans, and Protestants. And how impertinentlie (I will not say
vnscholler like) this is brought against us, which neither helps their
carnal presence, nor hurts our faith touching Christ's spiritual presence.
And now to the ^^st that follows.

Amongst factions of opinions, Catho. Priests. Magdeburg. in Epist. ad Eliz.
Anglia Reg. Rider.
some lately take away the body and blood of Christ, touching his real
presence. contrary to the most plain, most evident, and puissant words of
Christ.
GEntlemen, this concerns not us: it may fitter be inverted upon your selves,
for we deny not Christ's spiritual presence taught in the Scriptures, and
received in Christ's Primitive Church; but we deny your imagined carnal
presence, never recorded in Gods book, nor believed of ancient father, nor
ever known to Christ's spouse the Primitive Church: as you have heard truly
prooved. But this is your great fault usually practiced, that whether in
Scriptures or Fathers you hear of Christ's body and blood, and his presence,
or real presence: you imagine presently without further examination, that it
is your carnal presence, which thing is grown up with you from a private
error to a public heresy.

Tyndall, Frith. Barnes, Cranmer, left it as a thing indifferent to believe the
real presence. Catho. Priests.
So that the adoration (says Frith) be taken away, because there then
remains no poison, Fox in Mar^yrel. Kemnitius in Exam. Conc. ^rid contra ^^n
de F^. ch^ristia.
whereof any ought to be afraid of. Yet Kemnitius upon the assurance of the
real presence, approoveth the custom of the Church, in adoring Christ in the
Sacrament by the authority of Saint Augustine, and S. Ambrose, in Psalm 98.
Eusebius Emissenus, etc. Saint Gregory Nazianzen: and says it is impiety to
do the contrary. So that the brood being of such agreement we have the less
occasion to embusie our brains to confute them.
GEntlemen: by pieces you repeat some of their words, not knowing (as it
seems) the occasion; and so you utterly mistake the sense, which was this.
These godly Martirs perceiving the flame of persecution to burn so fast, and
mount so high, as it was neither bounded in measure nor mercy: and only for
a new vpstart opinion having no warrant from Gods word. They in a Christian and
brotherly discretion, exhorted the learned brethren, only to preach that
necessary Article of our free justification by faith in the personal merits
of Christ. And touching the Lords Supper, to teach to the people the right use
of the same: yet not to meddle with the manner of the presence, for fear of
danger, if not death: but leave it as a thing indifferent, till the matter in
a time of peace might be reasoned at large on both parties by the learned.
Provided ever, that poisonfull adoration be taken away. The premises
considered, what can ye now gather, that prooveth with you, or disprooveth us:
Nay, here is nothing but against you altogether. For if you had dealt truly
with the dead Martirs, or the living Catholics, these collections (and not
yours) you should from hence have gathered.

1 First, these Martirs taught with their breath, and sealed with their blood,
that your carnal presence and transubstansiated Christ, was neither
commandment given by God, nor Article of our faith ever taught in the
primitive Church, but a late invented opinion devised by man.

2 Secondly, they wished the brethren (considering it was but man's invention,
and never recorded in gods book) that therefore they should not hazard t^^
l^^^ of their lives, which would tend so much to the (...) of Christ's Church.

3 Thirdly, they wished it to be taken for a season as a (...), yet not
absolutely, but with these cautions.

1 First, that adoration or worshipping of the creatures were quite taken away,
which never was done by you: and therefore they held it not absolutely
indifferent.

2 Secondly, till the Church of Christ had peace and test from your bloudle
and butcherly slaughters, wherein the matter might be decided, not with
faggots, but scriptures: which was not granted in their days: and therefore
you greatly wrong the dead, when you make them speak that thing absolutely,
which was limited by them with conditions.

Now I appeall to the indifferent Reader, whether you deserve not a sharp
reproof, thus to dazell the eyes and amaze the minds of the simple
Catholics, by violent wresting the writings of the martirs, persuading the
ignorant, that they should either dissent in this opinion amongst themselves,
consent with you, or vary from us. Whereas both they and we, then and now,
consent with Scriptures, Fathers, and Primitive Church, in unity and verity
of doctrine, against your dissentions, pestiferous errors, and open
blasphemies. And next, you bring in another learned Protestant Chemnitius, who
(you say) alleges Augustine, Ambrose, and Gregory Nazianzen, to approve
your adoration in your sacrament: Intimating to the world, that we should
either allow that in you which publicly we preach against; or else, that we
should be at a discord amongst our selves touching this your opinion But the
matter being exactlie examined out of these Fathers themselves, and not by your
Enchiridions or hearesay, the Catholics shall see you wrong us, and abuse
them. And first, it seems very plain, you never saw or at least never read
Chemnitius, and my reasons be these.

First, you know not so much as his right name, much less his precise opinion,
for you misspel his name, Ke^^nitius for Che^^nitius, which had been a small
fault if you had rightly alleged him touching the matter. For your
^ridentiue Canon commands an external or outward worship of Christ in the
Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine. And Chemnitius he condemns
your outward worship for ydolatrous, and teaches only an inward spiritual
worship. And to prove what I say, I will truly allege your Canon: then
Chemnitius his examination of it, and then let the Catholics but judge
indifferently whether of us deal more truly and syncerelie in this case.
^qum. pars. 2. canon. 6. page. 434.
This is your Canon: Si quit dexerit in sancto Eucharistia sacramento Christum
vnigenitum Dei filium, non esse cultulatriae etiam externo adorandu^ and
solemnitor circumgestandum, etc. Anathema sit: That is, if any man shall say
that in the blessed sacrament of thanksgiving, that Christ the only begotten
Son of God, is not to be worshipped with that outward and divine worship
which is proper and due only to God, as well when the Sacrament is carried
about in procession, as in the lawful use of the same, page. 435. 436. 437.
let him be accursed. Martyn Chemnius examining this your Canon, first
condemns your fained Transubstansiation, and shows the reason: for says
he, unless the Church of Rome had devised this Transubstansiation, you should
have been palpable ydolaters, worshipping the creatures for Christ. And
therefore she imagined that the substance of bread and wine were quite changed
into Christ's body and blood, no substance of them remaining, lest the simplest
should spy their ydolatrie.

Secondly, he expreslie condemns your outward worship as ydolatrous, page.
444. lines 2. 3. 4
and shows there that Christ must be received by faith, and worshipped in
spirit and truth. And afterward he says, comprehenditur antem veta interior,
and spiritualis veneratio and adoratio Christi i^ il^is verbis institutionis.
hoc facite, etc. for the true inward and spiritual worship of Christ, is
comprehended in the words of Christ's institution, Do this in rememberance of
me. Now let the best minded Catholics see your unjust dealing with both quick
and dead, pretending that either Chemnitius (as you say) allowed your outward
worship in your Sacrament, or that we ^arre amongst our selves touching the
same: which both be untrue. For you hold the worship to be outward, he and
we inward: you carnal, he and we spiritual: and briefly, if you will yet
read him diligently, you shall find he utterly condemns your carnal
presence, and your external worship, approoving the one to be a fable, the
other blasphemy. And thus much for your ignorance touching Martyn Chemnitius,
whom it seems you never saw, but only took him by the ears, as
Water-bearers do their Tankerds. Again, you say, that Chemnitius upon the
assurance of the real presence, approves the custom of the church in adoring
Christ in the Sacrament, by the authority of Saint Augustine: Ambrose in Psalm.
98. by Euschius Emissenus, and Saint Gregory Nazianzen charging as many as
do the contrary with impiety: to every of which thus I answer.

This Psalm. according to the Hebrew is the 99 Psalm. and upon this place S.
Augustine writ, as I will a leadge him of your Paris print: his words be these.
Aug. in psa. 98.
Quid. car^^ Maria, carnem accepit: and quia in ipsa carne hic ambalauit, etc.
ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit: Nemo autem illam carnem
manducat nisi pr^us adorauerit: which took flesh of the flesh of Marie, and
because in that flesh he walked here upon the earth, he gave to us that flesh
to eat to our salvation, for no man eats that flesh unless first he worship
it. Now let us examine this place, and see how that fitteth your purpose.
First, the flesh of Christ that Augustine will have worshipped, must be thus
conditioned.

1 First, it must be borne of the virgin Marie: b^ yours was made of bread, and
therefore not that tr^ flesh of Christ which Augustine speaks of, and not to
be worshipped without ydolatrie.

2 Secondly, that flesh of Christ which August (...) will have us worship,
walked visiblie with his Chur^ here upon earth before Christ's ascension. And
vn^ you can approve unto us by canonical warrant, s^^ a Christ in your
Sacraments as walked upon the ear^ and died on the cross, Augustine will not
have h^ worshipped: which you shall never be able to do ^^ring the world.

3 Thirdly, that flesh of Christ which August^ will have us to worship, was
given to us for our s^vation, which I hope you will say (if you say truel^ was
actuallie, reallie, and in deed upon the cross. A in the Sacrament
misticallie, or by representation, has been prooved out of your own books.

Thus you wrest that which Augustine spoke of t^ blessed flesh of Christ, to
your fabulous supposed fle^ made by a priest: whereby you wickedlie abuse t^
learned father, and deceive the simple Reader. For the flesh of Christ which
was conceived by the holy Gho^ and borne of the blessed virgin, must be eaten
with t^ spirit, and adored with the spirit, as Augustine there spe^keth: and
neither adored with your external api^ worship, nor eaten with your corporal
mouth. But speak according to the Scriptures and Fathers, the vrie eating of
Christ, is the true adoring or worshippin^ of Christ: because as he is eaten,
so he is adored, b^ he is eaten spirituallie by faith: therefore he is ador^
spirituallie by faith. For faith is the chiefest braun^ of Gods honor. Your
next Author is Ambrose upon the 98. Psalm. which you imagine proves your
exte^nall worship of Christ in the Sacrament.

But Gentlemen, why deal you so untruly w^ Gods heritage, in a matter of this
importance? did ^rose ever write upon this place, I tell you no, Am^se indeed
writ upon the Psalms, till the end of the ^entie one Psalm. and there brake
off, and reconti^ed at the 118. Psalm. but never writ of the 98. or 99. ^d, as
you untruly deliver. For Chemnitius says ^s. I^a Ambrosius, in eundem Psalmi
versum inquit. (...) speaks Ambrose upon the same fifth verse of the ^^e,
adorate scabellum, worship ye his foot stool: T^m^. ^. lib. de
spiritu-sancto cap. 12. page. 157.
the says not that Ambrose writ upon that Psalm, but ^on a verse of the
Psalm, and not in that Tome, but another, and yet not of a worship external,
as you (...), but of a spiritual worship, such as Christ tea^th in the fourth
of John. For if you had read Am^se you should have heard him speak thus; Hoc in
loco sprituali Christ's adoratione, etc. In this place we will ^eake only of
the spiritual worship of Christ. So ^mbrose utterly (if you had understood
him rightly) ^demneth your external worship of Christ. But be^se Aug. writing
upon this Psalm. expounds Ambrose ^s opinion upon that one verse, adorate
scabellum, wor^^p ye his footstool, etc. and both against your ex^nall
worship, I will only desire you to read your own ^gustine of your own print,
both thorowlie and deli^^ratelie, and then I doubt not but you will see your
^rour, and reform your judgment. But now let us (...) how fitly you allege
Eusebius to prove your ex^ernall worship of Christ in the sacrament.

Saint Hierome makes mention of Eusebius Emesenus ^shop of Emesa in Syria,
Hieron. de script^^ Ecclesiast. in Eusebio Emeseu^ Tom 1. page. 296.
who writ in Greek very ^amedlie, and lived about the time of Constantius,
a^out the year of our Lord 342. and was buried in ^ntioche: yet some very
craftily have stitched certain ^atten Homilies upon this Greek fathers
sleeue, and ^orkt upon him a strange wonder, in making him ^peake Latten at
least five hundred years after his death, that was ignorant of the language
during his life. But here I will not take upon me to discuss whether this was
Eusebius Emesenus the Syrian, or Eusebius Emissenus that Canisius says was a
Frenchman, Cauisij ^r^n in Anno. 500.
and hoc fort^ tempore charuis, and peradventure (and peradventure not)
flourished at that time: or whether it was Gratians Eusebius. But this is most
sure, that Gratian does grace his Canon with his name, but which of them, any,
or none of them, it shall neither help nor hurt, because we will examine the
matter, not the man. The Canon is this: Did. 2. de consecr. canon quia corpus
page. 432. in fino.
and cum reverendum Altarecibis spiritualibus ascendis satiandus, sacrum Dei
tus corpus and sanguinem fide respice, honora maxim, totum haustu interioris
hominis assume. That is: and when thou come to the reverend Altar to be fed
with spiritual meats: look upon and consider with thy faith, the body and
blood of thy God, Your first decrees printed at Paris and your last at Louaine
something differ in words and periods.
honor it with great reverence, and receive the whole body with the swallow
of the inward man.

Now examine Chemnitius his doctrine and your opinion: he brings in this Canon
to approve the spiritual eating or worship of Christ in the Sacrament. And
you allege it to make good your external Tridentine adoration of your breaden
God. Behold, every word of this your own Canon is a witness against you, for
the meat is spiritual, the man is spiritual, the manner is spiritual, the
sight is spiritual, and the worship or honor is spiritual. Here is nothing
corporal or outward, as you say, but all inward and spiritual, as we teach.
In Epitaphio Gorgonia sore^is sua.
And so to the next witness, which is Gregory Nazianzen: his words be these,
Invoca^as Christum, etc. she called upon Christ that is worshipped on the Altar
were the mysteries are celebrated. I yray you what can you gather out of this
to prove your external worship of Christ in the Sacrament, with cap. thumpe,
and knee. Gregory says, she worshipped Christ, therefore you will conclude,
it was your breaden Christ: too hasty a conclusion to be true. Or do you
think she worshipped Christ as enclosed in those ^isteries? Surely no, for
Gregory says it was in the dark night she approached to the Altar. At which
time there was neither priest standinge by the Altar, mysteries upon the
Altar, nor he The Pixe was invented by Innocentius 3, 1214. and Gregory Naz.
write Anno. 567. Ioh. 4.20. Exodus 3.12.
pixe hanging over the Altar, and therefore she worshipped Christ that was
called upon at the Altar, in the celebration of the mysteries: not that he was
enclosed under the forms of those mysteries, no more then the mountain
wherein the fathers worshipped, was either God substantiallie, or that God was
enclosed in that mountain under the forms and shapes of the mountain. But
the mountain was the place where God was worshipped. And so the Altar was the
place where Christ was called upon and worshipped, not that Christ was there
locallie by a corporal descention, but that he was worshipped there being
called upon and served with a spiritual ascension.

And if you had read Gregory Nazianzen a little after, you should have read
that Gorgonia his sister, carried about her still some pieces of the figure of
the sacred body and blood of Christ, as it was the custom of that age: and
with her repentant tears she bedewed the same, not that she externallie
honored the same.

Here Gregory calls the Sacrament but a figure of the sacred body and blood
of Christ, Esaia 42.^^
therefore it had been ydolatrie to have worshipped it. Yet notwithstanding
your missaleadging and misunderstanding of the premises, as also your
dissenting from Scriptures, Fathers, and ancient Popes, and irreligious
dangerous ^arres among your selves, you easily disburden your brains from
further answer, thinking you have confuted the protestants, and satisfied the
Catholics, and so strike up your victorious plaudite in this manner: So that
the br^^d being of such agreement, we have the less occasion to embusie our
brains to confute them.

Here Gentlemen you call us a brood: we will take it in the best sense, for we
confess we are Christ his brood, hatched under the warmth of his merciful
wings coming unto him like hungry chickens at the heavenly clock and call
of his preaching ministry to receive that promised meat which indureth unto
everlasting life. math. 23.37. Ioh. 6.27.
And as for your pleasant Rhetorical conceit expressed under this word
agreement, it shows that in a merry mood you have not forgot all your
verbal tropes and figures But when you can show plainly wherein the
Protestants jar amongst themselves, Antiphrasis.
or dissent from the Scriptures and primitive Church in matter of faith; then
bestow upon them these biting figures. In the mean time, (your iarres amongst
your selves: nay your revoult from scriptures and all primitive practice being
made now so manifest to the Catholics) it stands you upon for the discharge of
a good conscience, to confess and recant them: for cure them you cannot. And
thus much concerning your unfortunate success in alleging some of our chief
Protestants, Fox page. 586 Acts and monuments.
as you term them: And now to that which follows.

The six Articles established by act of Parliament, Anno 1540. at the planting
of the Protestants faith.
Catho. Priests.
1 That there is the real presence of Christ's natural body and blood in the
Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine.

2 That the communion under both kinds is not necessary

3 That Priests by the law of God may not marry.

4 That vows of chastity ought to be observed.

5 That Masses are agreeable to Gods law, and most fruitful.

6 That confession is necessary.

The foresaid Parliament, and every one saying, publishing, preaching,
teaching, disputing, or holding opinion against the first of these Articles, is
adjudged a manifest was burnt and lost his Lands and goods as in case of high
Treason.
heretic: and misbeleevers in the They but lost life and goods as in case of
Felony, which was then a favor.
rest rigorously punished.

GEntlemen, I expected that your proofs should have ascended to the first five
hundred years after Christ's ascension, and now they descend so low, that there
is small hope either of your recall or recoverie. I might justly take
exceptions against this your Parliament proof, because it is many hundred
years too young to prove our matter in question: yet in respect it is an Act
done by all the Nobles and learned of the land, and least the Catholics
should think it unanswerable, I am content to admit it, yet still keeping my
ordinary course, in examination of the proofs by Scriptures, Fathers, and the
ancient Bishops and Church of Rome.

1 The first Article is sufficiently confuted in the

2 The second Article crosses Christ's blessed institution, Revel. 22.19.
But you know there is a woeful curse pronounced by Gods spirit, against such
as add or detract to or from Christ's Testament. Did. 2. de consec. canon,
Comperimus fol. 430.
And your own Pope Gelasius says flat sacrilege to their and your charge,
for this your half communion, contrary to Christ's institution, saying: Aut
integra sacramenta percipeant aut ab integris arceantur, quia divisio vnius
eius demque mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest pervenire Either let
them receive the whole sacraments, or else let them be kept back from the
whole, because the parting of one and the same mystery, cannot be done without
great sacrilege. The beginning of your Canon calls this half communion
superstition, and the later part calls it sacrilege. Yet says your
parliament proof, the receiving in both kinds is not necessary to salvation.
Then I say, if it be not necessary, why did Christ use it? if we should not
practice it, why did he command it?

Now if either Christ's commandment, Hoc facite, Do this, or the Popes law
can prevail with you, follow Christ his institution: If you care for neither
Christ nor Pope, then the Catholics may see that you are Antichrists and
Antipopes, and deny Christ's written truth, and the primitive practice of the
Church of Rome, and the best that you can make of your selves, is not ancient
Roman Catholics, but new vpstart Romish heretics. And so to your third
Article.

That priests by the law of God may not marry.

I may not here make any stay, only touch a point or two and so away. This
Article is contrary to holy Scriptures, ancient fathers, the practice of the
primitive Church, and the Canons of the Popes. In the old Testament the
marriage of the priests is recorded and commended.

Ierem. 1.1. Exodus 18.
The holy Prophet Jeremie was the son of a priest. Zapp^ra was the priest of
Midians daughter, and married to Moses the Lords Maiestrate.

Luke. 1.8.9.
Again, in the new Testament John Baptist was the son of Zaoharie a priest.
And the Scriptures touching marriage give rules without exception or
limittation. To avoid fornication, 1. Cor. 7.2.
let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband. And to the
Hebrevvs he says, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the bad
undefiled, but vvheremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Heb. 13.4
And the same Apostle points out to all posterities, that the Authors and
vpholders of this Article be liers and hippocrits, 1 Timothy ^ 1.2.3.
and the forbidding of ^^^es and marriage, to be the doctrine of Devils. And
this is only proper to the Church and Chap^^^ of Rome, as now they stand in
the view of God, Angles, and men.

Did not Tertullian write two books to his wife, Tertull. page 42^. and 427.
in the first he gave direction unto her toching his goods and possessions, if
he should die. In the second book, directs her in her Widdowhood, either to
live solelie serving the Lord, or else to marry in the Lord. But in no case to
marry (as some did, for honor or ambition) with the Gentiles. Who I pray you
ever checked or controlled him for so doing?

Ignatius the Martyr commends the Apostles and other ministers, Qui operam
dederunt nuptijs, Ad philodelph^^se^ Epist 5. page. 34. Did 56. Canon
Cenomanensius fol. 67. Col. 4. and 68. col. 1.
who ever blamed him for it? Nay, your own Popes and Canons condemns you and
your parliament proof. For thus they record to your disgrace: Cum ergo and
sacerd^tibus nati du summos pontific^^ supra legantur esse promoti, non sunt
intelligendi de fornication^, sed de legitimit coniugijs nati, etc. When
therefore we read that priests sons be promoted to the Popedom, you must
not think that they be bastards, borne in fornication, but sons borne in
lawful marriage: which marriage was lawful for priests, before the late
prohibition, and this day is lawefull still in the East Church.

Here your own Popes record that priests were married, and that their
marriage was lawful, and that Popes have been priests sons bone in law
full marriage. And that there was a prohibition to the contrary, made by man.
But no scripture or warrant from God.

Again, there he two other Canons of the Popes, that will batter down your
papered rampires of humane constitution: Did. 28. siquis fol. 3^.
the first begins thus, Si quis doeuerit sacerdotem sub obtentu religionis
propriam v^orem contemnere, Anathema sit: If any man teach that a Priest may
contemn his wife under color of religion, let him be accursed. And the second
canon immediately follows, which does second this. Si quis discernit
presbyter^^ coniugatum tanquam occasion nuptiarum, quod offere non debet, and
ab eius oblatione ideo abstinet, Anathema sit. If any man judge that a married
Priest ought not to offer, (or to do his office) by reason of his marriage, and
therefore abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed.

did. 31 Ni cae^a sy^oaus fol. 34
Paphnutius also being but one man, confounded a whole Synod of your Bishops
and learned men, as your Popes Records witness, and by Scriptures enforced
them to subscribe that Priests marriage was lawful. Here you see magna est
veritas and pravalet. Esdras. 1. cap. 4.41. Ror^^ in vita Mala chiae fol. 2.
col. 4. about the years of our Lord 1130.
Truth is great (though in one against many) and prevails.

And to come near home unto you with domestical presidents: were not eight
learned men, all of them immediate Archbishops of Armachan in this land, and all
of them married? who utterly refused this tyrannical and dyabolicall Romish
yoke of forced single life. Nay in those days the Nobility and Gentilitie of
that Province defended that true religion with their swords against the Pope,
and they refused to receive Orders, Bishoprics, or Decrees from Rome.
Whereupon you may see that Bernard then in the Popes quarrel, calls the
Nobility and Gentility of that Province generationem malam and adulteram, a
wicked and adulterous generation, and says it was Diabolica ambitio potentum,
8. Immediate Lo. Archbishops. of Armach^. married.
a divelish ambition of the Peers and mighty men. And execranda succestio, a
cursed succession, that eight Bishops successively all married (yet they all
learned, and preached the Gospel and ministered the sacraments) and yet neither
they, the Nobility, nor Gentilitie, cared two pence for the Popes blessing or
curssing. O quantum mutantur ab illio? O Lord, how far is the Nobility and
Gentilitie of Vlster, and that province, nay the most part of the kingdom
changed from that old Apostolical religion, and become slaves and idiots in
superstitious service to that late Italian priest the Pope, Gods enemy and the
Queens butcher. Mark this ye Noblemen and Gentlemen of Ireland Imitate your
Auncesto^^ in true honor.
Then they drew their swords against the Pope to defend the truth: now too
many of late drew their swords for the Pope against the truth. The Lord open
their eyes to see the truth, and give them hearts to renounce this new heresy,
and cleave to the Apostolical Roman verity. Then will all of them be as
ready to fight the Lords battle against the Pope, as many of late fought the
Queens battle most honorably against the Spaniard. And that golden mouthed
father Chrisost. upon this place of Paul. Chrysostom. hom. 2. upon first of ^itu^.
That a Bishop must be the husband of one wife, asked this question, what
moved Paul thus to write to Timothy? he answers himself saying, obstruere
pra^sus i^^endit hareticorum ora qui nuptias damnant, ostenden^, etc. The
Apostle intends to stop the mouths of all heretics that condemns
marriage, showing that the thing in it self is faultlesse, and a thing so
precious, vt cum ipsa etiam possit quisptam ad sanctum Episcopatus solium
subvehi: that a man being married, may be promoted to the holy function of a
Bishop. And your Pope Gregory says plainly, writing ad Theotistam
Patricium, that if marriage must be dissolved because of religion: Sciendum est
enquit, yet says he, you must understand, quia etsi hoc lex humana concessit.
lex tamen divina prohibuit, that if man's law grant that, yet Gods law forbid
eth it.

Now ye see Scriptures, Fathers, popes, practice of the primitive Church, and
presidents of godly Bishops and priests witness with us against you, that the
marriage of priests is lawful and honorable and your parliament stuff
unlawful and horrible: the one has the warrant from Christ, the other is the
doctrine of Devils, from which recall your selves, your confederates and
novices, least in abstaining from lawful matrimony, ye fall into damnable
adultery: which the Lord prevent for Christ's sake. And thus much for the first
three Articles.

That vows of chastity ought to be observed.

That masses are agreeable to Gods law.

That confession is fruitful.

These three Articles are as repugnant to Christ's truth, as the rest. The fifth
Article (Christ willing) in my next Treatise shall be handled, the fourth and
sixth Article, as you hereafter give occasion. Now let the Catholics consider
how vnmercifullie and immeasurable, the bloody Bishop of that Italian
murdering Priest shed the innocent blood of so many Saints, because they
would not say and subscribe that these six Articles (being in deed
heretical) were Apostolicali and Catholic. Was this the planting of the
Protestants faith? no, this parliament was established for no other end, but
to supplant them. And therefore these six Articles were fitly termed the whip
with six strings, whip with six strings
wherewith your forefathers whipped to death these innocent lambs (for neither
conspiracy nor treason) but only for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintained. But they cease not to cry still for vengeance against
those murderers, saying: How long Lord holy and true, do not then judge
and avenge our blood on them that dvvell on the earth? Revel. 6.9.10.
But thanks be to God, those channels of innocent blood shed then in England by
the Popes direction, have quite for ever banish out of England the Pope and his
superstition. And as the mother that would before Solomon have the child
divided, was not the true mother, so the Church of Rome that delights so much
in blood, 1. Kings. 3.17. etc.
cannot be the true Church. Time will not permit to write the damnable fruit
that this filthy Munkish chastity yields: but of that when opportunity is
offered: yet still nothing but what your own friends record.

The fourth proof. Deniers of the real presence condemned as heretics.
Catho. Priests.

Ignatius ad Smyrnenses, and Theodores dialog. 3. circu medium, do make mention
of certain deniers of the real presence: but so, as they had none to accord
unto them. Also Iconomachi (as may appear out of the 7 Council) did affirm
that the Sacrament was but an image of Christ: and they also had no
followers: only E^rengarius in the time of Leo the ninth, about five hundred
years past, who thricae recanted such opinion as erroneous, mantained the
only spiritual presence. And he in three Councels was condemned, in Conc.
Turon. sub Victor. 2. in Conc. Romans sub Nich. 2. in Concit. Romans sub Gregory
none. The Council of Trent remains for the rest that have insued.

GEntlemen, Rider.
you should have brought Theodoret before Ignatius, because Theodoret only
reports some such thing out of Ignatius (but Ignatius himself has not one
word of it) and it seemeh still you never read Theodoret, because you say circa
medium, not knowing in which of the three and thirty chapters it was. To be
brief, that which you think makes for you, is in the ninteenth chapter,
which is but a sacramental Metonymie, as the rest of the fathers use: and you
would wrest it to your litterall and proper sense; which is still your error
spoken of and confuted before. But read Theodoret dialog. 1. cap. 8. and he
will expound himself and confute you. And for Ignat. I have read his twelve
Epistles upon this occasion twice over, and from his first Epistle ad Mariam
Cassoboliten to his last ad Romans, there is no such thing in that reverend
Archbishop and Martyr, but the contrary: which makes me to wonder with what
conscience you can belie so godly a Martyr, and abuse the Catholics your
loving friends. And as for your Iconomachi, they are very impertinentlie
brought in this place, your title of Images were more proper for them. Yet that
you may see they fit not this purpose, I refer you for satisfaction to the
Popes own Synod and Decree, beginning at Cum diem extremum impiorum Arabum
Tyrannus quem Soliman nominabant, Ex Synod 2. Act 5. page 549.
claufisset, etc. and after follows the Popes decree. Petrus deuotissimus
presbyter, etc. Read this Act and Decree, and they will give you satisfaction
of your impertinent allegations: and if the Pope cannot content his Chaplens,
then you are malcontents indeed.

Berengarius.
Lastly, you bring in poor Berengarius upon the stage, to bear his faggot
and recant his error, of the spiritual presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
which we have sufficiently proved before to be (by scriptures, fathers, and
Popes,) the true presence. And now you bring in silie Berengarius his
recantation, to be our confutation. I pray you let me ask you but one
question: can a reason drawn from a particular conclude generally. If it
should, I would reason thus with you: Bonner, Standish, wih others, preached
stoutly against the Popes supremacy in king Edward his days: therefore the
Popes Supremacy is not lawful. Would you admit this kind of reasoning, These
Iurers be too young to give evidence, and too partial to be trusted with the
trial of this Issue.
I think no: no more do we the other. For shall one man's weakness,
inconstancy, and fall from the truth, conclude generally against the truth;
God forbid. But you will object and say, it is not one man but three several
Synods. But I pray you remember that subornation of witnesses, and packing of
Iuries done in Westminster Hall, is most severelie punished in that most
honorable Star Chamber: and shall not the Pope and his followers be called to
an account one day before the great judge Jesus, for the suborning of witnesses
and packing of corrupt Iuries to deface Christ's truth, and to maintain their
own forgeries? The Catholics demand a proof out of Scriptures and fathers
for the prooving of your Roman opinion touching Christ's real and corporal
presence in the Sacrament, and you bring in the Popes Stipendarie Chaplens
gathered by the Popes summons to uphold the Popes rotten declining kingdom,
and every one of them at least 1100. years after Christ's ascension, and one of
them within this sixty years to prove a thing done a thousand years before.
Now I give Irelands Catholics this friendly caveat, not to cleave to the
Popes Romish religion, but to Paul's Roman religion: and not to rest contented
with the name of Catholics, until they have the doctrine that is Apostolical
and Catholic. And now to your fifth proof, being your last refuge and least
help.

The fifth proof. Catho. Priests.
Of many miraculous testimonies of the real presence.
GEntlemen, you know in Schools, an fit, Rider.
is ever before quid sit: In architecture the foundation is before the
building. In Christ's divinity, man's philosophy, and common sense, the cause is
ever before the effect. But you, contrary to divinity, reason, and
philosophy, will have a thing to work wonders supra naturam, above nature,
which is not in rerum natura, neither has any being at all: for you would
make the simple people believe, that your transubstantiated Christ works
miracles, and yet you have not, nay you cannot prove any such a Christ, and
if there were such a Christ, he is none of ours: for he was never borne of
the blessed virgin, nor shed one drop of blood for our sins, and therefore we
renounce him as none of our Savior.

It is strange to see the difference of the old Church of Rome, and this last
giddiepated Church of Rome. The last Church of Rome, Pars 2. decret^ aurei
cans. 1. Q. 1 page 119. ^enaemus fraires.
thinks that Church to be no true Church, unless she work miracles: but I
pray you hear old Romes censure of new Romes opinion, Praeter vnitatem and
qui facit miracula Glossa Ibid: nihil ad vitam aeternam,
nihil est: in vnitate fuit populus Israel, and non faciebat miracula: praeter
vnitatem erant magi Pharaonis and faciebant similia Moysi: He that works
miracles without the unity of the Church does nothing: the Israelits were in
the unity of the Church, and did no miracles: the Magicians of Pharao were out
of the Church, and yet did like things to Moses. Therefore true miracles such
as Moses wrought, may be done by such as are not members of the true Church,
and so consequently miracles by old Romes confession, prove neither any
such wherein they are workt, to be the true Church, nor the workers true
members of the same. And then it follows: Petrus Apostolus, etc. Peter the
Apostle wrought miracles, and so did Simon Magus many things: yet there were
many Christians that could not work miracles, as Peter did, or as Simon did,
and notwithstanding rejoiced that their names were written in heaven.

The old Church of Room taught us to be assured of our salvation in this life.
Now for the Catholics good, let us examine the faith of old Rome. The
children of Israel wrought no miracles yet the true Church: Pharao his
Inchaunt is workt miracles, yet were the false church. And that many of
Christ's flock that neither workt miracles as Peter did: yet they rejoice for
that they were assured that their names are written in the book of life. And
thus much for your own Pope against your own miracles.

And does not your own Doctor Lyra tell you plainly, that, The new Church of
Room to doubt of our salvation in this life.
and similiter fit aliquando in ecclesia manima deceptio populi in miraculis
fictis.
factis a sacerdotibus vel eis ad haerentibus propter lucrum temporale, etc.
and so in like manner it comes to pass, that sometimes in the Church the
people are often most shamefullie cousoned with fained and false miracles
devised by the priests or their followers, even for a temporal gain: Upon
Dan. cap. 14. page 222. but Lyra printed ut Venice has.
which shameful shifts of cousoning and covetous priests. Lyra wishes to be
severelie punished by the chief Prelates, and to expel it and them out of the
Church.

And your own Alex. de hales part. 4. quast. 53. member 4.
Irrefragabilis Doctor (for that is one of his titles) records more special
iugling then this, saying. In sacramento apparet caro, interdum humana
procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica. In your very Sacrament of the
Altar, there appears flesh, sometimes workt by the nimble conveiance of man,
sometimes by the working of the devil: so that if there be any flesh in the
Sacrament of the Altar, whether visible or invisible, it is either wrought
through the priests legerdemaine, or the devils cunning and craft. Now
Gentlemen, you have brought your miracles to a fair market, I trust after a
while the discreet Catholics will not give you a halfepennie for a hundred of
them.

Tharasius the President of that ydolatrous Council demanded of all the
learned in that Synod, Nycen. si^ 1. Act. ^
why their images then did not work miracles. Answer was made out of Gods
book, that miracula non credentibus data sunt: Miracles are only given to
the unbelievers. If you be too busy with your fained miracles, we will make a
whole superstitious Synod yet to brand your Church and her children in the
forehead for unbelief. Crysost. Hom. 4^. in math.


And that reverend Chrysostom says, per signa cognoscebatur qui essent very
christiani, qui falsi: Nunc autom signerum operatio omnino levata est: magis
autem invenitur apud cos qui falsi sunt christiani.

In old time it was known by miracles, who were the true Christians, and who
were the false. But now the working of miracles is taken away altogether, and
is rather found amongst those that be false disguised Christians. Note but two
things out of Chrysostom: First, miracles are now quite taken away: Next,
only they remain with false Christians in the false Church: so if your Church
will have miracles, by Chrisostomes censure she is a false Church, and all in
that Church be false Christians. But if your miracles were true, as all Gods
and Christ's miracles are, then the change must be as well of the forms as of
the substances. When Moses rod was turned into a serpent, Exodus 4.3.
it was a serpent in deed, Tho. 2.9.10. These prove your miracles to be false
and no likeness of a rod remaining. And so when Christ turned water into
wine, there was neither color nor taste of water remaining, and so in all true
miracles. But you would have in your Sacrament, a change of the substance of
bread, yet the accidents, as whiteness, roundnesse, thinness, taste, and
relish, notwithstanding remaining, which is impossible, and not only
contrary to the word of God, but also to the faith of those primitive fathers.
And Augustine urges this matter very Evangelicallie, August. de civitate dei
lib. 22. cap. 8. live. 3. 4.
saying: Quisquis ad huc prodigia, vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipsum
prodigi^^^, qui mundo credenta non credit. Whosoever he be that yet requires
wonders and miracles, to bring him to believe the truth, is himself a
wonderful miracle, that the world believing, yet he remains still in
unbelief. And Augustine else where tells you flatly, August. de Trinitate
lib. 3. cap. 10.
that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there is no miracle: read him and
follow him. And this is not to pass untouched, that as your miracles are false
in themselves, so they are invented and done to a most wicked end, which is to
confirm your false doctrine of real presence, Purgatory, praying to Images,
and the like trash, which are clean contrary to Christ's miracles: for their
end was twofold: the first, to confirm our faith in Christ's divinity: and the
other, to assure our souls of salvation through his name. Ioh. 20.30 31.
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is that Christ
the Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life through his name.

Eusebius recounteth, Catho. Priests. lib. 5. cap. 1.
that in the persecution under Severe, that it was a great accusation against
Christians, that they did eat man's flesh, because they believed that they did
receive the body of Christ.
GEntlemen, Rider,
in that book are five and twenty chapters, and not one word of this matter
in any of those: and again, you mistake the time, for Severus then governed
not. If it were under Severus, it should then be in the sixth book, where you
shall find forty five chapters, yet there also is not one word of this. Yet if
you mark this that you bring against us, if it were to be found in Eusebius,
it makes nothing against us: for though the Pagans were as gross in the
matter of the Sacrament, as Nicodemus was in the matter of regeneration, it is
neither miracle nor wonder, but a thing too common now and then. And for true
Christians to eat Christ's flesh spirituallie by faith, is or ought to be no
miracle in the Church, but the practice of the Church. But if you had read
Eusebius your self diligently, you should have found that in the fifth book
and seventh chapter, he would have told you that then miracles ceast, and
were not in Gods Church: and he produces old Father Jraneus for confirmation
of the same. Ex lib. 2. Iranes. cap 58.
You bring in Eusebius to maintain miracles, and Eusebius himself denies
them. This is your old fashion, to enforce the fathers to speak not what they
would, but what you please: but read that place well, and remember that
Eusebius records that Church wherein miracles are wrought, not to be Gods
church: and so by his opinion your Church of Rome must be planted in the
suburbs of Babylon, not (in Civitate Dei) within the gates of Sion.

Catho. Priests. Amphil. and Guitmundus in vita Basilij.
A Jew present at mass, which Saint Basil did celebrate, was converted by
seeing a child divided in the blessed Sacrament.
I Find in Basil page 171. that he writ thirty chapters ad sanctum
Amphilochium Iconij Episcopum, but your Munkish Amphilochius I never saw, Rider.
neither do I care, because he is a forger of false miracles, and thus I
prove it. The fabler says, the Jew saw a child divided in the sacrament:
that could not be Christ, for he was a perfect man before his passion. And if
it were any besides Christ, or if it had been any in Christ his likeness, it
must be done as your own Author said a little before, either by man's slight,
or the devils illusion. A lier has need of a good memory.
But to be brief and yet plain, this must needs be a very shameful lie:
For how could Basil that lived about the year of our Lord 367. say your
mass, that was in hatching up and patching together at least four hundred or
five hundred years after his death? as shall (God willing) be prooved unto
you out of your own books, Tom. 6. Biblioth. patrum in lib Guitmundi Archi^.
de veritate Euch. li. 2. page 405
in my next Treatise of the mass: and so you feed the Catholics with these
lying legends, instead of holy scriptures.

(a) As for Guitmundus, he has neither one word of Saint Basils life, nor of
your miracle, yet he has some other thing as foolish and as untrue, or else
he had not been made Archbishop for his pains, wherein he greatly serviced
the Pope.

Cath. Pri. Amb. oration. 1. de obit. Satyri.
Ambrose speaks of a happy preservation of one from drowning, for devotion
toward the same.
IN deed Ambrose Tom. 5. page 720. Rider.
writes a treatise of the death of his brother Satyrus, wherein he shows the
great mercy of God always toward his Church and children in preserving them
from danger: and amongst the rest, he brings in an example of a great
number of passengers that in a storm suffered shipwreck, amongst whom there
was one seeing the danger, desired of some fellow passenger, So simple people
foolishlie carry about them halli^ bread, Crosses, Crucifixses, aguus dies, and
such tras^
to give him some part of the mystical bread (for in those days it was a
superstitious custom wickedlie tolerated, to carry some part of the
sacramental bread about them) which piece of bread when he had enclosed fast
in his garment, he leapt over board and did swim safe a shore. This now is
your wonderful miracle, out of which let us see what may be gathered. The best
note (says a learned writer) is, that he was a good swimmer. But to overthrow
your miracle, I will allege Ambrose his own words in that place: First, he
calls it but only fidei auxilium, a help of his faith. And if he had
thought it had been Christ, as you untruly teach, he would have called it
the Author and finisher of his faith, and therefore he took your Oste not to
be his maker, as you teach, nor his present preserver, but a strengthening of
his faith. And that you may see it is true which I say, afterward he calls
it Divinum fidelium sacramentum, the divine Sacrament of the faithful. And
therefore he thought not as you do, that Christ was locallie in the sacrament.

And again, there was no miracle in this, because other passengers that had
not such mystical bread, escaped safe to shore as well as he: for if the
having of that Host preserved him, the lack of the Host should have drowned
the rest. If your host cannot do the lesser much less the greater.
And it is very strange that the Catholics being so wise men in all other
matters, should be so sotted in this, as to think that a Wafercake consecrated
by a Priest or Pope, should preserve a man from drowning in water, when it
cannot preserve any good fellow from being drunk with wine. But to the rest
as they follow.

Catho. Priests. lib 8. cap. 5.
Sozomen recounteth how a woman not believing that Christ had transformed
bread into his body, was in danger by transformation of bread into a stone.
Rider.
SOme such thing there is, but you miss Sozomens words, sentences, and purpose,
and apply it still to your Host. The priest told Sozomen, that in giving the
Sacramental bread to a woman, she took it in her hand, and privilie gave it
her maid behind her: which the maid no sooner touched with her tooth, but it
turned into a stone, and the print of the tooth is this day to be seen in
Constantinople. Believe it that l^st.
I pray you Gentlemen, is this your Oste Christ's body? if it be as you teach,
(but f^e, it is a false lie) the^ were Christ's body turned into a stone, and
to be seen at Constantinople under the forms of a stone, as well as at Rome
under the forms of bread. O hellish divinity: Acts. 13.10.
but I say unto you Priests, and Jesuits, as Paul said to that false
Arch-Iesuit Bariesus: O full of all subtlety and mischief, children of the
devil, and enemies of all righteousness, will ye not cease yet to pervert
the straight ways of the Lord, but still like Elimas seek to turn Christ's
flock from Christ's faith?

Catho. Priests. Crantzius lib 5 cap 9
And a certain Duke of Saxony upon alike occasion did become a christian.
ALbertus Krantzius Hamburg: (you misspell his name) writes chronica Regnorum,
Rider,
Da^ia, Suetia, and Noruagiae, I have read diligently the ninth chapter of
every fifth book of these three histories, and there is no such thing in any
of them: therefore you are to blame still to abuse learned men to be the
Authors of these fables: and the Catholics most of all, to believe these
fables.

Optatus reports a grievonus punishment of abusere of a sacred Host. Catho.
Priests. Optatus lib. 2. contra Donatist.

OPtatus in deed speaks of two professed Donatists, Vrbanus Formensis and
Faelix Iduconeis, who coming into the country of Maurit^nia, and entering the
Churches at the time of the celebration of the holy communion, Rider.
commanded (Eucharistiam) the Eucharist to be given to their dogs, but the
dogs growing mad presently, set upon their own masters, and rent their
flesh with their teeth. A just judgment of God for their vile attempt of so
holy mysteries. But how dare you say that this was your consecrated Host*
Optatus says it was (Eucharistia) the Eucharist, that is to say, the whole
mysteries of thanksgiving (and not a part) which was cast unto dogs: but
Optatus says not that Christ was locallie enclosed in that bread. And you still
continue your wonted course, that wheresoever you find this word Ecclesiam, it
is your Church: and where you find this word Eucharistiam, that is your
consecrated Oste. But a loss, you deceive the Catholics, for you have
neither the true Church (because ye lack the sincere preaching of Gods word,
and the lawful use of his two sacraments, which be the two infallible marks
of Christ's Church) nor yet have you Christ's sacraments as he left to his
Church; but as they are disguised and profaned by the late Church of Rome,
which does as far differ from the primitive practice of the ancient Church of
Rome, as Christ's institution differs from man's invention.

Read Gregory Nazianzen in his funeral sermon of father, Catho. Priests.
mother, and sister, and you shall find miraculous demonstrations of the real
being of Christ.
Rider.
YOu still abuse the ears of the simple: Gregory has no such matter as you
speak of, wrought by your charmed Host: If you mean the spiritual real being
of Christ in your sacrament, This Gregory was dead 500. years before your
corporal presence was known.
that is none of yours: and if you mean of your corporal presence of Christ,
alas, Gregory never knew it. But Gentlemen, you are to blame to urge these
fables to prove a matter of faith you have alleged nothing that will weaken
your cause more then this. But if you will have the world to believe your
miracles, you must give over these iugling tricks, and show us what sick man
by your Host you have made sound: out of whom you have cast devils: what
Serpents you have touched (as Paul did) and yet were not stung: Acts. 28.5
which of you have drunk drink deadly poisoned, and were not killed: which
of you speak with new tongues, that were never by time nor Tutors taught?
Mark.
unless you can do these miracles, the Catholics must esteem you no better
then iuglers: And yet by your leave, if you could do all these and more to,
Galath. 1.9.
unless your doctrine be answerable to Christ his truth, the Apostle will
account you accursed: and we must not believe you.

Catho. Priests.
I trust this will suffi^^ for averring the consent of the Catholics, with
the fathers of the primitive Church which is the first Article we were
provoked to prove.
Rider,
I Know you are utterly deceived, and I trust, this will suffice the godly
learned and indifferent Reader, that you and your late Romish Catholics quite
dissent from Christ's truth and old Romes religion: and therefore remember from
whence ye are fallen, and return to the ancient (...) (while God gives you
time) which God grant, etc.

FINIS.

