THE Art of Iugling or Legerdemaine.

Wherein is deciphered, all the conueyances of Legerdemaine and Iugling, how
they are effected, and wherein they chiefly consist.

Cautions to beware of cheating at Cards and Dice.

The detection of the beggarly Art of Alcumistry. and, The foppery of foolish
cousoning Charms.

All tending to mirth and recreation, especially for those that desire to have
the insight and private practice thereof.

By S. R.

Quod noua testa capit, Inueterata sapit. Printed at LONDON for T. B. and are
to be sold by Samuel Rand, near Holborne-bridge. 1612.

TO THE INGENIOVS GENTLEman, and my loving father, Mr. WILLIAM BVBB.
THis short conceit, that I have writ of late,
To you kind Father BVBB, I dedicate,
Not that I mean hereby (good sir) to teach,
For I confess, your skills beyond my reach:
But since before with me much time you spent,
Good reason then, first fruits I should present:
That thankful The nature of this Bird is: that building her nest under the
cover of houses (as the Swallow does with us) leaus ever behind her for the
owner of the house, one young one, in token of her thankfulness: and as I may
say, for pawn of her rent.
Bird that leaves one young behind,
Ensamples me, to bear a thankful mind:
Ungrateful he, that thanks can not repay
To him, that has deserved it every way:
Accept (kind Sir) my love, that being done,
I ask no more, desire other Boon.
Your Lo son in all love, SA RID.
TO HIS LOVING FRIEND AND adopted Son Mr. Sa Rid.
Most worthy son,
YOur labor and observance herein, with the gift of your first fruits, is
both worthy commendations and acceptan^e: and to ^herrish yo^ further in this
your discovery, I will give an addition to your second treatise. So I leave you
to God: and believe you, not a more loving friend then,

William Bubb.

To the courteous Reader.
THere goes a pretty Fable of the Moon: On a time she earnestly be sought her
mother to provide her a garment, comely and fit for her body: how can that be
sweet daughter (quoth the mother) since that your body never keeps it self at
one stay, no^ at one certain estate, but changes every day in the month, nay
every hour? The application here of needs no interpretation: Fantasy and
foolery who can please? and desire who can humor? no Camelion changes his
color as affection, nor any thing so variable a Populus Chorus Fluuius.

I would with all my heart, every Author that had done no better then I have,
had done no worse: and it were to be wished that some capriehious Co^^co^bes,
with their desperate wits, were not so forward t^ disbowell the entrails of
their own ouerweening, singular, infectious, and pestiferous thoughts, as I
know some.

But I cannot stand all day nosing of Candlestickes; mean time bear with a
plain man: whatsoever I have now done, I hope no exception can be taken, it is
for your mirth and recreation (and I pray you so take it: (...) such as will
needs bark at the Moon, yell ^ill (...) hearts ache: Gentle and Gentlemen's
spirits, will take all kindly that is kindly presented.

Yours in love S. R.

THE Art of Iugling or Legerdemaine.
Heretofore we have run over the two pestiferous carbuncles in the
commonwealth, the Egyptians and common Canters: the poor Canters we have
canuased meetely well, it now remains to proceed where I left, and to go
forward with that before I promised: St. Quintane be my good speed, I know I
have run through the hands of many, censured of diverse, and girded at not of a
few: But humanity is ever willinger to love then hate: courtesy much forwarder
to commend then dispraise: clemency infinitely proner to absolve then to
co^demn. Is it not possible to find sauery herbs among netles, roses among
prickles, berries among bushes, marrow among bones, grain among stubble, and a
little corn among a great deal of chafe? In the rankest and strongest
poisons, pure and sweet balmes may be distilled, and some matter or other
worthy to be remembered may be embraced, whosoever is Author. There is nothing
so exceeding foolish but has been defended by some wise man, nor any thing so
passing wise, but has been confuted by some fool: Tut, St. Barnard saw not
all things, and the best cart may eftsoons overthrow: That curld pate Rufus
that goes about with Zoylus to carpe and find fault, must bring the Standard
of judgment with him, and make wisdom the moderater of his wit, otherwise
they may be like to purchase to themselves the worshipful names of Dunces and
Dottipoles. So much by the way.

These kind of people about an hundred years ago, about the twentieth year
of King Henry the eight, began togather an head, at the first here about the
Southern parts, and this (as I am informed) and as I can gather, was their
beginning.

Certain Egiptians banished their cuntry (belike not for their good
conditions) arrived here in England, who being excellent in quaint tricks and
devises, not known here at that time among us, were esteemed and had in great
admiration, for what with ^rangenesse of their attire and garments, together
with their sleights and legerdemaines, they were spoke of far and near,
insomuch that many of our English loyterers joined with them, and in time
learned their craft and cosening. The speech which they used was the right
Egiptian language, with whom our Englishmen conuersing with, at last learned
their language. These people continuing about the cuntry in this fashion,
practicing their co^ening art of fast and loose, and legerdemain^, purchased to
themselves great credit among the cuntry people, and got much by Palmistry, and
telling of fortunes: insomuch they pitifully cosoned the poor cuntry girls,
both of money, ^^luer (...), and the best of their apparel, or any good thing
they could make, only to hear their fortunes.

This Giles Hather (for so was his name) together with his who^e Kit Calot, in
short space had following them a pretty train, he tearming himself the King
of Egiptians, and she the Queen, ryding about the cuntry at their pleasures
uncontrolled: at last about forty years after, when their knavery began to be
espied, and that their cosonages were apparent to the world, (for they had
continued near thirty years after this manner, pilling and polling, and
cosening the cuntry) it pleased the Council to look more narrowly into their
lives, and in a Parliament made in the first and second years of Phillip and
Mary, there was a strict Statute made, that whosoever should transport any
Egiptians into this Realm, should for^eit forty pounds: Moreover, it was then
enacted, that such fellows as took upon them the name of Egiptians, above the
age of fourteen, or that shall come over and be transported into England, or
any other persons, and shall be seen in the company of ^agabonds, calling
themselves Egiptians, or counterfeiting, transforming, or disguising themselves
by their apparel, speech, or other behauiours like unto Egiptians, and so
shall continue, either at one or s^^erall times, by the space of a month, they
should be adjudged fello^s, not allowed their book or Clergy. These Acts and
^tatutes now put forth, and come so their hearing, they deni^e their hands and
companies into diverse parts of the Realm: for you must imagine and know that
they had above two hundred roagues and vagabonds in a Regiment: and although
they went not altogether, yet would they not be above two or three miles one
from the other, and now they dare no more be known by the name of Egiptians,
no^ take any other name upon them then poor people. But what a number were
executed presently upon this statute, you would wonder: yet notwithstanding all
would not prevail: but still they wandered, as before up and down, and meeting
once in a year at a place appointed: sometimes at the Devils arse in peake in
Datbishir^, and otherwhiles at ^etbrooke by Blackeheath, or elsewhere, as they
agreed first at their meeting. Then it pleased Queen Elizabeth to revive the
Statut^ before mentioned, in the twentieth year of her happy reign,
endeavoring by all means possible to root out this pestiferons people, but
nothing could be done, you see until this day: they wander up and down in the
name of Egiptians, cullouring their faces and fashioning their attire, and
garment like unto them, yet if you ask what they are, they dare no otherwise
then say, they are Englishmen, and of such a shire, and so are forced to say
contrary to that they pretend.

But to come a little nearer our purpose, these fellows seeing that no profit
comes by wandering, but hazard of their lives, do daily decrease and break off
their wonted society, and betake themselves many of them, some to be Pedlers,
some Tinkers, some Iuglers, and some to one kind of life or other, insomuch
that Iugling is now become common, I mean the professors who make an
occupation and profession of the same: which I must needs say, that some
deserve commendation for the nimblenes and agillity of their hands, and might
be thought to perform as excellent things by their Legerdemaine, as any of
your wisards, witches, or magitians whatsoever. For these kind of people do
perform that in action, which the other do make show of: and no doubt ^any
when they hear of any rare exploit performed which cannot enter into their
capacity, and is beyond their reach, straight they attribute it to be done by
the Devil, and that they work by some familiar spirit, when indeed it is
nothing else but mere illusion, cosoning, and legerd (...). For you have many
now adays, and also heretofore many writers have been abused, as well by
untrue reports as by illusion and practices of confederacy, and lege^damaine,
etc. Sometimes imputing to words that which rests in nature, and sometimes to
the nature of the thing that which proceeds of fraud and deception of sight.
But when these experiments grow to superstition and impiety, they are either
to be forsaken as vain, or denied as false: howbeit, if these things be done
for recreation and mirth, and not to the hurt of our neighbor, nor to the
profaning and abusing of Gods holy name: then sure they are neither impious
nor altogether unlawful, though herein or hereby a natural thing be made to
seem supernatural. And Gentlemen, if you will give me patience, I will lay
open unto you the right Art Iugling and Legerdemain, in what point it does
ch^e^y consist: principally being sorry that it thus falls out, to lay open the
secrets of this mystery to the hinderance of such poor^ men as live thereby,
whose doings herein are not only tolerable, but greatly commendable, so they
abuse not the name of God, nor make the people to attribute unto them his
power, but always acknowledge wherein the Art consists.

The true Art therefore of Iugling, consists in Legerdemaine: that is, the
nimble conueyance and right dexterity of the hand, the which is performed
diverse ways, especially thres: The first and princiall consists in hiding
and conueying of balls: The second in alteration of money: The third in ye
shuffling of Cards: and he that is expert in these, may show many seats, and
much pleasure. There are diverse and rare experiments to be shown by
confederacy, either private or public, all which in place convenient, shall be
spoken of. And forasmuch as I profess rather to discover then teach these
mysteries, it shall suffice to signify unto you, that the endeavor and drift
of Iuglers, is only to abuse men's eyes and judgments: now then my meaning is
in words as (...) I can, to rip up some proper tricks of that Art, whereof some
are pleasant and delectable, othersome dreadful and desp^rate, and all but
mere delusions, and counterfeit actions, as you shall son see by ^ne
observation of every knack^^^ one hereafter deciphered: And first in order I
will begin with the plays and devises of the ball, which are many: I will
touch only but a few, and as in this, so in all the rest I will run over
slightly, yet as plain as I can.

Notes and observations to be marked of such as desire to practice Legerdemaine.
REmember that a Iugler must set a good face upon that matter he goes about,
for a good grace and carriage is very requisite to make the art more
authentical.

Your feats and tricks then must be nimbly, cleanly, and swiftly done, and
co^^eyed so as the eyes of the beholders may not discern or perceive the
trick^, for if you be a bungler, you both shame your self, and make the Art
you go about to be perceived and known, and so bring it into discredit.

Wherefore use and exercise makes a man ready. Vsus promptos facit, and by that
mea^es your ^eats being cunningly handled, you shall deceive both the eye, the
hand, and the ^are: for often times it will fall out in this art, and devises
Deceptio visus, Deceptio tactus, et Deceptio Auditus.

No^e also that you must have none of your Trinckets wanting, least you be put
to a non plus: besides if behooneth you to be mindful whereabout you go in
every trick, least you mistake, and so discredit the arts.

You must also have your words of Art, certain strange words, that it may not
only breed the more admiration to the people, but to leads away the eye from
espying the manner of your conuayance, while you may induce the mind, to
conceive, and suppose that you deal with Spirits: and such kind of sentenses,
and (...) speeches, are used in diverse manners; fitting and correspondent to
the action and seat that you go about. As Hey Fortuna, furia, nunquam, Credo,
pass pass, when come you Sirrah? or this way they Jack come aloft for thy
masters advantage, pass and be gone^ or otherwise: as Ailif, Casil, zaze, Hit,
metmeltat, Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna? or ^hus:
Drocti, Micocti, et Senarocti, Velu barocti, Asmarocti, Ronnsee, Faronnsee, hey
pass pass: many such observations to this art, are necessary, without which
all the rest, are little to the purpose.

Feats of Legerdemaine used with the Balls, with one or more.
COncerning the Ball, the plays and devises thereof are infinite: insomuch, as
if you can use them well, you may show an hundred seats, but whether you seem
to throw the Ball into the air or into your mouth, or into your left hand, or
as you list, it must be kept still in your right hand: if you practice first
with the ^eaden bullet, you shall the sooner, and better do it with balls of
Cork: the first place at your first learning, where you are to bestow a great
ball, is in the palm of your hand, with your ring finger, but a small ball is
to be placed with your thumb betwixt your ring finger and middle finger: then
are you to practice to do it betwixt your other fingers, then betwixt the for^
finger and the (...), with the forefinger and middle finger jointly, and
therein is the greatest and the strangest conueying showed. Lastly the same
small ball is to be practiced in the palm of your hand, and so by use, you
shall not only seem to put any ball (...) you, and yet retain it in your
hand, but you shall keep (...) or f^ue, as clenly and certain as one, this
being first learned and fleight attained unto, you shall work wonderful
seats: as for ensample.

Note for this seat you must have (...) boxes made in the manner of
extinguishers that are made to put out candles, but as big again: but for want
of them, you may take small candlesticks, or saltseller couers, or some such like.

Lay three or sower balls before you, and so many boxes (...) small
candlesticks etc, then (...) seems to put one ball into your left hand, and
therewithal seem to hold the same fast. Then take one of the boxes etc. or
any other thing (having a hollow foot, and being great) and seem to put the
ball which is thought to be in your left hand underneath the same, and so under
the other candlesticks, (...) etc. seem to bestow the other balls, and all
this while the beholders will suppose each ball to be under each box, or
candlestick etc. this done, use some charm or form of words (before set
down) as hey Fortuna fury nunquam credo, pass pass: then take up the
candlestick with one hand and blow, saying that's gone you see: and so likewise
look under each candlestick with like grace and words (for you must remember
to carry a good grace and face on the matter) and the beholders will wonder
where they are become: But if you in lifting up the candlesticks with your
right hand leave all those three or ^ower balls under one of them (as by use
you may eastly do) having turned themall down into your hand and holding them
fast with your little, and ring finger) and take the (...) or candlestick etc:
with your other fingers and cast the balls up into the hollownes thereof (for
so they will not ^owle so soon away) the standers by will be much astonished,
but it will seem wonderful strange, if also in showing how there remains
nothing under an other of the said candlesticks taken up with your left hand
you leave behind you a great ball, or any other thing, the miracle will be the
greater. For first, they will think you have pulled away all the balls by
miracle, then that you have brought them again by like means, and they
neither think, or look that any other thing remains behind under any of
them, and therefore after many other feats don return to your candlesticks,
remembering where you left the great ball, and in no wise touch the same, but
having another great ball about you, seem to bestow the same in manner and
form aforesaid under a candlestick which stands farthest from that where the
ball lies, and when you shall with words and charms seem to convey the same
ball from under the same box or candlestick etc. (and afterward bring it under
the box etc. which you touched not) it will (I say) seem wonderful strange.

To make a little Ball swell in your hand till it be very great.
TAke a very great ball in your left hand, or three indifferent big balls, and
showing one or three little balls, seem to put them into your said left hand,
concealing (as you may well do) the other balls which were there before: Then
use ch^rmes, and words, and make them seem to swell, and open your hand etc.
This play is to be varied an hundred ways, for as you find them all under the
box or candlestick, so may you go to a s^ander by, and take off his hat or
cap and show the balls to be there, by conueying them thereinto as you turn
the bottom upward, These things so them that know them are counted ridiculous,
but to these that are ignorant they are marvelous.

To consume, (or rather convey) one or many Balls into nothing.
IF you take a ball or more, and seem to put it into your other hand, and
whilst you use charming words, you convey them out of your right hand into your
lap, it will seem strange, for when you open your left hand, immediately the
sharpest lookers on will say, it is in your other hand, which also then you may
open, and when they see nothing there, they are greatly overtaken.

An other pretty feat with Balls.
TAke four Balls, one of the which keep between your forefinger and your
middle, laying the other three upon the table, then take up one and put it into
your left hand, and afterward take up another, and conuaying it and the other
between your fingers into your left hand, taking up the third and seeming to
cast it from you into the air, or into your mouth, or else where you please,
using some words or charms as before: the standers by when you ask them how
many you have in your hand, will judge there are no more then two, which when
you open your hand they shall see how they are deluded. But I will leave to
speak of the ball any more, for herein I might hold you all day, and yet
shall I not be able to teach you the use of it, nor scarcely to understand what
I mean or write, concerning it, unless you have had some, sight thereof
heretofore by demonstration: and always remember that the right hand be kept
open and straight, only keep the palm from view: and therefore I will end
with this miracle.

A feat, tending chiefly to laughter and mirth.
LAy one ball upon your shoulder, an other on your arm, and the third on the
table: which because it is round and will not easily lie upon the point of your
knife, you must bid a stander by, lay it thereon, saying, that you mean to cast
all these three Balls into your mouth at once: and holding a knife as a pen
in your hand, when he is laying upon the point of your knife, you may easily
with the haft tap him on the fingers, for the other matter will be hard to do.

And thus much of the Balls. To come to the second principal part of
Legerdemaine, which is conuayance of money, wherein by the way observe that the
money must not be of too small nor too great a circumference, least either, it
hinder the conueyance.

Of conueyance of money.
THe coueying of money is not much inferior to the Ball, but much easier to
do: The principal place to keep a piece of money in, is the palm of your
hand: The best peace is keep, is a testor, but with exercise all will be
alike, except the money be very fiall, and then it must be kept between the
fingers, and almost at the fingers end, where as the ball is to be kept, and
below near to the palm.

To convey money out of one hand into the other, by Legerdemaine.
FIrst you must hold open your right hand and lay therein a testor or counter,
and then lay thereupon the top of your long left finger, and use words etc. and
upon the sudden s^ip your right hand from your finger, wherewith you held down
the testor, and bending your hand a very little, you shall retain the testor
therein, and suddenly (I say) drawing your right hand thorough your left, you
shall seem to have left the testor there, especially when you shut in due time
your left hand, which that it may more plainly appear to be truly done, you
may take a knife and seem to knock against it, so as it shall make a great
sound: but instead of knocking the piece in the left hand (where none is) you
shall hold the point of the knife fast with the left hand, and knock against
the testor held in the other hand, and it will be thought to hit against the
money in the left hand: then use words, and open the hand, and when nothing is
seen, it will be wondered at, how the testor was removed.

To convert or transubstantiat money into Counters, or Counters into money.
AN other way to deceive the lookers on, is to do as before with a testor, and
keeping a Counter in the palm of your left hand, secretly to seem to put the
testor thereinto, which being retained still in the right hand, when the left
hand is opened, the testor will seem to be transubstantiated into a counter.

To put one Testor into one hand, and another into an other hand, and with
words to bring them together.
HE that has once attained to the facillity of reteyning one piece of money in
his right hand, may show an hundred pleasant conceits by that means, and may
reserve two or three as well as one: and lo, then may you seem to put one
piece into your left hand, and retaining it still in your right hand, you may
together therewith take up another like piece, and so with words seem to bring
both pieces together.

To put one testor into a strangers hand and an other in your own hand, and to
convey both into the strangers hand with words.
TAke two testors eeuenly set together, and put the same in stead of one testor
into a strangers hand: And then making as though you put one testor into your
left hand, with words you shall make it seem that you convey the testor in
your hand into the strangers hand: for when you open your said left hand, there
shall be nothing seen: and he opening his hand, shall find two where he
thought was but one. By this devise I say an hundred conceits may be showed.

To throw a piece of money away, and to find it again where you please.
YOu may with the middle and ring-finger of the right hand, convey a testor
into the palm of the same hand, and seeming to cast it away, keep it still,
which with confederacy will seem strange: to wit, when you find if again,
where another has bestowed the very like piece. But these things without
exercise cannot be done, and therefore I will proceed to show things to be
brought to pass by money, with less difficulty, and yet as strange as the
rest, which being unknown, are maruelously commended, but being unknown, are
derided and nothing at all regarded.

To make a testor or a groat, leap out of a pot, or run along upon a table
with words.
YOu shall see a Iugler take a testor or great and throw it into a pot, or lay
it on the midst of the table, and with enchanting words cause the same to
leap out of the pot, or run toward him or from him wards alongest the table,
which will seem miraculous, until that you know that it is done with a long
black hair of a woman's head, fastened to the brim of a great by means of a
little hole driven through the same with a spanish needle: in like sort you may
use a knife or any other small thing. But if you would have it to go from you,
you must have a confederate by which means all Iugling is greased, and
amended. This seat is the stranger if it be done by night, a candle placed
between the lookers on and the Iugler: for by that means the eysight is
hindre^ from deserving the conceyt.

A very pretty trick to make a groate or a testor to sinck through a table, and
to vanish out of a handkercheife very strangely.
A Iugler sometimes will borrow a great or a testor, and mark it before you,
and seem to put the same into a handkercheife, and wind it so that you may
the better see and feel it: then will he take you the handkercheif and did you
feel whether the great be there or no: And he will also require you to put
the same under a candlestick or some such thing: then will he send for a Basin
and holding the same under the bo^rd right against the candlestick will use
certain word^ of enchantments, and in short space you shall here the great fall
into a basin: this done, one takes of the candlestick and the Iugler takes the
handcarcheife by the tassell, and shakes it: but the money is gone, which
seems as strange as any feat^ whatsoever: but being known, the miracle is
turned into a babble, for it is nothing but to sow a counter into the corner of
a handkercher finely covered with a piece of linen little bigger then the
counter, which corner you must conney in steed of the great delivered unto
you, into the middle of your handkercheife, leaving ^he other either in your
hand or lap, which afterward you must seem is pull through the board,
letting it fall into a basin.

To convey one shilling being in one hand into an other, holding your arms
abroad like to a roode.
Evermore it is necessary to mingle some merry toys among your grave miracles,
as in this case of money: Take a shilling in each hand, and holding your arms
abroad, to lay a wager that you will put them both into one hand without
bringing them any whit nerer together: the wager being laid, hold your arms
abroad like a roode, and turning about with your body, lay the shilling out of
one of your hands upon the table, and turning to the other side take it up
with the other hand, and so you shall win your wager.

Of Cards and Dice, with good cautions how to avoid cosenage therein:
special rules to convey and handle the cards, and the manner and order how to
accomplish all difficult, and strange tstings wrought with cards.
Having bestowed some wast money among you, I will set you to Cards, and
Dice: A cupple of honest friends that draw both in a yoke together, which have
bin the overthrow, of many a hundred in this Realm, and these are not the
slightest matters whereupon Iuglers work upon, and show their feats. By
which kind of Iugling, a great number have Iugled away, not only their money,
but also their lands, their health, their time, and their honesty: I dare not
(as I could) show the lewd Iugling that cheators practice, least it minister
some offense, to the well disposed: to the simple hurt and loss, and to the
wicked occasion of evil doing. But by the way I will a little speak of dice,
and the use of them, as caueats, rather to let you take heed of their
cosenings, then to give you light to follow their doings: Non ad imitandum sed
ad euitandum.

First, you must know a Langret, which is a die that simple men have sildom
heard of, but often seen to their cost, and this is a well favored die, and
seems good and square, yet is it forged longer, upon the Cater, and Trea,
then any other way: And therefore it is called a Langret. Such he also called
hard Cater trea^, because (...), the longer end will of his own ^way draw
downewarde, and turn up to the (...), Sincks, Deure or Ace. The principal use
of them is at Nouum, for so long a pair of Bard cater treas be walking on the
bourd, so long can ye not cast five, nor (...), unless it be by great chance,
that the tough^es of the table, or (...) other stop force them to stay, and
run against their kind: or without (...) know that (...) or nine can never
come.

But you will say by this reason, he that has the first dice, is like always
to stripp. and (...) all the table about. To help this, there must before that
purpose, an odd Die, called a flat Catertrea ready at hand, and no other
number, for granting the trea and Cater be always upon the one Die, then is
there no chance upon the other Die, but may serve to make five or (...) forth,
and loose all.

But now to show you what shifts they have to bring the flat die in and out,
which is a jolly cunning property of Iugling, with them called foysting: the
which is nothing else but a slight, to carry easily within the hand, as often
as the ^oister lift: so that when either he or his partner shall cast the dice,
the flat comes not abroad, till he has made a great hand and won as much as
him lifts: otherwise the flat is ever one, unless at few times upon purpose
he suffer the silly souls to cast in a hand or two, to give them courage to
continue the play, and live in hope of winning.

These things I know seem very strange to the simple, and as yet cannot sink
into their brain, how a man may carry so many dice in one hand, and chop and
change them so often, and never be espied: so as before I told you, Iuglers
conueyance seem, to exceed the compass of reason till you know the feat: but
what is it that use and labor ouercometh not. To f^yst finely and readily and
with the same hand to tell money to and fro, is a thing hardly learned, and
asks a bold spirit and long experience, though it be one of the first the
Cheater learneth.

What should I speak any more of false dice, of fullons, high-men, lowe-men,
gourds, and brisled dice, grauiers, demies, and contraries, all which have his
sundry uses: but it is not my meaning to stand on this subject: I would rather
use my pen, and spend my time, to dissuade and persuade all gamesters, to
beware not only with what dice, but with what company and where they exercise
gaming: and be well assured Gentlemen that all the friendly entertainment you
shall find amongst them is for no other end, but to persuade you to play, and
thereby to breed your great loss, if not altogether your undoing.

Therefore viterly forbear so hazard any thing at dice, and live in doubt and
suspicion of cheating, wheresoever you play (unless you know your company very
well) for the contagion of cheating, is now grown so vni^ersall, that they
swarm in every quarter: and therefore ye cannot be in safety, unless you shun
the company of such altogether.

To leave Dice and return to Cards, wherein is as much falsehood and cosening
as in Dice: I will therefore disclose as much in one as in the other, for I
would not give a point to choose, which of them is the better, or rather the
worse, for there is such a flight in shuffling and sorting of the Cards, that
play at what game you will all is lost before hand, but if there be a
consederate: either of the players or standers ^ie, the mischief can not be
avoided.

Beware therefore when you play among strangers of him that seems simple or
drun^^^, for under their habit the most special cosoners are presented, and
while you think by their simplicity and imperfections to beguile them, (and
thereof perchance are persuaded by their confederates) your very friends as you
think, you your self will be most of all overtaken.

Beware also of ^etters by, and lookers on: and namely on them that be on your
side: for whilst they look on your game without suspicion, they discover it by
signs to your adversaries, with whom they bet, and yet are they confederates,
whereof me thinks this one above the rest proceeds from a fine invention.

A trick by confederacy at Cards.
A Gamester, after he had been often times bitten by Cheators, and after much
loss, grew very suspicious in his play, so that he would not suffer any of the
fitters by to be privy to his game, for this the Cheators devised a new shift,
that a woman should sit close by him, and by the swift and slow drawing of her
needle, give a token to the Cheator what was the Cosens game.

Other helps there be, as to set y^ Cosen upon the bench, with a great Looking
glass behind him on the wall, wherein the Cheator may always see what Cards
he has in his hand, So that a few ensamples in stead of many that might be
rehearsed, this one conclusion may be gathered, that whosoever is given to
play, and once sits amongst them, it is great ods but that he shall rise a
looser.

But many there be that live so continently, that nothing can persuade them to
put a penny in adventure, and some again are so unskillful that lack of
cunning forces them to forbear play: but yet hard it is for any man to fall
into their company, but they will make him stoop at one game or other: and for
this purpose, their first drist and intent is to seek, by all means possible
to understand his nature, and whereunto he is most inclined: if they find that
he takes pleasure in y^ company of women, the^ seek they to strike him, at the
Sacking law: (as they term it) and take this always for a rule, that all the
Baudes in the country be of the Cheaters familiar acquaintance.

Therefore it is not very hard for them at all times to provide for their
amorous Cosen, a lewd lecherous Lady to keep him loving company: then fall
they to banqueting, and carrowsing and hunting of Tauernes, and much is the
cost that this silly Cosen shall be at in Jewels and apparel, otherwise he
shall not once get a grant to have a kiss of his (...) lips: and ever in
middle of their conference she lays in this reason, for her sake to put in
twenty or thirty crowns in adventure at Cards or Dice: you know not (quoth
she) what may be a woman's luck: if he refuse it, Lord how unkindly she takes
the matter, and cannot be reconciled with less then a gown or a kirtle of
silk.

But now if these Cheaters perceive that he esteems no bruised ware, but is
enamored with virginity, they have a^^ ne cast within an hours warning, to
make Ione Siluerpin as good a maid as if she had never come to the stews: but
to let these things pass, for offending of chast^ares, whose displeasure I
would not incur, for all the cheates these gamesters get in a whole year.
But to our purpose.

There are two sorts of using the Cards, the one is in playing (with one or
more) games, as Primero, Trumpe, Saunte, Decoye, etc.

The other use of Cards is to show feats of Legerdemaine.

Concerning the first, if it be used for recreation and not to the profaning
of Gods holy name, nor hurt of our brethren and neighbors, they are to be
tolerated: but now (more is the pity) they are not used in that fashion as
they should be, but much hurt often times arises thereof.

Primero now as it is in great use, so is there much deceit in it, some play
upon the prick, some pinch the cards privily with their nails, some turn up
the corners, same mark them with fine spots of Iuck, seem there be that
travel into Spain and into Italy to learn fine tricks and quaint
conueyances, at cards and retu^ne home, and win much money with them here in
England, but yet at the last they are still overreached by some fine wits
that devise new sleights here at home.

At Trumpe, Saunte, and such other like games, cutting at the nick, is a great
advantage, so is cutting by Bumcarde, finely under or over: stealing the stock
or the discarded Cards.

At Decoye they draw twenty hands together and play all upon assurance when
to win or loose, other helps there be as I have before set down, with a
looking glass and consederacy: all which and such like, tend to cosoning and
hurt of our brother: But we will proceed with the other use of Cards, which
tends to mirth and recreation of mind and which in themselves simply is no
hurt, unless they are abused. In showing fea^s and Iugling with cards the
principal point consists in shuffling them nimbly, and always keeping one
certain card either in the bottom or in some known place of the stock, four
or five cards from it, hereby you shall seem to work wonders, for it will be
easy for you to see or epsy one, which though you be perceived to do, it
will not be susp^cted, if you shuffle them well afterward, and this note I
must give you, That in reserving the bottom card you must always (whilst you
sh^^^le) keep him a little before, or a little behind, all the cards lying
underneath him, bestowing him (I say) either a little beyond his fellows
before right over the fore finger, or else behind the rest, so as the little
finger of the left hand may meet with it, which is the ester and the readier,
and the better way: in the beginning of your shuffleing, shuffle as thick as
you can, and in the end throw upon the stock the nether card, (with so many
more at the least as you would have preserved for any purpose) a little before
or behind the rest; provided always that your fore finger if the pack be
laid before, or the little finger if the packlye behind, creep up to meet
with the bottom card, and not lie betwixt the cards, and when you feel it,
you may there hold it until you have shuffled over the car^es again, still
leaving your kept card below being perfect herein, you may do alm^st what you
list with the cards: By this means what pack soever you make, though it
consist of eight, twelve, or twenty cards, you may keep them still together
vnseuered next to the nether card, and yet shuffle them often to satisfy the
curious beholders, as for ensample, and for breuities sake, to show you diverse
seats under one.

How to deliver out four Aces, and to convert them into four Knaves.
MAke a pack of eight cards, to wit four Knaves and four Aces, and although
all the eight cards m^st lie imediately together, yet must each Knave and Ace
be openly scauered, and the same eight cards must lie also in the lowest place
of the bunch, then shuffle them so, as always at the second shuffling, or at
least wise at the end of your shuffling the said pack, and of the pack one ace
may lie n^thermost, or so as you may know where he goes and lies, and
always I say let your for said pack, with three or four cards more, lie
vnseperablely together, immediately upon and with that ace, then vs^^g some
speech or other devise, and putting your hand (...) the cards to the edge of
the table, to hide the account, let out pri^ly a piece of the second card,
which is one of the knaves holding forth the stock in both your hands, and
showing to the standers by the nether Card (which is the ace or kept Card)
covering also ye head or piece of ye knave (wc is your next card, with your
four fingers: draw out ye same knave laying it down an ye Table: then shuffle
again keeping your pack whole, and so have you two aces lying together in the
botteme: and therefore to reform that disordered Card, as also for a grace and
countenance to that action, take off the uppermost Card of the bunch, and
thrust it in^o the midst of the Cards, and then take away the nethermost
Card, which is one of your aces, and bestow him likewise: then may you begin as
before, showing an other ace, and in stead thereof lay down another knave, and
so forth, until instead of your four aces you have laid down four knaves.
The beholders all this while thinking that there lie four aces on the table,
are greatly abused, and will marvel at the transformation.

How to tell one what Card he sees in the bottom, when the same Card is
shuffled into the stock.
When you have seen a Card privily, or as though you marked it not, lay the
same undermost, and shuffle the Cards as before you were taught, till your
Cardly again below in ye bottom: then show the same to the beholders, willing
them to remember it, then shuffle the Cards or let any shuffle them, for you
know the Cards already, and therefore may at any time tell them what Card
they saw, which nevertheless would be done with great circumstance and show of
difficulti^.

A strange and excellent trick to hold four Kings in the hand, and by words
to transform them into four Aces, and after to make them all blancke Cards,
one after another.
YOu shall see a Iugler take four Kings and no more in his hand, and
apparently show you them, then after some words and charms, he will throw
them down before you upon the table, taking one of the Kings away and adding
but one other Card: then taking them up aagaine and blowing upon them, will
show you them transformed into blancke Cards, white on both sides: after using
charms again, throwing them down as before. (with the faces downward) will
take them up again and show you four Aces, blowing still upon them, that it
may breed the more wonder, which trick in my mind is nothing inferior to
the rest: and being not known, will seem wonderful strange so the
spectators, yet after you know it, you can not but say the trick is p^^^ty.
Now therefore to accomplish this feate, you must have Cards made for the
purpose, (half Cards ye may call them) that is the one half kings the other
part aces, so that laying the aces, one over the other, nothing but the kings
will be seen, and then turning the kings downward, the four aces will be
seen: provided you must have two whole, one whole king to cover one of the
aces, or else it will be perceived, and the other an ace to lay over the kings,
when you mean to show the aces: then when you will make them all blancke, lay
the Cards a little lower, and hide the aces and they will appear all white.
The like you may make of the four knaves, putting upon them ye four fiues,
and so of the rest of the Cards: But this can not be well showed you without
demonstration.

Hitherto I have entreated of the three principal kinds of Iugling, now it
remains in order to speak of Iugling by confederacy, which is either private
or public.

Private conspiracy is, when one (by a special plot said by himself, without
any compact made with others) persuades the beholders, that he will suddenly
and in their presence, do some miraculous feate, which he has already
accomplished privately: as for ensample, he will show you a card or any other
like thing, and will say further unto you, behold and see what a mark it has,
and then burns it, and nevertheless fetches another like Card, so marked out
of some bodies pocket, or out of some corner, where he himself before had
placed it, to the wonder and astonishment of simple beholders, which conceau^
not that kind of illusion, but expect miracles and str^^ge works.

I have read of a notable exploit done before a King by a Iugler, who painted
on a wall the picture of a dove and seeing a pigeon sitting upon the top of an
house, said to the King, lo now your grace shall see what a Iugler can do, if
he be his crafts master, and then pricked the picture with a knife, so hard
and so often, and with so effectual words, as the pigeon fell down from the
top of the house stark dead, you may imagine how the matter was taken, what
wondering was thereat, how he was prohibited to use that feat any further, least
he should employ it in any other kind of murder. This story is held yet of
diverse as canonical, but when you are taught the feat or flight, you will
think it a mockery and a simple illusion.

To unfold you the mystery hereof, so it is that the poor pigeon was before
in the hands of the Iugler, into whom he had thrust a dram of Nux vomica, or
some other such poison, which to the nature of the Bird was so extreme a
poison, as after the receipt thereof, it could not live above the space of half
an hour, and being let loose after the medicine ministered, the always
resorteth to the top of the next house, which she will the rather do, if there
be any pigeons already sitting there, and after a short space falls down,
either stark dead, or greatly astonis^ed: but in the mean time, the Iugler
uses words of art, partly to protract time, and partly to gain credit, and
admiration of the beholders.

As with Cards you may show feats by private confederacy, so of the other
two, that is to wit, with the balls and the money, as to mark a shilling or any
other thing, and throw the same into a river or deep pond, and having hid the
shilling before, with like marks, in some other secret place, bi^ some go
presently and fecth it, making them believe that it is the very same which you
threw into the river the beholders will marvel much at it: and of such feats
there may be many done, but more by public confederacy, whereby one may tell
another how much money he has in his purse and an hundred like toys.

Of public confederacy and whereof it consists.
Public confederacy is, when there is before hand a compacte made brtwixt
diverse persons: the one to be principal, the other to be assistant in working
of miracles, or rather in cosoning and abusing the beholders, as when I tell
you in the presence of a multitude, what you have thought or done, or shall do
or think, when you and I were thereupon agreed before: and if this be
cunningly and closely handled, it will induce great admiration to the
beholders, especially when they are before amassed and abused, by some
erper^ment of ar^, magic or legerdemaine. I will in brief set you down some
pretty conclusions, and so I will proceene with other feats in other kinds.

To tell you how to know whether one cast Cross or Pile^ by the ringing
LAy a wager with your confederate (who must seem simple or obstinate opposed
against you) that standing behind a door, you will (by the sounding or ringing
of the money) tell him whether he cast cross or pile, se as when you are gone,
and he has phillepped the money before the witnesses who are to be cosoned, he
must say What is it if it be cross, or What is it if it be pile, or some other
such sign, as you are agreed upon, and so you need not fail to guess
rightly. By this means if you have any invention, you may seem to do an
hundred miracles, and to discover a man's thought, or words spoken a far off.

How to tell where a stolen horse is become.
BY means of confederacy Cuthbert Conycatcher, and one Swart Rutter, two that
have taken degrees in Whittington College, abused notably the country people:
for Cuthbert would hide away his neighbors horses, kine, colts, etc: and send
them to Swart Rutter, (whom he before had told where they were) promising to
send the parties unto him, whom he described, and made known by diverse
signs: so as this Swart would tell them at their first entrance unto the door,
wherefore they came, and would say that their horses kine etc. were stolen, but
the thief should be forced to bring them back again, and leave them within
one mile (south and by west, etc.) of his house: even as the plot was laid, and
the pack made before by Cuthbert and him. This Cuthbert is esteemed of some,
and thought to be a witch of others, he is accounted a coniurer, but commonly
called a wise man, and are able of themselves, to tell you where any thing that
is stolen is, as to build Paul's steeple up again.

To make one dance naked.
IT has been reported of such fellows, and such, that they can do rare
feats, as to make one dance naked. To the effecting of this, make a poor boy
confederate with you: so as after charms and words spoken by you, he unclothe
himself and stand naked: seeming (whilst he vndresseth him) to shake, stamp,
and cry, still hastening to be unclothed, till he be stark naked: or if you
can procure none to go so farr^, let him only begin to stamp and shake etc.
and to unclothe him, and then you may (for reverence of the company) seem to
release him.

To make a pot or any such thing standing fast on a cupbord, to fall down
thence by virtue of words.
Let your cupbord be so placed, as your confederate may hold a black Thread
without in the courete, behind some window of that room, and at a certain
loud word spoken by you, he may pull the same thread, being wound about the
pot. And this was the feate of Eleazer the Jew, which Josephus reports to be
such a miracle.

Now that we have spoken of the three principle acts of Legerdemayne and of
confederacy, I will go forward, and touch some few ordinary feats, which are
pretty, yet not altogether to be compared with the rest; I mean for conceit
and nimbleues of the hand, yet such as to the ignorant, and those that know
not the carriage, will seem strange and wonderful.

Of Boxes to alter one grain into another, or to consume the grain or corn
to nothing.
THere be diverse iugling boxes with salse b^^^mes, wherein many false feats
are wrought. First they have a box covered or rather footed alike at each end,
tho bottom of the one end being no deeper then as it may contain one lane of
corn or pepper, glewed there upon: Then use they to put into y^ hollow end
thereof some other kind of grain, ground or vnground: then do they cover it,
and put it under a hat or candlestick, and either in putting it thereinto, or
pulling it thence, they turn the bore, and open the contrary end, wherein is
showed a contrary grain, or else they show the glewed end first, (which end
they suddenly thrust into a bag of such grains as is glewed already there upon,
and secondly the empty box.

How to convey (with words and charms) the corn contained in one Box, into
another.
THere is another box fashioned like a bell, whereinto they put so much and
such corn as the foresaid hollow box can contain: then they stop and cover
the same with a piece of lether as broad as a tester, which being thrust up
hard to the middle part or waste of the said bell, will stick fast and bear
up the corn, and if the edge of the same lether be we^, it will hold the
better: then take they the other box, dipped (as is aforesaid) in corn, and
set down the same upon the Table, the empty end upward, saying, that they will
convey the grain therein, into the other box or bell, which being set down
somewhat hard upon the table, the leather and corn therein will fall down, so
as the said bell being taken up from the table: you shall see the corn lying
thereon, and the stopple will be hidden therewith, and covered, and when you
uncover the other box nothing shall remain therein, but presently the corn
must be swept down with one hand, into the other, or into your lapp or hatt:
many seats may be done with this box, as to put therein a toade, affirming
the same to be so turned from corn, and then many beholders will suppose the
same to be the Iuglers devil, whereby his feats and miracles are wrought.

How to pull laces innumerable out of your mouth; of what color or length you
list, and never any thing seen to be therein.
AS for pulling of laces forth of the mouth it is now somewhat stale, whereby
Iuglers get much money among maids, selling lace by the yard, putting into
their mouths one round bottom, as fast as they pull out another, and at the
just end of every yard they tie a knott, so as the same rests upon their
teeth, then cut they off the same, and so the beholders are double and treble
deceived, seeing so much lace as will be contained in a hat, and the same of
what color you list to name, to be drawn by so even yards out of his mouth,
and yet the Iugler to talk as though there were nothing at all in his mouth.
There are diverse iugling tricks which I am loath to describe for some reasons
before alleged, whereof some are common some rarer and some desperate: I will
therefore show a few desperate and dangerous iugling knackes, wherein the
simple are made to think, that a silly Iugler with words can hurt and help,
kill and revive any creature at his pleasure: and first to kill any kind of
pullen and make them revive.

To kill a Hen, chicken, or Capon and give it life again.
TAke a hen etc. and thrust a naule, or a fine sharp pointed knife through the
midst of the head thereof, the edge toward the bill, so as it may seem
impossible for her to escape death. Then use words or incantations, and pulling
out the knife, lay otes before her, and she will eat and live, The natural
cause why a Hen thrust through the head with a Bodkin does live notwithstanding.
being nothing at all grieved or hurt with the wound, because the brain lies
so far behind in the head as it is not touched, though you thrust your knife
between the comb and it: And after you have done this, you may convert your
speech and accions, to the grievous wounding, and recovering of your own self.

To eat a Knife, and to fetch it forth of another place.
TAke a knife, and convey the same between your two hands, so as no part be
seen thereof, but a little of the point, which you must so bite at the first
as noise may be made therewith: then seem to put a great part thereof into
your mouth, and letting your hand slip down, there will appear to have bin
more in your mouth, then is possible to be contained therein: then send for
drink, or use some other delay until you have let the said knife slip into
your lap, holding both your fists close together as before, and then raise them
so from the edge of the table where you sit (for from thence the knife may most
privily slip down into your lap) and in steed of biting the knife, This
is pretty if it be cleanely done.
knab a little upon your nasle, and then seem to thrust the knife into your
mouth, opening the hand next unto it, and thrust up the other, so as it may
appear to the standers by, that you have delivered your hands thereof, and
thrust it into your mouth: then call for drink, after countenance made of
pricking, and danger etc. lastly, put your hand into your lap, and taking that
knife into your hand, you may seem to bring it out from behind you, or from
whence you list: but if you have another like knife, and a confederate, you may
do twenty notable wonders hereby: as to send a stander by into some garden or
Orchard, describing to him some tree or herb under which it sticks: or else
some strangers sheath or pocket etc.

To thrust a bodkin through you head, without any hurt.
TAke a Bodkin so made, as the have being hollow, the blade thereof may slip
thereinto: as soon as you hold the point downward, and set the same to your
forehead, and seem to thrust it into your head: and so (with a little sponge
in your hand) you may wringe out blood or wine, making the beholders think the
blood or wine (whereof you may say you have drunk very much) runs out of
your forehead: Then after countenance of pain and grief, pull away your hand
suddenly, holding the point downward, and it will fall so out, as it will
seem never to have bin thrusted into the haste: But immediately thrust that
bodkin into your lap or pocket, and pull out another plain bodkin like the
same, saving in that conceit.

To cut half your nose in sunder, and to heal it again presently without any
salve.
TAke a knife, This is easily don, howbeit being nimbly done it will deccaue
the sight of the beholders.
having a round hollow gappe in the middle, and lay it upon your nose, and so
shall you seem to have cut your nose in sunder: provided always that in all
these, you have another like knife without a gap to be showed upon pulling out
of the same, and words of inchauntments to speak: Blood also to bewraye the
wound, and nimble conueyance.

To put a Ring through your cheek.
THere is pretty Knack, which seems dangerous to the cheeks: for the
accomplishment whereof, you must have two rings of like coullour and quantity,
the the one filed asunder, so as you may thrust it upon your cheek: the other
must be whole and conveyed upon a sticks, holding your hand thereupon in the
middle of the stick, delivering each end of the same sticks to be holden fast
by a stander by, then pulling the ring out of your cheek, cleanely strike it
against same part of the stick, keeping it still in your hand, then pull your
other hand from the stick, and pulling it away, whirle about the ring, and so
it will be thought that you have put thereon the Ring which was in your cheek.

Many other pretty feats of this nature might be here set down, as to cut of
ones head and to lay it in a platter^ which Iuglers call the decollation of S.
John the Baptist, also to thrust a dagger or bodkin through your gutts very
strangely, and to recover imediately: after another way then with the bodkyn
before rehearsed, also to draw a cord through your nose, mouth or hand so
sencibly, as is wonderful to see, al wc with many more, I here forbear for
breuities sake. There is a very pretty trick to make wine or beer, to come out
of your browe, or ear, with a funnell after you have dronk the same, the which
I am loath to discover, as not willing to have all the poor Iugglers tricks
made known at once: there is a way to make fire to come out of your mouth by
burning of towe, all which for reasons before aleadged, I will here (...) to
discover, But will hie me to another sort of Iugglers, or rather cosoners,
calling themselves by the name of alchimistes professing themselves learned
men, and to have the Philosophers stone, these professors of the mysty or
smokie science, study and cast about how to ouer-reach and cosen the simple,
and such as are given to cou^teousnes or gree^y desire after gain, with such
they insmuate themselves by little and little, professing a show of honesty and
plainnes, until they are acquainted with their desires, and found the length
of their foot: telling them that they can do wonders, make silver of copper,
and gold of seluer. Such a one a while ago was in Battersey, who coming
poor to town, made some of the town believe he had the Philosophers stone:
whereupon, one of the rest believing him, desired to be better acquinted with
him: insomuch, that he requested him to take a poor bed at his house, and
offered him great kindness, hoping in time to get some skill of him toward the
attaining of the Philosophers stone: upon a day as this Smith (for so imagine
him to be) and beggarly Artist were together, desired him of all loves to
impart to him some of his learning, assuring him, if it lay in his power to do
him a pleasure, he should not fail, protesting that both his purse and
himself were both at his comaund: Hereupon, to be short, my Gentleman at the
first was somewhat scrupilous, yet at the earnest request of his new friend,
did at last condiscende, charging him to be secret in what he should disclose
unto him. The Smith swore to be silent: then my cosoning copesmate instructs
him ^s follows.

In the month of July, search for the seed of Fearne, which must be first and
principal matter of working this, and effecting this hidden secret, and quoth.
he. if you had but an ounce of this fearneseede, thou shall be made for ever,
for it is very hard to find: here upon he gets up the next morning (for it
was about the same time of the year which he prescribd him to search for this
inestimable seed) and looks very dilligently about the heath, (where store of
fearne grows: but having) spent most part of the day in searching and looking,
his back ready to crack with stooping, and his throat furd with dust, for
want of small beer, so that the poor Smith was ready ^o faint for want of
food: by chance one of the town came by, add seeing him search so dilligently
up and down, and could not guess for what, asked him what he sought for so
bustly? O quoth the Smith, for a thing that if I could find, I should be made
for ever: why quoth the fellow what I prithee is it? Ono quoth the Smith I may
not tell you: not tell me quoth the fellow, why what is it? I prithee tell me: at
last, at the earnest entreaty of the fellow, the smith told he looked for
fearne seed: with that the fellow laughed a good, and asked him who willed him
to look for that? that did M. Etseb quoth the smith, and if I can but find
one ounce of it, it would be of much worth: worth quoth the fellow, he that set
thee to look for that was a fool and thou art an Ass, for there was never
any fearne seed as yet seen: therefore get thee home to thy forge, for he
makes but a fool of thee: at this the smith was blancke, and got him home to
his anuill: but how the smith and the Alcumister, agreed upon the reckoning for
his cosenting him, I mean not here to deliver: but this I bring in by the
way, to show that their art is nothing but deceit, and themselves cosoners,
which by two pretty tales I will declare unto you,

How an Alcumister cousoned a priest.
CHaucer in one of his Canterbury tales, rehearses this jest of a cousoning
Alcumist: espying on a day a coueteous priest, whose purse he knew to be well
lyned: assaulted him with flattery and kind speech, two principal points
belonging to this art: at length he borrowed money of this priest, which is the
third part of this art, without the which the professors can do no good, nor
endure in good estate: then he at his day repayed the money, which is the most
difficult point in this art, and a rare experiment: finally to requite the
priests curtesse, he promised unto him such iustructions, as thereby within
short time he should become infinitely rich, and all through this art of
multiplication: and this is the most common point in this science, for herein
they must be skillful before they be famous or attatns to any credit: the
Priest disliked not his proffer, especially because it tended to his profit,
and embraced his curteste: then the fo^le-taker had him send forthwith for
three ounces of quicke-silner. which he said he would transubstantiate (by his
art) into perfect silver: the Priest thought nothing of deceit, but with great
joy accomplished his request.

And now forsooth goes this jolly Alcumist about his business, and work of
multiplication, and causes the Priest to make a fire of coals, in the bottom
whereof he places a croslet, and pretending only to help the Priest to lay
the coals handsomely, he ioysteth into the middle ward or lane oscoles, a
beechen cole, within which was conveyed an iugot of perfect filuer, (which when
the cols was consumed flipt down into the croslet, that was I say directly
under it. The Priest perceane^ not the stand, but received the iugot of filner,
and was not a litcle joyful to see such certain success proceed from his own
handy work, wherein could be no sraud (as he surely conceived) and therefore
very dilligently gave the kuane forty pounds, for the receipt of this
experiment, who for that sum of many, taught him a lesson in Alcumistry, but
he never returned to hear repetitions, or to see how hes prostied.

A merry tale how a cosoning Alcumist deceived a country Gentleman.
A Gentleman in Kent of good worth, not long ^^thence was overtaken by a
cosoning knave, who professed Alcumistry, Iugling, Witch craft, and
coniuration, and by means of his companions and confederates, found the
simplicity and ability of the said Gentleman, and learnt his estate and
humors to be convenient for his purpose, and at last came a wooing to his
daughter, to whom he made love cunningly in words, though his purpose tended
to another end: and among other illusions and tales, concerning his own
commendations, for wealth, parentage, inheritance, alliancs, learning and
cunning, he bosted of the knowledge and experience in Alcumistry, making the
simple Gentleman beleene that he could multiply, and of one Angel make two or
three, which seemed strange to the Gentleman: insomuch as he became willing
enough to see that conclusion: whereby the Alcumister had more hope and comfort
to attain his desire, then if his daughter had yielded to have married him: to
be short, he in the presence of the said Gentleman, did include within a
little ball of virgins wars a couple of Angels, and after certain ceremonies
and coniuring words, he seemed to deliver the fame unto him, but in truth,
through Legerdemains, he conusyed into the Gentleman's hand, another ball of the
fame scantling, wherein were enclosed many more Angelis then were in the ball
which he thought he had received, Now (forsooth) the Alcumister had him lay up
the same ball of wax, and also use certain ceremonies, (which I thought good
here to omit) and after certain dates, hours, and minutes, they returned
together according to the appointment, and found great gains by multiplication
of the angels, insomuch that he being a plain man, was hereby persuaded that
he should not only have a rare and notable good son in law, but a companion
that might help to ad unto his wealth much treasure, and to his estate great
fortune and felicity: and to increase this opinion in him, as also to win his
further favor: but especially to bring his cunning Alcumistry, or rather his
lend purpose to pass, he told him that it were folly to multiply a pound of
gold, when as easily they might multiply a million, and therefore counseled
him to produce all the money he had, or could borrowe of his neighbors, and
friends, and did put him out of doubt, that he would multiply the same, and
reduble it exceedingly, even as he saw by experience how be dealt with the small
sum before his face: this Gent. in hope of gains and preferment, consented
to his sweet motion, and brought out and laid before his feet, not the one
half of his goods, but all that he had, or could make or borrowe any manner
of way: then this Iuggling Alchimister having obtained his purpose, foulded
the same in a ball in quantity far bigger then the other. And conuaying the
same unto his bosom or pocket, delivered another Ball (as before) in the like
quantity, to be reserved, and safely kept in his cheste, whereof (because the
matter was of importance) either of them must have a keys, and a several lock,
that no interruption might be made to the ceremany, or abuse by either of them
in defrawding each other. Now for sooth the circumstancis, and ceremonies being
ended and the Alchimisters purpose thereby performed^ he told the Gent that
until a certain day and hour lymited to return, either of them might imploye
themselves about their business, and necessary affairs, the Gent to his
business, and he to the city of London. And in the means time the gould should
multiply, But the Alchimister (belike) having other matters of more importance,
came not just at the hour appointed nor yet at the day, nor with in the year,
so as although it weresom what, against y^ Gent. conscience to violate his
promise or break the league yet partly by the longing he had to see, and
partly the desire he had to enjoy the fruit of y^ excellent experiment, having
for his own security (and the others Satisfaction, some testimony at the
opening thereof, to witness his sincere dealing, he brake up the cost^r, and
lo, he soon espied the Ball of wax which he himself had laid up there with
his own hands, so as he thought, if the hardest should fall, he should find
his principal, and why not as good incrase now, as of the other before? But
alas, when the wax was broken and the m^ttall discovered, the gould was much
abased and became perfect lead.

Hitherto have I spoken somewhat of the knauerie of Alcumistry, now I will
conclude with a pretty dialogue that Petrarke a man of great wisdom and
learning, and of no less experience, has written who as in his time, saw the
frandulent fetches of this compassing craft, so has there hin no age, since
the same has bin broached, but that some wise men have smelt out the evil
meaning of these shifting merchants, and bewraped them to the world.

Francis Petrarke, (I say) treating of the same matter, in form of a dialogue,
introduces a deciple of his, who fancied the foresaid profession and
practice, speaking on this manner.


Decip. I hope for a prosperous success in Alcamistrie.


Pet. It is a wonder from whence that hope should spring, fith the fruit
thereof did never yet fall to thy lotie: nor yet at any time chance to another,
as the report commonly goes, that many rich men, by this vanity and madness,
have bin brought to beggary, whilst they have weatied themselves therewith,
weakened their bodies, and wasted their wealth, in trying of couclusions: to
make gould engender gould.


Decip. I hope for gould according to the workemans promise.


Petra. He that promised the gould, will run away with thy gould, and thou
never the wiser.


Decip. He promises me great good.


Petr. He will first serve his own turn, and relieve his private poverty, for
Alcumisters are a beggarly kind of people, who though they confess themselves
bare, and needy: yet will they make other rich, and wealthy, as though others
poverty did molest, and grieve them more then their own, so far the words of
petrarke.

Albert in his book of mineralls, reports that Auicen treating of
Alcumistry: says, Let the dealers of Alcumistry understand, that the very
nature of things, can not be changed: but rather made by art, to resemble the
same in show, and likeness: so that they are not the very thing indeed, but
seem so to be in appearance: As Castles and Towers do seem to be built in
the air, whereas the representations there showed, are nothing else, but the
resemblance of certain objects below, caused in some bright, and clear
cloud: when the air is void of thicknes, and grossenes, a sufficient proof
hereof may be the looking-glass: and we see (says he) the yellow orringe
color laid upon red, seems to be gould.

Thus much for the fond, and vain art of Alcumistry, I will now draw to an
end, leaving to speak of the innumerable charms of coniurouts, bad
Physicians, lewd Surgions, melancholy Witches, and coseners, especially for
such: as had Physicians and Surgions, know not how to cure: as against the
falling evil, the b^ting of mad dogs, the stinging of a Scorpion, the
toothache, for a woman in travel, for the kings evil: to get a thorn out of
any member, or a bone out of ones throat: for sore eyes, to open locks,
against spirits: for the botts in a horse, for sower wines, and diverse others.

There are also diners books imprinted, as it should appear by the authority
of the Church of Rome, wherein are contained many medecinall prayers, not only
against all deseases of horses, but also for every impediment, and fault in a
horse, in so much as if a shoot fall in the midst of his journey; there is a
prayer to warrant your horses hoof so as it shall not broake, how far soever
he be from the smythes forge: But these of all the rest are the fondest toys,
that ever were devised, therefore we will pass them over, and yet how many in
these days are addicted to the belief of these charms it is incredible, I
will give you a taste of two or three, because you shall see the foolery of the
rest.


A Charm to be said each morning by a Witch fasting, or at least before she
go abroad.
THe fire bites, the fire bites, the fire bites: hogs turde over it, hogs
turde over it, hoggs turde over it. The Father with thee, the Son with me,
the holy Ghost between us both to be, thrice, then spitt over one shoulder,
and then over the other, and then three times right forward.

An old woman's Charm wherewith she did much good in the cuntrie and grew
famous thereby.
AN old woman that healed all deseases of cattle (for the which she never
took any reward but a penny and a loase) being seriously examined, by what
words she brought these things to pass, confessed that after she had touched
the sick creature, she always departed immediately saying. My loaf in my lap,
My penie in my purse:
Thou art never the better,
And I am never the worse.


A slouenly Charm for sore eiet.
The Devil pull out both thine eyes, spel this word backward and you shall see
what a slouenly charm this is etish.

And etish in the holes likewise.
A Miller that had his eeles stolen by night, made moan to the priest of the
parish, who indeed was the principal of the thieves that stole the eeles, Sir
John willed him to be quiet, for said he I will so curse the thieves, and their
adherents with bell, book, and candle, that they shall have small joy of their
fish, and therefore the next sunday Sir John got him up to the pulpit with
hie surplis on his back, and his Gole about his ne^k, and pronounced these
words following, in the audience of the people.

All ye that have stolen the myllers Eeles
Laudate Dominum in coelis:
And all they that have consented thereunto
Benedicamus Domino.
By this little you may plainly perceive the foppery of the Church of Rome,
who hold such toys as authentical, and also there knavery to make the people
believe, lies for truth, and falshod for honesty, Bearing them in hand, as in
this, so in all the rest, with blindenes, and ignorance but hereof enough.

And now to conclude, let us back again with one pretty knack, which is held
to be meruilous and wonderful. And that is to make a horse tell you how much
money you have in your purse: and I read of a pretty story of an ass at
Memphis in Egypt, that could do rare feats, among other Iuggling knackes,
there and then used: there was one that took pains which an ass, that he had
taught him, all these quallities following, and for game he caused a stage to
be made, and an assembly of people to meet, which being down in the manner of
a play, he came in with his ass, and said: The Sultan has great needs of
asses, to help to carry stones, and other stuff toward his great building
which he has in hand^: the ass immediately fell down to the ground, and by
all signs showed himself to be sick, and at length to give up the ghost, so as
the Iuggler begged of the assembly money toward his ass, and having gotten
all that he could, he said, now my masters you shall see mine ass is yet
alive, and does but counterfett, because he would have some (...) (...) to live
my years: but happy the father that begot thee, and thrice happy the Nurse
that ^^^tred such a toward yonker as thy self: I know thy virtues as well as
thy self, thou have a superficial twang of a little something: an Italian
ribald can not vomit out the infections of the world, but thou my pretty
Iuuinall, an English Horrelllorrell, must lick it up for restoratiue, a
putrify thy gentle brother over against thee, with the vilde impostumes at thy
lewd corruptions: God bless good minds from the black enemy say 9: I know
you have been prying like the Devil from East to West, to hear what news: I
will acquaint thee with some. and that a secret Distiuation be fore thou go.
He that drinks oil of pricks, shall have much a do to awoyd s^rrope of
roses: and he that eats nettles for prouender, has a privilege to piss
upon lillies for litter. I prithee sweet natures darling, insult not overmuch
upon quiet men: a worm that is trodden upon will turn again, and patience
loves not to be made a cart of Croydon. I do begin with thee new, but if I see
thee not mend thy conditions, I Will tell you another tale shortly: thou shall see
that I can do ^t, I could bring in my Author to tell thee to thy fare, that he
has found a knave in gross, of thee: but I can say, I have found thee a fool
in retaile: thou see simplicity can not double, nor plain dealing cannot
dissemble, I could wish thee to amend thy life, and take heed of the Beadle.

Vale qui rediculose haec legeris. FINIS.

