THE PILGRIM OF LORETO.

PERFORMING HIS VOW MADE TO THE GLORIOUS VIRGIN MARY MOTHER OF GOD.

Containing diverse devout Meditations upon the Christian and Cath. Doctrine.

By Fa. Lewis Richeome of the Society of JESUS.

Written in French. and translated into English by E.W.

PRINTED At Paris Anno Dom. M.DC.XXIX.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND EXCELLENT PRINCESS MARY BY GODS SINGVLAR PROVIDENCE
QVEENE OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND etc.
MADAME,
This Pilgrim being drawn with a great desire to present himself, and his
service to your Majesty, was driven back by a double fear: the one, of
offending with his ouer-boldnes, in presenting himself (poor Pilgrim) to so
great a Princess: the other, least the very name of Pilgrim might debar him
of all access, and Audience. Yet at last he resumed his first resolution,
considering that he was to appear before a Queen, not so Great as Gracious,
as all that converse in your Royal Court do try and testify. You are the
daughter of that great and Gracious King, who heertofore has with gracious
accepta^ce entertained this same Pilgrim in France presented unto him by that
eloquent, learned, and Religious Frenchman F. Lewis Richeome. Accept then,
MADAME, in England, what your renowned Father embraced in France. He desires
only to be graced, and honored with your Maiestyes Name, and to shroud
himself under the wings of your Princely protection, and to be admitted your
Majesty's poor beadesman.

For the bare Name of Pilgrim, though it may chance to breed some iealousy at
the first; yet whosoever shall but search him, and examine his instructions,
and directions, and find nothing but of devotion, meditation, and prayer, and
particulerly for your Majesty; he may hope rather to be admitted for his
innocence, and loyal Intention, then excluded for the only name of Pilgrim;
which Name (though now strange) has heertofore been so usual, and esteemed
in our Court, S. Helene.
and Country, as Kings and Queens have not only undertaken it, but gloried
therein. Canutus.
And so great (says an ancient Author 900. years since) was the devotion of
Englishmen in that time, Ceadwalla.
after all the Country was converted and christened, that not only the Noble
men, and the meaner sort, Clerickes and Layickes, but the Kings, and the
Kings children leaving their kingdoms and the wealth of the world, Marcelli^.
in vita S. Switb^r^^.
have out of their great devotion chosen for a time to go Pilgrims for Christ
on earth.

This Pilgrim was presented to your Maiestyes Father in France, of purpose to
offer his prayers for the then Daulphin, now King (the benefit and fruit
whereof he has found and felt in good success of his affairs) and for all
the Royal house, and Realm of France, wherein your Majesty had a part: he
comes now wholly, and particulerly to do the like for both your Majesty's,
that God (by the intercession of his Blessed Mother) would bless your Royal
persons, your people, and kingdom with all earthly and heavenly benedictions:
And namely, that having united you in the sacred bands of holy Matrimony, and
lincked your hearts with so fast Love and Affection, as all your Subjects do
joy to see and hear, that he would also bless you with the happy fruit
thereof, and make his Majesty a joyful Father, and You a Mother of many
goodly, and Godly Princes, who may long sway the Scepter of great Britain
after you, and may imitate in virtue and sanctity S. Edward, and S. Lewis your
Majesty's glorious predecessors, and in wisdom and valor, your Majesty's
noble Father of famous memory. Neither do I see, MADAME, why this Pilgrim
should fear to come to any Court, or company, seeing he comes every where
but among his fellows; for though all be not Pilgrims of Loreto (neither is
this book only, or principally to direct such) yet whilst we live in this
world, we are (though as Kings, Queens, and Emperors) all Pilgrims, as a
great King said of himself, Aduena and peregrinus sum ego. Psalm. 38.
Who though they have thousands of Castles, and Cities, yet have they not
here any one Ciuitatem permanentem, which shall not be taken from them before
they dye, or they taken from it by death; but futuram inquirimus, having no
mansion house, or byding place in this world, we go seeking one in Heaven,
where be multae mansiones. Which this Pilgrimage (under the shadow of his other
Pilgrimage) does exactly teach us to do, exhorting us, with S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2.
as strangers and Pilgrims to abstain from carnal desires which fight
against the soul, and to seek the spiritual and eternal, the increase
whereof will make your Majesty greater before God, and man.

For the honors, and glory of this mortal life, your Majesty has as much, as
your heart can reasonably desire: You have for your Ancestors great Emperors,
and Kings of Hungary and Bohemia; for your Progenitors, the great Dukes of
Tuscany; for your Father, Great Henry of France; and for your husband, the King
of Great Britain, all Great. Being placed in the top of these honors, there
is no room for more, nor cause to desire any greater fortunes, but only those
which may, and always should, increase in us, in this life, and provide matter
for a Crown of glory in the next.

These, MADAME, are holy virtues which adorn noble and devout souls, as
silk, silver, gold, pearls, and precious stones do the body: these are the
ornaments which have advanced mean women above Queens, and Queens above
themselves; as they did Hester, who though she were exceeding beautiful, yet
her humility, modesty, charity, wisdom and other divine qualities of her
soul, made her more admired in her life, the^ the beauty of her body, or the
Diadem of her head; and after her death, has left her Name graven in the
memory of all following ages.

These goodly ornaments, I say, together with the corporal gifts, which the
hand of God has liberally cast upon You, won the hearts of those who knew you
in France, and were the titles whereby you were judged to be a Princess worthy
of a Kingdom, and a fit Consort for so great a King. To conclude, these are
the treasures, which only You, shall carry with You, departing this life, to
reign for ever in the other with the Blessed.

The other gifts, as beauty, riches, honor, Iewelles, the Crown it self,
and all other earthly treasures the spoil of time, do pass from their being
to their burial, as a shadow that vanishes, as a Post that gallopeth away, as
a Ship on the sea, as a Bird in the air, who leave no path, nor trace behind
them; as dust, or a lock of woll hoysted with the wind, as the froth and foam
of the Sea broken with a storm, as smoke dispersed in the air, and as the
memory of a guest which stays but one night.

Thus said Solomon out of his own experience; and we see as much every day by
ours. Sap. 5.
How vain then, O most Christian Queen, is all this world? What are her
pompes, honors and pleasures, and their lasting, in comparison of that glory
which expects us in eternity? A Glory, worthy of Kings, and Queens, and
Princely souls, who know how to prize it in equal balance, and to seek it
with high, and constant courage. A Glory, which I, and this Pilgrim, and all
good Pilgrims besides do most heartily wish unto both your Majesty's, after
that you shall have left us many fair, and sweet Princes (such as should come
of the Lilly and the Rose) who may all represent the image of their
Predecessors, and their virtues; who may be all worthy to wear Crowns, and
to be with their Father and Mother crowned in heaven, having first reigned
here after them, long and worthily on earth* Amen.

Your Maties most loyal Subject, and Beadesman, E. W.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS and Arguments of this Book.
Chap. 1. PILGRIMAGES are agreeable to God, and commended in holy Scripture.
Page 1 Chap. 2 The Places most noble and famous in the world. page 2 Chap. 3.
Causes that make a place venerable. Places merua^lous in their beginning, and
of the admirable foundation of the house of Loreto. page 3 Chap. 4. The house
of our Lady called of Loreto is one of the three places most famous of the holy
Land, and of the causes why it was carried thence. page 6 Chap. 5. How the house
of our Lady was carried from Nazareth to Sclauonia, and from thence to Italy,
and there also to diverse places. page 8 Chap. 6. Why this Chamber of the B.
Virgin has been so often removed. page 8. Chap. 7. How the Chapel of Loreto
was known to be the Chamber where the Virgin was borne, and saluted by
Gabriell, and of the form thereof. page 9. Chap. 8. How the transport of the
house of Loreto was verified by the Sclauonians and Recanatines. page 11 Chap.
9. Of certain marvelous transportes. page 12 Chap. 10. Why diverse
Historiographers of that time did not writ of that marvelous transport of the
house of Loreto, and of many strange things not perceived or neglected. page 14
Chap. 11. Historiographers that have written of Loreto, and Popes that have
adorned it. page 18 Chap. 12. D^uine proofs of the truth of this Chapel.
page 21 Cha. 13. Of the marvelous situation of the house of Loreto 22 Chap.
14. Places honorable by reason of their Antiquity. That of Loreto most
honorable in that respect. page 24 Chap. 15. Places renowned by reason of
divine apparitions made therein, and of those of the Chamber of Loreto. page 26
Chap. 16. Places made famous by the habitation of holy men and Saints: the
house of Loreto most Noble in this respect. page 29 Chap. 17. The house of
Loreto admirable for diverse divine touchings. page 31 Chap. 18. Places famous
for some great and mystical effects, and Loreto more admirable then all. page
32 Chap. 19. Loreto most renowned in miracles. page 35 Chap. 20. How God does
miracles more in some places, then in others. page* 36 Chap. 21. Of the honor
of vows, and offerings of Religion made at Loreto. page 39
The P^eparation and furniture of the Pilgrim.
Chap. 1. THE end and allegory of Christian Pilgrimages, and compass of our
mortal course signified by the number of Forty. page 43 Chap. 2. Of Prayer,
Meditation, and Contemplation. page 47 Chap. 3. How Prayer should be made, and
of the parts and use thereof. page 51 Chap. 4. Of Iaculatory prayer. page 53
Chap. 5. Of the Beads, and the manner to say them. page 53 Chap. 6. Of the
Examen of Conscience. page 56 Chap. 7. A general distribution what the
Pilgrim should do every day. and 1. Of the Credo. page 58 Chap. 8. Of the
Pater, Aue, and Confiteor. page 59 Chap. 9. Of the sign of the Cross. page 61
Chap. 10. What the Pilgrim should do every day. page 62
The Pilgrim his setting forth, and first days Journey.
Chap. 1. A Meditation of the condition of man, who is to be Pilgrim in this
life. page 64 Chap. 2. A resemblance of the Pilgrimage of this life, to
Pilgrimages of devotion. The spiritual habits of a Pilgrim. page 69 A
Canticle of the Pilgrimage of this world. page 71
Chap. 3. The means happily to perform the pilgrimage of this life, is to
suffer and fight under the banner of Jesus Christ, and go always forward in
virtue. page 72 Chap. 4. Every Christian must suffer and bear his Cross. p.
76 Chap. 5. The true Christian must always go forward in virtue. page 78 Chap.
6. The commandments of God are the way of the Pilgrimage of this life. page
79. Chap. 7. A Meditation upon the 10. Cammandements of God in general. The 1.
and 2. point, Why the law was given with so great ceremony in 10. articles, and
two tables. page 80 Chap. 8. The 3. and 4. point of the Meditation precedent.
The love of God and of our neighbor is the end of the Law, and the observation
of the law proves the same love. Motives to the love of God. page 83 Chap. 9.
A Canticle of the law of God the way of our life. pa. 85 Chap. 10. A meditation
upon the 1. Commandment, Thou shall not have no other Gods. Thou shall not make
any graven Idol. page 87 Chap. 11. How the Justice of God does shine in this
first Commandment. Prayers to avoid the Idols of false Christians. page 90
Chap. 12. A Meditat. upon the 2. Commandment. Thou shall take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. page 92 Chap. 13. Diverse Meditations and Prayers. page
95 Chap. 14. A Meditat. upon the 3. Commandment. Remember to keep holy the
Sabbath day. page 96 Chap. 15. Of the Commandments of the Church, and devotion
to the B. Virgin. page 99 Chap. 16. The B. Trinity figured in the 3.
Commandments of the first Table. page 100 A Canticle upon the three first
Commandments, a figure of the sacred Trinity. page 101
Chap. 17. A thanksgiving for the first week accomplished. p. 102 Chap. 18.
Of the love of our Nighbour. That one man is neighbor to another. page 103
Chap. 19. A morning meditation upon the fourth Commandment. Honor thy father
and thy Mother, to the end thou may live long upon earth. page 104 Chap. 20.
The works of mercy spiritual and corporal. p. 105 Chap. 21. A meditation of
the fifth Commandment. Thou shall not kill. page 107 A Canticle of the love of
God and our Neighbor. 110
Chap. 22. Threats and punishments against murderers. p. 111 Chap 23. A
meditation of the 6. Commandment. Thou shall not commit adultery. page 112
Chap. 24. How to keep chastity, and fly the vices of the flesh. p. 115 Chap.
25. A medi^ation of the 7. Commandment. Thou shall not steal. page 116 Chap.
26. Diverse considerations upon covetousness punished, and liberalit^ pra^tised
by the Saints. page 119. Chap. 27. A meditation upon the 8. Commandment. Thou
shall not b are false witness against thy neighbor. page 120 Chap. ^8. Of the
nature and baseness of ly ng. page 121 Chap. 29. A m dita ion of the 9. and 10.
Commandments. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his house, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is his. page 122 Chap 30. The Decaloge is a branch
springing out of the law of nature. A canticle of the Decaloge. page 124 Chap.
31. Of the Evangelical counsels; of Grace gratuite, and making gratfull, and
of the effects thereof. page 127 Chap. 32. The 4. and 5. point of the precedent
Meditation. The 7 gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the 8. Beatitudes. page 131
Chap. 33. The Councels do facilitate the keeping of the Commandments. page 134
Chap. 34. A meditation of good works. page 134 Chap 35. Instructions
remarkable for good works. page 137 A Canticle upon good works. page 139
Chap. 36. A meditation of Sin. page 139 Chap. 37. Of the 7. capital sins
commonly called Mortal, and of their branches. page 143 Chap 38. Of the 1.
sin, which is that of Angels; and of the 2. which (...) Adam (...) of the
effects of ^^em, and of sin which every man com^^^eth* (...) ^^^^eth the
th^rd sort. page 144 Chap. 39. Effect^ of sin, and diverse punishments. page
147 Chap. 40. A meditation of death, the first effect of sin. p. 148 Chap.
41. Diverse sentences of death. page 150 Chap. 42. A medit. of judgment,
particular and general. p. 151 Chap. 43. The separation of the good from the
wicked, after Judgment. page 154 Chap. 44. A meditation of Hell. page 154 Chap.
45. Other meditations of the pains of the damned. p. 157 Cha. 46. Of general
Confession, and the parts of penance. p. 158 Chap. 47. Prayers and
thanksgiving to God, and the B. V. p. 161 A Canticle to the glorious Virgin.
page 162
Chap. 48. Of choosing a good Gostly Father, or Confessor. p. 163 Chap. 49. Of
the examen before Confession. page 164 Chap. 50 How to examine our conscience
before Confession. p. 164 Chap. 51. A prayer to say before Confession. page 166
Chap. 52. The order we must keep in Confession. page 167 Chap. 53. A prayer to
say after Confession. page 167
The Pilgrims abode at Loreto.
Chap. 1. A Meditation vp^n the holy Eucharist. page 169 Chap. 2. The first
point, Of three figures of the holy Sacrament. page 170 Chap. 3. The second
point, Of the Majesty of our Savior in this Blessed Sacrament. page 171 Chap.
4. The third point, Of the effects of this holy Sacr. p. 172 Chap. 5 A speech
to God* and thanksgiving. page 173 Chap. 6. How to hear Mass. page 174 Chap.
7. How a Christian should behave himself in every part of the Mass. page 176
Chap. 8. Of the Communion. page 179 Chap. 9. A prayer before receiving. page 1^9
Chap. 10. A prayer after receiving. page 180 Chap. 11. How to hear a Sermon.
page 181 Chap. 12. Exercises of devotion. page 184 Chap 13. A meditation of the
Conception of the B. Vir. p. 185 Cha. 14. Of the purity of Christian actions in
their intention. p. 188 Chap. 15. A meditation of the nativity of the B.
Virgin. page 189 Chap. 16. Of the B. Virgins ancestors, and of the vanity of
worldly greatness. page 192. Chap. 17. A meditation of the Presentation of the
B. Virgin in the Temple. page 193 Chap. 18. The third point of the Meditation,
Of Virgin and men consecrated to Almighty God. page 195 Chap. 19. A Meditation
of the Espousal of the B. Virgins with S. Joseph. page 199 Chap. 20. The second
point of the Meditation. Of the causes of the Marriage between the B. Virgin,
and S. Joseph. page 201 Chap. 21. Of the rare virtues of S. Joseph. page 205
Chap. 22. Of the incarnation of the Son of God. Of the misery of mankind when
this happened. page 207 Chap. 23. The third point of the Meditation. The
desires of the Saints, dead and living, of the coming of the Messiah. page 210
Chap. 24. Of the Annunciation made to the B. Virgin, by the Angel Gabriell.
page 212 Chap. 25. How the Son of God was conceived in the womb of the
Virgin. page 216 Chap. 26. Of the goodness of God, in the mystery of his
Incarnation. page 218 Chap. 27. Of the Wisdom of God, in the same Mystery.
p. 220 Chap. 28. Of the power of God in the same Mystery. page 221 Chap. 29. Of
the Visitation of the B. Virgin. page 222 Chap. 30. Of the Canticle of the B.
Virgin, Magnificat. page 225 Chap. 31. What the B. V. did in the house of S.
Elizabeth. p. 228 Chap. 32. A Meditation of the Nativity of our Savior. p. 229
Chap. 33. Our Savior encountreth, and ouercometh vices in his Infancy. page
232 Chap. 34. Of the Circumcision of our Savior, and of the Name of Jesus.
page 234 Chap. 35. A Meditation Of the Adoration of the three Kings. page 238
Chap. 63. A demonstration of the power of Jesus, in the adoration of the
Kings. page 240 Chap. 37. Of the Return of the three Kings. page 242 Chap.
38. A meditation of the Presentation of JESUS in the Temple. page 243 Chap. 39.
Ceremonies and feasts instituted for men to acknowledge Original sin, the
root of all the misery of mankind. page 245 Chap. 40. Of the Canticle, Nunc
dimittis. page 247 Chap. 41. The Pilgrims prayer at his departure from Loreto.
page 250 Chap. 42. How the Pilgrim departed from Loreto. page 253
The Return of the Pilgrim of Loreto.
Chap. 1. THE first Day of his Return. page 254. Chap. 2. Meditations upon the
flight of our Savior into Egypt, together with his glorious Mother and
Joseph. p. 256 Chap 3. 1. The fountain of Bees. 2. A dinner and meeting. 3.
Presages of eloquence* and the nature of Bees observed fifty years by
Aristomachus. 4. The wonders of our Savior going into Ae ypt. 5. The tree
Persis adoreth him. 6. The Idols of Egypt overthrown. 261. Chap. 4. The
arriual of the Pilgrims at the Farme-house. 1. Tables of Loreto, and of the
flight of our Savior into Egypt. 2. The ship of the Ragusians delivered. 3.
Two Capu^hines, and three country men; a Supper. 4. Three Slaves. 5. One of
Prouence: The B. Virgin star of the Sea. 6. The practice of the examen of
Conscience. p. 269 Chap 5. A Meditation of the histor^ of little Jesus lost*
and found in the midst of the Doctors in the Temple. page 2^9 Chap. 6. 1. Our
Savior manifested not himself until 12. years. 2. Theodosius found. 3.
Carried away by the Bandites. 4 Made prisoner with Lazarus and Vincent. 5. The
plea and answer of Lazarus. 6. All three delivered. page 283 Chap. 7. 1.
Theodosius takes again his Pilgrims weed. 2. recou^teth his fortune. 3. The
conversion of Tristram. 4. how he spread an occasion to save himself. 5. Of the
Bandites who left their sort. 6. Theodosius escaped out of their company. page
293 Chap. 8. A Meditat of the youth and dwelling of Jesus Christ, and his
Mother, and S. Joseph in Nazareth. page 303 Chap. 9. 1. A discourse with two
merchants. 2. The Manner to live well. 3. A sinner repelled from entering the
Chapel of Loreto. 4. Impossible to serve God and the world. 5. How a man may
be a good ^hristian, and a good merchant. 6. No estat without difficulty p. 304
Chap. 10. 1. The Trafi^ne of alms. 2. A memorable history of Alms. 3. A
combat betwixt a wefil, and a serpent. page 313 Chap 11. Of the tentation of
our Savior in the desert; with what weapons, and in what manner we must deal
with the Devil. p. 319 Chap 12. 1. An admirable Combat. 2. A Pilgrim together
with serpents nourished by a stone. 3. The ground of dreams. 4. Three bands of
the world. 5. How we must choose a religion. 6. The end of worldly joys. page
321 Chap. 13. Of the vocation of the first five disciples of our Savior Andrew
and his companion whom the Evangelist names not; Peter, Philip, and
Nathaniell. page 234 Chap. 14. 1. Nightingales. 2. The Hermitage. 3. The
mystical description. 4. The charmed drink. page 339 Chap. 15. The Hermits
prayer. page 346 Chap. 16. A meditation of the 8. Beatitudes. page 347 Chap.
17. 1. A description of the world. 2. Her laws. 3. Her faith. 4. Good mingled
with the bad in this life. 5. Horrible sights. 6. Honorable to serve God. page
349 Chap. 18. 1. Distraction and euagation of the mind in prayer. 2. A
meditation of the Passion of our Savior. page 359 Chap. 19. 1. Gratian
accused. 2. Men transformed 3. Gratian known. 4. Tables of Religion. 5.
Bagueuille. 6. The desires of a devout soul. page 366 Chap. 20. A meditation
of the descent of our Savior into hell, and of his Resurrection. page 383
Chap. 21. The first resurrection. 2. A horrible sight. page 385 Chap. 22. Of
the life and conversation of the B. Virgin, after the ascension of our Savior,
and of her departure page 393 Chap. 23. 1. Diverse farewels. 2. A hunting. 3. A
supper. 4. A Knight saved, and a Priest carrying his bowels in his hands. 5. A
spiritual discourse of hunting. 6. Also of hawking. page 396 Chap. 24. 1. The
sighs and deliberations of a devout soul. 2. A meditation of the glorious
assumption of the Blessed Virgin. 3. Of the glory of Paradise. page 422 Chap.
25. An exhortation to one lying in the agony of death. 2. The affliction of
Lazarus. 3. His arrival at his Fathers house. 4. His farewell to his Father,
and the world. page 428
THE PILGRIM OF LORETO Vowed to the glorious Virgin MARY the Mother of God.
That Pilgrimages are pleasing to God, and recommended in holy Scripture. CHAP.
I.
THE custom to travail from one Contry to another, and to visit of devotion
certain places, has always been usual and commendable amongst Christians,
and is also founded in the holy Scripture, and in examples of all antiquity,
and is full of spiritual profit. Pilgrimages of Saints.
There is nothing more frequently related in holy Histories, then the
pilgrimages of Saints, Christian Monarchs, Emperors, Kings, Princes, great
Lords and Ladies, and of all sorts of good people: which custom continues
till this day in all parts of the world, where the Catholic faith, or civil
prudence is in vigor and force. The Scripture tells us of the voyages of
Abraham into the land of Chanaan, to the mountains and diverse other places,
Genesis 12.^
where he erected Altars and Oratories of Religion. Genesis 26.3
Isaac was also pilgrim out of his own contry amongst strangers. The life of
Jacob was full of pilgrimages and places sanctified by him. Genesis 28.2 Genesis 37.2
Act. 7.6.
Joseph his son was pilgrim in the land of Egypt from his youth, and the
Hebrews after him for about 400. years.

A law for the Jews to travel thrice a year. Exodus 23.17.54.^4
The Law commanded all the Jews dispersed through the whole world to travail
thrice a year to Jerusalem, to sacrifice at three solemn feasts, to wit,
Easter, Pentecost, and of Tabernacles; and in this third was principally
observed in remembrance of their Peregrinations. There was a place in
Jerusalem appointed for the burial of Pilgrims: and Jesus Christ would have
his birth honored with the adoration of three noble Pilgrims, which were the
three Kings or Sages directed by a new Star from their Country in the East,
to Jerusalem, and from thence to Bethleem, where the star of the world was
newly descended from heaven to earth: and himself shortly after began to
travail into strange countries; and being a little child was carried from
Palestine to Egypt, where he remained Pilgrim the space of seven years:
Jesus christ carried into Egypt. Mat. 2.21 there pilgrim 7. years. Martyrol.
Romans 7. Ianuar. Baron. an. 8. Christi.
and afterward being returned unto heaven, and casting the beams of his
Gospel over all the earth, he has left many places honorable with the steps
of his bounty, and has given occasion to Christians to undertake such holy
pilgrimages, so much the more courageously, as they have more places then the
Jews had, to acknowledge and praise God in some peculiar sort, and to obtain
and gather the fruits and gifts of his graces. All which reasons have induced
me to write this manner of performing the pilgrimage of Loreto, which is one of
the most notable and famous in Christendom; and by this particular platform,
to teach also, how at all other places we may behave our selves in this
exercise of devotion, thereby to perform it like good Christians, and to help
our selves in the way of v^rtue, and perfection toward life everlasting.

The places that are most noble and famous in the world. CHAP. II.
AS in all actions that are prudently forecast, it is requisite to regard the
end, and to provide means proper to obtain it; The end and motive of the
actio^ and as it were the mark of the agent
so likewise in a pilgrimage wisely undertaken we must know the place, whither
we go, which is the end and mark we shoot at: and also know the way thither,
and how to perform it, which are the means. The knowledge of the place, of
the situation, of the qualityes and conditions thereof, provoke,
encourages, and strengthens a man to go and visit it, and by a secret hope
and alacrity nourishes devotion: the rest is of necessity. I will speak first
of the first, and of the house of Loreto, which is the end and motive of all
this action, and after of the means to go thither, and accomplish the voyage.

Of all the places of this universal world, The most remarkable places of the
world. The heavens. The holy Land.
the Heavens are the most noble in greatness, lasting, and beauty, as being the
palace and throne of God. Of all the places of the earth, Palestine has
always been the chief, for many divine prerogatives both of nature and
grace, wherewith God in old time had honored it above all other nations, but
principally since the coming of his Son, who has illustrated it with
infinite number of miraculous works, and at last performed the redemption of
man therein, sanctifying so many places as his holy humanity had touched; and
especially above all other, The chamber of Loreto, the abridgeme^t of all holy
places.
that which we now speak of, which justly we may call a collection of all the
holy places of the world, and verily the Holy of holyes in the Temple of God,
as only and alone having been sanctified by all those causes together, which
severally are wont to make other places holy and honorable, as I will now show
more in particular, as it were setting a star before the Pilgrims eyes to
guide him.

What causes make a place venerable. Places marvelous in their beginning, and
of the admirable foundation of the house of Loreto. CHAP. III.
THE titles that make a place venerable are these: Titles that make a place
honorable
The marvelous beginning; the Antiquity; divine Apparitions; the habitation or
touching of some Saints; the mysteries; the great effect and miracles; the
vows and presents of Religion: All which God has joined together, each one
as it were stryuing which should be highest in this house, to make it admirable
to the honor of his mother before the eyes of mortal men. Let us consider
each one a part.

The beginning of a place makes it venerable, when it is accompanied with some
notable, The beginning. 3. Reg. 6.7.
strange or wonderful thing. So we read, that the building of the Temple of
Solomon was wonderful, specially in that there was not heard therein the sound
of any hammer or saw, nor the noise of any Iron instrument; where
notwithstanding there must needs be an infinite number of workmen and tools:
this royal building of the Temple being the most accomplished and perfected,
in all variety of the parts and workmanship, and the most stately and costly
in the matter that ever was; and the nouelty of this wonder had been
incredible, if the Scripture it self did not warrant us, 1. P^^al. 29.
and facilitate the credit thereof, telling us on one side, how David left the
principal necessary stuff, and Solomon caused it to be fetched from other
places ready fashioned and framed for the work: and on the other side,
aduertising us by reason of this marvel to meditate a mystery of a future
Temple, which Jesus Christ the true Solomon, A mystical marvel.
and true David both, triumphing in his heavenly kingdom in abundance of
everlasting peace, shall build of his chosen lively stones, which he causes to
be hewed and polished in this world, at the cost and charges of his own
precious blood, and with great noise and blows of manifold persecution. The
Temple then was admirable in the beginning with such a wonder.

Admirable also was in the beginning, that wall which Titus the Emperor caused
to be made with many Bullwarkes about Jerusalem, Joseph. lib. 5. de bello Iud.
c. 31.
when he besieged it, compassing the city round about with a wall of 39.
furlongs, which are about two ordinary leagues, and building 13. Fortes or
Bullwarks in diverse parts thereof, having each 10. furlongs in compass, which
is 250. paces, and all this in the space of three days. This was made to bind
in the assieged, that none might enter to succor them, or come out either to
seek aid, or to save themselves. This work was wonderful, for being
extraordinarily advanced by the secret hand and help of God, furnishing and
providing the enemies of this ungrateful and perverse people of force and
industry thus to press them, and make to them a straight and doleful prison,
the head City of their country, and the place of their delight for ever
heretofore, and namely 42. years before, when they thrust their Savior out
thereof to crucify him. And then was fullfilled the prophecy of the same
Savior, when weeping over the city, Luc. 19.
he said: Thine enemies shall besiege thee round about, and shall compass and
enclose thee on every side. Ios^ph. lib. 5. de bello Iud. c. 31.
Joseph the Jew an eyewitness of this siege, did note this wonder, not
knowing the cause nor the prophecy, and says, that as soon as Titus had
resolved to make this wall, the soldiers and Captains were presently stirred
with a certain extraordinary heat in laboring, every man striving who should
be the best mason or workman, and labor most willingly and diligently in his
quarter. And Titus first besieged them upon this wall the third day after it
was begun, being thus encouraged to batter these obstinate mutiners, who were
greatly amazed to see themselves enclosed in such a wall almost in a moment.
The Ecclesiastical history tells us, Iap. to. 5. S^^. to. 6.
that after S. Clement was cast into the Sea with an Anchor about his neck,
there was found a little Chapel of marble meruailously built in the place
where he was drowned, the Sea (by another like wonder) retyring it self one
mile within the channel, to discover this holy treasure hidden within it, and
to make a dry way to those, that of devotion went to honor it, according unto
the common custom of Christians. These and such like places are made
honorable by the wonders that happened in their beginning.

The chamber or house of Loreto has been honored in this kind above all the
houses that ever were in the world; not in respect of the first building, which
was finished by the common artizans of Nazareth; nor for that it was beautified
with a goodly Temple, which Helena the mother of Constantine caused to be built
hard-by, S. Helen built a Temple in Nazareth.
but in that it has been transported by the Angels from one country to
another, and from one place to another in the same country, and consequently so
often built with miracles never heard off before, and much greater then if it
had been built by the Angels themselves, that transported it. For if the
Angels had built it where it is, or else where as it is, it had been
wonderful by reason of the workmen, but not of the work, which might have
been made by the industry of men, as it was at the first: but being
transported from the first seat (as we will show after) it is made admirable
both by the workmen, and the manner of the work; this transporting and
transplanting exceeding all the power and industry of all the Enginiers and
Builders in the world, though they had the hands of a hundred Briareuses, and
of a hundred Archimedeses: Briareus with an hundred hands.
and therefore we may say, that this Chapel is builded with such miracles, as
never any building was before, and that in this respect it was the most noble
piece of work that ever worldly eyes beheld. The which the better to pierce
and penetrate we must consider with the object of the circumstances.

How the house of our Lady called of Loreto, is one of the three most famous
places of the Holy Land, and the causes why it was removed, and carried from
thence. CHAP. IIII.
AFTER the triumphant Ascension of our Savior, three places in Palestine were
above the rest in singular honor and veneration with all Christians. Three
places famous in Palestine
In Galilee this chamber of Ioachims house, where the Virgin Mary was saluted
by the Archangel Gabriel in Nazareth; and in Judea the Cribbe, where our
Savior was borne in the little town of Bethleem; and the Sepulcher where he
was buried by Jerusalem.

These places honored with goodly Temples built by Constantine and his Mother,
Temples built at the Crib, and Sepulcher of our Savior, and in the house of
the B. Virgin. Guil. de Nangis in in life, and Io. Vill. c. 17. and 92.
were visited of an infinite number of Christians, coming from all parts of
the world to adore God there, and to acknowledge his gifts in that land, which
he had sanctified with his own steps, when he lived man amongst men, and which
was marked with the marks of his power, wisdom and goodness: which devotion
endured above 1200. years, that is, until the year of our Lord 1228. at which
time the Turks and Sarazens made many incursions, and great spoil in the holy
Land: which was the cause, that valiant King Lewis, father to all the most
Christian Kings that since have worn the Crown of France, and the last
Protector of that holy Country, made two voiages thither, at the prayer and
solicitation of Christians, to recover it out of their hands, and restore it
to liberty. An. 1254
The first was in the year 1254. when he armed forth about 1800. Ships, that
set forth from Marsiles the 7. of August. An. 12^9
The second was in the year 1269. which he called the Pilgrimage of the
Cross, wherein he was accompanied with the King of Navarre: and though he there
performed many worthy exploites, both of valor and piety for the recovery of
this holy patrimony of the children of God, and after him the Knights of the
Temple, and of S. John of Jerusalem, yet could he not establish and settle
such a peace and stay in Christians affairs, but that the Infidels quickly
became masters thereof again. Tripolis taken by assault by the Infidels 1291
14. of April. Aemil l. 8
For in the year 1291 the 14. of April about Easter 30. years after his death,
the King of Egypt took by assault Tripolis in Syria, and Ptolemais a famous
city in Phenicia, and diverse others that stood for the Christians in those
parts, and rased them to the ground, killed the inhabitants, and chased
Christianity clean out of Palestine; God of his justice so permitting it for
the sins of men, who had made way to their own destruction; and namely, the
factions of the Guelfes and Gibellines, The factions of the Guelf^ and
Gibellines. Platin. Blond. l 7. T^^th. in chron.
and other Christian Princes, who warred one against another, whilst the holy
Land lay destitute of the accustomed succors of Europe. In such sort, that
from that time Christians of other countries could not go thither, but with
excessive charges and danger of their life; specially unto this holy Chapel,
which was furthest within Palestine, and furthest from Christians of all the
three places, and more also exposed to spoil and injury: nothing remaining
there (after the Temple was pulled down) but a little poor building, and
work contemptible to the Infidells; whereas the Cribbe, and the Sepulcher were
founded upon Rocks and stones, The cribe of our Savior.
being by their natural situation in some sort assured, and near also unto
the Christians. Therefore our Savior meaning to take this precious prize out of
the hands of the Infidels, and (if we may so say) raise it from death, The
Sepulcher.
by a mean meet and worthy of his almighty power, and to make a present
thereof unto the faith and devotion of his Church, he caused it miraculously to
be transported into a Christian country; and place of liberty, and that at
diverse times, and to diverse places, as we shall declare,

How the house of our B. Lady was carried from Nazareth to Sclauonia, and from
thence into Italy, and to diverse places there. CHAP. V.
Diverse remoues of the house of Loreto.
IN the year 1291. the 9. of May, this house was carried from Galiley into
Sclauonia, to a plain at the top of a little hill, situated betwixt two
towns called Tersact and Flumen, not far from the Mediterranean sea: in which
place it remained about 4. years; and from thence it was transported the
second time into Italy in the year 1294. the 19. of November, The first from
Nazareth to Sclauony 1281.
to three several places. First into the Mark of Ancona, near unto the Sea,
in a forest of the territory of Reccanata, which pertained to a noble and
devout Lady, called Lorete, whence this holy place took the name. Secondly
from this forest, infected with thieves and robbers, it was removed to a little
hill hardby, 2. from Sclauony to Italy. 1294.
pertaining to two brethren: whence also for their avarice within less then a
month, it was once again translated a bow-shot from thence, and placed on
another little hill, by the high way to Reccanata, half a mile from the Sea,
where now it is.

Why the Chamber of the B. Virgin has been so often transported? CHAP. VI.
BUT wherefore (will some say) was it so often removed within Christendom?
This demand may be pertinent, because it is profitable; and it may be curious
also, for that we must admire and praise the works of God, rather then search
the causes, which cannot be but just. Notwithstanding we answer with respect
and humility, that the same power, which removed that heavenly house from
amongst the Heathens, causing it to be carried above 500. leagues, could at the
first have placed it where it should remain, and where it remains at this
time; but that it rather pleased his divine providence to do, as he has done,
and to make his work more certain and admirable by such changes and remoues.
For first the marvel has been thereby better known and auerred, The first
cause.
and is more great and famous by these manifold transportations never heard of
before, being removed in so diverse places, in the sight of many people and in
short time, from Asia into Europe, from one coast to another, and all this in
places near one to another, and in short space, to wit, from 1291. to 1294.
within less then five years. The 2. cause.
Secondly the divine Bounty has this way showed it self more liberal,
imparting and communicating it self to more people, that is, to the
Sclauonians, and to those of this side the Sea: and the divine Justice has
been more auailable, instructing men how to respect holy things, and not to
abuse them, except they would be deprived of them and punished. For God causing
this holy house to be removed from unfaithful Palestine to Sclauony, from
thence to Italy, and there from the forest to the mountain, by reason of the
robberies and murders that by thieves were there committed upon Pilgrims; and
from the mountain to the place where now it is, for that the Brethren,
masters of the place, instead of showing themselves devout and merciful,
became covetous and contentious, in danger to cut one another throat.

The divine providence, I say, making these changes and remoues just upon their
folly and excess, did teach men to reverence his gifts, if they will not
loose the sight of them, and bear the weight of his justice, seeing they would
not make their profit of his liberality. If then this house had been
tra^sported but once from Galiley into Italy, and set in one only place, we
had wanted the profit of all these instructions.

How the Chapel of Loreto was known to be the Chamber where the B Virgin
lived, and was saluted by the Angel: and of the form thereof. CHAP. VII.
AS the translation of this house was done by the power of God, so it was
known by the revelation of God, The house of Loreto known by miracles.
and the belief thereof confirmed by often miracles in the sight of men. First
the same house being perceived on the top of a hill by the Sclauonians, a world
of people there abouts came from all parts to feed their eyes with the sight
thereof. They saw a little Chapel that was never seen there before, of form
quadrangle, longer then it was wide almost by half, being 40. foot long, and
about 20. wide, and 25. high, built of ordinary small stones, hard* and squared
long, of the color of brick: the walls a foot and half thick, painted
after the old fashion, parjetted within, and adorned with the sacred stories of
the misteryes of our Religion; the vaulte seeled with wain-scot, painted also,
and the roof of the house somewhat rising with a little steeple. At the upper
end there was an Altar squared out of hard stone, The Altar.
breathing as it were some thing divine, and a little above that was behind
upon a pillar, the Image of the B. Virgin Mary standing, made of Cedar-wood of
a reasonable stature, The Image of the B. Virgin.
crowned with a crown of precious stones, her hair hanging, like the
Nazarenes, upon her shoulders, clothed with a gown of cloth of gold, girded
with a large girdle after the fashion of the country, with a sky-colored
mantle fastened over that, even to her feet. She carried in her left arm^ the
little child Jesus, having a countenance full of grace and majesty, clothed
with a little garment, with his hair wauing about his head like the Nazarens
also, as it were giving his blessing with his right hand, and holding in his
left a golden Globe, a Hierogliphical figure of the whole and universal world.
Just under the Image appeared behind the Altar a little low chimney of simple
work with a top and tonnell; and on the Epistle corner toward the South, was a
little window, and on the Gospel side was a little Cupborde, to put her
vessels, and her poor necessary household stuff in. These good people then
beholding with their eyes the frame and body of this Chapel, The astonishme^t
of the Sclauonians.
which they perceived was of the mother of God, considering the fashion, the
parts, the situation, brought into that place, and not built there, they were
astonished in their souls, and ravished with an extraordinary feeling of
devotion, and did verily persuade themselves, that this could not be any other,
but the work of God, and gift from heaven: but they could not learn in
particular, from whence it came, nor how it came thither: And therefore God who
was the author thereof, was also the reuealer by his Mother, who appearing to
the Bishop of Tersact, Alexander a very holy man, and extremely desirous to
honor God in this new sanctuary, An apparition of the B. Virgin.
whereof every body told him wonders, but he could not go by reason of an
incurable disease, that had long held him in his bed. The B. Virgin appearing
to him in the night with great light, and majesty, accompanied with holy
Angels, showed him in his sleep, and particulerly declared unto him, that this
was the chamber where she was borne, where she was brought up in her first
years, The B. Virgin brought up in Nazareth until the 3. years, and from 14.
to 45. See Nicephorus.
and dwelt most part of her life, where she was saluted by the Angel Gabriel,
and which after the Ascension of her Son, was dedicated for a Chapel by the
Apostles, and now transported from Nazareth to this place by the hands of the
Angels, for the good of men. And that he might be a credible witness heerof,
and denounce this with authority, she suddenly restored unto him the health and
strength of his body; so that the next morning, ravished with this vision and
miracle, he went to give thanks to God and his glorious mother, preaching that
which he had heard, with the testimony of his unexpected health and recovery.
He put the people there out of all doubt, and brought them an unspeakable
comfort with this joyful news.

How the transportation of the House of Loreto was verifyed by the Sclauonians
and Recanatines. CHAP. VIII.
THAT this matter might yet be more assured by humane means, 4. men sent into
Palestine
the most certain that can be desired in such a case, by the counsel of the
said Bishop Alexander, and the Lord of Tersact and Flumen, called Frangipan,
four men of wisdom and credit were deputed to go to Palestine, there in
Nazareth, to search the place of this chamber, and the Bishop himself was one
of the four, who coming to the Holy Land, and visiting the holy Sepulcher,
were brought by the favor of God without any disturbance to Nazareth, where
being informed by certain poor Christians (who remained there as relickes of
the final desolation of Christianity in those parts) they found the ruins of
the Church, A church built by S. Helen at Nazareth. Niceph. l. 8. c. 30.
which S. Helen had caused to be built near to this most happy Virgins house,
where they saw the foundations of the house newly razed from the ground, equal
in length and breath, they perceived that it was carried from Nazareth in the
same time that it was found in Sclauonia, though no man knew how: and
retourning sound and safe, they gave public attestation of what they had seen
with their eyes.

Sixteen men of Recanati sent to Sclauonia and Palestine
The inhabitants of Recanati four years after, when this house was brought
into their country, did double this diligence by the same trial and testimony.
For they appointed sixteen sufficient men, who going first to Sclauony, did
understand as well by the testimony of their public grief, lamenting their
late and unexpected loss, as also by their report of the measure and
situation of the Chapel, that it was the place, whence this holy house was
carried not long before. Afterward going from Sclauonia to Palestine, they
found in Nazareth the same marks and tokens of the place, which the
Sclauonians had found four years before. And their report recorded in the
writings of the City, was kept in the public Records for testimony unto all
posterity.

Of certain strange, and marvelous transportations. CHAP. IX.
THOUGH this be a wonder, the like whereof has not been often heard, that a
whole house should be transported and carried from one country to another, as
this holy house was, which alone had the honor of such a privilege; yet we
read also of diverse transports of the same kind, made either by prayer, or by
art and industry of men, even of Paynimes otherwise. Wherefore this should not
seem either impossible to the power of God, nor beyond the faith of men. S.
Gregory Thaumaturge (as S. Gregory Nissene reports in his life) by his prayer
removed a Rock from one place to another, Greg. Thaumat. Greg. Niss. in his
life.
and by this means planted the faith of Jesus Christ in the heart of the
Idoll-Bishop, before whom, and for whom he wrought it. Paulus Venetus
tells, that a simple Christian of Armenia, near the town of Taurisium,
caused also by his prayer a mountain to move in the sight of the Saracens,
Paul. Ven. l. 1. cap. 18
whilst they mocked Christians for holding of a faith that bosteth to remove
mountains, and threatened to kill him, if either he did not deny his faith, or
perform this miracle, which they seeing performed, many of them were converted
to Jesus Christ.

In the year 1571. a great Hill in England somewhat near the sea, changed his
place, whether it were by some earthquake, or by some secret supernatural
power. Pliny recounteth that in Brusse a town of Maracko, an orchard planted
with Ohue-trees appertaining to Vectius Marcellus a Knight of Rome, Plin lib.
^. cap. ^3.
and Procurator general of Nero the Emperor, was carried from one place to
another. Art also which is a branch and help of Nature, has her miracles in
the like kind. Lib. 7. c. 9 hist. Indic.
For we read in the History of the new world, that those of Mexico have by
device of water-workes, transported Gardens with their trees, and fruits into
fair countries. Archimedes boasted that he could remove the earth out of his
place, Archimed. Plutarch. in Marcel.
if he had another place firm whereon to set his mathematical instruments;
and there are found Enginers also of our time that could pull up great Oaks,
and other trees, as one would pull up a radish-roote, and make them leap in
the air with engines, which many would think a miracle, if they should see
it, and not see the cause; this being an effect above the ordinary force of
men, though as strong as Roland, or Milo, and surely it is a great wonder of
art. If then we think these miracles of S. Gregory, and the formentioned to
have been done, as the credit of histories does command us to think they
were, if the Paynimes have believed that by the power of their Gods, or by art,
such wonders could be wrought; why should we make difficulty in believing this
transport, who have and believe a God almighty, author of Nature, and of all
the power of art, and to whom Jesus Christ has said about these kind of
works, that one grain of faith should remove mountains, Math. 17.20. Luc.
17.^. 1. Cor. 1^.
and cast them into the sea; and so also says S. Paul: If then with faith men
may work these transportations, may we not believe with the fame, that Angels
by the will of God have done this, to whom he has given natural force and
strength to do this and such like works? For we know that the Angel carried
the Prophet Abacuc from Judea to Babylon, and carried him back from Babylon to
Judea again, Dan. 1^ 35.
more then twenty days journey in a moment. And we know by their natural
force, they roll about the huge frames of the celestial Bodies, from East to
West, and from West to East, with an admirable swiftnes and constancy now these
six thousand years together, without any pain or difficulty: a work without
comparison more difficult, then to carry a house once or twice from one country
to another, from Asia to Europe, from Nazareth to Sclauonia, and from thence to
Italy, although it be also an effect miraculous, and admirable for the rarenes.

Why the Writers of that time did not record in their History this marvelous
transport of the Chapel of Loreto, and of many strange things neglected, and
not perceeued. CHAP. X.
BUT here will be demanded why (this cause being so rare and admirable) no
Historiographer that writ in that time, made any notable mention thereof. The
demand is reasonable, and the silence may seem strange. Therefore to satisfy it
I say first, that this might happen, because there were few famous writers of
that time; for amongst the Greeks, the most renowned, Nicephorus flourished
about 1297.
was Nicephorus Calixtus, and amongst the Latins William de Nangu a Monk of
S. Denis in France, who perhaps were both ignorant of this matter; for although
in it self it were great, yet the fame thereof was not so soon spread in
strange countries; or if they should hear of it, so far off, they might not
believe it at the first, or if they did believe it, they durst not publish it
in their writings, strangers still referring themselves to those that were
nearer, and might have better knowledge and assurance of the matter. The other
learned men of that time as well Greeks as Latins, as Nicolaus Cabasila, Nic.
Cab. Geor. Pac. Robert of Sorbone about 1296
George Pachimer, Robert of Sorbone were occupied in commenting the Scriptures,
and handling Theological questions, rather then in writing of histories; they
therefore put this miracle first in writing, that knew it first, and whom it
concerned most, who were the Sclauonians, and Recanatines, and that the most
authentically they could, that is, in their public records and stories
written, for that printing was not yet devised. Secondly I answer, that it
might happen in this case, Two causes of silence in great matters.
which we often see to happen in great and rare matters, that they are not
known, either for that they are not marked and observed even by those that are
nearest, being busy in other matters that touch them more near, or else are
neglected and omitted by writers, as being known and manifest to al, which I
can prove by fresh examples of our own time, and whereof my self have been
for the most part an eye witness, and also by the testimony of antiquity.

I was at Auinion the year of our Lord 1590. when a little child of the same
town about five or six years old, A child fell from a place 24. foot high
without harm 1590.
named George Caluet, the son of a worshipful Advocate, going to see the
scholars procession at the Church of our B Lady of Gifts, fell from the
platform which is before the said Church about 24. foot high upon the stones;
they that saw him in the air when he fell, and they that took him up from the
ground, thought surely he had been all crushed and bruised, and having wrapped
him quickly in a Sheep skin, they found at the last, that he had no harm at
all, and the next morning he was to the procession, sound and lively, to give
thanks to God and our B. Lady, by whose intercession there was reason to
think, that he was preserved, not only from death, but also from any harm.
This happened in a public place, and the chance was great and strange, and
yet marked but by a few: for the Post of Auinion coming to Lions but some
months after, and seeing this in print, denied stoutly that any such thing had
happened there, and his denial had prevailed against the truth, if there had
not been some there, that were eyewitnesses thereof. A like accident happened
at Bourdeaux the year 1600. to the son of M. Antony Valet a renowned
Physician: The like happ of Antony Valet of Bourdeaux.
this child being six or seven years old, fell out of a window four and
twenty foot high, or more, upon a paued court without any hurt; and how few
are there in that town that know that special favor and protection of the
holy Angel, who as an instrument of the divine providence preserved that
little child committed to his custody from harm, to make him a name of honor
with a long life.

At the same town of Auinion in the year 1592. by the great providence of
God, In Auinion a child found buried quick.
was found by Hunters a little child about a year old, buried quick in his
clothes, by the banks of Durence, perceauing him by the toes of his feet
stricking up, whether he had put them out of himself, or the Dogs wynding him
had so discovered it: and it seemed that he had been in that case above four
and twenty hours; for they saw his eyes, nose, ears, and mouth stopped with
earth, now waxen hard and dry, a chance which did astonish the beholders, who
could no ways conceive how this little creature could live so long, not only
without sustenance, but also without breathing. It was christened with
condition, because they doubted; some saying it was not like to live so long
without Baptism; others ghossing that some unnatural Mother or sorcerer having
of negligence deferred t^ baptize it, was at last driven by the Devil to bury
it in this sort, that it might be deprived of life both of body and soul, for
a more cruel and bloody offering to this Tyrant. Mounsier Bartelesse an
honorable and virtuous gentleman, the chief Consul of Auinion that year,
caused him to be called John Joseph, which second name is that he now bears;
who I doubt not, does well remember the matter; as also I think but few then
took any great heed thereof, and fewer think of it at this present.

At Tolouse the year of our Lord 1595. the 19. of May, an other elder then
this, At Tolouse a youth buried in the ruins of a fallen house, 1595.
was in a sort buried alive, and saved miraculously; he was called Bernard
Gentiald a youth of that town of 18. or 19. years old, dwelling with a
merchant called Sire Caluet, who by good or evil chance being all alone in his
masters house, which was in the street of Exchange, when it fell down to the
ground, betwixt 9. and 10. of the clock in the night, was also taken in the
fall, and found an hour after on the ground in the midst of the timber, and
plaster, full of dust, and astonishment, without any harm at all, as my self
did see him some days after in our Nouiciate. How many be there at Tolouse
that were ignorant of this singular grace of God, showed in the behalf of this
young man, to the end to bind him more to love him, having preserved his life
even in his grave, as he did to Jonas, and kept him from all harm^ in so
dangerous a ruin?

In the same month the year 1597. at Vitescall five leagues from Bordeaux
certain little rocks seated upon the side of Garumna, At Vitescal 1597.
wherein were framed certain small houses, which served for tauernes, falling
down oppressed 19. persons, and there was found a little girl safe and whole,
between the legs of her father, who was al crushed: I think but few marked
this wonder of God. There be a thousand like that happen before the eyes of
men, which are not perceived, wherefore we must not marvel, if few did mark
this transport, specially at that time, when Italy, as I have said, was in
tumult and on fire with seditions and civil wars of the Guelfes and
Gibellines, which lasted about 250. years, Pl^t. l. 7. dec^d. 1. Trith. i^
Cl^m^.
and was the object whereunto most men attended, and which Writers of histories
took for the subject of their books; so that this small attending might be
the first cause of their silence in this miracle.

There may be also another contrary to this, and that is the famousnes and
manifest knowledge thereof, which often makes Writers neglect, or disdain to
write of that all the world knows, every one referring himself to his
companion.

At what time our Savior preached, the Piscina probatica was in vigor in
Jerusalem, and recommended through all Palestine, and with good reason, for
that it wrought continual miracles, healing all sorts of diseases, though
never so desperate and incurable: and yet Joseph that diligent and famous
Writer of the Jews, and their matters, speaks not one word thereof; Joan. 11.
and if S. John had not in his Gospel made mention thereof, we should have
known nothing of it, nor yet of the miracle of Lazarus raised from death,
written only by him, being notwithstanding the most famous miracle that our
Savior wrought. The same Joseph was silent also of that prodigious massacre of
Herod upon the children about Bethlem, which notwithstanding was a very
markable history, and a thing which Rome, and all the world knew; Macrob. l. 2.
Saturn. cap. 4. Dion in Caesa. Aug Philo lib. 3 de Herod.
for Macrobius and Dion Heathens do touch it in their writings. The Eclipse of
the sun and that admirable darkness which happened at the passion of our Savior
extended over all Palestine, and was manifest in Syria, Egypt, and in all the
places of our Hemisphere, yet never a Heathen wrote thereof, but only Phlegon a
franchised servant of Adrian the Emperor; a silence almost as strange as the
work was manifest. And how many things have vanished from before the eyes of
men, Phlego^. Orig. in Mat tract. 35. tom. 5. S. Tho. 3. p. q* 44.
and remain buried in the dust of ^unning ages, which in the beginning were
notorious and known to all the world? Therefore we must not marvel if ^ew
have written of this transport, when it happened; which happened either because
they did not mark, or not believe, or of carelesnes in printing or publishing,
that which was known to all; and every one thinking that others would write,
many have been negligent, reposing themselves upon the faith and diligence of
others.

Who have written of Loreto, and what Popes have adorned it. CHAP. XI.
THIS which we have said of the silence of the Writ^^^ of that time about the
miracle of Loreto, The first writer of the history of Lo eto.
is to instruct them that might muse thereat, and take occasion to discredit
it, and not to excuse any default of good and sufficient proofs* for there be
so many, and so strong as can be d^sired for the affirmation of any verity.
There is first the proof of diverse humane testimonies, and secondly of divine.
For besides the stories of the Sclauonians and Recanatians, the first beholders
and recorders of the fact, diverse famous and learned men that came after, have
inserted the history and praises of this place into their books from age to
age.

Blond. Fla lib. 1. de Italia illustrata, region^ 5.
In the 14. age which began the year 1301. immediately following the 13. in
which this miracle happened, ^londus a famous author, who flourished in the
year 1389. Secretary to Pope Eugenius the fourth, makes very honorable
mention of the house o^ Lor^to, in the book which he wrote of Italy.

In the 15. age in the year 1461. Pius the second being Pope, In the 15 age
Peter George.
the Lord Peter George, Provost of the Church of S. Sinedas of Terain, long
time Governor of Loreto and Recanati caused to be written in a table, the
sum of all this history drawn out of the records of the Sclauonians and
Recanatians, to the end that Pilgrims might to their comfort know it: and
which is more, The testimony of Paulus Rimalducius and Francis* Priour.
he cites therein two witnesses, Paul Rimalduccius, and Francis surnamed the
Prior, who being examined by authority did maintain upon their faith, that the
contents of this table were true; and the first added, that he had often heard
of his Grandfather, that he did see the house of the B. Virgin, when being
carried in the air it lighted in the forest, where he had often visited it.
Francis Prior said also, that his gra^d-father who was 120. years old, had
seen it in the forest, and on the Hill of the two Brothers, Hierome
Anglitanus, Secretary and perpetual Recorder of the City of Recanati,
recounteth this in the history of our B. Lady of Loreto.

In the same 15. age lived Baptista Mantuanus the Carmelite, In the same 15.
age Baptista Ma^tuanus Carmel.
countryman to Virgill, a Doctor, and Poet most famous of his time, who
speaks so highly of this place, that he pronounces this chamber, to be the
most noble and worthy dwelling that ever was seen on the earth. In our last
age past of the 16. Erasmus (that lived in Luthers time) a man more ready to
reprehend and mock where he listed, In the 16. age Erasmus
then to believe the devotion to the B. Virgin without good caution, speaks
notwithstanding very honorably of our B. Lady of Loreto, as appears by his
Liturgy, and Sermon he made thereof.

In this same age also in the year 1550. Leander a Religious and learned man
in his description of Italy, Leander Albertus Dominicanus in descrip. Italy in
regione 13. in Picen.
speaking of Loreto, he esteems himself altogether insufficient to writ
thereof, and not only confirms what others had said before him, but also
calls them hard-harted and stiff, who did not believe so manifest and
evident proofs. In our time we have had Peter Canisius a famous man, who has
written thereof both learnedly and religiously. Antony Muret a writer most
learned, eloquent, and pious, in his later days, has thereof left an Hymn
worthy of eternal memory in the Church of God: and lastly Horatius Turselinus,
who has more exactly then all the rest gathered it into an entire and complete
history. This number is not small, nor of small account, and they do carry good
reasons of credence to all reasonable readers.

If then we believe one Titus ^iu^us writing of the foundation f Rome 700.
years after it was built, Titus (...)
and of many strange things happened in that space: If we believe one
Plutarch, giving us the history of the Greeks and Romans, for above 1000
years before his time, and recounting a number of things exceeding the common
credence of men; why should we make difficulty to believe that which Writers
do witness to have happened miraculously, and by the power of God a little
before their age, to the honor of God, and the Mother of his son Jesus
Christ.

Besides these authors, (...) Pope^
we have also the Popes since B^^^facius VIII. (in whose time we said this
Chamber was tr^nsported into Italy, to wit, in the year 1294.) who have
always honored and beautifyed this place with their spiritual and temporal
gifts, or with both, with Indulgences and privileges, with gifts and
buildings, and thereby confirmed the verity which so many renowned men, and
famous Historiographers had said. Benedictus 12. 1326. Vrbanus 1353. Martin 5.
1400. Eugenius* 4. 1423. Nicolaus 5. 1439. Calixtus 3 1447. Pius 2. 1451. Paul
2. 1457. Sixtus 4. 1464. Innocen. 8. 1477. Alexand. 6. 1483. Julius 2. 1499.
Leo 10. 1513.
Benedictus the XII. made Pope the year 1326. was the first, and after him
Urban the V. in the same age; and of the 15. age which began 1401. Martin the
V. Eugenius IIII. Nicolaus V. Calixtus III. Pius II. Sixtus IV. Innocentius
VIII. Alexander VI. Julius II. And of the 16. age beginning at 1501. Leo X. and
all the Popes of the same age unto Clement VIII. that rules now full of zeal,
piety and virtue, and singularly devout to Loreto. This constant devotion of
such persons, is an evident proof, that this place is the same we believe it
to be; and so much the more assured, in that this holy Sea has always been
diligent and curious to be informed of the truth of like events, and to reject
and condemn all superstition and lies in the Church of God.

To these testimonies we may add reasons to confirm the same; for first it
seems impossible, that it should come by the fantasy of men to have found the
means of this transport, being without example both before and after. For
though diverse things have been heretofore transported, as we have showed
before, yet never was it heard of any whole entire house or building.

Therefore as any such like thing was never heard of, so neither could it
(speaking morally) enter into the thought of any man to feign or devise, or to
further it, if it were not true. Neither yet being true, could it be received
and acknowledged by the world, if it were not revealed and made manifest by
extraordinary means, as has been said.

Secondly, what could men promise to themselves or expect of this invention, of
so small assurance, not only in the truth, but also in the appearance of
probability, but only confusion and shame when it should be discovered and
found false, which must needs have happened quickly?

Thirdly, if the thing were false, how could it be done, that none should
percaue it? Or if they did perceive it, that none did contradict it? But clean
contrary all people of learning and conscience, that have written since, have
spoken in the confirmation of this common belief, none being found but only
these deceived people, who with Luther, without reason have opposed themselves
thereunto, as well as unto other articles of the Catholic faith, and that so
much the more obstinatly, by how much the more they have conspired to discredit
and contradict all that concerns the honor of the Mother of God, such as
this history is.

Divine proofs of the verity of this Chapel. CHAP. XII.
THE foresaid proofs are pregnant, and the firmest that men can furnish, yet
such as may some way be denied, Miracles done (...) Loreto are witness without
exception.
and contradicted being but humane. Therefore, that this verity may be declared
and confirmed from heaven, and without contradiction, God has given divine
proofs, such as conclude a discourse assured and irreprouable. Such are the
evident and innumerable miracles, that have been done by the Mot^er of God in
this sacred Chapel, and are there continually done, works of his own hand,
divine approbations and sovereign testimonies of verity; for it is God that
there speaks, Miracles are the truth of God alone.
and none but he can be author of such language. And if the opinion men ha^ of
the place were false, not only he would not have wrought any miracle in favor
of them, that should have honored and visited it, with such opinion and
belief: but, as he detesteth all falsehood, specially in matter of Religion, so
would he have discovered and confounded such a lie with some exemplar
punishment; and the proof is so strong and irreprouable, that the Devils
themselves though sworn enemies of truth, have been compelled to confess,
adore, and publish it. For as Hierome Angelita recounteth, one amongst them
called Arctus, A woman brought to Loreto 1489.
that did obstinatly possess a certain woman of Grenoble that was brought
thither the year 1489. and from whom diverse of his fellows had been cast
out, being commanded and adjured on the behalf of God to tell amongst other
things what he knew of this Chapel, in the which his companions had been so
grievously tormented, he said after much tergiuersation, to his great grief,
that he knew by good token, that it was the chamber where Mary was saluted by
Gabriel, and received the message that she should conceive the Son of God;
showing also that she prayed at that time in that part that answers to the
Gospel corner, and that the Angel saluted her (for the greater reverence)
from the opposite corner, and the furthest place of the chamber. And these
years past, How (...) and wherein the testimony of the devils is to be received
a spirit of the same family, speaking in a possessed person of Romerantine,
being demanded about this matter of Loreto, if he knew that this was the
chamber of the B. Virgin the Mother of God, he answered: that she made him and
his companions know it too well. These testimonies were not to be admitted and
received, as coming from the house of lies, were it not that being adiu^ed on
the behalf of God, they are constrained, as offenders upon the Rack, to tell
the truth though against themselves, not daring to lie before their soueraign
Judge, S. Justin. Minutius in Octaui^. Lactant. l. 2. cap. 16. S. Athan. in
Vita S. Antoni^. S. Cyp. ad Demet.
and in this respect their testimony is of credit. Therefore it is that S.
Iustine, Minutius, Lactantius, S. Athanasius, S. Cyprian, and others ancient
Fathers, disputing against the Heathens, used oftentimes this argument, how
they did whip those adverse spirits, their pretended Gods, co^strayning them to
speak and depose in favor of Christian Religion, against the vanity of their
fond superstitions.

Of the marvelous situation of the Chamber of Loretto. CHAP. XIII.
BESIDES the beginning of this heavenly house, we must also mark two wonders
in the situation thereof; the one, that being of four corners, longer then
wide, a^ has been sa^d, it was in such sort placed, that in length i^
stands towar^s the East and West of the Equinoctial, The rising and setting
of the Equinocti^ in March and Septemb^^.
as we^ in the Spring as in Autumn, that is in March and September, leuelling
overthwart with the two former corners to the two Eastes, and with the two
hinder to the Wests of the Solstice o^ Summer and Winter, in such sort, as the
middle line drawn^ from one end, goes just toward the Sun rising in March
and September, and the other to the setting in the same months. The marvel of
this consists herein, that this mystical placing does signify unto us the
two mystical months, Marc^ the first month of the holy year, Our Savior
coceaued and crucified in March
honored with the Incarnation and Passion of our Savior (for in that month he
was conceived, and suffered for the Redemption of the world) and September the
first month in the Creation of the world, and of the civil year, ^nob^ed by
the nativity of the B. Virgin the Mother of our ^auiour. Therefore it seemed
that the Angels would place this house, to the end that this fair morning
star^e in this season should salute in her rising and setting, the ancient
Palace of the marriage of our Savior and Creator with our humane nature, and
of the birth of his glorious Mother, the visible sun, honoring the house of
the invisible, and of the virgin star, and spiritual morning, more bright
and clear then a thousand suns, performing the rest of the year, the same
salutation in cross and overthwart, in reverence of the death of the same
Savior, the rising in the Winter answering to the setting in Summer, and the
rising of Summer to the setting of Winter, forming in such an opposition a
Cross overthwart. O spirits merely divine and most skillful builders, that
could so well acco^modate the scituatio^ of this palace and therein represent
by shadows and lights such goodly mysteries of the Creator toward his
creature, and so just offices and duties of the Creature toward the Creator.

The second marvel in the situation of this house is, that it is sustained
and stands upon the earth without foundation, How the ^a^t^ ^eth in the midst
of the world
more privileged heerin then the earth it self, which placed in the midst of
the universal world, stands fit me indeed upon the air without any human
art, yet it is founded and rests upon the bases of his own nature, where
contrariwise this house subsisteth without foundation or rest, against the
laws of Nature and art. And here also is to be noted a singular wonder, that
when the wall was made which now does compass it round about, to the end to
hold it up and sustain it, it was found to be disioyned and retired, leaving a
great space betwixt them, as i^ still to be seen; whereby God would declare,
that this was an effect depending of his holy hand, and a continual miracle to
make this house of his Son and his mother more admirable and honorable.
Behold the beginning of this house of Loreto, and the first condition and
quality that we said might make a place venerable before me^, wherein I have
enlarged my self the more, for that the knowledge of this is as it were the
foundation, whereon is grounded the rest that I come to say hereafter, where I
intend to be so much the shorter, by how much I have been herein the longer.

Of places honorable for their antiquity, and how that of Loreto is most
honorable by this Title. CHAP. XIV.
THE second cause and condition, that gives title of honor and respect unto
any place, as also to a man, to works, to goods, to virtues, to any thing else,
is Antiquity. Thereby men become memorable, families famous, nations glorious,
languages of great authority, amities and friendships become more commendable,
and wine with age waxes better. The Iaponians have certain earthen pots,
framed after an old manner, Pots of Iaponia.
of no value for the matter, nor of any beauty for the fashion* and yet more
esteemed with them for this only title of Antiquity, then here with us are
Diamonds, or other precious stones, and are sold sometimes for two or three
thousand Ducats, Opinion sets the price of all things
for which here perhaps a man should hardly get six pence, whereat the
Portugeses meruailing, and mocking also (who compassing these far Seas, did
first land with those people for their traficke) they could well avouch, that
their opinion of valewing their pots, was upon better ground and foundation,
then ours in so esteeming of stones; for of those we have no pleasure but the
sight, whereas their pots (say they) do them some service, and besides do
carry with them an image of immortality. It is certain then, that buildings
(as all other things) are honored by this antiquity, though fallen to ruin,
3. Rev 6.3. 2. ^a^al. 34. Joan. 10.23. Act 5.11
and decay. In the time of our Savior, there was standing in the Temple that
Herod had caused to be builded in Jerusalem, a porch, or cloisture remaining
of the ruins of Salomons Temple, which was for honor called the Porch of
Solomon, a piece honorable chiefly for the Antiquity. At Rome are beheld with
reverence the Amphitheaters, the triumphant Arches of royal palaces, and like
pieces of ancient buildings; and yet further the pillars, bathes, and Piramides
that escaped the breaking in the falls, and ruins of Cittyes, and have endured
whole or cracked unto our time, do make more honorable this City the
abridgement of the world. Loreto a most ancient building above any in Palestine.
But in all the world there is no work better founded upon this title of
ancient nobility, then this sacred House. The antiquity of the other for the
most part is but a profane work of vanity, and food of curiosity, carrying with
it no greater commodity then the testimony of the mysery and mortality of
humane things; but this is divine, full of honor, of spiritual fruit, and
holiness. It shows unto us a little Chamber, that has stood on foot 1600.
years, without reckoning how long it endured before (which was perhaps as long
or more) which we cannot know, as we do certainly know that it has lasted
these 1600 years whole and sound amidst the ruins of so many princely
Palaces, Temples, Synagogues, and other stately Buildings, More ancient the^
any in the world.
not only of Nazareth in Galiley, but also in all Palestine; yea I may boldly
say in the whole world, wherein it gives us, (without saying a word) a
heavenly instruction, giving us to know, that when God will, transitory and
fading things can exceed the bounds and laws of time, and become immortal,
maugre death, according as they are consecrated to the service of him, who
gives beginning and lasting to all things. There is nothing so frail, and so
soon perishing as hairs, yet notwithstanding, the hairs of that noble
Penitent Mary Magdalen, are yet whole, because they were employed to wipe and
dry our Saviors feet. There have been a thousand Queens, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen, who have had more goodly hair, which yet are turned to a^hes. 1.
Reg. 1^ 26.
Absalon had goodly golden locks, that did fly about his shoulders, and beat
upon his legs, and he was feign to cut it every year, least he should be
laden, or troubled therewith: all these hairs are perished, and Absalon
loosing his life, was hanged by them, and perished by his hair corporally, as
many Dames do by theirs, 2. Reg. 18.9.
spiritually The hairs only of Magdalen have remained incorruptible amidst the
great revel and change of mortal things, to serve for a goodly, and
honorable attire to her head, who so happily employed them to the service of
her masters feet. Such service has founded the Antiquity of this little great
Chamber* and has made it stable against all the assaults of men and time: for
that he who put all things* and time in his own power, was there served and
honored. O mortal men! build you so, and so dedicate your actions and works
to the glory of him, that can give them ground, and bring them to immortality
(even in the land of mortality) and to your selves above in heaven that life
and glory, which fears not the laws and rigor of time.

Places renowned by divine apparitions made in them, and of the apparitions of
the Chamber of Loreto. CHAP. XV.
The third cause.
THE third thing that does beautify and sanctify a place, is divine apparitions
made in them: by this title were many places in Pale tine made honorable, as
was the plain of Mambre, Genesis 18.
where God came to lodge in Abraham's tent and pauillon, under the figure of
three men: an apparition which Deuines expound of the B. Trinity, which is one
God and essence in three persons. Aug. lib. 1 de Trinit.
Also Bethel in Mesopotamia of Syria, where Jacob in his sleep saw that
marvelous Ladder standing upon the earth, Genesis 28.7
and reaching with the top to Heaven, and Angels ascending and descending
thereon; in praise of which place, Genesis 28.17.
Jacob awaking said: Verily our Lord is in this place, and I knew it not: this
place is terrible, and no other but the house of God. Honorable also in this
respect, was the desert where God first showed himself to Moses in a burning
Bush: but above al other, Exodus 20.
the top of the mountain Sinai is admirable in this kind; for thereon God gave
within a cloud the Tables of his law, with many admirable preparations of
thunder, lightning, sound of Trumpet, and other signs of majesty, and where
Moses twice remained forty days and forty nights, without meat or drink,
Exodus 24.18. and 44 28.
all which things have made this place venerable with an immortal memory.
There be a thousand places more sanctified with like visions of God, and of his
Angels, The apparition of Loreto admirable.
but none was ever so noble in this respect, as this heavenly House, and
Chamber. For the embassage of the Annuntiation made therein, was an apparition
most noble and divine in every circumstance, of the thing it self, of the
person that ordained it, and of the person that did it, and of the fashion and
manner, how it was done. The Scripture says expressly, that the Archangell was
sent on the behalf of God, which is to show the dignity of this mission, as
being appointed immediately from God, and of purpose; for although all good
Angels come unto men by the ordinance of God, yet the Scripture is not wont to
express so much, but leaves it to us to belie^e. But here it declares it in
express terms, to signify some thing extraordinary, even as it tells us,
Genesis 1.26
that God when he would make man, said: Let us make man to our similitude and
likeness, to teach us, say Deuines, by these words of deliberation, that it was
a higher and worthier work, then the creation of other things, where God did
not use this ceremonious language: although he made them all with wisdom and
prudence. By this expression then, is signified the majesty of this embassage
and apparition, as also by the person sent, which was the Angel Gabriel, one of
the greatest in the court of heaven, bearing the name of our Savior, whom he
announced; Theoph. in 2. Luc. (...) Proc. Episc. in ho. assidente Nestorio.
Vide Sa^mer. l. 3. p. 25.
for Gabriel signifies, Man God (as Doctors interpret it) a name proper to
Jesus Christ the only Man God, called Archangell by the holy Fathers, not as
being of the first order of the first Hierarchy, but a Prince among the Angels,
as are among us the name of Archbishop, Archdeacon, Archduke, and such like
title of dignity, and not of order. So the Angel that shall give the sign of
the great and last day, is called by S. Paul, Archangell, that is, a Prince of
Angels: as also S. Jude calls S. Michael, Archangell, in that sense that S.
Paul, 1. These. 4 6. S. Iud. ep. Dan. 10.13.
and the Prophets called him, Prince of Angels. It was also convenient (says
S. Gregory) that the Ambassador of so sovereign a work, as is the salvation
of men, should be one of the highest, and that he who should be sent to a
Virgin, in whom the Son of almighty God should be incarnate, Greg. hom 43.
should surpass the excellency of all the Angels, and be one of the
principal Spirits, and of the Seraphims themselves by special prerogative,
and to confront Lucifer and Satan, who were Princes of the Seraphims, and the
first workers and messengers of the fall and ruin of mankind.

The manner of this apparition was rare and singular; for we must not doubt,
but that he appeared with an outward majesty meet for his person and message,
with an extraordinary light, in the form of a heavenly young man, his face
shyning (as S. Aug. ser. 14. in natiuit. c. 10.
Augustine says) his habit glittering with a maiesticall regard, and admirable
presence. The salutation was also without example; for though Angels
heretofore have showed themselves to Agar, Genesis 21.16. Iud. 13.9
and to the mother of Sampson, and diverse other women, we read not for all that
they saluted the^, either much or little. But the Angel not only saluted, but
most honorably saluted her, which caused the B. Virgin (who was as low in
humility, as she was high in other virtues) to be troubled at so great, and
unaccustomed praises. Some Deuines have written, Albert. magn. in postil.
that there were two other Angels companions to Gabriel in this Embassage, to
announce in the figure of the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God,
which was a true work of the self same very Trinity, though Gabriel only did
speak, Genesis 18.
even as the prediction of the birth of Isaac was given by three persons,
whereof but one did speak. This apparition therefore, wherewith this holy
House was honored, The majesty of the Embassage of the Annu^ciation of the Son
of God.
was before all others full of majesty; for all the circumstances and
particularityes are not found in any, neither is there any in others which is
not found in this. The apparition made to Abraham was noble, for that there was
present the B. Trinity in the form of three men, here the same Trinity was
peculiarly present in each person, the Father sending his Son, the Son
taking flesh in the womb of the Virgin, the Holy Ghost also joining in the
heavenly work of this Incarnation, and besides this a principal Angel in
majesty an Ambassador of God almighty. The vision of Jacob was but a shadow
in respect of this, Genesis 18.
as also was the burning Bush: and that of Sinai, Exodus 3.
where God gave his Law, and let himself be seen only in smoke, and
lightning, and heard only by a voice framed in the air, and by the sound of
Trumpet: here he gave his Son the author of the law to make himself be
seen in him, to speak by his word, and by him to give the Law, and salvation
to mortal men; and let his Angels appear in the most beautiful form that
ever they were seen in, worthily to announce the mystery of all mysteries. This
apparition therefore wherewith this Chamber was honored, was every way divine,
and how many more (think we) have there been since? Luc. 2.13.
How often have the Angels come to adore their Lord in his infancy, in his
tender youth, as they did adore and sing unto him at his Nativity? How often
have they come to serve him in this little Cabbinet, Matthew. 4.11.
as they did in the desert? And who can doubt, but that they did continually
assist his humanity in earth, whose sacred divinity they continually assist in
Heaven? And though the Scripture has not expressed it in plain words, it has
signified it by silence, thinking it needless and superfluous to specify that,
which every Christian may judge certain and undoubted: this was then a house
of continual apparitions and heavenly vision, and honorable in this respect,
above all other places of the world.

Places made famous by the habitation of holy men, and Saints, and that the
house of Loreto is most honorable in this respect. CHAP. XVI.
THE fourth quality that makes a place honorable, The 4. cause habitation of
Saints
is the dwelling and frequenting of great persons; so we see that all Palestine
in general is called the Holy Land, because it was inhabited, and haunted by
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other holy Patriarchs; but principally because the
Savior of the world being made man, there conuersed with men, and has
sanctified it by his pilgrimages therein, and after him the Apostles, and other
the chief and first ornaments, and lights of the primitive Church.

In particular we read of diverse places inhabited by Saints to have been in
great honor and reverence; Places holy by the habitation of Saints.
as among others was that Den in the desert, where S. John Baptist dwelt from
his childhood, until he came forth to preach penance, and testify Jesus
Christ. Also Bethania the house of Mary Magdalen, and Martha near unto
Jerusalem, Io. 11.18
where our Savior raised their brother Lazarus from death, at which place (S.
Hierome says) was built a Church for christians. All Egypt and Syria, Hier.
de locu sacru.
was heretofore full of places sanctified in this sort, as there be also many
such yet amongst Christians.

But if ever place were privileged in this respect, it is this Chamber of the
B. Virgin; for it has received and entertained for guests and inhabitants the
noblest persons of Heaven and earth. Nic^ph. l. (...).
First, the B. Virgin was there borne, and brought up until the third year of
her age, when she was presented in the Temple of Jerusalem, where having
remained eleauen years, or therabout, she returned to Nazareth, and remained
there almost until the death of our Savior. Jesus Christ, the holy of holyes
dwelt there after his return out of Egypt, about the seventh year of his
age, (...). 9.5^
until the thirtenth year, when he began to manifest himself to the world,
and not to have (as he said to those that desired to follow him) any house of
his own, wherein to rest his head. I speak not of S. Ioachim, S. Anne, Luc.
9.58
S. Joseph, that dwelt there also; neither of S. Zachary, S. Elizabeth, S.
John, the Apostles, and Disciples of our savior, and all those worthy lights
of the Law, The Saints who dwelt in the house of the B. Virgin.
and the Ghospel, both before the death of our Savior, and after, who were all
often there: It is enough of these two stars, Jesus Christ, I mean, and his
glorious Mother, and especially of the one of them, not only to exalt the
dignity of this little house above the greatness of all royal palaces that
ever were, but also above the majesty of Salomons Temple, and above the
sanctity of all the holy places held in veneration all the time of the Law of
Nature, and of Moses; enough to make this house to be truly called an heavenly
Palace, or a terrestrial Heaven, where God and his heavenly, and angelical
Court does dwell. For, who can doubt but that the sacred Trinity was there
daily present, after a special and singular manner, the Father, and the Holy
Ghost with the Son, when this Son the self same essence with them,
clothed with our Nature, dwelt there corporally, visible, and continually? And
there being God in his Majesty, The court of heaven.
could the Angels, Archangells, Principalityes, Powers, Virtues, Dominations,
Thrones, Cherubims, and Seraphims fail to be there in state, and magnificall
array, to admire, serve, and adore this supreme Deity? this divine Humanity? O
little House! 9. orders of Angels
O royal Pallac^! O divine lodging! O sacred Cabinet! O paradise not earthly as
that of Adam, but heavenly; seeing thou have entertained within thee, the God
of majesty, the felicity and happiness, and most bright and glorious light of
heaven.

How the house of Loreto is admirable for diverse divine touchings. CHAP. XVII.
OF this habitation whereof I speak, ensues another cause which does greatly
advance the honor of this place in a tho^sand manners. For since our Savior,
The fifth cause of touching
and his holy Mother, and diverse other Saints dwelt there, how often in this
their dwelling, lid they sanct^fy it by their coming and going, by their
breathing and looking, by their holy talk and communication, by the spirit and
fire of their prayers, and by so many works of Religion, of piety, of mercy,
and other actions of virtue, which they did during their residence there. How
often has the holy Humanity sighing for our miseries, Jesus Christ honored
this House.
sanctified with his breath the walls of that chamber? How many times walking
and working therein, has he hallowed it with his steps of Obedience? How
often longing and sighing after our Redemption has he honored this house, by
there laying up his sighs and desires? How often has the glorious Virgin his
Mother made this place honorable by the offices, and services of Charity, of
devotion, of piety, of tears, and other signs and marks of sanctity? Chains
sanctified.
And if by the only touch of the Apostles, or Martyrs bodies, bands and iron
chains have become more noble, then the Crowns and Scepters of Kings, and
have received power and virtue to expel wicked spirits, to heal innumerable
diseases, and to raise the dead; what glory and satisfaction shall we think,
that this little Chamber has received, so often honored with the conversation
of these most holy guests? Which has been so familiarly visited and haunted
by the presence of such noble bodies? Which has been so clearly enlightened by
the beams of these divine stars? And if the Cross, The Cross.
which was the bed of our Saviors last ill rest and torment, if the lance
which pierced his side, if the sponge which reached him Vinegar to drink, if
the thorns that crowned his head, if the nails that pierce^ his hands and
feet, if the other instruments of his pain and Passion, if the Sepulcher that
lodged his body, if so many places as this body touched, were made divine by a
short touch, and as it were in passin; g who will doubt but that ground of this
holy house, trodden on by the feet of this Lord and Lady, ayred wit^ their
breath, touched with their hands, for so many year has been thereby
singularly sanctified? What place therefore in the earth, what habitation in the
whole world is more noble and honorable by this title, then that of Loreto?

Places famous for some great or mystical effects, and that herein Loreto is
more admirable then them all. CHAP. XVIII.
The sixth cause of mystery.
THE holy Scripture, as also profane Histories do repor^ unto us diverse places,
that are made memora^ by the sixth cause, that is, by some high and secret
work, by some action of rare virtue, some sacrifice, some battle, some
victory, some sacrament, or some other thing verily divine, or s^ accounted.
The old Testament reco^mendeth unto us the mountain Moria made noble by the
obedience of Abraham, Genesis 22.2
when h^ laid his son Isaac upon the Altar to sacrifice him. The mou^^ Thabor
was made famous by the noble victory of Debora. Iud 4.13.
The valley of Terebinthus where David a child fighting the field for the host
of the Lord of hoastes, 1. Reg. 17
caused the great Giant Goliath to kiss the ground, and cut off his head with
his own sword getting the victory, which was a notable figure of our
redemption.

Places sanctified in the law of Grace.
The new testament does also affoard us many places famous in this fashion. The
desert, wherein S. John (who wa^ sanctified in his mothers womb) passed all
his youth in austerity of severe penance, instructing sinners to purge
themselves, and those that were good to perfect themselves. The other desert
where our Savior fasted forty days and forty nights, Matthew. 4.
and repelled the Devil his tempter with confusion: and that where he filled
five thousand men with five loaves and two Fishes. Joan. 6.
The mountain of Thabor, where he showed the glory of his body transfigurated
to Moses, Matthew. 17
Elias, and his three Apostles, and the other where he made that worthy sermon,
co^tayning the eight Beatitudes, most of them Paradoxes to the wisdom of the
foolish world. The mount of Caluary.
The mountain of Caluary, where fighting in the field of his Cross, he
overcame the tru^ Goliath, and his troops, giving him a deadly blow in his
forehead, with the weapons and stones of his death and humility. The parlour of
the Eucharist.
The house wherein he changed water into wine; also where he made his last
supper with the Paschall Lamb, substituting for it the true Lamb in the
institution of the Sacrament of his body. That, where he powered down that
heavenly love of the Holy Ghost in form of fiery tongues, Of the Holy Ghost.
and a thousand places more, illustrated with some work of the almighty power,
wisdom or goodness. Profane writings also have their places famous in this
respect; their mountains of Olympus, Parnassus, Ossa, Pelion, and such other
bearing the memory of some work of their pretended Gods, or of some great
man in their Law: their Lake of Lerna, where Hercules killed Hydra, dreadful
to the whole country of the Argians. Strabo (...). 8.
Their den of Salamine, where Euripides wrote his Tragedy, and other places
which I omit, not to be too long in laying forth a verity, for the which the
testimony of Gentiles are too common, and too often given in their books, full
of recommendation of such like places. But when we shall have reckoned up by
name, the most renowned places of all the world, as well out of profane
Writers, as out of the sacred Scriptures, the Chamber of Loreto exceeds them
all in this condition, The chamber of Loreto more famous in such mysteries.
in having been the closet, where the marriage of the Son of God with our
humane Nature was celebrated in the B. Virgins womb, the most high and
mysterious work, that the holy Trinity maker of all things, did ever
accomplish; for therein God was made man; the Creator, a creature; the supreme
cause, an effect; the Word, flesh; the spirit did take a body; the first ^s
become last, and Alpha, Omega; the incomprehensible is enclosed in the womb of
a Virgin, Eternity has subjected it self to time, the Almighty is become
weak, the sovereign wisdom goes to school to learn, the souueraigne
goodness does suffer; and contrariwise on the other part, Man was made God; the
Creature, Creator; flesh was made the word; ^he body took a spirit; the last
was made first, and Omega Alpha; the little became incomprehensible; time has
passed ^o eternity; infirmity became almighty; folly supreme wise^ome,
mortality became to give life; and suffering, felicity. This is the mystery of
mysteries, the first foundation of all that the Christian faith adoreth in the
Church of God. The Incarnation is the ground of al mysteries and Christian
feasts, Nativity, Circumci io^, etc.
The foundation of that of the Nativity, of the Circumcision, of the Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, of the sending of the Holy Ghost, of all the feasts
of Saints, of the B. Virgin his mother, his Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and
Virgins. For the Son of God being once made man, gave ground and footing to all
these solemnities, and without it, we had had none, al were enclosed in the
sacred bosom of this work and mystery; and can there be any thing greater, or
more admirable? May the Creation of a thousand worlds be compared to the
majesty of this exploit? And this divine Chamber, having been the House, and
Closet wherein it was performed, does it not co^prise in it self the very
majesty of all the remarkable things and places of the old Testament, all
which did figure, and had relation to this Incarnation? Has it not more honor
in it, then if it had been a Temple with a thousand altars, or an altar or a
thousand sacrifices? More then the mountains of Moria and Thabor? Then the
valley of Terebinthus? of S. John's desert? Or finally, then all the places in
the world, honored with any token or sign of divinity put together? O little
Chamber, more capable at that time then the whole world, enclosing with thy
walls the Virgin that was great with him, whom the largenes and capacity of
the Heavens could not comprehend: a Chamber more rich, then all the Princely
palaces that ever ware, containing the endless treasure of felicity: a chamber
more clear and bright then the day, having in thy bosom the glorious morning,
and true Sun? Thrice honorable for this mystery alone, The chamber of the B.
Virgin the first chapel of Christians.
and thrice honorable also for having been the first of all earthly houses,
erected and dedicated for a Christian Temple by the Apostles, where the body of
the same Son of God, was, as it is still, offered in an unbloody sacrifice,
and Mass was celebrated after the descent of the holy Ghost in that happy
infancy of the Church of God, made therein a most worthy and noble match to
that parlour, which entertained our Savior, when he instituted the sacrament
and sacrifice of his B. Body before his Apostles, the night before he was
delivered for us: more honorable in this respect then the Temple of Solomon,
which contained nothing but Altars, where the bodies of dead beasts were
sacrificed; The holy of holies or the sa^ctuary of the Temple.
whereas in this Chapel, was also an Altar which carried the oblation of the
body of the son of God; more worthy also by this honor, then the place of
the said Temple, which is called Sancta Sanctorum, Holy of Holyes; for there
was but the material arc of the Hebrews, whereas this Chapel contains in
verity Jesus Christ, the Holy of all Holyes.

That the House of Loreto is renowned by miracles. CHAP. XIX.
THE seventh cause that makes a place venerable, The 7. cause of miracles.
are miracles, which either are done, or have been done thereat, which are
most certain testimonies of the presence of God there, seeing that such works
cannot proceed, but from the hands of God, or from such, as he gives power
unto. only ^od author of miraracles.
This has made admirable an infinite number of the Tombs, and sepulchers of
Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, infinite Temples dedicated to the honor of
God in their name, infinite Images hallowed in their remembrance, as all do
know, Temples
that are not altogether ignorant of the histories of Christians, and namely
of the glorious Virgin in a thousand places of christendom, Images.
as are for example (to choose the nearest to our knowledge) in the Kingdom of
France, of our B. Lady of Clary, of Charters, of Puy, of Vaultfleury, of Grace,
of Joy, of Argilliers. In Spain, Montserat, Piemont, Montdoni, and diverse
others, where God has done, and does still power down his benedictions by
works proper to his omnipotency: but in this holy House, he has wrought so
many, and so markable, besides those I have already spoken off, that he seems
to have made choice thereof, out of the whole word, for a Theater, there to
show the majesty, the power, treasure, and graces of his omnipotency, wisdom,
and bounty. There the bodies and souls of mortal men have not ceased since
the first arrive thereof into Europe, to receive heavenly benefits, in sickness,
in health, in war, in peace, by land, by sea, against Devils, against men,
every way, and to all sorts of men, whereof the histories do testify, and
namely that of Horatius Turselinus, as also the people that see them with their
eyes, and thousands of images and tables of devotion, which those that receive
benefits there, do hang upon the walls of the Temple, which e^closeth this
Chapel, for thanksgiving, and testimony of the bounty of God: neither is it
possible, but that he who belieueth this in his heart, should also conceive in
his soul a great respect, and love toward the majesty of God, the chief
giver of so many gifts, and toward the glorious Virgin Mary, by whose
intercession they are given unto men: Admirable conuersions of Loreto
and he that belieueth them not, makes us believe, that he is deprived not
only of christian faith, but of humane faith also, who will not yield to the
depositio^ of so many witnesses, nor be persuaded by so many supernatural
works, so open and manifest unto all. And if there were no other miracles,
then the admirable conversion of many great sinners, which is there wrought
every year, it were enough to testify the favor and grace of God singularly
present in that place: Multitude of penitents.
there do sometimes in a week confess 60000. Pilgrims, where an 100.
Confessors, if there be so many, cannot suffice to hear all that come: and
who can reckon all that come for this purpose in a whole year, all that have
done penance since 300. years in visiting this place: all that have left their
riches, honors, and commodityes, together with their sins, to consecrate
themselves living sacrifices to God, in a true holocaust, and to pass the
years of their mortal life, under the strait observance of a religious law,
far from the vanity of the lost world. Are not these meruailes great enough
to make the place marvelous? And if heertofore diverse places have been
admired for only one miracle done there, what admiration deserves this, for
having been honored with millions of meruailes?

Why God works more miracles in one place, then in another. CHAP. XX.
BUT whence comes it, that God does make such choice and difference of
places, and that in some he has been so liberal, Aug. epist. 137. ad clerum
and pop. Hyp.
and specially in those of the mother of his Son, and in this of Loreto above
all the rest? S. Augustine speaking of miracles, which were done in certain
places dedicated to Martyrs, and not in others, touches this question, and
does in a sort confess, that he cannot plainly decide the matter. Who can
search (says he) the secrets of God, and know wherefore miracles are done in
some places, and not in others? And having told how a certain thief coming
to Miln with inte^tion to take a false Oath in the Church o^ the Martyrs
Geruasius and Protasius, where the Devils were terribly tormented, and forced
to tell what they would not, Epist. 137.
was constrained to confess his fault, and to restore what he had stolen, he
adds: Is not Africa full of the bodies of Martyrs, and yet these things are
not done there? for as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12
as every Saint has not the gift of healing, nor every one the gift of
discerning spirits, so he, that distributeth to every one their proper virtues,
would not that these things should be done at every memory of Martyrs. So that
the only reason he assigns for these privileges of diverse places, is the
will of the Creator, who makes his miracles shine where he lists, and
divides his gifts as he thinks good. So we see, that according unto his
pleasure, Nature is fertile and plentiful in one place, of that she cannot
bring forth in another: and though there be natural causes thereof, yet they are
for the most part unknown to us, and we know nothing thereof, but in general.
It is God that has so wrought, or as the Naturalists do say; it is Nature
that has done it. Palestine yields Balm, Arabia Incense, India Rubarbe, the
Philippines, and the neighbor Hands Spices; Aeygpt, the bird Ibis; Peru, the
bird of Paradise; Brasil, Ibis enemy to Serpents.
the bird Toucan; the lake of Bourget in Sauoy, the fish Lauaret: contrary Peru
most fertile in a thousand rare plants, and trees, cannot nourish diverse of
ours. The birds called Woodpeckers abound in many Countries, yet they are not
to be seen in the country of Tarento, no more then Wolves in England; in the
I Will of Rhodes we cannot find one ayrie of Egles, nor in the territory of
Fidena, near unto Rome, one Storkes neast, Plin. ^l^. 20. 29.
nor one Storke within two leagues of the lake of Como in Italy. Who has given
these privileges and bounds unto Nature? Who knows, or can declare it? It
is not the diversity of Heaven or earth; for we see, that diverse of these
places we have named, and diverse others which we might name, be of the same
situation, and climate, which yet are very different in the production of
things. And contrariwise diverse of different country, and climate to be a
like, either in wanting or abounding. It is therefore the only will of God,
Particular causes of the diversity of effects in nature and above nature.
which is the supreme cause of all this diversity. As therefore the Creator,
who is the father of the family of this world, and master and dispenser of all
therein has made Nature, and the division of his gifts, so has he made
certain holy places, more fertile and more honorable with his gifts and
wonders, because so it pleased him. This is the general reason, which we can
allege: notwithstanding as we believe, that this sovereign wisdom does not
will or work any thing, but to a good end, and with good laws for the
instruction of men; so may we discern, (by that light it pleases him to
communicate unto us) in the secret of his principal actions, some reasons of
this inequality, as well in the works of Nature, as in those of Religion.

In nature the first reason.
He has diversely divided his gifts of Nature. First, to give us to understand,
that he is the first author of all good. If every thing had grown every where,
men would have thought, that it proceeded only of the virtue of heaven and
earth: but seeing this diversity, and not seeing the cause, they have good
occasion to have recourse to that supreme power, and to believe, The 2. reason.
that there is a God, that commands nature, making it fertile or barren where
he thinks good. Secondly, so much the clearer to make the beams of his
bounty and wisdom shine unto us, beautifying and adorning the whole world
with this variety of effects, and linking together the society of men by the
plenty and wants of the countries where they dwell, taking one of another what
they want, and yielding that wherein they abound.

In his Kingdom of the Church, he uses the like variety also: The Saints
differ in glory in heaven. 1. Cor. 15
first to show, that it is he that distributeth his graces, according unto the
counsel of his prudence, without dependa^ce of any other cause, or subject.
Secondly, to honor in earth the memory of his Saints one above another, even
as he makes their souls differently, like diverse stars to shine in heaven;
and finally to succor his children according to their necessity, which are
greater in one place then in another, and to give occasion to diverse nations to
visit one another, and to link them together by Pilgrimages made by occasion
of such places. Why God has glorified the B Virgin in so many places and
specially in Loreto.
All which reasons may serve for an answer to the dema^d made in particular,
why God has much, and in so many places honored the name of the B. Virgin,
and especially the place whereof we speak. It is in glorifying her, to let us
see the glory of his treasures, to make glorious above all creatures in the
earth, the mother of his Son, as he has made her shine above all in heaven.
And if he has honored his servants living and dead in every thing that
appertayned to them, working miracles by their hand-kerche^s, their girdles,
Act. 5.15. (...).
their shadows, their bones, the dust of their bodies; why should we wonder,
that he would honor the B. Virgin, in all these ma^ners, in her habits, in her
Images, in all places of Christianity, and namely in this where she conceived
the glory of heaven and earth Jesus Christ? Where she brought him up, served
him, adored him so often, with the care, charity, and tenderness of a mother,
nurse, and daughter, most faithful, most fervent, and most humble. And seeing
by the means thereof she has given the Savior, and salvation to the whole
world; shall it seem strange, that he should gratify mortal men with his
gifts and graces, by her prayers and intercession, and particulerly in this
place of her nativity and dwelling, and of her most fervent offices and
services of Religion? Let therefore those seduced people, who for this honor
done to the mother of God, does accuse the Catholic Church of Idolatry, mark
here, and else where in these works, the hand of God liberal in her honor,
and let them accuse their own misbeliefe, and not our devotion, except they
will also accuse God, who by so many wonders as he does by her, does inuit and
stir us up, to honor, serve, and call upon her, to be by her helped unto
life everlasting.

Of the honor of Vows, and presents, and gifts of Religion offered at
Loreto. CHAP. XXI.
THE vows and presents of devout persons are also witnesses, and testimonies
of their hands, The 8. cause of vows.
and real signs of the sanctity of the place. By this means, have diverse
places of the world become famous and renowned, not only among the children of
God, but also amongst the Paynimes; as the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, of
Apollo in Delphos, and of others in other Countries; To honor God with his
gifts, is a natural inclination.
this proceeding of the natural inclination, and reverence imparted to all
men, to judge it an holy work and a liberality acceptable to God, to honor
with holy gifts and offeringes places dedicated to his name, and sanctified
with some steep of his majesty. And doubtless, if they had not erred in
choosing ill, in taking false Gods instead of the true, and had made their
vows and offeringes to their Creator, and not to Idols, they judged aright of
the ceremonies. For this instinct being a branch of divine, and humane law, the
action proceeding from being good in the root, could not fail to be well
received of him, who is the author of nature, and justice, and bounty it self.
But leaving these places renowned amongst the Gentiles, to speak only of those,
that are famous amongst the children of God: amongst the Jews under the law of
Moses, the Temple of Jerusalem was greatly honored with presents, not only
of the Kings, and people of the Jews themselves, but also of diverse Pagan
Lords and Princes. 2. Macha. 32.
The Kings (says the history of the Machabees) and Princes esteemed the place
of Jerusalem worthy of great veneration, and honored the Temple with many
rich gifts. After the coming of the Son of God, when the Church, having
overcome the rage of Tyrants, and of Paganism, had once calm seas, Christian
Temples honored through Christendom.
and sure footing, then might be seen through all his Kingdom, Temples
erected, and holy places honored in this sort. In Asia, Europe, Africa, and
else where, as the Ecclesiastical historyes do teach us, with the testimony of
the Temples yet standing, heretofore founded and endowed by Christians
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, frequented to this day by Pilgrims, with vows
and presents from all parts of the world, where Christianity and Catholic
faith does reign.

But to the point of our purpose, and in one word to shut up this discourse, I
say, that if ever any place was illustrated by the gifts of Christian Princes,
and children of God in any age, it is this of Loreto; for the Kings and
Potentats of al Europe, the Popes, and the great Prelates of the Church,
communalties and cittyes, and an infinite number of people, coming from all
parts of the Christian world, have thither sent and brought their riches to
honor God in the memory, and house of the B. Notable offerings to the House of
Loreto.
Virgin the mother of his Son: and for all these earthly gifts or offerings
they have received and carried back the notable gifts of their health, and
recovery of body, or soul, or both together. F. Horatius Turselinus has made
a Catalogue of those he knew himself: there have been many thousands, which
men have not known, written in the book of God, Secret alms great merit.
Mat. 6.4.
who can well find their names in the day of general Judgment, to give them
openly, and in good company the reward and recompense of the good they have
done for his name in secret.

The wretched misbelieuer, who draws poison out of all this good juice, and
turns light into darkness, will say, that this was the mark whereat the
covetousness of Priests did shoot, and that to obtain that, they have so much
preached and magnifyed this place, drawing thither all the world by affected
commendations: but the faithful which have eyes to see the works of God, do
acknowledge the treasures of his heavenly blessing, having by the means of
this sacred House brought abundance of all good, as heretofore to the house
of Obededom, by the presence of the Arc of Testament, 2. Reg. 6.
not for to fill the avarice of the Priests, but for his own glory, and for
the ornament of his house, and for the maintenance of his servants, and of the
poor, for all which there is spent every year 30000. Crowns. Moreover, it is
answered to Calumniatours and misbelieuers, that this place has not been made
famous by the tongues of men, this not being in their power, but by the
wondrous works of God, even before men could frame any designement of the
celebrity of this place, or settle any hope of temporal goods therein: it is
the hand of God, that has done this great work, and has wrought these
blessings, and whosoever does attribute it unto avarice, he is ignorant of the
power of God, and blasphemeth against his graces and benefits.

But leaving these calumniations of those, that have lost their faith, let us
say for the end of this discourse, that seeing the proofs which we bring, do
manifestly teach, that the marks and tokens whereof each one might make a
place honorable, are found altogether in this place, we must necessarily
conclude, Loreto an abridgement of all holy places.
that it is an abridgement of all the holy places in the holy Land, and of all
Christianity, as we said at the beginning, and therefore a place worthy above
all the places in the whole world to be honored and visited. It remains now
to speak of the preparation and furniture of our Pilgrim and to declare the
condition of all mortal men, and after to set down the means and way,
happily to perform his pilgrimage, according to the laws and rules of that
condition.

THE PREPARATION AND Furniture of the Pilgrim.
Of the end and Allegory of Christian pilgrimages, and of the continuance of
our mortal course, signified and taught by the number of Forty. CHAP. I.
THE Pilgrim of Loreto, having been instructed in the knowledge he should
have of the place, All men pilgrims upon the earth.
must now take some aduertisements, and afterward learn the necessary means
to undertake and perform his voyage. He shall note then in general, and in
the first place, that all men have ever been, and are still in their condition
pilgrims, and trauailers upon the earth, as the lives and words of Saints do
teach us; and these whom we call in special pilgrims, to certain places of
the world, do no more, saving that they do that of a special purpose and
desire, which all mortal men do of necessity, walking to their grave, and, if
they be prudent Pilgrims, drawing toward their heavenly country. Of this we
have diverse examples, and figures in diverse ages of the world. The Patriarche^
who travailed in the law of nature
In the law of Nature, we know the pilgrimages of the holy Patriarchs, which
we touched before, and shall declare further; for it is a point meet for the
Pilgrim to know: we know the voiages of Abraham, who going out of his Country
of Chaldea by the calling of God, became a stranger and pilgrim in the land of
Canaan; of Jacob, who travailing from Canaan to Syria, saw in his sleep a
wonderful Lader of the pilgrim, Jacobs trauailling from Canaan, and the vision
of the lader.
reaching up unto heaven, and having God lea^ing on the top thereof, and the
Angels ascending and desc^nding upon the same; his children also, to wit, the
Hebrews were Pilgrims in Egypt three or four ages before the Law, and after
the law was given in the mountain of Sina, they walked pilgrims in the desert
of Arabia forty years, at which time they had the Arc of the Testament, as a
Tabernacle, and a moveable Temple to carry with them, for their comfort and
solace of religion in their pilgrimage. Afterward being come to the land of
promise, all the just and holy men among them, carried themselves as pilgrims.
So David for all, said unto God: I am a stranger and pilgrim before thee,
Psalm. 38 18.
a^ all my forefathers were.

Therefore these particular pilgrimages were figures and mystical instructions
of man's condition, and the words of this King and Prophet contain an
exposition of the same. In the law of Grace, Pilgrims of the law of Grace.
Christians have so much cleerer acknowledged this condition, and directed
their life according to the form of true pilgrims, by how much the more they
have received the light and heat of the Holy Ghost; and so much the more
piously and diligently have they practiced these particular pilgrimages to holy
places, and namely to this holy house, as well in Galilee, as in Italy, since
it came there, as they have received more abundance of truth, of love, and of
desire of the life to come, and other gifts of the same spirit. The pilgrim
shall mark this instruction, as being the main and maister-point of his
pilgrimage, Three ends of pilgrims.
as he shall perceive by and by by an express meditation. In the second place
he shall note, that these Christian pilgrimages are undertaken principally, for
three ends, all which tend to one, which is perfectly to perform the
pilgrimage of this life. The first is to honor God, and his Saints, visiting
those places, 1. To honor god and his Saints. 2. To do penna^ce. 3. To
increase devotion.
where he manifests himself by his gifts, and graces bestowed by their
prayer, and intercession, upon the true p^lgrimes, the members of his Church.
The second to do penne^ce, in patiently enduring the travail and incommodityes
of the way; and the third, to increase devotion, beholding and imitating the
notable exploits of Saints they visit, and all this to obtain the felicity of
our heavenly country, walking by the ways of Gods commandments. This is the
mark, that Christian pilgrimages do shoot at, and therefore those that under
the title of pilgrims wander over countries without devotion, or which is
worse, lead in their pilgrimages a disorderly life, are dissolute vagabonds,
not Christian pilgrims, people more worthy of punishment then praise: and
those who travail with honesty indeed and ciuility, but whose chief intention
is to see diverse countries, cittyes, peoples and to feed their curiosity with
the sight, and knowledge of many things, as they are not of the worst, so
neither deserve they the praise of a true Christian pilgrim, no more then
their end does. But they are such pilgrims as Ulysses, Aeneas, Plato, or such
like travelers, that ra^ over the world to enrich, and store themselves, with
humane knowledge and prudence, and to frame and fashion their life after the
skill and manner of wise men of this world. The Christian aymeth at a higher
mark, and directs his steps to a more rich conquest: The pr^pall en^ of a
christian ^grime
for although he does not refuse nor omit to learn all the good that others
learn, trauayling in diverse countries, as modesty, humility, patience,
tempera^ce, and other gain of moral virtues, whereby he may adorn his life
with civil carriage and fashions; yet his principal mark is to make himself
wise by christian wisdom to Godward, to enrich himself with piety, and
charity, to live christianly, that is to say, perfectly before him, according
to every man's state and condition, and finally by traveling upon earth to
gain heaven. Our pilgrim therefore shall not only have in horror the
fashions of the first debauched wanderers, but also shall beware of being
curious about vain and unprofitable things, and only seek and search after
such things as may help him happily to attain unto this end.

The form and parts of Christian pilgrimages.
In the third place, he must learn the forms and times of his pilgrimages,
which I divide unto him in three parts, his going his arrival or stay there,
and his return: and these in forty days journey, showing what he should do
in every one of them. The three parts, are the three estates of Christians:
the three ways are the three kinds of Christians virtues. Three sorts and
estates of ways and virtues.
The first signifies the estate of beginners, the way and virtues of
purgation. The second, the estate of the Proficients, and the way, and virtues
of illumination. And the third, the estate of the perfect, and the way of union
and exe^plar virtues, which by likeness and love, hold us always straitely
conjoined with God.

The number of 40 the figure of our mortal abode here.
The forty days journey signify the mortal abode, or time of men in the
pilgrimage of this life, as our Doctors do observe: and for such
signification has this number been often used, and applied in the Scrtpture.
The Hebrews passing toward the land of promise, travailed as I said before,
forty years in the desert. Moses was twice forty days in the top of the
mountain Sina, to receive the Law, which should guide and direct us in this
life. Elias fasted forty days, as also our Savior, showing us the painful
and penitential course of this life. And this mystery is well founded (says
S. Augustine) for that this number is composed of four and ten, Aug. l. 2. de
consen. Euan. c. 4.
whereof the first contains the second, and both together bring forth forty;
for the parts and numbers that are found in four, that is, 1. 2. 3. 4. make
ten, and ten times 4. or 4. times ten, make 40. so that four is the matter and
substance of ten, and ten is the perfection of four, and both together the
generation of forty, and every where four does rule and is predominant. 4.
Elements.
To the proportion then of this number, it seems that the production and
continuance of things in this mortal life is framed and disposed; for the
Elements, whereof all things here below are compounded and produced, 4. Times
of the year.
are four; the air, the fire, the water, and the earth. The times that rule,
and govern these productions are four; the Spring, Summer, Autumn, 4.
Humors. 4. Ages.
and Winter. In men there are four humors, Blood, Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy:
also there be four ages, Infancy, Youth, Manhood, and Old age: and four
brings always ten, a perfect number: that is to say, it makes the thing
perfect and accomplished according to the own nature: four Elements make a
Body, as a Stone, a Tree, a Bird: four Seasons make a Year: and the 10. with
the 4. make 40. that is to say, the thing being perfect, takes his race, and
runs unto the but, and end of his 40. making his whole continuance; the tree
his, man his, and so of the rest. The generation of m^n perfected in 40. days.
The same numbers do reign in the generation of man in particular; for he is
perfected in his mothers womb in four times ten days, that is forty if it
be a man child, and in twice forty if it be a femall: and therefore it is,
that Philo the Jew does call it the number of life. Our pilgrimage therefore
shall be of forty days, whereof shall be allowed for going 21. (...) de vita
Mosis. The 21. days of the pilgrims going is a mark of penance.
which is thrice 7. the number which signifies penance, and purgation,
according to the signification of the first part, which we have said, does
express unto us the estate of them that are penitents, beginners, and walking
in the virtues and way purgative. Nine are allowed for his arrival, and stay
there, which signifies the estate of illumination, as the number is a sign of
light, consecrated to the 9. Orders of Angels, the intellectual light.

Ten are allotted for his return, which is a note of a perfect life, and the
number of perfection: and because in every one of these iournyes the principal
and most frequent exercise of the pilgrim, is to pray, meditate, and
contemplate, to the end to be united, and conjoined to God, and to find him
favorable; also to make examen of his conscience, to amend his vices and
imperfections, and to go forward in Christian purity, as he does in his way
and journey; it is necessary before all things, that he learn how to perform
these things duly, before he set forward in this way.

Of Prayer, Meditation, and Contemplation. CHAP. II.
THE principal, most familiar, and necessary instrument of a Christian, and of
him that goes in pilgrimage for devotion, is prayer; for that is it, that
holds us united with God, and draws from him force, and necessary provision
to discharge our voyage; and therefore it is altogether necessary to understand
it well, and to know how to use and handle it with dexterity; which he shall
do by the proper definition thereof, as it were by a tool or instrument,
which discovers the nature of the thing, and by declaration of the parts,
conditions, and use thereof.

Aug. l. 2. de sermon. Dom. in monte c. 7. Basil. hom. in Mart. Iulit. Damas.
l. 4. de side orthodoxa cap. 24. Greg. N^s. lib. de ora. Aug. sermon. 226. de
tempore. Chyrs. l. 2. de orando Deo.
Prayer is a conversion of the heart of God (says S. Augustine:) It is a demand
of some good thing (says S. Basil.) S. John Damascene comprehending them both,
says: Prayer is an elevation of the spirit unto God, and a demand of things
convenient. Prayer (says S. Gregory N^ssene) is a contemplation, or talk of
the holy soul with God, a contemplation of invisible things, a certain
faith, and belief of things we should desire; it is an angelical state and
vocation, an increase of good, and subversion of evil. It is the key of heaven
(says Augustine) and the sinnewes of the soul. This is (says S. Chrysostom)
the instrument that should always be in the Christians hand, day and night, in
the town and field, in prosperity and adversity, in peace and war, in health
and sickness, and in all things. It is good reason then to learn the manner of
praying well. It appears by the foresaid definitions, that the essence and
foundation of true prayer consists in the soul; that which is made with the
mouth and voice only, deserves not the name of prayer. It is the language of a
Parrot that speaks it knows not what. Prayer of the spirit, speaks
properly to God, and makes himself to be understood as an Angel, though the
lips stir not, and he cries aloud to God in profound silence. Exodus 14.15.
Moses moved not his lips when God said unto him: Why cryest thou? It was
the cry and voice of his prayer, which he then made in the closet of his heart.
The prayer of the mouth is not good, except it be carried with the wings of the
spirit: both together make a perfume that pierces the heavens, a sacrifice
most acceptable to God, and a pregnant request to obtain whatsoever shall be
demanded of his Majesty. The inward is the root and fruit of devotion, the
outward is the flower and budd. To do it well, he must learn to meditate
well; for meditarion, and contemplation do illuminate the understanding, do
heat the will, eleuate the soul to God, and joins it to his love, which is
the very essence and vigor of prayer: Fire is kindled in my meditation (says
David,) that is to say, My prayer shall be fervent, if I meditate well.

To meditate Christian-like, is to discourse in the understanding of some
divine subject, of the creation of the world, of the Nativity of the Son of
God, of his death, of his resurrection, of the purity and humility of the B.
Virgin Mary, of some virtue or vice, of death, judgment, hell, heaven, and
such like matters. This discourse is made in noting the causes, The discourse
of Prayer.
and effects, and deducing conclusions agreeable to the honor of God, and our
good. For example, meditating of the creation of the world, I observe, that God
is the supreme cause of all things, who has made all of nothing by his only
word, that heaven and all the creatures with them are the works of his power,
wisdom, and bounty; hereof I conclude, Conclusion of our Prayer.
that he is almighty, having brought forth such goodly effects of nothing; all
wise, having so divinely ordered them; all good in having given them all to
men; again I conclude, that I am bound to fear him as my sovereign Lord,
adore him as the supreme wisdom, and love him as the infinite bounty, and to
serve him with all my heart, and with all my forces, as my Creator, my King, my
Maker, my Father, and my all in all. By this discourse, my understanding is
delighted in the marvelous works of God, my will is warmed in his love, and
of them both my soul takes a tongue to speak unto him, and makes her
prayer, adoring his greatness, admyring his wisdom, magnifying his bounty,
casting her self into the arms of his holy providence; declaring her
infirmityes, offering her abilityes, her vows, tears, sighs, and desires,
and all that she has, demanding what she has not, perfect humility, fortitude,
patience, charity, and other virtues; and finally drowning her self in praying
to this supreme Deity, as before she did in meditating. Contemplation is a
regard of the eyes of the soul fastened attentively upon some object,
Definition of Contemplation.
as if after having meditated of the creation, she should set her eye of her
understanding fast and fixed upon the greatness of God, upon the beauty of the
Heavens; or having discoursed of the passion of our Savior, she behouldeth him
present, and sees him crucified, and without any other discourse perseuereth
constantly in this spectacle. Then the soul does contemplate upon her
meditation: Co^templation more the^ Meditation.
so that contemplation is more then meditation, and as it were the end thereof,
and it grows and springs upon it many times, as the branch does upon the
body of the tree, or the flower upon the branch. For the understanding having
attentively, and with many reasons to and fro meditated the mystery, and
gathered diverse lights together, does frame unto her self a clear knowledge,
whereof without further discourse, one way or other, she enjoys (as I may say)
a vision which approaches to the knowledge of Angels, who understand without
discourse; although it may so happen, The knowledge of Angels.
that the devout soul may enter into contemplatio^ without any meditation
going before, according as the divine wisdom shall affoard her inward
objects, after the manner of visions, as it did often to the Prophets, and his
most familiar friends and servants; or else where the party himself does choose
some one, where he feels greatest gust, and there stays without stirring.
It may happen also, that meditation may follow contemplation, as if one having
attentively beheld an object, does thereof afterward ground some discourse, as
Moses did, Exodus 3.3.
when having seen the vision of the burning Bush he approached, discoursing why
it consumed not. Hereof we learn the difference betwixt these two actions;
The difference between contemplation and meditation.
for meditation is less clear, less sweet, and more painful then
conte^plation: it is as the reading of a book, which must be done sentence
after sentence; but contemplation is like casting the eyes upon a picture,
discerning all at once. Meditation is like eating: Contemplation like drinking,
a work more sweet, cooling, and more delicate, less labor, and more pleasure
then eating is. For he that meditateth, takes an antecedent, does behold,
weigh, and consider it, as it were showing the meat with some pain, and
afterward does gather conclusio^s one after another, as it were swallowing
down of morsells, and takes his pleasure by pieces; but he that
contemplateth, receaueth his object without pain swiftly, and as it were
altogether, as if he took a draught of some delicate wine: such is
Meditation, and such is Contemplation. All prayer therefore, and all elevation
of the spirit, for to carry it self with a strong and swift flight before the
throne of the divine Majesty must be carried by them, or by the means of one
of them, as having their force and vigor from them. This is the essence of
prayer, let us see now what are the conditions, parts, and use thereof.

How Prayer should be made, and of the parts, and use thereof. CHAP. III.
THE Prayer of a Christian must be attentive, devout, The principal parts of
Prayer.
full of love, respect and reverence to God, before whom he speaks, who is
King of Kings, and very wisdom, bounty, and majesty it self. It has three
principal parts, as have all other well ordered discourses. The entry, the
body or corpse, and the end and conclusion. The entry or beginning contains a
short and general preparatiue prayer; also a local representation of the
matter we meditate of, which is as the first essay and preamble of prayer. It
contains a particular prayer which is instead of a second preamble: the
general prayer demands of God, that it would please him to direct all our
intentions to his honor and glory, which may be done with heart alone, or with
heart and mouth also, using the accustomed prayer of the Church, framed for the
same end in these terms: We beseech thee, O Lord, to prevent our actions with
thy aspiration, and to follow them with thy help, that all our prayer and work
may ever begin at thee, and by thee be ended. Amen.

The representation or first preamble, The first prea^ble.
is a certain imaginary composition or framing of a place, where the thing we
meditate of was done, or of the thing it self: as of the desert where our
Savior fasted, Mat. 4.
if we meditate of his victory against the Devil; or the mount Caluary, where
he was crucified, if we meditate of his death; or of the B. Virgins chamber,
where she was saluted by Gabriel, if we meditate of the Annunciation, and so of
other mysteries. But if the subject of the meditation be spiritual, instead of
this composition of place, The representation of sin.
we must imagine some thing convenient and agreeable in manner of a parable; as
if we meditate upon sin, we may imagine the soul shut up, and imprisoned
within the body, as in an obscure and loathsome prison; and sin, as a cruel
and monstrous tyrant, a dragon, a serpent, and such as the Devil is painted,
and all the holy Doctors do sometimes describe it. It will help also, to have
before our eyes some picture or image of the matter we meditate, which may
serve instead of these representations, to them that cannot frame this
themselves. This preamble is very profitable to meditate attentively; for
thereby is settled and restrained our imaginaition, which is a flying and
wandering faculty, going for the most part out of the house without leave, and
carrying our thoughts sometimes before they are aware, as far from the mark,
or matter, as the North is from the South.

The second preamble.
The particular prayer, and second preamble; is a demand or petition we make to
God to grant us the grace to reap the fruit we seek for in the subject of
prayer. For example, to give us charity, if our prayer be of that virtue; or
compunction, if we meditate of our sins.

The body or substance of the prayer.
The body or corpse of the prayer, contains the points of the subject of the
meditation, one, two, three, or more: as if meditating of the Resurrection of
our Savior, we should make the first point of the time or hour of his rising,
the second of the glory of his body, the third of the soldiers fear that kept
the Sepulcher, the fourth of the apparition and testimony of the Angels, and
so in other matters.

The speech or colloquy ends the Prayer.
The end of the prayer contains a speech, which the soul makes unto God,
either with the heart alone, or with heart and mouth together, thanking him for
his gifts, offering our selves to his service, asking pardon of our sins,
and grace to amend for afterward, and finally speaking unto him as the nature
of the meditation shall require, and communicating it self in such sort, as a
devout and respective heart may do before God. This is the right prayer of a
Christian, which the Pilgrim shall perform every day. Those that have not yet
learned to meditate and contemplate, may also pray, saying their hours, or
reading some devout book, or taking some prayer which they can say by heart, as
the Pater noster, Credo, or the like, meditating sentence by sentence, or word
by word.

Of Iaculatory prayer. CHAP. IV.
THERE is another kind of prayer, Why it is called Iaculatory.
which is commonly called Iaculatory, because it is made shortly and suddenly,
as if one should throw a dart, which is very ordinary and familiar to
spiritual persons. It is a sudden excursion, and elevation of the soul
aiming at heaven, praising or praying to God or his Saints, in short time, and
in few words, according unto the occasion we shall presently take, of place,
time, or other thing; saying with heart or mouth, God be blessed. My God, show
me thy ways. Jesus help me. Glorious Virgin pray for me, and such like verses
taken out of the Scripture, or out of our own devotion: which manner of
praying is figured by the Broc^es of gold, that were set on the top of the
Temple of Jerusalem, Joseph. l. 6. de b^^^o Iudai^. c. 6.
to the end, the Birds might not perch, or sit therein, nor either file it
with their donge, or nestle there; and the similitude agrees well; for these
prayers being our highest and most subtle thoughts are like little golden Rods
sharp on the top of our soul, having always the point toward heaven, and
are very proper to chase away evil suggestions of the Devils, those soul
birds, and to make all sorts of temptations vanish away at all times, and
places; in night and day, in company and alone, in the city, in silence, in
talk and discourse, the soul may cast out a sudden sighe, a request, a
desire, a praise of God, or some Saint, and pray in secret effectually without
disturbance. Therefore the well advised Christian must always have this prayer
at hand, and help himself with it as often as he can in the day, and specially
our Pilgrim all the time of his pilgrimage, to the end to entertain himself
in continual devotion, and to overcome temptations, and always to have his
ear harkening after the mercy of God, and to obtain help and succor of him.
We will now speak of the Beads and Rosary, and of the examination of our
conscience.

Of the Rosary, and the manner how to say it. CHAP. V.
AMONGST the Prayers, and meditations which should be frequent and familiar to
our Pilgrim of Loreto, it is good reason to reckon the Rosary, and Corone
(Chaplet in French). Of the name of Chaplet, o^ Corone.
For seeing that all Christian Catholics do use it in the honor of the
mother of God, much more should her devoted servant and pilgrim. This word
Chaplet, or Corone had in the beginning another signification then it has now,
and is ancient in the French tongue; for we read in Froissart, that King
Edward of England, (...). vol. 1. ap. 1^2
that reigned in the year 1349. gave a Crown of pearls which he did wear on
his head, to M. Eustace of Ribaumont, in reward and honor of his valor. This
Chaplet was a little band of gold, folded and doubled after the manner of a
crown or garland, having pearls set on the outside, and it showed like one of
our Rosaryes, being set round upon our head; heerof came the name, and for some
similitude it was applied to a new subject; and for this cause we use that
name, as also the name of Corone, not to signify an ornament of the head,
Corone an instrument of devotion.
but an instrument of devotion, a little book without words or letters,
composed of fifty small beads stringed together, having betwixt every ten a
greater one, to distinguish the number, though commonly it has 63. which is
the number of the years of our B. The B. Virgin lived 63. years.
Ladies life. That which we call a Rosary is a triple Chaplet, or Corone,
containing 150. beads, stringed, and distinguished after the same fashion. The
Catholic Church uses them for prayer, saying upon every small bead an Aue
Maria, and upon the greater a Pater noster, meditating or thinking upon the
same mystery of the Rosary.

The 15. mysteries (...) the Rosary.
These mysteries are 15. five of joy, five of sorrow, and five of glory. The
first five are, 1. The annunciation of the Angel. 2. The visitation of the
Virgin. 3. The Nativity of our Savior. 4. The presentation of him in the
Temple. 5. When he was found among the Doctors.

The five sorrowful are. 1. His agony in the garden of Oliuet. 2. His whipping
at the pillar in Pilats house. 3. His crowning with thorns in the same place.
4. His carrying of his Cross out of Jerusalem. 5. And his crucifying upon
mount Caluary.

The five glorious are. 1. His Resurrection. 2. His Ascension. 3. The coming
of the holy Ghost. 4. The Assumption of our B. Lady. 5. Her coronation and
exaltation above all Angels. Of which mysteries the pilgrim may choose, in
saying his beads, which his devotion shall like best.

This is the little prayer-booke of our B. Ladies Deuotes in the Catholic
Church, a book more rich, The profit of the Rosary.
and noble if it be well used and said, then the crown of Kings, not only for
the simple who cannot read, but also fit for the learned, who may find enough
to meditate upon that profound and marvelous salutation, and upon the benefit
of the Incarnation of the Son of God, and upon those heavenly prerogatives of
our B. Lady, which are therein contained. Those that have forsaken the Church,
and waged war against this Son, The s^ofs of he heretics against the
Rosary.
and this Mother, at the beginning of their pretended reformation did mock
Catholics for this manner of prayer, saying that this was to serve God by
count and reckoning; and this, because al things are done without count or
reckoning, without measure, or order in their faith. They show by this folly,
that they are ignorant how all that God has done both under nature, and under
the law, is done by weight, number and measure. Sap. 11. 21. Psalm. 118. David
song praises unto God seven times a day: Sap. 11. 21. Psalm. 118.164. Matt.
27.44. Matt. 14.39.
Our Savior made the same prayer with the same words thrice in his agony;
these works that were done by count, do they cease therefore to be divine? What
then do these good fellows find fault with, accusing the Catholic Church for
that she prays, and honors God, and the B. Virgin Mary with the salutation
of the Angel, and the words of S. Elizabeth, often repeated, and by number
measured? seeing this is to imitate the wisdom of God, and of his Saints, so
to serve him, praise, and pray unto him, and his Saints, with a certain number
of prayers and praises. Let therefore not only the Pilgrim, but every good
Christian, as well the learned, as the simple, say his beads as often as he
can in the day, assuring himself that his devotion herein shall not be
without reward in full count and measure: and let him also account himself
much honored, that he may so often pronounce those words, which one of the
chief celestial spirits pronounced to the praise of the B. Virgin, bringing
unto her the most noble embassage, and most important, that ever was, or can be
made for men: and he may hold himself happy that he may pronounce that
blessing, S. Elizabeth sanctified at the salutation of the B. Virgin.
which that great Lady S. Elizabeth, great of so great a Saint, used unto her
when she was visited, blessed, and sanctified with the fruit of her womb by her
first salutation, and let every one persuade himself that there is spiritual
profit, not only in saying them, but even in carrying them at their girdle, or
otherwise, as a sign of a Catholic, against the misbelieuer, and of devotion
toward the Mother of the son of God.

Of the examination of our Conscience. CHAP. VI.
In the examen a man speaks to himself.
PRAYER teaches us to speak to God, and to ask his grace: The examen of our
conscience teaches us to speak to our selves, and to yield thanks to God for
his benefits, to amend our faults, and to preserve our selves in innocence and
purity. This examen in Christian terms is an exact searching and discussion,
which a man makes of his thoughts, words, and works, once or oftener in the
day, and it consists in five points. 5. points of the examen of conscience.


The 1. Is, after our Creed recited, to consider the benefits received God,
specially that day, and to thank him with an humble heart therefore.

The 2. With the like humility to ask grace to know our sins, and avoid
them, and say Pater, and Aue.

The 3. Makes the very scale, balance, and touch of this examen, that is, to
demand an account of our soul, and body, of all their faults committed since
the last examen, discoursing from one hour to another, from one action to
another; to enquire if our understanding has had any evil thought of anger,
vain glory, avarice, impurity, envy, wrath, gluttony, sloth, or like
cogitations, whereunto the will has constantly, or weakly, and negligently
resisted. If the tongue has fallen to any detraction, swearing, idle talking;
if the eye has been cast upon any evil object, or curiously beheld
unprofitable things; if the ear has been open to detraction, cursing,
prattling, vain mirth, and idle words; if the hand has been carried to any
nice, or impure touch of our own body, or others; if it has stricken, or
otherwise iniuried any body; and finally make enquiry of all that has been
thought, said, or done, contrary to the law of God, in what sort soever; and in
the end say, Pater and Aue.

In the 4. point he must say Confiteor, knocking his breast for his faults
found, with dolor and dislike, and also with hope to knock at the gate of
Gods mercy, humbly craving pardon for the snnes we find our selves to have
committed.

The 5. point is, to make a firm purpose, never by the help of Gods grace to
fall again into the like, and with the first commodity to go to Confession,
and so to end with Pater, Aue, And Credo. This is the daily exercise of all
that be careful and solicitous of their own salvation, commanded by the
Scripture, and practiced by the Saints: Eccl. 28.29.
Lock up thy gold and silver (says the Wise man) and make a weight unto thy
words, and put a strict bridle in thy mouth. That is, vaunt not of thy virtue,
nor glory in thy good actions, weigh and examine all, even unto thy words, and
keep thy self from evil, and have a purpose to abstain for afterward. Job
said: I feared all my works, Job. 9.28.
knowing that thou do not pardon the offender. And this without doubt was,
because he weighed all in the balance of Gods justice, which he knew left
nothing vnweighed. David: Psalm. 76.
I meditated in the night with my heart, I did exercise my self, I did sweep
and cleanse my spirit. Upon which words S. Augustine says: He enquired of
himself, he examined himself, and he judged himself within himself. He
examined in the night, the fit and proper time, in silence with attention
having his eyes shut to other things; he exercised himself in good earnest,
with all his heart, with fervor and vigor of devotion, and not with a
distracted and wandering cogitation, dead, and without motion of life and
sorrow: My sin is always before me. Psalm. 50.
Because he was in continual examination of his actions, always finding some
defect; and hereof he said to God: Psalm. 18.14.
Who is he that knows his faults? Deliver me from my secret sins, and
pardon thy servant the sins of others. He that does not his diligence to
perform this once a day, shows himself to have no great care of his own
soul; for he puts himself fondly in danger, to be surprised and suddenly
arrested by the executioner of the supreme Judge, having the accountes of his
life ill ordered and charged with debts, which he shall never be able to
discharge. The devout Christian does it often in the day: How often in the day
the devout Christian should examine his conscience.
Our Pilgrim shall do it thrice; in the morning when he rises, he shall
examine the night past; at noone, examine the morning; and at night when he
goes to bed, shut up the account and reckoning of the whole day.

A general distribution of what the Pilgrim should do every day. And first of
the Credo. CHAP. VII.
Clem. Constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 25.
THE daily prayers and spiritual exercises of the pilgrim, are distributed
into three times of the day; Morning, after dinner, and Night: according to
that distribution of K. David, who said; In the Evening, and Morning* and at
Midday, I will pray to thee, O Lord, and speak thy praises, and mine own
necessityes. Psalm. 54.
Which also Daniel practiced in his captivity, as before him all just men in
their own dwellings. Dan. 6.10
In the Morning he shall make the principal meditation, at Noone and after, he
shall make others, or else if he be loath to change the subject, having some
taste thereof in the Morning, he may go over it again by way of repetition; at
every one of these three times of prayer, he must still repeat the Credo,
Pater, Aue, Confiteor, as a true child of the Church, who recites them in the
midst among other prayers she makes: and he that prays must have Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Faith is the foundation of the others, by faith he does
often say in his prayers the Creed, as making profession of his faith comprised
therein by these 12. Articles.

1. I believe in God the Father almighty, creator of heaven and earth. 2. And
in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. 3. Who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilat, was
crucified, dead and buried. 5. Descended into hell, the third day he rose
again from the dead. 6 He ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of
God the Father Almighty, 7. From thence he shall come to judge the quick, and
the dead. 8. I believe in the holy Ghost. 9. The holy Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints. 10 The forgiveness of sins. 11. The resurrection of the
body. 12. And life everlasting. Ame^.
This is a summary of faith, called the Symbol, collection, or gathering,
because it was composed by the Apostles, every one bringing and contributing
his part, as they do at a reckoning after a banquet, representing by the number
of the Articles, the 12. Authors and compounders thereof; for which cause S.
Ambrose calls it, the Apostolic faith, Amb. ser. 38. Aug. ser. 1^1. de
tempore. Leo c. 13. ad Pulchr.
composed by those 12. Artificers; also the key, whereby is discovered the
darkness of the Devil, that the light of Jesus Christ might appear. S.
Augustine calls it, the Apostolic faith, because it contains the abridgment
thereof, and would have every one learn it by heart. The Symbol or Creed
(says he) is short in words, and great in mystery; let every one therefore
that is come to the years of discretion, learn the Apostolic faith, which he
has professed in Baptism, by the mouth of his Godfather.

These twelve Articles contain all that every Christian ought distinctly to
believe of God and his Church. The 8. first, teach us the belief we must have
of the B. Trinity, one God and three persons, and specially of the mystery of
our Redemption. The four last, deliver unto us what to believe of his Church.

Of the Pater Noster, Aue, and Consiteor. CHAP. VIII.
THE Pater noster is the summary of our hope, as the Creed was of our faith,
containing seven petitions in form of prayer as follows.

1. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. 2. Thy kingdom come.
3. Thy will be done, in earth, as it is in Heaven. 4. Give us this day our
daily bread. 5. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us. 6. And lead us not into temptation. 7. But deliver us
from evil. Amen.
The four first, demand the gift of good things; the three last, deliverance
from evil. The 3. first, ask that which pertayneth to life everlasting: the
four last, that which concerns this temporal, to attain unto the other, as
S. Augustine says. Aug. euch. c. 115. and sermon. Dom in montel. 2. cap. 17.
This is a prayer made and dictated from the mouth of the Son of God, the
richest, and worthyest of all the Church makes to the divine Majesty,
containing as the foresaid Doctor says, all that the Christian should desire,
hope, fear, and ask, for this life, and for the next; and therefore most
worthy to be recited often in the day, as a testimony of our hope, as the Credo
is of our faith; and to demand of God what we want, although it be lawful for
us to pray, and profess our faith in other words, which the holy Ghost shall
sugest.

After the Pater noster, we salute, and pray to the B. Virgin in these words.

Hail Marie full of grace, our Lord is with thee.

Blessed art thou amongst all women; and blessed is the fruit of thy womb,
JESUS.

Holy Mary Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now, and at the hour of our
death. Amen.

The first words are partly of the Archangell Gabriel, partly of S. Luc. 2.28
42.
Elizabeth: the last clause, is a prayer that all holy men make to the mother
of God. The Church therefore recites the Aue Maria after the Pater noster, as
it were coupling an excellent salutation with an excellent prayer, using the
said salutation, as a divine praise, to the honor of the mother of God, and as
a thanksgiving to God for the benefit of the Incarnation of his Son, and of
his benefits given us by the said B. Virgin, praying her to be our Advocate to
our Creator, that he would hear us in the requests we make, saying the Pater
noster, and especially to help us at the hour of our death, a ryme of very
dangerous conflict, and of our greatest necessity.

The Confiteor is thus.

I confess to Almighty God, to the B. Virgin S. Mary, to the Bl. S. Michael
the Archangell, to the B. Saint John Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter and
Paul, and to all the Saints, and to you my Ghostly-father, for that I have
grievously sinned in thought, word, and deed, through my fault, through my
fault, through my most heinous fault. Therefore I beseech the Bl. Virgin Mary,
the Blessed S. Michael the Archangell, the Blessed S. John Baptist, the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you my Ghostly-father to pray for
me to our Lord God.

When the Confession is not made to the Priest, we must leave out those words,
and to you my Ghostly Father.

This is the ordinary and general form of Confession, that every Christian
makes to God, to the B. Virgin, to al Saints, to the Priest, and to them all
present if it be made in company, acknowledging himself a sinner before the
divine Majesty, before Angels, and Men, asking pardon of his sins committed,
and praying the B. Virgin, and all the Saints, the Priest, and all the standers
by, to pray to this end for him. Of this is spoken after in the 21. journey.
This confession is the general and common: there is another general,
sacramental, and secret, which is made in the ear of the Priest at some
certain time, whereof we will speak after. This should be made often every
day, either alone, or with others; for as often we fall into faults, little or
great, so often also must we humble our selves, confessing our faults, and
asking pardon of God whom we have offended.

The pilgrim then praying these three times a day, morning, after dinner, and
night, must recite at the beginning of his devotions, and at the end, according
unto the circumstances, the Credo, Pater, and Aue, professing his faith and
hope toward God, and demanding things necessary; the Confiteor also at the
same time, in sign of humility, confessing himself a sinner, and asking
pardon of his offenses, and if he finds his conscience charged with any
mortal sin, he shall acknowledge his fault, making his confession to God,
with repentance and purpose at the next commodity, to confess to the Priest
for sacramental absolution, as has been said in the first part of the Examen.

Of the sign of the Cross. CHAP. IX.
HE shall remember also the sign of the Cross, the sign of the Cross must
be familiar in all our actions. Tertul. de coron. mil. Matt. 28.19.
not only in his exercises of devotion, but also in all other his domestical
and civil actions, at his rising, and going to bed, and putting on his
clothes, and putting them off, in going out, in coming home, at the
beginning, and ending of his reading, and refection, and in other like works
and occasions. This is the sign of a Christian, and being made with the words
spoken by our Savior: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, is a brief symbol or collection, and a short profession of the B.
Trinity, and of our Redemption, against the infidelity of the Paynimes, and
Jews, and specially in these times it is a mark of a Catholic against
Heretics. Amb. ser. 43. Athan. in vit^ (...). Antonij.
It is a sign of good success in our actions (says S. Ambrose sermon. 43.) And
a sign of victory against Satan overcome by the Cross (says S. Athana ius
in vita S. Antonij.) It is an armor and defense against temptations, and all
our enemies (says S. Ephrem.) And therefore we must use at all occasions to
bless, and cross our forehead, Tertul. de coron. ^^l. Basil. de spiritus^ncto
c. 27. Greg Na ora. 1. con. Iuli 1. Chrysostom. ho. 55. in Matt. Athan. vt supra.
Hier m. c. 9. Ezech. Aug. l. de cathe. rudibus cap. 20. and tract. 118. in Joan.
our mouth, our breast, our house, our letters, our books, our table, our
meat, and all things every where, as has been the custom of the Church,
founded in the Tradition of the Apostles, as we may learn by the waitings of
the Doctors thereof, Tertullian, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Chrysostom, S. Athanasius, S. Hierome. S. Augustine, and other holy persons.
And whosoever for shame, or negligence shall forbear to sign his forehad, and
his actions wirh this sign, he is unworthy to bear the name of a Christian,
and deserves at that great day to hear thundered against his folly and
ingratitude, the sentence of confusion and eternal pain, prepared for the
ennemies of the Cross.

What the Pilgrim should do every day. CHAP. X.
BESIDES this we have spoken, the Pilgrim must every day, as well working
days, as holy days, make some meditation proper for the day. So he may
meditate of our Saviors Resurrection on Sunday; of Death, on Monday; of
Judgment, on Tuesday; of Hell, on Wednesday; of the B. Sacrament, on Thursday;
of the Passion of our Savior, on Friday; and of his Burial, on Saturday. On
holy days, he shall take some subject, either out of the Gospel, or mystery
of the day, or of the life of the Saints: as to meditate of the hearing of the
word of God, on Sexagesima-Sunday; on the excellency of Martyrdom, on s.
Stephens day; of the holy Ghost, at Pentecost; of patience and charity, on S.
Laurence day, or any other Saint, upon the day of his martyrdom or feast: with
these meditations he shall have others, which are set down for every day of his
voyage, which he shall do the same day at diverse times. Being in the fields he
shall take matter of praising God as those things he beholds shall give him
occasion; beholding the Heavens, he shall admire God in those immortal bodies
and lights; seeing the mountains, the plains, the rivers, the plants, the
beasts, and other creatures, he shall give th^nkes for all to God, as made for
the behoof of man, and of himself in particular, and shall inuit them to
praise the same Creator, to the imitation of those wise and stout Hebrews, who
song in the midst of the Furnace: Benedi^^e omnia opera ^omini Domino.
O all ye works of our Lord, bless ye our Lord etc. In fair wether, he
shall thank God for that particular benefit of his way and journey: if it does
rain, hayle, or storm, he shall thank him also for this cross and
adversity, and take it patiently to make his merit thereof, and his spirit all
profit. Passing by the Cittyes and Towns, he shall visit the Churches, holy
places, the Hospitalls, and such like, where he may get any profit, or increase
of devotion. Going out of his lodging, he shall say Lord show me thy ways,
Psalm. 24
and teach me thy paths, or some such verse, and shall salute his
Angell-keeper, that he may accompany him in the way; Luc. 10.5
and beginning to march, he shall say his Itinerarium, and ordinary prayer for
pilgrims and trauailers: entering into his lodging by day, or in the night to
his bed, he shall say, The peace of God be here, and shall give good example,
and edification to every one, in his talk, gestures, and all his carriage;
sitting at the table, he shall say grace, or hear some other better then
himself say it, and in time of relection if there be company, he shall begin
some discourse of honest recreation fit for the time, or shall hear others
talk. If he eat alone, he shall feed his spirit also with good cogitations,
whilst he refreshes his body with corporal food. Having said grace, and
taken some rest, he shall retire himself, and having said his Litanyes, or
other prayers, and made examen of his conscience, and having thanked God for
his benefits received that day, demanding pardon, and purposing amendment, he
shall crave the aid of the glorious Virgin, of his Angell-keeper, and other
Saints; and having ended his devotions for that day, he shall take his rest.

THE PILGRIM HIS SETTING FORTH, And first days Journey.
A meditation of the condition of man, which is to be Pilgrim in this life.
CHAP. I.
OUR Pilgrim having observed all this, ordered and settled his affairs,
specially if he be master of a family, discharged his journey of all let and
hinderance, made provision of what is necessary, The first days journey.
being confessed and communicated, and well prepared and furnished both in
soul and body, and of whatsoever the circumstance of Christian and civil
prudence may require, he shall choose the day of his setting forth, and shall
take his journey, under the protection and safe conduct of Almighty God, and of
the glorious Vigin, whom he goes to visir, and of his good Angel.

The meditation of the morning of the 1. day
The meditation and prayer of his first days iourny, beside that which he shall
take proper for the day as we said before, shall be of the condition of mortal
men, which is, to be pilgrims, and strangers upon earth.

The prayer preparatiue shall demand of God, that it would please him, to
direct his intentions and actions to the glory of his holy name, as we taught
before.

The first essay or preamble of the Meditation, The first prea^ble.
shall represe^t first, Adam chased and driven out of earthly Paradise, to live
here on earth, as a banished man, he, his wife, and all his posterity.

Secondly, it shall represent unto us, diverse holy men, and Saints, as leaving
their homes, and houses, to walk to strange countries; Abraham going out of
Chaldaa, to dwell in the land of Canaan; Jacob going out of Canaan, to dwell in
Syria, and at last to dye in Egypt a strange country: the Apostles after the
coming of the Holy Ghost, leaving their country, to walk pilgrims, every one
according to his lot, into an unknown world.

The second preamble shall demand of God a clear light to see this verity, and
lively and profitably to apprehend, The 2. prea^ble.
how al mortal men are pilgrims in this world, and that we must seek for our
country else where.

The first point of the Meditation shall be taken of the words of the Prophet
David, and of the Apostle S. Paul: Psalm. 38.
I am a stranger with thee, O Lord, and a pilgrim, as all my forefathers have
been. Also: We are pilgrims and strangers before thee, Psalm. 29.15.
as our Fathers have been; Our days are like a shadow upon earth, and pass
without any stay. S. Paul also: We have not here a dwelling, or permanent
City, but we seek another, which is to come. Heb. 1.


The second point shall consider the practice of the foresaid words, verifyed
in the examples of many holy men and Saints, who from the beginning of the
world have carried themselves, as true Pilgrims in this life. Genesis 4.4.
Abel the first just man in the house and family of God, had neither house, nor
Inn upon the earth, attending only to prayer, and keeping his flock. Genesis 4.17
Cain contrariwise, the first of worldly reprobates, built a city as being a
Citizen, and Inhabitant of this world. Genesis 12.
Abraham the Father of the faithful dwelt (as we have said) a stranger in the
^and of Chanaan in tents and moveable houses, not buying one ^oote of Land all
his life, but a place of burial for himself, and his children. The whole
people of God, the posterity of the foresaid Abraham, was pilgrim in Egypt
400. years, and 40. in the desert of Arabia. Our Savior also was a true
Pilgrim, not thinking of any thing but of his journey, not possessing any
thing, yea less then Abraham; for he borrowed his tomb, and Sepulcher, which
Abraham bought. His Apostles also were dispersed over the whole earth, living
as pilgrims and trauailers, not aiming at any thing, but to gain way toward
heaven, and to draw other men thereunto by preaching of Christ Jesus.

3. Why man is pilgrim in this life.
The third point shall contain the cause, why man is pilgrim in this life;
seeing that the whole visible world is made for him, and also why this
pilgrimage is so painful of griefs and sorrows.

The cause of the first is the excellency of man, consisting in his soul, an
immortal or heavenly essence, bearing in it self the image and likeness of that
sovereign and supreme beauty: by reason whereof there was due unto him a
perpetual habitation more proportionate to his dignity, and a more noble house
then the earth, a dwelling common to the beasts also, and to the creatures of
vilest and basest condition: yea although he had not sinned, this base world
had been assigned unto him notwithstanding, as a land of pilgrimage, not
painful and wretched as it is now, but gracious and honorable, where having
a while delighted himself with the contemplation of his Creator, and his
goodly works, and in thanksgiving for the benefits received of that supreme
bounty, without any death or pain, he should have mounted with his body, to
heaven his true Country, there to reign for ever in the company of Angels,
his contrymen and fellow-cittizens. The earth therefore was granted and
given unto him as a dwelling, pleasant indeed, yet not perpetual, but only for
a time, as it were in passing, and so by reason of this pre-eminence, he was
still a Pilgrim, and no Citizen.

Why man's pilgrimage here is so paineful.
Now the cause why this pilgrimage is so painful, and full of miseries, is the
sin of Adam; for the which he was driven out of the earthly Paradise, and
became a poor Bandit about the world; and in him, all his posterity, and race
of mortal children were deprived (for the most part) of the dominion of the
world, which was their portion and inheritance: and moreover for this old
fault, and for other new daily committed by themselves, they are made subject
to cold, heat, hunger, thirst, wearines, want, dangers from men and beasts,
strangers one to another, and enemies one to another, and finally condemned to
a thousand miseryes incident to this life, and last of all to death, that
doleful close of all our whole pilgrimage, if it be not made in the grace of
God.

The fourth point shall be to consider the course of the pilgrimage limited
with two bounds; our birth, and our death, 4. The bonds.
a small time for all, whereas the lasting of time cannot be but short, though
the time were long, yet less for some, then for some other, by reason of a
thousand chances and accidents, that trauerse and overthwart our life, and do
hasten unto many the bounds and assignation of death.

The fifth point shall consider the saying of S. Peter, 5. Man must live like a
pilgrim. 1. Pet. 2.19.
exhorting Christians in these words: My well beloved, I beseech you to
abstain as strangers, and pilgrims, from carnal desires, that fight against
the soul. And thereupon we must consider, the great blindness of the most part
of men, who forgetting their condition, and pilgrimage, do live upon the earth,
as if they should abide there always, without ever lifting up their eyes to
heaven, man's true country.

The speech shall be a summary of all these points, The colloquy, or speech of
the prayer.
where the pilgrim having his soul enlightened by the light of this
meditation, and possessed with a new love of heaven, and disdain of the earth,
and so much the more straightly united to his Creator, whom he has perceived
to be so bountiful, and wise in disposition of his gifts; he shall speak
confidently unto his Majesty, and thank him, and entreat him; demanding his
aid and help happily to begin, and end his pilgrimage, in these, or such
like words.

O Lord, with what heart shall I love thee, and with what tongue shall I praise,
and thank thee! I say not for thy benefits received from thy holy hand, since
my first being, but eue^ for that which thou do bestow upon me at this very
time, in the clear knowledge of thy wisdom, and bounty, and of my own
estate, and condition! I see O my sovereign, that thou have created this world
with an admirable variety of creatures, ordained for my use and sustenance, and
that thou have made me to be borne upon earth, endowed me with thy own image
and likeness, there to live, not for ever, as a Citizen, but for a small time,
as a pilgrim, there to pass and walk, there to serve thee as long as time
shall last, and after come to enjoy thee for ever in heaven in that celestial
City of thy Kingdom, a City built of gold, and precious stones, upon the
foundations of eternity, and rich in glory, and infinite treasures. I see this
world is but a pilgrimage, a mortal and short race, and that above, thou have
founded the land of the living, and the seat of our rest, and repose, for them
that will pass this wayfaring habitation in the observation of thy holy
laws. O how great is thy liberality! To make so small account of the gift and
present of the universal world, enriched and beautifyed with so many tokens of
thy greatness, as to give it man only for his Inn and passage! What a place
then may that be, which thou have prepared for him to dwell with thee, in all
eternity! If the common Cabbine for beasts be so magnificall, what shall be
the Palace, which thy Majesty reserueth for him, in the company of thy
immortal spirits, the Princes and Nobles of thy heavenly Court! O my Creator,
may it please thee to grant me an inflamed desire to serve thee, and means to
enjoy thee one day, in the dwelling of thy palace there, and an assured
direction of all my actions, and affections, to walk that way, and to arrive
there; keep me from wondering at my Cottage and forgetting of thy Palace. Ap
air to the B. Virgin.
O most holy Virgin, who already reignest there, most happily exalted, above
the highest seats of honor, help my infirmity with thy authority, and whilst
I am thy pilgrim toward thy litle-great house of Nazareth, obtain me the
grace, happily to accomplish my great pilgrimage begun from the womb of my
mortal mother, and which must be ended in the grave, in the bosom of my other
mother. The earth our grand Mother.
If it please thee to ask, thou can not miss to obtain all that is
necessary for my end; for how can the Father refuse thee, who has chosen thee
for mother to his Son! And that Son being the Savior of men, how can he
repel his Mother, treating for my salvation! And the holy Ghost equal to them
both, what can he deny thee, by whose work thou have brought forth the Savior
of the world, and received the Title of the Mother of God! Ask then, O most
mighty and gracious Virgin: the grant is assured to thee in thy power and
grace, and to me in this, grant the favor and assistance of God.

The Pilgrim having armed his soul with this prayer, takes his refection for
his body, signing his forehead, mouth and breast with the sign of the Cross,
goes out of his lodging on his way, with the accustomed farewell to th^se of
the house, and he shall begin the steps of his pilgrimage under the protection
of God, and of the glorious Virgin, and his good Angel, who must guide him as
Raphael did young Toby.

The afternoon, and evening of the first days Journey. The likeness of the
Pilgrimage of man's life to the pilgrimages of devotion. The spiritual habits
of the Pilgrims. CHAP. II.
GOING on his way, after he has said the prayers of trauailers, admited and
blessed the divine Majesty, at the behoulding of the Heavens, the chief and
principal work of his hands, he shall ruminate his morning meditation, to
draw thereout some new taste and devotion. For this is the force of prayer, to
give always new light, according unto the measure and manner that it is used:
To ruminate or chew the Cudde.
and the proper exercise of devout persons, is often to remember in their
minds, what they have once learned, to the imitation of those Beasts, who in
the law of God are called clean, whose property is to chew the cudde, and to
take thereof new gust, and new substance: Clean beasts. Leu. 11.3
he shall gather then a new, and consequently of that he has meditated, that
the pilgrimage he makes to Loreto, and all others that men make upon the
earth, are but figures and similitudes of the pilgrimage, that all mortal men
do make from their birth to their grave, and comparing the figure to the truth,
he shall find the one most lively expressed and represented in the other.

The likeness of the earthly pilgrim to the spiritual.
The true Pilgrim has always in his thought the place whither he tends, he
chooses the shortest and surest way, he goes forward without any markable
stay. The Cities, buildings, pa^laces, fields, gardens and places of pleasure,
if he mus^ needs see them, yet he sees them only as in passing by them being
always attentive to his end. He endures in town and field, all the
incommodities and dangers of men and beasts, contempt, injury, hunger, thirst,
want, heat, cold, hail, snow sometime lying under the house-roofe, sometime
under the cope, or canopy of heaven; sometimes merry and well disposed* sometime
again weary and crazed; humble, patient, courteous, wise, and circumspect in
all his actions.

He shall find all this, point by point practiced in the pilgrimage of man's
life, The spiritual Pilgrim
by those that are well advised pilgrime^ these walking upon the earth have
heaven in their heart, which is the end of their mortal course: they strive and
walk without rest toward virtue, holding the directest and surest way, which
is that, which the Catholic Church, our good and common Mother, does show us
in her great Itinerarium of the laws an^ commandments of God: The Itinerarium
of the laws of God.
they make no reckoning of worl^ly magnificence, and take with an equal mind,
prosperity and adversity. If their affairs go well forward, they thank the
divine provide are without pride: if they suffer shipwreck, they lift their
hands to heaven, and bless the same providence: They are sober in abundance,
and abound in want; they are humble in honors, and magnanimous in the midst of
disgraces. Finally, there is no accident in the variety of this changeable and
inconstant life, whereof he reapeth not some profit towarde^ eternity: Our
pilgrim shall mark all these similitudes to the true pilgrims, and shall
contemplate in the figure of his, the form and tenor of the other, and make
his profit thereof.

He shall also allegorize all the parts of his furniture and appartell, and
shall attire his soul to the likeness of his body* For his Hat he shall take
the assistance of God: his shoes sha^ be the mortification of his affections;
Patience shall be (...) mantle, or lether cloak; Ciuility shall be his coat
or ca^ssacke: Chastity his girdle: contemplatio^ and meditation shall his bag
and bottle; the love of the Cross his pilgrims staff: Faith, Charity, and
good works, shall be his purse and money, so shall he spiritually attire the
inward man of the spirit, to the imitation of the Apostle S. Paul, who arming
the Christian soldier gives him his furniture, framed of the stuff of such
like allegories, and arms, forged of the same metal, Ephesians. 6.
The shield of Verity, a breast plate of Justice, shoes of the preparation to
the Gospel, the buckler of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the spirit of God. In such exercises shall he pass the after noone, talking to
God and himself, making his prayers and examen as before, saluting the B.
Virgin in her hours, saying his beads, singing some hymn proper for the time,
or some spiritual song drawn out of his meditation, as this that follows.

A Canticle of the Pilgrimage of this world.
O brightsome day which makes me clear perceive
The state of this life mortal,
And in my soul for to conceive
A lively expectance of the eternal:
Here I seek, in Pilgrims weed,
The way that unto heaven does lead.
This path m^^^ fair I walking, wind
By shadow of my pilgrimage,
Wherein at every step I find
An heavenly draugh^, and image
Of my frail mortality,
Tending to Eternity
O mortal men who tread the ground
Of this false earth disastrous,
As though beneath were to be found
The bliss of life delicious:
You m^cke your selves; this world below
No such pleasure can bestow.
The woods affoard no fish, nor wine,
Nor from the Sea does timber flow,
In this vain world naught else in fine
But thorns, and feigned fruit does grow:
Of feigned joy unfeigned grief,
The fruit of this our dying life.
This life we lead here in exile,
All fraught with danger and deceyte,
Resembles passengers by Lands hostile,
Seeking after Heavens retraite:
Such was Adam, and such was Eve,
Whilst in earthly Paradise they live.
Such was JESUS, though God and Man,
Such was MARY his Mother dear,
Such were all Saints, both now and than,
In this vale of woe, and fear:
Teaching us to seek by hand,
The milk and honey flowing land.
Merrily then, let us march apace,
Unto this Blessed Virgins Hall,
There shall we see the Heavens Grace
Enclosed in a Chapel small:
And learn to be of this mayde-wife
Perfect Pilgrims all our life.
At night he shall take up his lodging, such as he shall find to take some
rest, and to get new strength of body and spirit, the more cheerfully to
continue his journey the next day.

The second days Journey. The mean, and way happily to perform the
pilgrimage of this life, is to suffer, and fight under the banner of Jesus
Christ, and go always forward in virtue. CHAP III.
IN the second days journey, a good while before the Sun rise, the Pilgrim
shall examine his actions of the night past: he shall say the Credo, Pater, and
Aue, and after continuing the matter begun, he shall meditate of the means and
manner, how to perform happily the Pilgrimage of this humane life, having
already observed in his first meditation, that every man must of necessity make
it; seeing that every man is a Pilgrim upon the earth, and that some make it
well, of which number he desires to be one; and others ill, whom he would not
follow. The prayer preparatory here and after, shall be always as before.

The first Preamble shall represent a great Desert through which do pass two
sorts of Pilgrims: the one that go under a faithful and good Capraine,
patiently enduring the incommodity of places and times, fighting valiantly at
all occasions with robbers, and beasts; We must walk while it is day. Joan.
12.35.
measuring their refection not by pleasure but by necessity, not thinking of
any thing all the day long, but to gain way toward the place and end of their
pilgrimage. The other, lead by a naughty, and treacherous guide, walk all the
day wandering up and down, staying to behold curiously every thing, betaking
themselves, at every hour, to rest and repast, like drunkards and vagabondes.
Those that are surprised by death.
And at the last being surprised by night, in ill terms, and ill wether, and
ill provided, they fall into the mercy partly of cruel beasts, Lions, Wolves,
Bears, and such like that devour them, and partly of thieves and robbers, who
cut them in pieces, and make merry with their spoil and booty.

In the second Preamble, he shall demand of God with humble and fervent heart,
the grace whereby he may lively see and know the manner how to be a good
pilgrim in this world, and to avoid the doleful end of the bad.

The first point shall begin with that which God said to Adam, for the penance
of his doleful dinner: Because thou have heard the voice of thy wife, Genesis
3.17.
and have eaten of the tree I forbad thou ^houldest not eat, the earth shall
be accursed in thy work, and thou ^halt feed thereof in travail all the days
of thy life: it shall bring thee forth thorns and thistles, and thou shall eat
the grass of the field; in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread,
until thou return to the ^arth, whereof thou were made. By which words he
shall see, that all the race of man wrapped in the condemnation of our first
Father, has gotten a necessity to suffer pain and travail ^n this life
until death, as himself did.

In the second, he shall hear and consider the words of S. ^ames, saying:
Happy is he that suffers temptation; for after that ^e has been proved, he
shall receive the crown of Glory. 2. Tim. 2.5.
And that of S. Paul: He that fights not duly, shall not be crowned.

The third point shall set before his eyes, the great multitude of the Hebrews,
travailing in the desert of Arabia, amongst whom those that were valiant
suffered and fought valiantly under the conduct and direction of Moses the
servant of God, in hope to enter into the land of promise, to the which they
always aspired The other, slaves of the Devil, and their own bellies,
murmurers and rebels, sought nothing but to eat and drink, not caring for the
country, for the which they were come out of Egypt, and they perished
miserably in the desert, made a prey to their enemies, their bodies were a
spoil to the earth, their souls to hell.

Jesus Christ pilgrim for men.
In the fourth point he shall contemplate on the one part, Jesus Christ
descended from heaven to the desert of this world, to be pilgrim among the
children of Adam, the true guide of our pilgrimage and captain of our wars.
In the one being made unto us the way to lead us to our heavenly Country, and
give us light and strength to walk directly thither; and in the other having
taught us by his word and example how we must fight against our enemies, the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and all the squadrons of vices, and furnished
us with instructions, weapons, forces, with the assistance of his grace and
Sacraments, valiantly to assail and endure the assault, and to bear away the
victory and crown also, if we will our selves. The blindness of men.
On the other part, he shall bewail the blindness, forgetfullnes, and
peruersity of those, that straggling from the conduct of their King and
Savior, cast themselves into the ways and troops of Satan, walking to
perdition, in perpetual misery, darkness, and slavery to this tyrant, and their
own sins and vices.

In the fifth point he shall weigh how profitable and pleasing a thing it is to
God to suffer in this life somewhat for his sake, not for that he needs our
pains, It is profitable and honorable to suffer for God.
or takes any pleasure in them of themselves; but for that to have a will to
suffer, and in effect to suffer for him, is to bear toward him the depth of
true charity, and to give an assured proof thereof. For prosperity is not the
true touch and trial of love, but adversity; and therefore our Savior the
pattern of all perfection, to show his infinite love to his Father, and us,
has made choice of this way, and has performed his pilgrimage in the thickest
of a thousand travail and did end it by the torment and ignominy of the
Cross: and in the mean time, he has often with a loud voice exhorted his
Apostles and Disciples, to suffer; he councelled every one to carry his cross,
he preached those happy that suffer for his name, he promised rest for pain,
honor for shame, eternity for time. This exercise is so honorable and so
precious, that if envy could find place in the hearts of the glorious and happy
Spirits, they would envy just men this honor and happiness, If Angels could be
envious, they would e^uy our suffering.
that they can suffer for so great a Prince, after the example of such a
Captain, and for so great pay and reward. By which meditation the pilgrim
shall not only be comforted in the travail of this his pilgrimage, but shall
also be lively encouraged and enabled to labor more and more every day,
considering that he cannot have a more high, and royal way toward heaven,
then that of the Cross, beaten by the King himself, and as the Apostle says:
2. Cor. 4.
Our tribulation which is here short and light, works in us an eternal
weight of endless glory: he shall be then animated, and stirred forward to
suffer in fighting, and fight in suffering, seeing that his tribulations, his
discommodities, his wearynes, his tears, his watching, his hunger, his thirst,
fasting, disciplines, hayre-clothes, and all his afflictions and combats,
things of themselves of small worth, and short, yet suffered for this master,
shall be reckoned unto him for so many crowns of glory, and so many increases
of felicity in the great day, when all true pilgrims and valiant champions
shall enter in triumph to the kingdom of their heavenly country. In the end
he shall make his prayer, and speech to God, speaking to him with the words
and sentences of his meditation, and shall say with an humble and submis^e heart.

My Creator and Lord, behold me in the progress of my pilgrimage full of
desire and courage, but inexpert and unskillful to choose and find my way, and
weak to support the future difficulties thereof. Thou have given me the means
to undertake it with a courage, Each one may say this, specially beginners.
and a desire faithful to finish it, give me also, if it please thee, strength
and force: let me suffer upon the earth of my pilgrimage, seeing I am one of
Adams children condemned to tra^aile, but let it be for thy sake, and under the
banner of thine only Son Jesus Christ; for I know, that torments and death
suffered by such a title, under such a Captain, contain an earnest of the
joys of thy felicity, and of life everlasting. Above all keep me, O Lord, from
being of the number of those, who like evil pilgrims, seek the labyrinthes
of this world, and not the ways of heaven; who forgetting their own
condition, become (instead of wise pilgrims as they should be) mad and
senseles vagabondes, and after many courses perish in the desert, buried in the
dust which they should tread under foot. Alas! What seek they in their base
dwelling? Do they think to find true repose in the country of famine, of
thorns, of thistles? Life in the region of death? The vanity of worldlinges.
Triumph in the field of battle and place of war? Here is not the place
that they must seek such adventures, nor yet ask them: Neither do I ask it
of thee, O Lord: I desire of thee here the victory over thine enemies and
mine: let the honor of the triumph, if I deserve any, be reserved to a better
time and place, in the spring time of thine eternity, in the land of thy
children, in mine own home, and not in a strange Country: let the wise of
this world triumph in their country, The Romans triumphed in Rome, not in
strange Countries
and thy children in heaven, the house and city of their Father. O glorious
Virgin most pure Mother, and most puissant Queen, in this eternity, and in
this country we speak of, thou art my Advocate, seeing thou art content to be
so to all men, that choose thee for such, and fight for Heaven under thy
protection, fortify and second my prayers by thy intercession, and procure them
to be heard; and that having learned to honor and adore with all my heart, thy
Son in thy house of Loreto, I may also adore him, enjoy him, and magnify him
for ever in his celestial palace.

The Pilgrim being refreshed with this spiritual repast, shall march on his
morning, with his accustomed exercises.

The after dinner, and Evening of the second day. That every Christian must
suffer, and bear his Cross. CHAP. IIII.
IN the Afternoon he shall repeat the points of his morning Meditation, and
doing it with attention, he shall draw thence two instructions. The first, The
error of worldly men.
that they are greatly deceived, who carrying the name of Christians, and
calling themselves pilgrims upon earth, give themselves notwithstanding to
pleasures, enemies of the Cross, and of all that may afflict the body, and for
the good of the soul, they think it sufficient that our Savior has endured
for us, yea and that we do injury to the merits of his passion, to suffer any
thing with him, or after him; people buried in the blindenes of their
sensuality, neither acknowledging what they have received of him, nor what they
should render him again, nor the good they may get by suffering for him.

The benefit that man reapeth by the pains and passion of our Savior, is no
exemption from al pain, An instruction.
but from the eternal, which only is to be feared, and to which sin has
bound and tied us; from the which bond no other fine, Profitable and glorious
to suffer with Christ Joan. 14.
and ransom could deliver us, but the infinite merits of such a Redeemer: as
for temporal pains it is so far of, that he has thereby exempted us, as
that clean contrary he has invited, and bound us, by his example, his w^rd,
and promise of reward and recompense: I have given you example (says he) that
you may do as you have seen me do. And again: Whosoever will follow me, let
him deny himself, take up his Cross, and follow me. And S. Mat. ^6.
Peter plainly says: Our Savior has suffered for us, leaving you an example
to follow his steps. And S. Paul: Romans 8.17
We shall be glorified with him, if we suffer with him. And surely natural
reason does teach us that to be true, which our Savior says: Luc. 6.40
The Scholar is not above his Master. And it were a monstrous thing to see a
soldier playing at Dice, and drinking himself drunk in his Pauilion, whilst
his General with his armor on his back in the field, endures the heat, and
the dust, exposing himself to labors and dangers of death. By the example and
words of our Savior, we have eternal glory promised to our travails: Happy
are you (says he to his Apostles, and in them to all Christians^ when men
curse you, and persecute you, Matthew. 5.
for great is your reward in heaven A promise, that should lively stir us up,
if we have any feeling of true glory, to run with a great courage in this
race of tribulations and wants, and to endure all pain for the love of God:
and thus doing we honor him, following and serving him, and accomplish his
commandment, and win to our selves therein a crown of immortality: And
those that do contrary, are the children of confusion, unfaithful servants,
cowardly soldiers, very sluggards, taking occasion of dastardy, of the same
things, that should move them to fight valiantly.

The true Christian must always go forward in virtue. CHAP. V.
THE second instruction the Pilgrim shall take of his Meditation, is, that as
he, that will well perform his pilgrimage, must every day gain ground; so he
that will come to heaven, must every day profit in virtue and justice. And as
the true Pilgrim does not cease to walk whilst he is Pilgrim: Pern. epist
91. and 204.
so says S. Bernard He that is truly just, never says it is enough: He is
always hungry, always thirsty of justice, and if he should live always, he
would labor always to be wiser; so that if it be a perfect desire to have a
will always to profit and go forward, not to have this will, is to go
backward; and where a man begins to have a will not to be better, there he
cease to be good.

The true Pilgrim should always win ground, and advance himself to God
wards: and this endeavor concerns not only Religious persons, as people do
think, but all men, Inclination to perfection is natural
and namely Christians. Reason teaches us, that each thing tends to be
better then it is; plants and trees live to increase, to flourish, and
fructify, which is their perfection: and if a Cherry-tree could express his
natural inclination, it would say, that it desires to grow to the highest
degree of goodness, that any tree of that kind could attain unto; and so would
all other creatures say: Why then should not man have the like inclination, and
seek all the possible means to attain it? And seeing that every man is
thereunto obliged by nature, is not the Christian much more bound then other,
by reason of the law he professes, which is a law of perfection? How can he
worthily bear his name, if he endeavor not to be a perfect Christian
according to his name and degree? The King a perfect Christian in his rule and
roialty; the Captain a perfect Christian in his wars, and managing of Arms;
the Magistrate in government; the Judge in administration of justice; the
Merchant, Artificer, Labourer, in then trafike, shop, and travail; as the
Religious in his vocation. Is heaven only for Religious? If it be for all, why
do not all seek the way with Religious, Heaven is not only for Religious.
every one (as we have said) according to his estate and degree? This
instruction will teach the Pilgrim to make daily progress in good life, as he
does in his way, and with so much the more courage, as the merit and fruit of
virtue is more precious, and to be desired, then the wynning of way in the
world: and this shall suffice for the afterdinner, and evening of the second
day.

The third Day. The Commandments of God are the way of our pilgrimage of this
life. CHAP VI.
IN the third day our Pilgrim being well forward on his way, and journey, and
having attentively meditated the conditions and qualityes of his mortal
pilgrimage, The way to heaven is the commandments of God. Psalm. 118.^2.
he shall enter into meditation of the heavenly way, by which he must come to
the heavenly country, as by the other he shall come to Loreto; and marching
with the feet of his body, he shall cause his soul also to walk with hers,
which are her affections. This way is the keeping of the law and co^mandments
of God, whereof David said: I have run the way of thy commandments, when thou
have enlarged my heart. This way is Jesus Christ, who coming into this world,
has from point to point fullfilled the law given by himself; he has cleared
and bettered it with his doctrine and instructions, and has made it easy,
both to the eye, and to the hand, and in his own pilgrimage has traced the
true path of salvation, for which cause he is called, Joan. 14 1
The Way, Verity, and Life. This is the spiritual way which the pilgrim shall
first consider a far off, and in general, as if he were upon some high
mountain, like unto Moses, when from the mountains of Abarin and Nebo in the
land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 32.9.
he beheld the way and country of the land of Promise, and after he shall run
over all the commandments in particular, from the first to the last, one by
one.

A Meditation upon the ten Commandments of God in general. The first and
second point, why the Law was given with so great Ceremonies, in ten Articles,
and two Tables. CHAP. VII.
THE Prayer preparatory, as always before. The first preamble shall frame in
the imagination, the figure of the mountain of Sina, covered in the top with a
thick and bright cloud, rebounding with the noise of trumpets and thunder; and
God appearing in soueraign Majesty to Moses to give him his law, and the
Hebrews encamped in the plain by, terrifyed, and attending the issue of this
new spectacle.

In the second Preamble he shall demand grace of God, whereby he may thoroughly
understand the beauty and importance of this law, and the whole length and
continuatio^ of the way that leads unto Heaven.

The first point shall recite the law, with the clause going before it, Preface
of the Law.
where God speaks thus unto his people: I am the Lord thy God, who has
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and the house of bondage. And after
gives the same Law contained in ten Articles.

1. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me.

Exodus 20.
2. Thou shall not take the name of thy Lord God in vain, for our Lord will not
hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

3. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

4. Honor thy Father and Mother.

5. Thou shall not kill.

6. Thou shall not commit adultery.

7. Thou shall not steal.

8. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

9. Thou shall not covet thy Neighborus house.

10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid,
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.

In meditating the foresaid Preface, he shall make this conclusion: God when he
would dictate his law, puts in the beginning what he is, saying: I am the
Lord thy God, as also the deliverance of the Hebrews: he would have us
therefore in the first place, set before our eyes his greatness and majesty, and
afterward the benefits he has bestowed upon us, to the end we may be stirred
up to the keeping of his commandments, by that obligation we owe unto him, by
the title of our Creator, and sovereign Lord, and our Benefactour, our
Conseruatour and rewarder; meditating the rest, he shall gather these, or the
like conclusions. God published the law with great ceremonies, with thunder and
lightning, Exodus 19.16.
and trumpets, with clouds, and fire, and smoke, and earthquakes: he will
therefore, that it be received of us with great reverence, Psalm. 11^
fear, and humility. For the Fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. He
would have it sink deep into our souls, seeing it was sent with fire, voice,
and extraordinary noise, and by whatsoever might most move our eyes and ears,
our two most noble senses, and might most deeply print any thing in our hearts.
He published it in the top of an high mountain, and therefore would have us
meditate thereof with a spirit elevated, and lifted up from the earth; this is
the conclusion, which David practiced often, and advised others also to
practice: Psalm. 811.24. Psalm 118.14. Psalm. 118.47. Psalm. 1.2.
Thy testimonies are my meditation. Also: Give me understanding, and I will
meditate thy law: I have meditated upon thy commandments, which I have loved:
Happy is the man that thinks of thy law day and night.

He gave it to Moses, to communicate it unto the people and make them to keep
it, he would have them put it in execution, and that as we ascend to meditate
it, so we should descend to execute it. This is the signification of that
heavenly Ladder, which Jacob saw in his sleep, upon the which Angels did
ascend and descend; Genesis 28.
for the children of God do mount and ascend by the steps and degrees of
contemplation in the knowledge of the Law of God, and descend again by the
works of the same law, as it were by the same steps in the active life, for
the love of God, and profit of their Neighbor. The number of 10 a note of
perfection.


He has given it in ten Articles, signifying by the number of perfection, that
it is perfect; for ten is a complete and perfect number; all under it receive
increase, and this none; and all under it, do take their parts, and composition
thereof, being but repetitions of the parts of ten, Ten the ground of al other
numbers.
or whole Tens. 11. is 10. and 1. 12. is 10. and 2. and so unto 20. and 20. is
twice 10. 30. thrice 10. 100. ten times 10. 1000. a hundred times 10. 10000. is
ten times 1000. a 1000000. is ten times 100000. and so forth infinitely in the
composition of these numbers; Ten is found to rule as the perfection of all. It
is there fore a sign of the perfection of the law, Psalm. 32.2 Psalm. ^49.3.
which David signified by his musical instrument, by his Harp tuned with ten
strings, upon the which he sounded the praises of God. The Pilgrim having
learned all this, shall say, the law of God is perfect, it is reason then to
e^deauour to perform it perfectly; for how much better is the music, so much
better should it be song. And this is that, which God in plain language said
unto Abraham: ^o^. 17.1. Matthew. 5.
Walk before me, and be perfect. And by the mouth of his Son to his
Disciples, and in them to all Christians: Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect. That is: Go foreward to the greatest perfection you can,
and follow as near as you can the actions of your heavenly Father. And he
shall observe, that the Creator marking the laboring parts of man with the
same number, has made his hands and feet with ten toes, and ten fingers, to
teach him by a natural and domestical document, the perfection that should be
in our works, The affections are the feeet of the soul
signified in our hands, the executours of the Law, and in our affections, the
feet and carriers of our soul in the way of the said law; for they carry our
soul to the execution thereof, as our feet carry our body from one place to
another. He shall also conclude thus; that seeing God would have us aspire to
the perfect observation of his law, that it may be perfectly observed; and that
to the same end God will not fail to furnish that good will he has given us
with necessary grace, for otherwise, in vain had the law been given, if it
could not be kept, as in vain is that music which cannot be song; and the
Lawmakers should be unwise to command that which cannot be observed, and unjust
to inflict punishment upon those, which do not perform that which is not in
their power. These are the conclusions, which the pilgrim for his profit and
instruct on shall make of the first point of his meditation. In the 2. point he
shall consider another division of this law into two Tables, The Law given in
two Tables.
whereof the first concerns the worship of God, containing the three first
commandments; the second, that which appertains to our Neighbors, comprised
in the other seven, which division shall give him to understand, that things
pertaining to God must first enter into consideration, and after, that which
concerns men.

The third and fourth point of the precedent Meditation. The love of God, and
of our neighbor is the end of the Law, and the observation of the law is
proof of the same love. Motives to the love of God. CHAP. VIII.
IN the third point he shall observe, The end of the law is the love of God.
that the commandments of both the Tables are given to exercise us in the love
of God, and to make proof, and trial thereof, by doing what is told us, as
well for his service, and in consideration of his greatness, as for the good of
our neighbor; for that he will have it so. So that the grounds, and end of the
whole law, is the love of God, teaching us by the three first commandments to
love him in himself and for himself; and by the other seven, to love him in
his creatures, loving our Neighbor for the love of him. Therefore our Savior,
the sovereign and supreme interpreter of his own law (for he it was, that
before had given it to the Hebrews) reduces all to Love, as appears by his
answer he made, being asked by a certain Doctor, what was the great
commandment of the Law: Matthew. 21 Marc. 12 Luc. 10.
Love (says he) thy Lord thy God, withal thy heart, withal thy soul, with
all thy spirit, and with all thy strength: This is the first and great
commandment, and the second is like unto this, Love thy Neighbor as thy
self. And concludes: All the Law and Prophets depend of these two
Commandments. S. Paul delivers the same doctrine: Romans 3.
Charity is the fullnes of the Law: This is the bond of perfection. And again:
The end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, Coloss. 2.
a good conscience, and unfeigned Faith. All the law then consists in love, and
charity, and is given for love.

That the observation thereof is a true mean to make proof and trial of this
love toward God, the same Savior says in plain terms of affirmation and
negation: If you love me, keep my Commandments. He that has my commandments,
and keeps them, is he that loves me: he that loves me not, keeps not my
words. And his well beloved Disciple S. John says: This is true Charity to
keep his Commandments. And: He that says he knows God, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar. And S. Gregory says plainly: Greg. hom 30. in Euang.
That the execution of the work is the proof of love. Whereof the devout
pilgrim shall conclude, that it is not enough (for to love God duly) to
believe in him, but we must keep and practice his Commandments; for, Faith
without works is dead, Iac. 2.
says S. James. The lively faith is that which is quickened with the fire of
Gods love, which love cannot be without moving and stirring, for it is an
heavenly fire, the work is the true touchstone of love.

In the fourth point the Pilgrim shall set before his eyes some motives to
stir him up to the love and service of God. A motive to the love of God.
He shall consider, who this Lord is, and having found by faith, that he is an
essence of infinite bounty, beauty, and wisdom, a Lord most puissant, rich,
and liberal; he shall confess, it is a duty more then just, to love: and
seeing there is nothing more natural to man, nor more facile then affection
(for no man of what estate soever can live without loving somewhat) where
should we rather fasten our love, Love is a natural affection
then upon an object so infinitely amiable? Upon bounty, beauty, wisdom it
self, and that bounty, beauty, and wisdom infinite? Upon whom can we better
employ our fear, and respect, then upon a Lord that is Almighty? Or where may
we better bestow our service, then to the honor of him, of whom comes all
the good we have in body and soul, and in all the whole world and at whose
hands we expect eternal felicity? By these and such like discourses, the
Pilgrim shall kindle the fire of his meditation, to heat himself in the love
of God, and to make his soul divinely amorous of him, whom he is bound to
honor and serve withal his heart, and all his strength, and shall shut up his
discourse with this speech, or a better, if God shall put it in his mouth.

A prayer to God.
O Lord how just and absolute is thy Law in all respects, and how reasonable are
thy precepts! Is it not justice it self, that he has ordained, who is al
wise? that he has commanded who is Almighty? That he may be acknowledged, who
is all good? Is there any thing more justly due on our part, or more fit, and
convenient for us thy creatures then to love the supreme beauty? To admire the
supreme wisedoeme? To adore thee, supreme Deity? To serve thee, supreme Power?
To embrace thee, to reverence thee, to accomplish all thou command with so
many titles of right and majesty? But to whom shall I give my love and
service, if I refuse it to thee, to whom I owe service and homage, of all that
I possess, having received all of none other, but of thy holy hands? And who
do further promise, to give me thy self also in recompense, if I acknowledge
thy benefits, in keeping thy holy Law? And what profit have thou of my love and
service, Why God would be loved and served by us.
or what harm if I do not love and serve thee? None at all, O my Lord: what
then moves thee to demand this devotion at my hand, but thine own infinite
bounty, thereby to find occasion to show thy self yet more liberal unto me?
Be then more liberal still, O my King, and most merciful Father, and grant me
if it please thee, sufficient light and understanding to penetrate the beauty
of thy Laws, The mountain of God is the knowledge of his Law.
and the bond I have to keep them. Take me up into thy mountain, that I may
hear thee speak, kindle in me the heavenly fire of thy holy love, that I may
clearly see thy holy will, and happily descend to the practice of thy
commandments; that I may walk with a light foot, and a fiery affection the
way of thy holy Law; and that at the end of my course, I may find thee above in
heaven, there to admire, and adore thee for ever, in the mountain of thy
eternal felicity.

The after dinner, and the evening of the second day. CHAP. IX.
AFTER dinner the Pilgrim, either alone or with company shall for his
spiritual recreation sing the Canticle following, concerning the ten
Commandments.

A Canticle of the Law of God, the way of this life.
Now fellow-Pilgrimes every one,
Our hearts, and voices let us tune,
To sing, with a glad courage,
The Law, which must us always lead,
And teach us truly, how to tread
The paths of this our pilgrimage.
Adore one God that is Sovereign,
Take not his holy Name in vain.
Rest upon the Sabbath day,
To holy works see thou attend,
Thy sighs unto thy maker send,
Him in all things praise, and pray.
Honor with a reverence mild
Father and Mother, as a child;
The sovereign high Justice,
Shall be thy helper always,
And will prolonge thy days,
On earth for that service.
Stretch not thy murderous hand, nor knife
To kill, or hurt thy Neighbors life,
Nor with aduoutry stain his couch:
Fly all light and wanton nicenes,
Forbear eke, of covetousness,
Thy Neighbors goods to touch.
False witness see thou bear against none,
Speak good, not ill of every one,
Let thy sayings be sooth, and true.
Covet not of others good,
Neither Wife, nor liuely-hood.
Nor ought of any value.
These are Gods ten holy Sawes,
These are his ten divine Laws,
This is the Harp of ten stringes,
Which King David played upon,
That sweet Psalmist, and whereon
The soul devout Gods praises sings.
Let this Harp be day and night,
Our heart, our love, our whole delight,
Always sounding in our ear.
Let our eyes still this behold,
Let our hands this Harp fast hold,
Let our feet still this way wear.
This said, he shall repeat his morning meditation, or meditate some other
matter, that may seem proper to the circumstances of the time, place, and his
own devotion. And he shall not fail to bespeake the B. Virgin for his
Advocate to God, that he may well hold the way of his Law in this banishment
and exile, and attain the end of his great pilgrimage, which is heaven. He
shall say the old devout Salve Regina, or some other Hymn to the honor of the
said Mother of God. And in these and such like exercises, solacing his
travail, he shall end his journey, when time shall advertise him to take his
lodging to repose, if he find any Inn, or to merit by patience, if he must
endure some discomodity, of the seraine or air without doors, at the sign of
the Star.

The fourth Day. A Meditation upon the first Commandment: Thou shall not have
any other Gods before me: Thou shall not make any graven Idol. CHAP. X.
AFTER the Pilgrim has meditated in general of the Law of God, Thou shall
adore and love one only God perfectly
he shall come to every Article in particular, and go forward in spirit, as
well as in body; and therefore his principal meditation upon the fourth day
shall be of the first commandment: The prayer preparatiue, and the first
preamble shall be as before. The second preamble shall frame in his imagination
the two Tables of the Law, and shall behold them as before his eyes. In the
first he shall read the first Commandment written with the finger of God in
great letters: THOU SHALL NOT HAVE ANY OTHER GODS BEFORE ME; THOU SHALL NOT
MAKE ANY GRAVEN IDOL.

The first point of meditation shall mark, The exp^^^tion of the words of the
Commandment.
that this commandment, is the conclusion of the clause precedent: I am the
Lord hy God; as if God had said: I am thy God, therefore thou shall have no
other but me. And the meaning is, that as he is the only God, so only should he
be acknowledged for God, and Lord Almighty, all wise, all good, Creator of
heaven, and the first cause of all things. This acknowledgement is called of
the Deuines, by a Greek word, Latria, which soundes as much, Argu. de ^^^ip.
De^ l 10. c. 1. and 4.

Idem con. Faust. lib. 19. and 20. cap. 21.


as sovereign honor, and supreme worship due to God only, and to none other,
and comprehends two parts, the one inward in the soul, which requires that
we have such esteem, and belief of God in verity, as we should, without any
mixture of error, or heresy; the other outward in the body, whereby we honor
him with sacrifices, visible adoration, and the fruits of our goods.

The second point shall consider, that this honor and worship is paid by the
fine of the three Theological virtues, How this honor is yielded to God.
Faith, Hope, and Charity. By Faith we believe, that God is an essence
infinite, eternal, incomprehensible, one God in three persons, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. God that has created the world, and governs it
with his power, and wisdom, and has redeemed it by his bounty, and by his
justice shall give unto every one according to his works. This is the subject
of Faith, and the rest that is contained in the Apostles Creed.

By Hope, we have our sovereign trust in him, and expect of him, as of our
first cause, and last end, help and succor in the necessityes of this world,
and eternal glory in the other.

By Charity, we love and serve him with all our heart above all things,
according to his titles of Majesty, adoring and honoring him, with the inward
acts of our soul, and outwardly by corporal works agreeable to our faith,
and inward actions; also by first fruits, and tithes of our goods, but
principally by sacrifices, as the just have always done before the coming of
our Savior, by their sacrifyces made of the bodies of mortal creatures, Mass
the great sacrifice of the Christians
and afterward Christians by that of the Holy Mass, wherein is offered unto
God the immortal body of his only Son, in an unbloody sacrifyce, after the
Order of Melchisedeth.

The third point shall observe, as conclusions drawn out of the two precedent,
that all those that adore many Gods, and give the sovereign honor, due to God
only, to their Idols, and false Gods, as the Pagans did, and do still, that
they are Idolatours, and breakers of his first Commandment, as are also all
other Infidels, Jews, Turks, Heretics, Magicians, Sorcerers, and all sorts
of superstitious people; as also they that despair, or put their chief trust
or confidence in creatures, of whom Hieremy says: Accursed is he that
trusts in man, Ierem. ^7 5.
(that is, as in God) and that puts flesh for his arm, and draws his heart
from God. They also, that love any creature more then God, either Angels, men,
women, children, goods, lands, or any thing else, whereby they leave to serve
God with all their heart, or which is worse, do altogether forsake him,
despising his Laws, and Commandments.

The fourth point shall teach, To honor Saints is not against this
comma^deme^t.
that it is not against this commandment, to honor with a second (not
sovereign) honor some creatures, according unto that degree of excellency,
that God has bestowed upon them; as Fathers, Mothers, Kings, Magistrates, with
a civil honor; The B. Virgin, the Angels, and Saints departed, and reigning
in heaven with a religious honor; to praise them, and pray to them, and desire
their help, as being the friends of God, and faithful, Hier. in Vigil and
epist. 53. Damas l. 14. ortho. fidei c. 16. Basil. in 40. Mart. Naz. ora. 55.
Cyp. Athan. Basil.
and charitable intercessours for our necessityes in heaven, as when they lived
they were upon earth. And this honor and service does not derogate to the
Majesty of God, but does increase his honor, praising and honoring him, not
only in himself, but also in his servants, whom he has made heretofore
instruments of our salvation in his Church militant, and afterward glorious
lights in his Church triumphant, where they pray him without ceasing, and
intercede for us, and are careful for us, as for the members of the same body.

In the fifth point he must consider, how that Images, and the honoring of
them used in the Church of God, Chrysostom. de cate^. S. Petri.
is not repugnant to that part of the commandment, which forbids carved
Idols; for an Idol is the representation of a false Deity, as those of the
Paynimes, that represented Saturn, Jupiter, and other false Gods, or those
that every ones fancy did feign and forge unto himself. An Image is a
representation of a true thing, of God, of Jesus Christ, of an Angel, of a
Saint, and the honor done unto it, is referred, and redoundeth to the pattern
thereof; and therefore as it is piety to honor Jesus Christ, his Angels, and
Saints, although with diverse degrees, so also is it to honor their Images, as
things appertayning unto them, in that they represent them: and as he^
honors the King with a civil honor, The Image of a king capable of civil
honor.
who honors his Image; so he honors God, and his servants deceased, who
honors their representations. This is not therefore to adore the gold,
silver, wood, stone, after the manner of Idolatours, but to honor God and his
Saints in those things that represent their memory, after the manner of
Christians.

The speech shall give thanks to God for the light of this his commandment,
and shall ask his aid to perform it.

The after-dinner, and Evening of this fourth days Journey. How the justice of
God does shine in his first Commandment: Prayers to avoid the Idols of false
Christians. CHAP. XI.
IN the Afternoon having made some Meditation proper for the day, or some
other spiritual exercise, upon the occasions of times, How straightly man is
bound to serve God.
or places, he shall resume the points of his morning meditation, and shall
admire the justice, the importance, and fruit of this Commandment; for what can
be more due and agreeable, then the sovereign honor to the sovereign Lord?
Supreme love to the supreme Bounty? Supreme respect to the supreme wisdom?
What more strait bond of Obedience can there be, then of the creature to the
Creator, of the son to the Father, of the vassal to his Lord and Liege? To
whose glory should man employe all the actions of his soul and body, better
then on him, of whom he has both soul and body, understanding, will, memory,
all the interior facultyes of his soul; his eyes, ears, nose, tongue, hands,
and all the exterior parts and members of his body? And finally of whom he
has his being, of whom he depends, by whom he is redeemed, and from whom
he expects endless glory? So shall our pilgrim discourse, and say unto
himself.

A speech to his soul.
O my soul, adore this Lord, seeing he is thy sovereign; serve him with all
thy might, seeing he is Almighty; love him with all thy heart, seeing he is all
lovely; serve him with all thy powers, seeing they come all of him, seeing thou
have nothing good that comes not from him that made thee, that redeemed thee,
who preserves thee, and has given thee all this world, and his own only
Son; and will give thee himself at the last, and of himself prepare thee a
blessed banquet, and feast of felicity.

He shall speak also unto God, and say: O my sovereign Lord, my Father, my
all in all, be thou always my Lord, my Father, my God, and let me be always
thy servant, and thy son. Let my understanding adore thee in her thoughts, my
will in her desires, my memory in her capacity, and all my senses in their
functions and services; and that I take no strange Gods before thee. Alas, what
folly is it to admit and follow another, seeing thou art so great, and all
alone in thy greatness, and all others be false? Defend me from the vanity of
false Gods, and their Idols, not of Paynimes, from which we have been long
freed, by the clear light of our faith, O sweet redeemer Jesus Christ; but
from those Gods and Idols, which vanity and peruersity does forge in the souls
of those, False Gods and Idols are vices.
who under false banners carry the name of Christians; which are, proper will,
pride, avarice, impurity, envy, rancour, gluttony, sloth, and such like
abominations of vices; and above all, from obstinate error and heresy, which
this malignant abuser of men and infernal workman does forge, and furnish to
the world, instead of the old Idols of Pagans, which he sees has long since
lost all honor and credit. Keep me, Cypr. l. de unit. Ecc.
O my Creator and Savior from being abused by those false Gods; let not my
soul seek after these vanities, nor ever bow her knee to these Idols, that
she acknowledge no other God but thee, honor thee alone in thy Church, and in
the communion of thy Saints, and with a sound faith; and place her chief hope
in thee alone, God to be honored with a true faith hope, and charity.
and love thee alone withal her heart; and honor and respect, for love of thee,
all others that are honorable by thy gifts and graces, in heaven and earth,
Angels and men. These and the like, shall be the Pilgrims discourse this
after dinner. In the Evening he shall say his beads, or some other prayer to
salute the B. Virgin, and shall take up his lodging, for his rest that night.

The fifth Day. A meditation upon the second Commandment: Thou shall not take
the Name of God in vain. CHAP. XII.
THE second Commandment shall be the chief meditation for the morning of the
fifth Day, containing the prayer preparatiue, two preambles, and five points.

The prayer preparatiue.
The first shall contain the accustomed demand, to wit, the assistance of Gods
grace, by the which all our actions, and prayers may be made to the honor of
God.

The first preamble shall be like that of the precedent meditation, differing in
matter only, setting before the eyes of our soul the second Commandment
graven in great letters in the first Table of the Law, THOU SHALL NOT TAKE THE
NAME OF GOD IN VAIN.

The second preamble shall ask grace to make particular profit of this
meditation. The first point shall observe that this Commandment informs and
teaches the tongue, one of the most excellent members of man, Our tongue given
to praise God with.
to honor God, as the first instructed the heart: and as the tongue depends
of the heart, so this commandment is a dependence or conclusion of the first;
for if God must be honored with a sovereign worship, as the first teaches;
then it follows that we must honor his Name, What is meant by the name of
God.
which is the note of his Greatness, as the name of a King is the note of
Roialty; and that we should not take it in vain, that is, without reverence,
and just cause: otherwise it is a dishonor to him. This is therefore one
consequence of the first commandment, yet God would give it a part, and in
express terms, the better to particularize the marks of his honor, and more
distinctly to bridle tongues of worldly men, too much inclined to injury his
majesty, with false and vain oaths. It teaches us therefore to employ our
words to the honor of God, and if we must swear, to swear holily, and not
in vain: now the name of God, as far as we can know, is every saying, or
word, that signifies the infinite Essence, wisdom, bounty; as are, God, Lord,
King of kings, Almighty, Lord of Hosts. These names, and the like used in
holy Scripture, are soueraignely honorable, because they appertain to God,
and God is honored, and dishonored in them, as the King in his, by the
virtue, or malice of men, and namely by their language.

The second shall be employed to meditate, Diverse ways of honoring the name
of God.
how we honor the name of God m ny ways, to wit, when we confess him stoutly
before all; when we profess Jesus Christ his Son, author of our salvation,
God and man; when we attend holily to hear the word of God; when we singe his
praises, when we pray to him, when we thank him, as well in adversity, as in
prosperity, as holy men have always done, David, Job, and the like, who, were
they in peace, were they in affliction, said always: The name of God be
blessed. How the the name of God is honored by swearing
But specially, and according to the principal sense of this Commandment, we
honor his name, when we swear with piety, that is, when with necessity,
truth, and respect, we call God to witness of any thing, saying: God is my
witness, God knows, by God, I call God to witness, as God help me, or any
other ways, that a man may swear; to which also are referred the oaths made
by Saints, Angels, men, the Gospel, by heaven, or earth, or other Creatures,
all which appertain to the praise of the Creator, as they are under his rule
and service.

The third shall meditate the three conditions necessary to a good Oath, that
is, Verity, Judgment, and Justice. Three conditions of swearing
Verity commands, that what we swear be true, be it in affirming, denying,
or promising, saying: so it is, or so it is not, or so I promise, and I call
God to witness: he that swears without this condition, is forsworn, and
does a great injury to the divine Majesty, calling him to be witness of a lie,
who is the first and sovereign Verity. Judgment teaches us to think well of
that we swear, and not swear at adventure, without necessity; and he that
does it, swears in vain, and abuses the name of God. Justice wills, that
what we promise by oath be just, and honest, otherwise it is one sin to
swear it, and another to keep it; such was the oath of the Jews, binding
themselves not to eat or drink, before they had killed S. Paul. Act. 23.21.


The fourth shallbe to meditate, that as he offends God grievously, who
takes his name in vain, so does he honor him greatly, who swears with the
foresaid three conditions, by such an oath he confesses him first, to be the
first Verity, which cannot lie, the supreme Majesty, most worthy of respect and
reverence, and the sovereign Justice, hating all sin: So we read, that
Abraham, Moses, David, S. Paul, and other great servants of God have sworn
holily, Genesis 21.23. 24.31. 2. Reg 19 7. Romans 9.22. Cor. 11.31. Gal. 1.20. Genesis
22.17.
and effectually to assure themselves of some important truth; and God himself
did swear by himself, to fortify his promise, that he made to bless Abraham,
and to multiply his seed, as the Stars of heaven, and as the sand of the Sea.
Thereof it is that in public justice they cause men to hold up their hand, or
to put it upon their breast, to the honor of God, the sovereign Justice, and
in favor of innocence and right.

The fifth shall meditate, how God is not content to give this commandment,
but also would add a threate to those, that should break it: God will not hold
him innocent, who shall take the name of the Lord his God in vain. This is to
show the enormity of the sin, and to put a bridle in the mouth of men, who
do easily fall into this fault, and to give them to understand, that thereof
do come the greatest part of tribulations and adversities, wherewith men are
afflicted in their body, wives, children, and goods. And therefore Ecclesiast.
says: Thy mouth shall not be accustomed to swearing; Eccl. 23.
for there are many inconveniences therein. And again: The man that swears
much, shall be filled with iniquity, Matthew. 5.34.
and the sword shall not depart from his house. And the same Wisdom, not to
give footing or food to such a custom, commands a contrary extreme, that is,
not to swear at al: Swear not, neither by Heaven, nor earth, nor by
Jerusalem: let your words be, yea, yea, no, no, an advertisement also given by
S. James in the same words. Iac. 5.12
The prayer or speech to God, shall be thus.

My Lord, thou have given me a heart to believe in thee, and hope in thee, and
to love thee with all my capacity, and my tongue, as an interpreter of my heart,
and an instrument accorded, and tuned thereunto, to exalt thy holy Name, and
with the harmony of a lively Faith, and strong Hope, and sincere Charity, to
sing the praises of thy greatness all the days of my life; continue, if it
please thee, to deal well with thy servant, for thy bounty is bottomless, and
give me grace to employ my tongue to that use, for which thou have placed it in
my mouth: let it be only to praise thee, to thank thee for thy benefits, to
confess thee Creator of heaven and earth, Redeemer of mankind, and judge of
the quick and dead: Keep it, if it please thee, that it be never loosed, not
only to vanity against thy holy name, but not so much as unto any idle word;
that it may name thee with verity, judgment, and justice, and sing to thee
with sincerity, and exalt thee with thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

The after-dinner, and Evening of the fifth days Journey. Diverse Meditations
and Prayers. CHAP. XIII.
AFTER dinner the Pilgrim shall make this meditation upon some other matter,
proper for the day: or he shall resume some point of his morning meditation, or
shall say his beads, or some other prayer to the B. Virgin, admiring her
virtues, purposing to imitate her, and to that end demanding her help and
assistance.

In the evening he shall bewail the sins that are so commonly committed
against this holy commandment, and the evils that come thereof, demanding of
God for himself and others grace to amend, and shall say: O Lord, thy name is
holy, for it names the Holy of holyes, and none do comprehend the Majesty
thereof but thy self; and the ignorance of many mortal men is lamentable, in
that they know it not; and the peruersity of men is abominable, in that
knowing it, they do most wickedly dishonor it; their mouth is full of
blasphemy, and their tongue eloquent in vanity; Language of vanity.
their discourses interlaced with unprofitable oaths, and detestable
periuryes. The Soldier is not gallant, except he brave it in swearing; the
Merchant cannot sell, except he forswear; the Doctor, the Priest, the Judge,
the women and children, venture to swear, and forswear, and to profane with
their tongue that Name, which is only to be adored. And do we marvel if the
wrath of thy justice, does rain upon our heads so many calamityes? If war,
plague, famine, do persecute us? If heresy armed with our sins, ouerruning
Christendom so many years, do trouble the peace, overthrow traffic, bring
in robbers, and tread under foot all laws of God and man? Let us rather
marvel that we feel no greater evils. But, O Lord, notwithstanding be
gentle and merciful, as thou art, and keeping us from incurring thy just
anger, pardon us, if it please thee, our faults past, and keep us from
committing any more hereafter, and give us grace always to employ our tongue
to the Confession and praise of thy holy Name. And so he shall betake himself
to his lodging, whither his good Angel shall bring him.

The sixth Day. A Meditation upon the third Commandment: Remember to sanctify
the day of Rest. CHAP XIV.
The service of God with preparation.
THE morning meditation of the sixth day, shall be of the third Commandment,
with the accustomed preparation; and the first preamble shall set before his
eyes the words of the Law, as graven in stone: REMEMBER THOU SANCTIFY THE DAY
OF REST, as in the other. And the second shall demand grace to reap spiritual
profit of this present meditation. The points shall be these.

In the first must be observed, that this third Commandment is given, that
solemnly, with leisure, and preparation, and without any disturbance of
worldly affairs and business, we might put in practice the two precedent,
that is to adore God, confess and give thanks, by first fruits, sacrifices,
offeringes, and alms, to praise and sing forth his holy name: Every day we
should remember this day, and therefore it is said expressly, Remember thee,
and think thereof, and expect it; serving God the best that we can, every man
apart by himself, the other days of the week, amidst the press of our
temporal affairs. But when that day is come, all the children of God come
together unto his house, to find time and place for this devotion, as the most
important of all, that they may perform it in common as perfectly as may be.

The second shall consider, This feast is the remembrance of the work of God.
that this seventh day of rest was given to the Jews, to acknowledge the
benefit of the Creation of the world, and with a continual and weekly memory
renew the remembrance thereof: also to signify the eternal rest and repose,
which Jesus Christ was by his death, to gain unto us, regenerating us into new
creatures; first by his Sacraments in this life, and after by his Resurrection
to glory. He therefore being come, and we having gotten this rest, and glory,
figured by the Jews Sabbath, he would that the church should leave the figure,
and put in place thereof our Lords day, Why the Jews feast is turned to Sunday.
the Sunday, the day of his glorious Resurrection, and the closer of all the
works of our Redemption, as the seventh day before, was the end of all the
works of Creation, on which day we celebrate the memory of this great benefit,
specially with the holy Sacrifice of the Mass; the lively representation of
the same, in the oblation and sacrifice of the Body of our Savior.

The third shall observe, The cause of the institution of feasts.
that Jesus Christ has ordained feasts for his Church, as days of spiritual
rest and repose, and running tables, which in a yearly course do contain and
ca^y the memory of all his benefits, to the end, (as S. Augustine says) that
by fall of time they be not forgotten. Aug. ser. de tempo.
And these feasts are as well those which contain the celebration of his
mysteries, as of his Nativity, Easter, Pentecost, and the like, ^s those that
are dedicated to the B. Virgin Mary, his glorious mother, his Apostles, and
Saints.

The fourth shall discourse, concerning our devotion in ^^uly celebrating the
Sundays, and holy days, How we must celebrate Sundaies and feasts.
which consi^^eth first in flying all that may hinder the exercise of devotion
^n those days, as are servile works of the field, of plough^^g, or of the
town, as are any occupation, or attending to ^^mporall affairs, as suites,
buying and selling, and such like ^uill negotiation. Secondly, to observe what
the Church co^^andeth and teaches to be kept, as to hear Mass, which is an
ordinance of the Apostles, To hear Mass on holy days is an Apostolical
Tradition.
renewed by diverse holy Counsels: to receive the precious Body of our Savior,
with precedent preparation of Confession, fasting, and other preambles of
penna^ce and humility, if not every Sunday and holy day, yet oftentimes; to
hear the word of God, and divine service that is said in the Church of God, to
attend to praying, and reading some good book of devotion, and to other pious
works.

The day of rest for other creatures
The fifth shall note, that this rest regards not only man but also beasts,
not that they are capable of rejoicing or hallowing the day of rest, but that
they be not wearied and ouer-loaden with too much, and daily travel; this
divine providence having care, not only of his reasonable creaturs, but also of
all others, Matt. 10.29. Luc. 12.6
even to the little sparrowes.

The speech, and end of the meditation shall be taken of the foresaid points,
in this, or like manner. O my Lord, most just and most wise in all thy Laws,
The greatness of God appears in his law.
O how thy perfections do admirably shine in the framing thereof? Thou
command me to remember to sanctify the day of Rest; but what should the eye
of my memory sooner look unto, then to this day of repose, which represents
unto me, not only the goodly fabric of the universal world, prepared for my
use, but also the admirable work of the Redemption of man, without the which,
The day of rest represe^teth that of Creation and redemption.
the first benefit had turned to our damnation, and by which the gates of
eternal bliss is opened to us in heaven, and in earth, the enjoying of a
heavenly peace and tranquillity: where shall then my rest be? Rather in this
life, then in remembrance of this rest, and meditation of this day? In hope of
this eternity? In celebration, and exhibition of this service? Lord, let this
day be always before mine eyes, and that al my days may be this rest, in
thee, in thy house, in thy service: and that all the course of my life, may be
a continual travail in this heavenly rest, and a continual rest in this
heavenly travail; a travail without travail, and a rest without rest: a
figure of that which is reserved within the Temple of thy Majesty there above
in heaven, for those that here below have holily sanctified the memory of thy
divine and infinite benefits.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the sixth days Journey. Of the Commandments
of the Church, and devotion to the Blessed Virgin. CHAP. XV.
IN this afternoon the Pilgrim shall choose for his meditation, the
Commandments of the Church, The fifth Commandment of the Church.
which are given, the better to perform the other, and are these. 1. To keep
holy the Feasts instituted by the Church. 2. To hear Mass on Sundays, and
Holy days. 3. To fast Lent, Vigills, and Ember days. Conc. Lug. 2. Conc.
Agath. ca^. 47. Aurel. 1. can. 48. 3. Can. Apost. 68. Conc. Ga^g. c. 19. Conc.
Lat. cap. 22. Conc. Trid sess. 14. can. 8. 5. Conc. Later. Trid. sess. 23. cap.
9.
4. To confess our sins, at least once a year. 5. To receive, at least at
Easter. To which are added. 6. Not to celebrate marriage in times forbidden. 7.
To pay Tithes.
All which help us to discharge our duty in observation of the Sabbath. He may
also take some of these mysteries, which happened upon Sunday, as the Nativity
of our Savior, his Resurrection, the coming of the Holy Ghost; in all which
he shall behold the Blessed Virgin to have the highest place of virtue and
honor amongst men and Angels. He may meditate also the singular diligence she
showed going in pilgrimage every year to Jerusalem, with her wel-beloued
Jesus there to celebrat the feast of Easter, and other solemnityes commanded by
the Law. O with what memory did this B. Virgin remember this day of rest! With
what devotion did she expect it! With what fervor celebrate it! What prayers!
What eleuations of this royal Virgin, all ravished in the love of her God,
whom she carried in her heart, saw with her eyes, honored, and served with all
the forces of her soul? Thus may the Pilgrim question with himself, to find
the matter whereon to fasten his mind, and take spiritual refection of his
Journey for the rest of the day, until he come where he shall lodge at night,
saying for the shutting up of all his devotions, the Pater, Aue, Credo, and
other devotions.

The seventh day. The Blessed Trinity figured in the three Commandments of
the first Table. CHAP. XVI.
IN the seventh day the Pilgrim for his morning meditation shall contemplat
in these three Commandments, the mystery of the ineffable Trinity, one God,
and three Persons.

The prayer preparatiue shall be as always before.

The first preamble shall place for guide of his imagination, the first Table
of the Law, containing these three Commandments.

The second shall demand abundant light, holily to contemplate this majesty:
for the first point of the meditation the Pilgrim shall remember what the holy
Scripture, and faith teaches us, One God three persons.
that there is one God in three Persons, which we understand by this word,
Trinity, one essence, and one nature in three Persons: The Scripture says:
Harken Israel, the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
is One God; the word God twice put, and Lord once, signifies three Persons,
and the word, One, signifies the unity of essence. The Creed of Athanasius
says, this is the Catholic faith, that we adore the Unity in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity; a secret incomprehensible, and worthy of a high and generous
Faith, not communicated to the rude people of the Jews, saving a to few, of
more excellent virtue, but to Christian people, who in the school of
perfection are taught to believe all things, that are proposed by the Church,
be they never so high and transcendent.

The first person of the B. Trinity.
Meditating the second point, he shall observe God the Father, and the unity of
the divine essence in the first Commandment; for the first is the fountain,
and beginning of the other, as the Father is of all the deity; and by
forbidding to have more Gods, he teaches, that there is but one only divine
Essence, which must be adored.

In the third point he shall note, that the Son, the second person of the
Trinity, is signified in the second Commandment, for therein is verity and
truth spoken of, and perjury forbidden: Now, Joan. 14.
the Son is called Verity: I am the Way, the Verity, the Life: And as the
Son is engendered of the Father, so this commandment comes from the first,
though in a diverse fashion.

For the fourth point, remembering the third Commandment, which speaks of
sanctifying the Sabbath, he shall there find the third Person of the B. Trinity
noted, that is, the Holy Ghost the true sanctification, and repose of
reasonable creatures. And as the holy Ghost proceeds of the Father, and of
the Son, and is as it were the bond of this divine Trinity, so (though in
different manner) this 3. Commandment flows from the two first, and joins
them together in the execution of the worship of God.

In his speech and prayer, he shall direct his heart and words to this divine
incomprehensible Unity, and Trinity, admiring, praising and thanking him,
demanding aid and help always more and more, to admire, praise, and serve
him: and having walked some way that morning, he shall sing the Canticle
following, both for devotion and recreation together.

A Canticle of the three first Commandments, which are a figure of the B.
Trinity.
O ineffable Trinity, Three persons in one Essence,
One glory, One majesty, One wisdom, One puissance,
'Graue in my soul thy holy Faith and Hope: the lively flame
Of holy love unto thy law, print in the entrails of the same.
My Faith let see thy Greatness, my Hope let thee attend,
My Love let seek thine honor, and nothing else pretend;
My Understanding always, let humbly thee admire,
And let my Will, sincerely to honor thee, aspire.
My Tongue let praise thy Name, thy goodness, and thy glory,
Thy Feasts in every season, be always in my memory.
But if my tongue, nor thought, nor those of Angels neither,
Can speak, or think enough of thee; take my desires rather,
With heart lowly humbled, thy majesty I adore
And laden with the weight of sin, thy mercy do implore.
And he shall make an end, saying, Pater, Aue, Credo, etc.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the seventh days Journey. A thanksgiving
for the first weeks well passed. CHAP. XVII.
IN the Afternoon of this seventh day the Pilgrim shall employ himself to
thank God for all the goods he has received of him, and namely for this grace
and favor, that he is come to the end of the first week of his Pilgrimage, as
to a station of his first rest and repose; and he shall say thus, either with
heart, A prayer to the B. Trinity.
or mouth: Be thou blessed for ever, O Lord, and for ever praised of Angels,
and men, and of all creatures in the whole world; for to thee only belongs
benediction and sovereign praise, who art sovereign power, wisdom, and
bounty; sovereign Trinity in three Persons; sovereign Unity in one Essence;
sovereign Majesty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. O ineffable
Trinity, and sacred Senate, Creator, Governor, Redeemer of the world,
sovereign Lawgiver of all good Laws, thy self being the eternal law, God
the eternal Law.
eternal justice, and eternal reward to those that fear, love, and serve
thee with all their heart, and with the same heart keep thy commandments! O
infinite bounty, do me the favor for thy own sake, and for the merits of
that divine person, that descended from thy bosom, O heavenly Father, and by
thy work, O holy Ghost, was made man, to repair man that was lost; that my
Sabbath and rest may be every day in thy love, in thy fear, and service, in
the observation of thy holy laws; that all the web of my life, may be with
such days, and all my days composed of the hours of this repose! And that at
the end of my mortal course, I may without end praise thy holy name, and for
ever rest in the bosom of thy blessedness. With these, and like prayers, he
shall pass the after dinner of his first week, and shall take up his lodging
as he may, after the manner of Pilgrims.

The eight day. Of the love of our Neighbor, and how one Man is Neigbour to
another. CHAP. XVIII.
THE Pilgrim having run over the Commandments of the first Table, which
concern the love and worship of God; he shall pass to those of the second
Table, appertaining to the love and duty we owe to our neighbor, that is, to
Angels and men. For this word comprehends both, Neighbor universally is
man to man.
though principally man is neighbor to man; being near, and allied one to the
other, not only by likeness of their reasonable nature, and of the end, common
to Angels and men, which is eternal happiness; but also for the kindred both
by the first Adam (of whom al men descend and are brethren by that title) and
also by the second Jesus Christ, by whom they are redeemed (if themselves be
not in fault) and knit together by a knot of holy spiritual brotherhood. As
then the three precedent Precepts are contained under one alone which is the
end of all, which bids, to love God with all our heart for himself; so also
the seven following are contained under that which commands to love our
neighbor as our selves for the love of God, to help and assist him with our
goods, with our ability and industry, and to do him no wrong, and finally to
love him as our self. Also, S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 26.
as there be diverse and different obligations among men, so there be diverse
degrees of love; and therefore S. Augustine says, He leads a just and holy
life, who judges justly of things: such is he, who endewed with a well ordered
Charity, Aug. lib. 1. de
keeps himself from loving that he should not love, or from loving too much
that he should love less, or from loving equally, that he should love
differently, or differently that he should love equally. The straitest bond
that is amongst men, is between Father and son, and therefore the father
holds the first place in the list of neighbors: and for him is made the
first commandment, which shall make the meditation of the eight day, in this
sort.

The Morning Meditat on of the 4. Commandment. Honor thy Father, and thy
Mother, to the end thou may live long upon the earth. CHAP. XIX.
THE Prayer preparatiue as before. The first Preamble shall set before his
eyes, The first Preamble.
the words of this Commandment, HONOR THY FATHER, AND THY MOTHER.

The second shall ask grace of God to gather profit of this meditation. For
the first point the Pilgrim shall meditate the equity of this commandment
taught by the wiseman saying: The 2.
Honor thy Father and thy mother, and forget not the pains of thy mother,
Eccl. 27.9
and remember that without them thou had not been borne, and render unto
them as they have done unto thee: He means, they are cause that thou art in
the world, Why Fathers should be honored.
and have suffered much for thee, they have nourished, and brought thee up with
great labor and trauile, thou art then bound by law of nature, to render them
honor, to succor them if they have need of thy help, and to obey them, so
they command thee nothing against the commandments of God, or the counsels of
our Savior, as to kill another, to be an heretic, not to follow the way of
perfection if God call thee: for then we must stick to that exception taught
by our Savior himself: He that hates not his father, Luc. 14. Act. 5.
and mother, is not worthy to be my disciple: And that which S. Peter says:
We must obey God before men.

The name of father extends to all parents and Superiors.
For the second point, the pilgrim shall mark, that in this Commandment are
comprehended Fathers, Mothers, Uncles, Ants, and all sorts of superiors
spiritual and temporal, as are Prelates, Pastors, Priests, Masters, Kings,
Princes, Magistrates, Tutors, and such like, to whom, and to every one by this
law is due, honor, respect, and obedience in all that touches their charge,
with the foresaid exception, that they command nothing contrary to God.

In the third point he shall note, that this law does secretly teach, that
Fathers and Mothers should carry themselves Christianlike toward their
children, to the end, they may deserve and retain worthily the right of this
honor, commanded by God to them, to love them with a Christian love, to give
them good example, and edification in words and works; to bring them up in
virtue, and in the fear of God: Ephesians. 6.4.
You Parents (says the Apostle) bring up your children in the doctrine of our
Savior. To provide for their necessityes, but specially that concern the life
of their souls; for this is the end of true and fatherly love, as all the care
of beasts toward their young ones is the life of their bodies; and the like
should other Superiors perform, with due proportion to their subjects.

The speech shall praise the divine Majesty in the justice of this his
Commandment, The speech.
and shall demand grace for all children, that they may honor and serve their
parents; for all subjects, that they may respect, and obey their Kings,
Superiors, and Magistrates,; for Fathers, Kings, Pastors, Magistrates, and
Superiors, that they may discharge toward God that fatherly care they owe to
their children and subjects, and that both by the one and the other, he may be
praised, and blessed in the execution of this his Commandment; and shall end
with this prayer.

It was not enough for thee, O Lord, to give us laws concerning thine own
honor, thou have made laws also for thy creatures, seeking to have every
thing wisely, and justly ordered in thy house, (for this is the house of thy
sovereign Wisdom, and justice) the creature with his Creator, and the
creatures among themselves, giving and taking every one his due that
appertains unto him, and that man should honor thee, not only in thy self,
but also for the love of thee, in thy works. Power forth, O Lord, thy holy
spirit in abundance, upon all fathers and children, subjects and superiors,
and namely those that live in the compass of thy holy Church, that they may
holily accomplish thy commandment, and by a reciprocal performance of honor
and obedience, praise thy holy name, and merit eternal glory, the reward of
good and faithful subjects.

The after-dinner, and Evening of the eight days Journey. The corporal and
spiritual Works of mercy. CHAP. XX.
IN this afternoon the Pilgrim shall frame some Meditation of the works of
mercy, both corporal and spiritual; for in them we make proof of our love to
our Neighbor. The corporal are.

1. To give meat to the hungry. 2. To give drinks to the thirsty. Matthew. 25
3. To cloth the naked. 4. To lodge the pilgrim. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To
visit prisonners. 7. To bury the dead.
Tob. 1.2. 2. Reg. 9.
The spiritual are.

1. To correct the sinner. 2. To instruct the ignorant. 1. Tim. 5.20.
3. To counsel those that doubt. 4. To set those that err, into the right way.
5. To comfort the afflicted. 6. To pardon iniuryes. 7. To bear patiently the
troublesomnes of others. 8. To pray for the living, and the dead.
By all these works, men make trial of the love they bear unto their
Neighbor, and principally by the spiritual, which concern the health of the
soul; and by those also principally, the Son of God has showed his infinite
love toward us, attending to no other exercise, even to his last breath.

In particular, for that which concerns this fourth Commandment, the
Pilgrim shall have ready some examples of holy Scripture, of such as
singularly have been true children of their Fathers and Mothers, as were
Isaac, Jacob, Tobie, and such like; Plin. l. 7. cap. 36.
as also among the Gentiles, that Roman Damsel who nourished many days with
her own milk her Mother, being condemned to dye by famine in prison, by
visiting her in the way of comfort, Vai. Max. l. 5. c. 4.
secretly giving her her breasts to suck, and was the cause that the Judge
wondering at this piety, not only delivered this prisonner, but gave her also a
perpetual pension out of the public treasure.

The piety of Storkes.
The like is written of a Grecian Lady toward her Father Cimon prisonner in
his extreme age. He shall consider also the like piety in some unreasonable
creatures, as in Storks who nourish their father and mother growing old and
impotent, bringing them their prey into their neast, as they were wont to
nourish them, when they were young. But above all he shall admire the Savior of
the world, who not only honored his heavenly Father, by his obedience, but
also his Mother, and Creature, the B. Virgin Mary, and his presumed father
Joseph: He was subject to them, says the Scripture, that is, Iac. 2.51
he respected them, he honored them, he obeyed them.

O sweet Jesus, O Creator of heaven and earth? O sovereign Majesty, have thou
loved man so as to make thy self man, to be his Neighbor so happily? have
thou made such account of humility, as not only to annihilate thy self in
joining thy self in an insoluble bond to so small a creature, infinitely
distant from thy greatness, but so to subject thy self thereunto? O B. Virgin, I
behold thee ravished at every moment in this chamber of Nazareth, when thou
saw this little infant, this great God, whom thou did adore, to obey,
honor, and serve thee! O my soul, fix thy sight upon this beautiful object,
and kindle the coldenes of thy will, by the lightenings of this great wonder,
and follow with fiery feet the example of such a Lord.

It shall not be besides the purpose also, to meditate upon the markable
punishments of such as have been ungrateful to their Progenitors. And so the
pilgrim shall pass the day, till his retire.

The ninth Day. A Meditation upon the fifth Commandment: Thou shall not kill.
CHAP. XXI.
THE morning meditation shall be upon the fifth Commandment. The preparation
ordinary. The first preamble shall propose the words of the fifth Commandment,
THOU SHALL NOT KILL.

The second shall demand grace, well to understand it, and effectually to
observe it.

The first point shall note, that as life is the most precious present which
man has, and holds of his Creator; Life is the goodliest gift of God.
so to loose it, is one of the greatest grieves he can incur: and therefore
with good reason it is prohibited to assault the life of our Neighbor, and
herein shines the providence, and justice of our Creator, providing for the
safety and security of the principal good of his creature, in his family of
this world.

By the same law is forbidden (says S. Aug.) a man's killing of himself, Aug.
l. 1. civil. c. 20 and 26. Lib. de poenit. c. 13 Lib. 1. con. Gaud. c. 30. and
ep. 61.

S. Tho. 2. 2. qu. 64. art. 5.


so much the more detestable, by how much a man is nearer neighbor to himself
then to another, and for that he destroys himself with a double death, that
is, with the temporal death of his body, and the everlasting death of his
soul. And this sin is in such sort against nature, that there is no
creature, though never so cruel, that dares kill himself; and therefore the
law does punish with extraordinary ignominy such furious folks, after their
death, as guilty of an extraordinary crime.

The second point shall mark, that by this commandme^t is also forbidden to
hurt, strike, or otherwise to endomage our Neighbor in body, though we kill
him not; yea even with our tongue to touch his good name by any injury, or to
bear any hatred to him in our heart, or desire revenge: and therefore our
Savior, a sage interpreter of his own law, to show what meeknes is required
in his children to observe this law, Matthew. 5.
says: Whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be guilty of judgment, and
who shall speak injury to his brother, shall be guilty of hell fire. This is
to rule and draw the first motions of the soul to meekenes, and to bar, and
banish a far off the occasions of manslaughter, Matthew. 6.
and to cut up that vice by the root; and in another place he forbids
revenge, and after him his Apostle S. Paul; Heb. 10.
and in the prayer himself taught, and gave us for a pattern, and model of
all our prayers, he put in this clause of pardoning our Neighbor for iniuryes
received: Pardon us our offenses, as we pardon them that offend us.

Matthew. 6.12.
The third point shall be to meditate upon those killings, which are not
forbidden, as those which the Prince or Magistrate ordayneth, according to the
laws against malefactors, and such as are committed in a lawful war, or in
just defense of a man's life, being unjustly assaulted, not otherwise able to
save himself.

The speech shall praise God in his justice of this Commandment, and his Son
Jesus, in the perfect practice thereof, and shall beg grace to be able to follow
his sweetness and clmency, and shall say.

All thy laws, O Lord, are justice and mercy, Th prayer.
thou have given life to man, a gift worthy of thy goodness, and a law for the
safeguard thereof; thou have made man sociable, and to make him live peaceably
with his Neighbor, thou have prescribed a law of peace, and tyest therewith,
as with a strong cord, his hands and will, that he hurt not, neither in heart,
or deed his Neighbor. Thou have at last sent thy dear Son into the world,
made man among men, remaining always God with thee, Prince of peace, and our
true peace, who has honored this commandment with his rare doctrine, Esaias.
9.4. Ephesians. 12.14.
and by the exploites of his singular sweetness: no man could ever complain
that ever he did him any wrong: his heart was full of love, loving all the
world, friends and enemies; his eye was full of mercy and compassion toward
all; his hands full of liberality, and his doctrine agreeable to his actions.
For he taught his Disciples, not to hurt any in word or deed, to pardon unto
seauenty times seven, that is, To part unto 70. times 7.
as often as we shall be offended, and never leave pardoning: and what he taught
he practiced unto death, in the greatest conflict of his torments, and
reproaches, praying his heavenly Father, for his very enemies that crucified
him. The Captains of this world triu^ph of killing many enemies in the battle,
his great triumph has been to dye for his enemies upon the Cross, and to
give life everlasting to those that would take it. O my Creator and Redeemer,
how rich art thou in mercy, and clemency! O my sweet Jesus power it to me this
spirit of thy sweetness, and grant me for thine own love, that I may exactly
keep what thou have commanded, that I may perfectly follow, what thou have
taught by word and example, and that pardoning all, and profitting all, I may
obtain thy mercy, and at thy great day be partaker of thy glory with thy
elect. So having walked a little, and finished his ordinary devotions, he may
if he will, sing for his spiritual solace the Canticle following.

A Canticle of the love of God, and our Neighbor.
O worldly wights who love this world so dear,
And prize so high the presents of this life,
Riches, sports, pleasures, glory, and good cheer,
Alas, how can these last, where all is brief?
You that affect which perish shall,
And where with eke your selves shall fall.
All here below is brittle, and does fade,
All Is vain, deceitful, false, and variable:
Love thy Creator then, who all things made,
And is above all he made, most amiable,
The lovely object of our heart,
Who only does true bliss impart.
Love thou his lovely Clemency, whose breast
Did from eternal times thy soul embrace,
Love him at last, who loved thee thus first,
And show it by true using of his grace.
Love that rare and boundless beauty,
Love eke thine own felicity.
Thy Neighbors, friends, and foes must be enclosed
Within the bounds of thy unfeigned love;
For this just Law was framed and composed
By God, that sittes and rules from above,
Who says, he loves God, not his brother,
Loves neither the one, nor the other,
The mortal race of mortal men, we know
Of one sole man, did their beginning take,
So all that from this one did spring and grow,
One household only, and no more do make;
Every of whom by right of kind
To fastest love does straightly bind.
Yet straiter is the knot, and nearer band
Wherewith God binds us in his holy house,
Sweetly us conioyning with his blessed hand,
To be all one, in his sole Son, JESUS,
Whereto in reason all are lead,
Since all are members of one head.
Blessed is that soul which this Law keeps,
And is found faithful to her spouse above,
Who daily him does seek, and never sleeps,
Burning in the flames of his holy love:
Who above all things loves God the best,
And for his sake, loves all the rest.
The After-dinner, and Evening of the ninth days Journey. Threats and
punishments of man (...). CHAP. XXII.
IN the Afternoon the (...) make some repetition of what he meditated (...),
setting before his eyes the threats which God (...) against mankillers, also
some examples of such as have from heaven been discovered and punished for
this sin, and contrariwise some others of such, as have been easily pardoned:
Math. 2^.
All those that take the sword (says our Savior) shall perish by the sword.
And long before that, he said: Who so shall spill the blood of man, Genesis 9.
his blood shall be spilled, for God has made man to his Image. Cain was
accursed for killing his brother, Genesis 3.
and by his own mouth he condemned himself, for well worthy of banishment and
death, Plutar. lib Quae animalia su^t prudentiora.
for his murder. Before Pyrrhus King of Epyrus, a dog discovered the
murderers of his Master, who were therefore punished. Hesiodus his dog also
discovered them, who had killed him. The swallows him that had killed his
Father. The greatest men have been most sweet and courteous, Moses, David,
yea even among Paynimes, Alexander, Julius Caesar, and the like; Great men
gentle and courteous.
and contrariwise slaves, base, and cowardly people have been fierce and
cruel to revenge. Our Savior the pattern of all perfect and high virtue was
wonderful in this, which he showed at all occasions, where he might make
trial, but most clearly in the last distress of his death and passion, when
he prayed that divine prayer for his enemies, who crucified him, encountering
with a singular exploite of clemency, the cruelty of his crucifyers. Having
discoursed upon these examples and the like, and said his beads, or some other
prayer to the B. Virgin, he shall end his journey, and betake him to his lodging.

The tenth day. A Meditation upon the 6. Commandment. Thou shall not commit
Adultery. CHAP. XXIII.
THE sixth Commandment shall be the matter of the tenth days Meditation, The
sixth commandment well placed after forbidding to kill.
which follows very fitly after the forbidding of killing; for the second and
next injury, and a second death whereby a man may offend and hurt his own
body, or his neighbor, is adultery: and as by murdering, the society of men is
iniuried, so also by adultery, fornication, and other such vices of the flesh,
the common wealth is dishonored and disturbed with confusion of children.

The preparation and preamble shall be as before: the substance of the
meditation shall consist in these points following.

The first point shall ponder that this precept prohibiteth not only adultery,
Al impurity forbidden.
which man or wife commits, but also all kind of impurity, and all that may
cause it, as thoughts, words, touchings, looks, kissings, gestures, dishonest
songs, vain and superfluous attire, wanton talk, dissolute beholding,
paynting unchaste books, and such like allurements to this vice. Adultery is
named as the principal head, and the other acts as making way thereunto, and as
accomplices to the crime.

How pleasing to God purity of body is.
The 2. shall be employed to meditate how cleanesse and purity of body is in it
self pleasing to God and his Angels: It is a virtue wholly heavenly and divine;
for to live in flesh, and not to sin with the flesh, is to live in spirit,
and to be like those heavenly spirits who live without stayne of flesh. The
Son of God made thereof so great account, that he would be borne of a virgin,
he preached chastity, and by all means invited me^ thereunto: he would have
about his Altars, ministers, not married but perpetually chaste; virgins also in
his house as Queens betroathed to his majesty by vow of virginity; barren in
body but in soul fertile in all sorts of virtuous works: Finally he has
restrained the marriage of all those, that living under the name of Christians,
Chastity in every vocation.
will be married to one only wife, establishing a law of Chastity in all estates
and degrees of his household.

The 3. point shall consider, how contrariwise Impurity is as pleasing to the
Devil our capital enemy, The sin of the flesh pleasing unto the Devil and
wherefore.
as it is displeasing to God our Creator. For though this wicked spirit having
no body, cannot directly take any pleasure therein, notwithstanding it pleases
him wonderfully well, knowing that it displeases God, and that above all other
sins, it makes a man forget both heaven and hell: for there is none does so
darken the judgment and understanding of man, and take away the taste of
heavenly things, and the fear of hell fire, that does more draw man from
heaven, and from salvation, and that makes him more carnal, more stupide and
beastly. By means whereof this old preuaricator uses all his craft and devises
possible, to make men fall thereinto, and therein to hold and keep them unto
old age, yea even unto death. Against plays and wanton books.
To this purpose he inflameth their flesh with extraordinary fire by all sorts
of enticements, he chafeth them by charms, he proposes them plays and
comedyes, which in Threaters may represent unto them the fond fancies and
loves, as Painters do in the pictures of Amadis, and such other wanton Writers,
which paint them in the books of base souls, Against lascivious Poets
under the name of Poets, who like trumpets of flesh, and ignominy, blow forth
without blushing, and with full mouth, the shame of their own and others
passions: and finally he works all the ways to give the reins and liberty to
this Cupid and infernal Theon, even unto the transforming himself into man or
woman, clothing himself with figure, and fantastical body, to pollute and
defile the bodies and souls of those, whom he would hold fast in the fetters,
and chains of his tyranny: and thence is come the conceit of Gods, and
Goddesses, whom the Heathens believed to have begot those Heroes, and half
Gods, by carnal copulation with men and women; Aug. l. 15. ciuit. c. 23.
the Devil by these shadows of flesh abusing the fleshly, as Ixio^ was by
the clouds, and giving these titles of Deity to his feyned filth, to put them
in credit, and cause them to be practiced unfeignedly.

To see how God detesteth this sin, the Pilgrim shall set before the eyes of
his memory, such histories, whereby the Justice of God has chastised it,
sometimes by water, drowning (...) envy must be beaten back, Impurity is
overcome by flight.
and resisted by reason, but this sin by flight; and in this fight, the more
fearful is most courageous, and the runne-away most resolute and valiant.

The fourth is to consider, how base, foul and vain this pleasure is, and how
beautiful Chastity is. If there be any pleasure, To consider the foulnes of
the sin.
it is bestiall, an unclean work, and daughter of darkness; for above all
things it hates light and day, although it be impudent; it vanishes away as
soon as it begins, and draws after it ignominy and eternal misery:
whereas contrariwise Chastity is a virtue of honor and price, accompained with
immortal delights, The beauty of Chastity.
admirable among men and Angels, and worthy of the highest place of honor,
both in heaven and earth.

A prayer to the B. Virgin.
The Pilgrim having discoursed upon these and such like means, for the
detestation of this vice, and praise of the contrary virtue, turning himself to
the B. Virgin Mary his good Advocate, shall end his journey, with this humble
request. O Blessed virgin, the honor of heaven and earth, help me by the
virtue of thy intercession. Thou art the virgin of virgins, mother of piety,
Queen of chastity: I beseech thee obtain me this noble virtue, this gift is
worthy of the majesty of thy Son, and of thy entreaty: obtain it therefore
for me, O Virgin mother and puissant Queen, and use some part of thy credit to
beg me this my request. It shall be glory to the giver, praise to the advocate,
health and salvation to the suppliant, and a new obligation to serve thee more
devoutly hereafter, and for ever to praise, with a heart more clean, that
majesty thy self adorest there above. This done he shall provide for his lodging
and rest.

The eleventh day. A Meditation upon the seventh Commandment; Thou shall not
steal. CHAP. XXV.
THE Meditation of the eleventh day shall be of the seventh Commandment, THOU
SHALL NOT STEAL. The two former concerned the body, this concerns the goods.
The beginning of the meditation shall be as the other.

The first point shall teach, that Theft is an unjust taking or using another
man's goods, either by fraud or force, What Theft is.
or by any other unlawful means, and therefore herein is forbidden, not
only theft by cutting of purses, or picking of our neighbors coffers, or in
rouing by sea, or robbing at land, but also in ill Merchants, and Magistrates,
in buying and selling in falsifying wares, measures, and works, in selling
justice, and sacraments, and other things which should be given freely: In
lending to usury; in retayning what we find without purpose of restoring, or
enquiring for the owner; in keeping or buying that, which we know should be
rendered to the right owners, in assisting and counselling thieves and robbers.
And as there are diverse kinds of leachery, so are there of larceny; S. Tho. 1.
2. q. 99.
the one more grievous then the other. Sacrilege, which is the usurpation of
things sacred, is one of the greatest. Peculatus, or ill administration and
iniust usurpation of the public treasure to ones proper use, is very
pernicious also, so that all iniust usurpations are prohibited by this Law.

The 2. point shall observe that the root of theft is the desire of having, the
which S. Paul signifies when he said; 1. Tim. 9.
They that desire to be rich, fall into temptations and snares of the devil,
and into many hurtful and unprofitable desires, The root of theft is couetise.
which drown men in destruction: Those that will be rich (says he) who are
led with the desire of the goods of this world, are subject to temptations, and
to many other mischiefs.

The tentation is first to cast our eyes upon the good of our neighbor; the
unprofitable desire is the consent we yield; the hand and execution, is the
ruin and perdition.

The third shall consider the evils that come of these sins, and the
remedies against them; for of picking and stealing come enmities, dissentions,
clamours, murders, profanation of all holy things, and infinite other evils.
The sovereign remedy to avoid it, is not to set our mind upon earthly goods,
but to be contented with mediocrity; and therefore Jesus Christ author of this
law, and the wisest moderatour of men, teaching Christian perfection, in that
excellent sermon upon the mountain, begins with the contempt of riches,
with a maxim general and true, though a Paradoxe to the world, saying: Happy
are the poor of spirit; that is, Matt. 5.3.
they that of noblenes of heart, Aug. sermon Domin. in monte l. 1.
and religious magnanimity do despise the riches of the world, and care not
for having any thing else, so they may have heaven: as worldly men account
themselves happy, to possess this britle and frail world, which at last will
come to naught.

The prayer.
The speech shall be thus: O my Lord thou have done thy part in making good
laws to bynd the hands and hearts of men, that no wrong should be wrought to
their goods, and that every one, possessing his own in peace, might live in
amity and friendship amongst themselves, with one heart and consent might
together render unto thee praises for all thy benefits: But men have not
governed themselves by thy laws, but following the crookednes of their own
desires, have of brethren, The miseries of couetise.
as thou did make them, made themselves spoilers one of another, and are
enraged one against another, worse then ravening wolves, sucking the blood,
life and substance one of an other, by fraud, by force, by suites, by killing,
and a thousand other ways; casting their envy where thy cannot reach their
hands, and reaching their hands whither their desires nor thoughts should
not extend. Couetise is so strong as neither thy Law can bridle, The example of
our Savior against the covetous
nor the shyning example of the liberality of thy only son Jesus Christ can
move, who coming into this world made man for us, left all the world, of
which notwithstanding he was just possessour, giving his whole self for our
Redemption, and promising himself also for our glory. It is an example lively
to teach men their duty, who have not only not learned this lesson to leave
their own, but contrariwise they covet that of their neighbors, and if they
may, will iniustly invade it. O mortal men, whereto leuelleth the sight of
your swollen eyes? where do you cast the ancker of your light hopes? what get
you? and to what danger of destruction do you drive your selves? what shall
become of riches gathered by theft and iniquity? Against worldlinges.
what shall become of your rapines and vsuries? what gain you winning earth
and loosing heaven? what heap you up, but the treasure of the vengeance of
God? See you not hell open to swallow you, and eternal death expecting with
her laws, gaping to make a prey of your lost souls for ever and ever? O sweet
Jesus make us, if it may please thee, in love with thy rich poverty, amorous of
thy eternal riches, and contemners of these earthly treasures, Luc. 13.33.
and fear full of dreadful death and poverty eternal. Never let it befall us
to cast our hands on other men's goods, but to stretch them out to give them of
our own, and get heaven in giving earth, according to that holy trafike which
thou have taught us.

The After-dinner and Evening of the eleue^th days Journey. Diverse
Considerations of Avarice punished, and Liberality practiced by the Saints.
CHAP. XXVI.
IN this second part of the day, Diverse punishments of the covetous.
the Pilgrim shall make some spiritual discourse near unto the morning
meditation, he shall bring into his memory the punishment of thieves, rouers
church-robbers, usurers, and other breakers of this commandment, whom the
revenge of God has already stricken: he shall remember Achab and Iezabel, who
for taking from their poor subject his vineyard, and life also, 3. Reg. 21 19.
lost their own life and kingdom from themselves and al their posterity: of
Giezi who was stricken with leprosy, 4. Reg. 5.27.
which did stick to al his race after him for taking the gifts of Naman
against right, and the will of his master Elizeus: of one Heliodorus, 2.
Macha. 3.26.
who was beaten by armed Angels even unto death, for stretching his hands to
the sacred treasure: of our Judas who for a few pe^ce became a traitor and
sacrilegious homicide of his God, and himself. Act. 1.6.
To these, and such examples he shall oppose others of the contrary virtue: In
general the first Christians, who brought their goods to the Apostles feet,
for a present to God, and the poor: and in especial of the glorious virgin,
Act. 4.34
who in the imitation of her son lest all, having her heart and treasure in
heaven in the land of the living, and thousands of other Christians whereof
the Ecclesiastical histories do speak. And so he shall pass the rest of the
day, attentively beholding heaven, as the treasure of immortal riches,
prepared for those that do holily contemn the transitory, and shall in this
point end, and take his nights rest.

The twelfth day. A Meditation upon the eight Commandment. Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy Neighbor. CHAP. XXVII.
THESE former Commandments do order, and direct the heart and hand, and this
following the tongue, that we abuse it not against our neighbor, nor against
our selves by false depositions of good or evil. The morning meditation shall
be thereof, beginning as before.

False witness in ^ judgment forbidden.
The first point shall observe, that by the principal intent of this precept,
it is forbidden to bear false witness in Judgment against our neighbor; which
commonly being done by oath, carries an undoubted credit in that quality, if
otherwise there be no cause of exception or challenge. And if it be taken
falsely, It is injurious to God and pernicious to our Neighbor.
it is most injurious to God, and pernicious to the person of our neighbor;
for he uses the name of God in open Judgment, to testify falsehood, and is
cause that justice is perverted, that the right of inoncency is ouerborne, and
the iniquity of the wicked established: whosoever therefore witnesses falsehood
against his neighbor, or also against himself, as many do upon the rack or
tortour, he sins against this law in the princiapll point.

All diffamation forbidden.
The second point shall consider, that by this commandment is forbidden all
sort of diffamation, detraction, calumniation and al evil carriage of our
tongue against our neighbor either by word or writing: for such offend God
greatly, who upon every occasion or without occasion, make sport of other
folks faults and imperfections, forgetting their own: and they more
grievously, who impose feyned and false crimes; and yet most grievously of all,
they that write diffamatory libels, for the hurt is more universal and the
malice more bitter.

All lying forbidden.
The 3. point shall ponder that all kind of lying is forbidden in the compass
of this Commandment, but specially that which is against Religion: For this is
a great lie that strikes directly at the supreme verity: a lie which David
detested with a sharp threat of perdition, saying unto God: Thou shall destroy
all those that speak lies: Psalm. 5.
such are in the highest degree the Arch-heretiks, whom S. Peter calls,
Masters of lying, such as heretofore were Arius, Manes, and in our time
Luther, 2. Pet. 3.
and Calvin.

The speech shall demand grace of God, well to govern our tongue, and to avoid
al words contrary to verity in these terms: My God, thou art the supreme
verity, and all men are subject to lying, as one of thy Prophets writes. Psalm.
115.
Thou have given me a desire of thy truth, may it please thee to give me grace
to avoid all lies, not only of false witness against my Neighbor, or in
Religion against the honor, and the faith of thy Church, but of all sort or
kind whatsoever, not only in things great and important, but also in light and
little; for lying does dislike thee, of what sort soever it be made, and to
what intention soever it be spoken; and all those that use it, are therein
followers of thine ennemy Satan, the Father of lies. Let my heart be in thy
sight, right and true, and my tongue and hands conformable, and agreeable with
my heart, and that thy truth may resound with a sweet accord in my thoughts,
words, and works, in all, and above all to glorify thee.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the twelfth days Journey. Of the nature and
baseness of lying. CHAP. XXVIII.
IN the Afternoon the Pilgrim if he will not change the matter, may ruminate
that of the morning, What lying is.
discoursing of the nature of lying, and of the diverse sorts thereof. He shall
consider, that that is a lie, Putarch de pueror^on educatione.
where the word agrees not with the thought, the mouth affirming that which
the heart denies; a vice directly opposite to God the supreme verity, and
altogether base and servile, as coming of dastardy, not daring to speak
plainly and openly, and therefore hateful and worthy of punishment, not only
in such persons of honor, Aug. l. de Mendacio c. 7. and 8.
but also in slaves, says a certain Paynim with good reason. The holy
Doctors, and namely S. Augustine do think, that it is in no sort lawful for
any man, not only to tell a lie against the good of their Neighbor, or the
honor of Religion, but not the least that may be, not for recreation, nor
profit, nor any thing in the world; for that action or word cannot be virtuous,
which is done, or said against the truth of God, or with hurt of our
conscience: of which discourse he shall aid himself to make a full purpose,
never to lie, and so shall retire himself.

The thirteenth Day. A Meditation upon the ninth, and tenth Commandments: Thou
shall not covet thy Neighbors wife. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors house,
Exodus 20.17.
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his. CHAP. XXIX.
THESE two Commandments shall be the matter of Meditation for the thirtenth
day: The beginning shall be as before.

In the first point the Pilgrim shall consider, how these two Commandments do
indirectly respect all the former, but directly the sixth, which forbids
adultery, and the seventh which prohibiteth theft, so that those do bind the
will, hands, and feet, that we neither consent nor proceed to the outward
execution of the sin; S. Thom. 1. 2. q. 77. art. 5. and 2. 2. qu. 122. art. 6.
but these two do command the will to rule the concupiscence, and desires of
the sense, that they incline not to Couetise, nor retain any cogitation of
what is not lawful to do: by these is forbidden the deed, and the will of the
deed, and by these is forbidden in general, to embrace any unlawful desire,
of revenge, of harm, or the like, and in especial not to see, or hear any
sensuality, or carnal thought with delight or pleasure, nor admit any
unlawful desire of other men's goods; for such cogitation, retained with
liking, and consent is a sin, although we pass no further, or have no will
to put it in execution; even as he, that of bravery, or lightness of heart should
receive malefactors, willingly see them and make them good cheer, is
entangled in their crime, although he be not, nor would be, either counselor,
or cooperatour to their offense.

For the second point, he shall note, that this prohibition of carnal desire
extends it self to that which may cause it also, as to eating and drinking
disordinatly, Il thoghtes forbidden and all that may cause the^
which are near and next causes of adultery; vain and superfluous attire,
wanton books, lascivious pictures, curious sightes, and such other baits,
whereof we have spoken before.

For the third point he shall consider, that carnal thoughts not consented
unto, but rather resisted, and rejected, are not only no sin, but also matter
of merit, and therefore the devout soul must not be dismayed, when she feels
against her will those thorns of her flesh; as the Apostle when he said: I
know that in me (that is in my flesh) there dwells no good: Romans 7.
I see another law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and
making me captive to the law of sin, which is in my members. The corruption
of his flesh made his members rebel, and made war against him, but he
resisted and won the victory over his rebels: he would gladly have been
altogether delivered from them; but they will bear us company as long as we
live here: These are the thorns and thistles of our cursed earth, friends to
our enemy, from which we cannot be altogether exempt in this life. It is
reserved for the next, Genesis 3.17
where without all rebellion our soul shall rule and reign in her body, in
pure and plentiful peace: and therefore she must not loose courage, if she be
assailed, but rather rejoice that she may with the grace of God overcome all
assaults, if not without any pricking, yet without any deadly or mortal wound,
and of these briers, to erect monuments and trophies, of virtues and gain a
crown of eternal glory by the victory.

The speech shall be to Jesus Christ in these words: A prayer to Jesus Christ.
Here it is, O Redeemer of my soul, that I have need of thy help, valiantly
to fight, my self against my self, and to get a goodly victory over my self,
by resisting and ouercoming my own flesh. If thy strength will assist, I am
strong enough with my weakness to go conqueror from the combat, therewith I
shall be master over all couetise, and be a faithful obseruer of this thy
Commandment, neither shall any enemy stand in my hands, but I shall tread
them under my feet. My sweet Jesus, my Lord, my hope, and my strength, thou
made thy self little and weak, to make us great and strong; reach thy hand
to thy poor servant, help and rectify my crookednes, rule and direct my senses
and cogitations according to the purity and right of thy holy law, that my
looks, and my love may level at nothing, but thy beauty; my ears to thy
words, and my hands to thy commandments, that nothing may settle in my soul,
but for the desire of thy glory, and for sorrow of my sins; that my appetite
and couetise be not of the flesh, but of the spirit, not of earth but of
heaven; and that I may sooner give to my Neighbor of my own, then unjustly
desire any thing that is his; that my heart may be full of thee, and empty of
all the rest; for all besides thee, cannot content me, thou art the only center
of my soul, the All of my nothing, and the heap of my happiness.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the thirteenth days Journey. The Decalogue
is a spring, or branch of the law of Nature. CHAP. XXX.
THE Pilgrim having now run over all the ten Commandementes in particular,
in the afternoon returning, as it were, to the whole, and entire subject,
shall shut up his circle, resuming the compass and contents of the Decalogue
in general, discoursing upon those three instructions, which the Christian and
Hebrew Doctors have noted.

The Decalogue is of the law of nature.
The first is, that these ten Commandments are conclusions and branches of the
law of nature. This law is a natural light given by God, teaching certain
general maxims, out of which do rise as out of roots, certain documents
like little springs or branches. One of these Maxims is: We must do good,
Psalm. 33. and 36. 1. Pet. 3. Romans 12. Math. 7.12. Luc. 6.31.
and fly evil. A maxim marked by David, when he said: ^^rne from evil, and
do good. And afterward by S. Peter, and S. Paul. Also: we must do unto others,
as we would be done unto our selves; and not to do unto others, what we would
not have done unto us. A maxim expounded by Jesus Christ in these terms: All
that you would have men do unto you, do you the like unto them; for this is
the law, and the Prophets. Also: We must soueraignly love him that is all
goodness; soueraignely fear him, that is Almighty; Conclusions out of Nature
soueraignely respect him, who is all wisdom. Out of which principles, and
maxims, are deduced a^ the foresaid Commandments, as conclusions and decrees
recorded in the register of nature, to wit, that we must love God with all our
heart, serve him and not offend him, that we must love our Neighbor, and do
him no wrong, neither in body, goods, nor credit, nor desire unjustly any
thing that is his. All these were hidden in the foresaid Maxims, neither had
there been need of another law, had man's sight remained sound and clear, and
that natural light had not been darkened in him. But seeing that by the
corruption of men, their understanding was weakened, and the whole order of
their moral actions confounded, therefore God would help them by the Law of the
ten Commandments, set a part, and brought in evidence out of the treasure of
Nature, almost buried and forgotten.

The second instruction is, All laws referred to the Decalog and the law of
Nature.
that as these ten Articles are co^clusions out of the general maxims of
nature, so are they also as ten general springs of all other particular laws,
as well of the Jews heretofore, as now of Christians; neither is there any
law at this day, either in Civil or Canon law, which is not referred to one of
these ten. The Jews drew six hundred and thirteen Commandments, whereof two
hundred and forty eight were affirmative, 613. Commandments drawn out of the
decalog.
which as Physicians do say, is the number of the bones in a man's body; and
three hundred and sixty five negative, which is the number of the sinews, and
ligatures in the same body, as also of the days in the year. The affirmative
were such: We must believe in God; and that he is one; and we must love him
with all our heart; we must instruct our children in the Law of God; we must
scare him; The bones of man's body 248. the sinews and bindings 365.
we must say grace after dinner, and such other written in their books. The
negative are such: No Idol must be suffered among the people; No Sorcerer
suffered; No stranger admitted to the Temple; No man to wear woman's apparel,
no woman to wear man's. And such others to be found in their foresaid books.
Their Rabbis philosophating upon this number, say that the faculties of the
soul signified by the bones, The faculties of the soul signified by the bones.
which we said were 248. and their accord and agreement signified by the
sinews and bindings which we said were 365. are perfected by all these 613.
Commandments to make a man strong and constant in the service of God: they add
also that the 17. first verses, which comprehend the Catalogue, The accord by
the sinnewes.
contain so many letters as be their Commandments affirmative and negative
together, to wit 613. but indeed there are 34. letters more.

For the third, and last instruction, the Pilgrim shall remember the words of
S. Augustine, who speaking of the Decalogue, There be 647 letters which is 34.
more then 613.
says in Psalm. 32. Con. 1. The Commandments of the law are ten. In the ten
Commandments thou have the Psalter of ten stringes: This is a perfect work:
There thou see the love of God expressed in three: God speaks aloud. The
Lord thy God is one God: Behold one stringe. Take not the name of God in
vain: Behold another. Sanctify the Saboth: Behold the third. Honor thy
Father and Mother: Aug. in Psalm. 31.
and strike the rest aloud. Play upon this Harp, and perform this law which
our Savior came to fulfill, teaching thee to perform it, not with fear, but
with love. And having well considered these things, he shall in the evening
sing with mouth or heart these words of David: O Lord, I will sing a new song,
I will sing unto thee upon my Harp, and instrument of ten stringes. Or else he
may sing the Canticle following.

A Canticle of the Decalogue.
My Lute and Harp let us sound aloud,
Upon the air of thy ten stringes,
A holy song of joy and praise,
Unto the maker of all things.
These ten stringes so sweet and shrill,
Do represent in mystery,
One God the giver of these laws,
His wisdom, and their harmony.
The highest string does bear the base,
And that which it low'st of all,
Does sound the trebble, giving grace
Of concord with the mean, and small.
The first, and foremost of the Ten
Of all the rest is the only ground,
In it, as in the grave and base,
All the other nine do sound.
The last which unto carnal thoughts
Gives bridle, but, and bound,
Is called the little trebble string,
Low in place, but high in sound.
Such clear voices, with clean hearts,
Beset with works of sanctity,
Wrought by level of his Laws,
Fly aloft, and pierce the sky*
Then heart and Harp sound we always
The ten strings of this Instrument,
To praise the sovereign supreme God,
And to his laws, and love consent.
And having ended his journey, and shut up the day with thanks giving, he
shall take his lodging and rest.

The fourtenth day. Of the Evangelical Counsels, and of Grace gratuite, and
making grateful; and of the effects thereof. CHAP. XXXI.
IN the law of grace, besides the ten Commandments given to the Jews, and
common to all the children of God, 1. Cor. 7. Matthew. 19 Luc. 10. Aug. 61. de
temp. Ambr. ep. 28. ad Eccles. Hier. l. 1. adu. Iouin. and ep. 22. ad ^usto^.
there be also some other instructions and doctrines, which the Christian
Church calls, Evangelical Counsels; because they are not commandments of
necessity to be kept, as those the Pilgrim has hitherto meditated upon; but
aduices of perfection, which every one may choose without constraint, to attend
more worthily, and with more facility to the service of the divine Majesty, in
following more nearly Jesus Christ, who by work and word has thereunto
invited his Apostles and Disciples, and in their persons, all those that have
generous and noble hearts, and the sinews of their souls strong to undertake,
and perform a life more perfect in following his steps.

The Pilgrim then in the end of his second week, shall make his Meditation of
this matter, as the perfection of the Commandments, adding some other points,
as well concerning the Commandments, as the Counsels.

The preparation shall be as before.

Math. 19.
In the first point he shall mark, that these counsels left by Jesus christ are
three principal. The first, to leave all goods, dignities, honors of the
world for the honor of God, which is performed by the vow of Poverty.

Ibid.
The second, to make deadly war with all bodily pleasures, even such as are
lawful, and for this end is made the vow of Chastity.

Math. 16. Luc. 9.
The third, to renounce our proper will, and to sacrifice it upon the Altar of
God, by the vow of Obedience.

In the second point he shall note, that for the performance as well of the
Commandments, as of the Counsels, God gives his grace, The grace of God the
general means to keep the Comma^dements.
and all necessary virtues. And as having made the world for the sustenance of
his Creatures, he has withal given them natural industry to seek for it,
and proper and fit instruments to practice, and use their industry; to the
bird, his wings and beak to fly; to the fish, his sins and bones as oars
to swim, and force for fishing; to beasts, claws and teeth for hunting. In
like sort giving to man the Commandments of life everlasting, he has also
given him means to practice the one, to the end, to gain the other.

S. Thom. 1.2. qu. 111. art. 16.
This means is Grace, not only that which Deuines call, Grace that makes
grateful, but also the other called, Grace gratuite, which is indeed, a favor
of God, but of it self makes him not absolutely good who has it, such as are
Eloquence, Prophecy, discerning of spirits, gifts of healing, and such like
presents and gifts from heaven common to the good and bad, which S. Paul
comprehends in few words, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians: They are
both given freely, but the first is called Grace making grateful, for the
noble effect thereof, 1. Cor. 12.
which is to justify by remission of sins, and to make him that possesses
it, the friend of God, whose singular spiritual gift it is, and
supernatural; a divine quality, Effects of grace to justify and adorn the
soul.
which infused into the soul cleanses from all filth, makes it just, and by
those supernatural virtues she brings with her, does beautify her in all her
faculties, enlighteneth the understanding, rectifieth the will, fortifieth the
memory, quenches concupiscence, and finally driu^th out all, that may
displease the eyes of that sovereign beauty, and furnishes her with all
virtues (as it were with heavenly dressings and attires) that might worthily
adorn her, as a spouse decked with her marriage garment and jewels, as S. John
speaks, Apoc. 21.2.
and so makes her every way gracious to her espouse and Creator. Now then as
God produces in nature food and corporal sustenance by natural causes, as
Fishes, by the water; apples, by the aple-trees; Figs, by fig trees, and so
other effects by their proper causes; in like sort does he give in his Church
his graces by the Sacraments, as by supernatural causes, Sacraments vessels
and instruments of this grace, containing it as the cause does the effect.
which are therefore called, vessels and instruments of grace, which they
contain, as the cause co^teyneth the effect; as the Sun heat, the
cherry-tree cherryes, and so in others. And these be seven, all which have
this in common, to power the grace of God into the soul, or to increase and
augment it; and besides every one produces his particular fruit and effect.
Baptism, giving us faith, makes the spiritual birth or regeneration, and
places a man in the number of the children of God. Confirmation gives
increase of heavenly strength, courageously to confess the same faith, and the
name of Jesus Christ. The Eucharist is ordained for the food of the soul, to
keep it in good case, to preserve it from evil, and to put in the body the
seed of a glorious resurrection. Penance is a medicine against sin, physike
for the soul, and a reconciliation thereof with God. Marriage is for the
comfort of the married, and for the holiness of corporal generation. Order is for
the lawful creation and multiplication of Priests, Officers in the house of
God. Extreme unction is for necessary armor and defense in the last conflict
of this life.

The third shall consider, that this grace on one side brings with it, as we
have said, This grace ^a^s with it al virtues.
the ornaments and riches of all the most goodly virtues even as the heavenly
river that flowed out of earthly Paradise, carrying in her course and stream,
sands of most fine gold, and many sorts of precious stones, wherewith it
enriched the land it watered: and on the other side, it puts force and vigor
to the virtues, Genesis 2 11
which finding themselves in a sullied soul, are in a manner dead, without
fructifying to life everlasting. It gives faith to those that have it not, as
in Baptism, and quickens their faith who have it but dead, as to Christians
in mortal sin, whom she calls to a better course, cleansing their sin
by the Sacrament of Penance: she gives hope to them that want it, and
fortifyeth them that have it weakly; she gives charity, or rather is charity
her self, the most precious pearl, that is in the treasury of the holy Ghost,
a virtue above all other most acceptable to God, and making the soul acceptable
to him. These three virtues are called Theological, The virtues Theological.
Why so called.
because they have God (Theon) as their first and direct object, they speak of
him as of their proper subject, and do most nearly concern his service; for by
them we believe in him, hope in him, and love him, and honor him, as our
sovereign Lord according to his law, as we have said else where.

The same Grace gives, or perfecteth the other virtues, called Moral, The
virtues Cardinal.
whereof some be called Cardinall-vertues, for being the principal spring of
diverse others, and they are four. Prudence, that makes us advised in our
actions, to the end, not to deceive our selves, or our Neighbor. Justice, that
teaches us to give every one his own. Temperence, which is the bridle of our
desires, and appetites. And Fortitude, which gives our soul courage, to
sustain any dangerous encounter, and valiantly to expose her self to death,
for the honor of God, and our own salvation, or our Neighbors: and out of
these four springs do arise, Diligence, Liberality, of Humility, The daughters
of the Cardinal virtues.
Religion, Piety, Chastity, and other qualityes, which she gives, either
altogether, or else does perfect the^, and adorn them, as that Queen was
adorned, of whom David song in these words: The Queen stood on thy right
hand, clothed in garments of gold, Psalm. 44.10.
compassed about with variety. This Queen is the devout Soul: the gold is the
grace of God, and this variety are the sundry, and diverse virtues and graces,
wherewith she is garnished, as the body with precious attires of sundry stuffes
and fashions.

The fourth and fifth points of the precedent Meditation. The seven guiftes
of the Holy Ghost, and the eight Beatitudes. CHAP. XXXII.
THE fourth point shall consider, how further to purify these foresaid virtues,
and to raise the praise of them by some particular quality God has joined unto
them the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Wisdom, Understanding, Counsel,
Fortitude, Knowledge, Piety, and the Fear of God. Esa. 11. Hier. 16. Amb. c.
20 Aug. 209. de temp. and 17. de Sanctis.


By Wisdom, we do perfectly know our end, and constantly do direct all our
actions to the glory of God. By Understanding, we are elevated to the
understanding of the mysteryes of our faith. Counsel, causes us to take good,
assured advice against the crafts and subtiltyes of the Devil, to make us
resist and prevent them. Knowledge, shows us most lively the will of God: as
Fortitude gives us strength to execute it. Piety, makes us specially devout
and obedient. Fear, is as a faithful Schoole-maister, keeping us from sin.
Wisdom, which is the first gift, eleuateth us to God, Aug. 209. de temp.
and Fear, which is the last, does depresse and humble us in our selves for
God, says S. Augustine: and by this counterpoise our soul is kept in an even
estate of justice.

But because the hope of reward, has a great force to excite men to good, The
Beatitudes baits for virtues.
in the fifth point shall be noted how our Savior has left us those heavenly
lessons of his sermon in the mountain, composed of eight Maxims of heavenly
Philosophy, putting to every one his price of the same height and valor,
though of diverse names and sorts, to the end by this heavenly bayte to draw us
to the observation of his Commanments and Counsels, and to the getting and
practicing of the foresaid virtues and gifts of the Holy Ghost. These eight
Maxims are eight aduertisements called Beatitudes, for that each one carries
in his forehead the name, and promise of Beatitude, and gives it at the last
to every one in his rank and order.

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit, Math. 5.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 2. Blessed are the meek, for they shall
possess the earth. 3. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. 4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for justice, for they
shall be satisfied. 5. Blessed are the merciful* for they shall obtain mercy.
6. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God. 7. Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the Sons of God. 8. Blessed are they
that suffer persecution for Justice, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.
The speech shall be made by thanksgiving, and request in this sort. O my
Creator, and sovereign Redeemer, my understanding is too small to conceive
the greatness of thy liberality, and my tongue insufficient worthily to thank
thee for the thousand part of thy benefits; nor all my parts, although they
could all speak with the tongues of Angels: I thank thee notwithstanding,
from the bottom of my heart, and with the best accent of my language that my
mouth can utter: the confession of my insufficiency, is a faithful and clear
witness of thy great bounty. Thou have dictated to me thy laws, to direct my
feet into the way of thy iustifications, the path of heaven. Thou have left me
thy heavenly counsels, to make me a good scholar in the school of
perfection, and to make me capable of greater glory in thy great day. Thou have
left me a thousand means of thy grace, of thy virtues, of the gifts of thy
holy Spirit, a thousand baits and allurements of thy liberal promises, to
keep and accomplish easily, consta^tly and courageously, all that thou have
commanded and counseled. What could thou do more, O my King, for thy poor
vassal? And what can I now do, but confess that I am overwhelmed with thy
benefits, and confounded for not having performed my duty, whereto I was bound
by so many titles? What? But beseech thy Majesty, by thine own great name, by
the great merit of thy only Son my Redeemer, that it would please thee to
continue always to be liberal in my behalf, and give me grace abundant and
effectual, that I be no more ungrateful unto thee, but a thankful child,
serving thee with all my heart in this mortal life, to the end, I may praise
thee for ever in the life to come.

The after-dinner, and Evening of the fourteenth days Journey. The Counsels
d^ facili^ate, and make easy the observation of the Command^ments. CHAP. XXXIII.
THE after dinner shall pass in repeating some points of the morning
m^di^^tion, The counsels do facilitate the Commandments.
namely of the Counsels of our Savior. There the Pilgrim shall observe, how
the Counsels are more high in dignity of action, th^n the Commandments are,
and yet notwithstanding they help to perform them the better. As for example,
none can more easily and exactly perform the first three Commandments, more
easily and holily adore God, hallow his Name, sanctify his Feasts, then he
that forsakes all things to serve him with all his heart, offe ing himself an
holocaust to the divine majesty. None do more easily honor Father and Mother,
less iniure their Neighbors in body and goods, then he that loves all with a
perfect love, and acknowledges in all, the Image of God, that prays for all,
desires heaven to all, that employeth himselself to all, that has left the
use and right of all pleasure, and taken his leave of all earthly desires, not
caring but for heaven: Counsels like wheels.
so that these counsels are as the wheels of a Cart, where though the drawing
of the wheels do increase the weight, yet it makes the drawing more easy to
the horses.

He may also entertain himself in the meditation of some of the Beatitudes,
and therein behold the practice of the Son of God, of his glorious Mother, and
of other Saints, The glorious Virgin perfect in virtue above all Saints.
who have been markeable in poverty of spirit, that is, in voluntary poverty,
and vowed to God for devotion, in mildness, and meeknes, in cleanesse of
heart; and in all he shall see that glorious Lady holds the highest place of
perfection. When night is come he shall give special thanks to God, and to
this holy Virgin his Advocate, that he has happily ended the second week of
his way, and so he shall end his days journey and retire himself to his rest.

The fifteenth day. A Meditation upon Good works. CHAP. XXXIV.
IN the morning of this fifteenth day, the Pilgrim shall make his meditation
upon Good Works, as order requires; for after the Commandments, Counsels,
Grace, Virtues, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are given, and reward promised for
working well, does very fitly follow these meditations that have been made of
all them. The beginning shall be as before.

All the Bible exhorts to good-works.
The first point shall be to meditate, how as well the old Testament as the new
every where exhorts man to do well, and to abstain from evil, showing him
that to that end God made him, placing him as soon as he was made in Paradise,
to keep and labor it, with a law of obedience, not to touch the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil; and to the same end after his fall, Genesis 2.15
giving his commandments, with promise of reward to those that should keep
them, and punishment to the transgressors, Genesis 17.
who shall give themselus to vice: therefore it is that he showed himself to
accept the sacrifice of Abel, and checked Cain for hypocrisy, Genesis 4.4.
and after speaking to Abraham Father of his people: Walk (says he) before
me, and be perfect: I will make my covenant with thee, Genesis 15.
and I will multiply thee exceedingly. Walk, that is, do well, and I will give
thee a rich reward of thy fidelity, and good works, and as he said a little
before, I am thy reward too-to great. The last judgment shall be upon our
works.


In the new Testament, there is nothing oftener or more earnestly recommended
unto us then good works. All the sermons of our Savior are founded upon this
Theme, and in one of them he foretells, that at his great day, at the shuting
up of the world, he will judge men for their good or bad works, Matt. 10.42.
to eternal glory, or confusion; and in one place he promises reward even
unto a cupp of cold water given for his sake showing that he will leave
nothing, though never so small without recompense, Romans 2.10. Matt. 25. Apoc.
22.12.
so careful he is to encourage us to do well. His Apostles and servants, S.
Paul S. John and others have spoken in like sort, preaching always, that God
will render unto every man according to his works, and living agreeably to
their preaching. How good works merit paradise.


The second shall note, that good works measured by the foot of bare nature,
without any other quality, and as an effect only of free will, do not merit
eternal glory, a limited action having no proportion to a recompense of an
infinite value: but being considered not in it self, but as grafted in heavenly
grace, and the infinite vigor of the holy Ghost dwelling in the soul, giving
it the right of adoption toward God, by the merits of Jesus Christ, The
wonderful beginning o^ birth of natural things.
it contains in this respect the price of everlasting glory. And as we see in
nature a little lively seed to contain in it a hidden virtue, and force to
bring forth a great tree, and fruit without number; as for example, a little
nut incloseth in the seed, a Nut-tree, and millions of Nuttes, and as many
trees by succession for ever after; so in a supernatural sort, the action of
moral virtues quickened by the grace of God, carries a title, and seed of the
kingdom of heaven; this is a marvelous strength and virtue, Prosper. in Psalm.
111.
and it is also from God: whereupon S. Prosper says: What can be found more
strong and puissant, then this seed, by the growth and filling whereof is gained
the k ngdome of Heaven? We know also that inheritance is due by justice to
adoptiue children, in like sort is the inheritance of heaven due to the
Christian that serves his heavenly Father with the Charity and love of a true
child: And in title of this grace and adoption, God promises felicity to his
children, and by his promise binds himself in justice, to give unto their
virtue the reward of life everlasting: 2. Tim. 48
and therefore S. Paul says confidently: I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, for the rest there is reserved for
me a Crown of justice, which our Lord the just Judge shall render to me at
that day, and not only to me, but to all that love his coming. He would say, I
have done good works, How ^od binds himself by his promise.
and by them deserved a crown, which God has promised to all those that serve
him, and therefore I expect it as a thing due from his hand, who gave me the
grace to work well, and who by his promise is bound to crown my works, and
all that serve him. And elsewhere speaking of the adoption of the children of
God? If we be sons (says he) then heirs, that is, Romans 8.
by right of adoption we have heaven for well doing. Now God had given this
right and grace freely to Adam, and he having lost it by his own fault, the
Messiah, that is the son of God Jesus Christ, How Jesus has recovered what
Adam lost
was promised, to recover him, and his posterity, who at last coming into the
world, and being made Man, has meritted by his Passion, in favor and behalf
of all men, his brethren, past, present, and to come, wherewith their works
are made living works, and in justice meritorious of life everlasting, Jesus
the root of al merit.
if they be lively members of their head and Redeemer. Therefore in the first
fountain, that is, by the merit of Jesus Christ, we merit life everlasting and
our recompense, which is the glory of the goodness and justice of God: and such
as say, that our merits do derogate from the honor of God, are ignorant of the
law of God, and of the virtue of our Savior, and injurious to the same God
himself, and to the merit of the same Savior.

The idle person is worse the^ the beast
The third point shall consider, how he that does no good works, does abase his
own dignity under the unreasonable, and insensible creatures, al which do
work according to their power. The heavens do compass the earth, and make it
fertile with their influence; the sun and stars do shi^^; the beasts,
plants, elements, cease not to move and labor; and all the parts of the
universal world are in perpetual Action; and employ themselves without rest to
the end to which their Creator made them. If the idle be punished how much
more the ill occupied.
That man therefore who stands idle is a monster amongst insensible
Creatures, having so good helps above them, and the promise of eternal
felicity which they have not; if he labor not, nor serves the master that
made him to wo^ke and serve him, is worthy of eternal misery and confusion,
although he should do none other ill; but what death deser^eth he, that, not
only does no good, but also commits sins witho^t number?

The prayer.
The speech shall be to God, upon the misery of man, and shall beg grace to
attend to good and holy Actions, to his service in these or like terms. O Lord
of Angels and men, what shall I ^ay after this m^ditation of thy works, and
the works of men? Upon thy laws, and their loyalty and obedience? What shall
should sa^ in my prayer of the m^s^^y of man, and of thy greatness? Of his
ingratitude and thy libera^ity? Of my poverty, and thy strength and virtue?
Thou have made man, O Lord, that is chief Captain of all thy other corporal
creatures, to thine own image, and likeness, furnished and coupled his nature
with an immortal soul, with an understanding, and freewill, two noble
instruments to do noble actions, and highly to praise thee in them. I contrary
wise for getting my self, and my degree, only amongst all creatures have
ceased to do well, and have been compared unto bruit beasts, Psalm. 48.13.
and made like unto them, yea and worse also. The constancy of al creatures to
do well, but of man.
For they not only are not idle in that occupation and trade thou have taught
them, but work continually, according to their law and order, and wanting
reason do follow reason. But my self a reasonable creature, remain idle
against reason (one piece and part of my life) or do works contrary unto
reason. Other creatures have received thy commandment but once, to do that
which they do, and they have continually discharged their duty unto this
present. But I having read and heard thy will a hundred times, thy promises,
thy menacings, do sleep and slumber notwithstanding, wretch and benumbed that I
am: and when I do wake, my works are worse then sleep, and idleness. O Maker,
and Redeemer of man, reform this same man, by the same power and mercy,
wherewith thou have created and redeemed him. Give unto him, give unto me, O my
Lord, as to the most weak and needy, strength and means, well and holily to
employ what thou have given me; that my Understanding, Will, Memory, my whole
soul and body may be in perpetual action, to bring forth works of life, to
the praise and glory of thy holy name.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the fifteenth days Journey. Markeable
documents and instructions for Good works. CHAP. XXXV.
AFTER dinner, and at night the Pilgrim shall for his spiritual occupation
discourse upon the most markeable sentences of Scriptures and Saints, spoken to
show that only faith suffices not for salvation, The Talents Matthew. 25.16.
without good works. The parable of the Talents holds the first place in
this doctrine; for thereby our Savior does plainly instruct us, and with
authority, that we must negociate in the house of God, and put the money of his
graces to profit and usury, which to that end he put into our hands, with the
condition of a good reward, if we be diligent and obedient, or of punishment
and confusion, The workman. Matt. ^0.
if we be slothful. Also the parable of the workmen sent to work in the
Farmers vineyard, paid at night for their days labor. Also the counsel which
our Savior gave to the young man, saying: If thou will have life everlasting
keep my Commandments. Matt. 19.17.
Also those words: He shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, who does the
will of my Father, and not every one that says: Matt. 7.21
Lord, Lord. But especially he shall weigh the clause of that general decree
which shall be published at the last day in favor of good works against the
slothful. Romans 2.13.
Come my wellbeloued, Iac. 1.22. Matt. 25.34. Iac. 2.
possess the kingdom which is prepared for you from the Creation of the
world: I was hungry and you gave me to eat etc. And thereunto he shall add the
plain saying of S. James: What shall it profit, my brethren, if any man says,
he has faith, without works, shall his faith save him? And S. Gregory
Nazianzen: Do good works upon the ground of thy instructions; for faith
without works is dead, Isa 26.
as also works live not without faith. And Saint Hierome upon these words of
Esaias 26. Our city is a fortress, salvation shall there be put, for the inward
wall and outw^rd: By the inward wall (says he) is meant good works, and by
the other, faith; for it is not enough to the outward wall of Faith, unless this
faith be grounded and sustained by good works. These works are Prayer, The
principal good works.
Fasting, Alms, and other works of charity, which we spoke of before in the
afternoon of the eight day. In these and the like discourses, shall the
Pilgrim pass the after-dinner, thereby stirring himself to the love and
practice of Christian works. In the evening either alone or with others, he
may sing this Canticle that follows to shut up the evening with joy and
profit.

A Canticle of good Works.
The pious Pilgrim that does walk
Unto the Chapel of Loret,
Must work with hand his sovereigns works,
And keep his soul still pure and nett.
To hear alone, and not perform
The law of God, does work no meed.
To know the way, and not to walk,
Nothing does our journey speed,
The tree that brings nothing else
But leaves and breathing verdure,
Is fit for fire and not for fruit,
And does greet wrong to nature.
Our Savior chief, and iustest Judge,
The fruitless Fig Tree struck with curse,
If man in vain does wast his days,
Shall he not blame, and strike him worse?
How hot shall then be his revenge,
To those that nothing else do bring,
But poisoned grapes, and fruits of death:
Of sin and shame, and else nothing?
Each thing does work, and nothing sleeps,
In Earth, in Sea, in Heaven above,
Each thing does move in his degree,
Man's end is God to know and love.
Then these short days of this short life,
Let be in virtuous works well spent,
That last long day shall all works try
When each shall b' either crowned, or shent.
And having made his particular prayer to the Blessed Virgin, he shall take
himself to his lodging in good time, not to be surprised by night in the
fields.

The sixteenth day. A Meditation of sin. CHAP. XXXVI.
THE morning Meditation shall be upon sin, an actio^ opposite to good works,
which were the matter of the precedent meditation. This order shall make a fit
opposition of virtue to vice, The opposition of vice to virtue.
and by setting their faces one against another, we may better discern the
beauty of the one to love it, and the foulnes of the other to hate it.

What sin is.
The first point shall put the definition of sin, the better to know, both the
corpse and countenance, and duly to meditate of the foulnes thereof: Sin
(says S. Ambrose) is a straying from the law of God, and a disobedience to the
heavenly Commandm^nts. Ambr. de Poenit c. 8. Aug l. 22. cont. Faust c. 27 l 1.
cont. ep. 1. Pe^il 113.
By S. Augustine, it is, What is said, done, or desired against the law of God:
so that one word spoken, one deed done, one thought conceived against the law
of God, that is, against any of his commandments, is a sin great or small,
mortal or venial, according to the diverse motion of the will, sinning either
with full consent, or by some light motion, or sudden surprise, and according
to the great or small importance of the thing, and other circumstances. Of
which definitions he shall learn, that there is nothing so foul, and deformed
as sin. For what can be found more monstrous, then that which is opposite to
the law, and rule of the highest wisdom, beauty, and goodness?

The second point shall consider two sorts of sins, Original, and Actual,
and this mortal and venial. Original sin, Aug. ench. 164.
is that spot which flowed from the sin of Adam, wherewith all men are stained
in their conception, and beginning, and is cleansed by faith in the Messiah,
and certain ceremonies in the law of nature and Moses; Conc. Tri. sess. 5.
and after the coming of the Messiah, by the faith of the same professed in
Baptism, by the which we are made children of God, as by a second spiritual
birth and generation. Actual mortal sin.
Actual, is that which man commits by his own free will and work, which
if it be grievous that is committed in any important matter, with deliberate
will, and full consent, is called Mortal, because it bereaueth the sinner of
the grace of God, which is the life of his soul, and makes it guilty of death
everlasting, called by s. John, The second death. 2. Cor. 6. Gal. 5. Apo. 21.
Romans 6. Apoc. 21. Romans 6.
And by S. Paul, The reward of sin. Such a sin was the pride of the first
Angel, and his Accomplices, made Devils thereby. Such a sin was the
disobedience of Adam, Actual in himself, and Original to all his children.
If the Actual sin be not grievous, that is, if it be committed in a small
matter, without full consent, as an idle word, a light negligence, an evil
thought, a foul motion, without any stayed consent, it is that we call
Venial, of the Latin word Venia, which signifies Pardon, because it is easily
pardonable, not making man enemy to God, and for defacing whereof, no Sacrament
is necessary, as it is for mortal. Notwithstanding we must keep our selves, as
far from it as we can, for that it cools and quenches charity, and
christian devotion, and makes way for mortal, and it is well done to confess
them daily, both to purge them, and to prevent them. Aug. ser. de Sanctis 41.
epist. 19. Conc. Tri. sess. 14. c. 5.
Now this distinction taught by the Catholic Church, as we learn in the
Council of Trent, and the ancient Doctors, and namely S. Augustine, may be
understood by a similitude in the body. For as there be certain diseases and
wounds deadly of their own nature, as the Plurisie, the hot ague, the wounds
of the brain, heart, or the like; and others are not so, as the tertian ague,
and quartaine, the Migrame, Moratll wounds or diseases.
and other wounds or blows on the less vital and noble parts of the body,
which are small and healed soon; so it happens to the soul, the diseases
and wou^des whereof are vices, and sins, which if they deprive it of the
Grace of God, are mortal maladies, Sin the wound of the soul.
and deadly wounds, and is mortal sin; if they do not deprive him thereof,
but alter a little the harmony of his peace with God, these are light diseases,
and are venial sins.

The third point shall ponder, how sin begins by suggestion, grows by
delectation, and is perfected by consent. By suggestion of the devil, the
world, or the flesh, some of these three enemies casting into our mind some
object contrary to the law of God: to which suggestion suc^edeth a pleasing
and lyking of the sense, willingly beholding the object, as Eve was delighted
to see the forbidden fruit. To pleasure succeeds Consent, and to consent the
execution and consummation of the sin: So Eve after she had received the
suggestion of the Serpent, cheapening it at the sight, The steps of sin unto
the depth.
and giving her heart to delight thereon, she reached her hand to the execution,
and bit of the apple, and took that morsel that infected all the race of
mankind: Behold here (say our Doctors) the linkes, Gre. l. 4. mora. c. 25
Isido. l 1. de sum^o bo^^. c. 23 Psalm. 118. 2. Reg. 22. Prouer. 5. Aug. l. 8.
contest c. 5 Greg. l. 25 moral c. 12
and rings of this strong chain of sin. Of suggestion comes thought, of
thought pleasure, of pleasure consent, of consent the work, of the work
custom, of custom despair, of despair defense of ill, of defense boasting
of boasting damnation. This is the chain which that old Tyrant made of the
work, whereof himself was author, that is of sin: these are the cords and
boltes wherewith he fettereth the poor sinner, and in fine does cast him
hedlong bound hand and foot into the shipwreck of eternal damnation,

In the speech the Pilgrim shall desire of God grace to avoid sin, and shall
say: O infinite bounty, keep me from sin if it please thee, The speech.
and preserve me from any alliance with that abortiue impe so monstrous and
infected. Let death armed with all sorts of torments pull my soul out of my
body, rather than I should consent to any sin, though never so small against
thy holy Law, O sweet Jesus, and infinite bounty, how should I offend thee being
so mild, good, and bountiful? Chaste Joseph said to his Mistress who
solicited him to unchaste loves: How can I commit so great an offense against
my Master, of whom I have received so many benefits? How can I then sin
against thee, O my Master, and souueraigne Lord, seeing thou have bound me
with many better titles, by so many favors and promises? Seeing thou have
bought me not with gold, or silver, or any corruptible price, but with the
ransom of thy most precious blood, how can I then offend thee?

O glorious virgin Mother of the Allmighty, and who by special privilege from
his Omnipotency wast preserved from all spot in thy Conception and Birth, To
the B. Virgin
and in all thy actions, and wast preserved all pure, and beautified, enriched
and adorned with a thousand virtues, help thy poor Pilgrim with thy credit
and grace, and procure me pardon of my sins passed, and effectual grace for
hereafter to remain without stayne of any sin, even venial, if it may be by
the grace of thy Son. Let mine eyes be enlightened with the heavenly beams,
that they may never slumber into this deadly sleep, and that mine enemy may
never say: Psalm 124.
I have prevailed against him. This gift, O happy virgin, will redound to the
glory of the Majesty of thy Son, to the health of thy wearied Pilgrim, who
honors and serves thee, and by thy assistance desires to serve with all
his soul, that Lord whom thy self adorest.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the sixteenth days Journey. Of the seven
Capital sins, commonly called Mortal, and of their Branches. CHAP. XXXVII.
IN the Afternoon, and in the rest of the day, the Pilgrim shall persist upon
the same matter, for though it be but sour to the taste, yet taken with a holy
Meditation, and digested into the stomach of the devout soul, it helps much
to deface and detest sin. He shall discourse upon the seven sins commonly
called mortal, or more properly Capital, for being the heads, and springes
of diverse others. They are, The 7. Capital sin.
Pride, Couetice, Lechery, Envy, Gluttony, Anger, Sloth; having so many
virtues opposite to encounter them, Humility, Liberality, Chastity, Charity,
Abstinence, Patience, The contrary virtues.
Devotion or Diligence.

Pride is an inordinate desire of excellency, whether it reign within the
soul only, or be manifested or discovered by words or works outwardly. This
is the King of sins, altogether abominable before God, Aug. ep. 5^. Greg.
3. Mora. 31.
and the Capital enemy of all virtue; thence as from a pestilent root do all
vices spring and take life, and especially these, Disobedience, Boasting,
Hypocrisy, Contention, Pertinacy, Discord, and Curiosity.

Couetice, is a disordinate appetit of having an insatiable thirst, making
continually more dry, the more it drinks: Basil. hom. in diuites 117.
from thence come Treason, Frauds, Deceit, perjury, Disquietnes, violence,
inhumanity, and hardness of heart.

Lechery is a disordinate appetite of pleasures of the body, she brings forth
blindness of spirit, inconsideration, Isido. l. 2. de bono. 39.
inconstancy, precipitation in affairs, se^fe love, hatred of God, greedines
of this life, fear ^n^ horror of death and judgment, and despair of life
everlasting.

Basil hom. 11. de liuore. Cir de zelo and liuore.
Envy is a sadness or grief at the good of others, and hate of their prosperity,
or good success; either of their Superiors because they cannot equal them,
or of their inferiors, in that they would not have them equals: her daughters
are, Hatred, Murmuring, Detraction, wicked Joy of the evil, and wicked Grieft
at the good of another.

Gluttony, is an inordinate desire of eating and drinking; her children are
Foolish mirth, lesting, Prating, Scurrility, Stupidity of senses, Greg. mor. 31.
and Understanding.

Anger, is a disordinate desire of revenge, of whom do rise, Debates,
Swellings, Contumelies, Clamours, Indignation, Bern. ser. de Asc.
Blasphemy.

Sloth is a languour of spirit, remiss and flow to do well, Greg. 3. part.
curae past. 10.
and a heaviness, and sadness in spiritual things: of her grows Malice,
Rancour, Pusillanimity, Despair, a loathing of necessary commandments,
Euagations.

The Pilgrim having this afternoon cast his eyes atte^tiuely upon these
bodies and branches, upon these Captains and their companies and recommending
himself in the evening with some particular prayer to God, the B. Virgin, and
his good Angel, that he may be always assisted by their aid against these
enemies, he shall look for lodging, and rest.

The seventeenth Day. Of the first sin which was of the Angels, and of the
second which was of Adam, and of their effects: and of the sins of every one
in particular, which makes the third sort. CHAP. XXXVIII.
WELL, to penetrate and discover the deformity of sin, and to conceive a du^
hatred thereof, the Pilgrim shall bestow one day in the meditation of the
effects of sin, therein clearly to see it self: for as by the fruit the tree
is known, and the workman by his work, so is the malice of sin manifest by
the evils thereof.

The sin of the Angels.
The first point, shall b^ to bring into his mind and memory the sin of the
first Angel, and his Confederates in that faction, who having been created to
the Image of God in estate of grace, and endowed with many excellent gifts of
nature, rebelling afterward against their Lord and Maker, of such noble spirits
as they were, were made Devils, and thrown headlong from heaven to hell, there
for their rebellion to suffer the torments of euer-burning flames. Whereupon
the Pilgrim using the light of his understanding, How to discourse of the sin
of Angels.
to enlighten and move his will, and to stir it up to a detestation of sin
in general, and to shame and confusion for his own in particular, shall thus
discourse. If these divine spirits, and the most goodly and glorious creatures
that were in heaven, for one only sin, were so turned and transformed from
an extreme beauty, to a monstrous foulnes and deformity; how abominable are
those who commit many? Who do nothing else? Who are plunged in their vices, as
Swine in their dirt? 2. Pet. 25
And with what filthiness have I deformed my own soul by so many as I have
committed? And if God spared not these noble Cittize^s of heaven, and servants
of his own household, but has cast them, as the Apostle says, with chains
of darkness into the dungeon of hell, reserved for that great day and general
judgment, what entertaynement may I expect at the hands of this sovereign
Judge, if I amend not my life?

The 2. point shall be appropriated to the consideration of the sin of Adam,
which is the second sin in regard of the person which is man, differing in
nature from the Angels: The sine of Adam
here the Memory shall represent to the Understanding the doleful fall of our
first Fathers, and their honorable estate changed into a miserable exile and
banishment: how Adam having been formed of dirt, and quickened with a soul,
bearing the Image and likeness of God, and Eve brought forth to the likeness of
man, of one of the sides and ribs of Adam, suffering themselves to be persuaded
by their capital enemy, did eat of the forbidden fruit, and suddenly lost the
grace and favor of their Creator, the life of the soul, and all that they
had good besides, the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Justice, Charity, their right
to heaven, and the immortality of their body. Our Pilgrim then shall behold
them as present, driven out of Paradise, clothed in beasts skins, and from
the place of pleasures and delights, cast into a country of death and
malediction, Genesis 3.2.
in which they performed a long and severe penance, that is 900. years and
more; and finally he shall consider, the great corruption, that has come from
this root, having like a general plague infected all mankind, and thrust
thousand-thousandes of persons to everlasting death; out of which
consideration, he shall draw light to discover the poison of sin, to hate and
detest it.

Every ones proper sins.
The third point shall be to meditate in himself his own faults, which is the
third sort of sin in regard of the person. Here our Pilgrim calling to
remembrance, his own enormityes shall consider, that many thousands are in
hell, that perhaps had committed but one of those sins, that he has done
himself: he shall think that many are condemned to the same hell of
everlasting death for sins, less and fewer then his are, whereby he shall
learn, how great the goodness of God is toward him, having thus patiently
expected him to penance, and how great is the malice and malignity of sin,
having moved and incited the infinite bounty so far, as to ordain pains
unspeakable for the grieuousnes of them, and eternal for the lasting to punish
it withal. With which consideration being heat and warmed, he shall speak in
his speech thus to our Savior.

The speech.
O souueraigne Lord and Redeemer of my soul, how great is the peruersity of
this monster, whose foulenes thy light has discovered to me in her effects: It
made a revolt in heaven among thy domesticalls, making them rebel against
thee. It has brought confusion and plagues to the families of Men, and has
marked them all, with her infernal brood; and her malignity was so great and
strong, that there must be an eternity of punishments to chastise it: the
infection so deadly, that the quickening, and life-giuing blood was necessary
to cleanse it. O mortal men, whereof think you, when you do the works of
death? Where is your memory, not remembering what is passed? Where is your
providence, not regarding what is to come? Where is your heart and wit, yielding
your love to so monstrous and detestable an enemy? O sweet Jesus, made man for
my sins crucified for my sins, and raised again for my justice, pardon me
my sins, which were too great to be pardoned, were not thy mercy infinite; and
by the same mercy keep me from offending thee any more: give me tears to
bewail those I have committed, and force to forbear hereafter, both which
gifts are worthy of thee, and both most necessary to me. O Blessed Virgin yet
again, To the B. Virgin.
now and always be my Advocate; it is the honor of thy son, that I may
obtain my suite, and the salvation of thy poor and devoted Pilgrim.

The after-dinner, and Evening of the seventeenth days Journey. The effects
of S nne, and diverse pains. CHAP. XXXIX.
THE rest of the day the Pilgrim shall employ his hours to ruminate and
repeat some particular effects of sin, the better to know and detest it: He
shall see, how it made the chief Angel so impudent and wicked, The first
exploit of the devil.
that with the first use of his language, he durst accuse his Creator of envy
and malice, in that he had forbidden the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
to Adam and Eve, that they might not be like Gods, carrying under the color of
this blasphemous calumniation, Genesis 3.
that poisoned ^art, wherewith he stroke to death this poor ill advised woman,
and by her, her husband Adam, and by him all mankind: he shall cast his eyes
upon the envy of Cain, Genesis 7.21
which made him lift up his hand to embrew the earth with his brothers blood;
to the dissolution of all mortal men, together buried in the revenging waves
of the universal Deluge; to the pride of the Babylonians b^ilding against
heaven to their own confusion; the impurity of the five sinning Cittyes,
drowned in fire and brimstone; the avarice of Giezi, Genesis 11.4 Genesis 19.25. 4.
Pe^. 50. ^atth. 26 Luc. 16.19.
and of Judas; to the riot of the rich Glutton, and other sinners, and sins.
By the view whereof he shall conceive an immortal hatred, and shall firmly
purpose to serve God withal his heart for the time to come, without ever
offending him never so little willingly, and toward night having made some
particular prayer to the Blessed Virgin, he shall think of his lodging

The eighteenth day. A meditation of Death, the first effect of sin. CHAP. XL.
To who^ the remembrance of death is grievous, and to whom profitable.
THERE is nothing more unpleasant then the memory of death to them that do not
live well: nothing is more profitable to those that desire well to govern
their actions for to live and reign always; and therefore the Pilgrim shall
help himself with the meditation of death, very fitly after that of sin the
father of death. This meditation shall have all his whole and entire parts.

The Prayer preparatory as always before.

The first Preamble shall represent a man stretched on his bed, in the agony of
death.

The second shall demand grace to reap particular profit of this exercise.

The first point shall set before mine eyes that decree and sentence of death,
given by the supreme Judge on the person of our first Father Adam: Genesis 3.
Thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return again, and executed on the body
of him, and all that have come of him, except Enoch, and Elias, who
notwithstanding shall dye also in their time. And therefore S. Paul says: It
is ordained for all men once to dye. Heb. 9.17
Of this meditation he shall mark, that as there is nothing more sure and
certain then Death, so also there is nothing more uncertain, then the hour
and manner thereof, and the estate wherein it shall find the soul, Eccles. 9.
whether in grace or in sin, when it shall dislodge and remove from her body.
By which circumstance he must stir up himself to watch and seek all the
means, and ways he can to put himself in good order and preparation, for
fear of being surprised, and taken unawares by reason of such uncertainty.

The second, shall be to consider the accidents, that do accompany this last
conflict, The conflict of death.
as well in soul as in body, the remembrance of things passed, the fear of
that is to come, the prickinges of griefs and desires, the assaults of the
Devil, the failing of our senses and facultyes, the coldness of our members and
the benumming of all parts of the body, the dole and extreme anguish in the
distress of death; all which things foreseen, will teach us what danger it
is, Math. 25.
to defer our preparation to the concurrence of so many calamityes, miseryes,
and infirmityes, and to go buy oil for our lamps, What follows after death:
the soul saved o^ damned.
when it will be time to enter into the bridegroomes chamber.

The third point shall meditate, what follows incontinently after death,
which is the judgment of the soul, either to salvation or damnation; for she
is either placed among the children of God, be it by passing by, if she need
purgation, o^ presently if she be clean, to enter into heaven and reign there
for ever, or else carried away in company of the Devils to hell, there to
suffer eternal torments, if she left the body seized with any mortal sin.
The body in the mean time, is put into the ground for food to worms and
serpents; his goods are parted to the living, who will make merry therewith,
and perhaps will laugh at him, for having labored so much for them.

The speech shall be to Jesus Christ in these words: O my sweet Redeemer, thou
have suffered death to deliver me from death, and have overcome death, to make
me conqueror thereof, grant me by this thy infinite charity, and divine
victory, the grace to use and enjoy the benefit, which thy death has brought
to me, and so well to prepare my self against this combat of death, so
valiantly to wrestle with it, Psalm. 115.
and so happily to overcome it, that my death may be of those the Prophet
speaks: The death of his Saints is precious in the eyes of God; and not of
those of whom the same Prophet says: Psalm. 33.
The death of sinners is most miserable. Thou saydst sometimes to thy Apostles
and Disciples: VVatch and stand ready, for the Son of Man will come at an
hour, when you think not of him. And again: Math. 24. and 25.
Walk whilst you have light, least darkness do apprehend you. And again by
one of thy Scribes: Do justice before thy d parture, Joan. 12. Luc. 19.
Eccles. 14.17.
for there is no food to be found in hell. These are thy aduertisements most
excellent, and most worthy of a prudent and valiant Captain, for they
comprehend and teach all that is necessary well to defend our selves, well to
fight, and to overcome, well to live, and well to dye. Grant then, O my
sovereign Lord, that I may follow this, point by point, and execute with a
faithful and constant obedience, all that thy love and wisdom has advised
me for my salvation, that my life may be nothing but a prudent and continual
preparation to death, and my death a door to life everlasting.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the eighteenth days Journey. Diverse
sentences of Death. CHAP. XLI.
THE rest of the day the Pilgrim shall pass his time and way, Psalm. 101.4.12.
meditating some sentences of the Scripture, or the holy Fathers written of
this subject: As are, My days have sailed as a smoke, and my bones have
withered and dried up like small sticks. My days have passed like a shadow,
and I have withered like grass. Job. 14.5.
And again: The days of man have passed, and the number of his months are in
thy hands, thou have set bounds which he cannot pass. 1. Pet. 1.
And again: All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof like the flower of the
field; Eccl. 9.12
the grass has faded, and his flower has fallen. And man knowe^h not his
end, but as Fishes are taken with netts, and Birds with snares, so are the
children of men taken in an evil time, when it comes suddenly upon them.
Eccl. 9.10
And again: Labor, and do well with thy hands while thou can, for in the
grave whither thou go, there is neither work nor industry, nor knowledge
nor wisdom. Aug. l. 50 hom. 27.
Also: The gate of penance is open to us, and the day of death hidden from us,
that by despair we do not increase our sins. Item: All the rest of our good
and evil is uncertain, only death is certain. Item: Idem. de verb. De.
sermon. 21. de ciuit. l. 13. cap 10
All the time of our life is but a race to death. With th^se sentences and the
like, he may also remember the happy death of many persons, Martyrs, and
others, borne to heaven, dying to the earth; and of diverse wicked men, who by
disastrous death have begun their hell in this world: and so he shall pass
this day, and the next night, and every night after when he goes to bed, he
shall remember death and his grave, represented by that action and place; for
sleep is the image of death, as the bed is the grave. Death is a long sleep,
and the grave a long lying; sleep and the bed are transitory, death and the
grave firm and lasting.

The nineteenth Day, A Meditation of Judgment, Particular and General. CAHP.
XLII.
AFTER death (says S. Paul) follows Judgment: Heb. 9.
After the death of every one in particular, comes particular Judgment; after
the general death of all men, The Meditation of judgment profitable.
comes the general Judgment. The memory and meditation of these two is a
strong bridle to hold men from sin, and a sharp spur to incite him to
penance, and to prepare his pleas and books before he be presented to the
examination of a Judge so just, wise, and mighty, as he that must hear and
judge him. Therefore the Pilgrim shall help himself with this consideration,
to clear himself before the judgment come, and also to make him worthy to
enter into the Sanctuary of that noble house the end of his Pilgrimage, and to
visit it with the profit of his soul.

The Prayer preparatiue as always before.

The first Preamble for particular Judgment, shall be to imagine a soul gone
out of the body, Matthew. 25.
as presented before God to be judged; and for the general, to behold Jesus
Christ coming in majesty, accompanied with Angels and Saints, to make a
public trial and judgment of all mortal men, both in bodies and souls, and
to reward or punish every one according to his works good or bad.

The second Preamble shall demand a wholesome fear of this fearful day.

The first point shall be to meditate the sentences of Scripture that make
mention of that day with some great exaggeration of speech, as that: Sayings of
this Judgment 2. Cor. 5.10. Heb. 10. Psalm. 142.2. Job. 3. 2. Pet. 4.18.
We must appear before the Tribunal of Christ, that every one may receive in
his body, as he has done good or bad. And: It is a horrible thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. The words also of David, who though he were an
holy man, yet trembling at the expectation of that day, he said: Lord, enter
not into judgment with thy servant, for none living can be justified in thy
sight. And of Job: What shall I do when God shall rise to Judgment, and when
he shall ask, what shall I answer? And of S. Peter; If the lust shall hardly
be saved, where shall the sinner appear? With which sayings, the soul shall
spur forward her self, saying: If the Saints have so feared this judgment,
what shall I poor sinful creature do?

The majesty of the Judge.
The second point shall bring in consideration the quality of the Judge, wise to
know all, just to punish all, mighty to execute all his Judgments and Decrees.
Whose power none can escape, whose wisdom none can deceive, whose equity none
can bow, Aug. l. de 10. chordis c 1. and 2. Innoc. l. 3. de ciuit. mundi.
and from whose sentence none can appeal, as the Doctors say. And if we
tremble before a Judge, who^ we think will not be corrupted, what shall the
Proud do before that Judge, who infinitely detesteth that vice? What the
covetous before the supreme bounty and liberality? The Lecher before Purity it
self? What other sinners before him, who is the Capital enemy of all sin?

The general judgment.
The third point shall set before our eyes that dreadful general Judgment,
whereof holy men speaking could not find words great enough proportionably to
express the greatness of it. Sound forth (says one of them) sound forth the
trumpet in Sion, cry out on my holy mountain, that all the Inhabitants of the
earth may tremble; for the day of our Lord comes, it is at hand, Seph.
1.4.15.16.
a day of darkness, and obscurity a day of clouds and tribulation. And another:
The great day of our Lord is after this day: this is a day of wrath, a day of
tribulation and anguish, a day of tumult and desolation, a day of darkness and
obscurity, a day of clouds and tempests, a day of the sound of trumpets, and
alarums. This is the day which properly is called, the Day of our Lord. The day
of Judgment, when the whole world shall be judged, when the justice of the
Judge shallbe made manifest to all the world, when the justice of the good
shall be published by open judgment in the full assembly of Angels and men, and
rewarded with a crown of immortal glory. There (says one Saint) shall be no
complaint, Aug. l. 20. ciuit. c. 11.
such as often in the press of this world, saying one to another; why is this
wicked man so happy in his wickedness? Why is such a good man unhappy and
miserable in his virtue? Why do Robbers prosper, and poor Pilgrims have
their throtes cut? For then true felicity shall be reserved only for the good,
and extreme and true misery reserved only for the wicked. This then is called
the day of our Lord, all other days are the days of men, this which is the
shutting up of them all, shall be our Lords day; for therein he shall show
manifestly the treasures of his infinite mercy and justice, making for his glory
the heavens and earth to leap, and all the most strong pieces of his power,
wisdom and bounty.

O my soul tremble with fear, The Prayer.
at the remembrance of this fearful day; for if David, Job, the Prophets, if
the pillars of virtue have shaked, how great ought thy fear to be, poor
sinful and feeble creature that thou art? With what sense and feeling
should thou meditate upon the holding of this day, the Judgment of
judgments, and the last of all? What will thou then do? What Advocate shall
thou have? Who dares defend thee from this just Judge, if he be offended with
thee? How shall thou hear the irreuocable sentence, when it shall be
pronounced? What shall thou do, if he condemn thee? O sweet Jesus, keep me
from thy wrath to come, if it please thee, and give me now a penitent heart,
that may deserve both now and then, the voice of thy mercy. Let me in this
banishment, suffer a thousand deaths, but at that day let me live with thee.
Afflict me, whippe me, cut me, burn, my soul, my life, my flesh, my bones,
with all sorts of tribulation, persecution, travail and torments, but may it
please thee to pardon me then for ever, O Lord. O Blessed Virgin my good
Advocate, whom I often see represented in this Judgment, by the pious
pictures of the holy houses in the Church of thy Son, as suppliant for all
mankind, entreat I beseech, O Virgin, for all and for me, who am of the number,
and the most needy; and perform what the pictures represent. They signify that
thou art now Advocate of mortal men, to the end, that at that day they may be
out of pain and danger. Ask now, O B. Virgin for this is the time of asking,
and mercy, and not then, when there shall be no question but of judging,
rewarding, and punishing: ask, and in good time obtain for me, and for all
those that seek unto thee: obtain for me, O puissant Advocate, the grace
thoroughly to bewail my sins, virtuously to correct my faults, wisely to
order my senses and actions, that at that day I may confidently behold the
eye, and countenance of that sovereign Judge set in his throne of Justice,
joyfully hear the sentence he pronounces, and happily be placed on the right
hand in the number of his beloved.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the nineteenth days Journey. The separation
of the good from the wicked, after Judgment. CHAP. XLIII.
AFTER dinner the Pilgrim shall employ his devotion in meditating what
follows Judgment; setting before his eyes, how the one sort take their
flight up to heaven with Jesus Christ, and his Angels, there to reign with
him happy and blessed for ever. The other full of misery and anguish,
broken-harted and desperate shall be swallowed down body and soul to the
Center of the earth, with the Devils whom they served, and having gone
foreward a while in this thought, he shall also in the evening make some prayer
to our Lord, and to the B. Virgin his glorious Mother, to the same end with
that before dinner, and shall look about to lodge himself in some place
proper for a poor wearied Pilgrim to repose.

The twentieth Day. A Meditation of Hell. CHAP. XLIV.
THE Pilgrim having purposed to cleanse his soul in this his Pilgrimage, and
in good earnest to swear emnity for ever against sin, the better to move
himself to pe^nance, and to conceive cont^ition requisite for such an effect,
he shall help himself with the meditation of Hell, the second death and reward
of sin, as he helped himself hitherto with the meditation of the first
death, and judgment. This is a thundering piece, Eccl. 7.40
to beat at the ears and soul of a sleepy sinner, and with a wholesome alarm
to awake him, and make him take arms, and look to himself. Good men are also
helped thereby; for though they follow virtue rather for love then for fear,
and serve God for himself, which is the service of true children, it profits
them notwithstanding to meditate as well the punishment as the reward, drawing
from thence matter to praise God in his justice and mercy, and to stir up
themselves to serve him well.

The Meditation shall have his parts.

The prayer preparatory accustomed.

The first Preamble shall represent an obscure, and dark bottomless dungeon
in the Center of the earth, full of horror and stench of fire, brimstone, and
smoke, and souls enclosed in their bodies plunged in these flames.

The second shall demand particular grace, well to meditate of Hell, for ever
to avoid it. Hell most intolerable.


The first point shall consider, that as there is nothing in this life more
horrible then death, nothing so dreadful as Judgment that follows after: so
nothing is more intolerable then Hell, and the punishments thereof: Matthew.
8.33.22.24
There (says the Scripture) is weeping and gnashing of teeth: there is the
worm gnawing of the soul and never dying, and killing always without killing.
Marc. 9.44.
There is the fire that never quenches; there is the dark Country covered
with the cloud of death. There is the shadow of death, where no order, but
perpetual horror inhabiteth. Job. 10.25 Apoc. 21.14.
There the portion of the damned is in a lake burning with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death, where the wicked shall be tormented world without
end.

The second point shall represent the diverse sorts of pains ordained
according to the diversity of sins; Diverse pains for diverse crimes.
for notwithstanding the horror and disorder of this gulf, the order of Gods
iust^^e nevertheless shall be kept, as the Apostle signifies, when he says,
that he heard a voice from heaven, condemning the Lecher to pains, saying:
Apec. 18.7.
Give him torments in that measure, that he has had glory and delight in this
life. Therefore there the Proud shall be oppressed with an extreme confusion and
shame. The Covetous suffer an unspeakable hunger and thirst. The Adulterers
buried in fire and brimstone, with an intolerable stench, and each of all their
parts, and specially of those that have been instruments of their villainies.
The Choleric and cruel shall have for their whips and scourges their own
passions, and the fury of the fiends. The Gluttons, shall be served at the
table of Hell, fed with serpents and toades, and drink of the cup of the
wrath of God. The Envious, shall bear in their bosoms everliving scorpions,
who shall sting them to an immortal rage. The Slothful, shall be beaten with
the rodes of his own rechlesnes, and vexed with a particular torment of body
and soul. These shall be the proportions of every one, and all in general
shall have the horror of that hellish company, of darkness, of cries, and
howlinges one of another.

The eternity of hell torments.
The third point shall be to consider that al these torments besides that they
are unspeakable and continual, shall also be everlasting. This eternity is
that, which gives the form and the name of Hell to that hellish misery, and
without it there should be no Hell of torments, nor paradise of pleasure. This
shall be the great hart-breake to the damned, The cause of the da^neds rage
and sting their soul with a raging grief that they shall suffer without
ceasing, and they shall also see, without ceasing, that it shall always be so.
They shall always pay the interest of their sins committed, and yet shall
always be behind in errerages: they shall always pay, and their debt increase
still, that which shall be past, though it were ten milions of ages, shall be
reckoned for nothing, and the future time shall be followed, with another
future as long as all Eternity.

The form of this Eternity shall fly as a fierce fury, continually before
their eyes, beating her unwearied wings; and hissing her horror into their
ears, shall couch it self in the depth of their imagination, and grauing
there the mark and round circle of these eternal ages, shall breed therein
the sting and immortal rage of a furious desperation.

O sovereign bounty? What monster may sin be, that could so incense either
thine anger, or thy clemency against it? O sin, how abominable art thou,
seeing no pain is sufficient to punish and chastise thee, but eternal? O
mortal men what think you of, when you defile your souls with the
familiarity of this plague, this death, this confusion? Where is your wit, to
loose glory, delight and riches of heaven, for a fond pleasure, for a foul
delight, for a brutish vanity, with this inestimable loss, throwing your
selves headlong into everlasting damnation. O my soul, think hereof, delay
no longer, think of it betymes; all time of repentance is good time, fly the
danger of eternal evils, whilst the mercy of God inuiteth thee, and does
promise thee help, and assistance, and recompense for thy labor. O my Lord, I
will serve thee with all my soul, and withal my soul renounce all vanity;
and do vow from henceforth eternal emnity to thy great and immortal enemy,
who has furnished so much matter to thy justice, to build these mansions of
darkness, confusion and death. O Virgin, Queen, and Mother, most pure, most
great, and puissant, further the desires of thy Pilgrim, and devoted
suppliant, and by thy credit obtain that he may happily perform the good
desires and designements, which thy Son his Redeemer, and Lord has by thine
interc^ssion planted in his heart.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the twentieth days Journey. Other Meditations
of the pains of the damned. CHAP. XLV.
THE two other parts of the day shall be employed in the consideration of the
infinite number of souls lost, The lost souls.
since the beginning of the world unto this time: also an infinite number that
daily are, and will be lost from this time to the end of this world: Souls,
alas, lost, dead and deadly groaning in the gulf of their torments, biting
their tongue for fury, that seek for death, and cannot find it; Apo. 18.10.
being buried in the bowels of death it self, dying always and yet cannot
dye, living always, and yet cannot live; that curse the day of their birth,
and the name and memory of their Progenitors, detesting the earth they so much
loved, the heavens and the stars that they could not see; and fo^^ul measure
of the^ impiety, they blaspheme the Majesty of thy Creator, and have no rest
neither day nor night. All things are to them affliction, all is night and
darkness, all is gall and bitterness, all tears and gnashing, all grief and
despair. Death can neither end them, nor overcome them, and wheresoever they
cast the eyes of their understanding they find themselves on every side
compassed and enclosed with the bars of eternity, without all hope, not only
to escape out of the prison of this doleful and lamentable being, and worse a
thousand times then not being at all, but also to have ease or respit. By this
consideration the Pilgrim shall learn more and more the malignity of sin,
and shall harden himself to the hatred thereof: and at night he shall yield
thanks to the mercy of God, for the time, and respit he has given him, with a
thousand means to do penance in this life, and to abstain from sin, that
he might avoid these pains reserved for sinners in this everlasting prison.
And after he has in good time taken up his lodging, to prepare himself with
leisure, to the last meditation of his third week, and the day of his arrival.

The one and twentieth Day. Of General Confession, and of the parts of
Penance. CHAP. XLVI.
THIS one and twentieth day is the last of the first part of this Pilgrimage,
wherein the Pilgrim must prepare him self with his best endeavor to penance,
and purgation of his soul, which is the end of this part, the more worthily to
appear in the house of the B. Virgin that he goes to visit, a Virgin of
purity, mother of purity, and Queen of purity. This preparation shall be in
the chief foundation, and exact and entire confession of all his sins since
his last Confession, or if need be, To who^ general confession is necessary.
generally of all his life, since his years of discretion, or from some other
markeable time.

This is the Confession commonly called General, necessary to him that was
never so confessed, or was ill confessed, either by concealing any mortal
sin willingly, or for want of good disposition necessary to a Penitent, that
is, without sorrow for sins committed, Sorrow and purpose of amendment
necessary.
or firm purpose of amending, or for having been confessed to such as wanted
either knowledge to help him, or authority to absolve him: to others that have
been daily confessed, this general is not necessary, yet to them also it is
profitable; for thereby gathering as it were into one heap the multitude of
our sins, we procure a confusion so much the more wholesome, by how much it is
greater, The profit of general confession.
by the viewing of our sins thus altogether, and make us more ready and
prompt to satisfy by good works, and more capable of the mercy of God by our
humility: it stirs us up more effectually to the love of God, making us see
his long patience, having so long time mercifully supported so many faults of
ours. It gives means to repair our negligences which might pe^h^ps have
happened in the precedent Confessions, and puts the Conscience in great
peace, joy, and tranquillity for afterward. And therefore it is good to use it
often, namely from year to year, not of all their life, but of the sins of
that year, though they have been often confessed within the year; but that
it be done always with the counsel of a sage and discreet Confessor. The
Devil who is Father of the Proud, hates all confessions of Christians, Why
the Devil hates confession.
but specially those who do more humble the devout soul, and put it in better
estate, more easily to obtain pardon and grace, and therefore as a crafty and
malicious workema^, he withdraws them by fear and shame, as much as he can,
and by other lets, whereof the Pilgrim must take good heed, and arm himself
with a strong resolution, to break courageously, through all the snares of
this deceauer.

There is also another Confession general in another sense, General
confession in common, before chap 8. in the Pilgrims preparation.
when one confesses to God without a Priest, which may be called General,
which should be made often in the day, with the ordinary Confiteor, or
otherwise, as we have said before. This we speak of here, is the General
Sacramental. But whether the Pilgrim makes this General, or else having made
it already, confesses now, since his last confession, he must upon so good an
occasion exactly cleanse his conscience of all sin, and therefore to prepare
himself, well, he shall bestow that morning in the meditation of penance,
well to do it, in confessing himself, and attending to other good works: his
Meditation shall have the whole and entiere pares.

The accustomed prayer preparatory.

The first Preamble shall represent Adam, and Eve, put out of Paradise to do
penance all their life long: and our Savior, and his Precursour Saint John
Baptist, Matthew. 2.1.4.17.
beginning their preachings to men, themselves having ^^ad all their life in
penance.

What penance is.
The first point shall show, that penance is a Sacrament, wherein the sinner
duly confessed and contrite, receaueth absolution of his sins, which power
of absoluing was given to Priests by Jesus Christ, Conc. Tri. sess. 4. c. 1 and
Can. 1. Conc. C^st. sess. 15. Ambr. l. 1 de Poenit. c. 2. and 7. Conc. Tri.
sess. 14. c. 6. Can. 10. Joan. 20.
when he said to his Apostles, and in their person to all Priests: Receive the
Holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, shall be forgiven, and whose you retain
shall be retained. And again: All that you bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and all that you loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. It is God
then, that absolueth, by the service of the Priest, and not the Priest by his
own power.

The second point shall note, that to obtain the fruit of this Sacrament, and
to be reconciled to God, three things must be done. The first, to leave and
detest his sins, and make a firm purpose to sin no more; for such is truly
contrite. The second, to confess. The third, to satisfy; for as we have
offended God in three sorts, by heart, by word, and work, so by the same means
we must recover his favor and grace, as the Scriptures, Psalm. 50. 1. Joan. 1.
and the Holy Fathers do teach us: Thou shall not despise a contrite and
humble heart; this is the first. Let us confess our sins; this is the second.
Redeem thy sins with alms; this is the third. Joan. 4.
So it is said, that the Ninevites turned themselves to God, cried unto him,
clothed themselves with hair and fasted. Luc. 15.
And the prodigal Child rose, cried Peccaui, and submitted himself to
punishment. S. Chrysostom says: Contrition is in the heart, De poenit. t^ni. 5.
Confession in the mouth, and all humility in work. This is perfect and
profitable Penance. And S. Augustine: God heals those that have a contrite
heart, heals those that confess, heals those that punish themselves. In
Psalm. 146.
The other holy Doctors and Saints write in the same style.

The third point shall first consider that the detestation and hatred of sin
required to contrition is grounded in the love of God, True pe^nance founded in
the love: of God.
and not in the fear of hell, or other temporal evil, that is to say, the
Penitent must be sorry that he has sinned, because he has offended his
Creator, not that he has incurred punishment of Justice; to purpose also
hereafter to avoid sin for the love of God with a filial fear, and not for
any other evil, which shall be a seruill fear.

In the second place, he shall renew in his memory, the principal qualityes of
true Confession, which are, Conditions of true Confession.
that it be whole and entire, that is, of all his sins he can remember, since
his last confession; that it be Simple without affectation of superfluous or
choice words; also Faithful, declaring his sins with their circumstances in
truth, as before God who sees all; accusing, not historically, that is, in way
of accusing our selves, and not as telling a tale or story; and finally Humble
and respective, as coming from a contrite and an humbled heart, accusing it
self before the Majesty of so great a God offended, and asking pardon.

In the third place he shall note, Satisfaction a mark of the goodness and
Justice of God.
that Satisfaction which makes the third part of penance, does not any thing
derogat to the Passion of our Savior, but does honor it more; for this
Passion has truly satisfied for us, paying for us to the divine Justice, that
fine which we could not pay, to deliver us from eternal death, but it was with
a condition that we should contribute of good will what we could, and satisfy
also by the merit of the same Passion. But as it is more honorable to God to
work miracles, not only by his own hands, but also to give power to his
servants to do the like, so is it greater glory to our Savior, to make his
servants works meritorious and satisfactory, then if himself alone had merited
and satisfied. But in tne end of the reckoning, as al good comes from him, as
from the first fountain and spring, so all the praise of our satisfaction will
redound unto him, as to the last end.

Prayers and thanksgiving to God, and the Blessed Virgin. CHAP. XLVII.
O Lord behold me at last arrived by thy favor at the place I have long
desired, there to cleanse the spots of my soul, and to beautify it with the
merits of thy precious blood, and to offer my self to thy service for ever,
with a full and faithful heart. This is my intention and end: it is thy grace
and favor, that must succor my intention, and crown my end; the good of thy
assistance, and the crown of my end, shall be thy glory. O glorious Virgin, I
shall this day see that happy and holy house, magnificall with thy greatness;
may it please, that it may be to thy Sons honor, and thine, and to the
health of thy humble and devoted Pilgrims soul. Going out of his lodging in
the morning after his meditation, he shall sing the Canticle following, as
continuing to ask the aid and help of the B. Virgin, and stirring himself up
to go forward with a great courage.

A Canticle to the glorious Virgin Mary.
Of Gods own Son, O Mother glorious,
Hear my voice, O Mother gracious:
Hear my sighs, hear my prayer,
Obtain the grant of my desire.
My groaning voice does tell my grief,
My instant prayers require relief:
To heaven I sigh with eyes all weeping,
Heaven I seek the land of the living.
Obtain me grace to tread always
The steps of Saints, and not to stray:
To walk on earth, straight and even,
True Pilgrim-like the way to heaven.
To see the Chamber that lodged Christ,
And then thy glory in the highest.
This being done he shall make have to come, if he may soon enough, to hear
Mass at that holy Chamber, and to have all the after noone free to prepare
himself to Confession: and as soon as in his way he shall have discovered,
and discerned the house of Loreto, he shall kneel down, saluting the B.
Virgin, according to the custom of Christiah Pilgrims, which is to salute the
places of their Pilgrimage, as soon as they see them. So the Christians going
to recover the holy Land, prostrated themselves at the first sight of
Jerusalem; he shall therefore salute this noble discovery, greeting the B.
Virgin, and saying: O sacred Virgin, honor be unto thee, honor be unto thee
Mary full of grace, who have happily brought me hither. O happy hour in which
I begin to see that little palace of my great King and Redeemer, and of his
glorious Mother. O heauely house, when shall I kiss the threshold of thy
door? The walls of thy house, and within the walls admire the wonders that
have made thee admirable? And having said this, he shall sing Te Deum, Thanks
giving at the arrival at Loreto.
and being come unto the place, as he shall feel himself comforted and
ravished, he shall say in thanksgiving: O holy Virgin, Holy Mother, Virgin of
Virgins, Mother of Jesus, Mother of Grace, most pure, most chaste, most
inuiolate Mother without touch, immortal thanks for thy favors, ptaise,
honor, and eternal glory for thy benefits; immortal thanks be to thee for
that by thy intercession, I am happily arrived at this long desired place; and
that with mine eyes, I see the house I have so much longed and sighed after.
Perfect and finish to my good, O gracious and faithful Advocate, that which
thou have begun in me, and procure, that to the praise of thy dear Son my
Lord and Redeemer, I may cleanse my soul from all sin, and so holily bestow
my days in this holy Temple, that I may depart stored and enriched with all
such means as shall be necessary form to perform the rest of my way, as well
for my return to mine own temporal house and home, as of my great Pilgrimage
to the country of heaven; and this being said, he shall hear Mass and Matines
of that morning.

The after-dinner, and Evening of the one and twentieth days Journey. Of
choosing a good Ghostly-Father, or Confessor. CAHP. XLVIII.
IN the afternoon having visited the most markeable places there, and having
used some prayers, To chose a good Confessor.
he shall choose some pious Priest, learned and wise, and one who must be his
spiritual Father, Judge, and Physician, to confer with him about the estate
of his soul, and to appoint a fit hour to make his Confession at evening, and
shall for that time attend to the examen of his conscience for his Confession
at the appointed hour, and shall prepare himself to receive the next morning
the Blessed Body of our Lord and Savior. Before the examen he shall demand the
assistance and grace of God by this, or the like prayer.

A prayer to be said, before the Examen which is made before Confession.
LORD God, who making me according to thine own Image and likeness, have given
me memory, principally to remember thy good, and mine own evil; to thank
thee for the one, and cry mercy for the other, and confess them; grant me by
thy holy mercy, Eccl. 38.15.
thy grace with the fruit of compunction to bring before thee all my years in
the bitterness of my soul, and to show my self to my self, and lively to
represent to the eyes of my soul, the estate of my life passed, the benefits I
have received, the sins I have committed, in thought, word or deed, against
thy holy Laws and Commandments, by Pride, Couetise, Impurity, Envy, Gluttony,
Anger, Sloth, with my eyes, ears, and other my senses, and give me throghly
to know the wounds and defects of my soul, that I may faithfully confess
them, and by confessing be pardoned, cured and strengthened, to serve thee my
Lord and my life, better the^ hitherto I have done. And this I desire by the
merits of thy Son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee in the
unity of the holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the examen before Confession. CHAP. XLIX.
THIS examen must be so much the more exact and diligent, by how much the
longer the time is that must be examined, as ten, twenty, thirty, or more
years. It is performed in running over the ten Commandments, the seven
Capital sins, the five senses with the circumstances. The particular calling
of every one, as of Clarke, Priest, Religious, Magistrate, Soldier, Prelate,
Superior, Advocate, Physician, Artificer, every one, beside the general duty
of a Christian has proper points of his own particular calling, which he
must look over, if perhaps he has failed in any of them.

How he must examine his Conscience for Confession. CHAP. L.
An examen upon th Commandments.
HE shall therefore examine himself upon the first Commandment, searching if
he has thought, spoken, or done any thing against faith, hope, or charity,
which he owes to God. If he has doubted in any point of the Catholic
Religion, or spoken against it, read any heretical books, or had any
familiarity with Witches or Southsayers: and finally if he has served God,
with all his heart and soul, as this first Precept imports. He shall do the
like in the second, and the rest; running over the Capital vices, called
Mortal, Of the mortal sins.
he shall examine himself in his conscience, if he has had any thought in
presumption, if spoken any vanity, showed any pride, and so in the sin of
Couetise, and the rest. Of the five senses he shall remember if he has abused
his eyes by any curious or lascivious looks; his tongue by speaking
detraction, Of the 5. senses.
or his ears by hearing it, and other vain things, and so of the other
senses. If he be a Churchman, besides that which is common to all Christians,
he shall consider in particular, how he has carried himself in his estate, if
he has assisted at divine service, if he has said his Canonical hours, if
he has learned what is required to his charge, to hear confessio^s, say
Mass, preach. If he be Religious, Religious
he shall call his consicience to account about his Vows, and rules; if he
have been a proprietary, against the vow of Poverty; if he has committed any
thing against Chastity, or has been disobedient. If he be a Prince, Prince.
whether he has maintained the honor of God, if he have kept justice, if he
has governed like a Father, Gentleman.
or grieved his people. A Gentleman, if he has done wrong to his neighbors,
or abused them. If he be a Magistrate, Counselor, President, Judge, if he have
diligently examined the right of every one, Magistra^ Judge.
and justly rendered every one his own; if he has taken bribes or judged
against his conscience. If he be a Consul, Consul.
or chief Magistrate of the City, if he has been willingly, or negligently
wanting to the public good. An Advocate, Aduocat.
if he has undertaken the defense of unjust causes, or if he has faithfully
defended the right. A Proctor, Proctour
if he has dealt truly with his Clients, if he has not used craft and
cunning in prolonging suites, and hindering the course of Justice. Captain,
Captain
if he has kept, and caused to be kept the military and martial laws, if he
has faithfully served his Prince, if he has been cowardly, or stricken any
wrongfully. A Soldier, if he spoiled poor men, Soldier.
if he has been true and faithful, if he has beaten or killed any man in
villainy out of war. If he be a Superior or Prelate, Superior.
whether he has commanded justly and prudently, if he have been arrogant or
impious in his charge. A Regent, or Master, if he have diligently and
faithfully taught his scholless, Scholar.
giving them in word and works example of virtue. A Scholar, if he has lost
his time, or kept the laws and order of the School. Physitia^.
A Phisitain, if he has been diligent and faithful in attending his Patient,
if by his fault any have dyed, Apothecary.
or fallen into any inconvenience of body. An Apothecary, if he has made his
Medicines of sound and entire Drugs, not sophisticated, if he has faithfully
followed the Physicians bill. Surgeon.
A Surgeon, if he has been negligent in attending his hurt and sick patient,
if he has prolonged the wound to get more money, Merchant
and fill his purse. A Merchant, if he has sold to dear, or used false
weights or measures. Printers or Booke-binders, Printer. Booke-binder.
if they have printed, or sold pernicious, heretical, wanton, or diflamatory
libells. Artificer, if he has done his work fraudule^tly, if he has filched,
wrought upon the holy days: Artificer.
and thus of other estates. Women and Maids shall also particulerly examine
themselves about the vanity of their apparel, their too much speaking, or
speaking evil, of their too much care of their corpse, of impatience, choler,
couetise, of the goods of this world, and of other vices more familiar to their
sex. The Penitent shall discourse over all, and shall note wherein he has
failed, and shall make as it were a table of his sins, and kinds, in his
memory, or in paper to confess them. This examen being thus made, he shall say
the prayer following, immediately before he goes to Confession.

A Prayer to say before Confession. CHAP. LI.
Mercy ready for the Penitent.
ALMIGHTY God, who desire the conversion and life of a sinner, and not his
death and perdition, and have promised the grace of thy benediction and mercy
whenever and how often soever repenting, and confessing he shall cry thee
mercy with an humble and contrite heart, give me if it please thee, a firm
voice and tongue to confess the sins I remember, and say wholsomly before
thy secret Tribunal with the Prophet: I have sinned, and done ill before thee
alone. Psalm. 50.5
Take from me all fear, and vicious shame, that I may freely, simply, purely,
and entirely discover all the faults, wounds, and griefs of my wounded soul
to him, whom thou have given me for Lieutenant of thy justice, for the
judgment and remission of my sins. And if I have dared with a damnable
boldness to incense thee with thousands of sins, that I may dare also now
with an humble confidence to confess them, to ask and receive pardon, in the
name of thy Son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity
of the holy Ghost, for ever and ever.

The order we must keep in Confession. CHAP. LII.
THIS prayer being said, and his sins noted, he shall present himself at the
place, and hour appointed, to the Priest, and having asked and received his
blessing, shall say his Confiteor. unto mea culpae, and shall begin to
confess his sins, according to the order of his examen, and memorial, running
over his whole conscience faithfully, purely, simply, humbly, and without
affected ceremonies of words, or gestures; without accusing any other to
excuse, or diminish his own fault, without telling what he has not done, but
accusing himself alone, and only of his sins, with the greatest sense and
feeling of devotion, and compunction that he can: and after he has told all in
his memory, he shall make an end of his Confiteor, and desire his Ghostly
Father to ask him, and to bring into his remembrance, what he might have
forgotten, and this done he shall receive of him penance and absolution, and
shall prepare himself all the rest of the day, and some part of the night to
communicate the next morning, and going from the place of Confession, shall for
thanksgiving say this prayer following.

A prayer to say after Confession. CHAP. LIII.
O sweet Jesus, the true Physician, and healer of my diseases, the true life and
peace of my soul, the true solace of my heart, I humbly thank thee for all the
benefits I have received of thee since my first being, and namely for this
last, whereby thou have given me means to cast my self at thy feet, to ask
thee mercy, and reconcile my self unto thy Majesty justly offended with my
faults, and to revive in me the joy, and riches of thy good favor and
friendship. Alas, O my souueraigne Savior, what had become of my poor soul,
if thy justice had according to my demerit, drawn her out of this body and
life, in so miserable a plight, all covered and infected with the spiritual
leprosy, dead in sin, buried in her filth, abominable before thine eyes, a
mark for thy fury, a prey to death and eternal confusion. O my Redeemer,
immortal thanks be to thy infinite mercy for this great benefit: and since
thy mercy has no bounds, add also, O sweet Jesus, to this benefit, the
firmness of a holy perseverance, whereby I may always preserve the Temple of
my soul and body, pure and neat from all filth and ordure of sin. Conserve,
O Lord, the house thou came to purify, 2. Match. 14.36. Psalm. 50.5.
by the light and heat of thy holy Spirit: cleanse it, beautify it always more
and more, and more and more wash me from my sins, purge me of my sins, and
give me grace, that as I have hitherto served the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil, the most cruel enemies of my good and salvation, so I may with all my
force, love, honor, and serve thee for hereafter. O my life, my Creator and
Savior descended into earth, and made man to seek me poor strayed sheep, and
make me participant of thy deity; ascended also up to the Cross, there to shed
thy precious blood, to wash and cleanse me, there to dye, to give me life:
Grant, O Prince of mercy, that for all thy benefits I may affoard thee an
humble and an entire service unto my last gasp; to live after this mortal
soiourning eternally with thee, and to glorify thee in heaven, where thou
live and reigning with the Father, in the unity of the holy Ghost, for ever
and ever, Amen.

This shall be the shutting of the 21. day, and third week, finishing the first
period of his pilgrimage, the which represents as we have said the life of
those which begin the way of virtue, the way of Purgation, by virtues
purgative. In the morning the Pilgrim shall begin his second part, which
represents the estate of those that are gone forward, and advanced in the way
of perfection and light.

THE PILGRIMS ABODE AT LORETO.
The two and twentieth day, and the first of his abode. A Meditation upon the
holy Eucharist. CAHP. I.
FOR the meditation of the first days journey of this second Part of his
Pilgrimage, the Pilgrim shall fitly take the subject of the Eucharist; for he
cannot better begin to honor this holy place, then with so holy an action, nor
more refresh and solace the travail of his pilgrimage, then by this refectio^,
nor better open the door of his soul to the light of the Holy Ghost, then by
the receiving of such a Sacrament; and this should be the first meal, and the
last banquet of every true Pilgrim; he shall make his Meditation early in the
morning at the holy house with these parts.

The prayer preparatory accustomed, shall demand grace to direct all his actions
to the glory of God, and salvation of his soul.

In the first preamble he shall set before his eyes the history of the two
Pilgrims, Luc. 14. Aug. epist. 50. ad Paulin.
who first of all other Christians received at our Saviors hands after his
resurrection, in the village called Emaus.

The second shall demand a special light, well to penetrate the majesty and
profit of this mystery.

The first Point, Of three figures of the Holy Sacrament. CHAP. II.
THE first point of the meditation shall contain three old Figures, Genesis 14.18.
among diverse others, of this B. Sacrament. The first is the Sacrifice of
Melchisedech sometime King of Salem, and high Priest, who entertayning Abraham,
as he returned victorious from the battle, offered to God, Bread and Wine,
in thanksgiving for the victory, blessed him and refreshed him, and his
company, Our Savior the true Melchisedech
in figure of the Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, the
Christian Eucharist, which the same Jesus Christ, the true Melchisedech, the
true King of peace, and high Bishop did institute and ordain, when in his last
supper he did communicate his Apostles, giving them his Body to eat, under the
figure of Bread, and his Blood to drink under the figure of Wine, after the
order, and form of the Sacrifice of Melchisedech, and making them his Vicars
and Deputies, commanded them, and their Successors in their person, to do the
same, Luc. 22.1^.
and to continue this Sacrifice and Supper in his name and remembrance: which
has heene always performed hitherto, and shall be always hereafter unto the
worlds end. For as Jesus Christ is Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech, and not of Aaron, whose Priesthood together with the sacrifices
were ended and fullfilled on the Cross; so his Sacrifice according to this
order of Melchisedech shall be perpetual and everlasting, in yielding of
thanks to God, and in the feeding and refection of Christians the spiritual
children of Abraham, Psalm. 109.
fighting in the Church here militant on earth, and shall one day triumph
altogether in heaven, returning co^querours from the combat.

The second Figure is the sacrifice of the Paschall Lamb, which was ordained
the night before the deliverance of the Hebrews, Exodus 12.
from the captivity of Egypt, and continued in remembrance of this great
benefit, until that our Savior, the true Lamb, did institute our Eucharist
of his precious Body and Blood, in the evening before his Passion, and our
Redemption, and shall continue as a memorial thereof until he come again;
not to be judged and condemned to death as he was at his first coming, but to
judge the world, by the weights of their works, to kill death for ever after,
and to deliver his children from all evil.

The third Figure is the Manna, Exodus 15.16.
given from heaven to the Hebrews, whilst they were Pilgrims in the
wilderness, walking toward the land of promise; even so the Eucharist, the
true bread of heaven, and the true drink, is given in the Church of God, for
the solace and sustenance of our souls, in the desert of this world, and for
our provision and food, until we be brought to the land of the living in
heaven.

The second point, Of the Majesty of our Savior in this Blessed Sacrament.
CHAP. III.
THE second point shall be to meditate in this Sacrament, first, the power of
our Savior, Power.
converting by his almighty word the Bread into his body, and the Wine into his
blood. Second y, the goodness of the same Savior, who having given himself a
price and ransom for our Redemption, Goodness.
has also vouchsafed to give himself for food, and to unite himself with his
creature, soul to soul, body to body, in the straitest manner that can be
imagined. Thirdly, the divine wisdom, Wisdom.
seasoning and tempering this precious food in so familiar and easy a fashion,
under the form, and taste of bread and Wine, of the one side facilitating our
senses to the taking of his flesh and blood without horror, and on the other
side instructing our faith to understand and acknowledge the union of faithful
Christians, made heerby one Bread, one Body, one Blood, one Flesh in Jesus
Christ, to the likeness of material Bread, which is composed of diners grains,
and wine made of many grapes, as our Doctors do expound.

The third point, Of the effects of this Holy Sacrament. CHAP. IV.
The effects of B. Sacrament. S. Tho. 3. quest. 79.
THE third shall be to consider the effects of this divine mystery, which are
many. The 1. whereof is to Quicken and give the grace of God, the life of the
soul, as our Savior says: He that eats me shall live by me. The second, to
Nourish, and increase the same grace, even as corporal meat maintains life,
Joan. 6.
and makes the body to grow. The third, to Enlighten the spirit, as appears
by the first Communion which our Savior after his resurrection gave unto his
two Disciples at Emaus, by the which their eyes were opened, and they knew
their Master presently, Luc. 24. Aug. epist. 59. ad Paulin.
whom before they knew not, and they believed that he was risen again, whom
they thought had been still in his grave. The fourth, to Unite the soul with
God, and with our Neighbor, and to dissolve all emnity and discord; so
teaches our Savior: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Joan. 6.
Act. 4.31.
remains in me, and I in him. An effect which did manifestly appear in the
first Christians, who received every day, of whom it is said, that they were
one heart and one soul. The fifth, to Enkindle devotion, and Charity toward
God and men, even as bread and wine does increase the vital spirits, and heat
the body. The sixth, to Extinguish, and quench the concupiscence of flesh, and
to preserve from sin, as a remedy against the flesh of our first Father Adam,
by the which men were defiled, and made prone to sin. The seventh, to
Fortify and strengthen us against all the storms and tribulatio^s of this
mortal life; David prophesying of this effect, said: Thou have provided a
table for me, Psalm. 22.5
against those that trouble me. So we read that the Prophet Elias persecuted by
Queen Iezabel, and constrained to fly through the desert, 3. Reg. 19
sustained the travail of forty days and forty nights with the refection of
that bread which the Angel had brought him, which was a figure of this our
Angelical bread, the flesh of our Savior. The eight, to Content, fill, and
rejoice the soul, which of it self cannot be satisfied or filled, or find any
firm or solid repose in things of the earth, although she had them all alone:
even so Christians in the beginning of the Church, made no reckoning of riches,
but rejoiced in possessing nothing, and in suffering some thing for the name of
Jesus. The last, to Bring to everlasting glory; for this deified Flesh, holily
and devoutly received, breeds in the soul, an insatiable desire of her
heavenly Country, and transporteth, and carries the heart and affection to
heaven, and gives to the body a seed of the glorious resurrection, which is
signified by the words of our Savior: Joan. 6.54
He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has life everlasting, and I
will raise him again at the last day. After these considerations, the Pilgrim
shall admire the greatness of this gift and benefit, and in his admiration
shall say this prayer following.

A speech to God, and thanksgiving. CHAP. V.
O My sovereign Lord, and sweet Redeemer, I behold in all thy divine works,
and especially in the Sacrament of thy Blessed Body, that thy power is
infinite, that thy wisdom is a depth, thy bounty a sea without bottom or
bounds; thou have made all this visible world of nothing for the use of man,
thou have allied thy self to the house of Adam, The liberality of our Savior.
and taking thereof a mortal body, and matching, and marrying it with thy
divinity, wast made man to make man God, thou have given this body on the
Cross a ransom for our redemption, and not content with so great a
liberality, have also left it in this mystical Table of thy Church, for the
nourishing of our souls, and the resurrection of our bodies, tying thy self
with this second band of love and charity never heard of, with all and every
one of thy members. What shall I wonder at in this mystery, and gift? Thy
almightines? His power.
Who have so wonderfully changed this common and mortal bread, into thy
glorious and immortal Body, by the same authority and power, wherewith it made
the whole world of nothing, but with greater marvel and miracle; for this
Body is more worth then a thousand worlds. Shall I admire thy wonderful
wisdom, His wisdom.
which in the heavenly Table of this thy body, do teach us Faith, Hope and
Charity, Humility, Obedience, Prudence, Chastity, Fortitude, Piety, Meeknes,
and all other goodly Christian virtues. And whereas other bodies could not
nourish ours but for a time, this Body duly received does feed, and fat the
soul with spiritual riches, His bou^ty.
and powers into our flesh the seed of immortality. Shall I admire thy infinite
bounty, in making us this present of thy Body, a present that surpasses the
price of al things created, a present of thine own self, of infinite value,
for with the same Body thou gave us thy soul and deity, which are
inseparable companions, and therefore in this holy Table, we have a lively
figure, and pledge of the future felicity, which shall be to live in heaven of
thy self, and to enjoy the immortal food of thy self: what shall I then say
of this banquet, O my Redeemer, but only that I am oppressed and overwhelmed in
the consideration of thy infinite power, wisdom, and goodness! O dear depth!
O sweet Savior, what will thou work in them, who have this grace to receive
thee holily? Do me, sweet Jesus, this favor, thus to eat and receive thee,
and to see my self always drowned in the depth of thy infinite charity.

How to Hear Mass. CHAP. VI.
HAVING finished his prayer, he shall hear the divine Office, and go to
Confession if he need, and shall hear Mass to receive afterward, which to do
profitably, it is good to know the manner that every Christian must keep to
hear it well.

Purity and devotion to hear Mass.
First he must have his soul not only pure, as much as may be from sin, but
also prepared with a special devotion; for sin is a general bar to all
blessings, and therefore whosoever will fruitfully assist the divine
mysteryes, and get good by hearing or dealing with them, he must be cleansed
from sin by Confession, and if he want means thereto, by holy contrition and
sorrow for his faults, with purpose to confess at his next commodity, as we
have said elsewhere.

Attentio^ to help devotion.
Secondly, he must be attentive to every part thereof, to enkindle devotion. Our
Pilgrim, as also any man else that loves piety, shall consider three things,
which he must have learned in the Cathechizme school. Mass the chief actio^
in the Church.
The 1. that Mass is the most noble and high Action that is, or ever was done
in the Church of God; for it is the sacrifice of Christians, a sacrifice of all
sacrifices, the verity and unity of all the old ones in the law of Nature, and
of Moses, Old sacrifices gave no grace.
which were but figures and shadows hereof. In those were only the bodies of
bruit beasts, and other offeringes of small virtue or value, as which could
not forgive sin; in this is offered an unbloody sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedech, that very body which was offered on the Cross in a bloody
sacrifice, after the order of Aaron; Chrysostom. ^ c. 6^. ad po. ^nti^^ (...) 13 in
Mat
the body not of the creature, but of the Creator; the Body of God, of
inestimable value; the Body whereby the sovereign Justice was fully satisfied,
and the whole world redeemed, and wherewith the souls of the faithful are
nourished, and their bodies quickened, and in which the world shall be judged;
that Body which makes an offering most highly acceptable to God, and most
profitable to his Church, because it is the body of his Son, by the which he
has been most highly honored, as also because it was offered by the same
Son himself, whose vicar only the Priest is; as in Baptism, and the other
Sacraments, wherein our Savior as the first cause, works, baptizeth,
confirms, absolueth by the means of the Priest, as by an instrument: and
this being the body of God, there is also his soul and deity, and all the
Court of heaven, to honor the body of their King.

The second thing which the Pilgrim shall consider, is the admirable manner
whereby this Body is made present upon the Altar, and there remains present;
How the body of Christ is present in the Mass
for it is not by any natural or common cause, but as we have said, by the
almighty word of our Savior who made the world of nothing, the which word does
transubstantiate the Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood, that is, make the
substance of his Body succeed the substance of Bread, which departs: there
remains notwithstanding the color, taste, and other accidents of Bread and
Wine, under the which, as under a veil, the Body and Blood of our Savior are
present as long as these accidents remain in their being which are so many
wonders above nature, as there be sorts of things therein, The profit which
the well disposed soul receaueth of the Mass.
and so many testimonies of the infinite power, wisdom, and goodness of God,
the worker of such high effects.

The third is the fruit we may reap by the good disposition, wherewith we
hear Mass, and the danger in hearing it negligently: our Pilgrim therefore
shall, come provided and instructed in the meditation of these three said
things, and thereby shall take occasion to conceive a profound respect, and a
great admiration, with a like affection toward this divine and most admirable
mystery. Besides this general preparation, he shall endeavor also to be
attentive to all the parts of the Mass, and to draw particular profit from
each of them, following with his ears, eyes, mouth, and heart, all the actions
of the Priest sacrificing, and therefore having answered him to the prayers,
and the Confession which he makes at his entrance unto the Altar, he shall
accompany him through all the Actions of the Sacrifice, which are four.

How the Christian should behave himself in every part of the Mass. CHAP. VII.
IN the first part of the Mass, which is from the beginning to the Offertory,
Four parts of the Mass
he shall hear the Introite, or Entry of the mass, the Epistle, the Gospel,
the Creed, and the Offertory, and specially the prayers; and if he understand
no latin, it shall suffice that he know in general, that the Priest reads
Scripture, that he prays to God, and prepares himself to the sacrifice,
which knowledge is sufficient to give life and quickening to his devotion, and
so for his part shall prepare himself, saying his own prayers to God, The
Mass an abridgeme^t of al old Sacrifices, and of all acts of deuotio.
and specially he shall have regard to the ceremonies of the Priest, which are
natural marks and signs, speaking in a language common and intelligible to
all the world, both learned and ignorant, and distilling into the soul the
Majesty of this divine action by all the means and ways, that a mystery can
be carried to the heart of the beholders. For as the Eucharist is an abridgement
of all the old Sacrifices, so is the Mass of all the ceremonies which man does
naturally use to confess, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 9. Aug. ciuit. l 17. c. 20. Leoho.
8. de passio. Domini. Psalm. 121.^.
reverence and adore the supreme deity, and which holy men have used, as holy
Scripture do teach us. Therein the Priest employeth the noblest parts and
gestures of his body, with all the facultyes of his soul, his understanding,
will, and memory: He hearkeneth what he reads and what God says to him in
his Scriptures, he lifts his eyes to heaven, in token that there he
acknowledges God to reign whom he imploreth; he casts them down in sign
of humility; he lifts up and joins his hands, Luc. 18.13. Psalm. 13^. Phil.
^
stretches abroad his arms, boweth his knees, turns him from the East unto
the West, from the West unto the East, from the South unto the North, from the
North unto the South; he kisseth the Altar with his mouth; he prayseth God with
his tongue; he speaks high, he speaks low, he keeps silence; he serves
the smelling with Incense; he takes and gives the refection of the sacrifice.
Finally, he imployeth together with his soul, all the senses and religious
offices of his body, to the homage of this mysterious and divine service, and
affoardeth as many means to excite the heart unto devotion. The Pilgrim then
shall note the whole, and shall draw profit from the whole, conforming himself
to the mouinges, and exterior ceremonies, and performing interiourly according
to his power, together with the Priest, that which they signify.

In the second part, The 2. part of the Mass
which is from the Offertory to the Consecration, where the Priest offers to
God the Bread and Wine to consecrate, and pronounces with a low voice, sundry
godly prayers, asking the divine assistance. He shall offer with him, the bread
and the wine offered by him and shall offer up himself, namely when the Priest
turns him, exhorting the assistants to pray to God, to the end ^e ^^ceaue
this sacrifice in a grateful odor, saying: Orate fratres.
Pray Bre^hren etc. at which warning he shall say the prayer, which he says
who serves in the name of all the people, in these words: Our Lord receive
this sacrifice at thy hands, to the praise and glory of his name, to our
profit, and of his whole holy Church. Suscip. ^^ Dominus ho. sacri^cium etc.
After he shall offer up his soul and body, with all that he has, in
holocaust to this sovereign Majesty, who has been so liberal, and so gentle
to us, as to give himself after so many fashions, and to familiarize himself
in this action, Per ^m^^a^. s^^ula ^e. (...). Dominus ^o^^^^m. Su^^ co^^^.
with so amiable a presence, and so strait an amity.

When the Priest pronounces the four precedent clauses of the Preface, he
shall answer thereto with heart and mouth, and withal his might shall excite
his faith and love toward God, especially at these words: Sursum corda; Our
hearts on high, (...) what is mine. Come, O my Lord, and enter into the house of
thy poor servant, to strengthen it, to beautify it, to make it pure with thy
purity, and beautiful with beauty, capable of thy blessings, enriched with
(...) ^races, and happy with thy present goodness. Amen.

After, he shall receive the body of our Lord at the hands of the Priest,
withal the humility that a poor servant can bring, receiving into his house
the Majesty of his God; and if any foolish conceit happen to fall into his
fancy, such as the Devil often uses at that time to cast into the bosom of
the devout soul, to break and disgust the taste of his devotion, he shall
contemn it, and make no reckoning thereof, but shall pass on, sticking to the
Meditation of the B. Sacrament which he comes to receive.

In the last part of the Mass, which is all that follows after the
Communion, consisting in nothing but prayers and thanksgiving, he shall thank
God, and say the prayer following.

A prayer after receiving. CHAP. X.
IMMORTAL thanks be unto thee for thy favor, O my Creator and Redeemer,
thanks for this heavenly food, this virginal flesh, this deified body, for
this precious purifying, quickening and deifying Blood. In this banquet, O my
Lord, I behold the meruailes of thy almighty power, of thy infinite goodness
and wisdom, and acknowledge that to be true, which thy Prophet did sing long
since, Psalm. 110. Our Lord has made a memorial of his wondrous works, he
has prepared food for those that fear him. O my soul, now fill thy self,
seeing that having taken this food, thou have within thee him that fills all:
satisfy thy self on this meat, which gives glory and life everlasting. O my
senses here be you astonished; you my eyes see nothing but the whitenes and
roundnes of the bred, and thou my tongue feel only the taste of a frail
eleme^^, and thou my understanding can not with the wings of thy discourse
ascend to the height and knowledge of this mystical banquet. It is true, but be
not therefore sorry, O my senses, for such a noble dish must be served to a more
noble taste, the taste of the soul; and not to the palate of the body, as other
earthly meats are, taken indeed by the body, but chewed and tasted by the
spirit, considered by the eyes of faith, and consumed and digested by the fire
of heavenly charity, not by the heat of our body, or mortal stomach. But you
are not here left without your part also; for this flesh that seedeth the soul
gives also immortality to the body, and will bring you to the immortal glory
in the general resurrection of al mankind. O flesh immortal! O flesh
virginal! O flesh divine! O fruitful virgin! O most pure Mother, who have
seasoned this flesh and bread for us; blessed be thou, and blessed be the fruit
of thy womb for ever and ever. Procure, O Virgin, by thy intercession, that it
may conserve me in the love of thy Son, in the purity of thy grace, and
nourish me unto life everlasting, Amen. Mass being done, and his prayers said,
he shall return to his Inn to his refection.

How to hear a Sermon. CHAP. XI.
BECAUSE the hearing of the word of God after Mass is one of the most common
and important actions of Christians, and wherein diverse errors are committed,
which deprive the soul of the fruit it might receive thereby; the pilgrim
that will profit, The art of hearing is as necessary as the art of speaking well.
and get salvation by his devotion must needs be instructed in this exercise,
and know as well how to use his ears, as the Preacher his tongue. The common
sort think it sufficient, that the Preacher can speak well, and mount up to a
pulpit, or chair furnished with goodly stuff, thence to sell his words to the
ears of hearers; but it is not so, for reason does tell us, that the art of
hearing is as necessary, as the art of speaking, and our Savior the true
wisdom does teach us, that the greatest part of the hearers of his word,
loose their time for want of this art, and preparation. For of four sorts he
assigns, he signifies, Matthew. 1^
that three reap no profit thereof. The word of God is the meat and medicine
of the soul, and as the body if it be ill prepared, instead of being nourished
by its material meat, The word of God, the medicine of the soul.
or helped by the potion it receaueth into the stomach, were it the most
exquisite in the world, waxes worse, and ingendreth crudities, and dies by
the medicine; in like sort he gets little good by the sermon, who hears it
without due preparation: and the Aphorism of that great Physician, Hippocrates.
The more we nourish the body ill affected, the more we hurt it, is found most
true by similitude in the soul; for the more that an impure and indisposed
soul is preached unto, Why the Pharisees waxed worse by our Saviors sermons.
the more it becomes ouercharged and weak. And therefore the Scribes, and Pha
isies waxed worse by hearing the sermons of our Savior. And that which
Aristotle wrote, that young men, that is, such as suffer themselves to be
c^ryed away with the heat of their sensuality and passion, are not proper
scholars for the school of Philosophy, may b tter be verified of Chri tians
ill disposed and prep^red to hear good instructions, that they are not capable
to hear the word of God.

How it importe h to be prepared for the word of God.
Contrariwise, a good and due preparation reapeth an unspeakable fruit even from
a mean Pre cher, and we have known sometimes hearers well disposed to have
undertaken notable resolutions of penance, and virtue, by one word, yea by
some one gesture of him that spoke; who at other times, without that
disposition have been hardened and obstinate to the amplifications, and forces
of the most fine and rare eloquence. One spark of fire is sufficient to kindle
a whole barrel of powder, but a great cole is not sufficient to heat a piece
of Brass.

The word of God is the electuary of the soul.
This therefore is a most necessary knowledge to hear well the word of God, the
word of all words, the electuary of the soul, the bird of Paradise, which
caryeth in her beck and under her wings the Manna of the true and heavenly
philosophy. Our Savior the essential word of his Fa her taught us this
science, Matt. 13.
in that notable sermon he made of the Seed, where assigning four sorts of
hearers, whereof three were ill, he shows what faults they should want, Three
so tes of ill hearers signified.
and what qualities they should have, that would reap profit by his word. The
first sort were those whom he compares to the high way, where the seed of the
sower falling, and not being covered with the earth, is pi^ked up, and eaten by
the Birds. The second, those, who ^ike a stony field, where the seed having
sprung a little up, and not finding root, is dried up and withered by the heat
of the Sun. The third, those who are as a good field, but full of thorns,
where the seed growing up, is at last choked. By the first similitude are
declared those, who negligently hear the Sermon, The first are the negligent
(...).
or only to seed the ears with curiosity, to hear some fine wouen discourse,
(...) choice words, some subtle sentences, without ^y ^a^e to learn how to
know, or amend themselue^ and finally who go to the sermon, as to some lecture
or (...) Philosopher or Sophister. Such people have their soule^ (...) with a
thousand fond cogitations, and are ^^po^^l to the prekings of the Devils, who
like spiritual (...) snatch out of their memory, the grain of that divine
seed and will keep it from bringing forth any fruit, or growing to any
greenesse. The 2. and ^^ut and sinners.
By the second is noted the vice o^ those who receive and hide this seed in
their soul with some spiritual joy, and gladness, but into a small depth of
good ground, o^ true devotion, whether it be that they are l^^den with diverse
sins, as it were inward stones hardened by ill customs, or for that they are
not thoroughly resolved to do well, and therefore subject to wither at the least
heat of temptation. The third worldly and covetous.
By the third, he reprehendeth those, who are overwhelmed with the solicitude
of worldly affairs who though they have a soul good and well disposed, yet
the heavenly seed cannot there grow, but is stifled and choked with the
press and multitude of their worldly and thorny businesses. True hearers of
the word of God.
To have then the field of our soul we ^^isled, and our ears well prepared to
hear, and receive fruitfully the word of God, we must be free and exempt from
these vices, and have the contrary qualities, and to bring unto the sermon a
sound and straight intention, to seek our own health and salvation, The
hireling, and vain preacher.
which is also the true end of the Preacher. For he that preaches for profit,
is but a poor Mercenary, and a poor merchant in the house of God, giving gold
for straw; and he that preaches for vain glory, and to be esteemed, is a
simple fellow, and is like him that charge his harquebtize with pellets of
gold, or Saphires, to shoot at Crows. The faithful Preacher.
A faithful preacher seeks God, and the good and salvation of his hearers,
and his Auditors must hear to that end also, and recea^e their instruction
with a reciprocal ear, and equal intention, whereby he shall come with great
desire, well to understand the Preacher, with a firm resolution well to amend
himself, and put in practice what he hears. For to hear it attentively only
to remember it, and repeat it, is not to attain to the chief point of
profit; he must put it in execution, and show by his works, and not by words
only that he does well remember it. Epi^tetus in l^nch^r.
The sheep (says a certain Philosopher) does show by her good milk, by her
fine fleece, and by her sweet and sauoury flesh, that she is well fed, and not
by casting what she eats. So our Savior pronounces happy, not those that
hear his word, but those that hear and keep it. Those that have their soul
and ears so qualifyed before and after the sermon, make the fourth kind of
hearers, whom our Savior approves and prayseth, Luc. 1^.86.
and those are only they that take profit in hearing his word, and do reap
greater or lesser harvest, according to the measure that the field of their
soul is cultiuated with these virtues by more or less preparation. Our
Pilgrim therefore shall endeavor to be of the best prepared, and most
diligent, that he may be of the richest, in the reaping of those spiritual
blessings.

The After-dinner, and the Evening of the two and twentieth day. Exercises of
Devotion. CHAP. XII.
HE shall pass the Afternoon in the exercise of pious works, in the reading
of some good book, in visiting the holy place, in viewing the votiue tables
hanging upon the Church walls, containing the miracles done there, by the
intercession of the Blessed Virgin, in hearing the sermon, Euensong, Litanies,
and Hymns that there are song by diverse Pilgrims, to the honor of the Son,
and his glorious Mother, to give alms if he has wherewithal, to confer
with spiritual men about some matters meet ^or the Virgins Deuote, especially
having that day been admitted to the Table of our Savior. Having thus
bestowed the day, he shall retire himself to his refection, and rest at his
lodging, with his accustomed prayers, taking some point of his morning
meditation, or of the Gospel read that day in the Mass, or some other
subject, which he shall choose, or take of his spiritual Father.

The three and twentieth day. A Meditation of the Conception of the Blessed
Virgin. CHAP. XIII.
THE Pilgrim in the second day of his ariue, and the three and twentieth of his
voyage, Epiph. cont Collirid. ser. 10. and ser. de laud Mar.
having prayed a while in his chamber, shall go early in the morning to the
Chapel, and there shall make his principal meditation of the morning, drawn
out of the subject of the Conception of the B. Virgin.

For entry thereunto, he shall set before his eyes the history of S. Ioachin,
and S. Anne, who being past hope of children, but by special favor from
heaven, Greg. Niss hom. de hum. Chr. gener. 17.
finding themselves both barren by nature, and ouer-aged, they perseuered in
prayer, demanding of God issue, to be delivered from the reproach of sterility,
and making a vow to consecrate unto God what he should send them. Niceph. l. 1.
c. 17. Germ. Constant. Pat. de Mariae oblation. Niceph. l. 1. c. 7. ex Epiph.
and Niss.


The first point shall contain the message which the Angel brought from
^eauen, that they should have a daughter of great virtue, Ioachim being on the
mountain praying, and S. Anne in her garden.

The second point shall propose certain figures of this future Conception; the
first shall be taken from the history of the creation of the world, where it is
said, That God created light before all things. This light was the matter
whereof God framed the Sun the fourth day, as S. Denu says, which is a
figure of the Conception of the B. Virgin; Genesis 1.26 S. Denis c. 4. de diu.
nominibus.
the mystical light whom God brought forth without corruption out of the
bareness of Ioachim and Anne, as of nothing, thereof afterward to form the
humanity of Jesus Christ, the Sun of the world, and to cause of her to be
borne both God and Man, S. Tho. 3. p. q. 60. c. 12.
the fourth day, that is in the Law of grace, which is the fourth estate, o^
day of the world; the first day having been under sin, the second under the
law of Nature, the third under the law of Moses.

Procl. ser. de natiuit. Deiparat.
The second figure shall be the earth whereof Adam was made which was free from
malediction, whereto it was after subject for sin. As therefore the first
earth, the matter of the first Adam was in the beginning without any curse or
malediction; S. Bruno Carth. in Psalm. 101.
so the second earth, whereof the second Adam Jesus Christ was to be formed,
was without the malediction of that original stain in her conception.

Pet. Dam. in sermon. de virg. Ass. Dominic. tract de corpore Christi.
The third shall be Gedeons Fleece, wherein the Pilgrim shall consider, that as
the Fleece is engendered without corruption, and feels no passion of the Body;
so the Blessed Virgin, was in her generation without sin, or any stayne of
concupiscence, a prerogative given only to her above al other children of Adam
engendered by the ordinary course, in respect that she was to be the mother of
God, by another prerogative unheard of before. Luc. 2.44
Jeremy, and S. John were indeed sanctified in the womb of their Mother,
notwithstanding they were first infected; Ierem 15. Hier. in 3. Isa.
they were healed, but not exempted from that wound. The B. Virgin by a more
noble privilege, was preserved both from the wound, and from the scarre
thereof.

The third point shall consider some prophecyes of the same Conception, Psalm.
84.
as out of David: Lord thou have blessed thy earth: that is, the Son of God,
who should preserve from sin the Virgin that was to be his Mother. Ar. ibid.
and Isid. ad Floren.
Also: The Highest has sanctified his Tabernacle, that is the Virgin, who was
to be the Tabernacle of God, and therefore was by him prepared and sanctified
from the beginning with a sanctification most meet for such a Son, Psalm. 48.
and such a Mother. In the same sense says Solomon: Sap. 9.
Wisdom has built her self a house. It is then a most perfect house, seeing
Wisdom it self has built it, a house all beautiful in the foundation, and
every part, according to an other prophecy: Cant. 4.
Thou art all beautiful, and there is no spot in thee.

In the fourth point he must consider, that for diverse reasons, Why her
conception was sanctified. The first reason. The 2.
this Conception was to be exempted from Original sin. 1. For that it was no
way decent, that the Virgin, which should conceive the Son of God, should be
marked in her generation with that spot, which makes men, children of the
Devil; for thereby the Son had been some way dishonored. 2. Seeing that
sundry servants of her Son, were both before and after her sanctified in
their mothers womb, as Hieremy, and S. John, as we have said; it were reason,
that the generation of the Mother of the Holy of Holyes should be honored with
some more noble prerogative, and that not only she should be cleansed from
sin as other Saints were, but also preserved from all uncleanness in her
Mothers womb, as she was in all her life. The third
3. For that in this prerogative do shine the power, wisdom, and goodness of
God; for here appeared the work of an Almighty, Power.
in hindering that the poison which infected all the children of Adam in their
origin, should not in any sort touch, either flesh, or soul of her, who was
chosen to bear the sovereign Physician of mankind. There appeared the glory
of his infinite wisdom, Wisdom
in that he could separate unto himself a Mother free from all sort of sin;
therein appeared the liberality of his sovereign bounty, not only in having so
plentifully bestowed his graces upon this glorious Virgin, but also in having
preserved her from all evil, Bounty.
from the first instant of her being. These shall be the 4. points of his
morning meditation, out of all which the Pilgrim shall gather co^clusions,
either to exalt the greatness of the divine Majesty, and to admire it in this
his work, or to stir up himself to the reverence of the Mother of God, and
to enkindle himself to devotion in her holy service, to the glory of the
Creator, admirable in the framing of this his Creature.

Be thou therefore eternally praised, A Prayer to God.
O Creator of all things, and sovereign Maker of the Mother of thy Son,
Thou did appear great and admirable in creating the heavens the throne of
thy Majesty, and the earth thy footstool: yet do thou appear more
wonderful in this work; for thou made in her an heaven and earth, of which
stuff thy Son was to make, and take the cloak of his holy humanity, a
heaven which out of her substance should give the Sun of the world; an earth,
that should bring forth the Savior of the world; a heaven and earth conceived
miraculously of the barren, to conceive afterward by a greater miracle, him
that made heaven and earth, and all things of nothing. O happy hour that gave
the beginning to this divine generation, and more happy that measured the
progress, and most happy that saw it perfect and finished. To the B. Virgin.
O noble Virgin! O noble seed of our heavenly light! O earth of our fruit! O
mother of our salvation, who can worthily speak of the course of thy life,
seeing the very beginning thereof exceeds the tongues, and capacities of men
and Angels.

The After-dinner of the three and twentieth Day. Of the purity of Christian
actions in their intention. CHAP. XIIII.
IN the afternoon the Pilgrim shall attend, as the day before, to pious works,
shall hear^ the sermon and divine Office, shall read some good book, shall
confer with his Ghostly Father, or other devout persons, shall say his beads,
give alms, or beg for himself, or others, sing some Hymn of the B. Virgin,
or hear the Salve Regina song, or some other for the time. In the evening he
shall make his meditation in the Church upon some point of his morning
meditation, laboring thoroughly to know, and praise the greatness and goodness of
of God in the excellent purity of this Conception, and shall understand, that
it is much more beseeming the Majesty of God and his Mother, to be conceived
without original sin, then to be cleansed from it; more noble to have been
light from the beginning, then of darkness to have been made light; more
approaching to the sense and mind of the Catholic Church, which honors this
conceptio^ with a solemn feast, though she does not condemn of heresy, those
who believe that she was touched with original sin, but after from heaven
sanctified.

Pure intion the foundation of all Christian actions. Luc. 11.34.36.
He shall gather also certain conclusions, and practical rules of his
spiritual discourse; as that our actions should be pure in their conception
and beginning, in the thought, and in the will, that we must begin by the
light, to be children of the light; that the good and pure intention which our
Savior calls, The eye of the soul, ought to be the foundation of all our
works. These and such like rules he shall frame in his mind, and shall verify
them in the life of the Blessed Virgin, who from her infancy, never sought in
her actions any thing but the glory of God. This has been her light, her
beginning, her end, in all that she did, thought, or said. Upon these reasons
and examples, our Pilgrim shall make a full purpose to reform his life to
Godward, and to serve him with all his heart, to the imitation of his glorious
Mother, and shall say.

O B. Virgin, To the B. Virgin.
all bright and beautiful cast some beams of thy divine favor upon the soul
of this poor sinner thy devoted servant; drive away my darkness with my holy
light, and my coldness with thy heavenly hea^e, and strengthen my weakness with
thy merciful^ power. Make me see that Sun that came out of thy bowels; make
me fe^le the vanity of this vain world, and the firmness and solidity of
those goods, which this thy Son has g^tten for us with his precious blood;
and that this may be the profit of the pi^grimage, which I have undertaken to
thy house, and of the vow I have made to thee, O Virgin of all Virgins.

The four and twentieth Day. A Meditation of the Nativity of the glorious
Virgin. CHAP. XV.
THE meditation of this morning shall be of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin
in three points.

The first shall consider some figures of this Nativity, The firmament.
as the Firmament which God made, and filled with many goodly stars; to the
likeness of this B. Virgin, a living heaven, and firmament, as the holy Doctors
call her, high and sol^d in perfection, marked with a thousad goodly virtues in
her soul, Earthly Paradise.
as with spiritual stars. Also the earthly Paradise p^anted with most
excellent fruits, and made, in the Month of Septer for the dwelling of the
first Adam, which is a figure of the Virgin given unto the world in the same
month, adorned with all sort of graces, a garden of delights, where the second
Adam Jesus Christ should dwell much more happily, Exodus 2^.20.
and pleasantly, then the other in the earthly paradise. Also the Arc of the
Testament made of incorruptible wood, covered with plates of gold within and
without, Heb. 9.
where the heavenly Manna was kept, as this Virgin exempt from all corruption
in her Conception, beautifyed both in soul and body with excellent gifts,
has given and kept the Manna that feeds our souls, Jesus Christ: and
discoursing upon these figures, he shall admire the goodness of God, bestowing on
the world so noble a creature, and shall thank him therefore, and stir up
himself to devotion of the Creator, and of this B. Virgin.

Prophecies of her Nativity. Number. 24.
For the second point, he shall take some Prophecye, as among others, this: A
star shall rise out of Jacob, and a man from Israel. The B. Virgin is
signified by this star, so called by the Saints, by reason of her heavenly
and eminent virtues, and her Son by the name of Man. For he is verily the Man
of men, Cant. 6.
and Savior of men. Also: Who is she that comes ascending like the morning
rising, beautiful as the Moon, chosen as the Sun, terrible as a battle in
array: This is the B. Virgin appearing, and coming to the world with her
celestial purity, next and before the Sun, the spiritual morning, and more
beautiful a thousand times, then our worldly morning; for she did not only
bring tidings of the day at hand, but brought him forth, and not only did make
the end of the night of this world, but also the day of the grace of our
Redeemer. Also: A rodd shall rise out of the root of less, Isa. 11.
and from the root thereof shall spring a flower. This Rod is the B. Virgin,
says S. Hierome, having no other shrubbe joined with her: Hier. 16.
The flower is her Son Jesus Christ, Cant. 2.
The flower of the field, as he is called, issued from this Virgin, whereof the
same Prophet said, cap. 7. Behold a a Virgin shall conceive, Isa. 7.
and bring forth a son. Upon these and like prophecies he shall discourse in
his meditation, still gathering the fruit of love or admiration to the praise
of God, and this holy Virgin.

In the third point he shall meditate the Nativity it self, rejoicing therein
and honoring it as the chiefest that has been among men, The nativity of the B
virgin most honorable, and joyful.
worthy of all joy and honor. Others hitherto have been of misery and sadness,
as the wiser sort of men have acknowledged: and the Princes of the earth that
made feasts upon their birth day, were ill advised and ignorant of their own
estate and condition, for their birth was but uncleanness and an entry unto
misery; but this is of good fortune and joy, being without al deformity of
sin, the only cause of al evils, and for that therein the world has received
the nearest beginning of salvation, the Mother of Messiah to come, of the
Savior at hand, of that Sun rising which should bring us the day so much
desired, and therefore the Church sings, and inuiteth her children to rejoice
in this day, saying: Let us with solemnity celebrate this feast of the Nativity
of her, who was ever a Virgin, the mother of God, Mary. This is the day that
saw borne the living heaven, this blessed earth, this star of the Sea, this
paradise of pleasure, this Arc of the Testament, this Rod of less, this fair
morning that brings the Sun; and so shall discourse on the joy of this
Nativity, and conclude with these or the like words.

O day desired above all the days of the precedent ages, or rather the only
day, all the rest being but night; To the birth day of the B. Virgin.
for seeing the morning did not appear before thee, and the bright shyning and
quickening sun was yet far distant from the Horizon of our Redemption,
surely all the days before thee were nights, and men that lived in those
days lived in darkness altogether, or at most in that small and weak light of
the Moon and stars of the law of Nature and Moses. Be thou therefore, O day
of such a Nativity, blessed above all the days of the world, and be thou, O
chamber, honored above all the Princely palaces of the earth, for having
received into thy bosom this rising star. O people of Sion, rejoice ye in
the birth of this Virgin, whom your mysteryes have so much celebrated, your
Prelates so much foretold, your Fathers so desired, as the best and most noble
flower of the race of your Kings, and of your Synagogue. Rejoice also, O ye
Gentiles, behold the morning that ends the night of your ignorance and
brings you the light of heaven: a Virgin that shall bear you a Redeemer; a
Queen that shall give you a King, that shall make you all Kings. Rejoice thou
also, O my soul, that thy eyes do see the place where this morning, this
Virgin, this star was first seen, and pray her there with a devout heart,
that with the abundance of her graces, she would obtain of this great God,
whom she gave unto the world, light to understand his holy laws, love to
embrace them, force to perform them, as long as thou shall walk Pilgrim upon
the earth, that thou may praise him eternally in heaven.

Having made his prayer, he shall hear Mass, and communicate with his
accustomed preparation, and employ all the morning in like exercises,

The After-dinner, and evening of the four and twentieth Day. Of the B. Virgins
Ancestors, and of the vanity of worldly greatness. CHAP. XVI.
IN the Afternoon having taken some honest recreation, in reading some good
book, or talking with his Ghostly Father, or some other of good conversation,
he shall hear Euensong, and the divine Office, and shall have his meditation
ready against night, The B. Virgin her Ancestors.
which shall be of the same matter of the first, gathering some new
instructions and points; as of the nobility of the B. Virgin, having for her
Ancestors the holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, so many Kings,
Princes, and Lords, as are recited, and named in the Ghospel of the day. The
vanity of worldly greatness.
Of the vanity of worldly greatness, and the solidity of virtue and eternal
goods, setting before his eyes on the one side the long list of those Princes,
and that notwithstanding, the house of David was brought to the condition of a
poor Artificer, the Scepter thereof being usurped by Herod, a stranger and
forrenner. How god raised the house of David.
Considering on the other side, how God would raise this royal house of David,
not by ordinary ways by abundance of honors and worldly treasures, but by
giving a Virgin that should surpass the nobility of all the Kings of the
earth, and who should bring forth a Son, that should restore the Kingdom,
The spiritual kingdom of David established by Jesus Christ.
and seat of his Father David, by a way worthy of an Almighty King, changing
earth to heaven, and time to eternity, writing his heavenly laws in the hearts
of m^n, and making them to be published over all the world, establishing with
the price of his own precious blood, an heavenly and everlasting kingdom,
therein to crown for Kings all his friends, and servants, and to heap on them
glory and everlasting riches. Of these and like considerations, he shall take
occasion to praise our Lord, so wise as to find such ways to repair the
ruins of mankind, so liberal to communicate his goods and graces to his
creatures, and namely to this sacred Virgin, to make her Mother of his Son,
and his Son Redeemer of the world. And having made his speech, and conclusion
of his devotion, he shall draw toward his lodging, and shall finish the rest
of his Journey, saying our Ladies Litanies, or other prayers, to take his
repose, and rise the more fresh, and fit for his morning exercise.

The five and twentieth Day. A meditation of the Presentation of the B. Virgin
in the Temple. CHAP. XVII.
THIS day, The B.V. presented to the Temple.
the Pilgrim having said his accustomed prayers at his lodging, shall go to
the holy House there to perform his principal Meditation, which shall be of
the presentation of the holy Virgin, when her father Ioachim, and Anne her
Mother, Niceph. l. 1. cap. 7. Niss. ser. de human. Christi. S. Euod. epist. ad
Antioch.
did bring her to the Temple of Jerusalem at three years of age, there to
offer, and consecrate her to God.

The prayer preparatory as before.

The first preamble shall represent S. Ioachim, and S. Anne, as standing at the
gate of the Temple to offer their little creature this Virgin, to the high
Priest to be admitted and received among the virgins consecrated to Almighty
God.

The second preamble shall demand grace duly to understand this mystery.

The first point shall be to consider, Our Bl. Ladies childhood, wonderful
every way.
that as the Conception of the B. Virgin was a work beyond the ordinary course
and law, by a singular grace, whereby she was so conceived of barren and old
parents, and by a special privilege above all the children of Adam preserved
from all sin and uncleanness, being all pure, and heavenly; as also her
Nativity was divine and correspondent to her Conception: so her childhood
exceeded the common course of others, and was endowed with all the blessings
that might make that age admirable: And if the holy Scripture says nothing
thereof, The son of Cresus Zoroastes Hercules. S. Ambrose. Plato.
it is because it may necessarily be presumed. Some children have been
marvelous for speaking a little after their birth; others for laughing when
they were borne; others for having killed serpents; S. Ambrose was honored
with a prodigious swarm of Bees, that set themselves on his mouth: who will
not then believe that the infancy of our B. Lady was honored with all
spiritual and rare graces, and that this part of her life was agreeable and
proportionate to the two preceding, The vertus of this virgin infant.
and ensuing parts thereof, which were all admirable: and therefore here the
contemplative soul must represent her a little creature, as a wonder of
creatures, a child prudent, sage, advised, modest, devout, having nothing
childish but body and years, and having a great soul in a small body, and
finally a Virgin bearing in her childhood all the qualityes and conditions that
should make the foundation of virtue, for the most noble, wise, courageous, and
most virtuous Lady of the world. And in such discourses he shall praise the
greatness of the workman, for having made such a creature, and shall stir up
his love and devotion to the service of him, and of this Virgin for the love of
him.

Why she was presented. The first cause.
The second point shall contain two causes among many other of this oblation,
whereof the nearest is the promise of S. Ioachim, and S. Anne, who had vowed to
God their fruit, to the imitation of that holy, but barren woman S. Anne the
Mother of the Prophet Samuel, who prayed unto God with warm tears to take away
the reproach of her sterility, with that promise, 1. Reg. 12 11.
that she would consecrate to his service the child he should give her; and so
having obtained of God a little Samuel, that was to be a great Prophet, she
did dedicate him to Gods service, 1. Reg. 2.
as soon as he was weaned: with like devotion did Ioachim and Anne offer their
daughter to the Temple, Niss. sup. Niceph. l. 1. c. 7.
as a present received by the special favor of God, and consecrated to God by
promise and vow they had made.

The other cause of this oblation is more high, that is, the election of God,
The 2. cause.
who had decreed before the creation of the world to make a pattern or
principal work in this B. Virgin, according as Wisdom makes her self to
say: I was created from the beginning, Eccl s. 14.
and before the world, that is, foreseen in the council of Eternity, and by
the same Providence chosen by God to be the Mother of his Son; he would
therefore, that as she was a singular work of his hand, so should she be
dedicated to him, as his own from her infancy by this particular ceremony,
whereby giving her to Ioachin and Anne, above the course of their natural
infirmity and years, he inspired also into the^ to offer her as a proper gift
of his liberality, that she might be blessed with all causes, as well
supernatural as natural, enriched with heavenly gifts in her soul, and
honored with the devotion of her Progenitors, and made capable of greater
benedictions. The offering of the Virg.
This was therefore the richest offering that hitherto was ever made to God in
his Temple; it was also the most noble piece, that ever came out of the
treasury of his holy Spirit: With what eye then think you did he receive her,
and with what admiration did the Angels-guardians of the Temple desire to
behold this divine star, rising in the heaven of the Temple of God? This
heavenly Virgin, that was to be the Mother of their Lord and Maker?

The third point of the Meditation, Of Virgins and men consecrated to Almighty
God. CHAP. XVIII.
IN the third point he shall meditate how God has always had in his Church,
Women consecrated to God have been always.
not only certain men dedicated to his service, who by a common name were
called Priests, but also women, as well Virgins (who after a certain time did
mary) as Widows, who remained in perpetual widowhood; a custom counted
heavenly among the Jews in the book of Exodus 38. where he says, that Moses
made a Vessel, or Lauatory of brass with the foot, Exodus 38.8.
of the looking glasses of those women, which fasted and watched in great
number before the door of the Tabernacle, whereof Rabbi Abraham writing says:
Rabbi Abraham.
This was the custom of women to dress, and adorn themselves every morning,
dressing their heads by a looking glass of brass, or of glass. Now there
were in Israel women pious and devout, who leaving the follies of the world,
did offer their Glasses to God, as needing them no more for the attiring of
their bodies, and they met every day before the gat of the Sanctuary in great
number, in manner of an army, and attended i^ prayer, and hearing the Law of
God. Of which words we gather first, that Moses made the foot of this Lauer
of those Glasses of brass, or steel molten, which being polished and
burnished, Lyra and others.
did serve for a Glass to such as washed, to see if there were any indecent
spot in their face; though some Doctors have less probably held, that these
Glasses were not melted, but rather set on as plates or bars: both opinions
come to one, but the first is more agreeable to the text of Scripture.

Looking glasses the instruments of vanity.
In the second place we gather, that these women did altogether renounce the
pomp of the world; for in sign heerof they offered to God their Glasses,
principal instruments of their vanity to be applied to some holy and sacred
use, and served God with all their strength, with goodly order and constancy,
like spiritual Amazons, and women of war, consecrated in the house of God,
Amazo^s women of war.
even as the Priests in their vocation made another sort of spiritual army, of
which principally the Creator in the Scripture is called, God of Hosts or
Armies, as ruling, and pleasing himself in them above all other companies of
men, they being the strength and ornament of his spiritual kingdom against
the armies of Satan, who being an Ape of Gods works has not omitted to
ordain like companies in his Kingdom; for as among the Idolatours he had his
sacrifices, Vestall Virgins exe^pted from Parents authority.
his Temples, and Priests, and other tokens of divinity to the imitation of
God, so caused he to be erected Houses of women in Egypt, Greece and other
places, and one the most noble of all the rest in the famousest seat of his
Tyranny, which was Rome, of the Vestall Virgins consecrated to Vesta the
Goddess of fire, whom they served unto 30. years, Aul. Gell. l. 1. Noct.
act. c. 12. Sueton. in Iul. Caes. c. 83. Hub. in suo Caesar. Alex. ab Alex. l.
5. cap. 12. ex Plutar. and alijs.
and afterward married, were respected of all the world, and honored with
many privileges; for they were exempt from the power of their Father and
Mother, from the day of their consecration, without any other letters of their
emancipation; they had authority to make their will, and were of that credit
and respect, that to them were given to keep the Testaments of the most noble
men of Rome that died, and the public contracts of peace and alliance. If the
Magistrate met them in the street, he returned to make them place, and saluted
them as if they had been Goddesses, and if in the way they chanced to meet
with any condemned person, they delivered them for that time, neither durst any
speak a dishonest word in their presence, as if they had been a certain
Deity; at the Theaters they had the most honorable place by themselves a part,
which honors no doubt were given to the imitation of the Hebrews, among whom
these religious women were inviolable, and held in great reverence, yet without
all show of superstition. Therefore the race of Hely the high Priest, was
accursed and rooted out, because his sons, 1. Reg. 21.22.
besides other sins had violated some of these, as in the book of the Kings
is signified. These women continued unto the time of our Savior, who being
brought to the Temple a child was ackowledged, and praised by one of them
called Anna, a Widow of 84. years, Luc. 2.37.
who departed not from the Temple, giving her self to fasting and praying day
and night, as S. Luke in his Gospel says, Chap. 2. In the company then of
these Virgins and holy Women was consecrated to God this Virgin of Virgins, and
Mother of al mothers, and Widow of widows, to sanctify and begin a
foundation for other virgins and widows, that should serve God in the Law of
Grace, consecrating to him by solemn vow their body and soul, not for a time,
but for all their life long. The B.V. remained in the Temple until the 14.
year of her age ended. Niceph. l. 2. cap. 3.
Here the Pilgrim shall meditate attentively, first what this chosen child
might do during her infancy in the house of her Father, which was even this
heavenly Chamber, wherein he makes his meditation? how many signs she gave in
this her young age of her present and future sanctity? In her carriage? In her
words and actions? In her modesty, in her obedience, in her going, in her eyes,
and in the government of all her senses and gestures?

Secondly, with what ardour and fervor of devotion and piety, with what
innocent purity of body and soul, with what consent and harmony of all the
great virtues of a celestial virgin she served that supreme Majesty in the
Temple, for eleven years she remained there? O little habitation! O happy
house of Nazareth, which first did behold to move and shine this beautiful
shining star, performing the course of her infancy within thy walls and
closure! that first heardst her speak, first did see her go, did first
behold her grave and modest footesteps and marchings! O Temple most honorable
in the holiness of this offering, in the greatness of this Queen, in the
dwelling of this Virgin! her self a Temple more royal then thou, builded of
more precious matter, and by a wiser workman then he that made thee! a living
Temple a work of the Holy Ghost, built of precious stone, and adorned withal
sort of graces! who was to be a Tabernacle and Pauilion to the King of Kings,
and a refuge to mankind! O God great work man of this wonder, as of all
others, be thy name blessed for ever in her, thy liberality praised, thy
goodness exalted and magnifyed!

O glorious Virgin, O great-little Lady, an offering most pure, most
beautiful, and most acceptable to the eyes of the divine Majesty in thy
infancy, and in all thy youth, which thou did spend in the service of thy
Creator, obtain for me, that I may be a pure and clean offering unto his
altar, that I may serve thee day and night, and that if my years passed have
been ill spent, at least the rest of my life may be consecrated to the praise
of thy Creator and mine, that my thoughts words and works may be a continual
offering to his Temple, and that such may be the life and pilgrimage of thy
devoted Pilgrim.

This shall be the speech, and the end of his morning meditation, after he
shall hear Mass, and the rest of the divine service, until dinner time.

The After-dinner, and evening of the five and twentieth Day.
IN the afternoon he shall use the same exercises of devotion that he used the
days before. In the evening he may read the history of the Presentation of our
B. Lady, and gather thence some new profit of admiration, love, zeal, devotion
toward God, and the B. Virgin: the like he may do at midnight, except he had
rather choose some other subject.

The six and twenty Day. The morning Meditation, of the Espousall of the B.
Virgin with S. Joseph. CHAP. XIX.
THIS morning the Pilgrim shall take, as following the former, the Espousall of
the B. Virgin with S. Joseph, which was done by divine dispensation, for causes
which we must consider afterward, after she had remained in the Temple until
fifteen years of age, at which time the virgins were commonly wont to be placed
in marriage according to the ordinary course, and practice of the Jews.

The prayer preparatory shall be as accustomed.

The first preamble shall represent the B. Virgin and S. Joseph betrothed
together. The Scripture tells not by who^, but we may think it was by the
high Priest, Iosep. lib. cont Ap^.
or one of the principal, as the common tradition of the Jews, touched by
Gregory Nissen, or by the chief or nearest of kindred in the Fathers absence,
according to the custom of the Jews, Tob. 7.24
whereof we have an example in the book of Tobie, where it is said, that
Ragnell married his daughter with young Tobie, joining their right hands with
these words and ceremonies: Vide Gereb in Rituali Iudaorum de Sponsalibus.
The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob be with you, and join
you together, and fulfill his blessings upon you.

The second preamble shall demand a special light to know this mystery.

The first point shall be to consider, how marvelous this marriage was, The
marvelous marriage of the B. Virgin.
and accompanied with prerogatives extraordinary of honor and grace, as well
as her Conception, Nativity, Infancy, and Presentation, and all the degrees of
the life of this most happy Virgin, as we have said in the former Meditation.

The wonders and prerogatives of this Marriage amongst others were these. 1.
That both parties were not only virgins, but purposed so to continue. Of the B.
Virgin Mary none may doubt; for the Scripture does evidently show, Married with
vow of continence.
that she had made a vow of perpetual chastity, and the faith of the Church
is, that she was always a Virgin, before, in, and after her childbirth. S.
Hierome disputing against Heluidius that infamous heresiarch: Aug. l. de S.
Virg. Greg. Niss de Cr natiuit. Joseph a pertuall virgin adu. Helu. ad finem.
Aug sermon. 15. de not. Domini.
Thou houldest (says he) without reason, that Mary did not continue a Virgin,
but I hold with reason, not only the contrary, but that Joseph also was a
virgin by Mary: and gives the reason saying: To the end that the Son of God
might be borne of a virginal marriage. S. Augustine, of the same spirit: Hold
thou, O Joseph thy virginity, common with the Virgin thy spouse; for that the
power, and strength of the Angels shall be borne of her. Let Mary in her flesh
be the spouse of Christ in keeping her Virginity; be thou also the Father of
Christ, by thy care of chastity, and honor of thy Virginity. Again: Rejoice
thou Joseph, and be glad of the virginity of Mary, who only in thy marriage have
deserved to have a virginal affection; for by the merit of thy virginity, thou
art deprived of the act of marriage, with this gain, that thou art called the
Father of our Savior. And diverse other Fathers and Saints, Theodoret, Beda,
Bernard, Anselme, Thomas, Gerson, and almost all the Latin Doctors that have
written since, Petr. Da. ep. 11. c. 4. ad Nicol. Romans Pontif.
hold the same. And Peter Damianus a noble writer of his age, says boldly,
That, this is the faith of the Catholic Church. And surely if our Savior
being to go out of this world unto his Father, thought it not meet to commit
the custody of his Mother a Virgin, though of good years, to the keeping and
trust of any but of a Virgin, Gers. ser. 5. de not. B. Mariae.
that is, to S. John; is it not like, that being young, and not his Mother, he
would mary her to a man that was not a virgin, and that had not made a vow to
persevere in that estate? we must think therefore that the B. Virgin was
assured to Joseph, and he to her again, with purpose of perpetual continency,
instructed thereunto by the secret instinct of the holy Ghost, and strengthened
with a lively faith, that God would able them to live both virgins, and married
folks together.

Secondly, this marriage was marvelous in this point above other common
marriages, that notwithstanding the purpose of virginity in them both, yet was
it a true marriage, and the Scripture does plainly teach this truth; Ambr. de
inst. virg. S. Thom. 3. p. q. 29. art. 1.
for it calls the B. Virgin, the spouse and wife of Joseph; and this is the
belief of the Doctors, and of the Church. S. Ambrose says: The Bl. Virgin
the mother of our Savior, being betrothed to her husband, was called his wife,
even as marriage is called marriage, when it is made by common consent of wills;
for it is not the losing of Virginity, Amb in 2. l. c. 1. in Luc.
but the co^iugall consent and alliance that makes the marriage. Again:
Marvel not to hear the B. Virgin often in the Scripture called, the wife of
Joseph, although he never knew her; for this does not signify, The essence of
marriage.
that she lost her virginity, but that she was married unto him. He means, as
other Divines do say, that the only consent, and lawful, and mutual union of
wills, and not carnal knowledge, does tie the band of Matrimony, and the
essential knot of marriage. S. Augustine: Joseph is called an husband, S. Aug.
de nupt. and concupis^. l. 1. c. 11.
by reason of the first faith of his assurance given to the B. Virgin, although
he never knew her carnally, nor might do; neither therefore was vain, or
false that name of husband, for this Virgin ought to be more holily and
admirably pleasing to her spouse, who was to be fruitful without the work of
man, unequal in lignage, equal in faith and fidelity. And a little before
exhorting the faithful to this continency, Wedding without bedding.
upon the example of this marriage: By this example (says he) is signified to
married Christians, that marriage may be made and vowed by common consent, with
the mutual affection of the heart and spirit only, without lying together. And
indeed many have lived in this sort; Henry the 2. Emperor with Chunegund, both
a beautiful, and young Princes; Valerian with S. Cecily; Edward King of
England, with Editha; and that noble Frenchman Eleazarus with Delphinia that
noble Lady; and a thousand others, whose names are written in the book of
life, though they be unknown to men.

Thirdly this marying is marvelous for the admirable virtues, The love and
fidelity of this couple.
and namely for the conjugal faith and charity of both parties, and by the
excellency of lignage, and by all that may make a marriage complete: All the
good of marriage was found here, (says S. Augustine) the fruit Jesus Christ,
Aug. l. 2. de nupt. and conc. c. 11.
the faith without adultery, and the Sacrament without divorce; and the issue
such as surmounteth the fecundity of all the Mothers that ever were, or shall
be, as also the fidelity, charity, and all other virtues of married folks,
were there found singular and rare.

The second point of the Meditation. Of the causes of the Marriage between the
B. Virgin, and S. Joseph. CHAP XX.
THE second point shall meditate the causes of this marriage; for both parties
being resolved to keep continency, seems that they needed not to marry at al:
S. Thom. 3. p. q. 28. art. 1.
but the more this marriage may seem to be against reason, so much the more may
it seem divine, and considerable. The Saints yield diverse causes, whereof one
concerns the person of the Son of God, others concern his Mother, and some
others, our Faith.

Seven causes of this marriage.
The first is, that our Savior should not be rejected of the Jews, who not
believing that a Virgin could bear a child, would surely have judged him
illegitimate, and to have been borne of a dishonest woman; whereof S. Ambrose
says: Who could have blamed the Jews, S. Thom. 3. p q 29. art. 10. Ambr. in
Luc. 7.
or Herod, persecuting Jesus Christ, if he had been thought to be
illegitimate? And if they did persecute him notwithstanding, having a good
conceit of his nativity, what would they have done, if they had judged him, to
have been borne of adultery?

The second, that he might be known to be the Son of David by the Genealogy
of his line and issue, which was always done by the line of the Father, as
appears by S. Luke and S. Matthew, who deduced it; whereby Joseph being
proved to be of the house of David, they could not doubt but that the B. Virgin
was so also (she being an heir who might not be married out of their own
lineage) and that the child borne of her was the Son of David.

The third, that he might be helped not only by the care of his Mother, but
also of her husband, for whom it was more meet to undertake and menage such a
business then for a woman. And therefore when he was to execute any thing, the
commandment was always directed to Joseph, as when there was question of
going to Egypt, Matthew. 2.13. Luc. 2.48
or returning back, and other like.

The fourth, to the end that the Virgin should not be infamed or punished as
unchaste; so that our Savior chose rather to be accounted the Son of a
Carpenter, then of a dishonest woman: whereof very fitly says S. Ambrose in
Luc. 17. He chose rather that some should doubt of his own birth, then of his
Mothers chastity, Ambr. in Luc. 17.
and would not have the faith of his Nativity sounded upon the injury of
another, that is, of his Mother.

The fifth, that she might be comforted by the assistance of Joseph, namely in
her long iournyes and voyages, and dwelling many years in strange countries, as
she did.

The sixth, that the Church might have a certain testimony in S. Joseph, that
Jesus Christ was borne of a Virgin, for as none could better tell then he, that
the Mother was a Virgin, so none could give a more certain testimony thereof,
says S. Ambrose 7. in Luc.

The seventh and last was, in the person of the B. Virgin to honor the estate
of virginity and marriage, and therein to figure and represent the condition of
the Church, which being a virgin, is notwithstanding married to Jesus Christ,
and remaining a virgin does bring forth children by Baptism. The 3. first
causes concern the person of our Savior, the fourth, and fifth his Mother,
and the other the Church, and altogether the honor of God and his Mother, and
our good and salvation. The Espousals being done, the Virgin remained in
Nazareth, in her Fathers house, Philo Iud. de special. legib.
which espousalls were as fast and of as great force a the marriage it self, so
that if the espoused should commit any fault in the house of her Father, she
should be stoned as an Adulteress, who had broken her faith in her husbands
own house. In the same house the B. Virgin was saluted by the Angel, and
there dwelt with Joseph after the death of Ioachim and Anne, and not in the
house of Joseph (which by likelihood was at Bethleem) whereof the Scripture
gives no reason, but only that by silence it signifies, that these espousals
were of another quality then others were, and that she was always a virgin, as
those that remain always in the house of their Fathers, and go not to the
house of their husband to celebrare the marriage, as other married folks do,
who must loose their virginity. The Pilgrim shall mark all this, thereby to
praise the divine Majesty, and to give him thanks, ending in this speech.

O heavenly marriage, The marriage of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Tobie.
and work worthy of the sovereign Wisdom, a marriage all spiritual and
divine, having nothing carnal or earthly in it; a marriage that did be^re the
beauty of all the goodliest alliances of the world, and does exceed them in
honor, as far as the heavens in largenes exceed the earth: The marriage of
Adam and Eve, made and blessed by the hand of God himself; the marriage of Sara
with Abraham; of Rebeca with Isaac; of Rachel with Jacob; of Sara with Tobie.
All these marriages were nothing in comparison of this: and the most worthy of
them were honorable in this respect, that they gave seed and beginning to
these two married folks, of this husband and this wife, children of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and of twenty other Kings their ancestors in the house of
Judah, married to God by an excellent band of Faith, Charity, and inviolable
Virginity. O noble pair! O noble husband! Psalm. 44.10.
and more noble wife! and verily the daughter of the great King, clothed in
gold, and adorned with the richest jewels that ever came out of his cabinet! O
worthy marriage of this couple! A marriage most worthy to be honored, with the
most glorious fruit that ever woman bare! Spiritual marriages
O daughter of Sion! O Christian daughters, learn thus to marry your selves,
to marry your selves to God, to give him your body and soul; and fear not
either the privation of that pleasure which passes like a dream, nor yet the
barrennes of your body; for your pleasures you shall have the delights of
earth and heaven, and for the children of your body, a thousand goodly works
that shall accompany you above, as an honorable and immortal posterity, and a
thousand crowns of glory instead of the children you might have had: but if
you be married already, after the fashion of these holy Dames, let it be to the
same end for posterity, and not for pleasure; and always with the honor of
christian chastity, and conjugal fidelity. O sovereign Lord, author of these
virginal marriages, be thou always praised in them, as in all thy works. O
Virgin obtain for me that spirit that made thee so to marry; and thou holy
Joseph, a heavenly branch of the house of David, given for solace and succor
to this divine Virgin, solace us with thy prayers, and succor us with thy
help, that we may follow thy faith and word, and may be made partaker of that
reward, and recompense which thou have received in heaven.

This shall be the Pilgrims meditation in the morning, after which he shall
hear Mass, and do his accustomed devotions, until Noone, when he shall take
his repast.

The After-dinner, and evening of the six and twentieth Day. Of the rare virtues
of S. Joseph. CHAP. XXI.
IN the afternoon he shall follow his former exercises, only the subject of
the meditation changed, which he shall vary, according to the diversity of the
things he did meditate in the morning.

Having heard Euensong he shall employ some time to read, or meditate the
virtues of S. Joseph, The virtues of Joseph.
which without doubt were rare and worthy of a man chosen to be the spouse of
the greatest Lady of the world before God, and the foster-father of the son
of God himself.

His innocence, his faith, his hope, his charity, obedience, magnanimity,
prudence, humility, and other royal virtues appeared in his actions, performed
in matters most difficult to believe, and most hard to execute, Why he is
called Just.
which may easily be verified by some examples. First, when it was first
perceived, that the Virgin had conceived, not knowing either the cause, or the
mystery, he showed himself a perfect wise man, when on the one side, he
deliberated to dwell no more with her, not to consent in his conscience to any
suspicion of dishonesty; and on the other side, he would not defame, nor raise
scandal without cause about her reputation, Matthew. 1, 19.
for the which cause he is called Just by the Evangelist, by a name that
comprehends all the qualityes of a holy soul. Secondly he showed his faith
and virtue, when without contradiction, he believed the words of the Angel,
aduertising him that his wives being Great, was a work of the Holy Ghost, and
obeyed him with promptitude and humility, taking again his Spouse at that
instant, loving and reuerencing her more then ever, seeing she was chosen to be
the mother of such a child; so much the more assisting her with love and solid
respect, His respect to the B. V.
by how much it was founded more in the soul then in the body, more in the
beauty of the spirit, then in the fairenes of the face; and if holy Elizabeth
was thought to have so much reverenced the Virgin, for having by sweet
inspiration understood, that she was the mother of God, how great may we think
was the reverence that Joseph did bear her in this respect, being informed by
so clear testimonies and oracles of this truth, and of her virtues, having
also experience thereof by daily and domestical conversation? What care
besides, what diligence, what patience, what prudence, His prudence.
must he needs have showed in conducting this Virgin from one Country to
another, flying the persecution, and fury of Herod the Tyrant? Dwelling so long
in Egypt a strange Country? Always firm in faith and Charity? Surely the
holy Doctors could not tell with what words to express his praises. S.
Chrysostom doubts not to say, That he was eminent, in all things
commendable, and accomplished in all virtues, having well discharged the office
and duty of a true Father to Jesus Christ: neither was ever father so careful
of his own son begotten of his body, as this spiritual Father was of this
child: He had (says he) wisdom above the law, he was always attentive to
meditate the Prophets, and by these titles deserved the name of Just, Hom. 2.
de B. Virg.
which the Scripture gives unto him, as we have said S. Bernard with the like
style, exalts him for a man of singular faith and perfection, and groundeth
his proof upon that he was the husband of this Virgin: We must not doubt
(says he) but that this Joseph was a good and faithful man, seeing he was
given for a Spouse to the Mother of our Savior, a faithful servant and a wise
(say I) seeing our Lord gave him for a solace to his Mother, Matthew. 24 Luc.
12.41.
a foster-father to his own body, and alone chosen for a most faithful
Condiutor of that great Council. The reason is good; for God being Wisdom it
self, did choose no doubt an Espouse agreeable to the virtues of the Mother of
his Son, and to the Majesty of them both. All these great virtues which are
not easily found in a young man, Whether Joseph were an old man.
gave occasion perhaps to many to think that Joseph was old, when he was
espoused to the B. Virgin, as the painters with their pensils have amplified,
making him all white, representing him old and gray headed; and whilst on the
one side they would make his continency and other qualities, seem more
credible by the conueniency of his age, they have on the other side abased the
praise thereof, laying that upon nature which was of grace, a beginning, or
root much more noble, and not marking, that the marriage might have been
suspected, by this inequality of age in the parties. It is probable indeed,
that he was of good years, mature, and strong, and fit to exercise actions of
prudence, but not old; neither needed the Paynters to use that fiction, seeing
it is as easy to God to give chastity to youth, as to age And if the anncient
Patriarch Joseph, Genes 39.7.
who had no vow of continency, and was to be Father of many children, was at
18. years old chaste, with an unchaste mistress; might not our Joseph bound
with vow of chastity, and specially assisted by the grace of God, be so with a
most pure Virgin, except he were old? Here therefore the Pilgrim shall take
matter to meditate, of the sanctity and perfection of this holy personage, and
shall thereby learn, that his death was happy. Of the time whereof, the
Scripture says nothing: Joseph dyed some years before our Savior. Epiph. con.
haeres. 78.
we may gather notwithstanding that he died before our Savior, for that it is
not likely that in his life time, our Savior would have commended his mother
to S. John, and not to him. Some say he departed, when S. John Baptist began to
preach. The opinion of Epiphanius, that he died about the 12. year of our
Savior is more agreeable to holy Scripture, which never in her narration
forgetting to name Joseph, as long as he lived, never me^tioneth him, Luc. 2,
after the history tells of our Savior found in the Temple at Jerusalem
amongst the Doctors at 12. years of age, which certainly was, because he
died about that time. After these meditations and the like, the Pilgrim shall
take his refection and rest, until his midnight meditation, which he shall
make upon the same subject, or what other he shall choose.

The seven and twentieth Day. Of the Incarnation of the Son of God. Of the
miseries of mankind, when this happened. CHAP. XXII.
HERE comes the main and chief meditation of our Pilgrim all the time of
his abode at Loreto. For it is of the Incarnation of the Son of God, the most
high S^ important mystery of our Religion, announced ^^th B Vir^^^ and
performed in this holy Chamber and (...) to penetrate the Majesty, as well of
the Mysteries, as of the Embassage, he must appoint three times for meditation,
midnight, morning, and noone with the evening.

At midnight for the first point, setting before him the fall of our first
father Adam, his estate and misery, he shall meditate withal, the goodness of
Almighty God, who made so great show of his mercy to this his poor creature,
at that very time when he was offended; for then accursing the Serpent, who by
a woman had wrought all our misery, and in counteruaile threatening him with a
woman, and the seed of a woman who should crush his head; he promised in the
same words a Redeemer to mankind, who should be borne of that woman: I will
put (says he to this Seducer) emnity between thee and the woman, Jesus the
seed of a woman.
and betwixt her seed, and thy seed, and she shall crush and break thy head.
This woman was the B. Virgin, and her Son Jesus Christ our Savior truly her
seed, and borne of her only seed; for those who are borne of other women, are
of the seed of men and women both. This promise was signified by the beasts
skins wherewith Adom and Eve were clothed (after their fall) in the evening.
Genesis 3.13
For this was a figure foretelling that the same God who then did speak,
should take the flesh of man in the evening of the world, and should become a
Lamb to be killed and sacrificed, and to gain for us by his death the robe of
innocence in this life, covering the confusion of our sins, with the stole of
glory in the next life, meriting for us the kingdom of Paradise; and this
toward the evening, deferring the execution of this his coming by Justice,
that the pride, Why the Son of God was incarnate toward the end of the
world?
whereby man was fallen into misery, might be punished, and man might be
througly humbled, by the long knowledge and feeling of his infirmity, and so
might cry to the Physician to be cured. If the Son of man had been
incarnate presently, men would not have acknowledged their maladies or wounds,
and in tract of time they would have forgotten the benefit of their salvation;
for if we forget it already, it being but fresh and the other day, having been
done toward the end of the world; what had we done, if he had come four
thousand years before? Besides it was convenient, that many ceremonies,
prophecies, sacraments, sacrifices, and other preparations should go before so
great a Lord into the world, to dispose and prepare the hearts of men, Fit
preparatiues to the coming of our Savior.
to receive him with a lively faith, profound humility, and a burning charity.

In the second point he shall meditate on the one side, the increase of
corruption in our humane nature, going still from ill to worse, after its first
fall until the coming of the Son of God incarnate: he shall consider the
confusion and miserable condition of men, plunged for the most part in the
dark du^geon of ignorance of God, and heavenly things, and opp^essed under
the tyranny of him, who inthralled our first Father, and held all his posterity
prisoners in the slavery of all sort of sins and vices, The prodence of God
toward man before his sons coming.
infinitely more cruel then that which the Jews suffered in Egypt; for that
was only a figure and shadow of this. On the other side, he shall behold the
divine providence, not ceasing still to provide help and succors, to prepare
and dispose this patient by convenient remedies, and to retain men in their
duty and virtue, by good laws, and good works, by punishments, promises,
threatenings, as the examples of the deluge, of the burning of Sodom, of his
protecting of the just do teach us. And here he shall remember, how the Father
of mercy, in what measure he sees our misery increase increases also and
strengthens his remedies, more lively stirring up his friends to the faith and
hope of his help and benediction: which namely he performed in the person of
Abraham, Gods promises for the comfort of the world.
when having foretold him that his posterity should be captive in a strange
country, he promised also that in the fourth generation they should be
delivered, and should return from whence they parted: which is according to
the outward letter of the history, the deliverance of the Hebrews, the
children of Abraham, happening in the fourth generation, that is, four hundred
years after they entered into Egypt, allowing every generation a hundred
years, Four diverse generations
and were put in possession of the land of Promise. According to the interior,
or mystical sense, it is the redemption of man, wrought by the coming of the
Son of Man into the world, in the fourth kind of generation, which was this.
For the first was that of Adam without Father and Mother; the second, that of
Eve made of the substance of Adam, without a Mother; the third, is the ordinary
of all men, borne of Father and Mother by the common law of Nature; the fourth
then was this of the Son of God made Man, and borne of a Mother without a
Father.

He shall note also in the same place, and mark, that faith and hope were
always entertained and renewed among the people of God, by diverse sacraments,
sacrifices, ceremonies, and prophecies which did figure and foretell this future
Messiah and Redeemer of mankind, as is evident in all the law of Moses.

The third point of the Meditation. The desires of the Saints, dead and living,
of the coming of the Messiah. CHAP. XXIII.
FOR the third point, the Pilgrim shall choose certain places of Scripture,
which declare the desires, and longing of the Saints, who from the time of the
law of Nature and Moses, The Fathers desirous of the coming of Messiah.
bewayling the great miseries of mankind, and longing after the promised
Redeemer, were in an incredible expectation of his coming, and ceased not to
cry for him with prayers, sighs, and tears, so much the more fervent, by how
much the more they saw the greatness of our evil and misery. Moses said, Exodus
4. I pray thee, O Lord, send whom thou will send. He spoke to the Father,
Exodus 4.
desiring him to send his Son. How long (says David) O Lord, will thou turn
thy face from us? How long will thou forget our poverty and anguish? Psalm. 43.
How long shall our enemies lift up their horns, and glory in our destruction?
Arise, O Lord, arise, and for the love of thy name, send us help and succor.
As if he had said, Lord, if thou deferrest thy coming, to the end by thy
staying to make us acknowledge our own misery, and poverty, alas, we know
already too well, and cannot sufficiently bewail it, we know full well that
without thy help, we are lost; Psalm. 8.20.
help us then, O Lord, and show us thy face, and we shall be safe. Send us this
promised face, this valiant woman, this divine seed, Genesis 3.13
that should crush the head of our enemy, show thy image, thy face, thy Son
incarnate, which fully does resemble thee, to the end that we may be delivered
out of our misery. And in another place, as it were comforting himself in a
holy hope, he sings out this divine generation: Psalm. 71.
He shall descend like a shower of rain upon a Fleece, signifying the heavenly
and virginal Conception of the Son of God. And this was the rain, and dew
which Esaias the Prophet demanded: O heavens, power down thy dew from above,
Isay 45.
and let thy clouds rain down the Just. Let the earth open, and bring forth
our Savior. Let it bring forth this just man, that must be borne of a Virgin,
and bear our iniquityes. And again: Isay 64.
I would thou would open the heavens and descend, the mountains would melt
at thy presence. His meaning was; O King of heaven, when will thou descend from
thy heavenly throne, I would thou would open the heavens, and come down to
us, at thy only presence our spiritual enemies, the mountains of pride,
should be abased and confounded.

After these places of Scripture considered, he shall cast his eyes upon those
great and holy souls, The just souls in Limbo or Purgatory.
who after the death of the first Just Abel, being shut in the prison of Limbo,
or wrapped in the flames of Purgatory, did expect the coming of the Redeemer,
in whom they believed and hoped in their life time, and did invoke him in
this prison of hope, did pray him, and press him for his mercy sake to make
have. Genes. 3.13.
Adam said: Send this woman, and that seed (O my Maker) wherewith thou did
threaten the pride of that old Dragon, the first cause of my f^ll, and finish
this my long banishment. Abel said: Genesis 4.4.
O Father of the whole world, send that Lamb, which thou made me to figure
by my first sacrifice, and open our prison gates. Noe said: O God Almighty,
make that Prince of peace to appear, signified in my time, by the raynebow in
the clouds, a figure of thy Covenant which thou did promise to make with
mortal men Abraham: O Lord, Genes. 12.3.18.18.22.18 46 4. Act. 3.25.
thou did often promise to multiply my seed, as the Stars of heaven, and as
the sands of the Sea, and to give them the Country of Chanaan, and did
swear unto me by thy self, to bless all Nations, in my seed: my race is
multiplied, the country of Canaan is given according to thy word; when will it
please thee to accomplish the principal point of thy promise, and raise that
branch wherein the world shall be blessed, and draw us out of these shadows,
into the possession of thy light and everlasting felicity. Isaac and Jacob said
as much. Genes. 36.
Moses prayed by that great ineffable Name, that it would please him to show
his face so much desired. David said: When will my beloved come, O Lord, my
son, and my Father, whom I have fortould, whom I have song, whom I have
exalted in my mortal days? When will come that little David elder the^ his
grandfather, truly to bury the Giant Goliath, whom I killed only in figure,
and shadow. Esaias: when shall come that God, of whom I said to the people of
Israel: God shall come in person, Isay 36.
and save you. Micheas: When shall he come of whom I prophesied, saying:
Behold our Lord shall come out of his place, and descend, and all with one
voice shall call unto him. In meditating hereof he shall admire the Providence
of God, who in so good time did promise a remedy of our fall in a Redeemer: his
Wisdom, in that he deferred the execution thereof so many ages, to teach men
the gravity of their sin, to make them feel their own infirmities, to
humble them in their misery, to cause them to cry unto heaven, and to beat at
the gates of his mercy, with sighs, prayers, and tears, and to obtain that
by merit, which without merit was promised unto them. In this devotion, the
Pilgrim shall pass the midnight, with thanks giving to the goodness of
Almighty God.

The Meditation for Morning, and Noone. Of the Annunciation made to the B.
Virgin, by the Angel Gabriell. CHAP. XXIV.
OUR Pilgrim having taken some rest, shall go betimes to the holy Chapel,
there to make his morning Meditation, which shall be of the Annunciation of
this mystery which he comes to meditate. Preparation to the Meditation.
In the beginning of his meditation he shall conceive in his mind, as profound
reverence toward God, as possibly he can, as one that is to speak in his
presence of a chief work of his, of a mystery and Embassage full of majesty;
he shall with equal humility demand a sufficient light to see it, and to
profit by it. He shall not near need to imagine a place where the history
happened, as in his other meditations; for he shall meditate the mystery in the
same place, where it was both told, and performed; yet he may set before his
eyes our B. Lady praying at the now Gospel corner of the Altar, when the
Angel Gabriel brought her this tidings, The Angel saluting the Virgin.
glittering and shining with an extraordinary light, and accompanied with many
of the chief of Angels, as we may piously believe, and as we have said before,
Cap. 18.

The first point shall be taken of the beginning of the history, which says:
In the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent of God to Nazareth, a city of
Galily to a Virgin whose name was Mary, espoused to a man called Joseph, of the
house of David. Behold an Embassage in every point excellent and honorable.
In the Majesty of him that sent it, who is God; of the messenger sent, who was
one of the principal Angels; of the person to who^ it was sent, who was the
greatest Lady that ever was in the sight of God; The excellency of the
Embassage.
of the mystery or message it self that was brought, a mystery of all
mysteries, which is the marriage of the Son of God, made with the Nature of
man, agreed on by the sacred Senate of the glorious Trinity, for the comfort of
men; of the end for which it was sent, which was to inform the B. Virgin, to
have her consent, and accomplish, and celebrate the marriage. Here now the
devout soul contemplating the majesty of this Embassage in the foresaid
circumstances, shall set before his eyes, all the ranckes of the heavenly Court
of all those happy Angelical spirits, rejoicing there above in this mission,
and the assembly of those just Souls that before this departed, who having
heard this good news in Limbo, were in an admirable expectation of the coming
of their Redeemer. It is said, that this message was done the sixth month. This
at the first hearing seems to be referred to S. John, who was six months
elder then our Savior; Christ incarnate in the 6. age.
but in a mystical sense, the mention of this number goes further, and
teaches, that this Conception of the Son of God, is annou^ced and
accomplished in the sixth Age of the world, as Beda says. Also, Man created
the sixth day which is Friday, on which day christ was crucified.
that as God created Man in the sixth day of this world, which is our Friday,
and that at the sixth hour of the day, which is our midday; so he descended
into the earth the sixth day, and at the sixth hour of the day; for on such a
day, was this Embassage made, to wit, the five and twenty of March which that
year was Friday. And upon the same day, and hour, he ascended up the Cross,
as the Scripture does expressly signify. Conueniences which do easily declare
that the benefit of our Redemption was no more by chance or adventure, then
that of our Creation, but proiected of purpose many ages before, even from all
Eternity: and this long providence does testify the ancient and fatherly love
of God toward us. The Aue Maria thrice a day.
The Catholic Church in remembrance of this Embassage, and Mystery which it
teaches, saluteth the Virgin at high noone, with these words of the Angel,
as also at morning and night, to give thanks to God for so notable a benefit,
in those three times which we have showed before to be remarkable by the
devotion of the Saints; and therein she shows that she does not loose the
memory of that immortal benefit.

The second point shall consider the words following. When the Angel was
entered to her, he saluted her thus: All hail full of grace, Luc. 2.28.
our Lord is with thee, blessed be thou among women: But she hearing this, was
troubled at his speech, and thought what manner of salutation this might be.
And the Angel says to her: Fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with
God: behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, The Majesty of this salutation.
and shall bring forth a Son, and shall call his name JESUS. He shall be
great, and shall be called the Son of the most High: And our Lord shall give
him the seat of David his Father, and he shall reign in the house of Jacob
eternally, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. And Mary said to the
Angel: How shall this be done, seeing I know not man? And the Angel
answering, said unto her: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the virtue
of the Highest shall shadow thee, and therefore the Holy that shall be borne of
thee, shall be called the Son of God. And behold Elizabeth thy kins-woman,
she has also conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month to
her that is called barren, because every word shall not be impossible with God.
And Mary said: Behold the hand-mayde of our Lord, be it done unto me,
according to thy word. And the Angel departed from her.

Behold first a wonderful salvation. The Angel pronounces the blessed Virgin
full of grace, and fullnes cannot be but divine: he says, that God is with
her, no doubt with a singular and special assistance, and therefore he calls
her Blessed among women: A salutation never heard or given to any crearure by a
heavenly spirit. The most humble and wise Virgin was troubled, seeing the
Majesty of this messenger, and much more hearing the praises he pronounced; The
modesty of the Virg.
and not presuming to open her mouth to answer, she thought upon that she
heard. A spirit very different from that of our worldly Dames, who instead of
troubling themselves at the praises which the world gives them, even without
ground or desert, they rejoice and tickle at the least blast of glory that
blows in their ear; they lift up themselves, and swell in their heart, The
lightness of worldly women.
and the more is said to them in that kind, the wider have they their heart and
ears open to hear more of their praises. The Angel seeing the heavenly Maid
to blush, and reading as it were in her face and silence her astonishment,
called her familiarly by her name; did assure her, and advised her not to
fear, having cause rather to rejoice, having so good a place in grace, and
favor of God, by him cherished, and chosen to be Mother of a King without a
match, of a Son who should succeed in the throne of David, who should reign
for ever in the house of Jacob, and of whose kingdom there should be no end,
and finally Mother of the Son of God; and pronounced her Great in that
measure, that she accounted her self little.

But behold a question and doubt worthy of such a Virgin. She had consecrated
to God, her soul and body, The B.V. first vowed virginity.
by the vow of Chastity, the first in this praise and magnanimity among all the
daughters of Israel. She was troubled at his first words, by reason of
humility; but hearing him speak of co^ceauing and bearing a son, she was
troubled by reason of her virginity: she highly esteemed the grace promised,
but she was careful also of her own faith promised, and of her integrity,
which she would not loose for all the treasure of the world. How many Virgins
be there clean contrary, who willingly abandone their body and soul, so they
may get the love of some earthly Lord? The Angel does deliver her also from
this fear, and shows her that this Generation shall not be like others, by
the company, or seed of man, or by any violation of the body, but heavenly
without hurt of her virginal integrity, by the work of the Holy Ghost, by the
power of the Highest, by the grace of the same Son that shall be borne, the
Holy of God, and the son of God: Adding that Elizabeth her cousin being now
both old and barren, Why the Angel makes mention of Elizabeth.
had conceived a Son, and that it is as easy to God to make a Virgin
conceive, as an old and barren woman. The B. Virgin understanding that her vow
of virginity should be kept and preserved, agreed and gave her consent, and
believed that God could do what he said; and she that was called the Mother of
the most Highest, The Dialogue of the Angel and the Virgin, differing from that
of the devil and Eve.
calls her self his servant. O happy conference and dialogue, and much more
fortunate then that of the seducing Angel, and the seduced Virgin, in the
earthly Paradise, who harkening to a promise of Deity, if she would eat of the
forbidden fruit, suffered her self to be deluded with vanity, and made the
first breach and entrance to the fall and ruin of mankind.

O Virgin happy by thy virginity! more hapyy by thy humility! yet most happy by
thy lively faith! Thy virginity has made the Son of God amorous of thee; thy
humility has made him descend into thy womb; but thy faith made thee conceive
rather of the spirit then of the body. The excellency of virginity.
O verily full of grace, full of God, and verily blessed above all women:
blessed above all Virgins in purity, above all Wives in fecundity, above all
Saints in faith, hope, and charity, chosen from heaven to be the Mother of the
Highest. For if a Virgin may be with child, nothing can she more fitly bring
forth then the ^onne of God; and if the Son of God will be conceived and
borne, he cannot more fitly be borne, then in the womb of a Virgin.

The third point of the Meditation. How the Son of God was conceived in the
womb of the Virgin. CHAP. XXV.
THE third point shall meditate, how so soon as the B. Virgin had pronounced
the words of her consent, Behold the hand-mayde of my Lord, Luc. 1.38.
be it unto me according to thy word; the Word of God was incarnate, and made
man in her womb, not after the manner of other men, whose bodies are organized
after 40. days, and then receive a reasonable soul, yet without the use of
reason: but in a manner altogether divine and supernatural this body was at
that very instant prepared to lodge and receive the soul, and to be animated,
He was happy at the same instant. S. Thom. part. 3. q. 34. art. 4.
although by little and little it did grow unto the nativity. And this soul
united to the word of God, together with the body had also at the same instant
the use of reason and free will, was filled with all sort of spiritual graces
above all men and Angels, and found it self joyful and happy in the vision of
God. And all this in favor of this admirable vnio^; though by dispe^sation of
God, the body that was to be the subject of our Redemption remained passible
and mortal, which otherwise had been immortal; and the soul subject to
sadness and sorrow, which has no place with beatitude: so desirous was our
Savior of our salvation, and so prodigal of his mercy as willingly, and
cheerfully, and quickly to bear our sorrows and miseries, in part he
deprived himself of the possession and use of his happiness, to make us
thoroughly happy.

This Conception then was full of the meruailes of the bounty of God in so
markeable signs of his love, and of his almighty power in joining things so
difficill, which the Prophet foretold as an effect never happened before:
Ierem. 31.
Our Lord has created a new thing upon earth: A woman has compassed about a
man. This is the B. Virgin conceiving a Son in her womb, who was a man as
soon as a Child, having from the first instant of his Conception, all the
virtues of men of perfect age; God made man, and man God.
and that in higher title of perfection, then ever was given to any creature.
Behold then God made man, and man made God; behold God conceived of a virgin
according to the Prophesy of Esaias: A Virgin shall conceive. Behold the Word
clothed with our weakness, and our weakness married to his Almightines; Esa. 7.
two natures joined together in one person. Behold the descent of the Highest,
figured by that he did heretofore, when he said, I will descend to deliver my
people from the bondage of Egypt. Then without abasing himself he descended,
Exodus 3.8
by the effects of his Justice and power, to chastise a Tyrant, and deliver the
oppressed from a temporal evil: here he is descended making himself man,
making himself little, Phil. 2.12.
emptying and humbling himself, as the Apostle says, to pull man from under
the spiritual Tyrant, from the tyranny of sin, and the everlasting prisons.
The joy of the Just and Saints at this conception.
To that deliverance Moses and the Hebrews sung a song of thanks giving; to
this descent, and to this marriage the Angels from heaven sung an hymn of a
new note, and the just souls in Limbo did leap for new joy; and both were
ravished into admiration, seeing him that is called the Son of the Highest,
vouchsafe to be the son of his own creature, bowing himself down to our
littlenes, to lift us up to his greatness. O sovereign bounty what may I do to
acknowledge this benefit? The prayer.
what may I say to praise it worthily? what may I alone render in recompense,
where all men and Angels together cannot yield one worthy thanksgiving? what
can I say stutting and stammering, when as the tongues of all the Angels cannot
reach to the hundredth part, either of the greatness of thy charity, or of the
height of thy humility, or of the purity of this match and marriage? O Virgin
most pure, most wise, most humble, most fruitful, most rich, most charitable,
chosen for spouse, for daughter, for mother, chosen to bring forth to the
Angels the honor of heaven, and to men the salvation of the world, and to the
whole Church of God the peace, kingdom and the glory of God: help thy poor
Pilgrim with thy favor and credit, obtain for me light to understand this
immortal gift of God made man; obtain for me virtues proper to thank him
withal, a charity celestial to love him, a strong memory to hold him always
in my heart. Let me never depart from this place, from this chamber, from this
heavenly Temple, from this earthly heaven, without this favor worthy of thy
Son, and thee.

Having ended his meditation he shall prepare himself to receive at his best
commodity. At midnight he shall resume the same meditation, or some points
thereof.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the seven and twentieth Day. Of the goodness
of God, in the mystery of his Incarnation. CHAP. XXVI.
IN the evening the Pilgrim having done his accustomed devotions shall
particularly meditate the greatness of God in the mystery he has considered,
still more and more to perceive therein an evident demonstration of his infinite
goodness, The Incarnation, a clear testimony of infinite bou^ty.
wisdom, and power.

First he shall see, that this Incarnation is a clear testimony of the infinite
goodness of God, in that he would be made man, and join himself with so strait
a band to our humane nature, and to lift up our poverty with the wings of his
majesty, to make himself man, to make man God (as S. Augustine says) moved
only with love and charity toward his creature, De catech. rudibus c. 3.
having no need, nor profit thereby, seeing he could as a sovereign God with
absolut power loose man from his misery, and restore him to his first estate,
without these costs and charges, and without this conjunction, specially being
already his enemies not only by the fault of their first Father, but by those
they committed since. In having made the world, and presented it to man, he
gave all his goods; but in making himself man, he gave himself, and has
communicated himself to him in the largest measure of his sovereign bounty.
The nature of bounty and goodness (says one Saint) is to impart the good it
has, and thereupon as all creatures are good in their nature, Dyon. de dium.
nominibus c. 1.
so are they communicable; the sun yields without sparing, his light and
influences; the fire his heat; the water his moisture, the earth her plants;
and beasts and other parts of the whole world do contribute to the
entertainment and pleasure of man, all that they can by this law of bounty: S.
Tho. 3. p. q. 1. ar. 1.
and man in what measure he is well borne and morally good, is also more
liberal of his goods. God then the chief and sovereign goodness has
communicated himself to man in a sovereign sort, making himself man, and
uniting in one person, our humanity with his divinity: the union could not be
more strait and noble, and therefore let the devout soul even drown her
self in the consideration of this supreme liberality, let her admire, adore,
and drown her self in a profound humility, seeing here God made Man for
sinful man, and to have exalted this nature, fallen even to the very center
of the Earth, unto a degree of honor higher then ever she could have hoped,
though she had never sinned.

Of the Wisdom of God, in the same Mystery. CHAP. XXVII.
SECONDLY, he must consider, how in this Mystery God has showed his infinite
wisdom, having found so fit and convenient a mean for the reparation of man,
A most evident testimony of wisdom in the incarnation.
to instruct him, to plant in his soul the seed of all the most noble virtues,
by a way most plain, short, and effectual; for making himself man, and
conuersing f^miliarly with men, he taught them by word of mouth the heavenly
mysteries, and traced out the way of happiness with the admirable examples of
his own virtues. Hitherto he had taught by his creatures, by his servants, by
the books of his Prophets; but being made man, he did speak in person, as S.
Paul to the Hebrews deduceth, he became his own interpreter, Hebr. 1.
he read the book of his own knowledge, and expounded himself, and was the
living glass, practice, and proof of the Text, which he had dictated: Eccl.
52.
Behold I that did speak am present, says he by his Prophet. He spoke
hitherto not being seen, behind the curtayne of his creatures, and within the
clouds of obscure and dark prophecies, and as being absent, by Prophets, as
Ambassadors. But making himself man, he is become visible, he has presented
himself, he has spoken, and with his own mouth, and his own works has
taught us our lesson from heaven. Whereupon S. Augustine says: Lib. 11. de
Cunt. Dei c. 2.
That man might boldly walk toward truth, Truth it self the Son of God is
made man, and has laid the foundation of our Faith. By the same lesson he has
planted hope in our heart also, for having given us so notable a pledge of his
love, he must needs give us great cause of hope and trust in him: There was
nothing (says S. Augustine) more necessary to uphold our hope, Lib. 13. de
Trinit. c. 10.
then to have some token of his love, and what token greater can there be, then
to see the Son of God united to our nature? Now by the demonstration of this
love he has most lively invited, and incited man to love him; for there is
nothing so natural, as to love him of whom we see our selves beloved: August.
de catech. iud^^us c. 4.
Wherefore (says the same Doctor) if heertofore we were slow to love, yet
now let us be ready to render love, Moreover, could there be a more noble
means to make man partaker of this supreme nature (our happynes) then by this
alliance, whereby God is made Man, and man God? To break the heart and pride of
the Devil, then to see the nature of man which he so much despised and abased,
to be exalted above the nature of Angels? To tame his arrogance and
presumption, and to remove the yoke of his tyranny by a Man God, man alone not
being sufficient to satisfy and overcome for mankind, and God alone could not
suffer being impassible? To teach man humility, the foundation of all virtue,
Phil. 2.
seeing God not only humbled, but also annihilated, taking the form of a
servant, and suffering the death of the Cross? To teach obedience, purity,
liberality, devotion, prudence, constancy, Philip. 2.
magnanimity, and other virtues, whereof he has given so good instructions,
both by word and work, all his life long, and specially in the three last
years, that he manifested himself to the world, and most clearly, and
effectually in that admirable conflict of the Cross? To teach finally to do
nothing against the dignity of man so much honored by this alliance? Are these
means effectual enough to redeem man? Do they sufficiently declare the
infinite wisdom of God?

Of the power of God in the same Mystery. CHAP. XXVIII.
DOES not the power of God also divinely appear in this mystery, The power of
God in the Incarnation.
for therein we see two natures infinitely different to be joined together, the
divine and the humane, and by a bound so admirable and so strait, that
remaining distinct and without confusion, they make but one person, the closest
and nearest union that can be of things diverse? This therefore is a work of
one Almighty, and a most manifest demonstration of an infinite power. It is
without comparison greater, then that he showed in the Creation of man, in
joining his spirit and body, an heavenly soul with an earthly body, making as
it were an abridgement of the whole world; for the soul was not infinitely
distant from the condition of the body, as the divine nature is from the
humane: this was only to join two creatures of diverse ranks and degrees; but
to join the word of God with our flesh in one person, is to have united two
natures infinitely unequal, S. Berna. sermon. de Natiuit.
and to have made an admirable abridgement of the whole world, and of the
Author of the world, and to have enclosed infinitenes in littlenes, and
eternity in time. This is infinitely more then to join East to West, or North
to South, or heaven and earth together; for such a conjunction should be of
things far different, yet with some proportion and measure, but this is of
two natures infinitely distant the one from the other, the divinity with the
humanity, the infinite with the finit, the most souerain majesty with the least
reasonable creature, stable Eternity with floting Time, the supreme power with
infirmity, impassibility with sufferance, God with man, the Creator with his
Creature, which are so many exploites and testimonies of an Almighty power.
Motives to the love of God.
Here then the contemplative soul shall admire, shall praise and exalt the
wonders of this sovereign God, in this mystery; he shall stir up himself to
his love, seeing the effects of his wonderful bounty; to reverence and
respect, seeing the signs of his infinite wisdom; to his fear, considering
the greatness of his majesty. He shall thank the Father for sending his Son,
and the Son, for taking our flesh by the will of the Father, and also the
Holy Ghost, the bond of the Father and the Son, and shall adore this divine
and sovereign Trinity, one God in three persons, all and every one the maker
of this admirable and principal work, greater then had been the Creation of
a thousand worlds.

The eight and twenty day, and the seventh of his Aboade. Of the Visitation of
the B. Virgin. CHAP. XXIX.
THIS day the Pilgrim shall make his meditation of the voyage of the B. Virgin
to the house of her Cousin Elizabeth, The modesty of the virgin in her voyage.
whom she went to visit immediately after she was saluted by the Angel.

For the first point of the meditation, the Pilgrim shall take the first part
of the history: In those days Mary rose, and went quickly to the mountains,
unto a town of Judea: he names not this town, as he did Nazareth, because it
concerned not the mystery of the visitation, and such a writer puts nothing
superfluous in his history: he declares only the courage and diligence of the
B. Virgin to undertake and perform this Pilgrimage which principally he meant
to report. Here the devout soul shall first cast her eyes upon this heavenly
maid, great with God Almighty walking the fields, not with the train or
company of an earthly Queen, in Coach, or Litter garnished with velvet or
cloth of gold, with soft beds and cushions, but in the simplicity of a daughter
of Sion, on foot, in company of her Spouse Joseph, though assisted with a great
company of Angels, for the guard of him they carried and of her, and followed
her foot by foot through all the places she passed.

Secondly she shall consider the humility of the B. Virgin practicing by work
the virtue which she professed in word, Her humility in visiting S. Elizabeth.
calling her self the servant of our Lord: the greater goes to the less, the
virgin to the wife, the daughter of David to the daughter of Aaron, the mother
of God to the mother of a man, the mother of our Lord to the mother of a
servant, which are so many proofs of an heavenly humility. It was also very
convenient that she should excel in this virtue, and meet for the Mother of
him, who descended from heaven to her womb by humility, to begin to walk in
humility. The Daughters of this world do not so; for when they are by others
exalted to any greatness, they make themselves also greater in their own heart,
and do highly disdain their inferiors; and the ordinary fashion of women with
child, is to become heavy, and to seek rest, and ease of body. This B. Virgin
goes another way, as she is of another rank; for being exalted above the
highest, she humbles her self to the lowest, waxes light with her load, and
instead of rest undertakes a troublesome journey to the Mountains of Judea. O
ways honorable with the steps of such a Creature, carrying in her bowels
the Creator! O happy Hills that were trodden with the heavenly feet of the
Blessed Virgin, and Mother of the most high, never did you bear so precious a
burden, neneuer did you perform a more honorable service! O my soul, see and
contemplate here, behold this fruitful Virgin, this daughter of Sion, this
Mother of God, to fly with joy, carried by him whom her self does carry:
behold her rising as a fair morning, upon the top of those beautiful
mountains ascending those hilly places like the Sun rising from under his
Horizon: behold the beauty of her face and soul surpassing the most
glistering stars, the modesty of her pace and going, the fire of her charity,
the greatness of her divine fortitude and courage.

The salutation of S. Elizabeth.
The second point shall be taken from the salutation of the Virgin, and the
effect thereof. It is said that the Virgin entering into the house of Zachary,
saluted S. Elizabeth: And it happened, when Elizabeth heard the salutation of
Mary, the Infant exulted in her womb: And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and cried out with a great voice, and said: Blessed art thou amongst
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb: And how comes this to me, that
the Mother of my Lord should come unto me? For behold, as the voice of thy
salutation was made in my ears, the Infant in my womb exulted with joy: And
blessed art thou which have believed; because those things shall be performed
which have been spoken to thee by our Lord. In these words he must mark the
marvelous virtue and force of the salutation of the B. Virgin, having so
happily stricken the child and the Mother, that they were both sanctified and
filled with the Holy Ghost, and enabled to effects exceeding the common course
of nature. The child received sense and use of reason beyond his age, and
leaped at the voice of the Mother of our Lord, honoring the said Lord by that
his motion.

Elizabeth did prophesy of things past, present, and to come.
The Mother was made a Prophetess, knowing by revelation, what had passed, when
she knew things secret, to wit, that the B. Virgin had believed; knowing also
the present, as that she was happy and blessed above all women, that she was
great with a blessed fruit, with the Son of God our Lord: She knew also what
was to come, foretelling that those things that were told her, should be
accomplished. Whereupon the Pilgrim shall consider how much the Son of God
has honored his mother in making her so soon the instrument of the Holy
Ghost, and his cooperatresse to so high effects, and in what credit she must
needs be now in heaven for the salvation of men, having been enriched since
with a thousand merits and prerogatives, and reigning with her Son, heaped
with eternal glory, above all Angels and men. And if her simple voice and
salutation that did pass, brought the Holy Ghost unto the souls of men; of
what efficacy shall be her firm and constant prayer, to obtain us the
heavenly graces of the same Spirit to our salvation?

O B. Virgin, make this heavenly voice of thine sound unto thy Pilgrim! this
voice so pleasing, so powerful! this voice whereof the Spouse speaks saying,
Cant. 2. Cant. 2.
Let thy voice sound in my ears, for it does rejoice me. Make it be heard O
virgin and therewith obtain me necessary help, happily to accomplish the
course of my mortal Pilgrimage.

The third point of the Meditation. Of the Canticle of the B. Virgin.
Magnificat. CHAP. XXX.
THE third point shall meditate the meaning of that notable Ca^ticle which our
B. Lady uttered after S. Elizabeth had spoken. Then says the Gospel Mary
said: Luc. 1.
1. My soul does magnify our Lord. 2. And my spirit has exulted in God my
Savior. 3. Because he has respected the humility of his ha^d-mayd: for behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed etc. The B. Virgin having
heard so many blessings, and praises for those graces she had received, and
knowing that forgetfullnes, Ingraritude ryseth of Pride.
and ingratitude are two branches of pride very displeasing to Almighty God,
she took occasion to yield thanks unto her benefactour, and to rejoice in
him, and said in heart and mouth: I acknowledge my Lord, my soul does magnify
and extol him as author of all the good you have praised, and prophesied in
me. O my dear Cousin, I praise him from the bottom of my heart and with all my
soul, and glory in his graces and bountiful liberality, not in mine own
merit: It is he that has cast his eyes upon my litlenes, and has exalted me;
It is his bounty and blessing that is the sovereign cause, that all the
nations of the world that shall live under the scepter of his Son, shall call
that Mother happy that did bear him.

Luc. 1.49.
4. For he has done great things unto me who is mighty; and holy is his Name. A
great thing it is, that a Virgin should vow virginity among the Hebrews; a
great thing it is, that remaining a Virgin she should conceive without man; a
great thing it is, that she should be the most fruitful Mother that ever was,
having borne but one child; great things and unheard of, that the servant
should bring forth her master; the daughter her father; the morning the sun;
weakness power; the Creature her Creator. These are the great things and the
wonders that are wrought in me his little Creature, for the which my soul does
now magnify, and exalt his holy Name.

Luc. 50.
5. And his mercy is from generation to generation, to those that fear him. For
the mercy of our Lord is always and shall be for ever, Psalm. 102.17.
but to them that live in the fear of his laws. It was showed to our first
Father Adam promising him a Redeemer, to Abel, Noe, Abraham, and to all our
forefathers, assisting them with gifts and graces, and strengthening them in
the hope of this Redeemer; and will show it self now more then ever, sending
according to his promise, the same Redeemer, not an Angel, or only man; but his
own Son, God made man, to repair the ruins of men by his own blood, and
to exalt their condition above the Angels.

Psalm. 71 28.135.4.
6. He has wrought wonders with his arm, and has scattered the proud in the
mind of their heart. It is he only, that is omnipotent, and mightily works
these meruailes, and all others. It is he, that has drawn this great All,
from nothing, who has created these lights and heavenly palaces, these 4.
parts of the whole world, the fire, air, water, and all that is made of the^:
it is he, that has powered down these deluges of water and fire upon the
impiety and fifth of the world; that has beaten down the Tyrants of Egypt,
made ways for his people through the waves of the sea, opened the bosom of
the water and the earth, to swallow down armed pride, or the proud army; who
sent his Son to tie an everlasting knot of amity and friend ship with men, to
make himself little and humble, and in his litlenes and humility to confound
the counsel and arrogance of the proud, and to overthrow the power of hell,
and the world.

7. He has put the mighty from their seat, and has exalted little me^. So is
he King of Kings; it is he that places and displaceth according to his
pleasure; he makes the little great, and the great little; he changes times
and ages, translateth kingdoms, Dan. 2. Ec. l. 10. Job. 11.
and establishes them, he gives the scepter of one people to another, because
of injustice and injuries; he shall unloose the girdles of Kings, and gird their
loins with a rope; he takes the needy from the dust, and the poor from out
of the smoke to make him sit in the company of Princes, and inherit a seat of
glory.

8. He has filled the hungry with good things, and has sent the rich away
empty. This is the work of the mercy and justice of God, to relieve the
necessity of the needy, and to leave empty the pride of those who do
sumptuously solace themselves in the abundance of their riches.

9. He has received his Child Israel, remembering his mercy. He seemed to have
forgotten, but he shows well the contrary; for as the father takes his child
in his arms, so has he shadowed under the protection of his wings poor
Israel afflicted under the Tyranny of a Paynim, and poor mankind which was to
be his people, oppressed under the tyranny of the Devil and comes now in
person true King and true Redeemer of Jews and Gentills to help both; to win
the Roman Ruler and make him one people with the Jew his vassal, and join all
in a sweet liberty and obedience of one law, of one faith, of one King, and
herein he shows, that he has remembered the old promises of his mercy, and
that he meant to perform what he had spoken. Genesis 13.3 15.3.17.19.18.9. and 21.


10. As he did speak to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. For this is the
holy Patriarch Father of the Jews, and head of all the children of God, to
whom he first promised expressly, that in his seed all nations of the world
should be blessed, Genesis 26 4
and after to Isaac, Jacob, David, and others who followed after; and this
blessing should last as long as the world and the effects thereof unto all
eternity. This is the song and sense of this Canticle. Genesis 28.14.


O divine finger of the praises of thy Son! Gabriel, Elizabeth, the Angels,
and men sing thy honor, Psalm. 131.11.
and thou singest the glory, power, bounty, mercy, and justice of him that made
thee worthy to be praised and exalted by men and Angels: and in what measure
they cast their eyes upon thy greatness, the more thou humblest thy self, The
ten Verses of the Magnificat, is the B. V. Harp with ten stringes.
and do oppose thy humility to the greatness of God. David thy great
Grandfather was a marvelous singer out of the great works of the Creator;
thou art not inferior to him in any thing, and thy Harp often stringes,
reaches as near to the throne of Majesty, as his, and sounds as loud as
his, for ever in the sanctuary of the church of God. Learn here, O Christian
souls, to humble your selves, when you are magnifyed; and when any praise does
sound in your ears, be you stirred up to praise him, whose gifts have made
you prayse-worthy. Teach me, O B. Virgin, teach thy Pilgrim the manner to sing
after thee, the marvelous works of the Creator, teach me to acknowledge his
good deeds, and my miseries, to extol him in his power, and to despise my
self in my baseness, that my soul may magnify him, that my spirit may rejoice
in him, that my tongue and heart may sing to him thanksgiving for ever and
ever. Amen.

After this meditation he shall hear mass, and the divine Office, and then go
to his dinner.

The After-dinner, and Evening of the eight and twentieth Day. What the B.
Virgin did in the house of S. Elizabeth. CHAP. XXXI.
THIS After dinner the Pilgrim shall employ himself in his wonted exercises
according to the time, in reading, conference, hearing the Sermon and Euensong;
and occupying himself in such and like exercises, toward the evening he may
make some short meditation, taking for his subject the rest of the history,
discoursing in his thoughts upon those good works, which the B. Virgin did in
the house of her Cousin S. Elizabeth, during the three months she stayed
there. For, now he shall see her praying in her Oratory, then lifting up her
heart to God, then humbling her self to his majesty the more she did see and
discern it; sometime sighing for mankind, whose Redeemer she carried in her
bowels; at other times hear her discourse with her Cousin of heavenly things,
of the greatness of God, of his goodness, of his providence, of his wonderful
works, and other points of devotion, which she had touched in her Canticle. He
shall behold her also in her less businesses working with her needle, and
employing her self with all humility and charity, in the mean services of the
house for the solace and help of her Cousin Elizabeth. Two great Ladies big
with two great Saints.
Finally lodging in this house, by contemplation he shall set before his eyes,
these two admirable Ladies, the one great with a Saint that never had greater
before him, the other great with Sanctity it self. A heavenly Guest of S.
Elizabeth with whom she lodged, and an heavenly hostess of God whom she
lodged in her womb! both mother and Virgin, rauishing with admiration both
heaven and earth, with the most excellent beauty of her virtues. And having at
her return accompanied her from the house of S. Elizabeth to Nazareth, he
shall end the evening with thanksgiving, and shall go to his lodging, there to
end the day, and take his rest and resection.

The nine and twentieth Day, and the eight of his Abode. The Meditation for
midnight, of the Nativity of our Savior. CHAP. XXXII.
THE nine and twentieth Day shall contain 3. meditations at 3. times: at
midnight of the Nativity of our Savior, in the morning of the Circumcision,
and at night of the adoration of the three Kings.

For preparation to the first, after having demanded the assistance of God, he
shall first seek and follow in spirit the way which the B. Virgin with Joseph
had held from Nazareth to Bethleem, whither they of the house of Judah came then
as to their chief City, to give up their names to the enrolment which was
made there and else where over all the world, by the appointement of Augustus
Caesar, who commanded to be made a general description over all countries, The
description of the world by Caesar.
as S. Luke says ^ Cap. 1. He shall then behold the B. Virgin, as a Pilgrim
walking on foot with her husband, light with that precious load which she
carried in her womb, burning with love and charity toward God, whom shortly
she was to bring forth. Secondly he shall draw in his imagination the picture
of the place, where she was to lie in, and be delivered, giving salvation to
the world. Our Saviors Cribbe.
This place was a desert or forsaken Cave and stable to set beasts in, where
she was constrained to lodge, not fynding any place in the Inn, by reason of
the great concourse of people, that then repaired thither; and upon this
imagination he shall demand of God, light, well to penetrate the wonders of a
Nativity so admirable in all the circumstances.

The first point shall be to meditate some figures and prophecies of the birth
of our Savior. Figurs and prophecies of the birth of our Savior.
The figures were all the ancient apparitions, wherein the Son of God showed
himself in the form of man, as in Paradise to Adam, in Canaan to Abraham, and
Jacob; for he that was borne this midnight was the God, who before had spoken
to men, therefore called Verbum, the Word of God, and he showed himself to
them in humane shape, S. Chrysostom. hom. 2. Greg. orat. 4. de Theo Clem. Ale. in
exhort. ad gentes, and in paeda. cap. 12.
but as a passenger not staying in it, as it were making a proof or trial of
that nature, which he was once to marry, and join by an eternal union to his
divinity, and be borne God and Man, to converse with men, and be to them the
Word and interpreter of the mysteries of heaven, and of the Commandments of
his Father. And this was in his Nativity, when he showed himself merely
clothed with our nature, performing what he had prophesied, and caused to be
foretold by his Prophets, My delight is to be with the children of men; for
here he began to be among the children of men, Psalm. 8.
a true Man, already conuersing with them as a little child; here he did first
effectuate what I say said in his person: Isa. 52.
Behold I that did speak, am present; and that he sung of the Nativity:
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, Isa. 7.
and bring forth a child. And again: A little child is borne to us, Isa. 9.
Bar. 3.
and a son is given unto us. And another: And thou Bethlee^ Ephrata, thou art
not the least among the principal towns of Judea, for out of thee shall come a
Captain to govern my people. This therefore is that little Son, that Prince
prophesied of, by these and like passages of Scripture, and who was borne this
night.

The second point shall consider the circumstances of this Nativity, 1.
Circumstance of this marvelous nativity.
which being well understood will teach us a good lesson of the greatness of
God, and of the misery of man. He was borne as he was conceived, that is,
miraculously conceived of a Virgin without man, borne of a Virgin without the
breach of her Virginity, without the panges and throws, or grief of
childbirth, which was the effect of the malediction given to the first Woman,
and to all her race: So has the Prophet foretold, speaking of this Virgin:
Before she did labor, Isa. 66.
she was delivered, and before the hour of her deliverance, she brought forth
a man child. Verily a man child, having nothing effeminate, God and man
together, all mighty, all wise, all good; and though the B. Virgin did bear
only the body, The Virgin verily the Mother of God.
and not his divinity, which was from all eternity, yet was she verily the
Mother of God, for having conceived that body which was united to the divine
person, and so brought forth that person; even as other Mothers, are mothers of
those they bear, although the soul is not begotten of them, because they
engender that body which is personally united to the soul. It is therefore a
more admirable nativity, Isa. 53.
then that of all the world in the Creation; and so what was said of the
eternal generation of the Son of God, Who shall declare his generation, may
also be said of this temporal Conception and Nativity.

He was borne in the sixth age of the world, four thousand years or there
about after the Creation, in the night, The circumsta^ce of the time of the
sixth age.
in the heart of Winter, when the world was most covered with darkness, and
frozen in the filth of all vice and Idolatry, when the temporal Kingdom of
the Jews was dismembered and translated to the government of foreign Princes,
and strangers, Herod and his brethren, who divided it into 4. parts or
Tetrachies, and made so many particular tyrannies, governed by the great and
sovereign Pagan tyranny of Rome, Why Caesar described the world.
which commanded all, and therefore Caesar commanded that description, a
commandment that carried the sign of sovereignty. And these five temporal
tyranies did in mystery signify the miserable estate of mankind overwhelmed and
oppressed with so many spiritual tyrannies of diverse sins which it served,
under the great and general tyranny of the devil, who held the world in his
dominion, as peaceable, as Augustus held his Empire.

At midnight.
He was borne at midnight in the heart of winter, the true sun of our Night, to
drive away the deep darkness, and hard Ice from the hearts of men, to bring them
day, and heat them in the love of heavenly things, to bring in the beautiful
season of the spiritual springtime of summer and Autumn, of sweet smelling
flowers, of the heavenly heat of the Holy Ghost, of the fruit of good works
whereof the world had hitherto been barren. And this is what the Prophet said:
The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light, Isa. 9.
and light has risen to them who dwell in the shadow of death. He was borne in
a stable among beasts, Psalm. 48.13.
to restore man to his old rank and place, who by sin was cast down to the
baseness of bruit beasts, and was made like unto them.

The third point of the Meditation. Our Savior encountreth, and ouercometh
vices in his Infancy. CHAP. XXXIII.
THE third point shall be to contemplate, how this little child begins to
handle his weapons, and to fight for us betymes, even from his cradle, for this
being happened (not by chance, but by his own providence) in a stable, he
bruized in his birth with this only circumstance, the head of the old Serpent,
which before he had threatened. He crushed the pride of the devil the ancient
enemy of our salvation, Genes. 3.
and the author of all our miseries. In this stable, and in this equipage of
poverty, he bruized the vanity, folly, and vain delights of the world and
flesh: he crushed them in his cradle with the weapons of his profound and
unheard of humility; not only in that he was made man, and clothed with the
infirmity of our condition, The victory of the child Jesus.
but also he would be the least and lowest amongst men: he would be borne not
in a princely palace in a soft bed royally arrayed, not in a house of his
own, nor yet in an Inn as some others did, to wit the poorest sort, but in a
cribbe and stall for beasts, and that borrowed. This battle is glorious, and
which mortal men could never hitherto gain to their race and nature, and so
much the more glorious, as it was more quickly undertaken and won by a child.
The ancient Authors boast of their Heroes, for that in their cradle they
strangled material serpents, Hercules.
but though it were true and not feyned, it is nothing in respect of this
childs exploit, making proof of his prowes and valor against the strongest
enemy of man, before he could speak: and this is that the Prophet song as a
miracle never heard of: Call the name of this Child, Isa. 8.^.
Make have to spoil, make have to pillage, for before the Child can call
Father or mother, he shall carry away the spoil, and strength of Damascus;
noting the age, the quicknes, the force and glory of this Conqueror, and of
the conquest wo^ne, and the goodly spoil of souls drawn out of the hands of
Satan. O glorious fighter! O little Child! O great God! welcome art thou into
thine, and our world; thine because thou have made it by thy almighty word,
ours, because of thy infinite bounty thou have bestowed it upon us! But how art
thou here entertained, O King of Kings? where is the train of thy Court?
Where are thy Princes and lords, thy Gentlemen, pages and gromes of thy
chamber? where is thy guard and all thy royal furniture? O sweet Infant, the
train of thy Court is above, heaven is thy lowest Tower, the Angels are thy
Princes, thy guard is thy self, who guardest all things, thy seruitours and
pages are the stars, and all the creatures of the whole world. O Caesar, if
thou knew the King who is now borne in thy Empire, if thou knew whom
thou inrollest in the Record of thy Registers, thou would come in person,
poor vassal, to present thy self at his feet to do him homage, and adore his
cradle at Bethleem, whose majesty the Angels admire and adore in heaven, and
would request him to make thee be enrolled in his great book of life! O
heavenly Angels, it is just and wisely done, The Angels s^^g at this nativity.
to sing this night, and honor with your holy quires, and sweet melody of your
heavenly music, the nativity of this King, to show the shepheardes, to teach
us and them how we should receive him, this is your office and duty; for you
have long served him, and know the fashions of the ciuility of his Court; we
poor mortal men ill taught and rude, cannot worthily perform this duty: but
only thou, O Virgin-Queene, who have learned this manner in the house of God,
Hester.
and as a heavenly Hester art prepared with attire and jewels, chosen out of
the treasury and cabinet of the Father of thy son King of Kings, thou may
co^fidently present thy self to see him, to receive and handle him. But O
heavenly Mother, how did thou receive and use him, how did thou entertayne
this Son, this God, this Child given us, this King of heaven and earth? In
what spiritual clothes did thou wrappe him with what embracings did thou
cherish him? With what devotion did thou adore him? What were the eleuations
of thy mind, having before thine eyes thi^ precious gage issued out of thine
own bowels, come into the world a little Child, a great God, visible,
palpable, the glory of heaven, the salvation of the earth, the hope of mankind,
the joy of men, and Angels? What a spectacle was this unto thine eyes
beholding this divine Sun? What admiration to thy soul contemplating this
object of infinite beauty? What ecstasies of love embracing this incomprehensible
beauty? O little God, O Almighty child, grant me leave by that infinite love
which made thee man to draw us unto thee, to come near thee with my senses, to
behold thee with mine eyes, to hear thee moan my miseries, to touch those
heavenly hands, to kiss those sacred feet, to adore that little humble humanity
married unto thy greatness, to offer my soul and body to thy majesty, and say a
thousand times on thy birth day, Viuat Rex, and viuat Rex Regum in aternum: To
him be all honor for ever, Amen. So he shall pass the hour of midnight,
taking the rest of the night for his repose, or he may employe the whole night
in meditating the song of the Angels, and the visit of the shepherds, who
being warned, came to adore our Savior borne in Bethleem.

The Morning Meditation. Of the Circumcision of our Savior, and of the Name of
Jesus. CHAP. XXXIV.
IN the morning the Pilgrim shall take for subject of his meditations the
Circumcision of the Son of God, made according to the Law, eight days after
he was borne, Our Savior circumcised on the first day of the year consecrated
to Ianus.
the first day of the year, and of guiftes, according to the ancient custom
of the Romans, and consecrated to Ianus their two faced God, with one face
beholding the year past, with the other the new year to come.

The first and fundamental point of this Meditation shall be to consider the
institution of this Ceremony, the devout soul calling to remembrance the
commandment of God made to Abraham, to circumcise, Genesis 17.
and in that place to cut his own flesh, his son Ismaell, and all his
hosue-hold, and to cause it from thenceforth to be kept, as a law to all his
posterity, S. Thom. 1. 2 q. 102 p. 3. q. 68.
as a token of the eternal Covenant betwixt God and them; to be also some
remedy against original sin, and a profession of their faith toward the
true God. Whereupon the Jews kept it exactly ever after, causing their male
children to be circumcised the eight day after their birth, and then giving
them their name, as we do now in Baptism, whereof Circumcision was a figure:
and as now he that wants Baptism, is not reckoned among the children of God,
but is excluded from all right and hope of heaven, and has neither name, nor
honor in his household; so then were those who were uncircumcised. Genesis 1^.14.
Here therefore he must meditate, how Jesus Christ the true child of Abraham,
according to the flesh, and by whom the race of Abraham, Why Christ would be
circumcised.
and all nations of the world were to receive benediction and peace of God,
would be circumcised, and undergo the law which himself had given, making his
first entry into the world, and beginning the reparation thereof by obedience,
as by the same obedience he went out of the world, dying upon the Cross, in
counterpoise of the first man, who as soon as he came into the world, became
disobedient, and lost the world.

This is the benefit wherewith our Savior signed the first day of the year,
giving to the world for a new years gift, Herodian. lib. 2.
not a piece of gold or silver, or fruits, as the world does figs, dates,
honey, laurel, and such other presents of the earth, or of the sea; but his
precious blood which he shed in this Circumcision for our only good, and not
for any necessity, or bond he had of the law (which himself had made and,
might therein dispense as the sovereign Judge) or any profit he might get
thereby.

The humility of the Son of God. Phil. 2.
The second point shall be to note in this action, how our Savior goes
forward, still showing more and more humility; for in his Incarnation he humbled
himself in beco^ming man, and taking the form of a servant; in his nativity
he humbled himself beneath man, placing himself among the least, and the
poorest; in his Circumcision he humbled himself more then all this, making
himself to be enroled among sinners, and using the remedy of sinners; he who
was not only without sin, but the cou^terpoison of sin, come with his
innocence and virtue to destroy it: so did he always more descend in humility,
the more his works did ascend and show themselves before God and his Church; so
necessary did he judge it to authorize and credit this virtue, and to batter
pride which had overthrown both Men and Angels. How far from this spirit
are they, who knowing themselves to be sinners will not be so esteemed, and are
ashamed to use the remedy that should heal them? They are ashamed to confess,
and do penna^ce, and are not ashamed of the foul filth of sin. Who would not
willingly endure any thing to deface their faults, seeing our Savior began to
shed his blood for them, within 8. days after he was borne?

The 3. point shall be to meditate the glorious name of Jesus this day given to
the Son of God, which signifies Savior, and is taken of the end and effect
of his charity, Of the name of Jesus.
for he came into the world to save it, and in effect did save it, if it had
would. As therefore heretofore great Personages have often gotten their names
by their notable actions, Great me^ surnamed by their actions.
and were called by them; as Joseph the Patriarch, Savior of the world,
because by his providence he had prevented the famine in Egypt; the Roman
Captains, and Ambassadors were called Africani, Parthici, Germanici, by
reason of the victory they had wone in Africa, Genesis 4^
Parthia, and Germany: In like sort, but by better title without comparison,
the Son of God is called Jesus, that is Savior, because he came to save man:
and this was the reason which the Angel gave to Joseph, Math. 1.28
fortelling him that the Son which Mary should bear, should be called JESUS,
because he should save his people. And S. Peter says: Act. 4.12.
There is no other name under heaven, whereby to be saved. This is the name so
song by the Prophets. Isay says: Isa. 30.17
Behold the Name of our Lord comes from far. He comes at the beginning
of the world; for it was written in the book of God from all eternity. Also my
people shall know my name in that day, for my self that do speak, will be
present, that is to say, when I shall be made man, Exo i. 6.1 Prou. ^0. S. Tho.
1 q 13. a. 1.
I shall take a name that my people shall know, for that which I bear from all
eternity, which is the essential name of my Deity, is a name hidden to men and
Angels, and cannot be known but to God. It is a name ineffable. This name
JESUS shall be understood of men; for I will make it known by good effects. I
will make manifest (says another Prophet) my holy name in the midest of my
people. And Isay: Za^h. 39.
He shall have a new Name given him by the mouth of our Lord. He could not have
a fitter Godfather; Isa. 62.2.
for it to impose a name according unto his nature be the work and office of
wise men, who could better name the Son of God, then the mou^h of God, which is
Wisdom it self? To impose names i^ the work of a wise man Plato in Crat.
This name comprehends all the goodly names that are noted in the books of
the Prophets, Emanuel, Counselor of God, Prince of peace, A strong God an
admirable Name; and other like are contained within the compass of this, for
Jesus is all this, and much more.

O sweet and admirable name, a name more beautiful then the morning or day,
more sweet then milk or honey, more strong then armies, wider then the whole
world, higher then heaven, deeper then hell, more noble then the crown of
Kings, more rich then gold: a Name full of Majesty, the glory of the heavens,
the terror of the Devils, A speech to the name of Jesus.
the hope and health of mankind. By Thee death is life, without thee pleasure
is death; with thee ignominy is nobility, without thee nobility is ignominy;
with thee infirmity is strong, without thee strength is weak and infirm; by
thee, nothing is made all things, and without thee all things do vanish to
nothing. Be thou therefore always with us, O admirable Name, be thou graued in
everlasting letters in our spirit, in our heart, in our memory, in time of
peace, in time of war, by night, by day, in joy and sadness, in Town and
field; be thou our direction and salvation in our Pilgrimage, and our glory in
our country.

To Jesus.
Sweet Jesus heir of this Name, be unto us Jesus, give us the grace to
circumcise and cut off the superfluities of our flesh, of our desires, of our
thoughts, and actions of our hearts, eyes, ears, and of all our senses, that
after this spiritual and Christian Circumcision, signified by that carnal of
the Jews, we may be partaker of the wholesome effect of the same, and of the
immortal glory of this Name. To the B. Virgin.
And thou most benign Mother, who this day see thy dear child, Innocence it
self, enrolled in the catalogue of sinners, for sinners, and giving his
precious blood as a pledge of his infinite charity, and of our salvation, who
pierced with sorrow in thy soul, did shed virginal tears in compassion of
him; obtain for us by the merit of thy grief and compassion, the fruit of
this gift, and the good fortune of this name, that our bodies may be
circumcised, and purged from all impurity, that our souls may be clean, our
thoughts and desires well ordered; that this Name may be a defense to us
against our enemies, a solace of our sorrows in this mortal pilgrimage, the
oil and remedy of our wounds, and in the end, our life and salvation.

The Pilgrim having thus prayed, shall hear Mass at his time, and shall
finish his accustomed devotions of the morning.

The After-dinner and Evening of the nine and twentieth Day. A Meditation, Of
the Adoration of the three Kings. CHAP. XXXV.
IN the evening after Euensong, the Pilgrim after the two precedent mysteries
shall, meditate of the Adoration of the Kings, those notable and first
Pilgrims of the Paynims, come out of the East, by the inspiration of God to
adore the King of the Jews, at the place where they should find him borne; of
whose birth they had a revelation in their Co^ntry without knowing in
particular where it should happen.

For ground of this meditation, he shall consider, how these Magi were men
skillfull and learned in humane, The learned among the Persians were called
Magi.
and divine things, whether they were of Persia, or Arabia, or of any other
country of the East, where they called such people Magi, as many Writers tell
us. And though these were men curious, yet no coniurers, according to S.
Agustine. They were also Kings, as the preparations and presents they brought
did declare; for mean personages had no means to come so far, to offer
gold, incense, and myrrh, and therefore also they were Magi; Tert. l ^. Iud.
Plin. l. 30. c. 1. and (...) l. 1. de (...).
for the Roialty could not there be without this Magia in the East, and none
might be Kings but Magi, and learned folks, as amongst other authors one of
our Doctors do note. And they are by the Evangelist rather called Magi, then
Kings; for before God the name of Sage is more honorable then the name of King.
This ground being laid, the first point of the meditation shall be to
contemplate these holy Kings coming out of the East, into strange country,
moved heerunto first by the inspiration of God, as Abraham left his country to
come into Canaan; secondly by the Prophesies, as well of Balaam their Ancestor
who prophesied of a star that should arise out of Jacob, as of the Sybills,
who had most plainly written, Number. 24.
that there must be borne a King of the Jews, Ci ero 2. ^^uin. Sueton. in
O^tau. c. 94. and in Vespas.
who should rule all the world. It was also about that time a common bruit over
all the East, as profane Authors themselves do testify, Cicero, Suetonius,
and others.

Thirdly, they were moved, and forcibly driven to undertake this voyage by the
vision of the extraordinary star which did appear to them in the East,
whereof they had heard the foresaid Prophesy of Balaam, and had long expected,
according to our Doctors, as a sign of this King borne. They came then to
Jerusalem, as to the chief and Metropolitan City of Judea, there to learn
this news: Number. 24.
they ask for him that is borne King of the Jews. The earthly King entered
into a rage and fury, enquireth also with them, Chrysos. and Hier. in Matthew.
not to adore with them, but to kill him if he could; he assembleth the
Doctors, he demands of them who should answer the truth; he did all
prudently, saving what was the principal, for he enquireth exactly after the
truth, but will not embrace the truth. They al tell, that this King must be
borne at Bethleem, he exorteth them to go, and to advertise him when they had
found him, and he feygned that he would be good, to destroy goodness it self.
They go on, and are guided by the new Star, which had brought them from the
East, which lead them even to the house where the King they sought was: they
find him, they prostrate themselves before him, they adore him: they behold a
little Child, they believe a great King, a small port and a great Majesty, a
mortal infant and an immortal God, and by their presents of Gold, Incense,
and Myrrh, they do homage as to a King, adore him as God, and confess him to
be Man. And in this coming and adoration was accomplished what Isay
prophesied: Isa. 60.
Arise Jerusalem, and be thou enlightened; for thy light is come, and the glory
of thy Lord has appeared upon thee; and the Gentiles shall walk in thy light,
and Kings in the brightness of thy birth. Psalm. 71.
And King David: The Kings of Tharsis and the Islands shall offer gifts; the
Kings of Arabia and Saba shall bring their presents; he shall live, and the Gold
of Arabia shall be brought unto him.

Then O Christians soul, instructed in the house of God, adore this King,
seeing these poor Paynims, coming out of the darkness of their Paganism,
Vide S. Chrysostom. hom 14. in 1. Cor. 10.
are come to adore: worship him after so many wonders wrought, seeing they did
adore him being a child: adore him, prostrating thy self before him, and
offering thy self as they did, and after offer thy presents; for first he
regards the heart, and then thy gifts: so he cast his eye upon Abell, Genesis
4.4.
and after upon his Sacrifice; adore him with fit and convenient presents, with
the Gold of Charity, with Incense of devotion, with Myrrh of Purity; offer him
thine understanding, thy will, and thy memory, thy spirit humbled, thy will
ordered, thy flesh mortified, to confess, love, and serve him as thy true God,
and true Redeemer.

The second point of the Meditation. A demonstration of the Power of Jesus, in
the adoration of the Kings. CHAP. XXXVI.
THE second point shall be to consider how the Son of God did heerin an act
of an Almighty King, although he appeared low and humble. The Kings of the
earth when they are crowned, and take possession of their kingdoms, are
visited by diverse Ambassadors, and honored by foreign Princes: Here our
Savior entering into possession of his spiritual kingdom, is not only
honored by Ambassadors, but adored by the Kings themselves coming unto him
in person. Marvelous coniu^ctions.
Of which work the contemplative soul shall take occasion to consider, the
marvelous conioyning of things most different, which our Savior made in all
the parts of his life. And even as he had married into one person two naturs
infinitely distant, the natures of God and man, to be a mediator, God and man,
betwixt God and me^: so has he always joined divine actions to humane, and
testified the truth of these two natures, by the diversity and encounters of
works directly opposite. In his Incarnation, it was an act of great humility,
and abasement that God was made man, yet was it a most high work, that this
man was borne without man, by the power of the Holy Ghost, of a Virgin. In his
Nativity, was seen the Son of God borne in a stable, having less then the
least among men, but the same is song by the Angels, and adored above by the
immortal spirits; he comes weak out of the womb of his Mother, yet mightily
he preserves the virginity of his Mother; he is swadled in poor clothes, but
is enlightened with the splendor of heaven. In his Circumcision, he was
reckoned among sinners, Phil. 1.
but he took a Name above al names whereat every knee should bow in heaven,
earth, and under the earth. In this apparition and visitation of the Sages, he
seemed obscure, and a poor man among men, but he is honored by the Stars,
and adored by the Kings. And so in all the rest of his life, and especially in
his Death, wherein we may see a wonderful weauing together in one web, of
things contrary and opposite, which encounter in this Tragedy. The Son of
God is nailed to a tree as feeble and faulty, and yet as sovereign he gives
letters of grace, and as an Almighty God, of a great thief and malefactor, he
makes a great and holy Confessor; he endures the torments of temporal
death, and promises the Paradise of eternal life; men blaspheme him on earth,
and the stars do moan him in heaven. The Jews more hard then stones, have
no compassion of his anguishes, but the Rocks rent, the Graves opened, the Sun
darkened to mourn for his death. Of al these encounters the devout soul shall
learn the wisdom and power of this. Lord, having given us so goodly
instructions, to teach us to admire, love, and serve him.

The third part of the Meditation. Of the Return of the three Kings. CHAP.
XXXVII.
The providence of God toward the Just. Psalm. 33.16.
THE third point shall contain the Meditation of the Return of the three
Kings, who being from heaven advertised in their sleep not to return by
Herod, took another way toward their country. In this advertisement we must
acknowledge and confess the providence of God, watching in the protection of
them that serve him with a royal mind, to deliver them from danger, and conduct
them to a sure haven, notwithstanding all the storms and contrary winds of
this boisterous world, and her worldlings. By the same consideration is
discovered the folly of the Tyrant Herod, who thought by his craft and subtilty
to deceive not only men, 1. Cor. 3.19.
but God also, and to catch him in the snares of his cruelty: but the
sovereign wisdom deluded his folly, and calling unto him in spite of this
worldly and bloody King, these stranger-Kings to take honor and homage of
them, signifies unto us that happy prey of souls, The Magi the first fruits
of our faith. S. Leoser. 2. de Ep.
which in the sight of Satan, signified by Herod, he did carry with him in the
person of these converted Kings, as the first fruits of our faith, and
Christian calling, gathered out of the harvest of the Gentiles. And this is
that, which God before by his Prophet said of his Son newly borne: Call his
name, Hasten to spoil; for before the Child can call Father or Mother, the
strength of Damascus shall be taken away, and the spoil of Samaria, Isa. 8.3.
in presence of the King of the Assyrians. This is Jesus, who not tarying as
other men do, for age fit to fight, has being but a child gotten the victory,
and this noble spoil, and subdued unto him the force of Damascus and Samaria,
tho strength of Idolatry, and the errors of the Pagan world, and this in the
sight of the King of Assyria, Satan, the king of this world; and upon this
consideration the good Pilgrim may say as follows, speaking to himself, and
to his God.

What say thou here my soul? And where shall thy eyes rest in the variety
of so many wonders? To his soul.
Will thou consider the greatness, or the littlenes of this Child? Either of
the^ exceed the conceits of man? Will thou behold the Majesty, the modesty,
the joy of this heavenly Mother holding in her arms this litle-great King,
whilst the other Kings did honor and adore with their devotion and gifts?
Thine eyes are dazelled in the light of this Majesty, and clean lost in the
depth of this humility. Contemplate the devotion, the piety, the submission,
the bounty of these things. Thou art not capable to conceive this; do better
then, and confess thine incapacity in all; adore this King as well in his
littlenes as in his greatness; admire the virtues of his Mother, imitate the
humility, and devotion of these Kings, and say with an humble and fervent
heart, O my King and Savior, govern me, To God.
save me, be my guide in my pilgrimage, my confort in afflictions, my strength
in temptations; give me of thy Gold, Incense, and Myrrh, of thy bounty, of thy
divinity, of thy humanity, to make unto thee a pleasant offering of my
presents, and to return by thy direction, and under thy protection, to mine
own country, whence my Father and all his posterity were banished. With these
three Meditations he shall end this day.

The thirtith day, and the ninth, and last of his Abode. A Meditation of the
Presentation of JESUS in the Temple. CHAP. XXXVIII.
IN this last day of our Pilgrims abode, he shall prepare himself to confess
and receive, happily to end and conclude his nine days of stay there, and to
depart the next morning, with the greater light and courage, being purged of
his sins, and armed with this precious food and Viaticum.

His meditation shall be of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, and of the
oblation she made of her dear child in the Temple, forty days after that he
was borne.

The Law of Purification. Leuit. 1^. Luc. 2.
At midnight he may briefly remember the history of this old Ceremony of the
^ews, which gives the ground to this Christian solemnity, and to his
meditation. The history is, that it was commanded by an express law, that the
woman who was brought to bed, should be unclean a week, if she brought forth
a son, and two if a daughter, and should remain sometime in her house, The
Sacrifice for Purification. Leuit. 12. Luc. 2.
before she came into the Temple, not touching any thing that was holy, to wit,
forty days for a son, and fourscore for a daughter; which days being
expired she came to the Temple to offer her fruit, with a Lamb of one year
old, or a Pigeon, or Turtle, which were sacrificed, the Lamb as an holocaust
for thanksgiving; the Pigeon, or Turtle for expiation of sin. If the Mother
could not have a Lamb, either for the time of the year, or by reason of her
poverty, The males consecrated to God.
she offered two Pigeo^s or Turtles to the same effect. Moreover the Male
firstborn, by right of being the eldest was consecrated to God, and pertained
unto him to serve in his house: but because God had chosen all the Tribe of
Leui for the service of his Altars, he permitted them of other Tribes to
redeem their firstborn, with five sicles of siluere and so to be delivered
of that obligation. The B. Virgin then following the law came from Nazareth to
Jerusalem (where was the only and the famous Temple of the Jews) the fourtith
day after the birth of her eldest Son, with a pair of Pigeons. This is the
history, whereon the Pilgrim shall discourse in his spirit, and contemplate
this heavenly Virgin coming with the blessed fruit of her womb, first to
offer him to his Father, and to exercise her humility, submitting her self to
the law of Purification, though neither the one nor the other had any need
thereof; and that the sovereign Savior. Prince of the law, was above the law,
and the Blessed Virgin was exempted, for not having conceived so as she could
become unclean like other women, for whom this Law was made. And thus having
made his midnight prayer, he may rest until the morning.

Ceremonies and feasts instituted for men to acknowledge Original sin, the
root of all the misery of mankind. CHAP. XXXIX.
IN the morning he shall continue his meditation upon the same mystery in three
points. The cause of this ceremony.


The first point shall be to consider, that the principal cause of this
ceremony, was to make man understand, and acknowledge his impute and unclean
generation, by reason of that infernal stain of original sin, wherewith all
the children of Adam, borne by the ordinary course are infected. This is the
confession which David made, when bewailing in his own person the misery of
all mortal men, he said: Psalm. 50
Behold I am conceived in iniquity, and my Mother has conceived me in sin.
And because this knowledge was necessary to men for to humble them, and make
them call for help, whereby they might be cleansed from this corruption, God
did institute certain Ceremonies, which contain a lesson of this learning and
knowledge, as were the ceremonies and sacrifices of the law of Nature, which
did sufficiently show the beginning of man to have been infected, Circumcision
in the law of nature
and the great need he had of the favor of God to be cleansed. But above all
was the Circumcision commanded to Abraham, which was done by cutting the most
rebellious part of the body, the instrument of concupiscence, of generation,
and corruption. In the law of Moses, ceremonies were so much more multiplied,
Purification in the law of Moses.
as men were more deeply drowned in darkness, and the ignorance of their own
misery, and had need of more light to discover it. For there was not almost any
man beside the Jews, that had any news or notice of original sin, nor of
the remedy thereof. The Paynime Philosopers boasted of knowing all things,
Most (...) ignorant of original sin.
but they could not discover the ground and root of all those errors, and
disorders wherein they saw mankind wander, which though being a reasonable
creature should of all others have been best ruled and ordered. But among all
these Judicial ceremonies ordained in the law, to discover this evil, this of
the Purification of the woman delivered, Leuit. 11.
held the first place; for it did plainly and publicly declare the corruption
of our generation, and the necessity of the expiatio^ thereof.

The first point the^ does make us see on the one side, the misery of the
corruption of men, which begins at their first being, and on the other side,
the obedience of the Son of God and his Mother, obeying the law they were not
bound unto; their humility, placing themselves among sinners, and offering
sacrifices for sin; although the one was cleanesse it self come for to
cleanse us, and the other all pure and free, not only from actual sin, but
also by a singular prerogative preserved from the touch of Original, common to
all men, as is said before.

God will be known in his gifts
The second point shall meditate the ceremony of the offerings and sacrifices,
and shall show him, how the Justice of God requires that with thanksgiving,
we offer unto him the good we have received of him, and namely that Fathers and
Mothers should offer their children, which is the best fruit of marriage; Good
works are spiritual children.
and that all Christians should offer their good actions, which are their
spiritual children, engendered and brought forth by the inspiration and grace
of God: and this was the moral sense of this ceremony.

In particular the devout Pilgrim shall mark, that this day was presented to
the sovereign God, The noblest offering that over was presented in the Temple.
the most noble and rich offering that ever was presented in the compass of
the Sanctuary, and that by the hands of the greatest Lady of the world. The
offering was his own dear son, a sacred and living oblation, infinite rich
and noble. She that presented it was his glorious Mother, gloriously endowed,
enriched and adorned with all the virtues that might exalt a creature above all
other creatures, humane or Angelical. Anna made an honorable present, 1. Reg.
1.24.
when she offered to the Temple her little child Samuel, who was to be a great
servant of God, yet he was but a servant, a creature, a vassal or subject:
Here is offered the Master, the Creator, the King, the Son of the Father,
God of God, Almighty of Almighty, not by an ordinary Virgin or Mother, but by a
Virgin singular, and without example in her degree, and a mother most singular,
the mother of God. The Prophet foretold this present, and this day, speaking
in the person of him that received it: Behold I send my Angel, who shall
prepare the way before my face and straight: Mala^h 3.
the Lord whom you seek, and the Angel of the Testament whom you desire,
shall come unto his holy Temple.

The Father is he who speaks; the first Angel is S. John Baptist; the face
of our Lord, is his Son Jesus Christ, the natural and true Image of his
Father; the Lord and the Angel of the Testament, is the same Son, which is
offered God and man, the Angel and mediator of the Testament, and Covenant
between God and man, offered this day as man, and adored as God; for otherwise
the Scripture would not have said, that he came into his Temple, seeing that no
pure creature may have a Temple, no more then an Altar or Sacrifice; this
preeminence being proper to the supreme deity. In respect of this offering the
second Temple of the Jews being lesser in all outward humane respects, was by
another Prophet preferred, before that of Solomon, Agg. 2.
being much more magnificall in gold, silver, and fashion, this being
magnificall by the Majesty of our Savior, who was there offered in person.

The third point of the Meditation. Of the Canticle, Nunc dimittis. CHAP. XL.
THE third point shall meditate the Canticle of venerable old Simeon, a man just
and fearing God, who a few days before had revelation from the Holy Ghost,
that before his death he should see the Anointed of our Lord, that is, the
Savior of the world, JESUS Christ, who coming then in spirit into the Temple,
when the B. Virgin and S. Joseph brought him, having confessed and adored him,
took him in his arms, and song a Canticle of thanksgiving, which the Church
has used ever since, for the conclusion of the divine Office, and said: Nunc
dimittis etc. Now thou dimissest thy servant O Lord, according to thy word in
peace. For my eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people. A light to the revelation of the Gentills, and the
glory of thy people Israel. And as the B. Virgin and Joseph meruailed at these
things that were said, Simeon did congratulate them, and call them happy, and
spoke to Mary the Mother of the child, saying: Behold he shall be put for the
ruin, and the resurrection of many, and for a sign which shall be
contradicted; and the sword of sorrow shall pierce thy heart, that the
cogitations of many may be made manifest. In which history the pious soul
shall contemplate the notable faith, charity, devotion, and joy of this noble
old Man, expressed by his words and gestures; he confessed and adored by his
confession the Anointed of God, though a little child in the eyes of men: He
foretold the redemption at hand of mankind, which he should bring to pass; he
straightly embraced this precious pledge of our salvation; he did exalt and
magnify him, Our Savior the ruin of the obstinate.
and prophesied of him, and of his Mother; he foretold that he was set for the
fall of many obstinate for their malice, such as were Herod, the Scribes and
Pharisees, and such like, who running against him, as against a hard stone,
should ruin both their soul and body; and as since them, have done many
Tyrants and persecutours of the same Savior, and his Church; all in the end
buried in the ditch themselves diged, and stricken to eternal death, by the
Justice of him, whom they persecuted. He foretold also the resurrection of
many, The resurrection of the good
who believing in him should live holily, and should be raised from sin, to
be made afterward happy and glorious; and by this means have the cogitations
of many been known, the hate, or the love which the Jews and Paynimes did
bear to our Savior: he foretold that he should be a sign or mark of
contradiction, Our Savior a sign or mark of contradiction.
and as a butt for the unbelieving to shoot the arrows of their tongues
against this mark, but most plainly and cruelly in his Passion, when he was
not only the mark of the calumniations and blasphemies of the wicked, but also
of the cruelty of those butchers, striking all parts and places of his body.
And this was the sword that pierced the soul of the Blessed Virgin, beholder
of his cruel Passion.

The like contradiction has always followed the members of the same Savior
and his Church, by the Jews and Paynims: neither was there ever Religion
planted or maintained with more contrarieties and opposition of all sorts of
people then the Christian, for as it is the perfectest of al other, The height
of the Christian faith enemy to the flesh, the world and the devil.
so has it found most resistance in the corruption of mankind, which were very
great and very general. Behold the Christian perfection, it eleuateth the
understanding of man to the belief of things altogether repugnant to fleshly
humors. It preaches the Cross and contempt of wisdom of the world, as also
of her honors and riches, and by many Maxims (to the world so many Paradoxes)
strikes just upon the face of her pride, makes war to defiance, with the
pleasures of the body, honors Virginity a chief enemy to sensuality,
imbraceth fastings, watchings, disciplines, and such like austerities, that
ha^per the body otherwise then it well likes, and promises in this life
nothing but persecution. This world being corrupted could not digest this
doctrine, nor the flesh understand it, but had it in horror and abomination.
Satan bestirred himself and entered into a rage, and kyndled fire to those
fond and foolish souls, and put them in a fury, and therefore the more malign
the malady was, and the stronger the medicine, so much more obstinate has
been the contradiction, and the sick so much the more incensed against his
Physician, Psalm. 117.13.
as his frensy was fierce and burning. But if the Savior has been persecuted
and so contradicted, he has not for all that been overcome; he has been
thrust at, Why God permitted these persecutions.
but not thrown down to the ground; and God has permitted these
persecutions, to show therein that his Son was God omnipotent, and too strong
for the strength and gates of hell, and to draw from them his own glory, and
the good of his elect.

The Pilgrim having meditated all this, The zeal of Saint Anne.
shall turn the eyes of his Spirit upon that which is said, That at the same
hour, the most holy and devout widow Anne did praise our Savior in the
Temple, and spoke of him to all the faithful Jews whom she found there: so
was our Savior magnified in his Temple, by the testimony of two persons,
diverse in sex, venerable in age, singular in sanctity.

Here the Pilgrim having found in his meditation, the sense of this ceremony,
shall learn the truth in the shadow, and shall acknowledge the misery and
corruption of man, from the first instant of his Conception infected with
original sin; he shall learn to humble himself, and to make small account
of the nobility of his birth, which he sees to be so base and abject in the
beginning; he shall offer what he has good to God, the giver of all good: he
shall imitate holy Simeon, embracing in his arms with like love and purity the
little child Jesus, either when he receaueth the B. Sacrament of the Altar,
covered under the visible form, as a child swadled in his little clothes, or
when he does meditate and join himself to him by love. He shall praise him
with holy Anna the Prophetess, and shall preach him to every one by good
speeches, and examples of good works; and finally he shall offer him unto God
his Father, as the B. Virgin did for our salvation, and shall offer himself
for his honor and service. Having ended his meditation and heard Mass, he
shall receive the blessed Body of our Savior, the Viaticum of his Return, as
it was of all the rest of his Pilgrimage, and shll say to God, the prayer
following.

The Pilgrims prayer, at his departure from Loreto. CHAP. XLI.
MY Lord and most merciful Father, mine eyes behold thy bounty and mine own
misery, more clearly then ever heretofore, by the light it has pleased thee
to give me. It remains to finish my vows and desires, and to conclude my
most humble prayers and requests at the end of my abode here. If thy clemency
does willingly harken to the groans of poor sinners to hear them, behold
here one oppressed with the burden of his sins, cries at thine ears from
the bottom of his heart. If this thy Clemency be accustomed to prevent sinners,
and to receive them into thine arms to show them mercy, then behold one who
casts himself at thy feet, confounded at his own faults, crying that he
has sinned against heaven, Luc. 15.
which he dares not behold, and against thee, to whom he dares have
recourse hoping in thy mercies. Hear my cry, Luc. 18.15.
O Father of mercies, and receive to mercy thy prodigal and penitent son,
and who have given me courage and strength to visit thee in this little-great
house of thy Son Jesus Christ, and kiss the walls and doors of that sacred
Chamber, which he, and his mother have sanctified a thousand ways: grant me
grace by the infinite merit of thy Son, and of the glorious Virgin, to serve
thee all the days of my life with an entire and perfect heart.

And if I may be worthy to lift up my hands to thy holy heavenly Throne, for
the body of thy Catholic Church, For the whole Church.
whereof by thy grace I am a child, and for those thou have made worthy and
principal members of the same; I beseech thee, O Lord, for all the said Church
in general, defend it, increase it, sanctify it, according unto thy power and
mercy: I beseech for him, who in the same holds, as from thee, For the Pope.
the keys of heaven, that he may perfectly and faithfully govern this
Commonwealth of thy house, to thy honor and glory, and the profit of the
flock committed to him: for the Princes and Pastors who do assist him, and
under his authority have the government of souies, For the Prelates.
that they may wisely instruct and faithfully defend their flock, and
charitably feed them unto life everlasting. For all Kings and Christian
Princes, For Christian Princes.
who under the protection of thy providence do command the people, that as true
Fathers and Protectours of the public good, they may carry the raynes and
government of their earthly policy, which thy power has put into their
hands, and may use justly the sword which they bear, for the defense of
Innocence, and punishment of wickedness.

For the most Christian King, his dear Queen, the Princes of the blood, and
all the Royal house and Realm; For the King.
assist them, O Lord, with thy favors and graces, remembering the services
which thy holy Church has received of their Ancestors, and of the French
nation, having heertofore often left their houses and country, not sparing
their goods nor their blood, to go buckle with the Squadrons of the enemies of
thy name, and to replant the banner of the Cross in barbarous Countries.

But specially I present my most humble vows, and prayers for this noble
Fleuron-de-Lys, Monsieur the Dauphine, thy gift, For the Prince.
and the hope of the Crown of France: Make him great in wisdom, valor,
piety, and in all those virtues which gave the title of Most-Christian to his
Ancestors, the name of Great to Charlemaine, S. Lewis.
the place and honor of a Saint in the Church of God to his great Gra^d-father
Lewis the IX. Make him great and holy on the earth, there to be a stay and
bulwark to the Catholic faith, the joy of his Father and Mother, the honor
of the nobility, and of his house, and the rest and repose of his people, and
that he may reign one day in heaven, in the rank of thy greatest Saints.
Assist the son, who have assisted the Father, so many ways, and so
meruailously, that France under him may shine in piety, abound in peace,
flourish in glory, and may be thy chosen Kingdom, and the French nation thy
well-beloued people.

I beseech thee Lord, for all those to whom I am bound in any title
whatsoever, For benefactours.
of blood, benefits, friendship, or otherwise, and who have hope in my prayers;
for my Parents, my friends, For friends and enemies.
my enemies, make them partakers of thy graces, and me worthy to obtain some
thing for them. O heavenly Father: O mighty Son, my sovereign Lord and
Master, equal to thy Father in power and bounty: O Holy Ghost the bond of
both: To the B. Virgin.
O ineffable Trinity, harken to my voice, and hear my prayer. O glorious
Virgin, the principal work of this one, and of these three, most happy
Mother, faithful Advocate, carry this my voice and prayer to the Sanctuary of
this supreme Majesty, who has made thee so great in heaven and earth. Obtain
for me an heart and forces to serve thee as a true Pilgrim all the time of my
mortality, to praise, bless, and adore his greatness and goodness for ever in
the Kingdom of heaven, in the company of thy self, the Angels, and Saints,
and of al those for whom I am to present my humble requests. This is the
prayer I make to thee in thy holy Chamber, departing from thence. Adieu sacred
Chamber, Adieu noble little Palace, Adieu pretty house, more large then the
whole world, more rich then the Orient, more pleasant then Paradise upon earth.
The remembrance of thy Altars, of thy pauements, of thy walls, and of thy
wonders shall remain always planted in my heart, as a lively and pregnant
memorial to stir me up to yield honor, praise, and immortal thank^ to the
Son and the Mothet, who with their honor have made thee so honorable.

The After-dinner and Evening of the 30. day, and the ninth of the Pilgrims
abode. How the Pilgrim departed from Loreto. CHAP. XLII.
AFTER his spiritual refection, he shall take his leave of his friends, bid
them farewell, thanking them, and recommending himself to their prayers, and
taking necessary instructions for his return, and he shall not forget to do
some markeable Alms, if he be able; and having taken his corporal refection,
he shall depart in good time, with a resolution to suffer much more for our
Savior. For in what measure he has received new graces, new light and forces,
he should also labor and do more in proof and trial of his love for him in
all occurrences. For his Itinerarium, and guide of his journey, he shall have
the Ten days of Lazarus, The ten days of Lazarus.
which are the ten days journey following, whereby he shall take example and
direction in the exercise of his devotion in his way. If the number of days be
too short, he shall divide the meditation of one day into more, to have enough,
or shall take them else where: and if he may return in less time, he may choose
what will be fittest for him, and leave the rest: and what is said of this
third part, of the ten days of Pilgrimage, of lengthning or shortning the
meditations, according to the way, may be practiced in the precedent parts also.

THE RETVRNE OF THE PILGRIM OF LORETO. Or the Ten days journey of Lazarus.
The one and thirtith day of the Pilgrim of Loreto, and the first of his
Return. CHAP. I.
LAZARUS a man much beloved of God, wise, and well versed in the learning of
Saints, and ye^ devour to the glorious Mother of God, departed from his
Country in the year 1583. to go see the world in Christian Pilgrimage, with
a little brother of his called Pauline, about 18 years of age at his
departure, himself being 24. and a Cousin of theirs called Theodosius, of the
same age, a young man of rare virtue, and excellent conversation, with a
faithful and pietis servant of their Fathers, somewhat elder then they, who
was called Vincent. They had already spent together six years, in the most
famous Pilgrimages of Christendom, and else where, and always with these
exercises of devotion, which we have set down before in the direction of our
Pilgrim, still continuing the same, though not without difficulty: but in the
beginning of the seventh year, by mischance Pauline was taken prisoner, and
made slave to the Barbarians in Alexandria: and ^s Lazarus being at
Constantinople, was ready to send his ransom, Pauline made prisoner.
which he had gotten by means of the French Ambassador, he understood that he
was dead, which news did meruailously afllict him; notwithstanding being a
Gentleman of great courage and virtue, he bare it patiently, hoping that his
death was happy, by reason of the piety and devotion, which he had always
marked in that youth, specially toward our B. Lady. The other three returned
toward France, and came the second time to Loreto, for they had been there at
the beginning, and still carried themselves, as Pilgrims of Loreto; and did
their devotions there certain days, not forgeting to pray for the soul of
Pauline, where also Lazarus caused his funeral to be kept. So they parted full
of spiritual joy, from that holy place, and came along until they were within
few days iourny of their Fathers house, when good Theodosius was lost from his
company, no man knowing what was become of him, notwithstanding the enquiry
that Lazarus had four or five days together caused to be made after him. This
loss did so much the more grieve him, the less it was looked for, and almost
at their home, as it were a shipwreck in the mouth of the haven. He offered
some vows to God, and our B. Lady of Loreto for him, and with a pious
resolution, continued his way, having now no companion but Vincent, and
conceived a great hope in God, by the Protection of the B. Virgin, that he
would have a special care of her Pilgrims. Now he had changed his name which
he had from his infancy, which was Aime-dieu, and called himself Lazarus,
because he desired not to be known, but by title of a poor and humble servant
of God, which he sought with a Christian magnanimity from his heart, and with
all auersion and disdain did eschew the vanity and glory of the world, as a
plague of al noble actions. The first evening therefore of these Ten days that
I write, being at an Hospital by a forest, before going to bed he took for
subject of his morning meditation following. The flight of our Savior into
Egypt, and conferred with his companion Vincent, these three points following.

The points of the meditation following.
The first, how S. Joseph a little after the Presentation of our Savior to the
Temple, was advertised in his sleep by an Angel from God, to take the child and
his mother, and to fly into Egypt, by reason of the persecution of Herod at
hand, who already contrived his death.

The second, the B. Virgins abode in Egypt with her Son Jesus.

The third, the return of our Savior to Jury, and his retyring to Nazareth.

Meditations upon the flight of our Savior into Egypt, together with his
glorious Mother and Joseph. CHAP. II.
EARLY in the morning an hour before going abroad, Lazarus and Vincent entered
into the meditation of these points a part by themselves. Lazarus spoke thus to
God, and to his soul: My Lord and faithful guide, direct (if it please thee)
my affections and actions to thy honor, and glory, and to the profit of thy
poor servant. I behold thy dear Son, made a little Infant and feeble for me,
to fly the persecution of of Herod, unjust usurper of the Scepter of the
Hebrews, thy children, and thy kingdom, and to be carried into Egypt in the
arms of his divine mother, as the Sun in the heaven: I desire to see the
course of this mystery, and to profit thereby (accomplish my desire, seeing
thou have given it me) and to have my understanding enlightened with the beams
of thy grace, well to meditate, and my Will heated with the fire of thy love,
straightly to embrace virtue, and to walk constantly in the ways of thy
commandments. I consider here (O my soul) the faithful and sweet Providence
of this heavenly Father, aduertising Joseph by his Angel to fly, and to
withdraw his Son from the cruelty of the Tyrant; for though he were sent, and
came to dye, yet not in that age, nor in that sort, but in the flower of his
age, and by the death of the Cross would he accomplish our Redemption, and
bestow on us in the mean time, the benefit and use of his life, to instruct us
by the example of his heavenly virtues and wonderful works, and by the
doctrine of his holy preachings, to show in his life and death, the signs of
his infinite love, with most manifest and clear proofs. If he had been put
to death in his cradle, men had wanted all those evident testimonies of his
Charity, so many motives to believe in him, and to receive him for the promised
Messiah. This little child then persecuted so soon by the Princes of the
world, visible and invisible, takes his way to Egypt, and as weak gives
place to the Tyranny, which he could as well have repressed by resistance, as
avoid by flying: But he would do, what himself had before taught his
servants, and would by his example, show his disciples what they should do in
like case. So Jacob left the house of his Father to avoid the fury of Esau;
Moses left the Court of Pharao to escape his hands; so little Josias, 4. Reg.
2.
the lawful successor of the Crown, was hidden from the massacre, which
cruel Athalia made of the Princes of the blood.

I see here, that holy Joseph obeys simply without excusing or asking why
he, The obedience of Joseph.
whom he heard to be come to save the world, would not rather save himself
staying in Iudaea, then by flying into Egypt. It is enough to obey the voice
of him, that commands, without searching the secret or reason of the
commandment; teaching the true servants of God to obey their Superiors,
without pleading or resistance. He arose in the night, took the child with
diligence, took the Mother, and went toward Egypt, by the same desert
whereby the Hebrews passed to Iudaea. This tender Virgin bare her little child
in her bosom, and closed in her arms whom the capacity of the heavens could
not comprehend; she fears his danger, and relyeth in his providence,
willingly endures the horror of the desert, and the wearisomnes of the way,
and gathers of her pains, the joys of just souls, in the love of him, who
came into the desert of the world to suffer. O how gracious a spectacle to
heaven is this little company! O desert more happy in these three Hebrew
Pilgrims, then in that infinite multitude that passed before. A desert
sanctified by these heavenly trauaillers, signed and consecrated one day after
to be the repair of sanctity, the earthly Paradise of devotion, to thousands
of Religious souls, who shall there sing the praises of their Redeemer. The
desert of Egypt inhabited by Religious.
A desert more plentiful then all the orchards of Eden; then all the Gardens
of Egypt, yea then earthly Paradise it self; for although thy trees be
barren, thou bear notwithstanding at this time the fruit of life, the mother
of life, and the faithful spouse of life. O Lazarus behold this pretty
Pilgrim, behold this trauailer, and his faithful Spouse, do them some
service in the way, give them some fruit, some ease, or refreshment from thy
hands, request of the B. Virgin that little load she carries in her arms, and
take him into thine to ease her: but alas, thou art not worthy, and although
thou were, yet she would not leave him. This burden though it be more weighty
the^ the whole world, is light unto her, yea gives her vigor and strength to
go the better. If she will not gratify thee in this, take boughs, and shadow
this little God, who heeretefore shadowed his children in a cloud from the
scorching Sun, and enlightened them with a Pillar of fire in the shadows of
night; Psalm. 77.14.
and if thou can do them no other service, kiss humbly their shadow, kiss
the steps of their feet, and have compassion of the payns of this child, and
confess thy sins to be the cause.

He entered into Egypt, according to the prophesy which he gave many ages
before: Behold, God shall ascend upon a little cloud, Isa. 19.1.
and enter into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt shall be troubled at his face.
This Cloud, is the precious humanity of the Son of God, in the which he is
carried: It may be also the glorious Virgin compared to a cloud, because she is
heavenly and divine, like the humanity of her Son, without any burden of
sin, having brought forth her Son, as the cloud does the rain without
corruption, and carries him in Egypt, and else where, as the cloud carries
the rain within her bosom. O celestial cloud! O heavenly rain! O divine
child! O divine Mother! He enters into Egypt, whence his Father called him,
as he foretold by his Prophet: I have called my Son out of Egypt. He had
called before the Hebrews his adoptiue sons, Ose. 11.
and people out of Egypt, he calls now his natural Son, borne of his own
substance, but in another manner. Then he called the Hebrews to recall them
from a cruel slavery and bondage, and to make them enter into Iudaea: now
co^trarywise he calls this his Son from Iudaea to Egypt, to enter there,
and deliver the Egyptian himself from a more cruel servitude, to crush their
Idols, and break the kingdom of Pharao, who oppressed them under his tyranny,
with thousands of horrible superstitions.

Arise then, O Egypt, receive with a good entertainment this little Son,
and have no fear of the plagues, Exodus 6. and 7. etc.
wherewith the malice of thy Ancestors has heretofore been pl^ged by him; he
comes to sanctify thee, and to save thee; he is a great God, but is become a
little child, affable, and of easy access, a King full of sweetness and mercy:
receive him then, receive with good cheer these three Pilgrims, the most noble
that ever marched upon thy ground. The Sages of Greece, the Platoes,
Philosophers have visited Egypt.
the Aristotle's, the Gallants of the world, the Great Alexanders, brave
Caesar's, that have heretofore visited thee, were nothing but poor wretched
slaves of Ambition, having their souls bound with chains of iron, howsoever
they seemed gold, and glittered only in the outward of worldly vanity; these
here do pass the greatness, the brightness of the glory of a thousand worlds.
This footman who is called Joseph, brings one who is a Virgin and a Mother,
the greatest Lady of the whole world, admired of the Stars and Angels, and
shall one day be the admiration and refuge of al mortal men. And this mother
brings thee a Son, who is the Majesty of the heavens, the King of Angels,
the Son of a Father, all mighty, all wise, all good, himself as wise, as
good, and as old as his Father, in every thing equal to his Father, Creator
of the heavens with the Father, Governor of the whole world with the Father,
and sent by his Father from heaven to redeem us here in earth. Receive him
then as a Pilgrim, seeing Herod chaceth him out of his Country, and whilst
this Tyrant embrueth Iudaea with the blood of the little Innoce^ts, make much of
this little Innocent, father of them all, and rewarder of their life lost for
him; make much of his Mother, and of his foster-father. O my sweet Jesus, and
did it please thee so soon to be chaced out of thy Country, and to be a
Pilgrim and banished man, to bring me unto my heavenly country, whence my
gra^dfather Adam has so long been excluded? Would thou suffer even in thy
cradle, what my sins deserved, and what shall I e^dure for thee in my
Pilgrimage? O mother, who have carried this pretty Pilgrim in a strange country,
who have suffered with him, nursed and weaned him, who can conceive the care,
the Charity, the zeal, the diligence, and the services thou did e^ploy in
these seaue^ years thou were in Egypt, faithfully to nourish and bring up this
little God, clothed in the sackcloth of our mortality? The goodly example thou
gave of all virtues to that people, blacker in their superstition then in
their complexion? O B. Virgin, that after thy example I might serve my God, not
now like a Pilgrim, suffering in Egypt, but as a Conqueror triu^phing in
heaven! It is I, that am in Egypt, this valley of affliction, where I have
need of his visit, and help, and of thine! O favorable Virgin, help thy
Pilgrims and deuotes

The seven years of this Pilgrimage being expired, Herod in Iudaea being
dead, and the Lion of Egypt being buried, the Angel of God aduertiseth Joseph
in his sleep to return into Palestine; The return of Jesus to Palestine
and because Archelaus the son of Herod, successor both of his crown and
cruelty, reigned in Iudaea, he retired himself from Galiley unto the City of
Nazareth, where the little child, Father of all ages, seven years old in his
humanity, was brought up by his Mother and foster-Father not manifesting
himself by the marks of his greatness, to any but to his glorious Mother,
whose soul he enlightened at every moment with the brightness of his Deity: to
men he showed himself as a little child, and as such was subject to this
Father and Mother being adored of them both. He was Citizen of Nazareth, as
before Pilgrim of Egypt, and ruling in the heavens, he suffered upon the
earth, and being greater then the heaven, was enclosed in the walls of a
little Cottage. O Nazareth, O happy city of such a Citizen, happy house of
such a Guest, happy chamber of such an Inhabitant! how often have thou been
honored with the steps of this heavenly child walking upon thy ground? how
often sanctified by the prayers, the sighs, the talks, and desires of this
little Savior, preparing himself betymes with the sweat of his face to our
redemption, for the which he descended from the bosom of his heavenly Father;
and sanctified also with the charitable offices of his heavenly Mother? O my
soul, can thou express it, can thou comprehend it? It is easier to honor
them in silence, and to beg of the mother, and the Son grace to follow and
imitate them.

I ask it of thee, O my Redeemer, withal my power, grant it me if it please
thee for thy goodness. I ask it of thee, O holy Mother, obtain for me, for
thou can do it. Let the memory of this mansion, and of this Chamber (which by
thy grace I have visited) be unto me a continual spur, to stir me to the
love of him, who has passed his youth in humility and voluntary poverty for me.

1. The fountain of Bees. 2. The dinner and meetinges. 3. Presages of
eloquence, and the nature of Bees observed fifty years by Aristomachus. 4. The
wonders of our Savior going into Egypt. 5. The tree Persis adoreth him. 6.
The Idols of Egypt overthrown. CHAP. III.
THVS prayed Lazarus in the morning according to the light God had imparted to
him, Vincent for his part, having made the same meditation, and recommending
themselves to the protection of the B. Virgin, and their good Angel, they
began their journey, saying their Itinerarum, and their other accustomed
prayers. And they walked thus joyfully until about noone, over the wild
plains, and barren, but only of briers, and broomes, whereof they saw good
store in the bare Champion, without meeting either man or beast; and they felt
themselves now well wearyed and tired, as well for having eaten little that
morning, as for the excessive heat of the Sun. At last looking here and
there about them, and searching some place to refresh themselves in, they spyed
on their right hand certain willowes, behind a little hille, and hoping there
to find some water, they went straight thither, and they found in the midest of
these thick, and shadowy trees a fountain clear as Crystal, which bubling
out plentifully made a little brook full of cressits, which was a sign that
the water was good. It was some what deep, the banks being high, and covered
partly with moss, and partly with herbs and flowers of that season, for it
was the month of May. Then said Vincent, Our way agrees not ill with the
matter of our meditation; for this morning we passed in spirit, through the
desert of Arabia, desiring to suffer somewhat to the imitation of little Jesus,
and his good Mother, who suffered there diverse incommodities, we have also
passed this with some pain. It is true, replied Lazarus, we have suffered but
little, and good Jesus and his Mother had quickly compassion of us, having at a
pinch provided us of a resting place, The Pilgrims dinner.
so fit for our dinner and refreshing: and so they stuck their staves in the
ground, and set them down to take their repast. They had in their sackes two
or three manchets, and a piece of cheese, with a few aples, and a little wine
in their botles, and as they set forth their provision upon their green
napery, they perceived a far off one wandering, hither and thither, seeking
as they throught either his way, or some fountain; they had compassion of him
and thought it a work of charity to set him in his way, or to make him
partaker of their good fortune, therefore they hung their dinner upon the bough
of the nearest willow, least some worms, or venomous beast might touch it upon
the ground, and ran speedily where they had espied him. But they were amazed
so soon to have lost the sight of the man, and could not conceive that he
should so quickly be walked out of their view, in so large and open a champion;
and they did not perceive, that as soon as he saw them, taking them for
thieves, he hid himself in a ditch behind a little bush, through which he saw
them not being seen, and beheld them running from one part to another, being
sore afraid to be found and spoild of that little silver he had, which he
carried to buy stuff for his shop, for he was a merchant. So they returned
softly unto their fountain again, persuading themselves that this fellow made
such have, thinking they were thieves, or else that it was some spirit, which
they judged more likly, because he vanished suddenly. Being returned to the
willowes, they go for their dinner, and behold they found a swarm of bees
lighted upon one of their loaves, and had all covered it with their honey dew.
Oh (says Vincent) our Lord would sweete^ our bread and our travel: we must
hope so (quoth Lazarus) for this little people is commonly a presage of good
luck and benediction. So it is said, S. Ambrose.
that a like swarm did sit on the mouth of Saint Ambrose, being a little
child, in his cradle; and the like is said to have happened to Plato, Plato.
in sign they should be such as they proved, Orators endewed with a heavenly
and honylike eloquence, the one amongst the Paynims, the other more happily in
the chair of truth in the Church of God: so they took the other two loaves
and the rest for their dinner, leaving the third to the Bees not to scarre them
so soon. But holding their bread in their hands they perceived in the bodies
of diverse trees, certain hides, out of one of the which this swarm came;
they went to visit it, and took out two or three combs of honey for their
dinner; when they had said grace and began to fall to their meat, these little
creatures came flying and buzzing about them; some lighted upon their bread,
some upon the grass, kissing and pinching with their little mouth the flowers
wherewith the beauty of the fountain was diapred, and sucked out the liquour
to make their honey: diverse drunk of the river, stryking at the little green
froggs, who lay like spies to entrappe them: Frogs ^ enemies to Bees.
they came often about them without doing them any harm, but only served them
for a sweet recreation. Vincent seeing their so great familiarity, began to
say smyling; If we were thought thieves by the Pilgrim who became so quickly
invisible, behold now we are acquitted of suspicion of this crime, Bees hate
thieves. Plin. l. 21. cap. 16.
by this familiar and friendly approach of these bees, for many say, that they
have thieves in horror: Yea, but what will they say, (quoth Lazarus) when they
find that we robbed them of their honey? This is not robbery, says Vincent, but
a present of hospitality, which they offered us, when they came swarming upon
our bread. Lazarus had more list to meditate then to eat, and the tears fell
of from his eyes in eating. Vincent not knowing if it were of grief, for the
loss of Theodosius, asked him if he had any new cause of sorrow that procured
those tears. No rather (says Lazarus) it is a new joy, in considering the
greatness of God in these little creatures. For who would not be ravished with
so many wonders heaped together, in these little bodies, and to see all the
parts of a perfect Monarchy painted out in the policy of this pretty people?
Properties of the Bees. Plin. l. 11. cap. 16.
In behoulding them, they make me remember their King, their Magistrates, their
distribution of offices, their obedience to their Superiors, their industry in
framing their houses, in dressing their Loure, and the palace of their Prince,
in making their honey, and hunting after flowers from morning until night, and
laboring without ceasing; of their justice in punishing their Drones, who
steal their honey, and live idly, and in pricking to labor those that are
slothful among them; of their piety in burying their dead; of their affection
in courting their King when he goes abroad to the fields; and of the wisdom
of their King, in encouraging them to their labor by his presence; of his
beauty, bearing a star in his forhead as a crown or diadem; of his mildnes,
having no sting, or at least not using it, armed only with his Majesty. Of
their fidelity toward him, accompanying him in peace and war, and exposing
themselves courageously to death for his safety and service; of their wisdom
in keeping their provision, and the public treasure of their hyues, in giving
the sign to go forth in the morning to forage, The enemies of the Bees. Plin.
l. 11 cap. 17.
to eat after their travel, to sound the retraite for their rest, and for
keeping of silence, in setting their guard at their gates, and to stop the
entry to Spiders, hornets, frogs, swallows, lizarts, and other capital
enemies of their estate, and Commonwealth.

Who will not, I say, be ravished to see in these small creatures so admirable
virtues, Aristomachus observed Bees 50. years.
which Aristomachus a Citizen of Soli, a Town in the Island of Cyprus, and
Philuscus Tatien, and a certain Gentleman of Rome did observe, and many more
which they marked not, although the first employed fifty whole years, to make
his observations, and the second al his life, Philuscus al his life. Plin. l.
11. cap. 16.
and the third made Hyues of horn, such as lanterns are made of, very
transparent, to see and observe at his pleasure and leisure their pretty order
and government. And to go no further for a subject of admiration, behold the
art of this comb, do you see the marvelous framing of their houses and
celles? The art of the Combs.
How properly and distinctly they are couched every one with six corners of an
admirable measure and proportion, the one to conserve the Honey, the other for
lodging to cover the little worms or seed that come of their wax, and to draw
them forth for the multiplication of their race? Was there over an Architect or
Builder, that could so wisely devise, and build as these little creatures, so
much the more admirable in that they do their work within their hyues, in the
dark, without confusion, and without all trouble, or instruments, saving only
their little feet and mouths? And if the world heretofore wondered, as at a
great piece of work, at the Be of Myrmecides, that covered with her narrow
wings, Plin. l. 6. c. 21.
a Ship garnished with the sails, and all her furniture and tackling; how
shall we be astonished, if we be wise obseruers of the works of God, to see
enclosed within these little bodies, the resemblance of all persons, virtues,
charges, and offices of a kingdom most politikly governed? Vincent was
ravished with this discourse, and left eating, and Lazarus went forward saying:
Their Chastity.
And that which we should specially praise and love in the Bees, is, that they
be Virgins, and Mothers both, for they have their little ones without
ingendring, or corporal conjunction, bearing herein a shadow of the B. Virgin
her prerogative, whom we serve; and of the Church of Ie^us Christ, who bring
forth their children without pollution. Their work is also blessed, for their
honey serves both for meat, and for medicine, and rheit wax is employed for
the most part to holy uses, serving for light, to the Temples and Altars. They
have some resemblance also of a Religious life; for they have nothing proper,
they live in common, They live in common.
they strictly keep silence, and the rules of their government and policy, and
doing what God has taught them, they sing also after their fashion; so that
you see in this society, poverty, chastity, and obedience, and the observance
of a house of God. And have not I then (friend Vincent) occasion to shed
tears, not of water but of honey, if I had them, sufficiently to thank the
wisdom of this great God, who has made these little creatures so prudent and
so profitable; and his goodness, who has brought them forth for me? Have I not
occasion also to shed more bitter tears of penance, in that I have not
employed my time with like fervor in doing good works, and keeping the laws of
Christ, as this little world, to do their work, and keep their laws? And I am
unthankful to my Creator, for the good he has done me, and namely at this
time, giving me not only rest and refection of my body in the way, but also a
spiritual dinner in consideration of his creature. But it is time to go
forward, let us say grace, and depart hence. Vincent would gladly have heard
Lazarus still, so great delight he took in his discourse, and could not
forbear to say unto him: I know not, if I may believe the honey Comb you have
eaten, has honyed your tongue, and made it sweet, so has your discourse
flowed more sweet then honey into mine ears, and if you will yet be longer, I
will not think it so. Joan. 12.35.
Let us walk (says Lazarus) whilst it is day; it is the part of wise
Pilgrims, not to loose a minute of time, when they may go forward, and to rest
in their Inn, not in their way.

They arose and said grace, and as they went to take their loaf, A battle of
Bees.
behold a Tragical spectacle presented unto the^: there were two great armies
of these little creatures hanging in the air, and ranged in battle array, and
ready to encounter. The swarm had left the loaf all mullied with honey, and
made an host, and a swarm new come made another. Either of the^ had their
King, flying in the midst of his troops, beautiful, shyning, bigger by half
then any of his soldiers, and with his buzing exhorted them gravely, to show
themselves valiant in this present necessity. There were of either side sundry
squadrons of diverse fashions, some round, some square, some triangular, some of
the form Croissant, all armed with the same arms, which was a coat of
scales, and of equal courage, all Lanciers mounted upon their wings. The
sign being given by a confuse buzing of both sides, the shocke began, squadron
against squadron, assaulting some time on the front sometime on the flancke,
sometime defending, sometime assaulting with such a furious encounter and
slaughter, that a man might see in the air, as it were a hail of fire, or
bullets of hargebushes, The way to depart and apease them.
one flying against the other, and falling thick and threefold to the ground;
and had not Lazarus parted the^ of purpose with a little honyed water, which he
quickly made in his dish, these two people had been utterly overthrown, so
enraged were they the one against the other. Vincent was not well pleased
heerwith being sorry to see his good Hostesses (of whom he had received so good
a refectio^ both of body and spirit) to kill one another, and to overthrow
their estate by this civil war. And Lazarus considering their great courage;
I marvel not, says he, if heretofore the Citizens of Alba Gracia did help
themselves with the succor of these Bees, Bonfin. l. 4. de 4.
filling the camp of Amurath the King of the Turks who assieged them, with
hyues of Bees, giving to their enemy an extreme trouble by the stings and
buzings of those little creatures.

This peace being made they continued their way all the rest after dinner very
joyfully, with many good spiritual discourses, namely upon the subject of
their morning meditation. Vincent recited the comfort he had in meditating the
way of little Jesus in the desert of Arabia; for he seemed to see him carried,
sometime in the arms of his glorious Mother, and sometime in the arms of good
Joseph; then fastened to the tet of the Virgin sucking her milk, and taking
refreshme^t, then laughing sometime on the one, sometime on the other, with a
countenance full of grace and majesty, giving them by his divine looks
strength and courage to sustain the travail of their Pilgrimage; and
himself, he said, was fortifyed unto his journey, by the meditation of this
history, and he asked Lazarus, Angels accompanied our Savior into Egypt.
if he thought not that Angels did often present themselves to do some
service to their Lord, and his Mother? I doubt not (answered Lazarus) but as
the Angel advertised Joseph to undertake this journey, so he did accompany
them in the same; and as these heavenly spirits had visibly announced his
Conception, and honored his Nativity, that they did also convey him through
the desert in visible form: and that the Scripture has made no mention
thereof, it is, because it could not be doubtful to those that could well
conjecture it; and if it has passed in silence thousands of miracls which our
Savior wroughr in his life, as S. John does signify, those that were written
sufficing to plant the faith of his divinity, Joan. 21.25.
is it marvel that there is no mention made of diverse things happened in this
journey, and in all the time our Savior abode in Egypt? And therefore I
believe, that not only the Angels did assist them traveling in the desert,
and remaining in Egypt, but also the Birds and wild Beasts too, yea the very
Trees and plants, driven with a certain extraordinary and supernatural
instinct, did acknowledge and adore in some sort their Creator, and gave some
sign of joy to see that divine company, walking upon the ground, where they
did grow.

The tree Persis.
You know, that the Faith of the Primitive Church has left us from hand to hand
what happened near to Hermopolis, a City of Thebais, near to which a Tree
called Persis, adored by the poor superstitious people, by reason of the huge
greatness, and the enchantments the Devil there wrought, did all shake, and bow
down his highest branches, even to the ground, S^zomen. l. 5. c. 20.
at the coming of our Savior into the Town, as adoring him, and giving
testimony, that the Devil who reigned there before, was driven away, and
received the benediction of his Creator, Niceph. l. 10. c. 31.
for that afterward, not only the fruit was more pleasant then before, but also
cured and healed many incurable diseases, as also the leaves and bark did the
like. The same tradition observed by our Doctors does teach us, Isa. 19.1.
that the Idols did fall to the ground at the presence of our Savior entering
into this town, which was the nursery of Idolatry, a sign that our Savior
should destroy it throghout all the whole world, as here he had battered it in
her root and spring. And therefore Athanasius the Great magnified this exploit
of little Jesus, and said: Who among all the Just, or Kings made the Idols of
Egypt to fall by their coming? Athan. lib. de Intarn. Verbi.
Abraham came thither, Moses was borne there, and yet their errors remained
always, and every where; neither had ceased, had not the Savior of all come
thither in his flesh, and been carried thereon, as on a cloud, and descended to
root them out. And Origin expounding the words which the Angel said to Joseph
(Fly into Egypt etc.): Orig. hom. 3.
It is to the end (quoth he) the works of the hands of the Egyptians, and
their false Gods and Idols should be overthrown, the Devils terrifyed, and
the machines of the Kings destroyed, in destruction of their Idols; and that by
the coming of our Savior should be wrought the ruin of these fugitive slaves,
the wicked spirits. Thus Origin.

The arrival of the Pilgrims at the Farme-house. 1. Tables of Loreto; and of
the flight of our Savior into Egypt. 2. The ship of the Ragusians delivered.
3. Two Capuchines, and three country men; a Supper. 4. Three Slaves. 5. One of
Prouence: The B. Virgin, star of the Sea. 6. The practice of the examen of
Conscience. CHAP. IIII.
COntinuing their discourse and way in this manner, The arriual of the
Pilgrims at the country House.
they came in the evening to a pretty Farm-house, about which fed certain
herds of Cattle and sheep pertaining to a good old man very rich, and withal
very devout to the B. Virgin, and very charitable to Pilgrims. This good man
was at that time in a chamber over his gate, which looked toward the way, as
soon as he discovered these to be Pilgrims by their staves, he came presently
himself to meet them, and prayed them very heartily, like another good old
Abraham, Abraham invited passe^gers Genesis 13.1
to come lodge with him, alleging that it was late, and that there was no
convenient lodging to be had, nearer then three leagues, to which they could
not reach, without walking long in the night, and exposing themselves to the
mercy of the beasts, and thieves. The Pilgrims stood meruailing at this honest
and hearty summon, and coniecturing that they should be happy in the company of
such an host, they suffered themselves to be persuaded, and went with him.
Entering into his house, they perceived in the countenance of all the
domesticalls, a certain joy that they had of their coming. The host made them
a sign to prepare some fruits, and taking the Pilgrims by the hand: I know
(says he) that you would salute little Jesus and his Mother, and brought them
to a little Chapel looking toward the East, built at the end of a
basse-court, with an Altar in it to say Mass very well adorned, and diverse
pictures of devotion hanging upon the walls. After they had prayed a while,
Lazarus and Vincent set themselves to behold the Tables, and desired to
understand them; but their host told them, they must first drink a draught of
wine to refresh their wearynes, and brought them to a hall hard by, where every
one bestirred himself to set somewhat on the table; one bread, another curdes,
another fresh cheese, and other raw Artichokes, and like fruit of the season.
They dru^ke once, and eat a few cheries. The host seeing they would eat
nothing else, I see well (quoth he) that you have need of rest, and would have
brought them to a chamber to repose themselves, whilst supper was making ready.
The repose (says Lazarus) shall be it it please you to see your pictures. Well,
quoth the most, but with that condition, that we may sit; and so they returned
to the Chapel. Diverse Pictures.
They sat down all three, having before them the pictures. In the first, set
upon the Altar on good days, was the house of Loreto, carried by the Angels
from Nazareth to Sclauonia: The house of Loreto
the picture was very pleasant, and the invention good, the colors lively, and
the lines clean etc. And the parts of the pictures composed with a proportion
very well measured, the Angels were hanging in the air in so many diversities
of placings, of wings, arms, legs, and all the parts of the body, as there
were persons, with their shadows so artificial, that they raised, and
represented so lively their members and actions, as they seemed to be Images
embossed, and to move upon the table. But above the rest was pleasant to behold
the little Jesus, and his holy Mother, who held him fast in her hart-hand, that
is, in the left, and embraced him with the right. The beholding of him did
breed in the soul a certain inward joy; and indeed Lazarus and Vincent could
not be satisfied with the sight. On the right hand of this Table, The picture
of the Purification.
was the Virgin presenting her Son into the Temple, and over against it, that
of his flight into Aegipt, where the painter had not forgot to place the
Angels that accompanied our Savior in the desert, and the city of Hermopolis
in Thebau, and the great Tree Persis, who bowed down his branches as this
child passed by, Of the ^light of our Savior into Egypt.
and the Devils who left their lodging and forsook the tree, flying in the
air, as scared crows. Vincent looking upon Lazarus: Lo (says he) here is
our Mattins: Why? says their Host? Lazarus taking the answer, he means
(says he) that the subject whereof we did speak this morning, is here now
represented unto us.

Tursel lib. 5. cap. 10.
There were two other Tables by these, very markeable; In the one was painted a
great Ship laden with merchandise and men, sailing within a thick foggy mist,
yet in some part clear, and that so artificially, that the behoulders might
discern over against them, some of the men holding up their hands to heaven,
calling upon the help of the B. Virgin of Loreto, whose Image they had with
them. They were in great danger, as appeared by the picture, for the painter
had set round about this ship certain loistes of Pirates, who going about her
this way, and that way, as it were groping and at adventure, pursued this
ship at every turn from stern and soredecke, from prow to poope, chased and
amazed like hounds, having lost the sight and sent of the beast. But the
nearer they labored to approach, the further they were off. It was easy to
know the three first pictures, but concerning the fourth, Lazarus asked his
Host, if it were not the shipe of the Ragusians, which returning from
Constantinople was miraculously delivered from an evident danger of Pirates, Tu
sell. lib. 5. cap. 10.
by the help of the B. Virgin, to whom they had promised by vow a silver
Chalice for the Altar of her Son? It is the same says his Host, and assure
your self you saw the same picture at Loreto, whither within a while after
these Merchants came to fulfill their vow, and to render thanks to God, and
their good Advocate.

But can you guess what is contained in these two other; Two Capuchins
delivered from shipwreck, 1553.
in one whereof you see hard by a ship, two Capucines plu^ged in the sea to
their wast, having then hands joined; and in the other, these good countrymen
with three companions standing upon the ridge of this silly houell, built of
hurdles and straw, which the stream swelling with an excessive ^ayne, and
ouerflowing all the cha^paine, pulled from his place, and carried a great way in
the waves? See you how they cry to God, and the B. Virgin, and finally how by
their savor, their lodge was fastened to a great tree, on the which they
mounted to save themselves, whilst that the rage of the waters ceased, and that
they might walk by land, the river being retired into his channel?

Of the first, says Lazarus, we have heard before, they were two good
Capucines, who returning Pilgrims from our Lady of Loreto in the year 1553.
took shipping from the Marc of Ancona, to go to Sclauonia; and the Merchants
of the ship salling in fury, by reason of the outrageous tempest which had
constrained the master and them to cast into the Sea, almost all their
merchandise, to lighten and discharge the ship, and having nothing left against
which they might discharge the rage of their despair and fury, they cast also
ouerbord these two poor Religious men, who they saw had nothing to loose but
their life, being grieved that they had not lost something as well as they. The
poor Friars being left to the me^cy of the waves, had recourse to Jesus
Christ, and his glorious Mother, whom they came to visit, and by their
assistance escaped victorious the fury of the floting waves, and the rage of
those mad Merchants, and carried by that Element that choketh others, they
landed again at the haven of Ancona, and presently without shifting or drying
their clothes, they came all wet and mullied, to visit again the holy
Chapel, and before all things to render thanks to the Son, and the Mother
of so notable a benefit.

Concerning the history of the other Table, I think it is that good Florentine
Dominico de Castro, Tursel. l. 4. cap. 17.
who had his house joining to the river of Elsa, and was surprised in the
night, by the inundation of the said river, and was carried down the stream,
almost two miles, with his said house floting with him, and three of his
companions also, and in the end were delivered by the intercession of the said
Virgin; and so we have heard it told. The tale is very true, says their Host,
as I have always understood.

Lazarus would feign have learned the history of the other two Tables, Their
supper.
the Pictures whereof he admired without knowing the story, but their Host
fearing to make them stay too long: Let us leave, says he, somewhat for
afterward, in my opinion we were best now go to supper, the history may be told
in Supper time, or after; so they returned to the Hall, where they found the
Table covered with victuals. They washed their hands, said Grace, and sat
them down, every one did his attendance, and the good old man was always
calling upon his guests to be of good cheer, with a singular demonstration of
hearty good will; especially when he understood they were French men, toward
whom he always bare a particular affection, and in sign of the greater
friendship spoke French with them. Whilst they supped diverse discourses were
proposed of matters, pious and pleasant both, such as talk at the Table should
be. They talked of the Pilgrimages of the old Fathers in the law of nature, and
of Christians now, of the piety of the ancient French men in that behalf, of
the misery and troubles of this present age, and of the providence of God
therein toward his Church, what these Pilgrims endured in their iournyes, and
namely in the holy Land, by reason of thieves and robbers. And upon this
occasion their Host told them good tidings of their way, as long as they should
travail in those parts, that a notable good Captain with a certain number of
Hors-men did scour the fields and the woods, by the Princes commandment, to
chase away the robbers who infested the ways, and had lately made an
incursion, and lead away certain Pilgrims prisoners five or six days since.
At these words Lazarus fetched a deep sigh, for they went to his heart,
doubting least Theodosius might fall into some mischance, and be perhaps one of
those prisoners; for it was just about that very time, that they lost him. The
good old man marked how he became pensive, and thinking it was upon
apprehension of these thieves and robbers, said unto him: Fear you not, for
the ways are now clear, and safer then they were any time these two years,
and will be safer every day, when these gallants, and good fellows shall be
catched, as no doubt but they will be shortly. I hope (answered Lazarus) that
though there should be danger, yet that God would assist us, by the
intercession of our good Advocate, and give us grace either to avoid all evil,
or to profit by all that may befall us by his permissio^. But I cannot choose
to grieve at the absence of one of our Countrymen, a virtuous young man, and
faithful companion of our pilgrimage, who six days since strayed from us, and
we know not whether he be dead or alive; and I fear much that he is fallen
into the hands of some thieves, or which were more lamentable devoured of some
savage beast; and the very point of my grief is this, that I can neither help
him, not hear any news of him, since we first lost the sight of him, although
we have used all possible diligence; and we can now do no more, nor less, then
to sigh and pray to God for him, whersoeuer he be, and to hope in the
providence of God, and in the help of this glorious Lady, to whom he was
singularly devoted: Behold the cause of my grief, and my resolution. Your
grief (says their Host) comes of a singular love and friendship, and your
resolution is Christian. If I have any experience of the particular assistance
of God toward them, that serve him, with a true and loyal heart, and honor
the Mother of his dear Son, I dare assure you, that you shall shortly see
him safe and sound, and therefore be merry and make good cheer of this little
we have, and to which you are most heartily welcome. Lazarus thanked him much,
and found himself much comforted in this good old man's talk, taking it as a
Prophesy, and showed from thenceforth a more cheerful countenance. When grace
was said, he called immediately for the narration of the miracles, attending to
hear them for a sweet recreation after their supper. I remember (says their
host) I have promised you to tell you two memorable histories, though I see you
have more need of rest then of talk; but I will not refuse what you request so
courteously: hear then the first.

In the town of Cabala near to Gallipolis, a certain Burgess of note among
the Catarians, Three slaves delivered. Tursel. lib. 4. cap. 1^.
called Michaell Boleta, had now remained five years slave among the Turks,
and not able any longer to endure so great affliction of body and spirit, took
a secret resolution, with two of his companions of the same condition, to seek
some means to escape and be delivered from their pain, and having long
watched an occasion for this purpose, one day they found at the haven, a bark
fraighted, without master or guard, they entered it, hoised up the sails, and
hoping the wind would be for them, sailed into the full sea, as far as they
could with their oars. They had not gone far, but their master perceauing
they had stayed longer, then they were wont, repaired to the port to hear
news of them, where at the same time, he found the master of the bark, and
both of them were informed, that three men had a little before taken the bark,
as to go on fishing. Immediately they made out after them two Brigantines,
furnished with men and weapons, who followed them so lustily with sails and
oars, that they discovered them three or four miles of; Michael and his mates
discovered the^ also, and saw them follow after them in all fury, coming
within the very sight of their bark: there appeared no way to escape the
hands of these Barbarians, nor the cruel torments they were to endure, if
they were taken. In the very point of the danger, they had recourse to the
mother of him, who commands winds and waves, and they make a vow of Pilgrim
go to our Lady of Loreto, even when the Turks were ready crying, to lay their
hands upon their bark. They had no sooner pronounced their vow, but straight
behold a sudden and furious tempest arose, which scattered the vessels, and
separared them one far from another, and so disordered the Pursuers, that
they were forced to seek rather some shore to save themselves, then to take
the ship they followed. These three that had thus fled, did see the other
terribly tossed by the waves, carried sometimes hither and sometimes thither,
sometimes aloft, sometimes below, whom they knew by their turbants, which made
them be seen a far of. Themselves in the mean time held on their course, as
in the calm Sea, driven with a favorable wynd, blowing in the poope, which
did comfort them with a sweet admiration, seeing in such contrariety of wether,
of tempest, and of calm in the same time, and almost in the same place, that
it was the stroke, not of the Sea, but of heaven, and an evident testimony of
the favor of God toward them. They sailed happily until they arrived at the
port of Catara, and from thence went to Loreto, where cleansed from their
sins by the Sacrament of Penance and made partakers of the Table of our
Savior, they rendered immortal thanks to God, and the B. Virgin, by whose
intercession they were delivered from a double danger of bondage, and of death.
A French man of Prouence delivered


The second history is of one of our Nation a French man of the Country of
Prouence, who having had news of the death of his Father at Constantinople,
whilst he followed the Ambassador of France, being before Almener to the Duke
of Mercury, returned in a common vessel; and as he came to the I Will of Zant, he
saw himself environed with 4. Frigots of the Turks, who approached swiftly
unto his ship, and prepared themselves to the prey, both of men and
merchandise, which they hoped to find. This good Gentleman seeing his danger so
desperate, recommended himself heartily to our B. Lady of Loreto, as also did
all his company: at the same instant almost, they found themselves brought unto
a haven of Calabria, without knowing which way they came thither, nor yet what
was become of the Pirates. They came immediatsly to Loreto to yield thanks to
God and the glorious virgin, and told their good fortune to one, who told it me
again not long since. I doubt not but you have heard of the first miracle, for
it is one of the most ancient and recorded in the histories of Loreto, and
perhaps also of the second; but you have forced me to tell what you knew
before, and brought me in danger to be importune, were it not that (as I
persuade my self) you do willingly hear repeated the miracles which concern
the praise of our good Lady, not only without wearines, but also with delight.
My good father (answered Lazarus) I learned always, and have now learned by
this your narration, what I knew not; for of the later miracle I never heard
before, and the other you have represented with a greater Emphasis and force,
then I had heard it hitherto. And I have taken a singular pleasure in your
discourse, and do confess by all these great miracles, more clearly then
ever, that with good right and reason the Church calls the B. Virgin, The
Star of the Sea; for by her intercession, The B.V. the star of the Sea.
as by the aspect of an heavenly star, not only are defended those that sail
the Seas, but are delivered also from many great dangers, which commonly the
stars do not perform. The good old man, would willingly have entertained
Lazarus longer, to hear him discourse, for he did perceive under the habit of
a Pilgrim, some thing generous and extraordinary in him, but thinking he was
weary and that it was late, he durst not ask him any more demandes, and
therefore having caused their collation to be brought, he conducted them both
to a little chamber, where were prepared two beds, and a little Oratory to pray
in: some of the household came to wash their feet, after the custom of
Christian hosts, but Lazarus thanked them harrily, aledging for his excuse
that it would m^ke their feet tender, and more easy to blister and take hurt,
and so every one retired themselves. The host caused according to his custom
the Letanies to be said to all his household; Lazarus said them with Vincent,
which being done they co^ferred together, about the subject of their
meditation for the morning following, which was of little Jesus, when his
mother lost him, and found him again in the Temple. The points were these.

1. The going of the B. Virgin, and holy Joseph with little Jesus to the
Temple. 2. The seeking and enquiry they made when he was lost. 3. How they
found him in Jerusalem, and brought him to Nazareth.
These points being noted in their memory, either of them made their examen of
conscience, and prayers for the Evening. The practice of the examen of
confess^^e


The examen of Lazarus was such, after he had said the Credo: My God enlighte^
my soul to see thy benefits: I thank thee for the assistance I have had of
thy liberality, and specially this day, by the means of this good householder,
thy servant, who has received us into his house: Enlighten me also if it
please thee, that I may see my faults, and amend them by thy grace. I confess
O my soul, that in my morning meditation, I did not present my self before
thy divine Majesty with that reverence I ought, nor made my prayer with due
attention, and that by my only fault; for I did not well prepare my self
according to the rules of devotion, as neither to my examen in the morning, and
after dinner. I have wandered in my senses and thoughts, my phantasy has often
carried me out of my self. I have twice or thrice loosed the reins to my
proper will, with some vain delight and complacence, and to foolish
impressions in my imagination, and opened my eyes to a careless and curious
beholding of thy creatures, my ears to curiosity, and my tongue to many idle
words. I confess these sins, and believe I have committed many more which I
know not: and who is he that knows his secret sins? I confess them all, O
Father of mercy, and humbly demand pardon of them, with a firm purpose to
amend them, by the assistance of thy holy spirit. Give it, if it please thee O
Lord, to me, and to all of this house, and grant that we may pass this night
without offending thee, and without illusion of him, who day and night lies in
watch to defile our body and spirit, and whilst our body sleeps taking its
rest, Cant. 5 2.
that our ha^t may wake in the light of thy grace. Glorious Virgin assist us,
and thou my good Angell-keeper.

This was the tenor of his Examen, for the conclusion he said the Credo, the
Pater noster, and Aue Mari^, and cast himself upon his bed in his clothes, as
his custom was. Vincent did the like, and being weary of their way, they fell
a sleep straight. About midnight Lazarus had a dream which frighted him; for
he seemed to see Theodosius his companion present himself before him, Lazarus
his dream.
all disfigured with a face pale and black, desiring him to call for the aid
and help of the B. Virgin for him; for that he was brought to a pitiful
estate, and extreme danger, both of body and soul; he leaped off his bed, and
asked Vincent, if any body had been in their chamber? Vincent answered, that
he thought no body, and knew well it was the violence of some vision, whereof
he would question no further at that time, but wished him to go to bed again,
and not trouble himself with dreams, and that he himself had dreamed also he
could not tell what, and so they slept again* Lazarus said not one word more
unto him, but prayed God in his heart in this sort. O my sweet Jesus, Lazarus
his prayer.
I have been deprived of the company of my little Brother, who I hope is now
with thee: thou gave me him as a faithful companion of my Pilgrimage, him,
whose image was presented unto me this night; thou know if he be in that
distress my dream told me, help him according to thy favorable providence,
wherewith thou assistest thy children and servants. Content thy self if it
please thee, with taking one, and forbear this other for a while; above all
keep him from offending thee, or committing any thing against thy holy Law, and
conserve in him the will which thou did give him, to serve thee always, with
an entire and perfect heart; and if that which was represented to mine
imagination were only a dream, and not a presage of some misfortune, and if my
companion be not in that danger I fear, I know notwithstanding, that in what
estate soever he stands, he takes care of me, as I do of him; do us the
favor once again to see each other. And thou glorious Virgin, help thy deuote;
if he be tossed on the Sea by any furious tempest, thou art the Star of the
Sea, reach him thy helping hand; if he be in danger of Thieves, thou have
delivered many, deliver him also, that we may together always sing this thy
favor, among thousands of others we have received of thee. Having thus prayed
he slept until three of the clock, when the day began to break, and the
Cocks to crow. Then he arose and awaked Vincent to make their prayer, who was
quikly ready.

The two and thirtith Day, and the second of his Return. A Meditation of the
history of little Jesus lost, and found amidst the Doctors, in the Temple.
CHAP. V.
LAZARUS began his Meditation in this manner: (...) 2.42
I presume to present my self at the feet of thy Majesty, having confidence in
thy infinite Clemency, which vouchsafes to harken to the prayers of thy
servant: It is to meditate the Pilgrimage of thine only Son my Redeemer, when
being twelve years old, according to his humanity, he went from Nazareth to
Jerusalem to celebrate the feast which thou did command thy people to
observe every year. He hid himself from his mother three days, and at the
end of the third day he was found again in the Temple among the Doctors,
hearing, and demanding. Here is presented to the eyes of my understanding, thy
dear and only Son, that walked with his Mother, a little Pilgrim toward thy
Temple, where he was honored with thee, but was hidden in the cloud of his
humanity, and was not seen but to those to whom thou had given the eyes of
faith. He went thither on foot, and grew in labor as he did in years: when he
fled into Egypt, he was carried in the arms of his dear Mother, now he is
carried upon his own feet with more pain. O Lord, make thy light shine upon
the eyes of my soul, that I may see the points of this mystery, and to thy
glory reap profit thereby.

By express Law, it was commanded to all the Jews, to go offer sacrifice at
Jerusalem where the Temple was, Thrice year me^ went to Jerusalem.
thrice in the year, at Easter, Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles. The
women were left at liberty, whether they would go or no, by reason of the
inconueniency of their sex, yet the devout did willingly undertake the pain,
choosing rather to use their devotion, Exodus 34.23.
then their Privilege. The B. Virgin then watchful of all occasions to do
well, went to Jerusalem, as always, in the company of women, leading her
little son with her, and Joseph with men went another way. Take here, O my
soul, matter to condemn thine own coldness and flouth, and to stir thy
self up to thy duty; thou see Joseph came from far, to adore God in his
Temple, how often have thou omitted it, being hard by? How often have thou
omitted to hear Mass, when thou were bound to be present? Or have thou at
least adored and served God in the Temple of thy body, Our body the Temple of
the holy Ghost.
the Temple of his holy spirit, which thou carryest always about thee? The B.
Virgin takes her journey, choosing rather to have merit with pain, then to
use her privilege for ease; and how often have thou better liked of exemption,
then of merit? How many times have thou been glader of some occasion or let
that hindered thee, 1. Cor. 3. and 6. and 2. Cor. 6.
to watch, fast, or to perform some other work of piety, then to be
constrained to do thy diligence, and walk with others to the service of God?
Jesus goes with his mother, and his mother with him, Jesus and Mary, fit
company
and who should rather walk with the Virgin of virgins, then purity it self;
and who rather with Jesus then the Virgin of Virgins? O heavenly company! O
little Pilgrim! O way of my soul, and the goal and guerdo^ of my Pilgrimage!
Grant that I may be Pilgrim with thee, and with thee and thy holy Mother
walk in this exile, to enter in your company, into the Temple of the
celestial Jerusalem!

But here behold a marvelous accident: Luc. 2.45.
Jesus is gone from Mary, and Mary has lost Jesus; Jesus without the knowledge
of his Father or mother, Our Lady seeks Jesus.
remained behind in Jerusalem but without disobedience; for himself was
master, and might dispose of himself at his pleasure, and that he was subject
or obedient to any creature, it was humility, and not duty; Mary and Joseph,
returning from Jerusalem to Nazareth walked without him the first day,
thinking he returned with his Uncles or kinsefolkes another way, as often it
happened, thinking to meet him again at night. But Jesus appealed not and Mary
was amazed, and not without reason; for though there were no fault in her, and
that the will of her Savior was the only cause, she was notwithstanding
troubled with this chance, and could not endure the loss. The absence of her
Jesus was an unspeakable torment unto her. Therefore in the morning she went
back again, seeking her well-beloved in every place and way, amongst his
parents, and friends, but alas without finding him. O my soul, consider in
this seeking, the thougthes of this afllicted Spouse, who languisheth for
absence of her love: Hear Mary saying in her affection, what the Spouse said
in hers: I will arise, and go about the City, Cant. 5.2.
and seek through the streets, and public places, the wellbeloued of my
soul. Who speaks to her dear Son and says: Cant. 1.7.
O the love of my soul, tell me where thou do take thy repast and repose at
midday? who not fynding him replieth sorrowfully; Cant. 3.
I have sought and have not found, I have called, and he has not answered. O
sweet Spouse! O sweet Jesus! let thy self be found by thy dear Spouse, by thy
mourning Mother, and answer her quickly, for she can no longer endure thy
absence. She cannot be without her Jesus, her dear child, her Creator, her
Savior, her All in All. Show thy self unto her, and do not contristate her
any longer. Let her not so soon feel the point of the sword, which Simeon
foretold, Luc. 2.
she shall have time enough afterward at the great Combat of thy Cross. See
the sorrows of her soul, behold her tears, The B. V. complaint.
hear her saying unto thee: O my well beloved where art thou? Have I
displeased thee in any thing, that might cause this divorce betwixt thee and
me? Between thee and thy desolate Mother, who loves thee more then her self?
Art thou ascended up to heaven, to the bosom of thy Father, for any
discontentement thou have received from me in thy little Nazareth? Alas, it was
against my will, I will do penance, appoint what punishment it pleases thee, I
will willingly endure it for love of thee, so that I may recover thee, and have
thy presence. With thee I will endure any thing, without thee all pleasure is
paynfull. Thus the B. Virgin lamented her loss.

The devout souls care.
O my soul behold here, what a torment it should be to loose Jesus, keep him
therefore well whilst thou have him, hold him and loose him not; for what shall
become of thee without him, and what shall thou be without Jesus? But if he
absent himself sometime from thee upon his own good pleasure without thy
fault, as it happened here to the B. Virgin, and leave thee in tribulation and
anguish of mind, bear thy affliction patiently, but arise notwithstanding with
diligence, and seek him with tears and sighs, as his holy Mother did.

Jesus is not found amongst his kindred.
Thou shall find him at last as she did, not in the world, nor amongst his own
blood and kindred, but in the Temple amongst the Doctors, and in the company
of men of conscience and honor. O sweet Jesus be thou always with me if it
please thee, that I may always be with thee, and beware of displeasing thee,
Orig. hom. 19.
or dryuing thee away from me. I know well that my sins and imperfections
have given thee a thousand occasions, but thou have notwithstanding been unto
me Jesus, in all the afflictions of my Pilgrimage. Be so still, O good Jesus,
be always Jesus unto us, and guide us. Succor our lost companion and do us the
favor that we may find him; be unto him Jesus and Savior, in his captivity if
he be captive, in his grief if he be afflicted, in his difficulty, if he be in
danger. Be Jesus to this good old man, who lodged us for thy sake, and
recompense his hospitality, and all his household with thy plentiful
benediction, a hundred fold which is the measure of thy liberality.

1. Our Savior makes not himself known until 12. years of age. 2.
Theodosius found. 3. Lead away by Thieves. 4. Made prisoner by the officers,
with Lazarus and Vincent. 5. Lazarus his plea's. 6. All three delivered. CHAP.
VI.
THVS prayed Lazarus accompanying his prayers with sighs and tears. Vincent
also performed his part on the same subject. He rested principally upon this
consideration, how our Savior thought good to manifest himself to men by
conversation, being now somewhat grown and past infancy, to give a glimpse of
his Majesty in such sort, Why Jesus Christ did not manifest himself before 12
years of age.
as he shadowed it again under the veil of his age. For if he had spoken in
his cradle, if he had disputed with the doctors at three years old, the
demonstration had been forced; doing it at 12. years old, which is the beginning
of the use of reason, and when youth begins to bud forth some blossoms and
flowers of their spirit and towardnes, it was sweet, and yet sufficient to
testify that he was somewhat more then man, and to prepare their hearts to the
belief of his Deity. The modesty of our Savior among the Doctors.
It did also much commend the modesty of our Savior, who being Wisdom it
self, yet observed good manners, and the rank of his age, carrying himself
not as a Doctor among the Doctors, but rather as an hearer or disciple, and
teaching not by sentences, and axioms, but rather by questions and answers,
but such as the Doctors were therewith both instructed and astonished: An
example (says S. Gregory) which teaches young men and weak, to be disciples
before they be Doctors. Beda in Luc.


He insisted also with great astonishment, in that which is said, that our
Savior returned with Mary and Joseph to Nazareth, and was subject unto them.
The Creator (says Vincent in himself) is subject to a creature, The
obedience of our Savior.
the Almighty to infirmity, sovereign wisdom to simplicity: And shall not I
poor worm of the earth, be subject to God, and to every creature for his
love? Shall not I make great account of Obedience, which the Creator has so
much honored?

When they had both ended their meditation, the good old man came up unto their
chamber, and gave them good morrow, and asked how they had rested that night:
they resaluted him; and for our repose (says Lazarus) weary Pilgrims cannot
choose but rest well, when they find so good lodging as we have had. If there
be any thing good in my house (quoth their host) it is my good will, and your
well-come, for the rest I am far short of all others. But my Masters there
is good news, which will make you glad; a certain Church man a friend of mine
a man of honor, came hither late yester night, Their departure from the
Country House.
who shall say you Mass this morning, and shall bear you company for these
two or three days, for so long at least you must needs be my guests, by the
law of good Pilgrims. Good Father, says Lazarus, we are Pilgrims and
passengers, will you have us instead of such become dwellers and inhabitants of
your house? I pray you be content with the pain we have put you too, since
yesterday till now, without forcing us to be troublesome and importune to you.
For the coming of this good Sir, we are very glad, and shall count our selves
honored to enjoy his presence, and shall be ready to be partaker of his
prayers and Sacrifice, which we will hear when it shall please you, but I must
needs request you for my self and my companion, that after Mass you would
permit us with your good leave, to follow our journey; for Pilgrims have
nothing more precious then time, as you know. Sir, says the good Host, will
you not bestow a couple of days on your friends? Ten and more (quoth Lazarus)
to do them good, but I know it is not for your self, but for our selves, that
you would stay us. Perhaps (says their Host) God may change your mind at the
Altar; and so not pressing them any further, he brought them to the Chapel,
where all the family was come together to hear Mass, which was to begin.
They heard it with an admirable contentment, and when it was done, they kissed
the hands of the Priest, and saluted him humbly, who would willingly have had
some talk with them, but that he saw them ready to depart, and judged it
should be in vain to importune them; yet notwithstanding they were constrained
to take their breakfast, in which time the host forgot not to renew his
request, and to entreat them a fresh to stay, with all the Rethorike his heart
could furnish him with, but he could not persuade them. So he caused to put in
their sackes, some bread and apples, and for either of them a crown of gold,
without saying any thing, so they took their leave with a thousand thanks.
The tears stood in the good old man's eyes, and he seemed as if they had been
his children, so great show of love did he make unto them, and did bring them
some good piece of their way, with the good Priest and some others of the
house. When he could go no further on foot by reason of his age, he embraced
them the second time, and gave them the direction for their best way, and thus
was their departure this morning about seven of the clock.

So, they said their Pilgrims prayers as they were wont to do, at the
beginning of their journey, they thanked the divine providence of his benefits,
and namely of their good encounter at this lodging: Then they fell on praising
the wonderful charity of their good old Host, praying God plentifully to
recompense his liberality. At the last Vincent, who longed to know the dream
that waked Lazarus that night, desired him to tell it. Lazarus told him all in
few words, whereby Vincent took good conjecture of the assistance of God; for
seeing God has revealed unto you that Theodosius is in danger, it is a sign
that he is not dead, and that he would help him by your prayers. Yea, says
Lazarus, if my prayers were worthy to be heard. He that will have us offer our
prayers, quoth Vincent, will also take them: we will attend his mercy quoth
Lazarus, but all this while you tell me not your dream? O it is in exchange that
you demand it, but I fear mine will not match yours, and that you will laugh
thereat, and so began to tell him. I dreamed, says he, the same time that you
wakened me, that we were shut in a green Castle, and Fear with us, and that
we were fetched out three from thence, having entered but two, and that the dogs
did devour Fear. Behold my dream, and if you be a good Diuiner expoud it me.
Lazarus smyling, of what color (quoth he) was this Fear, and how was he
apparelled? I should be troubled to tell that, quoth Vincent, because it was
night, and I saw him not but when mine eyes were shut; but as we see sleeping,
me 'thought he had a foul face, and three legs, and yet could not go, and
his coat of ash color. I confess (quoth Lazarus) your dream passes my
capacity, only I take it for a good sign, that Fear lodged with us, was
devoured.

Thus they walked on with diverse discourses of fear and hope, Theodosius found.
until an hour after noone, when they arrived at a little Burough called
Bompas, whereby the Pilgrims of Loreto do often pass. They entered into the
Inn, not so much to bayt, as to see if they could hear any news of
Theodosius. They found there diverse Pilgrims, talking of their fortunes and
adventures, some coming from Loreto, some going thither. Two that departed,
about the same time that Lazarus did, recou^ted how narrowly they escaped
drowning, in a brook which was risen, and thought that some were drowned
there. Two others that went thither told of the danger of thieves, who did
nothing but kill, and spoil passengers, as was told them. Both these
discourses gave Lazarus and Vincent cause of suspicion. For the two first put
him in fear that Theodosius was drowned, having taken the way where he must
needs pass that brook, instead of the right: the two others put them in
doubt of thieves, but that which astonished them most, was that they saw, as
they thought, upon one of the Pilgrims, the hat and habit of Theodosius; and
as they doubted and would have asked the Pilgrim, himself said in
discoursing, and not thinking of them, that he had bought his hat, and habit at
Millet a village hard by. This stroke them to the heart, and made them almost
wholly to believe, that either he was drowned or killed, and his apparel taken
and fold, either by the Peasants, or by the robbers, and they had but small
hope left of his good fortune. Yet they resolved not to omit any occasion of
be^ring certain news of their companion, and to help him if they could.
Therefore they went from thence to Millet, whither the Pilgrim did direct
them, not above a good mile and an half from thence, a little wide of their
own way. They went apace that they might return that night back to their
lodging. Of necessity they were to pass a certain wood much hau^ted with
thieves, because it was thick and wynding with many blind paths, and very fit
to hide and lay ambushments. As they were in the midst thereof, they discovered
certain Horsemen about 200. paces from them, and to make them, without being
seen themselves, they stood behind certain thick bushes. They saw about 20.
men well armed, marching very inconsta^tly, sometimes they marched, sometime
they strayed, as espying if they could discover any body in the woods. They
saw also as they thought, a little off a dead body, with a dog lying by to
guarde it. Then said Lazarus: Either I am deceived, or these be thieves; and
there is no way to escape their fingers, but by hyding our selves. And yet it
will be hard (quoth Vincent) if we be not discovered, for we need not doubt,
but they will beat every b^sh in the wood to find their prey; yet we must not,
says Lazarus, of bravery, cast our selves in their bosom, perhaps they shall
not have leisure to seek us, let us go into this bush, and do what necessity
compels us unto, and leave the rest to God to help us. So they entered that
bush hard by them, very convenient to cover them, they laid down their slaves,
The Pilgrims (...) themselves.
and themselves along upon the ground. Vincent espied a have squatted at their
feet, who stirred not, and said softly: Be of good cheer, behold one piece of
my dream, we have Fear our fellow prisoner. That is well, says Lazarus, The
(...) a sign of ^eare.
and we are also in a green castle. The have had been stricken with a
crossebow, and retired her self thither, and could not go, which put them
after in great danger. The thieves came straight thither and with them certain
il-faced foot boys. And because they heard that the Captain who hunted them
was in these quarters, with a great troop of soldiers to entrappe them, they
sent forth certain spies and Coureurs, to see if they could discover any
thing, and they strayed about the bush, and talked together of places they must
go unto, if they perceived their enemies to be too strong.

Now these had in their company Theodosius, Theodosius in the company of
Thieves.
whom they had taken six days before, and clothed after their own manner,
and mounted upon a good horse, hoping to have him their companion, for they
gathered all they could find fit for their manner of life and service, and they
saw him to be of a good personage and fair behavior, marked with diverse
signs of a man of honor and quality, able to do good exploits, where he would
undertake them; neither were they deceived herein, but only in hoping to have
him of their company, who had too pious and generous a heart, to forget himself
so far. Now it happened very well, that the Captain asked him only, if he
were of opinion that they should be gone, who answered softly, that he thought
it the surest way. Lazarus who had his ears open to harken, heard him, and
said with in himself: This is the voice of Theodosius. But Theodosius is a
gentleman of worth, a Pilgrim of Loreto, shall he in 24. hours turn thief?
May I dare to think so? And when he could neither believe, nor misbelieue,
that it was he, he iogged Vincent, to listen, and mark his voice, but he spoke
no more; for straight came their spies all sweating, who said they must save
themselves by their feet, because the Captain or Provost Marshal was already
within the wood with 60. horsemen and many footmen, who stayed all the
passengers. Being terrified with this advertisement, they dislodged without
sound of trumpet, and got far within the forest. Theodosius found the
occasion he sought for, sooner then he thought; for having forsaken his horse
which had broken one leg, he stole out of their sight, whilst they were busy
in saving themselves, and drawing back to seek some fit place to hide
himself, comes by good chance to the bush, where his companions were, who he
thought had not been so near, no more then they looked for him: as he went
about to find a handsome entrance, and they thought it had been some beast
(for they could not see him) at last he found the way, and was within before
they did perceive him. They thought when he entered to have cried out, and he
also thought to have done the like, when he saw them flat upon the ground,
without knowing them or being known; as he saw their Pilgrims staves and
weeds, he came and looked nearer upon them, they lifted up their heads, and
then seeing and knowing each others, they would yet still have cried out* they
were so greatly seized with amazeme^t and joy, but they had not the means
either to talk o^ stir, for behold incontinent all the place was filled with
soldiers that persued the thieves, and had already taken some of them; they
brought also with them hounds, which having the wynd of the hare in the bush,
The Pilgrims found in the bush.
did nothing but baule about them, and made a terrible noise, especially after
they perceived three men who frighted them and kept them from coming near the
hare. They kept such a crying that at last two men lighted of their horses, and
came with some footmen to see what the matter was, and seeing there 3. men, Lo
(say they) before God a fine nest. Theodosius escaping the thieves was taken
prisone^ by the Marshal.
One of the Archers would have shot at them, persuading himself that
undoubtedly they were thieves, the other with held him saying, they must take
them alive to examine them and to confess their Confederates: so they carried
them to the Provost; the dogs in the mean time made their prey upon the poor
hare, whom they took with small pain and difficulty for she had but three
legs, and so was Vincents dream fullfilled point by point, and Fear
devoured. The prisoners had their hearts lifted up to God and the B. Virgin:
they were examined a part, and each one told the truth of his fortune, Fear
devoured.
and namely Theodosius, but they would not believe them; for the place made
them suspected, the wood being no ordinary way for Pilgrims, and the rather
because they were found hidden at that time, and one amongst them in habit of a
soldier. Besides a certain footeman one of the robbers who was taken, deposed
that he had seen this young man with his Captain, pointing to Theodosius, and
the merchant that was squatted the day before at the fountain of Bees, being
there by chance to demand and recover some Merchandise that they had taken from
him, affirmed that, but the other day, he saw the other two running about the
fields, in pilgrims weeds, and that they had spoiled him, if he had not saved
himself behynd a bush. The Captain required no more proof than these
presumptions and testimonies, and therefore advised them to think of their
conscience, for they had but one hour to live.

Lazarus answered: Sir we are in your hands, Lazarus his defense.
and in the disposition of the divine providence. If God permit us being
Pilgrims of Loreto to dye as thieves, we shall receive the crown of our
innocence, and of the ignominy which we endure for Gods sake. But as you are
sent to punish thieves, and defend the innocent, so think it to be your duty,
to inform your self well of the truth, that you may know the one from the
other; we demand neither life nor mercy, if we be found faulty, we request
only that you would give us time and leisure to certify you of our innocence,
and our request is not unreasonable; for as you have some conjectures to doubt
of our honesty, so have you no certain proof of any crime: Our habit at least
should make you suspend the execution of your judgment. For why should we be
thus disguised? what should we seek for in the wood with our Pilgrims
weapons? Do thieves carry Pilgrims slaves to perform their robberies? This
merchant who calls us robbers, saying we would have spoiled him, has no
cause so to say. The truth is, that seeing him yesterday wander in the wild
fields, thinking he had lost his way, we approached to him to direct him, and
to make him partaker of our dinner, if he would have tarried, but he vanished I
know not how. And he that deposes against our companion, may not cause him to
be condemned, for his deposition does not accuse him of being a thief, but of
being in their company, whereof I suppose he gave you good reason, when you did
examyne him, and declared why he was otherwise attired then we. As he spoke in
this sort, stepped forth one of the company, saying: My Captain, thieves are
always innocent if you will hear them talk. They were found amongst thieves
with weapons in their hands, and taken as I may say in the manner, who can
doubt what they are? If you hear my advise, let them pass the pikes, and then
this matter is dispatched. The Captain was perplexed, not well knowing what to
do; for Lazarus tale had touched him, and without hearing him speak, he saw in
their countenances, marks rather of good souls then of robbers, and
determined in himself to delay the matter as long as he could. At the same
instant came two other saying: Sir why doubt we of the guiltines of these good
fellows, behold here a man, whom they have murdered, and bringing him six
paces off, they showed him a man lying al along dead, and a dog by him. This
was the body that Lazarus and Vincent had seen a little before. They were all
three brought thither, where lifting up their hands to heaven, they protested
that they were innocent of this crime, and said no more. The Captain found
himself more troubled then before. In the mean time behold there came a
troop of Archers, bringing two of those robbers whom they had sought after;
whereof he was very glad, not only for that they were taken, but that he hoped
by them, to have some certain intelligence of the fact of Theodosius. He
examined the^ a part, if they knew such a man, whom he made be brought before
them; they said they knew him, and told all the story of his taking, and of the
changing of his apparel, just as Theodosius had told it before, which did
greatly justify and discharge him. He asked if they had killed the man,
stretched there upon the ground: they knew nothing thereof they said. They
called another footman then to be examined upon the matter, and as soon as he
approached to the dead body, the dog did fly upon him with great fury, whereat
every man was astonished, and took it for a sure sign, that this man was
guilty. The Captain commanded him to confess, if he knew any thing hereof. He
confessed the truth saying it was a mercha^t whom he had spoiled a little
before with some of his companions without the knowledge of their Master. A
murderer discovered by a dog.
This was a great justification to Theodosius and his fellows, but that which
proved them altogether plainly innocent, was, that one of the Archers a tall
fellow and well esteemed of the Captain, who had known them at Loreto, and
lodged them at his house, came at the same time, Plut. de industria animalium
and remembering them embraced them straight, testified their honesty, and
offered to be bound his life for theirs to the Captain. All the company then
began to entreat for them, saying they were declared innocent by proofs
divine, rather then humane. The Pilgrims released.
The Captain having his own inclination fortified, with the witness and
entreaty of so many, not only delivered them, but also gave them a guard, to
convey them through the wood, until they were out of danger, and half a dozen
crowns to bear their charges in the way. Lazarus and his companions thanked
them, in the best sort and affection they could, and specially the Archer his
good host, calling him his Deliverer. But they told the Captain they had no
need of money, and desired him not to trouble any person for their conuoy, for
they hoped the danger was past, but he would needs have them take it in title
of Alms, and sent six Archers with their old good host, who would needs be
one, to set them out of the wood, they durst not refuse, but took their leave
of all the company.

Theodosius spoke a word in the Captains ears, which no man heard but
himself, and gave the sword he had to the good host for a pledge of their
friendship: so they were conducted by the Archers, who returned to their
Captain at a place appointed, laden with thanks, and full of contentement,
that they had helped to the deliurance of so honest persons. But who can tell
the great joy, that these good Pilgrims had, with what hearts and words they
thanked the divine providence, and the glorious Virgin, for having delivered
them from so imminent a danger of death and infamy, and brought them so happily
together: or with what imbracings they saluted each other after they had
dimissed their conuoy. God (quoth Vincent to Lazarus) put it well in our minds
to resolve so soon of coming to Millet, and has moreover heaped good fortune
upon us, and given us much more then we looked for, and that with a remarkable
demonstration of his goodness toward us. But, O my good friend (quoth Lazarus
to Theodosius) where were you yesternight, when we spoke of you to the good old
man, at the farme-house, who presaged what we see now present? Where were you
at midnight, when in my dream you did earnestly solicity me, to help you in
your great need? But do not I dream now (quoth Theodosius) seeing you, and
hearing you speak? For when I remember my fortune and my danger, me thinks it
is not possible, that I should so suddenly be set in your company, nor yet to
be delivered out of the hands of the Robbers.

1. Theodosius takes his pilgrims weed again. 2. He relates his fortune. 3.
The conversion of Tristram. 4. How he found occasion to same himself. 5. The
Robbers forsook their Fort. 6. Theodosius escapes out of their company. CHAP.
VII.
DISCOVRSING in this sort, Theodosius takes again his pilgrims weed.
they came to the town called Bompas to bed, where they found again the
Pilgrim that had Theodosius his habit, who marked it straight way, and
meruailing and smyling said to Lazarus, how comes this to pass (says he)
behold I am found again, you sought one Theodosius, and we have found two? It
is true, (says Lazarus) if the habit make a Pilgrim. But if this good man be
not Theodosius, yet has he given occasion of fynding him, and recounted unto
him, what the Pilgrim had told them a little before. Well (replied
Theodosius) I must needs have my habit again, yet with his good will that
wears it, in paying as much as it cost him. The host very joyful to
understand of the delivery of Theodosius; Care you not, says he, neither for
your habit, nor for your staff, I have a better then yours which I present
unto you. Not so (says Theodosius thanking him) I like my own better then any
other; but if this good pilgrim will be content with this habit you offer me.
I pray you give it him in exchange for mine, and in recompense of yours, take
if it please you this which I have on my back, which was a doublet of Chamo^s
new guarded with silver lace and a russet beauer-hat, lyned with green
taffaty, with a cypress band of the same color, the hose suitable to the
doublet. The host was ashamed of this offer, for the change was much more worth
then his gift, but he was constrained to accept it, and brought withal for the
Pilgrim, a coat, a hat, and a staff, who found his change also much for his
advantage, and made no difficulty in restoring his to Theodosius, who went up
to a chamber with Lazarus and Vincent, and there putting of his new suit he
gave it to his host, and put on his own which the Pilgrim had restored, and
so every man was pleased and contented. Well (said Theodosius) now I am in my
old estate again, let us say Te Deum, in thanksgiving for all benefits
received. It is a good motion (quoth Lazarus and Vincent) and so they said it,
adjoining thereunto a Salve Regina. Hasting ended their prayer, Lazarus desired
Theodosius, to recount his fortune since they first lost him. Theodosius
recou^teth his fortune.
It is reason (answered he) that seeing you have suffered in your soul some
part of my troubles, that you should have some recreation to hear it related.
The relation of storms and dangers passed is pleasant, to those that have
escaped and are in safety. Well harken then how the days of my absence were
employed. You remember that after we dined at Miette, I went to the Covent of
Dominican Friars to speak with Friar Antony my Contryma^, whom you saw in the
morning alone with me, by reason of my indisposition; as I returned to find you
at our lodging to depart, the Pilgrim of Bosom whom we saw the day before,
meeting me by the way, said, Sir whither go you? your companions are already
gone out of the town at S. John's Gate. I could not believe that you were gone
without me, until that coming to the Inn, my hostess told me that you were
gone, and as she thought would return no more. So I came to S. John's gate to
enquire if any Pilgrims had passed that way. The watch told me that a little
before, there passed three or four toward the brook of L^sier. I verily
thought you were of that company, and thinking you were before me, I hastened
my pace to overtake you, until I came unto the brook which was much risen by
reason of rain fallen the night before. I saw a far off certain Pilgrims
at the bank side for to pass, whereof I was very glad, thinking I had found
you, but I was all amazed when approaching to them I saw not you. I perceive now
(says Lazarus) the cause why we parted, for when we had tarried a good while
for you, we went to the Covent to take you with us from thence, we passed by a
street where that Pilgrim saw us, and thought that we went from thence out of
the town, and told you after as himself thought. And when not fynding you at
the Friars, we returned to our lodging, our hostess told us that you were gone
out at S. Peter's Gate, which also was our best way. We hastened to overtake you
as you did to overtake us, and the faster we marched, the further off we were
the one from the other, Minimus in principio error, manimu^ in ^^^. Aug.
even as they that miss their way at a little turn at the beginning, which
increases at every step, and becomes so great, as the way ^s long. But to
your river side again. Theodosius continuing his narratio^ said. As the
Pilgrims sought which way they might pass, and I was in doubt whether I should
return or no, judging that you had not taken that way; behold a troop of
horsemen crying to the Pilgrims with their swords in their hands, and set
upon us without doing us any harm, but taking us prisoners and bidding us to
follow them, and having brought us to a deep place of the brook they made us
pass over upon hurdels in some danger of drowning, as I verily think, some of
the company were. We found on the other side the whole troop, with certain
poor merchants whom they lead prisoners also, they parted them and sent them
with the other Pilgrims I know not which way, to me they gave a reasonable
good horse, and brought me into a marvelous thick wood, in the midst whereof
they had for their retraite, an old ruinous Castle, which they had fortified
with hand; I was put in a chamber alone, I recommended my self to God and to
the glorious Virgin, as heartily, as I could in that necessity. Two hours
after, a boy brought me somewhat for my supper, and showed me an ill favored
bedsteed, with a straw bed on it, near unto the wardrobe to rest, if I would.
I heard a great noise in the hall where they supped, and in diverse places of
the Castle where they played at cards and dyce, crying and blaspheming, and
continuing this stir until midnight, when they must go sleep a little: two
men stood Sentinels in two of the gar^ets which looked toward that way which
we came, and some other watched also for their guard In the morning the
Captain called me, and asked me who I was, and whence I came, and whence the
other Pilgrims were, that were with me at the brook. I answered that I was a
French man and came from Loreto having accomplished my Pilgrimage which I had
promised to the mother of God; and as for the other Pilgrims, I knew them not,
having met them there by chance. He heard me courteously enough, and caused me
t^ be carried back to my chamber, without saying any more; where I remained
always after the same sort; some came in the day to visit me to mark my
countenance (as he told me of whom I shall tell you anon) and they meruailed
much that I made no greater show of coffeehouse, some interpreting it to be
constancy, other some alteration of my mind, thinking that perhaps I could be
content, to change my long Pilgrims staff for a short sword, and my buckeram
cassocke for a coat of maile, and to be one of their company. Now all their
occupatio^ was to go hunt, not beasts, but men, always bringing in some new
prisoners. They rested neither night nor day; as well their body as their mind
was in a continual disquietnes, and me thought I was in hell amongst Devils,
being among such a company of thieves, saving for the comfort I had to suffer
some thing for Jesus Christ, who endured death for me, betwixt thieves; and to
consider on the one side the grace God had done me in giving me the fear and
love of his laws, and on the other side the misery of those poor rogues, who
suffered so much evil, at the last to endure the heap of all evils. Alas
(said I within my self) if thou did endure but as much for heaven, as these
do for hell, if thou were as constant to employ thy self in good works, to
pass whole nights in prayer to save thy self and others, as these do whole
days in works of iniquity, and undertake a thousand pains in discomodities
of body and soul, to destroy other men and themselves! O Lord of the whole
world I render thee immortal thanks for all benefits bestowed on me of thy
infinite bounty, and beseech thee by the same bounty to enlarge my heart, and to
make it more capable of thy heavenly love, and to increase the strength of my
soul, that I may suffer more, and with a better courage, for the glory of thy
name. Open the eyes of these poor blind souls, giving them to see the
indignity of their condition, and the miserable estat of their soul, or else
take from them all means to do any more harm. In these and the like
discourses did I pass day and night, and learned to make purpose of living
better, of the disdain I conceived in the ill life of this people; as it
happens oftentimes, that by the contemplation of the foulnes of vice, men
betake themselves more earnestly to the love of virtue.

Now there was amongst them a certain young man called Tristram about 25. years
of age born of a good house and neighbor to France, valiant, and expert in
arms, The conversion of Tristram.
and in that respect much esteemed by their Captain, who seemed to have some
particular compassion of my captivity, and came often to visit me, asking if I
had need of any thing that was in his power: he came one day among others, and
said to me in secret: Friend Theodosius (for now every body knew my name) for
that I have holden you for a man of honor and conscience ever since I first
knew you, I desire to declare one thing unto you, which is very important, but
you must swear secrecy. Sir Tristra^ (said I the^) if the secret be against
God or justice, I pray you tell it me not: no (says he) the thing that I mean
to tell you is just, and the intention good, and therefore I will tell it you.
Then I promised him on faith of a Christian Pilgrim, that I would keep his
secret: he said, this is the matter. They here have resolved either to make
you follow our manner of life, or else to kill you, for ransom they look for
none of you. All that have come to see you, have been so many spies to sound
you, and see if there were any hope to persuade you, wherein they make diverse
and different reports to our Captain, and therefore look to your self: thus
much I know, because I was at the counsel and deliberation, when it was taken.
When I heard this sectet, I doubted whether himself also came to sound me, and
to feel my resolution, neither was I deceived, though he did it with a good
intention and meaning, and therefore I answered him roundly, that I was ready
rather to dye, the^ make shipwreck of my conscience, yea, or of my reputation
and honor, in embracing a vocation proper not for Christians, but for Tartars
or Ethiopians, who believe neither hell nor heaven, and I should make a doleful
revolution of my Pilgrimage, to become of a Pilgrim of Loreto a robber and
thief. This answer pleased him much, though I did not make it therefore, but
only to declare unto him my mind in respect of God, and as a man of honor, and
an honest man, as he esteemed me. Continuing his discourse he told me: Friend
Theodosius, I would know this of you: I greatly commend your courage, and am
not deceived in the opinion I have of your virtue. But this is not all, I tell
you further, that I am determined with what hazard soever, to leave this
Labyrinth into which I was drawn five years since, by the ^^and of some, and
mine own folly, neitheir can I endure to stay any longer, in such a dungeon,
the very image of hell. This is the principal point, which I desire you to
keep secret, and to assist me with your prayers, that I may put this project in
execution, and deliver my self from these chains: though for regard of your
self I advise you to dissemble a while, and make no difficulty in leaving your
habit and taking another when they shall offer it you, for therewith they will
begin, and in the mean time seek occasion to save your self when it shall
be offered, which in my opinion will be shortly, and I shall wa^te from one
hour to another, with good devotion, to put in execut on my own designs of
leaving this lewd and execrable life. Here also I thought he dissembled, as it
were by digression to persuade me, and to make me by little and little to pass
by the midst from one extreme to another: so I said unto him. A strong
resolution.
Sir Tristra^ I have told you my resolution, and there is neither death nor
torments that shall make me swerve from honesty, nor to do any thing contrary
to the law of God, and the faith of an honest man: for my apparel it is in
their poer to take it away, and give me other, such as they please, so it be
without my fault, it is all one to me, to be in my shirt, or to be clad in
sackcloth or silk; our Savior was spoiled of his clothes, and clad in
derision in a royal robe. For the rest, Sir Tristra^, if you speak in good
earnest, your resolution is worthy of a noble courage, and you shall have the
honor thereof toward God and man, and doubt you not but he who has opened
your eyes to discern the danger you live in, will also give you means and
direction to perform your desire. I shall not fail to help you with my poor
prayers, if they can prevail any thing with God, and in any sort wherein my
industry may be employed. He seeing me speak so frankly and heartily, embraced
me and said: Sir Theodosius, I read in your words the sincerity, and the
magnanimity of your courage, and count my self happy, in the midst of all my
misfortunes, to have been acquainted with you: for not only you have
confirmed me in my designement, but also have given me a certain hope happily
to put it in execution by the help of God, and of the B. Virgin, under whose
protection you walk her pilgrim, and began to weep; then I doubted no more
of his vnfaynednes, but firmly believed that he spoke from his heart. I
encouraged him further with the greatest show of friend ship that I could, and
counseled him to make a vow to our Lady of Loreto, which he did most heartily,
and departed for that time.

In the morning which was yesterday, How he found an occasion to escape.
the sixth day of the month, and the seventh of my taking and imprisonment, a
little before dinner he came with more secrecy than before, and told me that
toward night the troop would dislodge from that place, by reason of a rumor
they had heard, of certain men of war which were come to buckle with them,
and how to that end they had sent forth some to discover the matter, and this
(quoth he) is I hope the occasion, which I watch for to save my self, and
whereof you may also help your self: for in the night if there happen any
encounter, it is easy to take either party: yea (quoth I) if we be not
surprised and entrapped by the enemies. I cannot (quoth he) fall into the
hands of any enemies whom I fear so much as these, being that these do often
kill both body and soul. As we were upon these terms, the boy of my chamber,
brought me a loaf, and a piece of biefe for my dinner: Tristram went out of my
chamber; I passed all that after dinner in prayers and sighs, desiring of God
light and direction, that in so dangerous a company, I might do nothing against
his honor, and that if I should suffer any thing, it might be without my
fault, and with perseverance in his holy love: I prayed also heartily for good
Tristram that he might happily rid himself from those bands, and for all
the troop that God would inspire their mind to live better. About two of the
clock they dispatched spies to diverse places, to have intelligence of the
soldiers coming whom they feared; about seven a clock, came those whom
they had sent before, saying for certain there were soldiers in the field,
who came directly to that place.

The Captain thought it dangerous to stay there any longer, The thieves
forsake their sort.
he caused the Trumpet to be sounded low, through all the Castle and all about;
every one heard the alarm and was ready. The boy of my chamber came to call
me, and brought me to a stable, where they brought me a Curtali sadled with a
sadle of war, and well furnished, and bad me mount, without saying any more,
or giving me any weapons; I mounted guirded with my Pilgrims weed, and with my
beads, which I had about my neck for a scarf, and my Pilgrims staff, and
every man laughed to see such a Lance-Knight, and so resolute in their company:
so we parted in have without our supper, and walked four hours in great
silence, often staying to harken or attend one another, and we wrought our way
through very thick woods, and hard to trauerse, and were many times feign to
pass a row, in little bypath, where six men in ambushment might have
defeated us all. I marked, and so did almost all the soldiers, certain
sparks of fire blew tending toward green, which appeared in the air, and
over the heads of every one, and very near, like to the worms which shine in
the month of May where we dwell: some took this for a presage of good fortune,
as Mariners when they see any such light, which they call the Star of the
Sea, appear in the obscurity of any furious tempest: for my part I did
interpret it a sign from heaven, menacing and warning every one to look to
his conscience, and me thought it was a Synderesis or natural light which was
signified by these sparks, which is given by God to every sinner, to make him
see that he does ill, and to bite his conscience. About midnight we came to
Millet whether you went to hear nowes of me, we went from thence, and took a
little refection instead of a supper, and fed well our horses. About morning
when our Captain saw the time of departing approached, he called me, and said
with a merry countenance: My good friend Pilgrim, what think you of this kind
of life? My Captain (quoth I) in truth it seems to me very painful, and
this great labor deserves to be employed about some good subject. He replied,
are you resolved to sight, if necessity drives us to it? Captain (quoth I if
it be to fight with the Devil, I have good courage, and am well armed for the
purpose with my beads and staff* to break his horns. If your courage serve
you to encounter to puissant an enemy (quoth the Captain) I do not think you
will run away from men, and because I have a good opinion of your valor, I
will put you in another atti^e* and furnish you with weapons; for it is not
meet you should be with us in this array. And commanding me to put off my
prigtimes weed, he brought me a souldierly suite, that, Theodosiu attyred like
a soldier.
wherein you saw me enter, to assault the Fort, wherein you were in garrison
with the Hare your Centinell Lazarus, and Vincent laughed: but I laughed not
(quoth Theodosius) hearing my Captain say thus; but I was put into an extreme
perplexity, fearing on the one side to be brought to some ill exigent, to loose
either conscience or honor, dying with such people. I stood resolved rather to
loose all things then do any thing unworthy a Pilgrim of Loreto, or an honest
Gentleman; and I answered my Captain, that he should have no dishonor by my
service, with which answer he was content, and Tristram more, who attended the
hour when the Captain should do that act. The host of the lodging took my
staff, my cassocke, and my cloak, and of him I think the Pilgrim bought it,
my beads I kept. Then Lazarus lifting up his hands to heaven; I thank the
divine goodness says he^ that a little before this your great affliction, he
presented you unto mine eyes, that I might pray for you; for about this
midnight past, I dreamed that you were before me desolate, desyring my prayers,
and I leaped off my bed, asking Vincent, if any body were in our Chamber.
Theodosius escapes out of then company
I remember it very well, quoth Vincent. From thence we came into the wood,
says Theodosius following his tale, where you saw us soaring, and coasting,
and attending for news from our spies, that were sent forth; and the man you
saw slain, was a poor Merchant that passed that way, whom two footmen
spoiled, and left half dead, whereof one was taken this day, and noted by the
dog as you saw. And as we stayed, all our spies with one accord did assure us
that the Prouost-Marshall was at hand, and a great company with him: We fled
apace whet^er our Captain lead us, by good fortune my horse running with a
great swiftnes entered on the left hand among certain roots of an old Oak
half bare and uncovered, and stumbled so rudely as he clean brake his leg,
and cast me upon the ground three or four pace before him. This fall was an
occasion from heaven for me to save my self; I rose quickly, others got the
wood, I left my horse, and my spurs, for I had no need of them to go on foot,
and came to find you where you attended me without any appointment, as I found
you without searching for you. Behold in few words the course of my fortune,
since I have been absent from you. But (says Vincent) you tell us not what
you said to the Captain in his ear, when you parted from him: That is also a
secret (quoth Theodosius smyling) yet I will not stick to tell it to my
friends. It was, that I reco^mended heartily unto him good Tristram, if by
fortune he should fall into his hands, and he promised to remember my
commendations, and have regard to the good will of him who recommended him. God
be praised, says Lazarus, for this favor done unto you, for delivering you
out of so great a danger, and for restoring us our companion. In such
discourses they spent their time in the chamber until super time, after which
they retired themselves quickly, said Letanies, made their examen, and took
the points of their morning meditation of the subject of our Savior, youth, or
adolescence, which were three.

1. How our Savior remained with great humility in Nazareth, until thirty
years of age, without manifesting himself.

2. The exercises of the devotion, and piety of Jesus, and his glorious Mother,
and Joseph living in Nazareth.

3. Of their offices and services.

Having marked these points in the Table of their memory, they cast themselves
upon their beds to take rest.

The three and thirtith day, and the third of their Return. A Meditation of
the youth, and dwelling of Jesus Christ with his Mother and Joseph, at
Nazareth. CHAP. VIII.
ABOUT three of the Clock in the morning the Pilgrims began their meditation,
that they might depart by four, every one by himself a part. The humility of
our Savior in not making himself known.


Lazarus greatly tasted in the first point, the wonderful humility of our
Savior, having remained in that little house of Nazareth from twelve years to
thirty, obedient to his Mother and nurse-father, bearing himself only for a
Carpenters son, and an inhabitant of this poor unknown village. O great God
of Israel, said he, before thou made the world, thou were hidden from the
world an infinite number of ages, known only to thy self; and now being made
a Citizen of this little Town of Palestine, thou remaynest in silence the
most part of thy time, preparing thy self to speak unto the world, to teach
it, and redeem it! O heavenly humility of my Redeemer, and foolish presumption
of thine, O vain man that thou art, who before thou know how to hold thy
peace, wilt preach unto the world, and undertake to reach it wisdom; and wilt
teach others the knowledge of heaven before thou have learned thine own
ignorance, and to make thy self be known before thou know thy self! O
miserable pride, how foolish and senseles art thou, who wilt be a guide unto
the blind, thine own eyes being out! The admirable silence of the scripture:


Theodosius stayed upon the second point, considering the admirable silence of
the Scripture, telling nothing of all that our Savior did in this private
dwelling the space of eighten years, which no doubt were wonderful: but it
had rather have it to the belief and consideration of wise Contempla^tes of
the works of God, then to record them, to the end that the fruit of such
knowledge might be reserved for them, who search them worthily, as also to
teach men to send their works before their words.

The obedience and exercise of Jesus in Nazareth.
Vincent was ravished in the Meditation of the third point, and he thought he
was in Nazareth, and saw little Jesus going here and there about that happy
house; sometime serving his Mother, sometime Joseph, sometime praying, sometime
laboring. O heavenly house! O divine family! O happy Joseph, more happy
Mother, and most happy Child!

1. A discourse with two Merchants. 2. The manner to live well. 3. A sinner
repulsed from entering Loreto. 4. It is impossible to serve God and the world.
5. How a man may be a good Christian, and a good Merchant. 6. No estate without
difficulty. CHAP. IX.
THEIR meditation being ended, they took their leave of their Host who would
take nothing of them, and departed at four a clock in the morning. They said
their accustomed prayers, and walked with great comfort and courage to a place
called Maisonette, four leagues off, where arriving about noone, they took
their refection, and there stayed some time, discoursing of their devotion, and
the way, informing themselves thereof by their host, who knew it very well;
Beaurepo^^
so they departed, all lusty to finish their journey, and reach Beau-repos to
bed, dista^t from thence three leagues. Having walked one league, they saw on
their left hand two Horsemen, accompanied with two footmen, running by them,
who galloped toward them. They were two Merchants, who ouertaking them,
saluted them courteously. One was called Gratian, the other Ludolph. Gratian
said unto the^: Well my friends, you come from our B. Lady of Loreto? Lazarus
as being the last and nearest unto them: A discourse with two Mercha^ts
marry do we Sir: it is not, replied the Merchant, without having learned some
good things. In truth (says Lazarus) we have had good occasions; but to
learn well in a good school, one must be a good scholar also, even as to
become rich by trafique, a man must be a good Merchant, and know well how to
buy and sell* Gratian sauouring this answer well, as stuff out of his own
shop: It is well answered, says he, and this your answer makes me believe,
you are come from that holy place good masters of devotion, and we pray you
heartily, make us partaker of that you have learned. For though we be not
Pilgrims as you are, and that our estate is to trafique in merchandise, yet are
we also Pilgrims in that we are mortal, and have no continual abode in this
world no more then you. Lazarus perceiving that they were merchants, and
coniecturing by their words that they were men of understanding and
conscience, thought it would not be time lost to hold them some spiritual
discourse, and said unto them: My masters, I would I had dug so deep in the
treasures of Loreto, that I might enrich you with bestowing freely upon you
what we have learned there by experience, and have often heard before, that
this place is a heavenly repair of devotion; for there is not any man so cold
who is not warmed in the love of heavenly things, at the very sight of this
sacred house, which is without doubt, because God is there singularly present;
as he show by an infinite number of miracles which are done in favor of those
who call for his help, by the intercession of the mother of his Son Jesus
Christ. You can not choose but have often heard speak thereof, seeing the fame
thereof is spread though all Christianity. I call miracles, not only the
healing of incurable diseases, the wonderful and strange delivering of
innocents and trauailers, prodigious ^ers, and such like effects in all four
Elements, but also the unexpected conuersions of thousands of great sinners,
leaving their evil life, and following the way of virtue, with an heavenly
zeal and fervor; a miracle perpetual in the continual benediction of that
house which God rayneth upon it, verifying therein what he promised to his
Disciples, to wit, that if they sought first the kingdom of God, other
temporal commodities should be given them in surplasage freely, and as it were
over and above the bargain. Matthew. 6. Luc. 12.
The merchants liked well this discourse, and perceived well that these
Pilgrims were not ordinary, so they lighted of their horses, giving the^ to
their footmen to lead, that they might talk more familiarly and leasurly.
Lazarus knowing the cause of their descent, desired them to get up again, and
not disease themselves, he and his companion would easily follow them on foot;
but they would not, and desired them also to cast their bags and their cloks
upon the sadle, but they excused it. These Merchants desired earnestly to teach
them the way to live well, and win heaven, and entreated Lazarus instantly to
tell them somewhat thereof, and to make them partaker of their devotions.

Lazarus said unto them: Gentlemen, I am too infirm to read a lesson of good
life to others, yet I will communicate with you by the way of discourse, The
way to live well is to keep the Comma^dements.
and talk what we have heard often of Catholic Preachers, and sometimes read
in Scriptures, that is, that the sovereign and sure way of living well, is to
keep the Commandments of God, to do penance, to give alms, and do other good
works, and to take (says he a flower out of the garden of our own vocation,
to be a good Pilgrim upon earth, The end of pilgrimages, pennace and profit
spiritual.
and to this end are ordained all pilgrimages of devotion, and whosoever does
them with any other intention (as many perhaps do) he is but a Pilgrim for his
weed and staff, and loses his time and travail; as contrariwise they that
do it to mend their life, and become better, are wise and well advised
Pilgrims. And this is that God desires, and our B. Lady of their Pilgrims;
and the wonderful works that are wrought at Loreto tend to no other end; and
thereupon some who meant not to change their wicked life, were miraculously
repelled from entering this holy Chapel, and I think you have heard the
story. It may be so (said Gratian but as our mind is filled with affairs of
the world, these things dwell not long in our memory, and you shall do us a
pleasure, to tell us some examples.

I will recount you one only (not to be troublesome or tedious) and that of
fresh date. Tu^s. l 5. cap. 20.
There came once a certain person to this holy place, laden with many sins,
and not caring greatly to discharge himself, A great sinner repulsed from the
holy Chapel.
he entered into the Church to enter also with other Pilgrims into the Chapel,
but as he set his foot upon the ground, behold a terrible Shape represented it
self against him, and drove him back with a fearful countenance, as with a
strong wynd. His conscience told him straight that his sins had placed that
porter there; so he went to confession, but as the Priest to whom he came,
perceived that he was not well prepared, and that he had not searched well his
Conscience, since he had remained many years in the filth of all sorts of
sins, he counseled him to go to the Chapel, and recommend himself to God,
and the glorious Virgin, to make a good examen of all his life past, the better
to remember his sins and confess them. He went thither, but because it was
not yet with a sincere heart, undertaking this examen and confession rather to
avoid shame then sin, the former disfigured shape did forbid him entrance
again; then he perceived that this was don of purpose, and was touched with a
lively sorrow and repentance of his sins, conceauing a full and firm purpose
to do penance hereafter and live better. And so having duly remembered
himself of his sins, he went to the feet of the Priest, and made a general
Confession, testifying with tears and sobbes, the truth of his Contrition, and
the change of his soul, and was absolved by the Priest, who bad him go present
himself with a good courage, to the holy Place, saying that he should not be
repelled: he went therefore the third time humbled and ashamed, yea also
fearing that it would not be permitted to so great a sinner as he was, to enter
into the house where God, and his greatest Saints have corporally dwelt, and
which now so many Saints frequent: but God by the intercession of the B.
Virgin, permitted his humility to enter into his sanctuary, as before he
repelled his presumption.

It may be that many sinners have entered there, and do enter without
difficulty, and their condition is never the better, yet this one example might
serve for a pattern to us, and all other Pilgrims, and to teach all
Christians, that to perform their pilgrimage duly, they should endeavor and
intend the amendment of their life, and that to live well they must forsake
sin, and commit it no more, and do good good works: The good Tree brings
forth good fruit, Mat. 7.17
and the tree which brings not forth good fruit is not good. Your discourse
is true (says the Merchant) but for us it is very hard, I may say impossible,
to abstain from sin, by reason of our vocation. Sir (says Lazarus) in every
vocation and in every good action there is difficulty, and will you not grant
me, that it is as easy to be a good Christian, as to be a good Merchant? Yes
verily, quoth Gratian. Nay I assure my self (says Lazarus) that you will
confess it to be much more easy; for there are a thousand and a thousand men
who are good Christians, that would never make good Merchants: It is then
easier to abstain from sin, and be a good Christian, then to traficke as a
good Merchant; how do you the^ think it so hard, as impossible for a Merchant
to abstain from sin, and live honestly?

I compare not the vocation of a Christian, quoth Gratia^, with that of a
Merchant, for I confess the first is easier, but my meaning is, It is
impossible to serve God and the world
that the first is meruailously hindered by the second, and I remember I have
heard our Preachers say, it was impossible to serve two masters, God, and the
World. And they called Riches, Thorns, by which the good seed of Gods word is
choked, whereof follows that the estate of merchandise which attends to
the world, and has nothing for her end but wealth, is a great stop and
hindrance to Christian life. It is our Savior (says Lazarus) who says, it is
impossible to serve two masters, and compares Riches to Thorns, Mat. 6.24
but this rule, and this Parable do not condemn the estate of Merchants, nor
riches neither (for both before, and since the coming of our Savior, there
were many Merchants, Math. 13.
and rich men too, good servants of God) they condemn only the folly of those
who calling themselves Christians, that is, servants of God, and disciples of
Jesus Christ, will also have the World for their master, obeying and pleasing
it; who say, they serve God, and suffer themselves to be carried away by
riches, who behold heaven with their left eye, and earth with their right, who
take on both sides, and finally who sail to East and West both at once. Our
Savior then says not, that it is impossible to be a good Christian and a good
Merchant, but only shows it to be impossible to set their love upon the
World, and earthly goods, and withal work their salvation; which is very true
doctrine, and therefore it is the love of the world and avarice that crosses
Christian virtue, and not the estate of a Mercha^t. And in that sense S. Paul
says: They that will become rich, fall into temptation, 1. Tim. 6.
and the snares of the Devil, and into many foolish and hurtful desires,
which drown men in destruction and perdition; for Couetise is the root of all
evil. So that, if the Merchant drive away all avarice and covetousness from his
shop, he shall receive no more impediment of doing well, by his estate, then
the Judge does by his office, or the Soldier by war.

Friend Pilgrim (quoth the other Merchant) you have touched the point, A man
may be a good Christian and a good Mercha^t both.
for doubtless if the Merchant be not worldly or covetous, he may be a good
Christian; but how many such do you see? In my opinion it is as easy to find a
white Crow, or a black Swan, or a Pike without a bone, as a Merchant without
Couetise. Sir (quoth Lazarus) will you condemn all Merchants of that fault?
And Sir (quoth the Merchant) can you name me one Merchant who would not gain,
and be richer still? Sir (replied Lazarus) it is another matter to have a
desire to gain honestly, and make a reasonable profit of ones money and pains,
and another thing to be covetous; for the second cannot stand with a good
Christian conscience; the first pertains to his estate, and hinders not a
good Merchant, but that he may be a good Christian also. For a well ordered
desire to get his living, and to gain by buying and selling, never compels
any man to do any thing against Gods law; but avarice will lay his fingers on
all, and will fill his pouch with all manner of gain. It will make him corrupt
his ware, take usury, love his shop better then the Church, his counting house
better then the Altar, and a reckoning, better then a Mass, or a sermon.
Effects of couetise.
It will make him loose his soul and heaven, rather then his earthly riches.
It is avarice therefore, that always corrupts the merchant and his estate,
but not that the estate is contrary to the observation of the laws of God. And
if there be any difficulty of working salvation in this calling, besides
avarice, it is a common case to all estates; for in every one shall a man meet
with difficultyes, which may turn him from the way of well doing, if he will
suffer himself to be turned out: In being a King, a Judge, a Captain, and the
like. There are the like also in every age: Youth has her faults, All estats
and ages have their difficultyes.
and old age has hers, and other ages have theirs: but as for these obstacles
we do not condemn all estates and ages, so must they not make us condemn the
estate of Merchants; for these are not impossibilityes to live well, (for so
all the world must become Religious) but matter to merit in every vocation. For
the more difficulty there is in any work, so much more is the virtue, and
reward, and glory in ouercoming it.

No estate without difficulty.
To think we may exercise any estate in this mortal life without difficulty,
is to imagine a Sea without tempest, or a War without encounters. The
Religious themselves, who at one blow have broken the greatest difficultyes,
casting from them the baggage of the world, and have entrenched themselves
within the counsels of our Savior, out of the wyndes and storms of this
worldly sea, are not exempt from all difficultyes; for they carry their flesh
about them, which is a seminary of many troubles, and the Devil goes every
where, Every man carries his Cross. Math. 16.24. Marc. 8.34.
who always cutteth work for our infirmity, and every where each man carries
his Cross; for that, is a decree pronounced by the mouth of our great Master.
It is true, that all do not profit thereby, because they carry their Cross
overthwart without merit, as without patience. Sir says the Merchant, if
difficulty make merit and glory, then our condition, and that of worldly men is
in better case then the Religious, for that we have more difficulty to be saved
without comparison. I answer (quoth Lazarus) that worldly men have more
difficultyes and letres of salvation then Religious, yet for all that they have
no more merit, but much less, because they breed the causes of their own
difficulty, and fasten the fetters on their own feet. Whereas the Religious do
overcome at one blow all the chief difficultyes, pulling themselves out of the
press of the world with a resolute mind, forsaking all things, to submit
themselves wholly to the service of God, which are too great exploites of a
noble mind, the one of fortitude, and the other of Charity; and if after, they
have less difficulty to live well, they miss not therefore of more merit; for
it is the fruit of their victory, and a continual praise of virtue to them,
valiantly to have passed through the bowels of their enemies, and an increase
of glory, to have chosen so noble a field to fight in, and therein to gain the
crown of everlasting glory. The excellency of an estate does not consist in
the difficulty, but rather in the goodness and beauty of her actions, Wherein
consists* the excellency of an estate.
as in the foundation, and of the end thereof, as in the crown. Therefore the
vocation of Theology is preferred before that of Physic, because it has a
higher subject which is God, and a more noble end, which is the health of the
soul; whereas Physic respects only the body and the health thereof; though
physike perhaps may have more difficulty then the other. Also when the
difficulty comes of the excellency of the thing, it is greater merit to
overcome it, as warfare is more laudable then tillage of the ground, because it
is more difficult by reason of the greater worthiness thereof. But if the
difficulty arise of the fault of the party, What difficulty increases merit.
it brings no praise with it, and therefore he that accustometh himself to
good cheer, is not therefore more to be praised if he fast with difficulty,
the^ the Religious which fasteth with facility, because he is used thereunto,
but rather this facility to fast turns to his greater commendation; no more
nor less then he that having learned to play well of a musical instrument,
plays with ease and facility, does an action more commendable, then an
Apprentise who does the same with difficulty. What more merit, say you then,
shall a merchant have to surmount his difficulties? I answer, he shall have more
then another merchant who should overcome less difficulty in the same
exercise; also he that has resisted more temptations, more desires, more
occasions of doing ill, shall have more merit, which must be understood of all
other persons of like vocation. For example amongst diverse religious living
under one rule, he that mortifieth his ill inclination with more force, that
suffers more, and labors with more charity; amongst diverse Christian
soldiers, he that fights more valiantly, with more incommodities; amongst
diverse Judges he that amongst most crosses of justice performs Justice, and
so of others. The conclusion then is, that the true Religious has more merit
because he surmonts greater difficulty, and because he does more worthy
actions, and the merchant notwithstanding the impediment of his estate, may be
a good merchant, and a good Christian, both traficke gainfully and live holily
if he will. And I say moreover, that he has one commodity above other
vocations always at hand, to make profit of his wealth and gain heaven, which
is Alms. For thereby he may gain a hundred for one, and buy with the gain
thereof the kingdom of heaven. My Masters do you desire a more gainful
traficke, or more faithful usury then this? In truth (quoth Gratian) your
discourse shuts our mouth to all excuses, and does encourage us to do better
hereafter; and I would to God we were in that liberty, that I think you are
in, without charge of wife and children, we would perhaps use another kind of
traficke, less exposed to the danger of the soul, and more profitable. But we
are bound, and have been of those, who feel not the weight of our fetters,
but when they hinder our walking, and when we repent without profit, the choice
we have made without prudence. My Masters (quoth Lazarus) every one will not
live in religion, and many would that cannot, he that can and will, and is
embarked, he receaueth an inestimable favor of God, and is to be esteemed
amongst the most fortunate Pilgrims; for he is carried in a vessel most
assured that may be, against the waves, and danger^ of the Sea of this world,
and if he cast not himself ouerboard into the waters, he shall arrive no doubt
at the haven of heavenly bliss. But though every one cannot be Religious, nor
sail with such fortune, every man notwithstanding may be a good Christian in
his vocation; the Gentleman in his, the Doctor, the Merchant, the Artisan, the
Labourer, in theirs; and every man may therein save himself. And heaven is not
only for Religious, it is for all that will purchase it of him, who has bought
it for us with his precious blood, and does sell it to good works, coined with
the stamp of his grace.

1. The traficke of Alms. 2. A memorable history of Alms. 3. Alms never
without profit. 4. A combat betwixt a VVesell, and a Serpent. CHAP. X.
YET one word more Sir, The traficke of alms.
if it please you (quoth Gratia^) what traficke, and what usury understand you
that to be which ryseth of alms? Marry the most rich traficke of all others
(quoth Lazarus) and the most fertile usury that can be used; and that not only
lawful, and no way against the law of God, but also with Gods special
service. How may that be (quoth Gratian?) Sir (replied Lazarus) have you not
heard oftentimes, that to those that leave, or give any thing for Gods sake, he
will render an hundred fold recompense, Math. 19.29.
and life everlasting besides? To gain an hundred for one, and a kingdom, and
that of heaven, is it not a rich traficke, and an usury both fruitful and
honorable? Gentlemen, if I feared not to be troublesome unto you, I would tell
you a memorable history of this matter, but it is enough for you that are
instructed in a Christian school, to have touched it in general. Sir, said
they, you have showed us so good stuff, that the more we see, the more we
desire to buy, we will take it of credit, and I pray you, do not deprive us of
the ware of this story. If you be weary get up on one of our horses, they
cannot carry a better charge, nor a worthier horseman. I am yet (quoth Lazarus)
very well disposed on my legs, and ready to serve you with these little
bribes, seeing you take pleasure in them. The history is. There was in Nisibu a
town of Persia, a certain Christian woman married to a Paynim: A memorable
history.
this fellow had fifty Crowns in his purse, and a great desire he had to
multiply them, and said one day to his wife: Wife, I would feign find a way to
make profit of the silver we have, for if we take not heed it will be shortly
all spent, one piece after another, we must put it forth to interest. The good
woman answered, I am of your opinion husband, so that the usury be good: as
high as we can find any, quoth he, thirty yea fifty in the hundred: you must
give it then, said she, to the God of the Christians. Shall we have so much of
him, quoth he? And more too (answered his wife) if you will. We will have no
more (quoth he) let us give it him hardly: but where shall we find him? You
must (says she) deliver it to his treasurers: and where dwell they? Come you
with me, said his wife, and bring the money: and she brought him from thence to
the Church of the Christians, and showing him a great number of Poor which
begged alms at the gate: Behold (says she) these are the treasurers of the
God of the Christians, to whom you must deliver your money to usury. He being
altogether abashed; Marry wife, quoth he, these are but ill assured
Treasurers, do you not see that they are poor beggars, who have neither
credit, nor any ground in bargayning, and when they have eaten the principal,
who shall pay us our interest? Nay, says she, we must not look to their
wealth or fortune, but to the credit and sufficiency of their Master, who
receaueth the money by their hands, and renders faithfully, to all that
gives them, and never yet deceived any. Believe me only, and give it them
without fear; I would die rather then deceive you: without fear, says he, I
cannot thus deliver our money, wherein consists all our wealth, but yet upon
thy word I will deliver it. And so saying, he began to distribute his fifty
pieces, shaking and trembling, asking his Wife if he must not taken an
obligation of them: to whom she answered, that it was not needful, and so
they returned home. Three months being expired, he said: Wife, behold the first
quarter is come, shall we finger any money to live on? Yea, says she, go to the
same place where you bestowed it: he went, and found there some of those
beggars, to whom he had given his money, and diverse new besides; he stayed to
see if they would say any thing to him of the matter, and he saw that instead
of giving him any thing, they reached forth their hand, and begged more
instantly then they did before: for the old beggars had told the other, that
this man was a great almes-giuer, and very charitable, and that not long since
he had given them a bountiful liberality, in such sort as they looked to
receive so much as they did before: whereas the good man had no such meaning,
but blamed the credulity of his wife, in giving him so bad counsel, and his
own simplicity in having believed her. Was not my wife (said he in himself)
very venturous, to counsel me any such course? And was not I a very fool, for
letting my self be ruled and persuaded by a woman? As he discoursed thus
angerly, walking in the Church, he espied upon the marble pauement, one of
those pieces of gold that he had given, and so he returned half pacifyed, and
told his wife, that he had not seen this God of the Christians, and that his
treasurers were but poor officers, who were so far from giving me any thing,
that they demanded more. Only I found under my feet one piece of that I gave
before. That was the God of Christians, said she, who said it there, with that
invisible hand wherewith he governs all the world. Well husband, says she,
go I pray you, and buy something therewith for our supper, and have confidence
in the providence of God: he went to the Market, and brought among other
provision a Fish, and coming home gave it his wife to dress, who opening the
belly, found therein a great Diamond of a most clear and beautiful luster;
she wondered at it, without knowing the worth, she showed it her husband, who
wondered also, knowing the value as little as she. When they had supped, he
said to his Wife: give me that stone to sell, perhaps we may get a Teston for
it. He took it, and went to a Ieweller, who had already shut his shop, and
presented him this stone to sell: the Ieweller beheld it with admiration of the
beauty and bigness of the Diamond, as never having seen the like before, and
said unto him: Well, what shall I give you for it? He answered, what pleases
you? The Ieweller told him he would give him five Crowns; he that esteemed the
stone worth but two Testons, thought he mocked him, and said, will you give me
so much indeed? The Ieweller also thought that his merchant iested with him,
and for his part mocked at his small offer, and said: I will give you ten
Crowns. The good man thinking he was mocked still, said never a word. The
Ieweller offered twenty, after thirty, and seeing he answered nothing, he came
up to fifty, showing by his speech and fashion, that he was in good earnest.
When he perceived the Ieweller to speak without jesting, he began to think
that his Diamond was of a notable value, and said: Sir, you know better then I
how much it is worth, and therefore without any more bidding, refer your
self to reason, and give me what a man of your estate would judge it worth.
The Ieweller was afraid, that he would have gone to some other, and so he loose
that good bargain, said, what shall I give then at a word? He answered at all
adventure; you shall give me (says he) three hundred Crowns without abating
one groat. He took him at his word, and told him out three hundred Crowns in
three hundred pieces. So he returned home laden with money, with an unexpected
joy. His wife seeing him all joyful, and thinking he had for his Diamond some
Testons; demanded how much he had gotten for it: he cast all the three hundred
Crowns upon the table, saying: Lo what they have given me for my stone. Then
said his Wife: My good Husband, now confess that the God of the Christians, is
faithful and rich, and pays his Creditours; you demanded but 50. in the
hundred, and he has given you three hundred for 50. And know you also, that
this is nothing in respect of that he will give you, if you will believe in
him, and become a Christian. The good man opening his eyes at this miracle, and
the words of his wife, caused himself to be instructed in the Christian
Faith, and being baptized lived afterward holily.

Behold Masters an example of trafike and usury, which may be used with praise
and profit everlasting. Alms never without fruit.
If all that give alms do not visibly find the gain which this good man
found, they must yet believe, if they be Christians, that they shall always
reap their hundred fold, according to the promise of our Savior, In pruto
spirt. c. 185
and that by the prayers of the poor God does by secret blessing multiply
their wealth, preserves them from many losses they should endure, and
defends them from thieves and robbers, and finally brings the^ to heaven.
If I have troubled you with too long a discourse your piety was to blame, in
making me begin. Friend Pilgrim (said Gratian) your discourse has been very
pleasing unto us. We do judge it short, which has made both our way and our
time short, and by my consent we shall put in practice, this manner of trafike,
which you have expressed to us in this example. It will stick only upon our
selves says Ludolph. Not only (says Gratian) but this good Pilgrim must
help us also with his prayers, as he has done with his good precepts, that we
may faithfully perform what he has taught us.

Continuing these discourses, A co^bat^ betwixt a VVesil and a Serpent.
they came within 200. paces of Beau-repos, where Lazarus and his Companions
went to lodge that night, and behold Vincent espied a Wesel chewing of Rue in
an extraordinary manner, he stayed a while to behold her, and the rest stayed
with him looking upon this little beast. One of the Merchants asked Lazarus,
Arist. l 7. de hist. any. c. 6.
if he took not this encounter for sign of ill fortune. That were heathenish
superstition (quoth Lazarus,) I think clean contrary that we must take it for
a favor of God, Plin. l. 29. cap. 4.
who gives us occasion to contemplate his wonders in his creatures; for it is
he that has taught this little beast to do as she does. And why says Gratian?
Therefore has she eaten this herb (quoth Lazarus) either because she has
fought with some serpent, or is to fight shortly, taking it for a defense and
preservative against her poison; and as he said so, behold the Wesel leaped
forth against a great serpent that lay hard by stretched forth in many circles
against the sun, which was then very warm. The battle began, the Wesel bit
him by the tail, and rising with a iumpe, thought to have bit him in the
belly. The serpent was not yet hoate, and therefore wynded about but heavily,
the Wesell went about nimbly, skipping here and there to fasten on the serpent,
without being bitten her self. The serpent by little and little waxed warm to
the skirmish, and began already to swell in the neck, and lifted one foot
above the ground, she turned and trained, hissing and darting her tongue.

The Wesel always fastened some hold of him, and passed sometime over him,
sometime under, sometime overthwart, so nimbly that she seemd to fly, and so
dexterously that it was not possible for the serpent, to find any fastening for
his teeth. The combat was doubtful a while, but at last the Wesell watched her
adversary so well, that she fastened her teeth in his neecke, close by his
head, and held him so hard crying, and casting her urine, that the serpent
having made many turnings, and ouer-turnings of his body in fighting with his
head and tail, remained dead upon the place, and the little Wesel went
conqueror out of the field, as it might seem to eat rue again. This combat
greatly rejoiced the company, and Lazarus was half ravished admiring the
works of God therein, having given so great a courage to so small a creature,
and strength to overcome another ten times as big as her self. So they
marched together unto Beau-repos, and because the Merchants meant to reach to
Mondeuille, which was a City two leagues of, to come betimes to the feast, and
certain plays that should be there next morning, they went on, Gratian having
left secretly a crown with the host, for the three Pilgrims charges; and
either excusing themselves for their departure, with a thousand thanks to
Lazarus and his companions, they took their horses again, and rode to
Mondeuille.

The Pilgrims entered their lodging, said their prayers, examined their
conscience every one apart, expecting their supper. The Merchants went on
talking of the good discourse they had heard. Good Lord (says Gratian) what
blind fellows be we, not to exercise this trafike whereof the Pilgrim did
speak? what poor merchants are we to forget that we are Christians, to be
trafiquers of the earth? And what had we got if we had all the wealth in the
world locked up in our shops, and our souls eternally prisoners in hell? are
we borne to inherit earth and not rather heaven? It was a great good hap for
us, The praise of virtue a sweet harmony.
quoth Ludolphus, to have met with these Pilgrims, but we must further put in
practice what we have learned. It is easy to hear virtue well spoken of, for
it is a sweet harmony to the ear of a reasonable man, but therein consists
not the profit; we must stretch forth our hand to the execution, and not be of
the number of those, who weep at the Sermon, and steal at market. You have hit
the very mark (quoth Gratian) and this is that whereat we should shoot.

So they passed the way to Mondeuille. The Pilgrims having supped, said the
Litanies, and some other prayers, and took for the subject of their morning
Meditation, the Tentation of our Savior in the desert, in these three points
following.

1. How our Savior after he was baptized went into the desert, and of the
weapons of a Christian. 2. Of the weapons and malice of the devil to tempt,
and of the manner of our Savior in resisting. 3. How the Angels ministered to
our Savior after his victory.
These 3. points being noted, they went to bed.

The four and thirtith day, and the fourth of their Return. Of the Tentation
of our Savior in the desert, with what weapons, and in what manner we must
fight with the devil. CHAP. XI.
LAZARUS passed the 3. points of his meditation with great light and fervor,
and discoursing upon the first, Our Savior being baptized is brought into the
desert to be tempted.
where the Baptism of our Savior is represented, learned, that whosoever is
baptized must enter into the desert of this world and fight: for that by
baptism he comes out of Egypt by the red Sea, and is enrolled amongst the
soldiers of Jesus Christ; according to which law S. Paul says; No man shall
be crowned who fights not valiantly. And therefore let no man expect the
crown of glory, 1. Tim. 2.
who has not first fought against the Devil, and his vpholders, the World,
and the Flesh, and departs conqueror from the combat, which he may obtain by
the grace of God, taking the weapons of Jesus Christ, The spiritual arms of a
Christian soldier.
and fighting valiantly to his imitation. His weapons are, Purity of
conscience, Prayer, Fasting, the word of God. Of al which Christ gave us a
model and pattern in this tentation. The Purity of conscience is signified by
Baptism. To have this piece of armor, we must often confess, and wash our
selves by Penance, as by a second Baptism, and keep our selves cleansed from
our sins; and who fights without it, is ouerthowne; for he that in state of
mortal sin, will undertake to fight against tentation, does like unto him
who presents himself to the breach, with traitors that would destroy him, or
confront his enemies being deadly wounded: within this desert our Savior
prayed and fasted, and both for our example. Prayer makes us one with God, and
this union does enlighten and strengthen us, as also fasting does, which the
Doctors do fitt^y call, The life of God, The food of Angels, because it does
nourish and fortify our Spirits; and therefore the Holy Church, the true
warrier and daughter of the God of hosts, uses often this food, and this
armor after our Saviors example. In Lent solemnly, and at other times often,
Ambr. ser. 15. Heb. 4.12
and calls such solemnities of prayer and fasting, the Forts and Camp of
Christians her children. The word of God wherewith the devil was here
thoroughly beaten, is a two edged sword, Apoc. 1.1. and 19.15.
a weapon fit both for offense and defense, which we may take out of the
storehouse of holy Scriptures, out of the Sermons, and conferences of holy
Doctors.

Upon the second point Lazarus noted, that the weapons and assaults of the
devil are in general, Gluttony, Vanity, Couetice; The weapons and malice of
the Devil
armed with these he set upon our Savior, as upon all mortal men: he observed
also his subtility in that he came disguised, in the figure and habit of a good
man, as of the Hermites, who in those times lived in those deserts. Also that
he assailed our Savior where he thought he was weakest, by hunger, and
principally in that he demanded but a small matter, The sweet pretenses of the
Devil.
and that, as it seemed, reasonable, to wit, to turn stones into bread, to
help his present necessity. So he makes his hole little, to enter in subtilty,
and with greater ease. So for one bit of an Apple he destroyed man; so also he
asks at the Witches hands but a hair of their head, Genes. 3.
to tie a knot of friendship betwixt them; but one venial sin of devout
persons, but one little imperfection of Religious men, by such little paths to
draw them at last to destruction. And as therefore Queen Semirami^ having
obtained of her son the king of the Assyrians, to reign but one day, Dion.
de rebus perficis.
took from him his crown, and his life: even so this our adversary, if he
become master but once by one mortal sin, depriueth us at last of the
kingdom of heaven. Lazarus also learned of our Savior, how to resist the
malice of this enemy, Diod. Sicul l. 3. c. vlt.
which is, in not giving him any advantage though never so small, but repelling
him every where, and in every thing, for such is the advice of the Apostle
saying, Give not place unto the Devil. Phil. 4. Our Savior served by Angels.
And so he was sent away with shame, and he that was tempted by the wicked
Angels, was at the last served of the good; showing us that after the victory,
we shall be admitted to the table of God, filled with delights, and crowned
with the garland of glory.

Thus meditated Lazarus, and said unto our Savior: O prudent and puissant
Captain, give me the grace to use those weapons, wherewith thou have overcome,
to teach us how we also should overcome. For thy self there was no necessity
of this trial or victory, heaven and earth knew full well, that thou with thy
Almighty power wast strong enough to reject thine enemy. And turning to our B.
Lady.

O vailant warrior, says he, who have in this war overcome thy sex, To the
B. Virgin.
and the valor of the most valiant Amazones that ever were, who did first
crush the head of our enemy this old serpent, take me, O heavenly warrior,
unto thy protection, arm me in the war of thy Son, with his weapons and
thine, direct me in this combat, that I may use mine arm after his and thine
example, that under thy defense I may get the victory, and that to him, and to
thee for the love of him, may redound the glory of my warfare.

1. An admirable combat. 2. A Pilgrim together with Serpents nourished by a
stone. 3. The foundation of dreams. 4. The three bands of the world. 5. How
to choose a Religion. 6. The end of worldly joy. CHAP. XII.
SVCH was the meditation and prayer of Lazarus. Theodosius and Vincent held the
same points with other veins of devotion. Their prayers ended they took a
draught of wine, and would have reckoned with their Host, but he said he would
have none of their silver, himself was rather in their debt, and so put in
their hand the Crown, which the Merchant had left the night before for their
supper, of which himself would take nothing, but restored it whole to them as
their own. They desired him to bestow it on other Pilgrims that passed that
way, or on the poor, saying they had God be thanked, good provision, and
thanking him very heartily for his charity, they departed very well content, and
he remained much edified with their piety and devotion. After they had said
their prayers for their journey, and their beads, they began to discourse of
their meditation, whereupon Lazarus said, he had had that night a dream, that
was all of war, and wild beasts.

He affirmed moreover, that this tentation was the most lively and goodly
pattern of a combat that could be represented, An admirable co^bat.
as containing therein the manner well to assault, and valiantly to resist, and
overcome. Do not you mark (says he) how this old Dragon disguiseth himself
into the form of a man, and of an honest man? How craftily he directed his
battery, The Devil te^pteth our Savior in a holy habit.
to that place which he thought weakest, and easiest to enter at, assailing
hunger with the hook, and enticement of gluttony? changing his weapons
according to occasions, from the desert to the Temple, from the Temple to the
top of the mountain? here battering with guns of Gormandise, there with
presumption, and after of ambition and avarice? and still in every one showing
himself a malign and impudent assaulter? See you, on the other side, our good
Redeemer, covered with the cloak of our infirm nature, suffering himself to
be carried by his enemy to bring him to confusion? See you how his great
humility, quickly pulled out the eyes of pride, which appeared by the second
assault, when Satan said unto our Savior: If thou be the son of God,
cast thy self down? Which was the discourse of a distracted spirit, joining a
conclusion of phrensy to an Antecedent of Divinity; for it is, as if he had
said: Thou art Almighty, do therefore an act of extreme infirmity; for that to
precipitate himself is an act of a base and cowardly heart: he should rather
have said, if thou be the son of God, fly up to heaven, or demand some
such thing which might have showed some worthy proof of such power, and might
have made some reasonable illation. And do you not think that our Challengers
have been at the school of this distracted Skirmisher, Against Chalengers.
when pricked with a point of honor (as they call it) but in truth with a point
of some phrensy, they send letters of defiance to their enemies in these
terms: If thou be an honest man come try a sword with me, that is, come
show a trick of dastardy, and cast thy self down together with me, into
everlasting death and ignominy? And should we not answer to the humming of
such a hornet: Go thy ways ill advised fond fellow, because I am an honest
man, Duellists.
I detest thy defiance, as a summon proceeding out of the mouth of a frantike
man, or scholar of Satan, and the Devils disciple, not a Christian Caualier?
Moreover what shame think you received this King of the children of pride, when
beco^ming yet in the second encounter more blind; and presuming of the victory
in the third, he was rejected with these biting words, Get thee gone Satan,
pronounced with disdain, and anger of our victorious Savior, of whom he
would have been adored on both knees.

In truth (quoth Vincent) it was a marvelous combat in every respect, and the
victory notable; as also these two were the greatest Captains that ever were,
the one in power and wisdom, the other in strength and malice, as I suppose
you could better penetrate then I. I stayed with great contentation in the
first words of our Savior, wherewith he did bear off the first assault of the
enemy, saying: Matthew. 4.
Man lives not only by bread, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. That is, as I have heretofore heard our Preachers say, by
whatsoever God will nourish us with all. For in this answer, I perceived the
wisdom, goodness, and power of God, who both could, would, and knew how to
give means to live, not only to man, but to all creatures, whereof some are
nourished with herbs, some with fruits, some with water, others with wind. Man
has all the world and all creatures for his provision, and sometime is
miraculously sustained, 3. Reg. 17.
even by the beasts themselves, as Elias by the Crow, yea even by direction of
beasts, such as are hurtful and pernicious to the life of man, as not long
since I heard a notable example of a Pilgrim, who was nourished diverse ways
with a stone, which serpents had showed unto him. Theodosius knows well this
story; for he told it once in good company, and if it please him to renew the
memory thereof unto us, he shall so far solace our way. Truly (says Lazarus)
looking upon Theodosius, you may not refuse this liberal offer. Theodosius
answered, seeing that Vincent is in company, and has so good a memory, as to
remember a history that I told four years since, me thinks he should rather
pleasure and recreate the company therewith. I remember that I have forgot it,
replied Vincent, if you will have me recite it, first help my forgetfullnes,
and after I will do my best. I see well (quoth Theodosius) Lazarus is lead away
by Vincent, and I must be condemned by them both to tell this history; I am
content to bear the sentence, but if I perform it ill, your ears shall bear
the pain and penance.

If I remember well (says he) then hear it as I learned it of that venerable
Prelate John Fisher an Englishman Bishop of Rochester, A Pilgrim together with
a serpent nourished with a stone.
in the book which he put forth in the year 1526. against Oecolampadius the
Heretic: there he says that he learned it of Vesalius Groningensis, a
Frizlander, a man of good learning and credit, That a certain Priest went into
Italy about the beginning of winter, yet it happened that one day in very ill
wether, walking upon the Alps, he lost his way, and turning here and there,
at last descended into a valley, Roff. l. 4. c. 22. con. Ooecolam.
hoping there to find the right way, where if night should surprise him, he
might also find some corner to cover himself from wind and snow, but looking
on every part, he found no issue or way to get out, all the ground being
covered with snow. For his bed, he espied a little hole on the right hand,
wrought naturally within the Rock, and a little plain before it, there he
cast himself as into his grave, not looking to live; for he had neither
weapons nor munition to sustain the siege of two so great enemies as cold and
hunger, which already began to buckle with him, and must needs shortly press
him without mercy, and take him with out striking a stroke. The Moon was at
the full, and by good fortune began to shine; the heavens waxing clear a
little after he had set himself supperles in his bed of stone, he waked almost
till midnight, when he saw a troop of great Serpents, which came toward his
den, trayning al along the snow; he was frighted at this sight, and blessed
himself, and did not think that they had been serpents indeed, because he
could not conceive any natural cause that should make them leave their holes
at this time, and thus train upon the snow; and it came in his mind to think,
that it was some illusion of the nights fancies, or perhaps some wicked
spirits, who came in that figure to disquiet him; so he blessed himself
again, and recommended himself with all his heart to God, and the B. Virgin.
The serpents approached and came to a stone, close by his den, they go about
it, and after they come to it, and licked it. He sat looking when they would
leap on him, entering into his den to devour him. But when they had tarried a
while licking the stone, they returned the same way they came. He thanked God,
that he was delivered from this fear, and slept a little the rest of the
night, and was all the next day without eating or seeing any thing, but the
whitenes of the earth, and the light of heaven.

In the second, and third night at the same hour, the serpents came again,
and having done as they did before returned. Then he persuaded himself that
they were very serpents, but he could not tell the cause why they should lick
the stone. In the mean time he was almost starued with hunger, and thought
that perharps those beasts did show him, what he should do to sustain
himself. Therefore he goes to the stone, puts his mouth to it, and licketh
it; and as soon as he had licked it (a strange thing) he felt himself
strengthened both against hunger and cold, as if he had taken some restoratiue
or some strange meat, and in this sort he sustained and defended himself all
the winter long and a part of the spring, until the month of April, when the
snow beginning to melte, and the ways to open, he heard the voice of
passengers whom he followed, and set himself in way with them to finish his
journey. Behold what you demanded of me; and surely Vincent had good occasion,
to note the providence of God in those words of our Savior; for it is easy to
see in this example, that God is all merciful and almighty, having always
care of his creaturs, and able to maintain them, not with bread only, but of
whatsoever shall please him, yea even with stones if he will. And therefore
Satan, though he were crafty on the one side, in giving the assault where he
thought likelyest to have sped, The folly of the devil.
he was notwithstanding a great fool on the other side, in thinking it
necessary to turn stones into bread to sustain the body, it being as easy for
the Son of God, to draw nourishement out of a stone without bread, as to
turn a stone into bread for nourishment. Lo (quoth Vincent) you are
discharged of your history, and I am contented. Truly (says Lazarus) you have
reason to be contented, and I know not whether we shall have so good a dinner
again to day, as Theodosius has given us; for besides the spiritual
refection, he has given us also a good lesson, teaching us to expect with
great faith and confidence the assistance of our Savior, both for body and
soul in all our necessityes.

But, says Theodosius, seeing you would break your fast upon that little I
had in the sack of my memory, bring you forth also the narration of your
dream you had the last night: you demand (quoth Lazarus) but a homely dish.
Such as will serve for Pilgrims and footmen, answered Theodosius. If you will
undertake, replied Lazarus, to give the interpretation thereof as a good sauce,
I am content to perform your will. I will do my best (quoth Theodosius.) Hear
the^ my dream and take heed you be not afraid, Lazarus his dream.
for it is full of dangerous pieces. In the night me thought I saw come out of
a town diverse squadrous of men, and furious beasts, of Lions enraged against
Foxes, and Foxes against Conies, Dogs against Wolves, and Wolves against Sheep:
I saw also in the sea Ships sailing in diverse coasts, and amidst of this
confusion and stir, some Pllgrimes walking upon the earth like our selves.
Behold my dream. Vincent began to laugh and said, that Theodosius needs not
dream much to expound this dream. Why? (says Theodosius.) How can you miss
(says he) to interpret a thing so notorious and clear? Who knows not that
there is war amongst men, and war amongst beasts, and that diverse sail
upon the sea, and walk upon the land? Truly (says Lazarus) Vincent has
reason to laugh, for I dreamed nothing, but that every man sees without
dreaming, and therefore Theodosius either laugh with him, or find some serious
interpretation to keep you from laughing.

I think (says Theodosius) that the most part of dreams are grounded upon
things that are in being and which we have seen. The foundation of dreams.
For the imagination which is the couch and nursery of dreams, represents
commonly what she has received; but reason slumbering when we sleep, the
fantasy can not make of her forms and figures any orderly or methodicall
connection, Order is a work of the understanding.
for that is the work of understanding and reason: but like a fond chambermayd
she makes absurd connexions, putting the head of a bear, to the body of a
goat, or the coppe of a mountain upon the neck of a man, or of a monkey: yet
she lays almost always the ground of her representations upon things
otherwise seen, or understood in some sort: and I think also that dreams,
come not only of nature, but also by the inspiration of God. Genes. 2^.
Jacob saw a ladder standing on the earth reaching to heaven, and Angels
ascending and descending thereon, and is there any thing more common then to see
a ladder and men ascending and descending by the steps; yet this was a divine
dream. Joseph the son of this Patriarch had a dream composed of the sun
and moon, Genes. 37.
and 11. stars, and another of many sheffes of corn. Genes. 41.
Pharao saw in his dream 7. fat Kyne, and 7. lean, seven fair ears of
Wheat and full of corn, 7. other empty and blasted. These were things natural
and vulgar, and yet the dreams were of God; and therefore I think Vincent
meant but to recreat us in laughing at yours, to the end that his laughing
proceeding from a sophisme, might give us matter to laugh. You have half
overcome me (says Vincent) and there remains no more, but the exposition of
the dream, to stop my mouth altogether, and your self to triumph, either of
my laughing, or of my silence, if I cannot reply. For my part (says
Theodosius) I think that the matter of this dream, as Lazarus did wisely
judge, came of the subject of his meditation, and that it signifies some other
war, then the ordinary of men and beasts, but I cannot expound it in
particular: that pertains unto you Lazarus, for I doubt not, but as God has
put this dream into your fantasy, so also he has in some sort written the
interpretation thereof in your understanding. I know nothing more (quoth
Lazarus) then your self have understood; God will show it us, if there be any
thing else, to his honor, and the profit of his Pilgrims. If you will have any
more than this at my hands, you must give me leave and leisure to ask of God,
what you ask of me. If there be nothing else but the representation of the
imagination, we must be content with that knowledge, which you have with me,
and so Vincent may remain victor in his laughing. Discoursing in this sort,
and deceiving the tediousnes of the way, they came at 10. of the clock in the
morning to Mondeuille, where the merchants the day before had lodged, and were
there still, Gratian having heard very ill news. They went straight to the
Church in the Suburbs, and having heard Mass, and done their ordinary
devotions, without going into the town they went unto an hospital which was
in the suburbs at the other end of the town, to take a little repast and
repose, and to gain way: but some told them, that they could not pass over
the ditches, by reason of the inundation of waters, whith had marred the way,
and that they must needs go through the town, which was also the shorter way.
They yielded to necessity. As they were entered a little into the town, they
met by good fortune Sir Gratian, who saluted them courteously, and was much
comforted in meeting them, namely for Lazarus sake, and understanding that they
went to the hospital to rest a while, and after go on their way; I will meet
you there by and by (says he) I pray you Master Lazarus do not depart the
town, until I have spoken a word with you, who promised to stay for him. In
the streets was nothing seen but troops of horsemen, clothed in rich and
precious attire, who made much sport with the Pilgrims, jesting sometime at
their Pilgrim staff, sometime at their buckeram cloak, wherewith the
Pilgrims were not much troubled; there they heard the fiffes, trumpets, and
haut-boyes sound in diverse places, especially where the list for the tourney
was prepared, and the Theater for the plays of the feast, and all the town
was full of rejoicing.

They met in passing, three companies of Caualliers, Three ba^des of the world.
with diverse habillements and ensigns. The first wore Caslockes and breeches
of crimson damask, powdered as with feathers of glittering silver, with scarfes
of Carnation taflata, with silver fringe, hats of beauer lyned with the same,
and edged with gold, and a band of green silk, and for their plumes they had
the feathers of the bird of Paradise, their arms were Gules, a Goat passant.
The second band were clad in black velvet, figured in the ground with gold,
scarfes of yellow cypress, their hats plaited of black taffata, with a band
of silver with two branches, instead of their plume, a nose-gay of double
marigoldes. Their scutchion was Sable, a Mercury argent with winged feet, and
holding a wand of the same color in his right hand. Those of the third band
were clad in changeable taffata, laced richely with glittering gold, in manner
of waves, their hates were garnished with the same stuff, and richely
embrodered without, the band was wound of gold and silver of diverse branches,
and a great plume of diverse colors, scarfes of green taffata fringed with
gold: their Arms were Azure, a Wheel Or, and in Chief, three Moons green,
in a field Argent. Merefolly the guide and retrait of worldlinges.


All this company went to the Inn of Mere-folly, as they said, there to
banquet, and after to accompany her to the Theater, where she should be carried
in a triumphing chair. They saw these things in passing, without making any
great account thereof, and came straight unto the Hospital. Sap. 5.
They had dined when Gratian came unto them, who took Lazarus apart, and
wringing him by the hand, Affliction opens the eyes,
said with tears in his eyes: Sir Lazarus, although I have not had the good
fortune to know you but of late, yet the good discourses I heard of you
yesterday, have e^grauen in my heart a great conceit of your virtue, as also a
great confidence in your friendship. Our good Lord has visited me, Sir
Lazarus: yesterday a little after we came to this Town, I had news that my
wife was dead, and a little son I had, the hope of my house, and old age. I
thought little of this accident, when talking with you, I said that were it not
for the hinderance of my family, I would willingly have served God, with that
liberty as you do; and in saying this, he began to weep, and sobbe, that he
could speak no further. Lazarus said unto him: Sir Gratian, you have lost
nothing which you should not have lost once, this is but a little preventing
the time, Death is a common debt.
and perhaps you have gained much herein; for how know you, what fortune would
have followed your son, as if instead of being the staff of your old age, he
might have tormented and undone you, your house, and himself, as has fallen
out to many Fathers? And if you had been sure of his virtuous course, God
would have him, and bestow on him a far better inheritance, then you could
have left him, or at the least have given you some other supporter instead of
your son. He took nothing but his own, he gave him you with this condition
to take him again when he would, and now he has taken him, it is his right,
and his will, to the which you neither may, nor can resist. It rests only for
you to have Christian patience, and to profit by your loss. Gratian being
somewhat assuaged, resumed his discourse, and said: Well seeing it has pleased
him thus to afflict me, in taking from me what was dearest in this world, I
resolve to cast my self wholly into his arms, and heal my wound by that hand
that made it. I have now no band that binds me to the service of the world,
and hinders my liberty to serve God withal my heart, and to live a true
Pilgrim upon earth: it is long since the world did stink unto my nose, and
my experience of her infidelity, has breed in me a hatred, and loathing to
deal with her, and this is the very matter that I would co^sult with you, and
take advise about retyring my self from vanity, to serve God in assurance all
the rest of my life; and I conjure you in the name of God, and by the zeal
which I know you have to his honor, and the salvation of souls, to assist me
with your direction. Lazarus told him in few words: Sir Gratian, I am of all
other the unfittest to instruct you, though I dare place my self among the
first in hearty affection toward you. I will tell you notwithstanding freely,
that I behold in this accident a great providence of God toward you; for I
doubt not but he has stricken you with this blow, to bring you out of the
gulf, where you were in danger to have made shipwreck of your soul, and me
thinks you should not call affliction the death of two dearly beloved, but a
double benefit, being unto your self a door with two hinges, to enter at your
ease into the rest of Paradise in this life, and of eternal felicity in the
next: he had prepared and disposed your heart heereunto, by making you taste the
bitterness of the world, he graued therein by little and little a desire to
leave the vanities thereof: now he vntyeth your feet and your hands, and
opens you a way to execute the desire he has given you. For that you demand
my counsel, you have diverse Religious men of great learning and conscience,
more capable then I without comparison, that may advise you in this affair,
yet seeing it pleases you to address your self to the meanest, by way of
friendship, I will tell you as a friend, that if you have a mind to leave the
world, and to serve God withal your heart, you are in a good way, and you may
your self alone decide the matter with Almighty God. The matter is extremely
commendable, the intention holy, the conclusion clear, what should you
consult? In high and heroical enterprises there is more need of execution,
then of consultation. All that you can doubt of, is, what choice to make of
Religions; for every Religion is not for every body. You say well (quoth
Gratian) and this is the principal point, How to choose a Religion.
wherein I desire your direction. Herein (says Lazarus) you must first take
heed, to choose a Religion well ordered; for to go out of the world into a
Religion debaucht and disorderly, is to leave Egypt, and join with the
murmurers in the desert, there to be exterminated by serpents, or swallowed
down into the ground. There is nothing more goodly, or excellent in the Church
of God, then a Religious company, walking according to their rules, toward
perfection; neither is there a confusion more pernicious, then a dissolute and
unruled congregation, having nothing of Religion but the title and the habit,
and therefore in the first place, you must choose a Religion, that keeps well
its Order.

Secondly, among many Religions well reformed, you must choose that which has
the most worthy and noble end, The highest and the best means.
or rules of greatest perfection, and more Apostolical, which has more means
and help to fashion, and frame the inward man, to cultiuate the soul, and
plant therein the most noble virtues; S. Thom. contra retrahentes a Relig. c. 2.
that contributeth most to the service of God, and profit of our Neighbors,
and therefore that which attends to Contemplation, is to be preferred before
that which deals only with Action, and that which tends to both, is the
better.

A man's own inclination.
In the third place, he that will make his choice, must observe whereunto
himself is more apt, and inclined to Godward; some embrace austerity of life,
others action, others contemplation: he shall therefore have regard not only to
the perfection of the rule, but also to his own capacity, and shall thereupon
confer with God by prayers, and with some good spiritual Father by
conference, to take resolution of the best. And to come to your self in
particular, if you have already cast your mind to any Religion, which has the
foresaid qualities, I advise you to set in good order your wordly business, and
being rid of all impediments, to confine your self as soon as you can to the
service of God. Sir, said Gratian, you have cleared all my doubts, and given me
firm hope that God will direct me to that house, where I may best serve him. I
will follow your counsel, and ever hold you for a fast friend. Sir (replied
Lazarus) I have not deserved such an acknowledgement, but do take your
friendship and your fortune for great favors at the hands of God, hoping that
I shall have part of your prayers, and by their means some good help to prove
a good Pilgrim.

The end of worldly joy.
Well yet I have somewhat to say to you all three (quoth Gratian) and made a
sign to Theodosius and Vincent to come near, that you do wisely depart quickly
from this Town. For I fear me greatly that the day of these sportes, will
turn to some tragical and doleful issue, as it falls out every year, by
reason of the vices and emnities that reign among great and small, which will
not fail to take every occasion, The quality, of a worldly City.
to utter their evil talent. Gluttony, Rebellion, Adultery, and all other
vices, are always here, in their kingdom and fury: and this compass of
Walls and buildinges which you see built in so great number, is not a City
and civil habitation of men, but a fearful desert of Africa, full of Lions,
Bears, wild Boares, Mastiues, Serpents, Asses, Foxes, and all sorts of
Beasts, which beat, and eat one another. And most of them that seem men, are
so but in appearance; for within they have the souls of those Beasts I named.
Whilst the Merchant talked thus, Theodosius beheld Vincent, as making a sign
for him to harken to the exposition of Lazarus dream. And Gratian going
forward, I will not deny (says he) but that there be some small number of men
of knowledge, and piety, for whose sake God suffers the Town to stand, but
they are as stangers and Pilgrims. At these words Theodosius began to speak,
and say to Vincent: Behold the whole interpretation, but he permitted the
Merchant to conclude, who said: Well Masters, I will esteem you happy, that
you have directed the ways of your Pilgrimage better then I have done, I
entreat you, by your holy prayers, to obtain for me, that I may walk
hereafter so happily, and so hastily perform the rest of my way in this
mortal life, that God may be glorified, and the repose of my soul assured,
under the shadow of his mercy. Lazarus answering for all; we depart from this
Town (says he) comforted with your generous resolution, with hope that God
will preserve you from all the danger of this wicked world, and accomplish with
a full measure, the good desire he has given you: we will bear in our heart
the remembrance of your love and friendship, and will place you in the midst
of our best prayers. This being said, they embraced, and took leave one of
another. Gratian put into the hand of Lazarus some pieces of money, desiring him
to take it to defray the charges of their journey: but he would none, saying he
had enough, and thanked him of the alms, he had given the^ before: so they
went from the town, where Gratian tarried not long after. Ludolph his companion
continued his course of merchandise. As they were out of the gate^, Theodosius
forgot not to quippe Vincent, and ask, if he had now any list to laugh at
Lazarus his dream. To whom Vincent, let me (quoth he) make the examen of my
conscience quietly, and so remained a quarter of an hour silent in their
examen, which they could not well dispatch before dinner. So they walked until
night without any disturbance or ill fortune, and took up their lodging for
that night at a little town called Bon-rencontre, three leagues from the place
where they dined. After they had supped and said their accustomed prayers, they
did confer upon their morning meditation, which was the calling of the first
five Disciples of our Savior, in three points.

1. How S. John Baptist showed our Savior, and preached, and his disciples
followed him.

2. How our Savior asked his Disciples: whom seek you? who said: Master
where dwell you?

3. How Andrew brought his brother Simon to Jesus Christ, who gave him the name
of Cephas, that is, a Rock.

With the memory of these points, they went to rest.

The five and thirteth Day, and the fifth of his Return. Of the vocation of
the first five Disciples of our Savior, Andrew, and his companion whom the
Evangelist not, Peter, Philip, and Nathaniel. CHAP. XIII.
AN hour before day the Pilgrims did make their examen, and a little after,
their meditation. Lazarus made it as follows.

Our Savior going victorious out of the desert, came to preach publicly
Penance, which he had practiced hitherto privately, he walked upon the bank of
the River Jordan, where S. John his Precursor did testify of him. S. John
shows and preaches our Savior.


Behold, O my soul, and contemplate upon these banks that blazing light which
showed the sun, hear the voice of him who came out of the desert, clothed
in a Camells shin, neither eating nor drinking, but showing in his life a
pattern of perfect penance, cried and said: Behold the Lamb of God, who
takes away the sins of the world. Matthew. 3. Marc. 1. Joan. 1.
O joyful news! O desired coming of this Lamb, to produce so heavenly an
effect! needs must his blood be precious, which was to pay the fine for such a
debt, and very effectual which must cancel such and so ancient an obligation,
and very powerful, which must deface so great a number of infernal spots, and
sins. This is that Lamb which is showed and called, and drew Disciples to
him, to have first familiar and domestical witnesses of his doctrine and
actions, and afterward trumpets to publish unto the world what they had seen
and heard. O sweet Jesus, make me gather profit of this, to thy honor and
glory.

Andrew, and one of his companions, both disciples of S. John, Saint Andrew the
first disciple of our Savior.
hearing that their Master in few words gave so divine acommendation to Jesus,
and understanding that this was Messiah, they went and followed him. But who is
the companion of Andrew whom the Evangelist names not? It is a Disciple which
is written in the book of life; the Evangelist did not specify him, because it
was not necessary, it is enough that he was named in general. Content thy
self, A disciple not named.
O my soul, that thy name is written in the book of God, although it were
unknown to all mortal men, and desire that it might be written in heaven, and
not in earth. The names of thousands are great before men, whose souls are
shut prisoners in hell, and the names of thousands of others do shine in
heaven, which are unknown upon earth. S. John shows his Master, and
preaches him with a wonderful testimony, The true Preacher sends his hearers
to Christ.
(...) his Disciples do follow whom he does show. So it is the ^art of a true
preacher to preach Jesus Christ, and to send his ^earers and followers unto
him: he that in his preaching makes himself admired, and not Jesus Christ,
and draws ^he hearts of his hearers after himself, and not after Jesus
Christ, is a thief, employing his Masters money and guiftes to his own uses,
and not to his Masters honor. God has given thee thy tongue to praise him,
and thou by thy tongue procurest and seek praises for thy self; and do
thou not think, that this sovereign justice will call thee to reckoning, and
revenge the wrong thou have done him?

Jesus Christ seeing that these two disciples followed him, turning to them,
Whom ^ seek you?
asked what they sought. O Lord what a question is this? They do not seek or
search, but they have found without seeking, that which hundred thousands of
just men have sought 4000. years without finding. They have found that which
the Ambassador did announce, that is the Lamb of God, Luc. 10.
the Lamb promised, figured, prophesied by the Scriptures, by the sacrifices,
and by the Prophets of thy school and family. Why do thou ask, O Lord, what
they seek? Is it perhaps to make them think better of the greatness of him,
whom they have found, and to make them enter into a deeper knowledge of him?
As if he had said unto the^. Whom have you found? Do you not know? What seek
you more? For many men find thee, O sweet Lamb, and yet search further, not
knowing thoroughly the value of the treasure they have found, Many Christians
and Religious, know not well their vocation.
neither can understand it, except thou will turn thy self toward them,
giving them light to know thee, as thou have given them grace to find thee.

They said: Master, Where dwell thou? O Lord thou did ask them, What
seek you? And instead of an answer, they ask another question, saying:
Master, where dwell thou? Why do they not answer directly, we seek the
La^be of God, and the Messiah promised in the Law, preached by our Master. Is
it, that enlightened with thy light in their spirit, they do thereby perceive
and acknowledge that they had found thee? And therefore they answered not, we
seek, but said in their heart, we see thee, and seek nothing but thee, and we
would know where thou dwell. They answer therefore, what thy holy spirit
had put into their heart, and mouth, Master, where dwell thou? And this
question they ask, that they might in convenient time and place, more
privately confer with thee of holy things, and much importing to their
salvation. And thou do answer them, Come and see; and do gently inuit them
to come to the place of thy dwelling. But O good disciples, know you well what
you ask of this Master, God is every where.
asking the place where he dwells He dwells in heaven, in earth, in the
sea, in the North, and in the South, and every where, and yet dwells in no
place. For no place is capable to lodge him, he fills all, and yet is without
all: but if you ask (as it seems you do mean) where this his Humanity
visible to mortal men dwells? know you, that he has no dwelling, and that
he has forsaken all to give us all, and to enrich us by his poverty, as you
shall hear of him hereafter, that, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air
have neastes, and the Son of man has no where to rest his head, Matthew. ^.
which is so, because he came to be a Pilgrim, and not a citizen upon earth.

The place then of his dwelling was a lodging borrowed not his own, and to
such a place he brought them, where they stayed a whole day with him. O day, a
day indeed for these disciples, having so near them the sun of the world,
casting into their soul this wholesome light and love! What heavenly discourses
were held in the hours of that day! What demands and what answers were made!
What lessons were given of the mystery of this lamb whom they had found?

Andrew who was one of the two, met his brother Simon, Andrew brought Peter to
Jesus who gave him his name Peter.
and by the light of this fair day becoming a Preacher, did show him the
sun his master, and said, we have found the Messiah, who is Christ the
Anointed. And like a good disciple brought him to Jesus, to the Savior to
save him. Simon came desirous to see Jesus, of whom he had heard before
somewhat, and was to hear much more afterward. And our Savior beholding him,
before he spoke unto him (O beholding divine, and most happy for thee, O Simon)
to dispose him to the faith of his divinity, called him by his name, and told
him whose son he was. Thou art (says he) Simon the son of Jonas; never
having seen him, or his Father before with his corporal eyes; and changed his
name, Thou shall be called Cephas, which is to say, a Rock. And declares by
this change what he was to do after, and what place he would give him in his
Church: which were so many testimonies that he was God, knowing his creatures
every one by their name; the name of the Fathers, as of the children, yea even
before they are borne into the world; and changing their nature as he changes
their name, bettering them by new gifts of graces: so he caused his Prec^^sor
to be called John, which is to say Gracious, by reason of the abundant grace
he bestowed on him. So he changed the name of Abram into Abraham, which is to
say, Father of many nations, because he was ordained for such an end. So now he
changes the name of Simon into Peter (that is a Rock) because he would give
him a faith, which should be a Rock, and stone whereupon should be founded the
great building of the Church. Behold then a remarkable service of S. Andrew,
bringing the sheep unto the Shepherd; and a notable benefit to his brother,
addressing him to a master, who so soon was so liberal unto him.

Galilee the higher, and the lower.
In the next morning our Savior went forth to go toward Galilie, not high
Galilie which is of the Gentiles, but low Galilie of the Jews, and where the
city of Nazareth is, and there he found Philip, and said unto him, Follow me.
This Philip was of Bethsaida the city of Andrew and Peter: Philip preached
Messiah to Nathaniell, and so by diverse means, all four became disciples, of
whom three afterward were made Apostles. This is the first calling of those
that should follow our Savior: this is his grace. For if he do not prevent us
to draw us unto him, if he calls us not, if he say not, Follow me, we remain
fast in the press of the world not able to move.

O my Redeemer and Savior reach me thy helping hand that I may rise out of my
infirmities, turn toward me that heavenly face, and always and as often as
thou shall se me wandering in chase, and pursuit of transitory things, say unto
me, What searchest thou? Say unto me with such success, as thou said it to
these disciples in another subject: Alas my Lord, I have not always sought
thee, and so it has fallen out that I have not found thee. I have sought the
baits of the world, and pleasure, and repose in present things, as all the
children of this world do, and have at last found thorns and vanities, and
could find no rest for my soul: and indeed how could I find thee out of thy
self; but what sought I in the bogs and quagmires of this vain world? And why
sought I that repose among the thistles of this earth, and out of thee, who art
the true and solid repose of men and Angels? My sweet repose I seek thee now,
and I desire to have thee always, and to dwell with thee: suffer thy self to
be found O my Savior, and let me enter where thou dwell, that I may learn
the lesson to live perfectly before thee, and the way effectually to draw
souls unto thee: be with us in the way of our Pilgrimage, and let us always
lodge with thee in this time of our mortality, that we may walk with thee, and
live eternally with thee in that heavenly Country we aspire unto. And thou O
glorious Virgin, To the B. Virgin.
who giving milk to this thy precious fruit, did thy self suck from him
the milk and honey of his heavenly wisdom, his first scholar and learner of
his lessons, and first nurse child of his sacred doctrine; make me by thy
intercession, a good scholar of this master, help me if it please thee to
find him, and that with him, and in him, I may travel and rest whilst I am
Pilgrim, at last to be receaue^ into his house, and into the company of his
heavenly Citizens.

1. The Nightingales. 2. The Hermitage. 3. The mystical description. 4. The
charmed and enchanted drink. CHAP. XIIII.
HERE ended Lazarus his meditation, as also his companions, and having paid
their small reckoning, The Pilgrims espied by a thief at the fountain.
and drunk a draught of wine, they went out of their lodging onwards of their
iourny, with their accustomed prayers: having walked about three leagues, and
waxed somewhat weary, they saw a little out of their way, a goodly fountain at
the foot of a little hill, having on the left hand a copse wood, and thither
they went to refresh themselves, and to eat a little: and Lazarus, as he
opened his bag to take out some bread, found therein a Crown of gold, and
Vincent found an other: this was the alms which the good host of the Country
farm had hidden in their bag without saying any thing. Lo (quoth Vincent)
we are richer in crowns, tha^ we took our selves to be; they said grace, and
sopping their bread, they did both eat and drink together.

The Nightingales which were in great number in that wood, began to sing,
striving as it were who should do best; and to make a consort of music with
diverse tunes and quires; and it seemed they had warning before hand to prepare
themselves to sing the best aires, they had in their books of nature, whilst
the Pilgrims did eat. Lazarus was ravished, and a man might see in his
countenance, that his soul song praises to the Creator, moved by the songs of
these little birds. Theodosius and Vincent also took more pleasure to refresh
their spirit with this music, than in feeding their body with meat and
drink, and they admired three of these, above all the rest; for in recording
and answering one to another, they made an admirable melody to the ear,
neither was there any variety of tunes of accord, or voices, which they did not
furnish: they song by nature, and did meruailously well mingle their flattes
and sharpes together, now in the Dorian and the Lydian tune, to bring men
asleep and refresh them, now in the Phrygian and Martial, as it were giving a
sign of battle: They song the treble with a clear sound and a high, and after
the base, with a throt stretched out, quauering with ascendants and descendants
fu^l and grave. They might hear them a part sing the high counter and mean,
and after together to sing three parts, a Trio of two trebles, and one
Concordant, a Bourdon, and at last every one song all alone the four parts;
they went softly, with longs and larges, and straight they stretched out their
voices in quauering and warbling, so thick and small, in so good measure and
harmony, that it seemed the music it self did sound in the breasts of these
little Qui^isters from heaven.

And thus these good Pilgrims took their recreation, but they were not
advised of a certain Robber, lurking as a spy behind them who cared not one
whit for the Nightingales songs, but rather for the Pilgrims purses, which he
thought had been full of Crowns, by reason of what he ouerheard a little
before, and watched to work them an ill turn, and harkened for no more but to
know which way they went, and so cross their way, and cut their purses, and
perhaps their throats too. Having taken their refection, and said grace, they
continued their way to go lodge at Meuriers, which was 3. leagues off. The
Rogue failed not, so soon as they were departed, to go seek his companions,
who were seaue^ or eight in ambush a quarter of a mile off in the wood, he
advertised them that he had discovered three Pilgrims laden with gold and
silver, who went toward Meuriers; and that they should arm themselves with
their best weapons, for that he judged by their countenance, that they were
stout fellows of their hands, and hearts. So they departed in post to intrappe
the Pilgrims half a league often in the wood; but God preserved them, for
coming to a crosseway parted into three ways, they commended themselves to
the B. Virgin, that she would lead them into the right; and instead of taking
the way to Meuriers, where the thieves lay in wait for them, they took
another, which lead to an Hermitage, where there lived after the manner of the
old Monks of Egypt, a man of most holy Conversation.

As they came in sight of this hermitage, The he^mitage.
they mistrusted that they were out of their way, and to inform themselves
they went straight thither, thinking it had been some farm house, where they
might find some body to show them the way; but coming near unto it, they
perceived by a little Bell, that it was an hermitage. A good old man who served
for porter and clarke to the good Hermit to say Mass, and to go a begging,
was then in his little garden set, before the the house on a little bank; they
came to him and saluted him courteously, and he did the like to them, and with
a friendly and kind countenance said unto them, My good brethren have you not
misled of your way? Father (quoth Lazarus) I think you have said true, but
fynding this holy place we are glad we lost our way, for we hope that this good
chance will set us again in our way, and bring us some good fortune besides.
It shall be you (quoth he) that shall (...) comfort to our good Father, for he
does willingly see all Pilgrims of Loreto, whence I guess that you come; we
come from thence indeed (quoth Lazarus) by the grace of God.

I will go tell him so much (quoth the good man) and went in where he met the
good old Father coming toward them, knowing of the Pilgrims coming by
secret revelation: so they made toward him, and he toward them, and embraced
them with a show of great charity. They were all much moved to see so venerable
an old man, all white, yet right up and vigorous, with his long locks beating
upon his shoulders, and a long beard, in a rugge gown girded with a thick
rope, buttened with a ma^tle of the same stuff, they saw not the hair he wore
next his skin. He said unto them: My good brethren God be with you; The good
Angel has brought you hither, for my comfort, and for your own good; I have
long desired to see some Deuote of the B. Virgin the mother of my Savior; She
has directed you by a secret way to this little desert, and has withal
delivered you from two immine^t dangers. The one from thieves, who this after
dinner thinking you had more money then you have did watch for you in the right
way to have spoiled and murdered you; he that advertised them was one of their
companions, who lay hidden behind the fountain, when you opened your bags for
bread: they remembered then well what they said, when they found their pieces of
gold, and they harkened to the good old man as a Prophet, who followed his
discourse. The other danger (says he) you shall know by and by: let us now go
salute our Savior and the B. Virgin, and so brought them into an Oratory,
where was a great Crucifixe of wood, having on the right side, a very devout
table containing the picture of the B. Virgin, with little Jesus in her arms,
and on the left hand, another table of S. Antony. In this he used to say mass;
they prayed there a while and from thence he lead them into a little chamber
joining to his cel, which served for a refectory, and gave them for their
collation a little bread and wine, with a few cherries, which the good porter
had gathered a little before. After he asked them of their Pilgrimage to
Loreto, of their fortunes and adventures; they told him in brief the comfort
they had received in the sacred House, the miracles that are daily wrought
there, and finally their way, and adventures they had had until that time, and
namely th s of the robbers. But Aime-dieu (says the Hermit) you te^l me
nothing what you saw and suffered in your pilgrim^ge of Palestine and Aegipt,
and other countries b^yond the Sea. The Pilgrims were astonished to hear him
name Lazarus by his own name, having never seen him before, and persuading
themselves fu^ly, that this Hermit spoke as a Prophet, they cast themselves
down at his feet. The Hermit lifted them up straight, and Lazarus said unto
him: My reverend Father, we need not discourse unto you what has hapened unto
us in diverse countries during our seven years pilgrimage, for as we see, God
has revealed it unto you, as well as my proper name, which I changed into
Lazarus, thinking my self unworthy to be called Aime-dieu (that is a I over of
God) not loving him with that perfection and purity I should; and have taken
the name of Lazarus, to remember that I am poor and needy. The name is good
(says the hermit) and the invention is better; and speaking to them all three,
My good brethren, says he, I will not put you to the pain to recount your
fortunes, it suffices me to know, and thank God therefore, that you have
suffered much for his name, and that you are Deuotes of the B. Virgin, the most
glorious mother of his Son. As he said this, the porter perceived a far often a
great troop of horsemen, who galloped with all fury toward the hermitage, and
he cried out, my Father, we are undone. Fear not (quoth the Hermit) not being
any whit moved, we are stronger then they: they were above fifty, carrying a
cloud of dust, which their horses raised in the air. As they came near the
hermitage, they went thrice about it, crying and shouting like mad men, and
after they returned whence they came, without doing any more harm. This is
(said the Hermit) a company of soldiers, pertaining to the Captain of that
town whence you came, who seek nothing else but to hurt men, or at least scare
them. And God did you a fair grace inspiring you not to stay at Mondeuil
whereby you passed yesterday at dinner, that you were not entrapped in the
sedition, that was raised a little after; and to direct you this day to this
place, for without doubt you had suffered damage: and this is the second danger
I signified unto you before. Blessed be God, and the B. Virgin (quoth Lazarus)
for this favor and all others we have received from his holy hand, as well
which we know not, as which we know. Well (says the Hermit) that you may have
occasion to praise yet more heartily that supreme bounty, I will tell you the
qualities of another City, the mother of this, out of the which, he has
delivered you long since, a benefit which you must always have before your
eyes. The Pilgrims showed great desire to understand of this City, and her
conditions, which the hermit knowing by their countenance said unto the^; I
will make you the description of this City by her causes and qualities, and if
thereby you shall understand it, you will be glad that I have made you remember
it.

The description of a mystiall City.
This City (says he) is built in the midst of the earth, and yet near unto
the Sea, in a marish ground upon great wooden posts; the founder and governor
thereof was a naughty and seditious person, who reuolting from his King built
this City, and made it his retraite and refuge of rebellion, and a den of
wicked persons. Instead of walls he has made great ditches, to the which he
has raised high rampires of earth, such as you have seen, if you remember:
and to the end to make himself strong against his lawful Prince, if perhaps
he would force him to his allegiance, he made both himself, The laws of the
world.
and his City vassal to a cruel Tyrant. The laws it holds, are, to love
none but themselves; to have no religion, and to abuse all, for to prevail in
their intentions; to oppress virtue and authorize vice, and namely, pleasure,
couetice, and ambition; to love and sow discord, to promise rest and honor,
and to yield at last nothing but wind and smoke. Her faith is to betray her
friends, and most cruelly to handle and destroy her most faithful servants,
which commonly are three great and ancient families of the same blood with
those three sorts of courtiers of Merefolly, whom you saw yesterdaye. And to
the end that this town do not rebel, being oppressed and offended with his
cruelties, An encharmed drink.
he has dressed a feast of purpose, where he gives them a certain drink,
whereby the guests are so well charmed that they lose the remembrance of all
that is past, and believe that all that were killed died in their bed, and that
they are happy, and have always a good opinion of their master, if by good
chance they be not vncharmed by seeing the perfidiousnesse and folly of men,
which trust unto him, and serve him with so great love for such wages. Those
whom you saw even now compass about this house like mad men, are not men, but
wicked spirits in the shape of men, who rejoicing in any tragedy acted to their
desire, came to see if peradventure they could entrappe any one to carry him to
the town, and to make him slave to their great master, by the means of their
governor. Now there be near unto this City some good men, that enter
therinto sometimes, but as strangers and forennners, and as neither he nor his
City does trust them, so do they trust it as little; and it falls out well
for them. For if they should be made Denizens, or take any right of burgess
amongst them, they must needs undergo the same fortune with the natural
Citizens. Our King has purposed a long time to raze it down to the ground,
and to cut in pieces these rake-hels, but by reason of those good and faithful
servants of his Majesty, he has deferred and temporized hitherto, choosing
rather like a good Prince, to pardon many enemies in respect of some friends,
than to hurt his friends in chastising his enemies, Perea^t amici modo pereant
in^mici. vox Tyranni.
which is the humor of a tyrant. Behold my good Brother out of what City you
are come, if it may be called a City, and not rather a labyrinth or enclosure
of many parkes, filled with lions, serpents, foxes, rhinocerots, basiliskes,
and other savage and cruel beasts. Here Theodosius and Vincent remembered
again the dream of Lazarus, and al three did highly praise God of this great
favor in having pulled them out of so dangerous a place, and they took a
singular pleasure, in the narration of the good man; but they did not
understand what City he had described, neither did they remember that ever
they set foot i^ any, that was of such situation, figure, and quality; neither
in Egypt, Palestine, nor in Christendom. Lazarus suspected that it was a
Parable, and a mystical description, allegorizing some spiritual City, and
they requested him more plainly to express what City it was. Theodosius and
Vincent, who had almost taken all his words according to the letter, made yet
more instance; but the Hermit for fear of holding then too long, and the
better to prepare their heart and ear, advised the^ to eat something first, and
rest a while; and that the hour of his prayer approached, promising for the
rest to satisfy their demand in the morning, if they desired: they took a
small refection which served for their supper, and after they went altogether
to say Letanies in the Chapel, whence the good Hermit brought them to a
little place near his Cell, where there was a table, and certain mats laid
upon bordes to rest upon; so he left them with his blessing, and retired
himself to his Cell, to his accustomed devotions, charging his man, to have
ready early in the morning, all things necessary for the Altar. The Pilgrims
examined their conscience, took for subject of their meditation, the sermon of
the 8. Beatitudes (as they are called) which our Savior made in the mountain
to his Apostles.

The six and thirtith day, and the sixth of his Return. The Hermits prayer.
CHAP. XV.
THE Hermit watched all night in prayer, and demanded of God the grace happily
to shut up the last period of his mortal Pilgrimage, and to favor his
Pilgrims, whom of his good assistance he had sent unto him, that they might
perform their course like true Pilgrims, and come at last to their heavenly
home and country. He prayed also in general, that it would please him, The
Hermits prayer.
to cast forth the beams of his mercy over so many poor mortal creatures,
who allured with the baytes of the world, and carried with the wind of her
vanities, posted unto everlasting perdition

O Lord (says he) what is this mortal world, and how great is the blindness
of man, The shortness of this life.
who suffers himself to be seduced by such a cosener, taking at his hands
straw for gold, and shadows for truth, I have lived 80. years upon the earth:
alas, what is become of these years, and all that has been done since the
Creation of the world? They came from nothing, and to nothing they are vanished
again, and nothing can I make account of, but of a few hours employed in the
service of thy Majesty, if I have employed any well; what is life but a passing
shadow, and the pleasures and presents of the world but deceitful vanities.

In such prayers and desires passed the good man all that night, talking to God
in the closet of his heart, without sound of tongue. Lazarus and his compainions
were up soon after mydnight, and in great silence began their Meditation.

A Meditation upon the eight Beatitudes. CHAP XVI.
EVERY one remembered the history of the Gospel which says: Jesus seeing the
multitude ascended up into a mountain, Matt. 5.2^
and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him; and opening his mouth he
taught etc.

They noted in these words the signification of some great and high doctrine
pronounced in a choice place, in a mountain, as a singular and high Law given
by our Savior, sitting and opening his mouth as the Doctor of doctors, who
having hertofore opened the mouth of his Angels and Prophets, opens now his
own and speaks in person; not to the common sort, but to those whom he had
ordained of the privy Council to his providence, the pillars of perfection,
and the noble foundations of his Church; and that which they had noted in
general in this Preface, they did observe, in every one of the eight clauses
which make this sermon.

The first says: Happy are the poor of spirit, 1. The poor of spirit. Lovers
of poverty. The humble.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. The poor, not by fortune, but by will
and vow; the humble, and that with a deliberate purpose despise the riches of
the earth. This doctrine is very high, and altogether a paradoxe to worldly
men, who call rich men happy, and care little for the Kingdom of heaven. The 2.
Happy are the meek, 2. The meek shall possess the earth of the living Psalm.
2^.141.6. Orig. hom. 26 in Number. Bas. in Psalm. 33.
for they shall possess the earth. This is the earth of the living. This is
also a paradoxe to the world, who esteems above all other, those that have
their choler and their hand ready at commandment, and know how to be
revenged of their enemies, children and heirs of the earth, but of the earth
of the dead not of the living. The 3. Happy are those that weep for they shall
be comforted. The world loves better to laugh in this life, although they
should be comfortless ever after, the^ to bewail their sins here, and
after to enjoy the everlasting comfort of heaven. The 4. Happy are they that
hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be filled; the hunger and
thirst of this world, is hungerly to seek and desire the transitory goods and
honors, that fill, but satisfy not. The 5. happy are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy; The worldlings are counted magnanimous, if they be
unmerciful and fierce, rather seeking to make others miserable, for their
particular profit, than to show themselves mercif^l unto them in their
necessity, for Gods sake. The 6. Happy are they that are clean of heart, for
they shall see God: the eye of the soul is the intention and clean heart; this
is the eye which shall see God, the object of eternal felicity, whereof the
foul and unclean soul is incapable. The 7. Happy are the peacemakers for
they shall be called the children of God: The lovers of peace and concord shall
carry this goodly title, honored with the mark of their Father, who is God of
peace; as contrariwise, they that make only account of war, to sow discord
and dissension, shall be called the children of the Devil. The 8. Happy and
those that suffer persecution for justice, for to them appertains the
Kingdom of heaven. This last clause encountreth right with the judgment of
men, who put their felicity in the friendship, favors, and countenance of men,
and accounts him accursed that suffers persecution. Jesus Christ therefore
opening his mouth has controled the false opinion of the world, and shows
how honorable a thing it is, to suffer for the honor of God, and that by his
practice fortifyed the proof of this his paradoxe, having himself chosen
labors, persecutions, the death of the Cross, the top and height of all
persecution; and here Lazarus concluded in these words.

O sweet Jesus excellent teacher of truth, and truth it self, The prayer.
give me the grace well to understand thy doctrine, and holily to practice it,
to be poor in spirit, and rich in thy blessings, and above all, for thy love
to suffer the wants and persecutions of this life, and with thee to be partaker
of that hire which thy doctrine promises in the other.

Thus prayed Lazarus. Theodosius and Vincent met in many points of their
meditation, and all did conceive, A sermon of Perfection.
that this sermon was a lesson of Apostolical perfection, contein^ng the
doctrine of most high Christian virtues, and the recompense that shall be
rendered to every one, according to the measure of their merit. This done they
prepared themselves to confession for to receive, for they understood by the
Porter, that the good man had faculty of the Bishop to administer the
Sacraments, when occasion should be offered. Math. 16.21. Romans 2.6,
He came to visit them in the morning, and giving them the good morrow, he
invited them to Mass, which he began having heard their confessions, they
received an admirable comfort, to see this heavenly old man celebrate the
Sacrifice, and yet more in receiving the body of our Savior.

1. The description of the world. 2. Her laws. 3. Her faith. 4. The good
mingled with the wicked in this life. 5. Horrible sights. 6. To serve God is a
thing honorable. CHAP. XVII.
THEIR devotion ended the Hermit brought them to the chamber to take a little
refection for the necessity of their iourny. Lazarus for himself and his
companions said, my good Father, we cannot eat, nor drink heartily, except
first we may enjoy the performance of your promise, and may see that City
nearer, which yersterday you showed us a far off, and made us wonder at the
marvelous qualities you recounted thereof; it is to early to eat yet, neither
can we have a better breakfast at your hand, than the hearing of such a lesson.
I remember well my promise (quoth the Hermit) and I will acquit my self, but
it shall be in walking with you, for I will be your companion some piece of the
way, and you shall be so much the forwarder on your iourny; giving his
benediction, he divided the eggs, which he caused to be sodden in the shell; and
to give them example, began himself first. When they had done, which was
soon; well (says he) let us now go on Gods name. The porter gave him in his
hand his staff of pear tree to rest himself on, and shutting the door after
him, he went out with them, the sun being about an hour high. The Pilgrims
were very aager and attentive to hear the exposition of the allegory, which
the good Hermit began in this sort. The description of the world. S. Aug. 14 de
ciuit. c. 26.


The City which I have described unto you (my good friends) is the world, the
assemby and City of the devil, founded in the midst of the earth; for those
wicked persons who make this City, whersoeuer they be, they are in the midst
of the earth, every part of the earth being his midst, as every line of a Globe
in the midst of his circumfere^ce. The situation is a ma^ith ground, a place of
dirt and mire, ill assured, as her hopes base and uncertain. It is near to
the sea; near I say, in qualities, tossed with a thousand winds and tempests,
full of dangers of vices and sins, as the sea is of rocks, sands, monsters
and such like. S. Aug. in Psalm. 142.
The founder is Self-loue, the eldest son of rebellion. Two loves (says one
Saint) built two Cities: Sel-floue built that of the Devil to the contempt of
God. The Love of God built the City of God unto the contempt of our selves;
and this is founded in heaven in the midst of the Kingdom of God. He of it is
that Abell the first member of that City, built nothing upon the earth, Why
Abell built no city but Cain.
because he was a Pilgrim and Cain the first reprobate and citizen of Satan's
City, and of the world built a town therein. This city is a refuge of
rebellion, a den of rake-hels, enemies to God, and preuaricatours of his law.
Instead of walls it has deep ditchs, and great rampires of earth, for that
her defenses are but bottoms and hills of error and pride. The first founder
made himself vassal and tributary to a Titant; for Selfeloue, and all the
burgesses of that city are always rebels to God, and tributary to the Devil;
him they have loved, to him they have bowed their knee, though a tyrant of all
tyra^ts and the most cruel that ever was; and seek help of him against their
God.

The fundamental laws of that City are those five I touched before: the
first, for each man to love himself, The laws of self-love and the world
and every thing for himself: for the humor of the world and worldly men, is
to affect only their own particular profit, having clean banished out of
their heart, the love of God, and their neighbor. The 2. to have no Religion,
to use and abuse all for their temporal commodity: this is to too much
verified by the experience of all the children of this world, whose common
custom is to make Religion a pretext of their designements, and to make use of
the name of God for their own glory; very hypocrites and sacrilegious
impostors. To have no Religion. To authotize vice* and disgrace virtue.
The 3. to cast down virtue, and set vice aloft; according to this law, the
world prayseth those that live in delights, as most happy, and the pleasures of
the body, as the joys of felicity. It commends the covetous as prudent, to
advance and further their own affairs. It bosteth of the ambitious, calling
them men of valor and courage, and therefore it is, that this City is filled
with the brood of these families, To sow discord.
all great courtiers of Mere-folly. The 4. is to love and sow dissension, and
to entertain subjects with false reports, calumniations and other malicious
means, thinking that by their discord and debility, their estate should be
strong and firm. And as the Kingdom of God is peace and charity, and his
spirit is to nourish and maintain peace, so the Kingdom of the Devil, and
the estat of the world is trouble and hatred, and the spirit of the world is to
make discord when there is question to do evil. To promise riches.
The 5. is to entice and deceive men by the promise of riches and honors,
which pass and vanish: so many abused do perceive, when they come to die,
though late, that all they have gotten is but shadows and dreams. Psalm. 75.6.
The rich men (says David) have slept their sleep, and in the end found
nothing in their hands. They have passed this life as a dream, and resting
themselves on the saffran bed of their riches, and at the end have found their
brains troubled with fumes, their hands empty of good works, and their
conscience laden with sins. These are the laws of this world and of this
City.

And as her laws are but disorders, so is her faith perfidiousnes, and her end
nothing else but to ruin her acquaintance, and to send them to the slaughter
that serve her best, and are most faithful unto her: will you see this? Cast
the eyes of your memory, upon the histories of all ages passed; how many
gallants has she precipitated into confusion, after they had a while run the
race of their vanity in the sight of men? How many has she most miserably
strangled, that had to her performed most faithful service? Was there ever any
that more honored or better served her, then the Assuerus, Caesar's,
Alexanders, Pompeies, Neroes, Diocletians, Decians, and other like Princes and
Lords of her Court, great admirers of her majesty, sighing, seeking, nor
breathing any thing else, but her greatness; has she not made them all dye death
everlasting? Thousands see this at every moon, and every day, but the world is
such a cosener, that it bereaueth mortal men of their senses, and men are so
foolish and simple that still they suffer themselves to be seduced by her
gaudies, and present delights, so that they honor and serve her as their
sovereign Lord, not able to open their eyes to behold either the misfortune of
others, or their own danger, nor their ears to hear the voice of the justice
of God who threatens them; The good mixed with the bad in this world
and persevere in such sort until they be overwhelmed in the ditches of their
enemy, without help or hope ever to come out. Now God, who is our sovereign
King will ruinate this City, and raze it to the ground; for he must judge the
world and drench the obstinate, but because there be diverse of his own
servants amongst these sinners, as of Lots in Sodom, he does not yet
exterminate the world, but expecting in favor of the good, and by patience
inuiting sinners to penance in the time of mercy, not to incur at the day of
judgment, the severity and rigor of his eternal justice. This is the City
of which I told you yesterday, and out of the which by the grace of God you
have been long since sequestered, and shall be yet more, if you be good
Pilgrims, as I esteem you. Thus did the Hermit expound his Allegory, often
looking up to heaven and sighing. The Pilgrims heard him with great attention
and contentment, and their way seemed short. Lazarus seeing him hold his peace,
said unto him. My reverend Father, you have set before our eyes, a wholesome
picture of the City of this world, and of the vanities of worldly men, and you
have bound us in eternal benefit: we desire to be bound unto you also for your
prayers, and to obtain for us of our Lord, that as he has already drawn us
from the snares of this deceifull world, so that he would give us grace to
persevere unto the end in his love and fear. He will do it (says the Hermit)
do only what is in you, walk on every day from good to better like good
Pilgrims: be perfect before him, and you shall come by Gods grace to your
desired country. The B. Virgin whom you serve will help you with the
assistance of her prayers, the holy Apostles, our good Fathers the Hermits, S.
John, S. Paul, S. Anthony, S. Hilarion, S. Bruno, and others who have trampled
upon the world with the feet of constancy, living in the deserts as Pilgrims
upon the earth, will procure you aid happily to finish your course. You have
yet some way to dispatch and some crosses to endure, you shall pass not without
pain and travail, but with the profit of your souls. As for you Lazarus, you
shall be lamented of many, and your funerals shall be kept before your death,
and those that shall most mourn for you, shall be most comforted in your
fortune; and that you may the better remember what I have foretold you, keep
this; and gave him a little paper folded like a letter, containing these four
verses.

At that fair Day, the last which you desire,
Two dead revived without death shall each other see;
And being seen, after their funerals kept,
Shall to the world then dye, to heaven revive.
As the Hermit said these things, and they entered further within the wood a
great lion came upon them with most terrible roaring: the Pilgrims and the good
porter were seized with an extreme fear, and Lazarus thought this had been the
day of his funeral: but the Hermit knew presently, that it was the Devil in
likeness of a lion, he made the sign of the Cross, and the lion vanished. Then
they came to a little Oratory of S. Anthony, whither this good old man was wont
to walk his station; where kneeling down, and saying Pater noster, and Aue,
and demanding the intercession of the Saint, he advertised them, to take the
right hand when they were out of the wood and to lodge if they could, at the
Convent of the Charterhouse monks called Bon-heur, The Co^uent of Bon-heur
which was six leagues of, and weeping he kissed them all three, and bad them
farewell with his benediction, as they did him and his companion with a
thousand thanks. After they had done the devotions of the day, they kept
silence a while walking on: Lazarus thought of that the good Hermit had told
him of his funerals, as also upon the verses written in the paper. He thought
that his funerals should be the lamentation of them who would be grieved that
he should dye to the world, in leaving it, and that the same afterward should
be comforted; but he was troubled to penetrat the sense of the verse, yet he
did interpret the last day, the death which he so much desired if it were the
good pleasure of God, but he could not accord the resurrection of the dead
without dying, nor their funerals. How, says he, shall the dead see one
another, after their funerals? It shall be then in heaven after they are dead
upon earth: such a sense did he find, for these four verses. When they had
walked somwhile without saying a word, they began to discourse of diverse
things pleasant and pious. Vincent had always ready in his mouth, some pretty
jest and often touched Theodosius, and so they marched all that day without
disturbance, but at night they found themselves in a pecke of troubles. For
being entered into a great forest, wherein they thought to have seen the
Convent of Bon-heur, and having entered a good way in without fynding any issue,
after many turnings and returnings, they were overtaken with night, and must
needs stay, whereat they were much amazed, for they were very weary and faint,
and had but one lofe and a little wine left; and which troubled them most was,
that they found themselves in this solitary forest in evident danger of wolves
and other wild beasts. So upon their knees, they commended themselves to God,
and the glorious Virgin, to S. John Bapt. S. Anthony, S. Bruno, craving their
help in this necessity. In praying they seemed to hear a voice saying: Get
upon the tree. There were hard by diverse great Oaks, and two especially very
commodious to rest upon, and easy to clime; they chose one: Lazarus first made
Theodosius and Vincent ascend, and helped them with his shoulders, and bad them
tie a cord which they had, to a high branch of the tree to help himself up
after them; he reached them all their three staves, and holding the cord he
mounted last, clasping and clyming very nymbly: they placed themselves as high
as they could, about 20. foot from the ground, and found many branches of the
greater boughs, which served for forms to sit or sleep upon without danger:
they eat a little bread they had and some pears, and drank the little wine was
left in their botle. The repast ended, Vince^t said; now behold we are lodged
at the sign of the oak and the Sar, upon a higher stage iwis by much, then we
were four days since in the green castle with the hare. But if it raineth
what shall we do? We will do (answered Theodosius) as they do in Normandy.
And what do they there, replied Vincent? They let it rain, quoth Theodosius.
After such pretty devises of honest recreation, they said their Litanies by
heart, made their examen of conscience, said their beads, and commended
themselves to the protection of God, the B. Virgin, and of their good Angel,
with the best devotion they could. It was about two hours after sun set, the
sky was very clear and many stars did shine; the moon was in the first
quarter, so that they might see reasonably in the shadows of the night. Theod
sius and Vincent slept, but Lazarus never shut his eyes, but took singular
pleasure in the present occasion of suffering somewhat for the love of God: in
beholding the heavens and stars, he drew matter to admire and praise the
Creator of those goodly creatures, which he beheld with great atte^tion, Psalm.
18.1.
often repeating in his heart, the words of King David: The heavens do declare
the glory of God, and the firmament does show the works of his hands: he saw
the sign of Libra, and that of the great Serpent, approaching toward the south,
which showed that the sun being then in the 21. degree of Taurus (for it was
the 11. of May) had already dispatched half of his course under the horizon of
the Antipodes, and that it was about 11. clock. A horrible spectacle.


As he was fixed in the consideration of these heavenly bodies, there was
presented before his eyes, a horrible spectacle: for he saw by the moon light,
a man acco^panyed with a woman, who carried in the air, lighted like two flying
owls, under the oak next to the Pilgrims. This fellow having made a great
circle with a wand he had in his hand, mu^bling certain words, which he seemed
to read in a book, he caused to appear also two other women, with a Goat of
a monstrous bigness and falshion, carrying betwixt his horns a light candle
which seemed to be of some black stuff like pitch, the light burning blew and
somewhat blackish; in the same instant he saw arrive diverse persons men and
women, young and old to the number of 66. every one bringing their candle, which
they must light at the goats candle, doing him homage, and kissing under his
tail. Lazarus perceived straight, that it was an assembly of Sorcerers,
remembering what at other times he had read and heard; remembering withal that
it was Friday, a day which the Devil detesteth above all other, and
dishonors all he can, and namely by such assemblies, 11. a number of ^ll
signification and a mark of sin.
as the Church does honor with holy ceremonies, to be a memorial of our
Saviors victory gotten against these infernal troops: the hour was also
suspicious, for at eleven of the clock in the night (a number of misfortune and
a mark of sin) the Devil has a custom to do his solemn abominations,
and the number of persons 66. that is 6. S. Aug. l. 15. de ciu. c. 20.
times eleven, did agree to that of the time. Theodosius and Vincent slept, not
seeing any of all this. Lazarus commended himself and them, as heartily as he
could to God, the B. Virgin and their good Angels, and consulted with himself
whether he should awake them or no; and he concluded that it was best so to do,
that they might set themselves to their prayers: so he iogged them softly, but
never were men so amazed as they, when their eyes were open, and saw so many
candles and folks: they beheld that foul goat that lead the dance, drawing
his da^cers in a ring, skipping about with their back one against another. At
the end of the place one, upon a bank raised of earth as upon an Altar, made a
sacrifice in derision (as may be thought) of that which is don in the Church of
God. Vincent would have cried out, but Lazarus stopped his mouth with his
hands, and bad him in his ear commend himself to God and sit still. And
although neither the Goat, nor his Synagogue took any heed of the presence of
these Pilgrims (as God would have it) yet they felt the effect of their
prayers: for they could not perform to their mind their charms and
abominations, and stayed many times looking about, if they could discover any
person, that might trouble them. At last the goat listing up his head
perceived the three Pilgrims upon the Oak: all the dance was dashed, and all
their action at an end, and suddenly he dispatched unto the oak three of his
troop, to whom he gave the figure of Wolves, who came straight to the foore
of the tree, lifting up their heads toward the Pilgrims. The Pilgrims looked
down sadly upon them again without saying word, not thinking that they would
come up to them: but when they saw them clyme like cattes, and come almost to
reach them, they soddenly made the sign of the Cross, and all three cried out
together as loud as they could, Jesus Maria, at which voice the wolves fell
down upon the earth like three sackes of corn, and all the assembly vanished,
leaving behind them a smoke and stench most horrible, as if the plague had
there burnt all the rags of her infection. Then said Vincent, never in my life
was I so high mounted to see such dauncings, and such a parlame^t meeting of
states or holding of estate, and if we be out of danger, I will say we have
escaped fair. I hope says Theodosius we shall be acquitted of fear. We must not
doubt (says Lazarus) for we are in the protection of him, who bridleth the
fury of these rebellious spirits, and without whose permission they can do
nothing: the issue of this spectacle may show us how weak they are against the
children of God, for there were diverse devils in company, and 66. persons
besides, against three poor unarmed Pilgrims, and they could not bear the
sound of the name of Jesus, and his glorious Mother; but alas in what estate
are those poor wretches, that by their own sin and folly, have enthralled
themselves into the chains of so detestable and shamfull slavery. To serve God
is honorable.


O my brethren, what difference is there to serve our God, and to follow the
abominations of this infernal goat? How will he handle them when he shall have
them his slaves bound in his eternal prisons, seeing he does use them so
ignominiously, whilst they attend to his service? As Lazarus said this, and all
three gave thanks to God for their deliverance, they heard a bell sound as a
far of, which was the ringing to mattins, at the Convent of Bon-heur a league
and a half from that place: they thought it was the bell of some Church, but
knew not of what: they were glad thereof and slept a little: when the day began
to break, and that the star of Andromades began to appear above our
Horizon, Lazarus awakened his companio^s, aduertising them that it was time to
be walking. Theodosius and Vincent came down first by the rope, and Lazarus
last, having tied it with a running knot, that he might pull it down after
him. They hasted to see the place where these wretches had held their Sabbath,
there they found certain gobbets of flesh roasted black, of bread, and fruits,
which was the provision of their banquet: also a chalice, and patten of silver,
certain candles of black matter and stinking, some what like Pitch, a slice
of a Turneppe made black, about the bigness of an host; two papers, in one
whereof was written Hezares, and some other barbarous and unknown names, which
were the names of Devils. Hezares.
In the other was a Catalog of the officers of this Hezares, and what every one
should perform in his service, The works of witches.
which were, to empoyson, bewitch, destroy the fruits of the earth, make
folks sick, and to heal them, or such like things, by charms and
characters. They found also a wolves skin, and a piece of a parchment unfolded
like toil d'oignon, and some grains of frankincense, and other such abomiable
trash; some they cast away, and some they carried to burn at their next
lodging; Vincent loaded himself, little knowing what imaginations that burden
would breed him. Theodosius took the chalice and the patten, and wiping it
with leaves, put it in his bag. It was full day when they began to walk, and
said their wonted prayers for their iourny. After every one set himself to
meditate a part; the subject of their meditation was of the Passion of our
Savior.

The seven and thirtith Day, and the seventh of his Return. 1. Of
distraction and euagation of the mind in prayer. 2. A Meditation of the Passion
of our Savior. CHAP. XVIII.
THE Pilgrims walked and meditated in the morning in great si^e^ce but with
much trouble, for they felt no gust of devotion in their soul, Euagatio^ of
spirit.
and the more they forced and endeavored to penetrate the mystery they had
undertaken the more they found themselves dry and distracted, and which
troubled them most, was, the matter of their meditation deserved much devotion.
So every man examined his conscience, to find out the cause of this dryness
and euagation of mind, without discovering so much one to another. Yet Lazarus
perceived somewhat in the countenance of his companions outwardly, that all went
not well within, and labored for his part to follow a good thread of his
meditation, but when he saw, that it went worse and worse, The Devils craft to
trouble prayer.
he perceived it was an assault of those malicious spirits, who incensed by the
shame they received in their Sabbath, do revenge themselves as well as they can,
sending these waspes and flies of distraction into the fancy of them who shamed
them, and he remembered the importunate flying of the birds which flittered
about the sacrifice of Abraham, and which Abraham drove away with all his force
and diligence; after they had walked a mile, and the hour of meditation
expired, Genesis 15.11.
Lazarus addressing himself to Vincent: Well my brother, quoth he, how goes
your meditation? Nay ask me rather (quoth Vincent) how goes my distraction;
for my meditation has been but a continual Mosaicall work of pieces of
fantasy ill hanging together: When I would have though of mount Caluary, the
montaine Atlas came into my memory: when I would have stuck upon the strains
of our Saviors torments and his patience, my fancy was carried to the candles
of their Sabbath, and to other foolish imaginations, and I wotte not, if this
trash I carry in my bag do work me this evil, for I felt not a long time,
so little comfort in a meditation, specially upon so worthy a subject. Lazarus
comforting him, we must not (says he) seek our own ease and pleasure in the
bitterness of the Passion of Christ. I seek at least (quoth Lazarus) to be
attentive, to that I would meditate. I see (quoth Theodosius) that I was not
vagabond all alone: were you distracted too (says Lazarus?) much more than
Vincent I doubt me, quoth Theodosius; well God pardon us our faults, replied
Lazarus, and give us of his grace; I have had my part of affliction also, for I
could meditate nothing to the purpose no more than you: It is Gods providence
to let us see, how little we can perform of our selves without his help, to the
end to humble us in the acknowledgment of our nothing: but let us not loose
courage for this, for if having done our diligence to prepare our selves, we
have not tasted the sweet honey of devotion, we shall in humbling our selves
find the profit of the sour, which is more to be desired; for humility is more
profitable and necessary to him that prays and more pleasing unto God than
spiritual sweetness; Humility better tha^ sweetness of devotion.
and if the Devil in despit of being driven away by us this night, will
revenge himself by these mystes which he casts into our fantasies (God
permitting him for our exercise) he shall yet receive confusion by our patience
and profit. Discousing in this manner, they came unto the Convent of Bon-heur,
about six a clock in the morning; this was a Convent of Chartherhouse Monks
living in great austerity, and perfection of life, strait obseruers of their
rules, and great lovers of hospitality, and specially Dom-Prior, who was a holy
and venerable old man, and very devout to our Lady of Loreto, as all that holy
Order is. This Convent was situate at the going out of the forest, having many
little houses round about it, where dwelt such good folk as had dedicated them
selves to the service of God in that house, called Oblati: one of these saluted
them, and said unto them, Messieurs you shall make very glad Dom-Prior, and all the Religious within by your coming.

The Pilgrims saluted him again courteously, and entered with him into the
Church, where they song Prime, presently after to celebrate high Mass,
Dom-Procurator being advertised of their coming, came to entertain them with a
co^tenance full of kindness and courtesy, and brought them to the guests
chamber. Lazarus delivered him their letters patents from Loreto, which he
would not see, taking their honest countenance for a sure Patent: he embraced
them all three and said; My dear brethren, Father Priour gives you the good
morrow, he has commanded me to come entertayne you, you are all three heartily
welcome; your coming will bring joy and good fortune by Gods grace in
recompense of the displeasures we have had these days passed, with thieves and
sorcerers. Good Father (says Lazarus) Dom Priors charity and yours does not
stay long to show it self in our behalf. It is we that come to the Convent of
Bon-heur, there to receive good hour and fortune, and comfort in your
devotions; we bring nothing but matter of pain: but do thieves and sorcerers
trouble you also here as well as Pilgrims? To our great pain, answered the
Religious: they have robbed our Church and spoiled our fruits, and done us a
thousand domages, and but yesterday we took a man whom we thought to have
been of that company, but we will talk thereof afterward; now let us go eat
something. Good Father answered Lazarus we have no need, for we have not come
far, and it is early days, we pray you permit us to go pray a little, and
hear Mass first of all: he urged them no further, thinking they had rather
dine at a good hour, and having laid up their bags, he brought them to a
Chapel, where they resumed the points of their meditation. Lazarus went on in
this sort.

My Redeemer and Lord, Of the Passion of our Savior.
thou know the trouble we endured this Morning, restore to us, if it please
thee now, the joy of thy salvation. I enter into the meditation of thy doleful
Passion and death, that great and admirable exploit of thy infinite mercy: open
to me the gate of thy grace and light that in this act I may see the heavenly
signs of thy greatness. I behold the mountain of Caluary, the mount of dead
men's sculls, the sepulcher of our grandfather old Adam, and now the field of
thy fight. O my Savior, who art the second Adam without comparison more worthy
then the first, a montaine made infamous before, by the burial of many
malefactors there executed, Psalm. 50. S. Amb l. 5 ep 19. S Aug. sermon. 71. de
temp. ^
to be afterward the house of glory, and refuge of devotion by thy death,
covered now with people enraged, who persecute thee with their hands and
tongues, and by all manner of hostility, cruelty and blasphemous outrages, one
day to be the seat of a magnificall Temple, where thou shall be adored.

I behold thee O sweet Lamb, hanging upon the Cross betwixt two thieves.
Alas: what parity betwixt innocence and robbery? What does the lamb with the
wolves? Is it to make of a thief a faithful seruitour, or of a lamb a wolf?

The death of our Savior fortold.
I behold thee now, O my Lord, and turning the eyes of my memory upon the
ancient mystery of thy house, and the old Prophecies of thy great book, I
perceive that long before thou did give the figures and news of this death,
for gage of thy ancient love toward the poor family of Adam; and for a
preparation and disposition, By Sacrifices and figures.
to the perfect belief of thy wisdom and bounty, all the Sacrifices of the
law of nature, all those that Moses used in the bodies of beasts, did foretell
unto us that which thou have offered in this mount on the tree of the Cross.
Moses stretching out his hands acrosse on the top of the mountain, Exodus 17.
and by secret inspiration furnishing the Hebrews that were in fight, of force
and succor, made a shadow of this truth which thou fulfillest now. Esa. 53.
Thy Prophet fortold that thou should be reckoned amongst thieves, thou were
crucified betwixt two thieves, yet put behind thieves, Psalm. 68.
and more unworthily used then they all. David complained that they gave him
gall to eat, and vinegar to drink; but himself never received such usage at
the Jews hands: but it was thou, O sweet Lamb, the true David who did taste
the bitterness of this gall, and the sharpnes of this vinegar. Our Savior
tormented over all his body.
The same Prophet said, that they had numbered his bones; of thee he did speak,
for he beheld with his foreseeing and Prophetical eyes, thy precious body,
stretched out upon the Cross with such violence, that men might tell thy
bones, and there was no part or member in thee, which had not his proper
torment. Thy skin was torn with the stripes of the rods; thy head crowned
with thorns; thy feet and hands nailed; thine eyes stricken with the sight not
only of thine enemies, but also of thy friends, and namely of thy sorrowful
mother, whom I behold at the foot of thy Cross, Our B. Lady at the foot of
the Cross.
and whom thou see also stricken in her soul, with that sword of sorrow,
which good old Simeon did foretell; thou see her alas with an eye watered
with tears and blood: these are the torments of thine eyes. Thine ears are
beaten with the blasphemies and mockeries of thy persecutors; thy heart is
afflicted with our afflictions; thy back laden with the weight of our sins;
and finally David did forsee thee in the light of his spirit which knew things
to come: he did contemplate thee in this Cross oppressed with torments and
filled with reproaches, as a man forlorn without all help or force, The
reproache of men, and the refuse of the people; who preferred a murderer and a
thief before the author of life; a man who was thought to be forsaken and
abandoned by God: there hence it is that thy grandfather wrote that verse,
which thou came to pronounce, O sweet Redeemer: My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? words that very emphatically do declare the rigor of thy
affliction, Deus D^^^meus Psalm. 21. Math. 27. Marc. 15.
and with a divine eloquence do represent thee as forsaken of God: yet by
interrogation without affirming; in appearance and outward show, not in truth:
For God had not forsaken thee, yea he has nothing so dear in heaven or earth
as thee his only Son, which he testified at that time, by the dole and
mourning of the whole world, when he commanded the sun to eclipse, when he
made the moon loose her light, the earth to tremble, the rocks to riue, the
graves to open in sign of thy griefs and sorrows, and in detestatio^ of the
malice of thy tormentors. Why the death of our Savior was so long before
figured and foretold.
It was therefore the enormity of thy torments, which these words declared, and
not any forgetfullnes of thy Father. Here suffer me, O my sweet Savior, to
ask thee, why thou did cause the tenor and form of so many torments to be
so lively expressed and fortold, and why thou would endure them? Have thou
foretold them, to prove thereby that thou were God, and that thy death was not
by chance, but a voluntary charity, a designement of thy wisdom and infinite
bounty, toward man, made long before hand, a mercy proiected in the closet and
counsel of thy Eternity: for who could so particularly foretell so many and so
diverse actions, happened in this tragedy that knew them not? Only God
perceives and forseeth future things. Esa 41.13
And who could know them, being so remote, and so vnl^kely but only God, but
thy self to whose eye all things are present? And who could have believed, that
thou would love us so soon and so happily, and would endure so much for
us, if thou had not given us advertisement before hand, of all that thou
did suffer upon the Cross?

But why would thou endure so much, O the Redeemer of my soul, yea why
would thou suffer death or any pain at all, seeing to the Redemption of man,
it sufficed that thou were made man, Why our Savior suffered so much.
though thou had suffered nothing, but lived in the glory of a rich King, in
commanding the whole world, and taking homage of all thy creatures, which is
due unto thee by all titles of souerainty? Why O Lord making thy self man,
would thou abase thy self under our baseness, after thou had left all; and
instead of riches, pleasures and honors, did choose poverty, pain, and
humility, and did lead a life which was nothing but a continual penance,
thou would besides suffer death, and the death of the Cross, that is most
bitter in griefs and anguishes, most cruel in torments, most shameful and
ignominious in injuries, a death armed with the fury of all the powers of hell,
irritated with all the vices conspired together of all notable sinners, Kings,
Princes, soldiers, Judges, Priests, and all sorts of people wicked, The 1.
cause, to show his love to his Father. The 2. to show his love to man.
and proper to perform an exploite of enormous cruelty? Why O Lord have thou
chosen this thorny way? And this field so full of asperities? Is it to show thy
exceeding love to thy Father, suffering for him in our behalf, whatsouer could
be suffered? For it is the touchstone of affliction that makes the sure proof
of firm friendship to any man. Or is it moreover to make man see the treasures
of thy charity toward him, sparing nothing for his salvation; not only making
thy self poor to enrich us, infirm to fortify us, little to exalt us, but
also giving thy life, the most precious gift, which a man can give for his
friend, and undergoing death with a thousand torments, to deliver us from
eternal death, with a ple^tifull and abo^dant fine of propitiation paiable to
the divine Justice; and therefore the same Prophet said, that with our Lord is
mercy, and with him is found plentiful Redemption. Have thou not suffered so
much to make man see the enormity of his sin, Psalm. 129.
which must needs be purged with so precious a life and painful a death? The
3. cause to show the enormity of sin.
My sins then are they that have lifted thee upon the Cross, they have torn
thy skin, they have crowned thee with thorns, they have nailed thy hands and
feet, they have entertained thee with gall and vinegar. O then my soul, sin
no more, for thy sins are the cause of this parricide; bring no more forth
the butchers of thy Redeemer after having received so many signs of his favor
toward thee. Finally, O gentle Lamb, have thou undertaken and suffered this
painful and ignominious death, To teach thy children how they must suffer; 4.
To give us example to suffer.
Giving them an excellent pattern of thy life, and of thy death to imitate and
to suffer for the honor of God, and to carry his Cross? For seeing the head
and captain is the foremost in the fight and assalt, seeing the King is the
first, and has the greatest part in pains and punishment, who can doubt but
that his servants and soldiers must fight also, and the subjects suffer to
the example of their Prince? To the deceived.
And they that will not carry their Cross after so great a Lord, who content
themselves with his suffering, and say that his torments are sufficient without
ours, who will eat and drink, sleep and sport upon the earth, and be at last
hoisted up to heaven without victory and without combat, are but monstrous
members, quickened with a lazy spirit and not by this valorous head, cowardly
soldiers and faint-harted, treacherous and impudent subjects, ignorant of the
law of God and of virtue, unworthy of the name of Christians, and of the reward
of heaven, and most worthy of pain and confusion everlasting. Never let me O
Lord be one of that number: and how can I be? How can I fly from travel, and
the Cross, knowing, beholding and contemplating my head, my Captain, my King
nailed on the Cross, fighting for me against mine enemies upon the Cross,
crowned with thorns, torn with stripes, drunk with vinegar, fed with gall,
filled with reproaches? shall I be so cowardly, so treacherous, so perfidious,
to have any such thought?

Give me therefore a part, if it please thee, O Lord, of thy Cross, The Prayer.
and of thy cup; and as great as thou shall think good, that I may be thy
soldier under good ensigns, under the ensign and banner of the Cross, that
I may glory in thy Cross in carrying mine own; that the pain, bitterness, and
shame of thy Cross, may be my rest, delight, and glory in this world, and the
meditation of thy Cross a continual spur, to follow thee carrying my Cross,
to the end that when thou do recompense the lovers of thy Cross, I may have
part of the felicity, which thou have gained for us by the Cross.

Most happy Virgin, present, if it please thee, this my request unto thy Son,
To the B. Virgin.
thou that have been blessed above all women; and above all men and women have
felt the sour and sweet of the Cross, and who have received an immortal
recompense, above all mortal creatures, that my request by thy favor may be
granted, for the honor of him, who has given thee credit and authority, to
obtain all thou demaundest for the good of thy Pilgrims and Deuotes.

1. Gratian accused. 2. Folks transformed. 3. Gratian known. 4. Tables of
Religion. 5. Bageuille. 6. The desires of a devout soul. CHAP. XIX.
THIS was the Meditation of Lazarus that he made with great feeling of
devotion, Gratian transported and accused.
as also Theodosius and Vincent for their part, and it seemed to them that the
goodness of God had multiplied their consolation, in that measure they suffered
before bitterness and trouble, with the mistes and fantasies of their
distraction. As they had ended, Dom-Prior was ready to begin high Mass,
which being ended he forget not to go entertain the Pilgrims, whom already
Dom-Procurator had brought to the guests chamber. After he had embraced them
and demanded certain questions about their iourny of Loreto, and
understanding how they had passed Mondeuill upon the day of their triumph,
where they met almost by miracle one good man, amongst so many bad called
Gratian, a merchant by his trade, he would have brought them their breakfast,
but understanding by Dom Procurator that their dinner was in making ready, he
continued to entertain them still, and told them that even then was in the
mouth of all the Co^uent, that the wednesday before they were robbed by a
Sorcerer as was thought, of some sacred vessels, and amongst the rest of a
silver Chalice, and that one of the thieves was found that day in the garden,
who notwithstanding denies stoutly himself to be any such man, though he
confess himself a sinner, and that so frankly and fervently, that he does
verily persuade us that he is an honest man, and that he was transported hither
by some good Angel: what think you my brethren of this prisoner then? Good
Father (says Lazarus) he is a good thief, and a good sorcerer if he say
truth* we must see and hear him to give our opinion; perhaps we may bring some
news of the thief, and also of the chalice: for if I be not deceived, we have
brought the thief that took it, and showing him Theodosius, this Pilgrim
(says he) has it in his bag; but that which I commend much in him, is his
good will to make restitution, but I pray you be good unto him and show him
mercy. Dom-Prior smyling said, he shall not need seeing he is in so good
disposition. I thought not (quoth Theodosius) to have been discovered so
soon, nor see may bag in danger to be rifled, though indeed I thought upon my
conscience and the chalice too as soon as Dom-Prior complained of the theft;
but that you may see farther that I am an honest thief, I will restore unto
you also a Patten stolen (as I think) with your chalice. But if it please you
make Lazarus first recount how the matter happened this night, and you shall
hear a story, that shall as much astonish you, as the chalice does rejoice
you. I pray you then heartily (quoth Dom-Prior) tell it us; except you had
rather defer it until after dinner. Father (says Lazarus) I had rather it
were now, I will dispatch it in a word. Nay not in a word (quoth Dom-Prior) but
rather tell it at your leisure, with all the circumstances of the history; and
as he was about to begin, the servants with Dom-Procurator, set their dinner
upon the table: I see well (quoth Dom-Prior) that dinner will go before your
discourse, and it is good reason for the words shall be more strong, and I will
cast the reckoning for you of purpose, I will bring you in the rekoning by and
by. Having washed and said grace, he caused Dom-Procurator to sit and bear
them company: when dinner was done and grace said, Lazarus made narration of
all that had passed that night with such a force and weight of words, that
Dom-Prior, and Dom-Procurator seemed not to hear but to see present, an
assembly of sorcerers, in the midst of the wood, and hearing him tell of the
wolves clyming up the Oak, they were ready to cry out for fear, but when they
understood that they fell to the ground, and that their Sabbath vanished, as
soon as the Pilgrims had pronounced the names of Jesus and Maria, they began
to laugh. Lazarus having ended his story; you have heard (says he) our fear:
now you shall see our booty, and therewith desired the servants to bring in
their bags, out of which Theodosius took the chalice and patten, and
presenting it to Dom-Prior; Lo (says he) my Father, the testitution I make of
your goods. The good old man knowing it was that which they had lost: verily
(says he) you restore truly what you took, and you pay liberally for your
reckoning: and if we have always such thieves as Sir Lazarus brings us, we
shall be sure to loose nothing. This is not all (quoth Lazarus) our fellow
Vincent has yet some fine things, and made him draw out of his bag his
witchery trash. When Dom-Prior saw the paper wherein was written the name of
Hezares, the distribution of offices and the rest, O (says he with admiration)
how cruel is this enemy of mankind and how abominable are those who serve him
in his cruelties?

But to what use think you, was given them this wolfes skin? To that end,
that with the application thereof, this tyrant makes those we call
Loup-Garons; People transformed.
for he charmeth and enchanteth so strongly the fantasy of those he gives it
unto, and that take it with a band of friendship, that they altogether seem to
themselves wolves, and do indeed assum^ diverse of their qualities, as going on
all four, and going like other wolves to hunt, specially for little children,
a prey for the rage of this infernal wolf, who hates cruelly men, and
specially little innocents, whom Jesus Christ loves most te^derly, against
the which this Antichrist sets in fury these his wolves, who not only do
take the inward feeling of the wolves, but also do outwardly so appear to
others, even as Nabuchedonozor thought himself a beast, Dan. 4.3.
and seemed so also to others; and that woman of whom Palladius writes,
Pallad (...) cap. 19.
who seemed to be turned into a mare, and seemed so to every one but to S.
Macarius, who having prayed and cast holy water upon her, made the charm
vanish away, both from the woman who was healed, and also from the seers, who
beheld her as she was before in the shape of a woman. Such were those illusions
of men, whom in old time men falsely believed to be turned into wolves, or
other beasts, It is not in the Devils power to change one creature into an
other.
for it is not in the power of the Devil to change one creature into another,
specially man; for so his soul must dye, and the wolves or some others soul
succeed in the place, which is impossible, man's soul being incorruptible and
immortal. It is therefore witchcraft and illusion, and we must think that
those wolves which came toward you upon the oak, were men transfigured in
that sort, by the touch of this skin, or by the means of some other
superstition, and that they were hurt with the fall they had, and who so could
find them, should see that they carry the mark thereof. My Father (answered
Lazarus) this is very true, and I will show you a shadow of the effect of this
charm, and that is, that beholding my companion that carried it, me thought
sometimes he looked like a wolf, but very slender and inconstant, and vanishing
as soon as it did appear. Vincent taking his words, verily (says he) you
make me bold in good company, to tell my foolish thought that held me all this
morning; when I did or endeavored to meditate, still me thought I was a wolf,
and I doubt there was some secret charm in this ill favored stuff that I
carried in my bag, which I signified unto you covertly, when I told you that
I thought my distraction come of my carriage. But good Father can this skin
have such force to alter the imagination and sense of men in such sort? How the
Devil alters men's senses.
Son (answered Dom-Prior) it is not the skin that brings forth these
illusions, but rather the secret hand and malice of the Devil, having as I
said, a natural power to trouble our outward and inward senses, if otherwise
he be not hindered, and make things seem of other figures than they are
indeed; but he uses and abuses creatures, and helps himself with the
skin of a wolf, with the head of a catt, with latchets of the lions skin,
with Virgin-parchement, and with other such things as you found under the
Sabbath oak, and puts such stuff to work, by ceremony, and affected
malice, the more finely to deceive men, and to entertain them in their
superstition by these visible things, and to induce them to greater sin,
making them abuse the creatures, against the honor of the Creator, to be
honored himself in them. But we have spoken enough of sorcerers, will you now
go see our prisoner. Gratian known.
Good Father (quoth Lazarus) your good and grave discourses have enchanted us,
and made me almost forget your prisoner: we will gladly see him, if it please
you. Dom-Prior brought them into the chamber where he was shut and entering said
unto him. Lo my friend, these good Pilgrims come to see you. The prisoner as
soon as he saw them, cast himself upon Lazarus his neck, who at first knew
him not, and crying out, O happy meeting (says he) Sir Lazarus! Lazarus
looking on his face, and beholding his attire, cried also, O my good friend,
are you here? Theodosius and Vincent embraced him with the same affection.
Dom-Prior, and Dom-Procurator, and all that were present were astonished
considering these entertaineme^ts, not knowing the cause. Lazarus beholding Dom
Prior; Father (quoth he) know you that this is the great good man Sir Gratian,
whom we left four days since at Mondeuill. Verily (says Dom-Prior) I am
amazed and glad both of so happy a meeting, and of the testimony you give to
him, whom we held for a false ladde. God forgive us if we judged ill, and Sir
Gratian also, and he must attribute it to the fault and misery of the time,
which is naught and wicked, and of men who cannot see and judge within, but
only by the exterior, and are many times deceived Good Father (quoth Gratian)
if you have esteemed me a sinner and a thief, you have judged right of me, for
I am both; not for having stolen any thing, but for that I have often and
grievously transgressed the law of my master, Every sinner is a thief.
often with held his interest and rents, which I ought him of the good which I
had of his, and ill employed the money of his grace, and finally I have been a
thief in so many points as I have received commandments and commodities from
him: and therefore he is offended with me, and has beaten me, but as a Father,
striking me with the rod he is wont to chastise his children withal, showing
me mercy even amidst the blows of his justice; for verily he has taken from
me all my te^porall goods, wise, children, and all the hope of my house and old
age; but he has given me in lieu of all this, means to save my soul and
gain heaven, giving me the mind to mend my self and do penance for my sins,
as I declared but four days since to Sir Lazarus here, and was ready to put
it in execution; when the good Angel of God (as I beblieue) carried me to this
house of Bon heur, by that means delivering me from the danger I incurred that
day that you p^ssed that way Sir Lazarus. For as the sports were ended, and
that all the world was busied in making good cheer, some wicked Citizens
driven with rage and envy against them, that had won the prize, and against
the Magistrates, that by pa^sicke sentence had adjudged it them, set fire to
the town house, and raised in this public flame a most cruel sedi^ion
against the Citizens divided amongst themselves* I found my self besieged in a
lodging hard by the house, with diverse oth^^ merchants whom they sought to
kill, and had already broken down the doors to enter: fynding my self thus
betwixt the fire and the sword, without means to escape a miserable death, I
had recourse to God with all my heart, making a vow to him that if it would
please him, to deliver me from the danger of this doleful day, I would not
defer to dedicate my self wholly to his service: and I was heard, for I had
no sooner pronounced this vow, but I felt some body, without see^ng any, that
seized on me with great violence, and carrying me in the air brought me hither
in an instant, into the orchard where I was found the last wednesday. Therefore
if it be God that has given me will to do well, if it be he also that made me
be thus carried to follow his counsels, your Fatherhood may judge by the
circumstances, and not refuse to open (if it please you) the gate of mercy to a
poor penitent: and with these words he began to weep, and cast himself at
the feet of Dom-Prior. And continuing his discourse, my Father (says he)
refuse not a prodigal child, whom to save, the Son of God descended from
heaven. If you account me a thief I have confessed and do still, that I am
so: but I am also penitent, punish me here with you, for satisfaction I will
contribute my life and death with you^ therefore reject me not for being a
thief; our Savior would be crucified between thieves, and at the time of his
death he showed so much, and his last exploit of clemency and mercy was
employed in the behalf of a thief. But do with me what you will, I will not
go from that place where the Angel of God has put me, and so he held his
peace, sighing and weeping. All that were present were much moved to
compassion. And Dom-Prior said unto him with a grave and gracious countenance;
My friend your tears and sighs make me believe that you are touched by God,
and that your desire deserves to be heard; but weigh well your strength and
the designement you undertake: and letting him kneel still, to try his
constancy and patience, What he must do who leaves the world.
went forward with him saying: My son you aspire to a high enterprise, you
must wholly renounce the world and all her vanities, you must make deadly war
with your own body, by labors, abstinence, fastings, watchings, hairecloth,
disciplines, and other skirmishes troublesome and painful to a man that is
worldly, who has nourished his flesh at a full table, Math. 16.24.
and a soft bed; and which is most difficult of all, you must renounce your
own self, according to our Saviors decree, that is give over your own
judgment and will, ^au. 9.23.
which are two of the most potent pieces of the soul, and which a man can
leave with more difficulty, then all the good of the world besides. You must
become a little child, and when you shall judge that any thing should be thus
and thus done for you, you shall be commanded the contrary: when you would go
to the garden you shall be sent to the kitchen, you will love to sing, they
will set you to write, and finally you must be ruled by the rules of religion
and your superiors, and not by your own judgment. Are you content to
contract with God and us upon these conditions? My father (quoth Gratian) I
desire not to be admitted upon any other condition, The world,
then to do all that your rule and commandment shall bid me. For as
concerning the world, I have renounced it already, and have in horror her
vanities, which to my cost I know to be deceitful, and pernicious; experience
has taught me that lesson. The flesh.
And for my Flesh, I hope to handle it, as it deserves, and pain shall be no
great news unto it, for it has labored already, and endured but too much
for the world, and for far less wages, then I expect for my labor in the
service of God. My judgment and my will are no more my own, I now make an
offering of them to God, Proper judgment
and leave them upon his Altar in your hands, and have firm confidence in him,
who has given me the desire to consecrate my self wholly to his service, that
he will also give me strength to accomplish it. This was Gratians answer,
which did wonderfully content all the company, and Lazarus turning to
Dom-Prior; My Father (says he) your benignity cannot deny this request, for it
is just, and the grant easy. I am content (quoth Dom-Prior) but so that you
will be content to yield to one small request, which I shall make for him.
There is nothing in my power (quoth Lazarus) that I will refuse. I require
(quoth Dom-Prior) only that you would stay this day with us, nothing can be
more reasonable, nor more easy; you shall comfort us your friends; to morrow is
Sunday, and this day a day of rest; say the word and Gratian is received.
Father (quoth he) under correction, you should have demanded some better
thing, you require nothing in this but to prolo^g your pain, to your charge;
but seeing it pleases you, that shall not hinder Sir Gratians contract with
your Fatherhood. Arise then my dearly beloved (quoth Dom-Prior) I embrace you
now as my little brother, you shall be no longer at prisoners table but sup with
your host this night, and to morrow (god willing) you shall have a master, who
shall begin to furnish you with the weapons of religion. The rumor of this
miracle was presently carried over all the Convent. Dom-Procurator who was
present, all joyful beheld Lazarus, I said well Sir Lazarus that your coming
would bring us good fortune, for not only you have recovered us our sacred
moueables, but have also delivered from suspicion this innocent, and will be a
cause to make him our brother: It is not we (answered Lazarus) that brought
good fortune hither, but we found it here. But Dom-Prior was wonderfully glad
of these good fortunes, and namely that the Pilgrims would stay until the
morning.

All the afternoon until Euensonge was employed in seeing the parts and
offices of the Convent, and the Cells of Religious. They saw three goodly
pictures in a fair chamber, where they used to make their recreation. The
first represented on one side, diverse persons, who carried their purses to the
feet of certain Prelates, and on the other a great ship tossed in a terrible
tempest, the mast was broken, and the shipmen upon the hatches, casting all
their merchandise and ware into the waves to discharge the ship. The second
contained the picture of a Virgin set by an heap of wheat, compassed about
with lillies, and trod under her feet a Hyena, so lively drawn, that it
seemed to move and snarle against her. In the third was painted Isaac tied and
bound, and his eyes covered upon an altar, and Abraham his Father lifting up
his sword to sacrifice him to God, and in the bottom of the table, a Religious
man, leading in his hand a Lioness to his Abbot. Lazarus perceived straight
that these were tables of the three essential vows of religion; Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience. And so did Theodosius and Vincent also; but Vincent
indeed could not conceive what was meant by the heap of wheat compassed with
lillies, and by the Hyena, and was even about to ask the exposition, which
Lazarus without thinking thereof gave him: for Dom-Prior said to him: Has not
the holy Scripture well expressed the fecundity and honor of the virginity of
our B. Lady the mother of God, by this heap of corn and these lillies?
Lazarus answered, yes indeed, for in the whitenes of the lilly, she has
brought forth of her virginal womb, Cant. 1.
the seed of immortal corn which multiplieth daily into great heaps in the
Catholic Church, and nourishes her children unto life everlasting without all
corruption or diminution, Hyena ^ Hieroglysse of mortal fle^^.
and which is more wonderful remaining always one. And of this Hyena (quoth
D. Prior) what think you? It is (quoth he) to my judgment meruailously well
drawn, for it is very like a wolf, and yet it differs being more rough, and
having the hair longer over all the body, as the hairs of a woman. But the
invention does please me yet better than the paynting; for in my judgment this
Virgin treading upon this Hyena, signifies the chaste soul taming her
rebellious flesh, well signified by the Hyena, which is a beast unclean, of
the night, charmeur, and cruel, counterfaiting the voice of man, digging up
graves in the night, not pardoning any she can catch: qualities that agree very
well to our corrupted flesh, for it is foul, and feeds of filth, A^^t. de
(...) 6. cap. 32. (...). lib 8. cap. 3^.
takes her greatest pleasure and delights in darkness, she flattereth, sings,
and charmeth by appearance of reason as by a man's voice, and if once she has
gotten and subjected a man to her evil customs, she in a thousand sorts
tyrannizeth him with her concupiscences. Vincent thanked Lazarus in his heart
for this exposition, and D. Prior took singular pleasure therein; and to give
him occasion to talk still; And for this Lioness (quoth he) are you not
afraid of her. No (says Lazarus) for I see she is tame and gentle, suffering
herself to be lead by a simple Religious, and in mine opinion, this is an
effect of blind Obedience, represented by Isaac blindfolded, for the Religious
commanded by his Abbot to go fetch this fierce beast, he went to bring her,
shutting his eyes to the danger, opening them only to the commandment of his
Superior, and God in favor of his obedience made the lioness tractable,
Obedience is the soul of religious life.
and obedient also. This is (quoth D. Prior) a notable example for all
Religious: and I doubt not (quoth Lazarus) but it is well practiced in this
holy family. I desire in truth it should be so (quoth D. Prior) for it is the
heart and soul of all Religion; and this being said, he brought him and his
companions to the refectory, and from thence to an orchard and garden, where
they saw goodly rows of choice trees, and knots of all sorts of rare flowers,
wherewith they deck the Altar. Many Arbers of hasell and laurel, yielding a
shadow and smell most pleasant, with a thousand airies of sweet nightingals
who in that season sang who should do best. They saw also a great Bear,
whereof Vincent at the first was afraid, which Lazarus perceiving said unto him
smyling; what are you afraid, in so sure and secure a place? do you not know,
that lions are gentle and tame in the house of God, as well as the lioness
which we saw even now. In such discourses and visits, they passed the
afternoon until Euensonge which the Pilgrims went to hear; after which
retyring themselves into their chamber, they said their beads, and examined
their conscience, and at five a clock they went to supper: diverse things were
proposed of the vanity and misery of the world, of the breuity of this life,
and of the providence of God over good men: Theodosius was desired to tell the
nights and fortunes he passed with his bandites; Gratian also recou^ted once
again how he was tra^sported from Mondeuill to this place: Whereupon Dom-Prior
brought diverse examples out of the holy Scripture, that it was no new thing for
Angels to transport bodies, from one place to another; and how the Prophet
Abacuc was in a moment carried from Palestine to Babylon, Dan. 14.
and S. Philip also from Jerusalem to Azotus. And that not only good Angels,
Act. 8.
but the bad also have had such power, and used it, when God did permit them,
as appeateth by the history of our Savior, who was himself carried by the
tempter to the Pinnacle of the Temple, and to the top of a mountain.

A marvelous transport of a french gentleman.
As he said this, Theodosius beholding Lazarus, I remember, says he, that I
have heard you tell an admirable transport of a French gentleman, and which
has much affinity with this of Sir Gratian, Dom. Prior at this word, desired
Lazarus presently to make the whole company partaker of that history. Lazarus
smyling, Father, says he, do you not mark, how Theodosius by policy seeks
to prolong supper? We must thank him therefore (quoth Dom-Prior) for if there
be any profit therein, it is as well for us as for himself, but indeed I shall
do you wrong, and make you pay too dear for your reckoning, making you talk
when it is time to eat, and perhaps it will be better after supper. Father,
replied Lazarus, when I have done eating, I have well supped, God thank you: I
do not forget my eating for speaking, and therefore I think it better,
presenty to serve you with the history you demand, that if it be unsavory, you
may feel it less, taking it with other meats.

The history is this, taken from hand to hand in Normandy. The history of
Bagueuille Belleforest.
About the year of our Lord 1386. Charles the 6. reigning in France, when most
of the French Nobility went into Hungary, to defend that christian Kingdom
against the invasion of the Turk, a great Lord of Normandy about 50. years of
age, yet vigorous and valiant of his body, and a brave Captain, had a great
desire to go serve in this war, thinking himself happy, if he might employ
either his life, or his labor in the defense of Religion. His wife was a most
virtuous and pious Lady, but being young, and loving him most entirely, found
great difficulty to give her consent to this voyage: but he was so importune,
that at last she must let him do as he list. He being prepared and furnished
for such a Captain, bad her farewell, and to leave and take a token of mutual
love, he divided a gold ring he had into two parts, leaving the one half with
her, he kept the other to himself and went his way. He did with the other
nobility of France, diverse noble exploites in this war; but the sins of
wicked Christians had armed the enemies, and made them conquerours in such
sort, that almost all the Christian army was cut in pieces, and diverse noble
men taken prisoners, and carried into Turkey, among whom this gentleman was
one. He sent diverse letters by diverse ways unto his wife, to send his ransom,
but he never had any answer of news, no more then his wife had from him, and
endured a thousand miseries the space of seven years; he was bought and sold
sundry times to diverse masters, every man scorning to keep a man so old and
worn out, as having lost their hope ever to gain any thing by him. In the end
of the seventh year he fell into the h^nds of a most merciless master, who
incensed to see himself frustrate of the ransom his prisoner had promised,
concluded one day to kill him, and gave charge to one of his servants to
execute his resolution that very day. The poor gentleman having understood so
much, and seeing all his hopes brought to nothing, took courage from despair,
and of a true noble and Christian heart, resolved to take death patiently, and
yet having recourse to divine help where humane wanted, commended himself with
all his heart to God, and S. Julian, to whom he had always been devout, and
made a vow to build him a chapel, if by his intercession and prayers God would
deliver him from this distress, and thereupon he slept; and after a while he
waked, and thinking he had been still in his cage, where he expected death, he
found himself in the midst of a forest in his clothes without his chains.
At the first he thought it had been a dream, and that verily he was in
prison, which happens oftentimes in cases which be strange, and beyond our
faith and hope; as appears in S. Peter, who being indeed brought out of a
close prison by an Angel, (...). 9.
thought it had been a vision: but having well awaked al his senses, he beheld
the heaven and the earth and touched the trees, and he persuaded himself that
he was in some forest in Turkey, where miraculously by the prayers of of the
Saint he was out of prison to seek means to save himself. Looking about him
he saw certain shephardesses of whom he demanded in the Turkish lauguage
what forest that was. The good maids were in Normandy, and looking on him
with wondering, thought he had spoken Latin or English, and told him in French,
that they understood not what he said: he hearing them speak French began to
doubt yet more that he did dream, and that dreaming he asked in French what
forest is this, and that they answered it was the forest of Bagueuille. This
was a forest of his own, where he had hunted a thousand times: he was now
more amazed, and casting his eyes round about to try his senses, he perceived
at last that he dreamed not, and that verily he was in Normandy, near unto his
own Castle, and thither he went, and was known and received by his wife, with
diverse pretty chances, but they are out of the purpose of our transport, whereof
only I was to speak, and therefore I forbear to ouercharge your ears with
by-matters. At this clause Dom-Prior turning to him, O Sir Lazarus, says he,
leave not our ears empty. This is to keep back the heart of the history, and
to take away our meat when you have made us hungry. I pray you for all the
company to tell it out. Hear then (quoth Lazarus) seeing you will have it so:
he went straight to the castle, where he saw a great number of gentlemen that
met there that day: he addressed himself to the Porter, and told him that he
much desired to speak with Madame: the Porter asked what he would have; I
desire to speak with her self (quoth he) about a matter of importance. It
will be hard, says the Porter to speak with her, for she is presently to go
to Mass, to receive the benediction of her marriage: the good gentleman was
much amazed at this and insisted the more earnestly to speak with her: The
porter half angry told him it was lost labor to demand it; yet he went to
Madame and told her, there was an old Hermit at the gate, who desired to speak
one word with her. This Lady was virtuous, and a great alms giver, and who had
mourned for her husband all the time of his seven years absence, and by the
advice of her friends, who thought certainly he was dead, was in a sort
constrained to consent to this second marriage. She thinking that this Hermit
would speak with her to demand an alms, commanded her steward to give him a
good one, aduertising him that if he had any things else to say, he should tell
it him. He brought it him, to whom the old man said, it is not alms I desire,
I pray you tell Madame once again, that it is necessary that I speak a word
with her, before she go to Mass, and if you can persuade her to hear me, you
shall perform the part of a faithful servant. The steward apprehended
something at these words, and went up ag^ine and said: Madame he would but one
word with you, and he says it is necessary that you take it from his own
mouth before Mass. My opinion Madame is, that you do so, and enter into the
low hall to hear him; what can you tell? Perhaps he may give you some advice
about your affairs, or bring you some certain news of Monsieurs death, or of
his last will and testament. She believed him and descended into the hall, and
stood to a window alone. The good old man leasurely passed through the midst of
the court and company, every man looking and wondering at him; for they saw an
old man, lean, and diffigured, his hair all white, and beard long and ill
kembed, clad with an ill favored old rugge gown of the Turkish fashion: He
presented himself to Madame attired in her wedding apparel, and making a low
reverence unto her said: Madame I come from Turkey, where I have sometims seen
one called Monsieur Bagueuille, as I understand, Lord of this place, and
hertofore your husband, who was taken prisoner, seven years since in Hungary,
when the Fenchmen were defeated. I know that he has long expected his ransom
and that he has suffered much misery, have you not heard any news of him
within this year? She answered, Alas my good friend, know you that we never
had either letter or message from him this seven years since he parted hence,
which makes us believe that he is dead, neither should there have wanted gold
or silver to have redeemed him, if we could have known where he had been; and
I would to God, he had followed my counsel whom he loved so dearly, and of
whom he was loved again, as much as ever wife loved husband; the good Sir, I
wisse, had now been alive, and had not endured so much pain, as I imagine he
did suffer, and I have lamented for, and my condition had not been so
pitiful by his afflictions and mine own, and she began to weep; but good
Father do you know any thing of him: I suppose you did not desire speak with
me for nothing. The good Sir seeing by the countenance and words of his wife
that he was yet unknown, answered; if I should let you see him, could you know
him? As she changed color (for this word went to her heart) he used his
familiar language, and said to her: Mamy do you not know Bagueuille your
husband and this half ring? and therewith he presented her with the half of
the ring which they had divided. The Lady seeing this gage and fastening her
eyes attentively upon the man, and aduising well, she remembered the figure of
his countenance, and the sound of his voice, and casting herself upon his neck
with tears: O my Lord and husband (quoth she) and therewith she s^unded; he
though but weak yet held her up The Steward and the seruitours, who from the
lower part of the hall did see them talk, without hearing what they said,
seeing this joy and entertainme^t, ran presently unto them, and straight did
acknowledge their old master, and in an instant all the Castle sounded of the
rumor of this news, and his unexpected return. Lazarus being come thus far
in his history, he looked upon Dom-Prior: Lo Father, says he, I have served
you with all that is in my budget, will you that I should recite also the
astonishment of the new bridegroom, newly espoused to this Lady, the joy and
admiration of all the kinsfolks and the old servants, and that I dress you in
this religious house, where you eat no flesh, a marriage feast of fish, and
finally that I trouble you any farther, with superfluous and ill seasoned
meats? Sir Lazarus (quoth Dom-Prior) the meat you have given us is very
pleasant, and sweet, and so well dressed, that it whetteth the stomach to
those that eat, and fills without glutting; but it seems you desire to be
served no more with ours, for you eat nothing. I will add this yet, quoth
Lazarus, that this Sir built the Chapel, which he vowed to S. Julian, and
died soon after in good peace, where his beard and perruque remained a long
time, hanging in the roof of the same Chapel, as an honorable memory, and
has been seen of diverse not 40. years since; and I know not if they be
there still. As he said this, came in the seruitours to take away, and with
them the Bear, marching right upon his two hinder feet, and carrying in his
forfeete a great basketh. Every man began to laugh, to see the poor beast do
such service, as his companions in the wood are not wont to do: when the cloth
was taken away and grace said, every man rose. Lazarus took his leave of
Gratian, and exhorted him to have good courage, commending himself unto his
prayers. Gratian thanked him with all his heart, and recommended himself to his
prayers, showing a great trust, and confidence in God. Dom-Prior led Lazarus
and his company to their chamber where they would not suffer their feet to be
washed, and so he left them with his blessing. They made their examen of
conscience, said the Litanies, and took the subject of their morning
meditation, which was in three points.

1. Of the descent of our Savior to hell. 2. Of his Resurrection. 3. How he
appeared first to his Mother.
After each one betook himself to his bed. Theodosius and Vincent were
straight asleep: But Lazarus could do nothing but think of Sir Gratians good
fortune, and the favor of God toward him. O Gratian, says he, how happy a
merchant art thou, The desire of a devout soul.
thus to have left the worldly and earthly traficke, and to have escaped out of
the gulf of this deceitful world? Out of this City of confusion, that makes
mortal men drunk with the cup of a thousand charms unto eternal death.
Thou shall trafike henceforth with the money of a better master, who shall make
thee gain a hundred for one, and after that thou shall wax rich thereby, he
will make thee heir of all his goods, which are of more value the^ a thousand
worlds. O when will that day come, that like unto thee, I may serve this
master in his house, whither he does call me, and whereto I have aspired, ever
since his light did discover unto me the darcknes of the earth, and the
inconstancy of this life? where, with his household servants I may carry the
collar of his yoke most sweet and honorable, Matthew. 11.30.
and walk the ways o^ his counsels, and gain way to heaven by those paths
which himself has marked with his own steps, and the steps o^ his best
beloved servants, to march without any hinderance of thorns which choke the
good grain, to live in the body without corruption of the body, like the
celestial spirits to have no other judgment or will, besides the iudgemen^
and will of that sovereign wisdom, and without any iudg^ment or will of mine
own, to judge well of all, to bridl^ mine appetites, to command and master my
self. O swee^ Jesus when shall this be? O sweet Virgin, it shall be then when
it will please thee with thy credit and authority, to further thy suppliant and
devoted servant. And with these desires, and sighs he slept.

The eight and thirtith day, and the eight of his return. A Meditation of the
Descent of our Savior into Hell, and of his Resurrection. CHAP. XX.
A LIT^E after the Religious had begun Mattins about midnight, the Pilgrims
having examined their conscience, and resumed the memory of their meditation
went to the Church into a chapel, where they had marked the day before the
picture of our Saviors descent into hell and of his Resurrection, very
devoutly represented, every one set himself to his Meditation.

Upon the first point Lazarus remembered the prophecy which says in the person
of our Savior: Eccles. 24.
I will penetrate the lower parts of the earth, and will look upon those that
sleep, and on all those that hope in our Lord: In which words he marked three
different places of souls, which our Savior did penetrate, accomplishing this
prophecy: the first was the bosom of Abraham, where were assembled in repose
the souls of the just: the second Purgatory, Orig. 15. in Genesis
where were the souls of the just also, but in pain and purgation, for their
faults, whereof they had not done penance, whilst they lived; Aug. epist. 99.
ad Exodus and lib 10. in Genes cap. 33
all which souls the soul of our Savior did enlighten, and deliver out of
pain and prison, and put them in possession of the vision of God, which was
the Paradise he promised to the good thief. The third place, was that of
eternal prison, which properly we call Hell, Greg. moral. c. 120.
where were enclosed the damned souls, with that great Devil, the rebellious
Angel and his accomplices. These souls were neither delivered nor enlightened,
no more then the Devils themselves, N^ss. l. de resurr.
because they dyed in the disgrace of God; without penance and repentance of
their sins, and had no hope in God, which the soul of our Savior did
reproach to them, showing the^ that (...) was not long of God, that they were
not redeemed and saved, but of their own obstinate malice. In this descent
Lazarus, beheld the burning love and great power of our Savior: his great
love, so soon delivering those imprisoned souls, and making them so soon
feel the fruit of his death: his power in entering freely into the kingdom of
death, Psalm. 87
there brauing his enemies, death and the Princes of darkness frighted with this
power, never having seen the like in that region of dead men, and in the
kingdom of death.

The Resurrectio of our Savior.
Upon the second point he observed, how the victorious soul of our Savior,
leading from hell the souls of his elected, came to resume his body, in the
Sepulcher, and made it living and glorious, which thing yet never happened to
any deceased: for all the souls departing out of theit bodies, remained
captive below, and never any were so far removed from those regions, where
death had reigned long in peace. This was an exploite reserved for the son of
God, thereupon called The first Borne amongst the dead; Col. 1.18.
and therefore the Poets who feigned that Ulysses, Hercules, and other
heroical fellows to have gone and returned from Hell, The vanity of profane
Poets.
spoke against the truth, being therein both liers, and sacrilegious,
attributing falsely to mortal men, that which the Prophets and Sibilles, have
written of the Savior of mortal men, the true triumpher of hell by his death,
and death by his Resurrection. Those that were miraculously raised again
before him, as Lazarus and the like, were not victorious of death, for they
died again; but he issuing out of his tomb, killed death with his victory,
and by his descent he had subiugated Hell; for so had he foretold by the mouth
of his Prophet: O death, Ose. 1.13 14.
I will be thy death: O Hell, I will by thy consumer.

Upon the 3. point Lazarus noted that our Savior being risen again, showed
himself first to his most honorable Mother. Our Savior first appeared to his
mother after his Resurrection.
For it was justice, that she who had honored him by her faith, followed him
in his Cross, and did suffer with him in sufferings above all other Creatures,
should be the first in the joy of his Resurrection.

O sweet Jesus (quoth Lazarus) what joy did thou bring to thy desolate
mother, showing her upon that fair Sunday the glory and brightness of thy body,
which she had seen the friday before so unworthily hanled in the conflict of
the Cross! What consolation feltst thou, O glorious Virgin, seeing thy well
beloved return victorious from Hell and his grave, clothed with immortal
glory, and carrying with him that noble spoil, the souls of his Elect!

1. Of the first Resurrection. 2. A horrible Spectacle. CHAP. XXI.
THIS was the Meditation of Lazarus. Theodosius and Vincent ended at the same
time, and having heard Mass, The Pilgrims departure.
and taken a small breakfast, they bad Gratian farewell, and with the blessing
of Dom-Prior, and a thousand thanks, they began their iourny: they said first
their Itinerarium, and after their beads in this manner: Lazarus declared the
mystery, which they must meditate at every Ten, and after recited an Aue
Maria. Theodosius followed with Vincent, saying another: Lazarus began again
and continued praying over the beads in turn, as those that sing in the quire,
or recite their hours.

This being done they began to discourse of the spiritual resurrection of man,
to the which S. Paul exhorts Christians, after the similitude of the
resurrection of our Savior, The first Resurrection.
saying: As our Savior is risen from the dead, by the glory of his Father; so
let us walk also in the newnes of life. Where the Apostle means that the
glorious Resurrection of our Savior does teach us a spiritual resurrection,
Resurrection spiritual
which is made by rising from sin, which is the death of our soul, and by
living and working in the grace of God which is our true life and glory in this
world; Romans 6.4.
and this is that which S. John calls the first resurrection, necessary to
all those, who will be partaker of the second, Apoc. 2^
which shall be when at the great rising again of mortal men, and the
general judgment, the bodies of the just shall rise out of their graves, and
united to their soul, shall shine like the sun, and the bodies of the damned
that made no reckoning of the first resurrection, shall rise again to dye to
death everlasting.

Vincent demanded of Lazarus, what shall be the qualities of the bodies of the
just being risen again? Lazarus answered him, that neither tongues of men or
Angels were sufficient to express the glorious beauty and qualities, which
God shall bestow upon the bodies of the blessed: yet the Christian School does
teach us in general, that these bodies shall be endewed with four special
and principal qualities, of brightness, agility, impassibility, and subtility,
and that whatsoever is goodly or beautiful dispersed among all other natural
bodies, as heavens, stars, stones, plants, birds, beasts, fishes, should be
assembled and meet all in the body of man. For as in the Creation God made in
him an abridgment of all nature, so shall he in their bodies risen again make
an abridgme^t of all the corporal beauties of the same nature. Theodosius
hearing this discourse of Lazarus, Alas (says he sighing) if men thought of
this Resurrection, what would they not do to obtain it? And if they make so
great account of goodly and brave apparel, and of wearing ornaments which
adorn the body, and yet belong not unto the body, how should they esteem the
glorious array of this future Resurrection, which shall be infinitely more
beautiful, which shall be proper, and affects to the body, and shall last for
all eternity. These and such like were their discourses from morning until
noone, about which time they arrived at a little village, and lay at the sign
of the Sun, where after they had examined their conscience, they made a light
dinner, and learned of their host that they might easily reach to Floree to
bed, which was three leagues off, but if they would make have, and reach
Bastide a league further, they should find better lodging.

So they departed an hour after noone, and having kept the high road way, for
one league, they met three horsemen mightily scared; who said: My friends
whither go you? Lazarus answered, to Floree: and which way go go you, replied
they? You cast your selves into the wolves mouths, for all this way is full of
thieves, within these two days descended from the mountains; and they spare
neither pu^se nor life of passengers, and we missed their fingers very
narrowly. For their purses (quoth Lazarus) Pilgrims fear not thieves much, but
we would not hazard our lives to no purpose, therefore we pray you tell us the
best way to escape them: they answered that they must turn a little on the
right hand, and take a path that leads straight to Floree, and showed them
the place to their eyes: the Pilgrims believed them, and sought the path, and
having gone therein about a league, toward 4. of the clock, they entered into a
high wood, and saw hard by four great Wolves, running all frighted, as if they
had had at their tail a kennell of hou^ds; they went on notwithstanding, and
being entered a little further, they heard a man's voice which seemed to found
from far toward the west: Vincent said they were hunters; but Theodosius who
had better marked it, said that he thought rather that it was too weak and
feeble: so they stayed a while to listen, and they heard the voice more
distinctly, and it seemed to them the voice of a man, complaining and crying
for help: Is it not perhaps (quoth Theodosius) some body that is assaulted by
wolves, and finds himself pressed? It may be (quoth Lazarus) let us harken
nearer, and approaching they heard one distinctly and often cry out, O God, and
our glorious Virgin help me: Then (quoth Lazarus) it is some without doubt in
danger, let us go to him.

Theodosius went first, and first saw 20. paces off, A terrible spectacle.
under a great Oak, a pitiful spectacle, and his companions also; which was
a man in his shirt, stretched upon the ground, fastened all along to 4. stakes
(like unto those that are executed upon the wheel) and a wolf hard by him.
They came quickly thinking the wolf would have devoured him, and were amazed
that he stirred not at their sight and coming. The poor man lifting up his
head, as much as he could, and seeing men there: masters (says he) have pity
on me, I am well, God be thanked; keep the wolf that he escape not, tie him
with some cord, I have him fast by the foot. Lazarus quickly drew a cord out
of his bag, and tied it very hard about the beasts foot, and gave him
Vincent to hold, and with Theodosius loosed this poor Patient; who as soon as
he had his arms free, embraced Theodosius, calling him by his name. O Sir
Theodosius, my good friend (says he) what providence of God, has brought you
to this place in so good time to help me? Theodosius meruailing beheld him,
and saw it was Tristram, and embracing him said, O my good friend Tristram, I
bless God and the Blessed Virgin, who have directed our ways hither, to do
you the service of a friend in so great necessity. Lazarus and Vincent admired
the great providence of God, in providing help for those that seek him, and
could not imagine how a man so bound, should get the wolf by the foot, and
all four were amazed at this meeting, and the wolf most of all. When Tristram
was loosed Theodosius cast his cloak about his shoulders, and having learned of
him that a small league of, there was a poor laborers house called
Maison-seul, where Pilgrims did sometimes lodge, they went thither to bed, but
Vincent remembered himself, that to lead the wolf the more surely, he must put
a gagge in his mouth, which they did, couching him upon the earth, and opening
his mouth by force, fastening his neck to the ground, with a forke they had
made of an oaken bow, and put also a rope about his neck, and so went toward
Maison-seul, all joyful saving the wolf, who was not accustomed to carry such
morsells in his mouth, not be led in a string. The labourer was returned an
hour before with his family from a village by, where they had heard Euensonge,
and was in a little orchard looking upon certain graffs, and seeing the
Pilgrims, he came out straight to entertain them, persuading himself that
they went to ly there that night; and when he saw the wolf gagged, and a cord
about his neck; Gallant (quoth he) you are not thus dressed for your good
deeds. The children and servants ran out of the house to behold this beast,
who kept silence with great modesty, but above all it was good sport to see the
intertainement with which the laborers dogs received him, yelping and
bauling about him with full mouth, and showing their teeth nearer then he well
liked of, though they durst not come to near by reason of the gag which frighted
them. The labourer endeaoured to appease them, saying they must have compassion
on prisoners, but he was feign to shut him up, else they had given him but hard
intertaynement. The labourer commanded a good fire to be made in the hall,
near unto two chambers commodious to lodge Pilgrims Theodosius procured of
their host, necessary apparel for Tristra^, promising to pay for the^, and
whilst Tristra^ did accommodate himself by the fire, they made their examen of
conscience, and said some prayers of thanksgiving, and supper being ready
they went soon to it, said grace and began to fall to their meat and talk.
Good Tristram did his part well, for he had eaten nothing all day, and told
what fortunes had befallen him, since he parted from Theodosius not with a
continued relation, but brokenly and by piece meal, and did not satisfy the
ears of the Pilgrims with counted morsells, but rather got them a stomach and
appetite to understand the whole; therefore when they had supped and thanked
God, Theodosius as most familiar with him said; Friend Tristram, I pray you
tell us at length what has happened to you and your companions since Monday
last, Tristram recounteth his fortune.
and how you came into that estate we found you in? Lazarus our good guide
desires it, and so do we both: You shall do me great honor (quoth Tristram)
to le^d your ears to the narration of my miseries; I should desire you to
hear me, and you command me to tell it. And this is the least service that I
can afford your friendship: and for mine old companions, I ween they be all
dead by this, or in poor estate, for our Captain was in an encounter with 20.
archers or thereabout, and was killed the sixth; they would have taken him
alive, but he defended himself so courageously, that they could not have him
but dead; his soldiers were all taken, except some few that saved them selves
by flight, as my self: I understood since by one who was hidden in the wood,
that the Provost gave charge to the Archers, that if they found one called
Tristram, they should bring him to him, without doing him any harm. As he said
this, Lazarus looked upon Theodosius, as showing him the effect of his
commendation to the Provost. Tristram following his discourse; seeing my self
(says he) at liberty, which I so much desired, I thought how to accomplish the
vow, which I have made by your good counsel, and to go in Pilgrinage to our
Lady of Loreto, I travailed three or four days to get me more out of sight
and knowledge, and came to Floree, and passed close by this house. I sold my
horse and my weapons, and made a little money wherewith I bought me a Pilgrims
staff and a botle, and walked a foot as a Pilgrim, and yesterday early in
the morning I began my iourny. I had not gone a league, but I fell into the
hands of six thieves of those that now course the country and high ways,
whom I took for merchants. They asked me, whither I went, though they might
have known that by my staff; they asking if there were any soldiers in the
country, and whence I came: I answered to all their questions, and at last they
came to the point, and asked if I had any money: I told them that Pilgrims are
not commonly much laden therewith that they may walk the lighter. Then one of
them said unto me, Follow us good Pilgrim, and led me to the place where you
found me; they rifled me and found about 20. crowns, and made me put of all my
apparel unto my shirt: there remained no more, but to take away my life, which
they had once determined to do, for fear that I should have discovered them;
some would have stabbed me, but one opposed himself and gave advise in
appearance of humanity, but in effect full of cruelty; which was to tie my
hands and feet to four stakes sticked in the ground, my face to heaven ward
as you found me, and there to let me die either languishing of my self, or to
be devoured of wolves, which were there in great abundance: they did execute
their deliberation, and leaving me so bound they went their ways: within one
hour the wolves failed not, following the wind, to come thither: there came
first one alone, and came within 7. or 8. paces of me, and from thence barked
on me a while; then he walked once or twice about, and sat him down, looking
yet more attentively upon me, to see if he could discover any snare; at last he
took courage to come close to me, and as if he had been sure of his prey, he
began to blow, with 4. or 5. great howlings, wherewith he called his
companions, who harkened for a sign, and understood it full well. In the mean
time he went about me to choose his blow and his bite, and because he durst not
venture his head without good caution nor breath over me with his snout without
good assurance (for it is a beast very suspicious and distrustful as you know)
he turned his tail to my face: Trow you, what trances I was in, lying so
bound, with such a squier of my body by me? And how heartily I commended my
self to God? When he had turned himself enough, and swinged his tail twice or
thrice over my face, he set his hinder foot in my right hand, of the which, as
also of my left hand, I could help my self by moving my fingers, for I was
tied by the wrests: My good Angel put it in my mind to hold fast his foot, if
he set it there again: he failed not to do it, nor I to take hold of it, and
graspe it as hard and fast as I could, and in such sort that perceauing
himself to be taken, he pulled his leg as hard as he could, but he durst not
turn his head for fear of being entrapped more: I held him as God gave me
strength, and me thought my fingers had never more force, and the more mine
enemy was astonished, the more was I encouraged. In the mean time came four
other great wolves, which were those whom he had called with his houling, who
came with good devotion to take part and feed of what they should find. They
found me easily and came near, but when they saw their spy set fast in the
stocks, and that he labored in vain to get himself out, they ran away
through the woods, as if they had been chaced and pursued by a whole company
of hunters: my wolf stayed still with me, thinking more how he might escape
himself then how to take me. Thus I remained with him, neither knowing how to
hold him, nor yet to let him go, and was as much troubled to hold my wolf by
the foot, as are they that hold him by the ears. At that instant came you in
good time to be my deliverer: Hold the wolf by the ears
I beseech the divine goodness, to give me grace and force, to thank him of
this his special providence, and to do unto you some service, worthy of this
benefit. Lo this was the history.

Surely (quoth Lazarus) it is notable, and declares a great favor of God
toward you, having delivered you from so eminent a danger, and toward us
also, having brought us unto this wood, to contribute our diligence to your
deliverance; and Theodosius especially must find himself greatly bound to
Almighty God, that his prayers (which I know he has made for you ever since he
knew you first) have obtained for you this present mercy.

Truly (quoth Theodosius) he bound me by his friendship to pray for him, which
I have done, and will continue, and render unto God immortal thanks for this
benefit; and you Sir Tristram, shall fill up my joy and my companions, when we
shall understand that you have happily performed your vow which you made to the
B. Virgin, and put in execution your designement of leaving the vanity of the
world, as you signified unto me, at the great ruinous house where I was your
prisoner, and I do heerto summon you, and conjure you in his name, who made you
to serve him, and to make you heir of his glory; I conjure you by your own
good, and by the friendship you bear me. Tristram thanked him most heartily,
and said; Sir Theodosius, I have a good desire to perform point by point what
I have purposed. And I have such hope in the help of the glorious Virgin,
whom I serve, (alas what say I?) at least whom I desire to serve, that she
will obtain me the grace, to attain my desire: Your prayers will help me
much, and I shall have an immortal band to pray unto the divine bounty, to
render you a worthy recompense of his own hand, for the benefits which he has
given me by yours: Thus they passed the evening; after they retired themselves
to one of the chambers, where they said Litanies together, after which
Tristra^ was carried to his bed in another chamber, where he slept quickly. The
Pilgrims made their examen, and took the subject and points of their morning
Meditation: The subject was the life of the glorious Virgin after the Ascension
of our Savior into heaven, in these points.

1. Wherefore she lived after our Saviors Ascension. 2. Of the profit she
brought unto the Church of God. 3. Of her death.
The nine and thirtith day, and the ninth of his Return. Of the Life and
conversation of the B. Virgin after the Ascension of our Savior, and of her
death. CHAP. XXII.
AT three a clock in the morning when no body was up saving some servants that
went to labor, the Pilgrims began their meditation a part. Lazarus the first
in fervor and heat of spirit began in admiration, wondering that our Savior
ascended into heaven, and left his glorious mother amongst mortal men, seeing
he knew well that she should be in continual grief for his absence, and
longing for his presence, and that she desired nothing more, then to go out of
this vale of miseries, and to be with him, and there was not any creature, more
worthy of heaven, and of his company then she was. Why the B Virgin was left on
earth after the Ascension of our Savior.


But the heavenly light showed unto him in the progress of his meditation,
that the Almighty, and all wise Son of God, did herein show a singular
providence, for the good of his most honorable mother, and of all his whole
Church; for if the scripture reports that for a great favor which is said of
the lust, that God has honored him in making him labor, and has
accomplished his travails, this was a special prerogative, and a great honor
which our Savior did to his mother to leave her sometime after him in this
life, therein to show and employ her virtues, The B; Virgin was left as the
moon when the Sun was gone
which hitherto had been in a manner hidden under the cloak of profound
humility known only to God, and to few men besides, and by a thou sand goodly
works wrought in public, make her multiply the usury of her merits unto the
highest heap and degree, and so much to increase the glory of her felicity. It
was also a great favor unto the Church, to see shine in her beginning and
birth upon the earth, this star, as the moon, after that the great Sun
taking himself from the eyes of mortal men, Our Savior and his Church both
bred and brought up by the B. Virgin
was mounted into the heavens, and to conte^plate in her the admirable beauty
of that sun it self, lively represented in the luster of the divine actions
of this B. Virgin, as we behold the visible splendor of the sun, painted in
the face of the moon. And even as God would that his Son Jesus Christ,
Espouse and Savior of the Church, should be conceived, borne, and brought up
by the said Virgin, so would he that the same Church should in some sort be
engendered by the feed of the said Virgins virtues, should be illustrated, set
in view, and in a manner brought forth by means of her, nourished, and brought
up by the example of her admirable works. Namely that she should be the light
of the Apostles and disciples, teaching them diverse mysteries of the faith,
that none knew but her self, and which the holy Ghost would have known by
her; so by her he taught the secret of the Annunciation, of the Incarnation, of
her perpetual virginity, of the Nativity of our Savior, of the music that
Angels sung thereat, of the Visitation of the shepherds, of the Circumcision,
of the Adoration of the Kings, of the Presentation in the Temple, of Simeons
prophecy, and other points which the Evangelists have recorded, and specially
S. Luke, Luc. 2.
who therefore is called the Notary of our B. Lady. Greg. Nis in fest. Assump.
It is he that said, Marie kept all these things in her heart: Signifying (as an
ancient Doctor says) that she had diligently noted the mysteries she had
seen, to reveal them in due time, and that what he had written, he had drawn
out of the mine and treasury of the Virgins heart, who was Secretary and of
privy Council to the meruayles of God. And as God has given at dives times
holy women, to magnify his greatness in them, and to succor his people, as a
Debora to counsel and conduct the armies of Israel, a Judith to encounter
with the great Tyrant, an Hester to win the King, and oppose herself against
the enemies of his people, and also among the heathens diverse Sibilles, women
emine^t in knowledge, and in the gift of prophecy, to instruct the ignorant of
the mysteries of the Savior of the world; so he left in his bodily absence
this his heavenly mother, to be a Debora, a Judith, a Hester, and the
Prophetess of the Christians, the refuge of the afflicted, the book of the
doctors, the strength of the faintharted, the force of those that fight, and f
nally to be a Regent in the beginning of the spiritual kingdom of her Son,
and by the accord of her divine contemplations and actions, to give a model
and pattern of the contemplative and act ue life, of the Apostolical and
perfect Christian way, She was a pattern of active and contemplative life.
as she did And therefore both then and ever after she was ordained and called
the Protectrix of all religious Families, and a general Advocate of the Church
of her Son for ever. God meaning in a woman to encounter and confound vice
and Idolatry, confound Pride, and the forces of Satan who in a woman had
confounded all mankind, and thrust mortal men into all sort of sin.

She lived then many years after the Ascension of our Savior, 10. after the
opinion of some, and 21. in the opinion of others, but the common tradition is
fourteen. 10 Nicep. li. 2. cap. 3.
And being arrived to that term which he had prefixed, who governs the time
and lot of the life of man, she received a message of her departure out of
this world by an Angel in the City of Jerusalem, 21. Epiph. sermon. de Derp
Virg.
where she had remained since the death of our Savior with S. John the
Evangelist, and whither the Apostles dispersed through diverse parts of the
world by the power of God were assembled together, and with them diverse other
holy men, amongst whom was S. Denu the Arcopagite, the Apostle of France, in
this last period, to assist the Mother of his master, and to do her obsequies,
Almighty God honoring with the presence of the principal lights of his
Church, the deposition of that Virgin, who had brought forth the Savior of the
world, Dion Metap^r ora. de obit. Virg.
and illustrating the death of the mother of his Son, with this singular
prerogative, as he had by a thousand more illustrated her life. And as the
Princes of the Church were visibly present, at her departure, so we may not
doubt but that the most noble troops of heaven were present also, with Jesus
coming himself, Damasc. de dorm it. Virg.
to receive into his own hands, the soul of his glorious Mother being borne
into heaven, as the had first received him into her bosom, being borne man
into the world

And here Lazarus, as if he had been present in this noble company, and had
beheld with his own eyes, this heavenly star ready to leave the body, and
take her slight into heaven, made this Apostrophe, saying.

O my good Advocate, O faithful Advocate of all mortal men, who in verity
will call upon thee, I call unto thee from the bottom of my heart, and conjure
thee by the great name of him who made thee great, that it would please thee to
succor thy poor suppliant from thy throne of glory, whereof thou go now to
take possession at the hand of thy Allmighty Son. Obtain of him for me, O
puissant Virgin, what I demand of thee, not gold, nor silver, nor pleasures,
nor delights, not renown or glory of this life, nor any other gift of this
mortal world: this is not the subject of my suite, O sacred Virgin, but a
fervent love to his holy service, a continual exercise in his holy love, a
resolute courage to suffer for his name, a constant perseverance in good works
unto the last breath of my life, that my death may be of those that are
precious in the sight of his Majesty.

Diverse Farewells. 2. A hunting. 3. A supper. 4. A knight saved: and a Priest
carrying his bowels in his hand. 5. A spiritual discourse of hunting. 6. Of
hauking. CHAP. XXIII.
THVS prayed Lazarus, sighing and weeping; Theodosius and Vincent ended at the
same time, and with the like affections. Straight after they went to bid
Tristram good morrow, and whilst he made himself ready, Lazarus got a
breakfast ready. After Tristram had said a few prayers they brake their fast
together, and had quickly done, for it was too early to eat much. Vincent
paid their host for all and for every body. Theodosius calling Tristram a part,
and taking his leave of him; Theodosius farewell.
I would I had the means (quoth he) to stay longer with you, and to do you some
service worthy of our friendship; but seeing we must part, I beseech you for
the honor of him, who has called you from the fellowship of so dangerous a
company, as you were with, and from certain danger of death wherein we found
you, for the health of your own soul, for the love and affection you bear
me, and that I bear unto you, that you will take to heart the execution of you
purpose you made to forsake vice, and to lead a life worthy of a man of a noble
house: God has done you these favors, to give you more if you use these well.
And if you shall abuse them, so much more rigorous will he be for your
ingratitude, how much the more liberal he has been to you of his mercy:
choose now for hereafter some estate or vocation, wherein you may serve God and
the public profit, there be enough such amongst Christians: if you will follow
arms, you have a fair field in the wars, that are made against the Turk,
and other enemies of God, and the Christian faith, there you may gain a goodly
crown of imortality. If you will serve God under the shadow of a peaceable and
quiet dwelling, and at better wages, you may enroll your self amongst the
children of God in some religious house, you know many, you may choose the
best. You go now in Pilgrimage to Loreto, ask devoutly the assistance of the
Lady whom you go to visit, that she will obtain for you of her Son
abundant light to see and discern, what shall be most expedient for you, and
make you to touch and feel the breuity, the inconstancy, the vanity of this
life; the deceit of the world and worldly things, the baseness of all earthly
greatness, and to make you amorous and in love of heaven. This is the farewell
which I leave you for gage of my love: and there Theodosius left. Tristram
answered him in few words. Tristra^^ farewell.
Most dear friend Theodosius, I esteem the two meetings wherein I met with
you, amongst the greatest favors that I have received of the providence of
God: for in the first God has by you opened the way unto the liberty of my
soul, and gave me courage to undertake that which hitherto I have executed. In
this second meeting he has by you also delivered me from the rage of men and
beasts, and has made me see by your instruction now, what is meet for me to
do hereafter. I promise you (my dearest friend) that with the grace of him that
guides me, I will perform from point to point, the resolution I have made by
your advice. I have some experience of what is past, which is sufficient to
harden me against the flattery of the world, and make me take part else where. I
have begun to estrange and sequester my self from it, and to perceive what
od^ there is in serving it, and him whom I adore. I hope to remove my self
further from it, to the measure of my travail, and every day to find more and
more taste, and delight in the sweetness of Virtue (...) go joyfully to Loreto
with a firm hope, that the B. Virgin will assist me, and make the bounty of
her Son favorable unto me, that I may choose what shall be best for his
honor and mine own salvation. I beseech you remember me in your holy prayers,
as long as I shall be Pilgrim in this world, I will carry in my heart the sweet
memory of our cordial and faithful friendship. Having said thus, Theodosius
taught him, how he should carry himself in his pilgrimage, how to pray and
confess, and to use other exercises of devotion, which Tristram learned with a
wonderful greediness, and both beginning to weep, they embraced each other.
Tristram came after to Lazarus, and thanked him with a great affection for all
his courtesies. Lazarus again confessed himself obliged unto him for his
friendship and favors afforded to his Cousin Theodosius in prison, and in
recompense thereof promised him all the service he could do him in France, or
else where as occasion should be offered. Tristram thanked him very humbly, and
made a reciprocal offer wheresoever he should meet him, and then embraced him,
and so did Vincent. Lazarus put about his neck a pair of beads like a scarf
for a noble chain, and gave him three crowns, the better half of their
Viaticum. Tristram took the beads as an honorable present, but he refused
the money, saying that it appertained not to Pilgrims to give alms, and seeing
he was a Pilgrim he would beg. At least (quoth Lazarus) Pilgrims may take
it, when it is given them, and therefore you should not refuse it at our hands.
Take it further, adds Theodosius, in title of necessity, for you are not only
a Pilgrim, but a spoiled Pilgrim: Tristram reaching forth his hand, well then
(quoth he) now I begin to be a hardy Pilgrim, and took it. The host also
moved with compassion offered his alms, and gave him a lether bagg to put his
small moueables in, and three manchets, a little cheese, and a Pilgrims staff
which he had carried once before to Loreto, with a little botle; and so Tristram
found himself in an instant armed for a Pilgrim at all points. The wolf they
brought remained prisoner with the Lost, until he could pay his ransom; They
embraced again, and taking a long farewell followed every man his way.
Tristram toward Italy for Loreto, and the Pilgrims into France, to which they
had but three hours journey, and but one days journey to the house of Lazarus
Father.

Marching thus courageously they came about noone to a little house at the
entry of a Forest, in the which being a little refreshed they continued their
way through the same forest, and having entered about a mile, they saw a Heart
run a great pace without any body following, and but half his head, the want
whereof made him both ashamed and fearful, as fynding himself disarmed: half
a league off they heard certain hallowings and gallopings of hunters, mingled
with the cries of dogs, which made them understand the cause why this Heart
dislodged hold so out of season, and before he had cast his whole head and
renewed his horns. Passing a little further they saw a great kennell of
hounds, and many set in relayes in diverse stations, and they knew by the
company and attendance, that it was some great Lord that hunted, coniecturing
that it was the Marquess of that country there, a Lord very courteous and
Catholic, (although he was beset with diverse of the pretented Reformation) and
singularly devout to the B. Virgin, and charitable toward the poor. He had
three sons meruaislously well bred, and brought up to all sorts of honest
exercise, namely of arms and of hu^ting: The youngest was gone to the bath with
the Lady Marquess his mother; the eldest who was called the Vicou^t, remained
in the Castle to dispatch some matters with the Abbot of S. Leo his uncle: his
younger brother, who was called the Baron, being about twenty years of age
accompanied his Father. He was a gentleman of excellent personage, and of more
excellent spirit, having been of long time inclined to serve God, in a
religious estate, though every man judged him more fit for the war, and for
the world. The beasts that were chaced in this hunting, were principally two
great wild bores, the one whereof was lively pursued by the dogs, the other
having escaped gained ground whilst his companion busied both dogs and hunters.
The Baron went a side out from the company, without being perceived, and driven
with a youthful heat, set himself to follow at the heels of the bore
escaped, with his sword in his hand: he was mounted upon a double curtall, and
encountered the beast just by the way where the Pilgrims passed, and seeking his
advantage going about the bore, he struck him on the left leg, meaning to
have stricken him on the right side without danger of his horse. The bore
turning himself to the right side of the horse whence he found that he was
strike^, gave him such blows within the belly, with such a fury, that he burst
again, the horse fell down straight, and the Baron under him, the bore rushed
to have killed him, had not Lazarus and his companions run quickly (for they
thought it was an office of necessary charity) who with their staves environed
the beast, and Lazarus so watched him, that he stroke him to the heart a deadly
wound with the pike of his staff, and sent him fifty paces off to dye: they
lifted the young gentleman from under his horse, and found he had no hurt. He
beheld with a very attentive and gracious eye the Pilgrims and especially
Lazarus, and could not forbear to embrace him, saying, My good friend
Pilgrim, next unto God I owe unto you my life Lazarus answered, God be blessed
Sir, al goes well, seeing there is nothing lost but the horse. In the mean
time diverse of the company that missed their young master, came to the place,
and seeing his horse lie dead, they set him up upon another; and the Pilgrims
did steal away the Baron not perceiving being compassed with his men. The
Marquess meruailed what was become of his people, and knew nothing of the
danger his son had incurred. As he went this way and that way, he met a
poor country fellow with a staff in his hand. Friend (quoth he) thou shall do
well to get out of the way, lest my dogs do thee some harm. Sir (quoth the
poor man) I can say certain verses of the seven psalms, with the which I
will arrest them well enough: he had no sooner said so, but five or six great
dogs ran with open mouth upon him: he got him self to an hedge, and the
dogs followed him; he threw at them three or four stones, which (foreseeing
the danger) he had put in his bosom; and struck the boldest of them so ^ud ly
upon the breast, as he ran away crying and howling, and the other dogs set
upon him as their manner is, leaving the poor man who stirred not. One of the
hunters wroth that his dog was stricken, went to bumbast the fellow: but the
Marquess staying him, Soft and fair (quoth he) is it not lawful for every
man to defend himself? and checking the poor man, Good fellow, quoth he, are
these the verses of the psalm, wherewith you arrest the dogs? Sir (quoth he) I
did say them, but I was forced to cast two or three stones among. The good
Maquesse laughed, and commanded them to look well to the dogs, that they did
him no harm, and the poor fellow was very diligent to get ground, and run
out of the dogs dangers. The Baron was returned unto the company, and
perceauing that his Father marked him, he said; Sir you see me mounted upon a
new horse, the other fell down under my legs, and told him how the matter had
passed, highly comme^ding the Pilgrims. The Marquis asked where they were, the
Baron thought they had followed, but one answered that, that they were gone on
their way. O verily (quoth the Marquess) you are very ungrateful for the
benefit, and commanded one of his Gentlemen to go stay them at the Castle in
any sort. The Castle was a league of, near unto a village where they did mean
to lie. The first bore being killed, the hunters followed the chase of the
second, to do as much to him, but they found him dead in the wood, and a horse
dead by him. Surely (quoth the Baron) this is of a blow the Pilgrim gave him;
I never in my life saw man better handle his sword against a wild bore, then
this Pilgrim did his staff. The gentleman that was sent to s^^y the^, found
them by the Castle in the high way: he had much a do to persuade them; for
Lazarus made difficulties and excuses, as well least he should be known, as
also not to loose their liberty for their devotions. But the gentleman told
them that he had commandment to stay them by force. Theodosius and Vincent
both were of opinion to stay, and so they went to the Castle, and were brought
to the Abbot the Marquess his brother. This was a man of great learning and of
very good life. They kissed his hands, and after were led to the chapel,
where they prayed a while. The Marquess followed softly with his son, and
the greatest part of the gentlemen, leaving some behind who had put their
Terriers into the ground to bolte a fox. He came about supper time, and forgot
not to ask for his Pilgrims. It was told him that they were praying in the
Chapel; thither he went, and having said a Pater noster, he said unto them
very courteously; you are welcome my friends; you shall if it please you sup
with us in the company of these young Gentlemen, and you shall be our guests this
night; this house has always one chamber to spare for Pilgrims. The
Pilgrims thanked him with low reverence, and Lazarus thanking him for all,
said; Sir we have not deserved so honorable entertaynment. Good Pilgrims
(replied the Marquess) deserve more then this, but you will have patience with
us, and saying this, he perceived and marked in their countenance, certain
shows of generosity and nobility, and in the speech of Lazarus, a grave
liberty and sweetness, and began in his heart greatly to esteem him, as also did
all the company, and especially the Baron. So he commanded them to be
co^ducted to their chamber, which was prepared for them.

The supper.
When they began to cover the table, and that all the Gentles were come
together, the Pilgrims were brought in, the Marquess made them wash their
hands with him, and the Abbot his brother, and his nephew: Himself fat at the
bordes end, Monsieur S. Leo, on his right hand, and by him Lazarus and his
companions, and on the left hand his Nephew a gentleman of a good nature, but
somewhat taynted with ill doctrine; after him sat the Vicount, and the Baron,
and the rest in their ran^^ about thirty persons. Near unto Vincent by good
fortune, ^at the Tutor of the Marquess his Nephew, who was of the pretented
religion, calling himself Monsieur le Cime, his proper name being Moses, and
he aspired to the function of a Minister; a man proud of heart and bold of
speech and would be esteemed wise and learned in every company, and was not a
little discontent to see the Pilgrims set so near him at the table, and be so
honored of the Marquess: he also unwillingly beheld over against him a
Doctor of physike a good Catholic, and a good Philosopher, and skillfull in
his own science, who did not forbear him in any thing. The Almoner said
grace, and every man fell to his meat. Many discourses were of hunting of the
Heart, of the Bore, of the Fox, of the Partridge, of the nature of dog* and
hawks. Lazarus did speak little, but marked all without being amazed or
astonished, and perceived the qualities and carriage of all the guests, and
especially of the Tutor, who had given many girds, to no purpose, and of
animosity against pilgrimages; always numbling somewhat, when they spoke of
any thing concerning the Catholic faith, or the honor of the B. Virgin. At
the second course there were served in some partridges, and as others talked
amongst themselves, so he took occasion by this mess, to ask Vincent, why
they served partridges in, without their heads? Vincent perceived well enough
that he mocked him, and had his answer ready, but he thought it better to hold
his peace, and not answer a word. Then says the Tutor, this Pilgrim is
attentive to his business: The Phisician and they by, were offended with his
fashion. He moved the like question also to Theodosius, who perceiving him,
answered that Loreto was the deuoutest place in Christendom. The Doctor and
others perceiving this answer of correction, began to laugh. The Tutor felt
himself touched, and prepared himself to be quittance; The Marquess
perceived that they laughed at him, and said, what is the matter Monsieur le
Cime? Sir (quoth he) the gentlemen among cups do easily take occasion to laugh:
I demanded of these good Pilgrims, who going about the country know all
things, why partridges are served in without their heads, the one answers me
with silence, and the other (from the cock to the ass, a poake full of
plummes) that Loreto is the deuoutest place of the world, and this Sir is all
the matter they laugh at me for: and how know you (quoth the Marquess, that
they laugh at you? Sir (quoth he) if they were all reasonable creatures, they
had no cause indeed to laugh at me, but rather at the answers that were given
me, but thus are men made now an days. Monsieur S. Leo taking the word, Sir
Cime, says he, to laugh should not breed anger among friends, and choler is
ill fitting and dangerous at the table; you would not be sorry, as it seems,
that they should laugh at these good Pilgrims if they had answered ill, and
perhaps it may be thought they laugh at their good and pertinent answer; and
how Sir, says the Tutour, by silence, or from the cock to the ass? It may
be, that I can show you how (quoth the Abbot) but upon condition that you
promise not to be cholerike. Sir (quoth the Tutour) I shall take all in good
part that shall come from such as you are; all the company was attentive to
hear what the Abbot would say: The first Pilgrim (says he) answered nothing
to your question, which in my opinion, was because he thought it unprofitable,
to which kind of questions silence is the best answer. The second answered
you, that Loreto was the deuoutest place in the world. Unprofitable question
best answered with silence.
This answer did signify unto you, that you should not make a question of the
kitchen, or of hunting to a Pilgrim, but ask of him some point of piety fit
for his calling; according to which he answered you: and this is an answer of
good prudence, and much praised in another subject in the person of that
ancient King and renowned Captain Pyrrhus, who being demanded whether Python
or Cefesius were the better player on the flute; he answered agreably to his
profession, that in his opinion, Hipparcon was the better Captain. At this
exposition every one looked upon Monsieur le Cime laughing at him, and the
Doctor told him softly Sir this is neither silence, nor from the cock to the
Ass, you may now be content, you have the full reckoning. The Pilgrims made
semblance of nothing. The Tutour, if he ^d durst, would have showed in words
that he was in high choler: and he began already to be mad, as well for the
exposition of the Abbot, as for the countenance of the company; but specially
for the word, his adversary the Doctor had cast upon his cushion: yet he could
not refrain, but tell him with a sharp accent; M. Phisician meddle you with
your Galen, I pray. The Marquess seeing this good Tutour in pain, and to wax
red partly for shame and partly for anger, took pity of him, and namely in
respect of his Nephew, Of serving partridges without head.
who was almost ashamed of his master, and began cover his face; for all this
(faith he) Monsieur le Cime his question, must not pass without an answer, in
the company of so many huntsmen, for to them perteyneth the decision thereof.
That is well said, quoth the Abbot, I pray you Sir, that my nephew may be the
man, who passed Knight of the chase so lately. The Marquess smiled and all the
company, and commanded the Baron to tell his opinion of the question proposed.
The Baron without being any whit astonished said, with a modest boldenes; Sir,
I will do your commandment, though I should here pass Knight ag ine, as I did
before: but I would first desire the gentleman there (pointing to Lazarus) who
has been in Italy and diverse others countries, that it would please him to
tell us, whether they serve partridges there, without the head, as we do here
in France? The Marquess knew well the custom of Italy, for in his youth, he
had been in diverse countries, but he looked upon Lazarus, as praying him to
gratify the Baron in that behalf, which Lazarus seeing, said smyling. Monsieur
Baron fears not to put me to such an answer, as the scholar of Paris made
when he returned to his Fathers house, and not knowing what they called a
partridge in latin (for that his Father asked him) answered that they eat no
such birds in the College. Shall I so answer you Sir, that Pilgrims eat no
partridges, neither traveling in Italy nor else where, because it is no meat
for Penitents, and that I know not whether they serve them with their heads or
without them in Italy? Here the Tutour spoke in his teeth: the^ you must eat
no partridge master Pilgrims. Yet I will say notwithstanding (quoth Lazarus)
that in mine opinion, you have given the form, wherein the question should be
proposed: for me thinks it shoud be demanded in special why in France they
serve in partridges without their head, for it may be that else where, they
serve them, as they do other foul, with all their parts and members. The Abbot
judged this answer to be full of prudence and modesty, yet not saying any
thing; and the Marquess also took it for no less, and looking upon the
Baron; you have here (quoth he) your demand; for Monsieur Lazarus has
covertly signified, that in Italy they serve Partridges, with their heads on,
and I confirm his saying; for I have seen it so in diverse places. It
remains then for me (replied the Baron) to answer why, they are served so in
France? I answer because they are brought without heads to the Cook. Every man
with this answer began to laugh. The Faulconer, who by chance stood behind the
Baron, did maintain this answer as very pertinent, having touched the true
cause of that quality of service; for the partridges heads, being the hawks
fee, they give it her, after she has flowne, to eat, and the body without
head to the Cook to dress, but this ceremony is proper only to the tables of
Gentleman, who fly the Partridge, though diverse afterward in imitation have
used so, not knowing the cause or origin thereof. And because the nobility of
Italy observe not this law so strictly, therefore they have not given occasion
to others to do as they do in France. The Baron was wonderful glad of this
good succor, which his Faulconer had given to his answer, and the Marquess
did approve it. Monsieur le Cime, would have found out another cause, saying,
that the head of the partridge was of evil disgestion, and therefore they cast
it away as unprofitable. Then, quoth the Phisician, we must take of the feet,
for those are of worse disgestion, and if all that is served in were good
meat, then we must eat the Phesants tail, and the pecockes too: how say you
Monsieur le Cime would you be served with such meat for your supper? The
Tutour held his peace as in contempt. The Baron was glad that the Doctor had
refuted this reason, for all this did fortify that which he had brought. The
Marquess was well pleased with these little skirmishes, so long as they were
done without bitterness, but with modesty for honest recreation. After this
question was decided, fruit was brought in, and supper being done, water was
brought for their hands, the most part rose from the table, saving such as the
Marquess caused to abide, amongst which were the Pilgrims, and the Almoner
said grace, after which by the Marquess commandment, every man took his
place, without saying word, with great desire to hear some thing of the
Pilgrims, specially of Lazarus. Wherefore Monsieur le Marquess said unto him;
Sir you have now heard our hunting and discourses thereon, worldly discourses,
and proper to our vocation, you are courteous and wise to excuse all: if you
were not wearied of your way these gentlemen would willingly hear some better
thing of you, and mamely of the place so renowned from whence you come. Lazarus
answered: Sir your discourses were very fitting and honest, and very pleasing
unto mine ears, as giving me matter to admire the Creator in his creatures,
neither shall wearines let me from speaking of Loreto: I have another let that
may hinder me more, which is mine insufficie^cy; yet seeing it pleases you I
will say somewhat choosing rather to be esteemed unfit then unwilling to recount
the wonders of God, or slow to satisfy your mind before so noble an audience.
These three or four periods pronounced with a very good grace, made the ears
of every one attentive, and Lazarus began his narration. He recounted unto them
the history of Loreto; how it was tra^sported from Nazareth to Sclauonia, from
thence into Italy, into a forest; after unto a hill, and finally placed in the
high way, where now it is; he related the wonderful Conversion of diverse great
Sinners who became great Saints, the admirable works that God shows there,
every year, every month, yea almost eueuery day, by sea, by land, in sickness,
in health, in diverse dangers and necessities, and all by the intercession of
the glorious Virgin, the mother of his Son; and discoursed a long time with
such weight of sentences, and such attention of the hearers, that it seemed he
had made all the company insensible, so was every one ravished to hear and
behold him, except Monsieur le Cime, who made mouths and faces still, at the
recital of miracles.

Lazarus seeing that they would not leave him, and there was time enough, I
will add (quoth he) for the conclusion of my narration two miracles. The one is
of a knight delivered from the gates of death by the favor and intercession of
the B. Virgin. This knight was a gentleman of Catana very wealthy called
Nicolas Pauonio, Turs. lib. 4. cap. 27.
who one day ryding his horse gave him the carriere so hardly, that the horse
stumbling cast him on the ground, and bruised and crushed him: his servants
took him up, and carried him to his lodging as a dead man. The surgeons and
physicians were fetched; after all the wounds serched and prescriptions
appointed, finally they condemned him to death. Then advised by some of his
friends, who assisted him, to call for the help of God, and to comme^d himself
to our Lady of Loreto, he made a vow, that if by her intercession, God would
restore him to his health, that he would go honor him as Pilgrim, and adore
his Son in that sacred Chapel. That vow being pronounced he slept, and it
seemed to him in sleeping, that our B. Lady presented her self unto him, and
that touching him with her hand, she had healed him; and awaking he found that
his dream was true, and that he was healed indeed; and went from thence to
Loreto, and there rendered his vow and immortal thanks to God and his glorious
mother.

A miracle upon a Sclauonia^ Priest
The other miracle happened (says he) about an hundred years since in the
person of a Sclauonian Priest, a simple man, but very devout to the B. Virgin:
he was by some misfortune taken not far from Loreto, by certain Turks of
base condition; when these Barbarians knew, that he was not only a Christian,
Hor. Ti^s. lib. 2. cap. 18.
but also a Priest, two qualities which they hate extremely, they thought to do
a great piece of work, and a great honor to their Mahomet if they could
spoil him of them both, making him renounce his faith. They pressed him
oftentimes with threatenings and promises, and by all means; he remained firm
as a rock, and the more he was thrust the faster he stood, calling upon the
name of Jesus and Maria. They incensed with the invocation of these names, what
meanest thou miserable dog (say they) so loud to call upon those names,
seeing they help thee nothing at all? It is (answered he) because they are
grounded in the bottom of my heart, and in my bowels. But (replied they) if we
pull out thy heart, and thy bowels, what will thou then say? Well, resolve thy
self if thou be wise, to deny them and save thy life, otherwise know thou
that we will put thy bowels and thy belly in thy hands: you shall so do quoth
the Priest) an act worthy of your selves, yet for all that it is not in your
power to take from me Jesus and Maria: they enraged with these words, set upon
him still, calling upon Jesus and the B. Virgin, and vowing to visit Loreto,
wherewith yet incensed with more devilish fury, they opened his belly, and put
his heart and bowels pulled out in his hands, saying with a tragical i^rision*
now, go accomplish thy vow and visit Jesus and Maria, and so they left him and
went their ways. A wonderful thing and never heard of, he took his bowels
and his life in his hands, and carried by the power of God walked to Loreto,
with the amazement of all the people that saw him go. He came to the place of
his vow, and having presented himself to the officers of the Church, he showed
them his entrails which he carried, and the co^ler of his empty body; he
recounted unto them the history briefly, he confessed and received, and having
performed his vow, he yielded his soul to God. All the world was ravished with
such a spectacle, and the entrails hung there a long time, in testimony of the
miracle, and they being consumed and turned into ashes, they supplied others to
their (...) made of wood, and finally instead of all this, in Paul 3. time,
there was made a table, wherein was painted a m n, holding in his hands his
bowels, which is seen unto this day, and many yet alive have seen the wooden
bowels, and some the true ones, as says Horatius Tursellinus, who did write
the history in Latin.

There are thousands more of wonders, that God has wrought in that place by
the intercession of the glorious Virgin, well known in Italy, but wherewith it
is needless to trouble you. Here the Tutour would have spoken and gainsayd
Lazarus, but the Marquess gently bad h^^ keep his co^tradiction yet a while,
and have patience until the speaker had done his discourse. Sir (quoth
Lazarus) I have done now if it please you. The Marquess replied; Sir, I
beseech you go forward, for you do us much honor, in refreshing us with the
food of so goodly devotions, most worthy of Christian cares, and which we use
not to hear often, and we find it of much better ^ast then our late
partridges. If I have any thing more to say (quoth Lazarus) it is to let you
understand, that I took great content in your discourses of hunting. Sir
(quoth the Marquess) you signified so much unto us before, whereat I both
meruailed and rejoiced, seeing that you had not only patience but also pleasure
in our little discourses, furnished with matter of very small nourishment in my
judgment, but only of pieces of our poor provision. Sir (quoth Lazarus there
is nothing in all the world so small, wherein God does not appear great. The
Marquess and the rest began to think that he would say somewhat of hunting,
which they never heard before, and desiring to understand it, requested him to
gratify with that secret, the gentlemen whom he saw so atte^tiue. Sir (quoth
Lazarus) expect no secret at my hands, for I will bring nothing, that shall not
be well known, and if what I shall say be any thing worth, you have furnished
me with the stuff, and the commendation must be your own.

First you discoursed of diverse sorts of dogs whereof some were for great
beasts, the Heart, the Bore, and Wolf: others for the lesser, A spiritual
discourse of hunting.
as hares, conies, badgers, foxes; some to find the chase, some to t ke it on
the earth by course, some in the waters, lakes and rivers, some under the earth
as terriers for the holes and buroughs: you have also spoken of the diverse
natures of beasts, some which defend themselves by force, some by fright, some
courageous and hardy, some cowardly and fearful, every one has his shifts
and crafts, as a mute reason to help themselves in their necessity: hearing
these things me thinks I see a table containing a living picture of many
wonders of the Creator in his creatures, and in the mixture of their
dissensions. It is not a great wonder of the power, goodness, and wisdom of
God, to have given that property to dogs to perceive the beast rather by
smelling then by seeing? Of the smelling of the dog.
To pursue him with their eyes shut, to carry their sight, and science, rather
in their nose then in their head? to sent the Heart, the Do, the goat in his
feet and going; the Bear and Bore by his traces and view? To have given him
such docility, as to understand the voice and eye, the horn and hallowing of
his master, to run, to stand still, His doo^lity.
to open, to hold his peace at a point? To accord with the horse, and with him
conspire to the taking of a beast, and at the pleasure of their masters hide
themselves? To have given unto beasts, courage, weapons, and craft, to assault
and defend, and rid themselves from danger? To a greyhound courage to assault;
to a Bore force to resist; to a wolf subtilty to fly, and without failing
make his retraite, when he goes by the worse in the combat? In which three
beasts you have noted, the three principal acts of valor in war,
comprehended in this sage and short sentence; The assault of the Greyhound; The
defense of the Bore; The retraite of the Wolf. When you said, that the Bore
when he would take the bush, and remain there as in his Fort, does always at
the entry use some craft, me thinks I see a Captain of war, who makes his
turnings, and rauelins at the gate of his castle, where he meaneth^ to place
himself in garrison. And what you said of the Hare, was also admirable in a
contrary note; for God having given to this beast neither force nor courage, as
unto the Bore, to make head against her enemies, and to defend herself, has
endewed her insteede of all this, with a great swiftnes in her course, and a
thousand shifts to save herself; sometime taking the sent from the dogs,
sometime putting them at default, sometime escaping by some unknown way. You
remember and so do I with admiration, what you recounted of the fox, the
badger, and such other beasts.

The discourse you made of hawks, me thought was most worthy of consideration,
Of hawks.
to draw from thence matter of praise unto the Creator, who has given them
such parts: You noted in the Hobbie, the Goshawke, the Sparrowhake, and the
like their bold attemptes, their great and high flight, The magnanimity of
these birds.
with a certain feeling of honor, as birds that fly not for desire of prey,
for the kitchen, and their belly, as the Kite and Crow does, but for the
co^bate and victory: you have noted then docility to be taught, and inured to
the flight, some to the fist, some to the lure: the facility and familiarity of
the Faulco^ with men, and the hunting horses, having the wit and boldenes to
mingle herself among them for her prey, although the were never taught. The
majesty of the Gerfaulcon, her high points, her maine stoopings, her fast
gripings, his piercing billings, these are so many marks of the greatness of
God, author of these creatures, and of their qualities.

Hunting an image of wa^r.
Now, in all these huntings, you see a true image of war: for there be
enemies, weapons, arms, forces, craft, combat, victory, honor and profit.
Profit, I say, not of prey, a vulgar commodity, but (which is proper to
Nobility) of the exercise most profitable to their body, making it strong and
nimble, vigorous and supple; and no less profitable to the spirit, being a
lesson of war to those that can note it, and here is the chief point, large
matter to praise God who has prepared in his creatures this pastime of honor
and profit, to the end thereby to be glorified by man, who having understanding
and reason, yields him thanks and homage of all the force and industry,
which for love of him he has bestowed upon the beasts, who cannot acknowledge
it themselves, wanting judgment and discourse.

Mowing Of hawks.
That which you observed of the time that hawks are in the mew, which is from
spring to Autumn, is a draught of the divine providence, having given this
time and season for the rest, and replumage of those birds, that in the mean
time the fruits of the earth may not be hurt by the Faulconers, and that their
sport should not endomage any, nor spoil the seed and travail of poor
laborers, whereunto all Noble men of conscience have great respect, An
advertisement for gentlemen.
and chastise their children and servants if they offend therein. It is
needless hereupon to recite the seat of prudence and notable justice of a
great Lord in France. The Marquess remembered presently the man and the matter,
and interrupting Lazarus; Sir, said he, I pray you pass not in silence this
history, for it is very fit to our pupose of hunting, and also proper to inst
uct our young huntsemen. Sir (quoth Lazarus) I will obey you, though I may be
too long. And, as following his discourse; One day (says he) came unto this
Lord, a poor man a Tenant of his own to complain that the Count his son,
had with a number of hunters trampled and spoiled his field of corn: he
commanded his purse bearer to recompense his loss, and bad him say nothing to
any man of this complaint, and signified to his steward what he should do, to
correct this fault, and instruct his son and others. The company arrived at
the Castle in the evening with good store of prey, and saluted Monsieur: he
showed them good countenance. All these nobles full of fire and gallantry, were
restlosse, though they had done nothing but run and ride all the day long:
some leaped about the court of the Castle, some walked in the platform, some
recited the encou^ters happened in their hunting, others the craft and shifts
of the beasts that were taken, and all attending their supper with good
devotion: when it was ready, they began to cover the table, grace being said
all the company sat them down: Monsieur sat at the bords end; Madame his wife
on his right hand, and the Count his son on the left, and the rest in order;
when every man had cast their napkins over their shoulders, they marked that
there was no bread, every man held his hands and meruailed: Monsieur showed
himself much offended and sent for his steward, and the Count was angry in
himself in good earnest: The waiter, ran about the house for bred, and the
steward could not be found: they sent to the bakers in the town and there was
no bread in their shopes: Madame feyned herself angry and could scarce hold
from laughing, seeing these young gallants fit at the table well furnished with
good cheer, armed with good appetite and courage, to look one upon an other,
and could not play with their hands. At last Monsieur having compassion of his
Penitents, made a sign to his page, who had the watchword to fetch bread, and
then said to the Count his son: My son, when you go on hunting, take heed
of spoiling the corn, as it happened yesterday, for you see the pain we are
in for want of bread, though we have abundance of every thing else. This said,
the steward came and three or four pages with the servants did straight set
bread upon the table, and every man began his quarter, laughing and eating. The
Count as he was generous and respective to his Father, took in very good part
this advertisement, and others with him, and remembered very well the corn
fields which the riders had trampled ever after. This history I heard a good
while since coming to Auinion by Roane. It is indeed (quoth the Marquess)
worthy of the wisdom and worth of that nobleman. Lazarus making an end: and
this is Sir (quoth he) that I have to say of Loreto, and that I have learned of
this honorable company, and so held his peace. Every man was ravished with the
memory, judgment and eloquence of this Pilgrim having so well remembered and
so faithfully repeated all that had been said, and with so high a flight had
raised their earthly sportes, to a sense and rebound so spiritual and divine.
But above the rest, the Baron had with his ears and heart devoured his
discourse, and specially observed, what he said of the knight hurt and healed
by a vow made to our B. Lady; and thought verily that the devotion of this her
Pilgrim had from heaven succored him in that encounter with the wild Bore.
But the Marquis seeing that Lazarus had don, said unto him: Sir, with your
histories and notable miracles you have given us a heavenly lesson for hu^ting
upon the same discourse which you heard of us, but more christian like and
happily purifyed, and of earthly made heavenly; and you have taught us to raise
our selves up from the earth, and to draw from our corporal hunting an
immortal profit, whereof in truth we think little, except my brother here of S.
Leo, who handles his books and holy meditatio^s: as for us, for the most part
of our time, we carry our thoughts only to the flower of the earth; and where
our senses end, there are the bounds of the cogitations of our soul; and
instead of being ruled by reason, we are led by our sensuality, even as hunters
by the beasts they pursue. Lazarus answered, Sir your goodly actions and
prowess, and the good order of your family, and the good education of these
gentlemen your children, do well declare that what you have said is of
humility: and the credit and authority you have with our most Christian King,
do sufficiently testify, that your thoughts know how to ascend: but modesty is
always a goodly companion of virtue and of nobility. The Abbot herupon
addressing himself to Lazarus answered; Sir, we cannot deny nor dissemble it;
Our Nobility is not so devout, nor so spiritual as they should be; and as they
have been in the time of our Ancestors: It is the mise^y of our age laden
with vices by reason of heresy, which has brought confusion and wast of souls
and good works: these last words put fire and tinder in the ears and tongue
of the Tutour, as expressly spoken against him; and as on the other side he
took his level, he rose all cholerike desiring the Marquess to permit him to
speak one word, and as the Marquess had licenced him, and he began to speak,
Tony the fool came into the chamber, crying with full mouth, Gaffer Marquess
thou art full, and well at thine ease, but thy servants have not supped as thy
self: every man began to laugh. The Tutour began, and Tony interrupted him
again and said; Cime thou will always be disputing, thou will one day be
beaten, and so went his w^y; here every man laughed again, and played upon the
Tutour: and his scholar that had admired the discourse of Lazarus, wished him
a hundred miles of: at last with his importunity they let him speak, and thus
he spoke addressing himself to Lazarus.

Master Pilgrim, Cimes obiectio^s against miracles.
I confess you have told many pretty fine things, but that which you set so
forward of miracles is subject to caution, and must pass the examen of good
spirits. If these gentlemen who be Roman Catholics do believe you, I report
me to themselves; for my part I can not believe them, and am therefore well
grounded both in scripture and in reason. The scripture does advertise and
warn us, that in the later times Antichrist should work miracles, and not the
Church of Christ, they being neither necessary nor profitable, and therefore
what you allege of all these miracles, may be put amongst tales told for
pleasure, and specially this last, wherewith you have shut up the mouth of this
company. Reason and Philosophy teaches me, that it is not possible, for a man
to live having his bowels burst, and you tell us of a man that walked from one
place to another, carrying his bowels pulled out of his belly in his hands: who
will believe this? You may sell this merchandise to them that were never at the
fair, to simple men and not to men of judgment. I have many things more to
say, but I will not abuse the ears of these gentlemen, neither is there any
need, for this suffices in gross to refel^ all you have brought in retaile^
without yielding any sufficient reply; and thus far the Tutour. The Marquess
looked upon his brother, and he upon Lazarus, as inuiting him to answer;
others murmured and said, this man was senseless. Lazarus addressing himself
to Monsieur S. Leo, said unto him: Sir, if it were a hard matter to answer
this good Monsieur, I would entreat you to employ the help of your learning,
to defend the honor of our Religion, according to the profession of a Doctor
and Ecclesiastical Prelat, to whom this office appertains, and not unto a
man as I am; but seeing that with the knowledge of the only rudiments of
Christian Religion, the objection which he opposes as a fearful engine may be
rejected, I beseech you that none but my self may be presented to this charge.
The Abbot and the Marquess smyling said unto him; Sir, we hold our selves
assured, there will need no other help but yours to answer this matter: but we
hope you will not deal so hardly with Monsieur le Cime, as you did with your
other adversary, htat killed the Barons horse. Sir replied Lazarus, I can not
though I would, for I have neither sword nor staff; and looking on the Tutour
with a sweet and friendly countetenance, answered him in these terms.

Sir, I will not say that your self alone, would therefore discredit and
discuss what that been said of miracles, An answer to ob^ectio^s
to appear, in your contradiction and examen, of a better of understanding,
and of more advised judgment then all the gentlemen of this company who did
believe them: It shall suffice me, without touching your intention, to show
that they did well in believing the truth, and that you have opgned it without
ground; you say, that the Scripture does warn you that in the later times
Antichrist shall do miracles and not the Chuch, they being neither necessary
nor yet profitable: I know not what scripture has given you any such warning;
God only works miracles. Psalm. 135.
but the holy scripture teaches us another thing when it says, that God alone
does wonders and miracles, or those to whom he has given power, of which
number Antichrist cannot be. A miracle is a work raised above the power of
nature: as therefore neither the devil, nor his Deputies, could do any thing
above nature, but only God, who is the author and maker thereof; so neither is
it in the power of Antichrist and ^ll the Devils to do one only miracle. Will
you say, that God has given, or will give him in later times this power, which
in the beginning he bestowed on his Apostles and on his Church, thereby to
seduce his children? and that he would give these weapons into his hands, to
deface and oppugn truth, and the honor of the same Church? I think you will
not dare to maintain so evident a blasphemy against the honor of the supreme
and sovereign providence. That which has deceived you is, that you have t^ke^
a false gloss of your ministers, for the holy Scripture. S. Paul said to the
Thessalonians, speaking of Antichrist, 2. These. 2.9.
that he shall do lying woonders, but not that he shall do miracles, as your
Doctors do expound it: for a lying miracle is no miracle, but in enormously*
as a Coloss^s of a man, is a great Image of a man, (...) true man; And
therefore your ministers and you (...) abuse this place of the Apostle,
alleging it to the (...) your affection you falsity the scripture, seduce the
(...) dishonor God, and his truth and perform a plea^ (...) Satan and
Antichrist. As Lazarus said this, To^^ came again into the pl ce; staring upon
Cime, whom he saw very pensive, and made them laugh with his looks, and would
feign have spoken, b^ the Marquess made a sign to him to be quiet. The Tutour
would gladly have broken off all this dispute, having already his full charge,
Lazarus going forward; you assure us also (quoth he) that the Church does no
miracles. Of your Church it is true; but if you speak of the Church of God
which is ours, I demand what place of scripture affirms that which you say,
or any thing near it? The scripture says, that God is Almighty as well now as
when he made the world, and that his hand and power is not shortened, then he
can do miracles when he pleases: now that it pleases him to do them we se^ by
experience of those which he does, for he would not do them, if they pleased
him not: and therefore you speak against truth and manifest reason, saying,
that there are no miracles done now a days in the Church; and further against
the truth, when you say that they be neither necessary nor profitable: when God
does them, teaches he not that they are necessary and profitable? Will you say
they are superfluous? Will you be wiser and better advised then God himself, to
know better then he, what is necessary and profitable? If you say they are not
necessary to plant the faith which is already planted, I answer, that if it
were necessary to have miracles to plant the faith at the beginning of the
Church among the Paynims, it is so still amongst the Paynims of the new world,
where the faith begins: and therefore it is that God does them there: I say
secondly that if amongst Christians, they be not necessary to plant the faith
as at the beginning, yet they are for other effects: They are to manifest the
glory of God, his power, his providence, his mercy, his justice, to show
always as by some mark of note that he is master of nature, and that he can
do more then she; to honor his Saints; to nourish and entertain the faith of
his children; to confute heresies, to convert sinners; al which effects have
followed the miracles which have been done at Loreto by the intercession of
the B. Virgin, and else where by the intercession of other Saints. Is it not a
thing necessary that God be glorified and sinners converted and saved? But are
not your ministers wicked and unjust, to think that God will not do any
miracle for the good of his Church, and yet will suffer Antichrist to do lying
miracles to the ruin of the same? who ever saw a Captain so ill advised, who
having undertaken the defense of a Fort, permits his enemy to batter to his
uttermost, and yet himself stirs not, nor permits any other to move to
the resistance and repelling of the enemy? Will Jesus Christ then permit, yea
command that his Church shall be battered and assaulted with signs and lying
miracles by Antichrist, which are the strongest engines of the Devil and will
let him batter without once moving or working against him any true miracle for
the truth Moreover does not your doctrine a notable injury to the Church of
God, Miracles a note of the true Church.
to take from her the use of miracles which is one of the fairest marks that
she has always had, to show that she is the true and lawful espouse of
Christ against all heresies and sects, which attribute to themselves the name
of the Church, which never yet could work miracle, no more then your selves?
For since your first Father Luther, we could never get from you one miracle,
though the Ministers have taken great pains thereabouts: and finally loosing
all hope ever to do any, they are advised to cover their own shame, with the
net of this negation, saying there are no more miracles wrought in the world,
wherein very experience refuteth you all over the world; and to deny that
miracles are wrought, is to deny palpable experience, it is to say there is
neither sun, moon, nor stars in the heavens, that is to be shameless, and
to mock at all authority.

And to come to the miracle that has most moved you, Whether a man man live
without his bowels.
you cannot believe that a man can live without his entrails, because, say
you, reason and philosophy do not tell you how. And I demand of you Sir, do you
know the nature of faith, and that she goes beyond reason? When there is a
question of a miracle, must we learn our lesson of humane reason and of
nature? Is not this, as if one should learn philosophy of a poor Grammarian,
and measure the water of the Ocean, with a nut shell? Reason, nature,
philosophy, cannot work or judge any thing, but what is in their own compass
and jurisdiction. A miracle is an effect which go h beyond the marches of
nature, as the heaven above the ea th: Philosophy (...) understood is the
mother of heresy.
how do you rule your faith by the measure of nature? Are you not so doing, a
Paynim philosopher rather then a faithful Christian? After the fashion of old
heretics, who by such like Maxims, would overthrow all the Articles of our
faith Demand of humane reason and of philosophy, if a man's body devoured by
beasts, or turned into ashes, can rise again to life? They will tell you that
it is impossible, and will mock at the Resurrection, as hertofore did Epicurus
and the Philosophers of his school: as also your ministers do mock other
mysteries of our faith, namely that of the Altar, the truth whereof they
impugn, saying that one body can not be in diverse places, that it cannot be
without occupying place, without being seen and touched, which are reasons
drawn raw from philosophy, which has only the eyes of nature and not of
faith; which teaches that God is mightier then nature; That he is faithful to
perform what he had said. Now it is he that said This is my body: then,
although by the laws of nature, a body could not be in diverse places, yet it
may by the power of God: Eue^ so to touch the point of our purpose, although a
man's body cannot naturally live without his entrails, yet by the power of God
and by miracle it may. And what will you say, Ios. Acost. hist. lid. lib. 3.
cap. 23.
if I shall add, that a man, whom the Paynims in Mexico, did sacrifice these
years past, did speak after they pulled out his heart? And if you receive not
this history, will you believe what a great Physician affirms to have
happened hertofore, Galen lib. 2. de Placit.
that diverse beasts that were to be sacrificed and cast upon the Altar, did
breath, cry, and rore aloud, yea also run sometime, after their hearts were
taken out. The Physician by the way said, this is very true, our Galen has
left it in writing: Arist. de genesis a^i^t. lib. 2. c. 4.
And yet, said Lazarus proceeding, Philosophy teaches that the heart is the
fountain of life, and the part that lives first and dies last in the bodies
of beasts. Now whether you believe these testimonies or no, it imports not
much; at the least you should believe that God can make a man live, speak, and
walk without entrayles, though humane reason and nature should say that by
their laws it could not be. And if you had rather follow reason then religion,
which teaches that God can do all things, you must also confess, that you had
rather be a Philosopher then a Christian. Thus far Lazarus.

The eyes of all the company were fastened on him, and there ran through the
table, a soft and sweet noise and rumor, every one praising his discourse, as
full of learning and eloquence. The Abbot asked the Tutour, if he had any thing
to reply: he answered No; for that he should gain nothing all the company
being contrary to his Religion, and that he would never believe these miracles.
Then it is want of faith (quoth the Abbot:) yea (quoth the Phisician) and of
some things else besides. Tony marking the man to be amazed, could not hold his
peace, but said unto him: Cime, thou may take horse when thou will, and save
thy self, thou have thy boots full and thy spurs on, did I not tell thee so
much? But what? thou have no faith. The Vicount had been very attentive all
supper long, taking singular pleasure in the discourse and contenance of
Lazarus, and said in his Cousins ear; behold a worthy Pilgrim, your master
in my opinion had rather be some where else. I would (quoth he) that he were at
the Garamantes, so I had never seen him; and upon these terms every man rose
from the table, saving Monsieur Marquess, and Monsieur S. Leo, who discoursed
sometime together with the Pilgrims, and forget not to entreat Lazarus to tell
them his country and his kindred: he answered in general, that his country was
not far of, and his parentage small, and modestly concealed the luster of his
house. They pressed him no further, doubting that he had made a vow not to make
himself known. So they took leave as well of the Marquess and the Abbot, as
of Monsieur Vicount, the Baron and their cousin, that they might not be
constrained to attend till they rose in the morning which would be late; as
also to be free to depart betymes. Every man did his endeavor to stay them the
next day, or longer, but they could not prevail. The Vicount and the Baron and
diverse others accompanied them to their chamber, and having talked a while,
they embraced them for their farewell, with a great demonstration of love and
friendship: and the Baron holding Lazarus hard, told him, that he would
remember him as long as he lived, but told him not what he had already resolved
in his mind. They being alone made their examen, said the Letanies, and took
for their morning Meditation the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, and the
subject of the glory of Paradise.

The fourtith day, and the tenth and last of his Return. 1. The desires and
deliberation of a devout soul. 2. A Meditation of the glorious Assumption of
the B. Virgin. 3. Of the glory of Paradise. CHAP. XXIV.
THE Baron being gone to bed, all kindled with the discourse of Lazarus, The
desires and deliberation of a devout soul.
could not sleep being tossed with the violence of his cogitations that
tormented him, and spoke to himself in this manner: whereon think thou young
man, and why take thou not the way of glory, which God has showed thee now
many years? What do thou expect of the world? ^ariest thou for some
misfortunate end of thy life, such as thou did escape narrowly in this
hunting? If thou h dst died by the tuske of the wild Bore, who killed thy
horse, in what estate and preparation had thou left this mortal life? And
with what rigor had thy poor soul, going out of her body laden with her
sins, been conuented before the tribunal of the divine and supreme justice?
And see thou not that this good God, let thee fall into this danger to make
thee fear, and has delivered thee by these holy Pilgrims, to show thee what
thou should do, to avoid the jaws of that internal Lion that expected
there, and to have thee in covert of his holy house? What expectest thou in thy
vocation of this earthly warfare? What can thou gain more then the
friendship of some earthly Prince, and the recompense of some humane and
flittering favor; and how dear shall thou buy it? How easily shall thou lose
it? And if being once gotten, it would last all thy life, yet what is it in
respect of those goods, those riches, of that immortal glory, which thou shall
get, following the service of this great King, who has long invited thee to
his Court by threats, by promises, by secret inspirations, and by a thousand
fair warnings whereby he knocks day and night at the door of thy hardened
heart? After he had long debated this matter, with these and like discourses, he
fell a sleep, and sleeping had this vision. He thought he was carried into
heaven, A vision of Paradise.
where he saw a City o^ form four square, great, and wonderful spacious,
compassed with walls of squared Am^thystes, of India and crystal, checker
wise, and pointed diamond wise, fastened with gold enamelled with azure: The
Towers were of the same matter and fashion, saving that their batlements were
made of Emeralds and Iacinths. The houses of the City were all great palaces,
built of Diamonds, Saphires, Topazes, and other precious stones of admirable
luster and variety, and cut most artificially: for couerings or roofes they had
the seeling of heauen-flaming, varying in colors like the rainebow. Me^ entered
in by twelve gates, three toward the east, and three toward the west, as many
toward the North, and toward the south, every one made of a whole entire
precious stone, figured and wrought with art surpassing the stuff. The market
place and streets were paued with brick of fine gold, and in the same place,
was seen a fountain of lively water, which made a torre^t of pleasure running
through the streets, and trees always green laden with the fruit of life,
and with flowers, which cast a most sweet odor, all over the City. The
Citizens men and women were divinely beautiful their bodies subtle shyning
like the sun, and all went and flew nymbly like to Eagles, clothed like the
Kings children, some in scarlet, some in crimson damask, others in white
satine, some in beaten gold, and others in other stuff, and these habits being
wrought and garnished with embrodery and pass main lace of gold, and poudered
with all sorts of exquisite and choice pearl and precious stones, were covered
with a garment of a glittering color, thin and swimming after them as a mantle
of Cypres, through the which the beauty of their ornaments appeared more
admirable. Their heads were crowned with Tissues of gold, set with great
oriental pearls, Rubies, Diamonds, and Emeraldes; and on their forhead hung a
glittering Cross made of diverse great Diamonds of wonderful brightness. They
carried a palm of immortality in their hands, and every one had ^is palace,
and lived all under one King, and at his own table in great abundance of all
good things, without fear of any evil, with a peace, union, and contentement
unspeakable; and there was heard without ceasing, sundry consorts of music,
of voices, and instruments upon the Towers, which made all the City sound with
an incredible melody. As the Baron was plunged in the rauishment of this
vision, he awaked about midnight, and perceived well that it was God, that
showed him the image of this City, and of these Citizens. He resolved from
thenceforth to be a Pilgrim upon earth and to serve God with all his heart, one
day to be received in the number of these Citizens, and a few days after, he
took his Fathers blessing and became Religious. In the same hour, when
Theodosius and Vincent had slept, Lazarus dreamed that being near his Fathers
house, his brother Pauline met him, saying all amazed: O my brother A^me Dieu
are you alive? Lazarus also more amazed, embraced him and said; O my dear
brother Pauline are you yet in the world? I kept your funerals at Loreto; and
with the shadow of this joy he awaked, and perceived it was but a dream and
slept again. Three hours after they a rose, and kneeled to their prayers,
making their Meditation, every man by himself, as they were wont.

Niceph li. 15. c. 14. ex lanen. Episc. Ieros. Gl^a, and alijs. Niceph. li. 2.
cap. 23. lib. 15. ca. 14.
Lazarus meditated first of the piety and devotion of the Apostles to our B.
Lady, perseuering three whole days to visit her sepulcher, and to honor it
with hymns and canticles, together with the consorts of Angels, who in the
same time afforded an admirable harmony of their heavenly melody, to the honor
of the same Virgin. Secondly he considered how S. Thomas, coming by the
Providence of God the third day, and desirous to honor the body of the B.
Virgin, whom he could not serve at her decease, as his companions did, was
cause that they opened the sepulcher, to give him contentment, and to behold
that sacred treasure laid up in it, and that not fynding it there, they
acknowledged the glorious Asssiption of the B. Virgin, carried to heaven both
body and soul, and privileged after her death with a prerogative of a
glorious resurrection, before the great and general day, as she was
privileged with a thousand graces all the course of her life. And thereupon
came into his memory the prophecy of King David, foretelling in these words
the Resurrection of the Son, and of the mother, Psalm. 133.
Arise O Lord into thy rest, thou, and the Arc of thy Sanctification. The
words also of the Son, speaking unto his mother, Cant. 4.
as unto his well beloved Spouse: Arise my friend, my dove, and come, the
winter is now passed the rain is ended and gone: make have my love without
staying for the last and general resurrection of men: Come betimes from the
shadow of the grave, and come to the light of heaven; for winter is passed with
you, and the showrs of your tears are dried up: he made her make haste, not
letting her lie three little, and short days in her Sepulcher.

So it was meet that, that sacred body which had brought forth life, should
not be swallowed by death, and given for a prey and food to worms; nor the
matter of incorruption turn to ashes; and that she who had by privilege been
exempted from original sin, Genesis 3.
and the common malediction of women in their childbirth, should also be
exempted from the pain and malediction incurred by the same, which was to be
by death, turned into dust and ashes.

Here Lazarus considered attentively, the glory of this resurrection, which
doubtless was worthy of the Son and mother of God, and such as the Angels
might well admire, but not express, and therefore seeing her ascend they said:
who is she that coming from the desert ascends laden with delights, Cant. ^.
and leaving upon her well beloved? They admired and demanded, and could not
otherwise express the beauty of this creature. And if these celestial
spirits, so well seen in all great things, do show by their wondering, that
they never saw the like in heaven, what can men say or conceive of the glory of
this Assumption?

Of the Meditation of this glory particular of the B. The joy and glory of
Paradise.
Virgin Lazarus took occasion to think of the joys of Paradise ^he
considered first the essence of that joy which consists in the vision of God,
a perfect joy and alone sufficient to satisfy and fill the heart of man, which
cannot be filled but with the possession of an infinite good; and if the
knowledge of creatures of the heavens, of the stars, of other creatures,
though imperfect and full of obscurity, can ravish with joy the spirits of
mortal men, in the darkness of this base and low world, what joy may redou^d to
the blessed souls above, of the clear vision and contemplation of their
Creator, the cause of all beauties that are in heaven or earth, and infinitely
more beautiful then all other beauty put together?

Of the body.
He meditated in the second place of the glory which the bodies of the ^ust
shall have after the Resurrection, which can not otherwise be declared, but as
the Apostle declares the whole felicity: That the eye has not seen, nor the
ear heard, nor the heart of man comprehended, ^. Cor. 2.
what God has prepared for those that love h m: he could say no more, then in
saying as he did, that it is impossible to conceive that felicty. The scripture
says that the just shall shine like the sun, and compares them to eagles,
Matt. 15.
signifying the beauty and agility of their body. Our Savior, to whose
similitude we shall rise again, came out of the grave that he rose out
subtle, impassible; such in similitude shall our bodies be in such qualities
shining, Phil. 3.20
transpare^t, agile, subtle, penetrant and immortal: here withal every
particular part of the body shall have a supernatural beauty, as now it has a
natural, with this difference, that then all the body being transparent like
crystal, all parts shall be visible in it, as well the inward as the outward,
the bones, the muscles, the sinews, the veins, the arteries, the lungs, the
liver, the heart, and all shall be cleansed and cleared from all imperfection,
indewed with their proper beauty, in propo^tion, clearenes, and color. This of
Sapphire, that of Emeraldes, one of Carbuncles, another of Diamonds, and above
all shall be most adm rabble those which have been employed in some special
and peculiar service of the divine Majesty. So the skin of S. Bartholomew
stead off for the faith, shall shine with a particular beauty; the arms and
feet of S. Peter crucified; the head of S. Paul cut of, the tongues of true
preachers, the hands of Almoners, the arms of the true soldiers of
Jesus Christ, the eyes of chastity* the hayres of virginity, nothing shall be
without recompense, without excellency, without particular glory. Lazarus was
plunged in this meditation and said: O my soul, if thou be ravished
meditating these beauties, how great shall thy joy be in enjoying them? O
Lazarus what do thou to deserve them? What give thou to buy them? What
suffer thou to gain this honor? And with what pace walk thou to get the
goal of this glory? O souls redeemed with the precious blood of Jesus, think
upon these honors.

O Christian Dames, who so highly esteem the beauty of the body, that not
having it you would gladly purchase it with great sums of gold and silver,
and having it do hold it so dear, tender it so carefully, by art, by gold, by
apparel, by chains, carkenets, and jewels; your beauty is nothing, it is
foul and ill favored in respect of this; and if it were any thing, you know
well it shall finally perish, either by some misfortune, or by touch of
sickness, or by age, or surely by death. Where is the beauty of Absalo^, of
Lucrece, of so many men and women admired in the world? Love then the beauty of
this Resurrection, which shall be proper for ever unto your bodies, and to
obtain it, love now the beauty of your souls! O my soul, be thou amorous and
in love with this beauty: O glorious Virgin, O faithful advocate, adua^ced
this fair and joyful day above all the thrones of the heavenly and happy
spirits, the wonder of all goodly creatures on earth, whilst thou were alive,
the wonder of all the creatures in heaven for ever, the honor of the
triumphant Church, the refuge of the militant, the comfort of the afflicted,
the guide of wanderers, help us with thy graces and credit with him, by whom
thou were this day carried up into heaven, with the company of all the heavenly
hosts. Procure, o most B. Virgin, that we obtain grace, holily to live upon
earth, to the imitation of thy self, and happily to dye to thy example, and
one day to enjoy eternally the riches of the triumphant Resurrection in the
Kingdom of thy Son Jesus.

1. An exhortation to a sick person in agony of death. 2. The affliction of
Lazarus. 3. His arrival at his Fathers house. 4. His farewell to his Father,
and to the world. CHAP. XXV.
THVS Lazarus ended his prayer, Theodosius and Vincent ended then also, and had
felt great inward joy therein. The steward came early to their chamber, having
made ready their breakfast, but they would eat nothing, saying it was to
soon. They desired him humbly to salute in their behalf Monsieur the
Marquess, the Abbot, the Vicount, and the Baron his children, and to assure
them that they would pray to God for their prosperity. The steward had closely
put into Lazarus bag ten Crowns wrapped in a paper, with these words of the
Marquess own writing, Pray to God for the Marquis; which Lazarus found at
night in his fathers house. He embraced the Steward with many thanks, and
after they had said their Pilgrims prayers, they went out of the Castle, and
having been a while silent, they began to talk: Lazarus praised much the
prudence and liberality of the Marquis, and of his brother, the sincere and
hearty love of his children, full of humility and courtesy, the true marks of
true nobility, as contrariwise pride and disdain is a true token of a base and
rude mind: he commended also greatly the modesty and diligence of all the
officers and servants, and took this for a sure sign of the Marquess his
virtue, for commonly like master like men, and the subjects do for the most
part frame themselves, after the fashions of their Lord. Theodosius said that
he noted at supper a marvelous contentment of all in the answer that was made
to Sire Cime, and that he did never better perceive the leuity and obstinacy of
heresy, then in that man, who sought nothing but to talk, and show himself,
though he showed himself always void of good learning. Pride the Father of
heresy.
Whereupon Lazarus said: Pride is the Father of heresy, and vanity is her
Mistress: and therefore you may not marvel to see an Heretic both proud and
vain together. Wherefore then (quoth Vincent) does not the Marquess his
nephew show himself like his master? Because (says Lazarus) he is not so
much an Heretic, as bred and brought up in heresy, never having been
Catholic, knowing nothing but what they have given him to understand without
contradictio^, and it is well to be hoped, that as he is of a noble and
tractable nature, and of a goodly spirit, that as soon as he shall have free
liberty to confer with some learned man, or cast his eyes upon some learned
book, he will discover the deceits of these impostures, which his master has
commended unto him for rules and maxims of his Religion, and will embrace the
truth of the Catholic faith. Surely (said Vincent I longed much to have told
the Tutour, that he wanted a Head himself, when he demanded of me, why
partridges were served without heads; I was not sorry (quoth Lazarus) that the
question of the head was proposed, for the tail thereof proved good, and
Theodosius had a doctor, who expounded his answer with an honorable gloss:
surely (quoth Theodosius) that fellow deserved to be well paid, as he was, God
give him grace to know himself. Discoursing in this sort, the Pilgrims had
dispatched four leagues which was more by half, then they had to the house of
Lazarus his Father, which was called the Castle, built near unto a town; they
came to a place called Bonuoison, where they dyned cheerfully and would
presently have been gone, but that a chance stayed them: And that was, that
there were two poor men sick in the Inn, who the night before had confessed,
and demanded extreme unction, and even now entered into the agony of death,
having no body, that in so dangerous a distress, might exhort them: for the
Curate was gone to the obsequies, which that day were kept at the Castle. They
thought that charity bound them, to assist until the Curate should come, who
(they said) would return presently, Lazarus took one in one chamber,
Theodosius and Vincent the other in another chamber: and seeing that they had
perfect memory, they exhorted them both. Lazarus exhorted his in this sort.

My dearest brother, you know well, that death is a common debt which all
mortal men must pay without exception, An exhortation to the sick.
great and small, soon or late, according unto the time which God the
sovereign master of death and life has prefixed: He having given us this
world, nor as a permanent City to dwell in always, but rather as an Inn, to
lodge like Pilgrims and passengers, and to go out, when it shall be time to
walk to a better life then this present is: Heb. 13.14.
Of the which we must not make any great account, for being full of miseries,
Math. 1.10
and wherein the longer we live, the more we offend, and where our sins do
multiply with our days and hours. Remember and acknowledge my most dear
Brother, the graces and gifts, which hitherto you have received of God, namely
that he has made you partaker of his grace, calling you to his heavenly
inheritance, by the light of his true and Catholic faith, and that in this
last conflict and period of your life, he has granted you your sense and
reason, to remember him, time to repent you of your sins, and to cry for
mercy, and means to obtain pardon and remission, not suffering you to be
surprised by sudden death, nor to leave this life, laden with sins, to be
condemned at the tribunal of the rigorous justice: have therefore great sorrow
for your offenses, and with a profound humility, demand if it please him, to
show you mercy, through the precious blood of his only dear son Jesus, dead
upon the Cross for us, and for all sinners: Suffer patiently the dolours of
your infirmity, beseeching him to take your anguishes and your death with those
of Jesus Christ, in satisfaction of the punishment you have deserved. Recommend
your self to the glorious Virgin, to S. Peter and S Paul, to your good Angel
and other Saints: if the enemy lay before your eyes the enormity of your sins
to thrust you into despair, lift up your eyes to the mercy of God, which is
infinitely more great, then your iniquity: If he tempt you with vain glory, by
reason of your good works, oppose thereunto your own sins to hold you in
Christian humility. Theodosius said the like to his Patient, and after this
exhortation they said the Lita^ies, which being said Lazarus went forward, as
also Theodosius, for his part, saying: Dearest brother, if you cannot speak
unto God with your tongue, yet speak with your soul, for God understands
the heart; follow me and say: I will live and dye in the faith of Jesus Christ,
in his Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church: I believe the Contents of the
Creed, the seven Sacraments, and all that God has commanded me to believe
by his Church, and detest all heresy contrary thereunto: I humbly demand pardon
of my sins, and purpose fully to abstain if God shall perhaps suffer me to
live any longer. I pardon all my enemies, and ask pardon of all I have
offended: I desire to endure these dolou^s, and this death for the honor of
God, and for the satisfaction of my sins. They had no sooner done, but the
Curate came, and had leisure to anneile them, after which they departed in
great peace. It came in Vincents mind to think, whether these two men should
rise again, and if in them should be fulfilled the Hermits verses, which he
gave to Lazarus, whereof notwithstanding he spoke not a word. They said
certain prayers for the departed, and without informing themselves of any
thing of the place whence the Curate came, they went their way, that they might
come betymes to the Castle, which was but a league and a half distant: they
went joyfully, remembering now well the coasts of the country, and the places
they had not seen seven years before.

Having gone half a league Lazarus met a country fellow all alone, coming
from the castle, whom he knew well but was not known again: he asked how
Monsieur of the Castle did? I think (quoth the fellow) that he is in health
but he has been very melancholy these last four days, for the death of his
son, whose obsequies were kept this day. Lazarus was pierced with this news,
and said not a word more unto him, but let him go on his way; and entered into
an extreme apprehension and melancholy within himself, for he ghessed by this
news that Francis his yo^ger brother was dead, who only was left with their
Father, when he and Pauline undertook their voyage. Theodosius and Vincent
went before; he followed alone after, and lamented thus to himself in silence.
Alas, how shall I present my self to this desolate old man, this day, bringing
him news of the death of one of his dearest children, hard upon the fresh
funerals of another, who was his only stay? What comfort can I give him, in
this grief for his son, reporting unto him the death of his Son, and his
Son Pauline whom he loved so tenderly, and whom he recommended unto me so
fatherly at our departure? Is it not enough to make him dye of grief, and to
defile my self with the crime of parricide? O Noble old man, who shall sollace
thy sorrows? O my dear Pauline, who have remained in the sepulchers of Africa
that thou were now present, to comfort either thy father or thy brother! O the
bitter and doleful conclusion of my pilgrimage! Thus complained he in his heart.

Theodosius and Vincent seeing him follow so slowly, and so pensiuely, stayed
for him, and perceiving his countenance changed, asked if he felt him self
ill? Alas yea, quoth he* Why, says Theodosius? I doubt me, my good brethren,
that we shall have cause to mourn to day at our arrival. Then am I far
besides my reckoning (quot Vincent) for I make account to rest and make merry.
It will be then, at the funeral (quoth Lazarus) that you must be merry, for
yonder fellow told me, that my brothers obsequies are kept this day: They are
(quoth Theodosius) the obsequies of Pauline: But I fear me (quoth Lazarus)
that they are of my brother Francis: and have I not then cause to lament both
mine own estate, and that of the good old man my fathers? With what face can I
look on him, and what hart-breake shall my presence be unto him, when by me he
shall understand the death also of his other son, his heart, and his dearling?
I pray you (quoth Vincent) let us not found melancholy upon shadows, it is but
a conjecture you have, we must not hold it for certain truth. Let us expect a
while, without giving the alarm at the voice of a peasant. Lazarus said no
more, but marched all mute: As they were a quarter of a mile from the Castle; I
see there below (quoth Vincent) five or six persons, I think they be of
Monsieur his people, stay a while I pray you, until I go and know. Lazarus and
Theodosius stayed; as he came about ten paces from them, he perceived Pauline
with three or four of his Cousins, amongst whom was a brother of Theodosius.
Pauline perceiving him also, ran straight unto him, and embraced him: Vincent
all ravished; And what, says he, we thought you had been dead in Africa, and
Lazarus mourned for you even now. My brother Lazarus! quoth Pauline: and is he
alive? Yea (says Vincent) and as lusty as ever he was, saving that he is
somewhat melancholy. Alas we have made his obsequies: His obsequies, quoth
Vincent! do the bury folks alive in this country? He thought they had been the
funerals of his brother Francis: He is quick and queath too, God be thanked,
quoth Pauline but where is my brother Lazarus? He is there (quoth Vincent) and
showed him where they stayed under the trees. Pauline fell a running, and
crying without seeing any body, my brother Lazarus, my brother Aime-Dieu where
are you? Lazarus hearing this voice, said to Theodosius, Is not this voice of
Pauline? Do I not dream still? Hark* Pauline cried again: it is even so
(quoth Theodosius) and they went ^e^^e: Lazarus saw Pauline, who cast himself
into his arms, and Lazarus (...) his neck, both weeping (...) remaining to a
w^i^^ (...) speaking. At last (says Lazarus) but is not (...) ^^ear^e, that
gives me a vain joy? Theodosius embracing Pauline; It is surely Pauline that
I hold (quoth he) doubt you nothing. And speaking to Pauline; O my good Cousin,
Lazarus has made your obsequies (...) Loreto, and are you yet living? And we
have made his here (quoth Pauline.) This then (quoth Lazarus) is the
fulfilling of the two first verses of the Hermits prophecy.

At that fair Day, the last which you desire,
Two dead revived without death shall each other see.
For behold, you my brother raised again to mine eyes, without dying, and I to
yours; and I hope that the other two verses, with the whole prophecy shall he
accomplished: but is our honorable Father well, and in health, and our
wel-beloued brother and decrest sister? All the world is well and galliard
(quoth Pauline) God be thanked, there was nothing but the news of your death
that did contristate us. Amidst these imbracings, the other gentlemen came, and
the brother of Theodosius, and embraced straight not without many tears.

Lazarus arrived at his Father house.
Now the question was, how to advertise their Father. Pauline would presently
have gone unto him, but Lazarus was of opinion to use dexterity, least
receiving news of a great joy presently upon a great heaviness, he should fall
into some deadly sounding, by the encountering of these contrary passions. No
(quoth Pauline) he is resolute and constant, and the news of your arrival
will not hurt him I warrant you. Let me alone with the matter; all shall go
well. Expect only in the court of the Castle, until I warn you of a fit time
to come in. Pauline went and saluted his father, who was in his chamber, with
his brother Francis, somewhat pensive. He said unto him. Sir, you must rejoice
and not be sorry for the death of my brother Aime-Dieu. My child (answered his
father) my greatest grief is past, I am resolved to patience, seeing it is the
will of God so; I hope I shall see him shortly in heaven. Sir (quoth Pauline)
would you not be glad to see him in earth? If it had been Gods will, I would
gladly have seen him returned from his pilgrimage, before I did end mine; but
seeing it is fallen out otherwise. God be blessed for all. Sir, quoth Pauline,
rejoice: your son is yet alive, and you shall see him shortly, and therewith
made a sign to the page who had the watch word, to call his brother. How
understand you that, says his Father? And as he would have spoken and asked
further, Lazarus entered in, with Theodosius and Vincent, saying aloud: Sir
behold your son risen again. The good good old man as it were a waked out of
a deep dream, and astonished, as if he had seen a body rise out of the grave,
fastened his eyes on the face of Lazarus, and embracing him bathed him in warn
tears: O my Son (quoth he) how little looked for, and how greatly pleasing is
thy coming unto me? thou art welcome with all thy companions: but art thou yet
alive? Art thou he whose funerals we celebrated yesterday, and for whom we
hanged this house with black? Is it not a dream that does thus transport me?
Sir (quoth Lazarus) it is your son, and here lo your nephew Theodosius, and
your faithful servant Vincent: Lo verily, I do remember them well (says he)
and embracing them, God save you my good friends, quoth he. Francis embraced
his brother Aime-Dieu, with a wonderful demonstration of joy, as also
Theodosius, and all the Castle and town did ring of the news of these
Pilgrims return. The hall which was hanged for do^e, was straight hanged with
tapistry, the countenance of the persons and of the very walls changed from a
great sadness to a sudden joy, and there was nothing but imbracements and voice
of joy; and the good old man come to himself, and as it were becoming young
again, with the return of his son, Go we (says he) to give thanks to God,
and lead them to the Church in their Pilgrims weed as they came into the
Castle: The Church was full of the townsmen astonished and ravished to see
their masters Son sound and lusty, for whom they had mourned in the
morning. After they had song Te Deum, and given thanks: the old man said to
Lazarus, My son Aime-dieu, your brother Pauline told me that you had changed
your name, and were called Lazarus; behold, to that purpose you are raised
again the fourth day: for this is twesday, and on Saturday we had news of
your death. God give me grace (quoth Lazarus) well to dye, and well to rise
again. This being said, they returned to the Castle. Monsieur caused good
alms to be given; and Lazarus advised Vincent, to give the steward the ten
Crowns in his bag, to give also in alms to the poor, and the remaynder of
their Viaticum: Open house was kept all that day, and the next to all comers:
they went quickly to supper, and al supper time, and after also, was nothing
but questions, and answers, and admirations. About ten a clock in the night,
the Pilgrims took their leave of the old man, giving him the good night, and
he to them: They were brought every one to their chamber, their feet^ were
washed, and new change of apparel brought them to put on when they rose. In
the morning all the Pilgrims made their meditations, and communicated, without
omitting any of their accustomed exerses of devotion. A fortnight passed in
diverse recreations, namely in recounting the miracles, and favors of the B.
Virgin, the adventures and accidents, the encounters and dangers of their
Pilgrimage, in Palestine, in Egypt, in Africa, in Asia, and in Europe, since
Pauline was prisoner; who also related unto Lazarus, and his companions, how he
fell into the hands of the Saracenes, and the manner how God delivered him and
conducted him home. Theodosius returned to his Fathers house, to take his
blessing, and after came back to Lazarus. Pauline was always in his fervor
of leaving the follies of the world, and pressed Lazarus as much as he could to
hasten that affair, as also Vincent. Lazarus was glad to see all the house in
good order; and his sister, who had been widow now three years, like a good
mistress of the house govern the family instead of her mother departed, and
in mind to marry no more: and his brother Francis full of prudence and piety,
honoring and solacing his father, as much as could be desired of a Son: so
that he watched nothing but a fit hour to bid his father farewell: and fynding
him one day as he desired, he spoke to him in this sort.

Lazarus his farewell to his Father and the World.
My most honorable Father and Lord, by Gods favor and power I am returned from
my seven years voyage, and upon the point to begin another longer then
that, with your leave and blessing. I beseech you to permit me upon my
departure solemnly to confess and acknowledge, that I am as much bound unto
you, as ever was son to his father or subject to his Lord; and that I use
this confession, to justify the request I mean to make, and make it gra^table.
I owe unto you next to God, all that I have, and all that I am; for I am your
Son and you are my Father, by which title I owe you all: And a Father, not
such as only having begotten me, and given me my body, as other fathers, to
leave me heir of your earthly possessions, The obligation of the Son to the
Father.
without taking any care or very small of the salvation of my soul: but like a
true Father, you have nourished me in my childhood in the fear of God, and
without sparing of any care or temporal means, have provided me of the best
and choicest masters in Christendom: having learned good literature until
18. years of age, you made me learn to wear and handle arm^s after the
fashion of our Nobility of France in the best Universities of E^rope. After I
was sent into Hungary to wars against the Turks, where I commanded three
years with honorable success of my travails, and contentment of the
Captain, in whose company I carried arms: being returned from this voyage and
no occasion presenting it self unto me in our France, honorable to employ my
desire and calling, you were of opinion, depriving your self of me for love of
me, that I should travail into the East, that so I might learn virtue in the
school of the world seeing diverse countries and diverse nations, and you did
condescend that my brother Pauline should go with me, because he desired it:
and you caused us to be furnished with honorable provision of men and horse:
but I desired you to permit me to go travail as a Christian Pilgrim, and
namely to that noble place of Loreto, and that enduring some pain for the love
of God and satisfaction of my sins, I might win heaven: you praised mine
intention, and yet notwithstanding you recommended us to certain french
Gentlemen, which were in the East, and made us to take letters of Bank, to
help us if we should be in necessity. Then I declared unto you, as also did my
brother Pauline, the desire I had in my soul, ever since my youth to leave the
world, and to dedicate my self to the service of God; a desire which has
always increased in me, and grown so much the more earnest and fervent, by
how much the more clearly I did discover the vanity of this life in every
vocation, and learn that there was nothing stable under the heavens, and
nothing more noble or worthy then to seek everlasting riches; a desire which
came not of my self, but of God, for whom I have heard you often say, that we
must leave Father and Mother, and all. It came also of you, Sir, by reason of
the good instructions which you gave me, and had caused to be given me, so that
for all, and every way, I am bound and obliged to you.

Behold then my request grounded upon two good titles, of the goodness and will
of God, and of your virtue and merit toward me: and this my desire is, that
for the honor of God whom your self honor above all things; and for the
holy love you bear unto me, and have showed by a thousand benefits, that it
would please you to take in good part, that without any longer delay, I may
leave the world to consecrate my self to the service of him, who has called
me to follow him, and that giving me your blessing, you would crown with this
benefit, all others that hitherto I have received of you; all which I will
remember whilst my body shall breath, and for the which I shall demand of God
with warm tears, a recompense worthy of his divine Majesty. The manner of
life which I shall choose, shall not make me leave, or forget the love and
respect which I owe unto you, but will make it more solid and firm: for the
counsels of God, which teach us to follow him near, are not contrary to his
law, which commands to honor Father and Mother; and Religion does not
destroy the law of nature, but does purify, confirm, and increase it. And
therefore though I should be absent in body, yet I shall be always present with
you in spirit, and in what place soever the providence of God shall let me
live, I shall always remain your most humble Son and Servant, and will put
you in the beginning, middle, and end of my best prayers and desires. And I have
full hope in the goodness of him, Genesis 12.14.
that said, Go out of thy country, out of thy kindred, and from the house of
thy Father, that if he give me the grace to be a good religious man, as he has
given me the desire, he will also yield more comfort to your person, and more
service to your house, by my prayers, then by my presence I could affoard, what
estate or calling soever I should embrace. And in this respect the prudence and
piety of my well beloved brother, and my dearest sister shall supply all the
want you may have by my absence. For you have had good trial and experience
this seven years that this house can well stand without me, and that your old
age receives by their only assistance, obedience, and charity, all the
service and succor that a father may expect of his best children. And
therefore I beseech you, my most honorable Father, to hear my request and
bless my departure: and saying this he cast himself at his feet.

The good old man began to weep a good while, and being somewhat pacifyed,
caused his Son to rise up, and said unto him, with a grave and constant
countenance: My Son Aime-dieu, thy words do show, that thou have pity and
compassion of thy Father, and that thou would part from me without violence:
thou do well and like a good child: for though thou know not yet, what it
is to be a Father, thou doo^t notwithstanding wisely conjecture, that fatherly
love does make me feel thy departure, and thou do piously endeavor so much
the more the assuage the grief that grows in me, by nature, by how much the
more pricking and piercing it is. Know thou, my Son, that I have been now,
long time prepared to conform my self to the will of God, namely seven
years since thou wentst in pilgrimage with thy brother Pauline, when together
with him thou made thy meaning known unto me. I found some difficulty to
resolve my self; but at the last, this is my mind and my resolution; I am
content and glad that the will which God has given thee to do well, and serve
him with a perfect heart, has continued in thee lively and constant, and shall
be more glad to see thee happily effectuate the same. I think I cannot wish a
better fortune, then to see thee in the service of such a Lord, and that I
cannot have a desire more worthy and fit for a Father, then to desire thy
salvation. The obligation thou have to me is small in it self, and nothing in
respect of that thou owe unto God. Of me thou have the beginning of thy
being, in the mortal seed of thy mortal body, which being well considered is
a thing of nothing, and should indeed have been nothing, if the Almighty hand
of God, had not given force to nature to form thy members within in the womb
of thy mother; and all these members formed are but a lump of nothing, if he
had not infused a soul, bearing his own image and likeness to rule therein, to
quicken and govern it; and finally that little I have contributed to thy
generation, comes also from the liberality of the same Lord: so that all
being well deducted, it is God that has given thee all thou have, and all thou
art, and from him all thy goods do rise; to his goodness thou must return duty
and homage, and to me thou owe nothing but by the law of the same God, who
commands thee to honor father and mother, in consideration of what thou
have received of them. For the rest, thou art all his, and if he had taken thee
twenty years since or before from me or from this world he had done me no
wrong, taking but his own. And when these days past I had news of thy death.
I settled my self to a resolution to thank him for all, with the hope I
conceived, that he had showed mercy unto thy soul, and having now conserved
thee in life and desire to serve him, I have the more to thank him for the
honor he does me, calling thee to the service of his Altar: An honor much
greater, then if thou were called to the court of the greatest Prince in the
world. The care, pain, and charges that I have bestowed to bring thee up in
virtue, and to make thee worthy of a noble house, and which thou have learned
in schools, in wars, in thy peregrinations, are also gifts of his holy hand,
and cannot receive a richer recompense, nor a better fortune, nor a more royal
employment then in the house of God. And if I be a true Father, I cannot desire
thee a better inheritance, then that which thy heavenly Father will give thee,
if thou seruest him as a faithful child. And if I should pretend to have some
comfort of thy presence, I should receive an unspeakable comfort to understand
that thou were in the train and wages of this King, placed amongst his
domest^call servants, leaning his ears to thy devotion, speaking to him of me,
and praying to him for me, and demanding of him by thy continual prayers some
gift for the salvation of my soul. Thou set before mine eyes for my
comfort, the assistance of thy brother and sister: Surely the proof I have had
of their filial sincerity and obedience has made me hope well of the^; but
know thou that the hope of my repose and solace is in God, who has given me
such children, and if he will call them also to his service, I will then also
expect help at his hands in my viduity and solitude, and will think, that I
have received at his Majesty's hands a new benefit, without fearing that my
house and race shall end by them: for if it shall once take an end, according
to the common course of families of this world* it cannot be more honorable
ended, then by this sacred sterility of religious persons vowed unto God. Many
Fathers will think my judgment and opinion inhumane, but I am content that it
is reasonably and magnanimous before God. If for my temporal commodities which
I may expect of my children I should hinder their vocation from heaven unto
eternal goods, which specially I should desire unto them, I should not be a
true Father: for this should not be to love my children, but to love my self,
and to prefer mine own temporal ease, before their honor and salvation:
and therefore, my Son, have no grief to leave thy Father to serve God. Thou
leauest not thy Father neither, but do obey him. If I have done any thing
for thee, thank him, who made me thy father, and beseech him to do me this
favor to end my mortal pilgrimage under the safe conduct of his grace. I
beseech him with all my heart to make thee great in his sight, and a worthy
seruitour in his holy house, and thy fellows; and this is the blssing I give
thee: farewell my dear Son, fare thee well: And saying this, with tears he
fell on the neck of Lazarus, who also wept tenderly. And soon came Pauline,
and being iofull of this lo^ing leave which he saw was granted to his brother,
and full of hope to obtain as much for himself with the like or more
facility, cast himself at his Fathers feet, who was set in his closet sad and
pensive, desiring to have his blessing, so long desired. But behold nature, and
some contrary and adverse spirit helping her, played her part to trouble the
peace of the father, and to cross the designement of the Son: for as the
good old man saw himself at the point to be deprived of the dearest of all his
children, pierced with the grief of the loss, and loosing the memory of his
former resolution, and of all he had said a little before to Lazarus, he
suddenly changed his love into fury, being tra^sported with anger, as a
Lioness in the loss of her little ones. Well then Pauline (quoth he) thou will
also abandon and forsake me after thy brother, and instead of succouring my
solitude, thou preparest to leave my house destitute and desolate, and hereto
thou demaundest my blessing. Tell me, thou unnatural child, and cruel Impe,
have I brought thee into this world, and nourished thee so fatherly, to be
forsaken by thee without piety, at the brinke of my grave? Have I fashioned and
cherished thy youth, with all sorts of favors and benefits, to reap in my old
age these fruits of anguishe of thy ungrateful ground? Does God command thee
to be forgetful, disobedient, or cruel, to him that begat thee? To be his
death after thou have received of him thy being, and all the good that a child
could receive of a good father? But with what face will thou present thy
offering to God, after thou have left thy father laden with the burden of a
thousand troubles, and torments endured for thee, and wounded with a
hartbreake, and with a deadly stroke, by thy murtherous hands? God commands
to love thine enemies, and thou will kill thy father: and dare thou appear
before the holy Altar of the supreme Justice, soiled with so great a sin? And
if thou will serve God as a perfect servant, who lets thee to perform it in
the house of thy father, whom God commands thee to serve and honor? Of thy
Father, I say, who has always given thee by his works and words good
testimony that he caryeth the fear of God in his heart, and loves virtue, and
is pleased to see his children perfect in all piety? Think thou that there
is never a good man in the world, nor any worthy of thy company? Is there no
place in heaven, but only for Religious? Or may we not live a perfect life
among men, without leaving the company and conversation of men? After these
periods and clauses shot like sharp and pointed arrows, he paused a while; and
as if all his choler had been spent and disgorged, yet Nature forced him to
apply, for a second assault and battery, the force of a contrary passion. He
took the language of love, stroaking and embracing whom he would not anger
but win, and resuming his speech: O (says he) my well beloved Pauline. O my
life and my comfort, have comp^ssion of me, thy desolate Father: behold these
white hayres, these hollow eyes, these tears, and hasten not my end: live yet
a while with me, and if thou desire my death, thou shall see it shortly, it
draws on apace with the roll of my years and infirmities, and knocks
already at the door of all my senses, assigning me over to my sepulcher. Stay
a little that I may give thee my last benediction in peace, and that thou may
take it without offense: expect and tarry till I be put in my grave, and then
thou may go which way thou will: here he held his peace, being stopped with
the violence of his sighings, and abundance of tears, which trickled down
his cheeks, great, and fervent, and held the head of Pauline fast in his hands
upon his knees; and a man might see in his face inflamed, and his body shaking,
the conflict of an extreme passion that ruled in his soul. Pauline was at this
anger and commotion of his Father, more astonished then offended, for he easily
perceived, that it was not of any evil will, but that the subtilty of the
wicked spirit had surprised the good old man by an ambushment, laid behind the
walls of Nature, and fatherly affection; and had of him great compassion, and
with a calm countenance said unto him. My most honorable Father, if I had
thought that my demand would have offended you, I protest that I would never
have made it, neither except I had long before perceived by evident signs,
that my vocation had been full pleasing unto you, dared I to have opened my
mouth to discover it. And now Sir, let not God suffer me to grieve honorable
old age, which I have alwais respected as becomes a man of honor, although
otherwise it had not touched or concerned me any thing at all; nor so far to
forget my self, either of your immortal benefit, or of the duty of a true
Son, nor to foul my soul with the vice of such ingratitude, contemning your
commandment, which I am bound to obey with a thousand merits, and a thousand
titles of love. My most dear Lord and Father be you in rest. I will stay as
long as it shall please you, and will serve you in your house, and will account
my self much honored to live in your company, and under your obedience, and do
verily believe, that God will we^l accept this duty done for his love according
to the direction of his laws. And if it please you, I will also do my best to
persuade my brother Aime-Dieu, to stay his voyage also, to dwell with you, and
to employ himself with me to your contentment and comfort. At these words,
uttered with so great simplicity of heart and countenance of a child, the good
old Sir was in that instant pacifyed, and his heat assuaged; and it seemed that
the speech of Pauline entering at his ears, had also mollifyed, and transformed
his heart, as it were, with some sweet drink of heavenly liquour, and therefore
taking again his spirits of love and prudence, and returning in a sort to
himself: O my God (says he) where am I? And into what errors has the
iniquity of my soul transported me? O merciful^ Father have mercy on me, and
have not regard to my folly, and rashness in speech. O my well beloved Pauline,
I know well thy obedience and piety toward me, and thou have undertaken
nothing, but by the inspiration of God; with my good will and lyking, thou
did long since advertise me of this desire. O sovereign God, pardon me, and
do thy pleasure with my Son, or rather with thine own, for thine he is, and
not mine. Pardon me, my Son, and excuse my infirmity* this was an excursio^
of a child of Adam that old sinner, and of my corrupted nature, which seeks
earth and not heaven. Pursue (my Son) thine enterprise, and better, and
perfecter then thy Father, serving God far from this Babylon, and the
confusion of this perverse world, and live happily in the household of his
sovereign Majesty: follow hardly the voice of him who says unto thee; Go out
of thy country, and out of thy kindred, and out of the house of thy Father, and
come into a land which I shall show thee. And leaving me, fear not to be
cruel toward me, for this kind of cruelty is an exploite of great piety. It
is the Father of the whole world, who commands and calls thee, and who am
I, worm of the earth, to oppose my self to his vo^ce? And what an unnatural
Father were I to envy thy souls health, thy rest, thy glory, for the desire of
my commodity? And to hold thee at my chymney corner, to crouch to the service
of my sensuality, having but three short days to live, and to the mean time
to hinder thee from following in good time the King of Kings, and reigning in
his Court. Pauline would have spoken to have stayed the course of his Fathers
tears, and to solace his grief which he saw was great. But the old man went
forward saying: Go then my joy, my happiness, mine own dear Pauline, I am well
worthy to want thee for my sins; go thou with good fortune, and succor me
with thy Christian virtue, and not with any compassion contrary to the counsel
of God; I give thee for gage of my fatherly love the best things that I have,
and my greatest blessing; and I beseech the King of heaven, that he would
plentifully bless thee with his favorable hand, and make thee great with his
graces, rich with his treasures, and happy with glory. And saying this he
kissed him fastly, bathing him with tears, instructing, and exhortiing him,
with many grave words, to constancy, courage, and magnanimity, and to show
allwaies and in every thing, that he carried the heart of a true Gentleman.
Pauline wept bitterly, and humbling him self unto his feet, thanked him of
these his favors, promising that all the days of his life, he would remember
his benefits and good in^tructions, and so took his last farewell. Vincent
came a little after, took his leave of him also; and was praised for his
fidelity toward his masters. All three took their leave of their brother
that remained, and of their sister, recomme^ding their Father unto their car^,
as they did themselves to their prayers. Theodosius returned that night, having
bid his father farewell, and the next morning they departed all four and with
in three d y s, they arrived at the house, where they were to continu^ i^ the
s^^uice of God all their life, according unto the vow watch they had made; and
so was fulfilled the ^^st (...) in prophecy of the good Hermit, upon Lazarus
and Pauline.

And being seen, after their funerals kept.
Shall to the (...), to heaven revive.
Tristram also became Religious; and the Baron the Son of the Marqu^^se, a
month after, by a chance from heaven, was received Religious in the same
house, where Lazarus and his companions were, which was an incredible joy for
the one and the other.

These are the ten days Journey of Lazarus, for the use of our Pilgrim. There
is nothing in the whole web of this discourse which is not true, either in
deed, or in allegory, or morality. I beseech the divine maies^y that it will p
ease him to accept with a good eye, this offering of his own gifts, this little
work of ours, for the health and prosperity of our most Christian King, of the
Queen his dearest spouse, of Monsieur the Daulphine, and all the Royal house
and Realm, and that he would give grace to all that shall make, or read this
Pilgrimage, to pray effectually for the same, to the same end, and also draw
thence for themselves wholesome and profitable counsel, to the glory of God,
and of the sacred Virgin the mother of his Son, the most faithful Advocate
of his Church, and specially of her Pilgrims, and Deuotes.

FINIS.
LITANIAE LORETANAE B. MARIAE VIRGINIS.
KYRIE eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de caelis Deus. Miserere nubis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus.
Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus. Miserere. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus.
Miserere nobis. Sancta Maria. ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei genitrix. ora. Sancta
Virgo Virginum. ora. Matter Christi. ora. Matter diuinae gratiae. ora. Matter
purissima. ora. Matter castissima. ora. Matter inuiolata. ora. Matter intemerata.
ora. Matter amabilis. ora. Matter admirabilis. ora. Matter Creatoris. ora. Matter
Saluatoris. ora. Virgo prudentissima. ora. Virgo veneranda. ora. Virgo
praedicanda. ora Virgo potens. ara. Virgo elemens. ora. Virgo fidelis. ora.
Speculum iustitiae. ora. Seeds sapientiae. ora. Causa nostrae laetitiae. ora.
Vas spirituale. ora. Vas honorabile. ora. Vas insigne deuotionis. ora. Rosa
mystica. ora. Turris Dauidica. ora. Turris ebu^nea. ora. Domus aurea. ora.
Foederis arca. ora. Ianua caeli. ora. Stella matutina. ora. Salus insu morum.
ora. Refugium peccatorum. ora. Consolatrix afflictorum. ora. Auxilium
Christianorum. ora. Regina Angelorum. ora. Regina Patriarcharum. ora. Regina
Prophetarum. ora. Regina Apostolorum. ora. Regina Martyrum. ora. Regina
Confessorum. ora: Regina Virginum. ora. Regina Sanctorum omnni. ora. Agnus Dei
qui tollis peccata mundi. Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata
mundi. exaudi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi. Miserere nobis.
In Aduentu, and in die Annunciationis.
Verse. Angelus Domini nunciauit Mariae. Resp. Et concepit de Spiritu sancto.
Oration.
GRatiam tuam quaesumus Domine mentibus nostris infu^de^, vt qui Angelo
nunciante, Christi filij tui incarnatione^ cognouimus, per passionem eius and
crucem, ad resurrection is gloria^ perducamur. Per eumdem Christum Dominum
nostrum. Amen
Post Natiuitatem.
Verse. Post Partum Virgo inuiolata permanfisti. Resp. Dei genitrix intercede
pro nobis.
Oration.
DEus qui salutis aeternae B. Mariae virginitate foecunda humano generi praemia
praestitisti, tribue quaesumus; vt ips^m nobis intercedere sent^amus, per quam
meruimus auctorem vitae suscipere, Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filiu^ tuum,
Qu tecum etc. Amen.
A Purificatione vsque ad feriam V^in C^ena Dom ni
Verse Dignare me laudare te, Virgo ^acrata* Resp. D^ mihi virtutem contra
hosts tuo^.
Oration.
COncede misericors Deus fragilita^^ no^trae praesidium, vt qui sancte Dei
ge^itr^^^ mem^ eriam agunus, intercessioni eius auxi^io a nostri, in
qu^atibit^^e surgamus. Per eu^dem Christum Dominum nostrum.
A Sabbato sancto, vsque ad Sabbatum post Pentecosten.
Verse. Gaude and laetare Virgo Maria, Alleluia. Resp. Quia surrexit Dominus
vere, Alleluia.
Oration.
DEu^ qui per Resurrectionem filij tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi, mundum
laetificare dignatus es, pra^^ta quaesumus; vt per eius Gen^tric^m Virginem
Maria perpetuae capiamus gaudia vitae. Per cumdem Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.
A Sabbato post Pentecost. vsque ad Aduentum
Verse. Ora pro nobi^ sancta Dei genitrix. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur prone
issionibus Christi.
Oration.
OMnipotens s^mpiterne Deus qui gloriosae Virginis Matrio Mariae corpus and
animam, vt diuinum filij tu^ habitaculum effici incre^et^^^, Spiritu sancto
cooperan^ (...), da vt cuius commemoratione laecamur, eius pia intercessione ab
insta^tibus malis and a morte perpetua liberemur. Per cumdem Christum Dominu^
nostrum. Amen.
In Festiuitate Conceptionis, Natiuitatis, Praesentationus, and Visitationis B
Virginis.
Verse. Conceptio Natiuitas Praese^tatio Visitatio
est hodie sanctae Mariae Virginis. Resp. Cuius vita inclita cunctas illustra
Ecclesias.
Oration.
FAmulis tuis quaesumus Domine caelestis gratiae munus impertire, vt quibus B
Virginis partus extitit salutis exordium, Co^ceptionis, (vel) Natiuitatis,
(vel) Praesentationis (vel) Visitationis eius votiua solemnitas pacis tribuat
incrementum. Per Dominum nostrum, etc.
In Assumptione B. Maria.
Verse. Exaltata est Sancta Dei genitrix. Resp. Super choros Angelorum ad
caelestiar egna.
Oration.
FAmulorum tuorum quaesumus Domine delictis ignosce, vt qui tibi placere de
actibu, nostris non valemus, Genitricis filij tui Domini nostri intercessione
salue^^ur. Per eu^dem Dominum nostrum etc.
THE ROSARY OF OUR B. LADY, containing the 15. Mysteries.
The 5. Joyous.
1. The Annunciation of the Angel Gabriel to our B Lady. 2. The visitation of
our B. Lady to S. Elizabeth. 3. The birth of Christ our Redeemer. 4. The
Presentation of her little Jesus in the Temple. 5. The fynding of of him in the
Temple.
The 5. Dolorous.
1. The prayer of our Savior, when he swet blood in the garden. 2. When he was
bound to the pillar, and whipped. 3. When he was crowned with thorns. 4. When
he carried his Cross. 5. When he was crucified.
The 5. glorious.
1. The Resurrection of our Savior. 2. His Ascension. 3. The coming of the
holy Ghost. 4. The Assumption of our B. Lady. 5. Her Coronation.
Every Mystery must be considered with an Oblation, and a Prayer, either
before, or after the Aue Maria.
Of the Annunciation. The Oblation.
O Most holy Virgin full of grace, I humbly offer unto thee 10. Aue Maria, and
one Pater noster, in honor of the joy thou receiuedst, when being in thy
closet, thou were saluted by the holy Angel S. Gabriel, with these sweet
words, All hayle full of grace, our Lord is with thee: And brought thee that
good tidings how the Son of God came to be made man, and incarnate in thy
virginal womb, for the remedy of mankind: and thou, Blessed Lady, thy vow of
chastity provided for, with profound humility did answer, saying, Behold the
handmayd of my Lord, be it with me according to thy word.

The Prayer.
I Beseech thee O B. Virgin obtain for me of thy beloved Son, to live in
this world with great recollection and heed of my soul, that I may perform
all the vows and good purposes I have offered unto God, and perfect humility
wherewith in all things I should resign my self to his holy will and pleasure.

Of the Visitation. The Oblation.
Au^s, and one Pater noster in remembrance of that joy, thy soul felt, when
inflamed with charity thou wentst in all have to visit thy Cousin S. Elisabeth,
at which visitation the blessed child S. John, began joyfully to exult in his
mothers belly, and was therewith sanctified; and thou most B Lady, being known
and saluted for the mother of God; did sing that divine Canticle of
Magnifi^at.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee O B. Lady, to obtain for me of thy dear Son that I
may always seek good company and conversation, and walk right ways, and
have fervent charity to God, and profit of my neighbors, and sanctification of
mine own soul.

Of the Nativity. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster to that ineffable joy which thy soul felt, when of
thy virginal bowels, for the remedy of man, the Son of God was borne, thou
remaining a pure Virgin before, in, and after his birth, and with joy and
admirable reverence, did swadie him in poor cloutes, and rest him in the
manger, and as true God did adore him, in whose birth the quires of Angels
song, Glory to God on high, and i^ earth peace to men of good will.

The Prayer.
O Always Virgin, obtain for me that with thee I may love thy little newborn Jesus, with all my heart, and in all things seek his glory, and keep
peace with my neighbors; and that in honor of so g eat poverty (wherewith my
God lay in a manger) I may abhor the vanities, and delights of this world.

Of the Presentation. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster in remembrance of the joy thou feltest, when after
that thy Son had been glorified by the Angels, visited by the Shepherds,
and adored by the Kings (observing the law of Purification, whereto thou were
not bound) 40 days after thy childbirth thou did present thy little Jesus in
the Temple, where he was agnized and known of holy old Simeon, and Anne the
Prophetess, and adored for Messiah, and the true God.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee obtain for mo of thy dear Son, perfect chastity and
purity of conscience, that being purifyed in soul and body, I may be presented
before thy divine sight. Amen.

Of the fynding, etc. The Oblation.
O Virgin Mother of mercy, the comfort, and help of the afflicted and
distressed, I humbly offer thee 10. Aues and one Pater noster Jesus, the light
of thine eyes, thou foundst him in the Temple, at three days end, set amongst
the Doctors, hearing and demanding with admirable wisdom, and returned in
thy company, and was subject unto thee, and thy holy and most pure spouse
Joseph.

The Prayer.
GRant me, O Blessed Lady to seek my God, with great grief and sorrow for
having lost him, and grace never more to loose him, and perfect obedience to
all my superiors. Amen.

Of the Prayers in the garden. The Oblation.
O Most holy Virgin, in the Passion of thy Son so sad and desolate, Aues and
one Pater noster, in reverence of that dolorous mystery, when thy Son praying
in the garden to his eternal Father, in his agony swet drops of blood in such
abundance, that they ran down upon the ground, and after was by one of his
disciples betrayed and delivered to the ministers of the Jews, by whom he was
taken, and his hands being manicled, with a cord about his neck, was cruelly
haled to the houses of Annas and Cayphas.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee obtain for me of thy dear Son the gift and grace of
true prayer, and that in all my tribulations and afflictions I may conform my
will unto Gods, bearing them all with patience, and that he will assist me in
the agony of my death. Amen.

Of the Whipping. The Oblation.
O Virgin most afflicted I humbly offer thee 10. Aues and one Pater noster in
memory of the grief and shame which thy Son felt, Pilate despised and put to
shame, being (he that clothed the heavens with beauty, and is himself the
most beautiful of all the children of men) bound to a pillar, and whipped most
cruelly with no less then 5000. stripes and more.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee, ask of thy Son for me, that he would rid me of all
earthly affections, and give me grace and courage to chastise and subdue mine
own flesh, that it prevail not against the spirit; and that I may patiently
bear the rods and chasticements, which in this life his divine Majesty shall
send me.

Of the Crowning. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster in reverence of that grief, which thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ suffered, when the cruel tormentors crowned him with a
crown of thorns, which pierced his most tender and holy head in such sort,
that his precious blood trickled down round about most abundantly. They
mocked him also, and put in his hand a reed for a scepter, striking him
therewith on the head.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee pray for me that I may avoid all desire of pride and
presumption, and may rather desire ^^ame and injuries for my sweet Savior
Christ his sake; that in this life being crowned with thorns of tribulation, I
may deserve hereafter to be crowned with glory in thy bliss everlasting.

Of the carrying of the Cross. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster for the sorrow thy holy soul felt when thou did
see thy dearly beloved Son led through the streets of Jerusalem with
proclamation condemned to death as a malefactor and disturber of the people,
carrying all along that heavy Cross upon his weak shoulders, and saw him
failing to the ground with the weight thereof, with which doleful sight, thou
were even pierced with grief and sorrow.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee obtain for me perfect feeling and tenderness of heart and
compassion in these sufferings of thy Son, and t^^e repentance whereby I may
weep also for my self, confessing, correcting, and satisfying for my sins,
and that with promptitude and alacrity I may carry any Cross which God shall
lay upon my shoulders.

Of the Crucifying. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster to the incomparable grief which thou feltst, when
in mount Caluary, thou ^awest thy good Jesus, that lamb without spot fastened
to the Cross with cruel blows which pierced thy heart where (after pardoning
of his enemies and fulfilling the scriptures, with a great cry and tears he
commended his soul to his eternal Father) thou saw him yield up his ghost.

The Prayer.
BY the greatness of thy griefs which hear B. Lady thou did suffer, obtain
for me that I may pardon and love mine enemies, and that our Lord may pardon me
all my sins, and not forsake me in the hour of my death, but that having
performed all my duty, I may yield my soul into his holy hands. Amen.

Of the Resurrection. The Oblation.
O Queen of heaven full of joy, I humbly offer thee 10. Aues and one Pater
noster for the ineffable joy thou tookest in the Resurrection

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee procure me the true joy of a good conscience, and that
my soul may rise again in newnes of life and manners, and firmly believe the
mysteries of the faith which our holy Mother the Catholic Church teaches.
Amen.

Of the Ascension. The Olation.
O Glorious Lady full of comfort I humbly offer unto thee 10. Aues Pater
noster, for the joy thou haddst in the wonderful Ascension of thy Son our
Lord, when thou saw him with glorious triumph mounted up, accompanied with
the blessed souls of the holy Fathers, adored and worshipped of all the quires
of Angels, ascending into the heavens, there sitting at the right hand of God
his Father, leaving thee here on earth for the stay and light of his Apostles,
and for the example and comfort of his Catholic Church.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee obtain for me, that my heart may be lifted up to love
heavenly things, and that thou will be to me a sweet comforter in the journey
of this present life, that I may deserve life everlasting Amen.

Of the coming etc. The Oblation
O Excellent Spouse of the holy Ghost, mother of the motherles, comfort of the
comfortles, I humbly offer 10. Aues and one Pater noster to the sacred mystery
of the coming of the holy Ghost, when

The Prayer.
PRay for me O B. Lady that I may deserve to receive plentiful grace* the
gifts of the holy Ghost, and the language of Christian love in all my
conversation with my neighbors, and perseverance in virtue, and all good
purposes.

Of the Assumption. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster, to the glorious mystery of thy Assumption; when by
the B. Son, thou were called to his everlasting glory, and deseruedst at thy
happy passage to have present the holy Apostles thy servants, and wast received
body and soul into the heavenly habitations of the celestial spirits, as
Queen of the Angels and mother of their Lord and master.

The Prayer.
I Humbly beseech thee be my Advocate in all times and places, and deliver me
from sudden and unprovided death; and when I shall pass out of this world
defend me from all the temptations of the devil, that my soul may have free
access to the joys of my God and Savior.

Of the Coronation. The Oblation.
Aues and one Pater noster to the glorious mystery of thy Coronation, which was
the accomplishment of all thy joys, and the crown of all thy deserts, when
thou were exalted above the Angelical spirits, and to the blessed Trinity, the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, thou were crowned and appointed Queen and Lady of
all, and the defendresse and advocate of all that invoke thee.

The Prayer.
WE rejoice O B. Lady at thy exaltation and glory, and beseech thee that from
the high throne where thou art placed, thou would remember thy poor
children, which wander here in this vale of tears, and that thou would
obtain for us plentiful gifts and graces, that we may deserve with thee, and
all the holy Saints to enjoy the B. Trinity. Amen.

THE CORONE OF B. LADY.
THe manner of saying the Corone of our B. Lady, consisting of 63. Aues and six
Pater noster in remembrance of the 60. years of her life, every Pater noster
with the 10. Aues are to be said and offered in the honor and remembrance of
10. years of her life, and of what (...) did or suffered in that time, with a
prayer either before or after, craving those graces and virtues, which most did
shine in the actions of those years.

The Oblation of the 1.
O Most innocent and immaculate Virgin, I humbly offer unto thee 10. Aues and
one Pater noster in honor of the first 10. years of thy life, and all thou
did therein in honor of thy immaculate Conception, and miraculous Nativity
of a barren womb, of thy blessed infa^cy, and Presentation into the Temple,
and all thy virtuous exercises and devotions there, whereby thou were disposed
and prepared to be a meet mother for the son of God.

The Prayer
PRay for me I beseech thee, that I may offer my best and first times, to the
service of God, and by exercise of virtue, and eschewing occasions of sin, I
may dispose my soul to receive Gods grace in this life, and his glory in the
next.

The Oblation of the 2.
O Most happy and chosen Virgin, I humbly offer up 10. Aues and a Pater noster
in remembrance of the high virtues, which daily increased in thee, first vowing
chastity, and espousing thy self to chaste Joseph, receiving with joy, humility
and resignation, the joyful news of the Incarnation of the Son of God in
thy virginal womb, bearing thy Creator, swaddling and resting him in the
manger, seeing him glorified by the Angels, visited by the shepherds, adored
by the Kings, circumcised, presented, and redeemed in the Temple at thy
Purification, did nurse him and give him suck, and stedst with him into
Egypt, and there in a strange Idolatrous Country, did work for his
maintenance and thine.

The Prayer.
I Beseech thee obtain for me, part of these joys which in this time thou
did receive, and the imitation of thy chastity, and special love of poverty,
which thou and thy son so greatly did embrace.

The Oblation of the 3.
O Most B and patient Virgin, I humbly offer unto thee 10. Aues and a Pater
noster in remembrance of thy poor pilgrimage and entertaynement in Egypt and
in thy return from thence, and the fears thou had at returning, thy sorrow
in loosing, and joy in fynding thy Son in Jerusalem, and in honor of all that
sweetness and joy thou receiuedst in the conversation and company of thy
heavenly guest and child.

The Prayer.
PRay for me I beseech thee, that in all my pilgrimage of this life, I may have
thine and thy sons company, and never long want the comfort of his gracious
presence, doctrine, and Sacraments.

The Oblation of the 4.
O Most happy and gracious Virgin, I humbly offer up to thee 10. Aues and a
Pater noster, in remembrance of all that joy and pleasure, ^ou had in the
presence of thy sweet Jesus, eating, drinking, talking and woe king with him
that gives meat, drink, speech and strength to all creatures.

The Prayer.
PRay for me I beseech thee, that in all my life and actions I may be so
conjoined with Jesus, and so communicate with him, that whether I eat or
drink, or whatsoever I do, I may do it in his presence and to his only glory
and praise.

The Oblation of the 5.
O Most joyful, and dolorous Lady, I humbly offer unto thee 10. Aues and a
Pater noster, in remembrance of those pangs and (...) which after all the joys
thou receiuedst, by departing of thy Son from thee, of thy cares and fears
thou had of him, and the excessive grief thou tookest when he was betrayed,
taken, bound, led captive, beaten, spit upon, mocked, whipped, crowned with
thorns, blindefolded, buffeted, condemned, crucified, blasphemed, pierced,
taken down and buried: in remembrance also of thy great joys, in his
Resurrection, Apparition; Ascension, and sending of the holy Ghost.

The Prayer.
PRay for me I beseech thee, that among the comforts and discomforts of this
life, I may remain firm and constant at the foot of the Cross with thee,
and thy blessed company, that at last I may be partaker of the joys and glory
of his resurrection and Ascension, and of the comfort of his holy spirit.

The Oblation of the 6.
O Most perfect, patient and blessed Lady. I humbly offer unto the^ 10. Aues
and a Pater noster in remembrance of thy most holy life here on earth after
the Ascension of thy Son; of the longing tho^ had to be with him, and
loathing of this life: of the light, comfo^^ and example thou gave to the
Apostles and all Christians, of the zeal for the glory of thy Son; of thy
devotion to his B. Body and often visitation of the holy places of his life,
Passion and Resurrection.

The Prayer.
PRay for me, I beseech thee, that being here on earth I may have like longing
to be with thy Son, and loathing of this life, with devotion to all his
remembrances, and Sacraments.

The Oblation of the 7.
O Most happy and glorious Virgin, I humbly offer unto thee 3. Aues and a Pater
noster, in honor of the last three yeare^ of thy life, and of the joyful
expectation of thy depositio^, with most perfect works and more fervent
desires, in remembrance of thy great joy at the calling of thy Son and
spouse; of thy visitation of Angels and their heavenly melody; the presence of
the Apostles praising and lauding him: and finally in remembrance and honor of
thy most happy passage, joyful Assumption, and glorious Coronation.

The Prayer.
PRay for me I beseech thee, that I may so live, as I may expect a joyful end,
and a comfortable passage, that I may not want the rites and ceremonies of thy
holy Church, nor the comfort and company of thy servants, but may be protected
by my good Angels, and my soul by them carried where thou do sit in glory
and behold the face of the most blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. Amen.

FINIS.

