THE REPENTANCE OF PETER And IVDAS. TOGETHER WITH THE FRAILTY OF THE
Faithful, and the fearful end of wicked Hypocrites.

PROVER. 24.16. A just man falls seven times, and rises again: but the
wicked fall into mischief.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, for Joseph Brown.

ANNO DOMINI, 1612.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND RELIGIOUS LADY, THE LADY MILDRED SAVNDERSON, WIFE TO THE
HONORED SIR NICHOLAS SAVNDERSON, Knight Baronet, increase of grace in this
life, and eternal glory in the life to come.
GOOD MADAME, there is such a satietie, if not a surfeit of books at this day,
that it may be thought as superfluous to publish any new work, as to carry
timber to the Wood, or water to the Sea. In which respect, I had never presumed
to set pen to paper, but only that I have long desired, to give your Ladyship
some testimony of my thankful heart, for the favors I have received at your
hands. And though I know, that as Pliny said of Traian the Emperor, you are
most sparing in prizing and valuing the benefits you bestow, because you give
them freely and put them not out to usury: yet if I should dissemble them, I
might justly be condemned of gross ingratitude. I acknowledge you have opened
even the fountain of your good opinion to me, which has flowed as it were
with a full stream of piety: and so many ways has your virtue refreshed and
relieved me, that I may truly say, as once Furnius said to Caesar, I shall live
and die unthankful. For when I have done all I can, I cannot sufficiently
conceive the thanks which you deserve. I am bold therefore, to present these
poor fruits of my labors unto your Ladyship, to be a public witness and
pledge to all posterity of my dutiful affection toward you. And though this
paper-gift be too base a recompense for your undeserved favor; Yet it being
the best which my poverty can affoorde, I doubt not, but according to your
mild disposition, you will accept of it: respecting rather the affection of
the giver, then the worth of the gift, for if I were able to give more I would
perform it. I am not ignorant, that in publishing these my weak Meditations,
I shall expose my self to a thousand censures of curious and carping Readers:
but I had rather be taxed of rashness in this behalf, then justly blamed for
want of duty. How mean soever they be, if they may any way benefit the Church
of God; especially, if they may be any small means, to further your godly
endeauours in the way of Christianity, and to build you up toward the
Kingdom of heaven; I shall gain that which I most desire. And thus I commend
your Ladyship to God and to the Word of his grace: beseeching him, that
whatsoever good beginnings he has wrought in you, he will perfect the same,
until the coming of Jesus Christ, that your last worldly day may be your
assured entrance to everlasting glory.

Your Ladyships in all Christian duties obliged. CHARLES RICHARDSON.

(...) or to manifest what is wrong, only the one cannot demonstrate the right.
But Almighty God and his Ministers, do not only show the one but teach the
other: especially in this doctrine of Repentance, without the knowledge whereof
all knowledge in the mind is but like a dream, and all pains but the washing
of the Moore. Only the true penitent when he awaketh shall be satisfied with
the Image of God, which made Otho the Emperor to cause his kitchin-boyes to
tread upon his neck, Et vilissimam dei creaturam conculcare, and trample upon
him the vilest creature of God. The penitent man has but seven steps to
heaven, which are showed out in the seven penitential Psalms, the conscience
and shame of sin, the fear of punishment, the sorrow for the offense, the
desire of amendment, the firm belief of pardon, the mistrust of his strength,
the longing after heaven, with the apprehension of Jesus Christ the way unto
it. He that does these things shall never fail. But let me say of these
treatises as the Angel said to Cornelius, Simon Peter is at Ioppe, send for
him, he shall show thee what thou shall do. This Book in the sorrow of Peter,
shall teach thee to repent exemplarily, and by the example of Judas to dread
hypocrisy the way to desperation. Farewell,

EDW. TOPSELL.

THE REPENTANCE OF PETER AND IVDAS.
MATT. 26. VER. 69.70. 69 Peter sat without in the Hall, and a maid came to
him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galile.

70 But he denied before them all, saying, I wot not what thou say, etc. To
the end of the Chapter.


IN this Chapter and the next that follows, the Holy Evangelist does at large
set out the History of the passion and suffering of our Savior Christ,
together with all the circumstances and several parts thereof.

Now in these words the course of the History is interrupted, to inserte a
brief narration of the fall and repentance of the Apostle Peter: which was
necessarily done, that the truth of that which Christ had foretold him, Verse
34.
namely that before the cock crow, he should deny him thrice, might appear.

It is worthy to be observed, that all the four Evangelists do diligently
describe this Story of Peter's fall. Many things there are, which some one of
the Evangelists do make mention of, which are omitted by all the rest. But
here, as if they had taken consent, they all leave this registered to all
posterity. Shall we think, that they are delighted in blasing and publishing
this horrible and shameful fault of their fellow Apostle? Indeed carnal men
love to rippe up other men's vices, either to satisfy their own envy and
malice, whereby they are moved to disgrace and defame their brethren: or to
commend their own righteousness and holiness above other men, as the proud
Pharisie dealt with the poor Publican. But far be it from us to imagine,
Luke 18.11. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
that so holy men, being inspired, and, as it were, led by the Holy Ghost,
should be carried either with envy or arrogancy in this case. But as their
heart and pen was guided by the Lord in the rest of the Scripture: so no doubt
they were also directed in this particular, and that for the public benefit
and great good of the whole Church. Romans 15.4.
For as Whatsoever things are written, they are written for our learning: so
this narration is richly furnished with many excellent and heavenly
instructions for our use. For first of all, it has pleased the Lord in Saint
Peter, the chief of the Apostles, to give us a memorable example of the
frailty and weakness of man's strength, if he be left never so little to
himself. Secondly we may see in it the beginning and progress of sin, how
being yielded to at the first, by degrees it comes to the height. Thirdly we
may behold as in a glass, the great love of God toward his children, who
will not suffer them to perish in their sins, nor cast them off when they fall,
but mercifully puts under his hand, Psalm. 37.24.
as David says. Last of all, we have here a lively pattern of true and sound
repentance, for our direction in the like case. All which are most necessary
to be known, and therefore the Holy Ghost would have the Story related by all
the Evangelists. As then it has pleased the Lord to use such diligence in
setting it down: so let us use the like diligence in attending to it for our
benefit and edification, And that we may proceed orderly in the handling
thereof, let us consider.

Two general parts.
1. His falwhere 1. The occasion of it. 1. The place, the high Priests Hall.
2. The Persons. 1. A maid. ver. 69. 2. Another maid. v. 71. 3. The standers
by. v. 73

2. The sin it self. 1. Propounded, he denied. 2. Amplified. 1. By the
manner, openly, Before them all. v. 70. 2. By the degrees of it. 1. A bare
denial or a dissembling. ve. 70. 2. An Oath. ver. 72. 3. An imprecatio^, he
cursed himself, if ever he knew Christ. v. 74.



2. His Repentance, whereof afterward.
Peter sat without etc.) It was a duty of piety in the Apostle Peter, to
follow his Master to this place; and a great argument of his love toward him,
above all his fellows For it is said before in this Chapter, verse 58.
that howsoever Peter followed a far off, yet he came after to the high
Priests hall and went in, and sat with the servants to see the end. It was an
honest affection in him, that he did not hide himself, as the other Disciples
did, verse 56.
Who all forsook their Master and fled: but did earnestly desire to see what
the issue would be, and what would become of Christ. All this, I say, was
commendable in the Apostle. But because our Savior had forewarned him of the
weakness of his nature, and had plainly told him, that before the cock crow
he should deny him thrice: he should rather have kept himself close in some
secret place, then thus to offer and expose himself to temptation, and to the
occasions of sin. He could not but know that every body would observe and
take notice of him above all the rest, because he had bin such a tickler in his
Masters quarrel, and had cut off one of their ears with his sword, that came
to apprehend him. And besides, he had always accompanied his Master whether
soever he went and therefore there was no hope, that he should escape unknown.

Doct. 1. We must carefully avoid all occasions of sin.
From hence then we learn for our first instruction, that he that would
preserve himself from sin, must carefully avoid all the occasions thereof. It
is a true saying, He that would no evil do; must do nothing that belongs
thereto. The occasion in every thing is a great matter. The occasion of good
prevails much to draw men to good, and the occasion of evil, to draw them
to evil, even when before the occasion be offered, there is no great desire
to either of them. But especially occasions to evil are most forcible. The
reason is, first, because of our selves we are so prone to evil. Our nature is
like dry wood, which is apt to kindle, as soon as ever fire is put to it. So
give a man the least occasion, and presently he yields to sin. There is no
speedier conjunction of fire and gunpowder, or of fire and towe, or tinder, or
any other such combustible thing, then there is between our corrupt nature and
sin upon the least occasion, unless the grace of God do prevent it. There
needs no Devil to tempt us; Nemo laeditur nisi a se. Nihil mihi contrarium
est, nisi ego ipse. Mecum est quiquied mihi nocere potest. Bern. Med. c. 11.
let but any occasion be offered, and we straight way become tempters to our
selves. It is a true saying, No man is hurt but by himself. The Devil, and
all the Devils in hell could not prevail against us, if our own hearts, by
yielding to every occasion of sin, did not betray us. And this is that which
the Apostle James says, Every man is tempted, Jam. 1.14.
when he is drawn away, and entised by his own concupiscence. We harbor a
secret enemy in our own bosoms, without which we could not so easily be
overcome. As we see in our Savior Christ, who says of himself, John 14.30.
Diabolus plus confidit in adiutorio carnis, quoniam magis nocet domesticus
hostis. Illa vero ad subuersionem meam, ^um illo faedus inijt. Bern. Med. cap.
15. Iam. 5.11.
that the Prince of this world came to him but he found nothing in him. The
Devil tempted and assaulted him with might and maine, but because there was no
corruption in his nature to work upon, he could not prevail. Yea holy Job,
against whom Heaven and earth might seem to conspire so long as he hurt not
himself by impatiency, he was not hurt by all his afflictions, but rather
became more famous thereby, being set forth as a pattern of patience to all
posterity. So would it be with us, were it not that we are as ready to lay hold
upon every occasion of sin, as the Devil or the world is to offer the same unto
us. The truth of this point appears in many examples in the Scriptures. Gene.
3.6.
Euah the Mother of us all, had no sooner an occasion of sin offered her, by
the beholding the fairness of the forbidden fruit, but presently she
consented to the suggestions of the Serpent. Neither did this corruption rest
in her; Gene. 6.2.
but it has likewise ouerspread all her posterity. When the sons of God saw
the daughters of men that they were fair, they took themselves wives of all
that they liked: Gene. 39.6.7.
Joseph's Mistress no sooner casther eyes upon Joseph and saw that he was a
fair person, and welfauoured, but straight she intised him to commit folly
with her. Gene. 34.1.2.
When Dinah the daughter of Jacob, in a curious humor, began to walk out
to see the daughters of that country: though it is like she went not with any
such purpose, yet occasion being offered, she lost her virginity. Josh. 7.21.
When Achan saw in the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, presently he
coueted them, and took them. Yea David a man otherwise after Gods own heart,
1. Sam. 13.14.
as soon as ever he saw Bathsheba washing her self, 2. Sam. 11.2.3.4
by and by lusted after her, Diabolus dum decipere quenquam quaerit, prius
naturam vniuscuiusque intendit, and inde se applicat, vnde hominem aptum ad
peccatum inspexerit. Bern. de ordine vitae.
sent for her, and lay with her. So violent is man's corrupt nature in
apprehending every occasion that may draw him to sin. Again another reason
hereof is this, because the Devil is so ready to watch every occasion, and
whenever he sees us any whit inclining, there he takes advantage, and
bends all his force against us.

This Doctrine serves first for admonition 1. that we be careful in
performing this duty. As the Mariner is Job; Job. 31.1:
Who made a covenant with his eyes, that he would not look upon a maid. To
which purpose the son of Sirach gives good counsel. Use not says he, the
company of a woman that is a dancer, Eccle. 9.4.5.
least thou be taken by her craftiness. Gaze not upon a maid, that thou fall
not by that that is precious in her. 8.
And a little further. Turn away thine eyes from a beautiful woman, and look
not upon others beauty: 11.
for many have perished by the beauty of women. And again, Sit not at all
with an other man's wife (namely, without warrant, either from thy general or
particular calling) neither banquet with her, least thine heart incline unto
her, and so through thy desire fall into destruction. The fear of this danger,
made Joseph so careful as he was, Gene. 39.10.
who knowing the lewd mind of his Mistress would not only not consent to lie
with her, but not so much, as to be in her company. But because many times it
is hard to rule the eye, but it will be full of adultery, as the Apostle Peter
says, and will cause a man to look upon a woman to lust afer her: therefore,
2. Pet 2.14. Matthew. 5.28.
besides all a man's own endeavor, he must earnestly pray unto God, as David
did, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. Psalm. 119.37.
If a man be inclined to drunkenness, he must follow the advice of Solomon.
Look not upon the wine when it is red, Prou. 23.31.
and when it shows his color in the cup; he that knows the weakness of
his brain, and how easily he is overtaken, he should utterly abstain from
strong drink. Better were it for him to drink water all his life, then to
fall into so filthy a sin. The Prophet Isaiah pronounces a heavy woe upon
all such, Isa. 5.11.
as rise up early to follow drunkenness, and continue till night, that the
wine do inflame them; that is, such as are not careful to avoid the
occasions of this sin. So likewise, if a man be inclined to swearing, or to
any other abuse of the tongue, because, as Solomon says, in many words there
cannot want iniquity, Prou. 10.19.
he must do as David did in the like case, even take heed to his ways, and
keep his mouth bridled, Psalm. 39.1.
that he may not sin with his tongue. But because the tongue, Iam. 3.5.8.
though it be but a little member; yet it is an unruly evil, and can hardly
be tamed by the industry of man: therefore, he must pray with David, Set a
watch, O Lord, Psalm. 141.3.
before my mouth; and keep the door of my lips. The like may be said of anger
and all other sins whatsoever.

2. That we watch continually over our hearts in regard Keep thine heart with
all diligence says Solomon; Prou. 4.23.
we should watch and ward over our hearts, more then any treasure in the
world. And it is the exhortation of the Apostle: Take heed, brethren, Heb. 3.12.
least there be at any time in any of you an evil and an unbelieving heart, to
depart away from the living God. We must at all times have especial regard to
the heart, or else we cannot stand. So also the Apostle Peter, Be sober, says
he, and Watch. 1. Pet. 5.8. and 4.7
And though a man be otherwise never so sober, yet if he do not watch
against the occasions of sin, he is easily overcome. And it was the charge
which our Savior gave his Disciples, Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. As the Iaylour, watches
over the prisoner, for whose escape he is to answer: so must we watch over
the corruptions of our own hearts. We must take notice of our pronenesse to
sin in every part of the body and faculty of the soul, and give diligent
heed that it break not out, to the dishonor of God, and offense of our
brethren. For want of this care many of Gods children have been overtaken with
grievous sins. As we have a fearful example in Judah, Gene. 38.15.16.
who going forth about a lawful and honest business, namely to see his
sheepshearers; and intending no evil, yet meeting with an occasion, because
his heart was not guarded, he defiled himself in a very vile and filthy
manner. Yea many times even in those things which we know to be evil, and
whereof we are convicted in our own consciences, we are so blinded for want
of this care, that we rush into them. As the Mariner knows all the dangerous
shelues and straites in the Sea, yet many times for want of present beed, he
rusheth upon them and suffers shipwreck.

1. Pet. 4.4. Ephesians. 4.19.
then they do hunt after occasions of sin: running into all excess of riot
and working all uncleanness, even with greediness, as the Apostle says. What
madness is this for a man thus to expose himself unto danger, as if the flesh
were not prone enough of it self unto that which is evil? There is no man will
bring a great deal of dry straw, into an house where fire is, and leave it
there, unless he mean to fire the house. So no man will wilfully rush upon
the occasions of sin, but he that is careless of his soul. Blessed is the
man, says Solomon, that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into evil. And it is a good speech of Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesiast. 3.27.
He that loves danger shall perish in it. It is in vain for men in this case
to boast of their own strength; For as we see by experience; that a weak man
that is always out of gunshot, Pro. 28.14.
is likely to live longer then a strong man that is ever in the midst of the
pikes: so a weak Christian, that by all good means guardeth himself from
occasions of evil, is more like to be preserved from sin, then he that
presuming of his own strength, is careless of danger, and therefore shunneth
no prouocations whereby he may be overcome.

In the Hall.] This action of Peter in it self was not simply evil. For
howsoever he was among the profane servants of the high priests, yet he had
nothing to do with them; there was no society at all between them: yea the
end of his being there, was far different from theirs. For they were there to
do service to the high Priest, in abusing and disgracing of our Savior
Christ: but he was there, as has been said, in an honest affection to his
Master to see what would become of him. But though the occasion of his being in
this place was honest, and the end good: yet the very place it self, and the
company is hurtful to him, and ministers diverse occasions and temptations
of sin. He had preserved himself from this fearful fall, if he had
fled with the rest of his fellows, and hidden himself as they did. Joh.
18.18.
But when once he was bold to enter into the Hall of the wicked high Priest,
though he did it not with any purpose to deny his Master, yet there he met
with temptations, whereby he was overcome. He sat among the profane persons by
the fire to warm himself: but it had been better for him to have frozen with
cold, rather then to endanger himself in this manner.

Doct. We must shun the company of wicked men.
This example does teach us, not to sort our selves, nor to converse with
wicked men even in things otherwise not unlawful, least by their familiarity
we be drawn to sin. This Apostle Peter, who whiles he was in the company
of his fellow Disciples, Mat. 16.16.
did confess Christ Jesus to be the son of God, and our redeemer, now
joining himself with these profane and lewd persons, Pro. 4.14.
is brought in shameful manner to deny him. 15. Noluit non Deus negligenter
audire quod tam diligenter studuit enarrare. Si enim nec folium de arbore sinc
causa; nec vnus ex passeribus sine Patre caelesti cadit super terram, putem ego
de ore Sancti Euangelista superfluum defluere verbu^? Bern. super Euang. Missus
est Homil. cap. 1.
For this cause the holy Ghost presses this duty in so many places of the
Scripture. It is the exhortation of Solomon, Enter not into the way of the
wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, and go not by it;
turn from it, and pass by. Where we see, the holy Ghost cannot satisfy
himself in urging this duty. We may not think that this is any idle
repetition, to set down one precept in so many words. No, it were blasphemy
to imagine an idle syllable to be in the Scriptures. It is set down therefore
to teach us, that the duty is of great moment, and chiefly to be regarded of
us. Yea this Apostle, laboring to confirm the new Conuertes, amongst many
other exhortations, he urges this with great vehemence, Save your selves from
this froward generation. Employing, that the performance of this duty, was as
much as their souls were worth. Which Solomon also insinuates in another
place, Act. 2.40.
saying. Forsake the wicked, and ye shall live. And David makes it a mark of
a true member of the Church, Pro. 9.6.
that in his eyes a vile person is contemned. And his own practice was
answerable hereunto, as himself testifies, I have not says he, Psalm. 15.4
Psalm. 26.4.
haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with the dissemblers. I have
hated the assembly of the evil, and have not companied with the wicked.

5.
And great reason is there, why all the children of God should be careful to
perform this duty; Iam. 4.4.
for first, all wicked men are Gods enemies. Exodus 20.5.
As St. James says, whosoever will be a friend of the world (as all ungodly
persons are) makes himself the enemy of God. Yea they hate God and his
service and worship, as the Lord himself says. And therefore how can they
that profess themselves to be the children of God, hold any familiarity with
them? It were treason in a subject, to live in friendship with one that is a
professed enemy to the King. Much more is it treason in the subjects of the
King of heaven, to have society with those that are deadly enemies to his
majesty. And therefore, when Iehoshaphat, otherwise a good King, would join in
league with Abah a wicked wretch, Iehu the son of Hanani the seer, welcomed
him home with this salutation. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? 2. They are
odious to God, as they hate him, so he hates them, as David says, Thou hate
all them that work iniquity. Now we should all be perfect, Psalm. 5.5. Mat.
5.48. 1 Pet. 2.9.
as our Father which is in heaven is perfect. And we should show forth the
virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light.
This therefore being a virtue in the Lord, we should labor to imitate it. As
the Lord commends the Church of Ephesus for it. Thou hate, says he, Apoc.
2.6.
the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. And this does David profess
of himself. I hate the works of them that fall away. Psalm. 101.3.
Where by the way, he teaches us, how our hatred must be qualified: namely,
that we must not hate the persons, but the works of wicked men. For as for
their persons, they are the creatures of God, yea and our own flesh, as the
Prophet says: And for a man to hate his own flesh, it is unnatural. Isa.
58.7. Ephesians. 5.29. Psalm. 139.21.22:
But their vices and sins we are to hate, even with a deadly and a perfect
hatred. 3. They are the Devils weapons, whereby he does more prevail with Gods
children, then by any other means. Other occasions are dumb and cannot plead
for themselves, but by our own tongues: But these will be importunate suitors
to draw us to sin: And therefore, they may be well called even the Devils
strength without whose help his assaults are but weak. But then are they most
powerful, when they are of our kindred, or such as we love and favor, then
especially if they be witty, they are most pernicious, Sub specie incunditatis
venenum infundunt bonis. Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. c. 20. Pro. 18.8. Psa. 119.21.
for whiles with their wit they make us merry, their words, as Solomon says
of the flatterer, go down into the bowels of the belly, and fill even the
inward parts with deadly poison. 4. Their company is dangerous. For the wrath
of God hangs over the head of all wicked and ungodly men, as David says;
Cursed are they that do err from thy commandments. And therefore if we
converse with them, there is danger that we should be en wrapped in their
punishments, when the wrath of God breaks out against them. As Solomon
threatens. The companion of fools shall be afflicted. Pro. 13.20. Gen
13.10.11.12 13. and 14.12. and 19.16.
And so we see it fell out with Lot, who by the fruitfulness of the place,
being drawn to live in Sodom, where the men were wicked, and exceeding
sinners against the Lord, when they were taken prisoners, he was taken prisoner
with them. And had not the Lord been merciful unto him, he had perished in
the general overthrow of the city. And therefore, when the Lord was about to
destroy Corah and his company for their rebellion, Number. 16.26.
Moses charge all the congregation, to depart from the tents of those wicked
men, and to touch nothing of theirs, least they perish in all their sins. And
it was the voice of God from heaven concerning Babylon, Apoc. 18.4. Qui
iunguntur in culpa, non seperantur in paena. Cyprian. lib. 1 Epist. 4. Eusebius.
eccle. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. Hence was it, that the Apostle John coming into a
bath at Ephesus to wash himself, and finding there unlooked for, Cerinthus
that wicked heretic, straight way leapt back, and departed unwashed, saying
to those that were with him; Let us flee from hence, least the bath fall upon
our heads, wherein this enemy of Gods truth is washed. 5. Their company is
contagious, and there is great danger to be infected by them, wicked men for
the most part hold the old rule, The more the merrier. And therefore, as,
Solomon says, Pro. 1.10.11.14. Noui ego hoc seculum moribus, quibus sit. Malus
bonum malum esse vult, vt sit sui similis. Plant. Trinum.
they will entise and draw on others to come with them, and to cast in their
lot etc. As it is the Devils desire to make many partakers of his own
damnation: so his instruments have the same affection. They that are bad would
make the good bad also, that they may be like themselves. As (they say) he that
has the plague running on him, has a desire to infect others: so he that is
infected with any vice, labors to make others as bad as himself. As we see
in drunkards, and swearers, and such like, they love none but such as will
swill and drink, and swear and swagger with them. And as we have heard
before, the danger in this case is the greater, because of our selves we are
Dociles imitandis turpibus and prauis omnes sumus. Iuuen. Sat. 14. Ad deteriora
faciles sumus. Sen. Epist. 97.
all so apt and prone to sin we are all of us too apt scholars to learn that
that is naught. As the Painter with a light hand, and running pencill, can
express the wrinckles, and warts, and moles in the face; but not so easily the
face it self: sow are hardly brought to follow the virtues of our friends, if
any be; but for their vices we imitate them without any labor. It is with us
in this case, Seneca. Epist. 7. Si quis magistru^ cap^t improbum, ipsum animum
aegrotum ad deteriorem partem plaerumque applicat. Terent. And. Pro. 22.24.25.
Non tuta tibi tua bonitas obsessa malis, non magis quam sanitas vicino
serpente. de confid. ad Eg. lib. 40.
as with one that has been long weakened with sickness: that as he can
hardly come abroad, but he takes some cold, and is the worse for it: so it is
as hard for us to come into lewd company, and receive no hurt. If they cannot
cause us wittingly to yield to sin, yet they will give us some stain at
unawares. And therefore, Solomon gives us good counsel: Make no friendship
with an angry man, neither go with the furious man, least thou learn his
ways, etc. The like may be said of all other sins. And Bernard has a good
saying to this purpose. It is as hard for a man to preserve his goodness, in
the midst of evil men; as it is hard to keep his health, in the midst of
serpents. For there is a secret poison both in their words and deeds, which
fretteth and infecteth whomsoever it touceth: as the Apostle speaks of
Hymenaeus and Philetus. Hence is it, that by reason of the manifold sins that
bear sway, the Apostle says, the times are perilous times, 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.
such as it should be hard for a man to keep faith and a good conscience in
them. Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum. Eras. adag. Eras. de lingua. Dum
spectant laesos oculi laeduntur and ipsi. Ovid. de remed.
It is a true proverb, Much evil comes by an ill neighbor. He that dwells
by a man that halteth shall learn to limpe of him. He that lives daily among
them that stammer, shall in time learn to stut like them. And he that is much
conversant with them that have bleare eyes, is in danger to catch the disease
himself: So he that is familiar with wicked men, will in time become as bad as
they. Haerebit tibi auaritia quandiu auaro sordidoque conuixeris. Incendent
libidines tuas adulterorum sodalitia. Sen. Ep. 104. Eccles. 13.1. Ecclus. 13.1.
Pro. 6.27.
Let a man live with a base covetous person, and covetousness will strik unto
him. Let him keep company with whore-masters, and it will set his lusts on
fire. And as Ecclesiasticus says, He that is familiar with the proud, shall be
like unto him. As it is hard for a man to go into a mill, and not to have some
meal stick on his clothes; or to touch pitch and not be defiled with it; or
to walk much in the Sun and not to be tanned and sunne-burnt; or to take
fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt; or to go into a pesthouse,
and not take infection: so it is as hard for a man to come into lewd and
profane company, and not be tainted with some vice or other. For this cause the
Lord gave such straight charge to the people of Israel, that they should have
no dealing with the inhabitants of the land of Canaan, Exodus 23.32.33. and
34.12.15.16. Deuteronomy. 7.2.3.4.
Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their Gods. Neither shall they
dwell in thy land, least they make thee sin against me. And again, Take heed
to thy self, that thou make no compact with the inhabitants of the land,
whither thou go, least they be the cause of ruin among you Least when they
go a whoring after their Gods, some man call thee, and thou go a whoring also.
And again, Thou shall make no covenant with them: Neither shall thou make
marriages with them, neither give thy daughter to his son, nor take his
daughter to thy son. For they will cause thy son to turn away from me, and
to serve other Gods: And how true this was, the event made it manifest. Psalm.
106.35.36.
For they neglecting this strict commandment of God, were mingled among the
heathen, and learned their works: And served their Idols, which were their
ruin, as David says. And we have too much proof of this, even in our own
experience. For as we see the rivers, which otherwise of themselves are sweet
and fresh, yet when they run into the sea, become salt: so many young men and
women, who in their young years whiles they were kept in by good education,
were of great towardness and good hope: afterward falling into ill company,
have bin corrupted and grown most dissolute. And indeed a man though otherwise
well affected: yet when he shall live in such places, where he shall never
hear good word, but swearing and lascivious speaking etc; never see any good
example, but open contempt of godliness, and all vile practices that may be;
by little and little it quelleth his hatred of these things, and makes them
seem less offensive to him. For as a burning firebrand, if it be cast into
the snow, will soon be extinguished: so even a great measure of zeal will
soon be quenched among wicked company. Yea it will come to pass, that when
men have past the day in vanity and foolish delights (such as evil companions
will continually suggest,) they shall be altogether unfit, with any
reverence, either to pray or read, or perform any other good duty. And
therefore David, as it were in a holy indignation, chideth wicked persons away
from him. Away from me ye wicked: Psalm. 119.115.
for I will keep the commandments of my God. Insinuating that he could not
set himself to the performance of any holy duty, with that feruency he ought,
as long as such lewd companions were about him. And knowing his own weakness
in this case, he prays earnestly, Psalm. 141.4
incline not mine heart to evil, that I should commit wicked works with men
that work iniquity, etc. So that to conclude this point, we may say of
frequenting ill company, as they were wont to say in a common proverb in
England of going to Rome, Willet. synop. controuer. 4. quaest. 10. part. 9.
he that goes to Rome once sees a wicked man; he that goes twice, learneth
to know him, he that goes the third time, brings him home with him.

Last of all, if it does fall out, that we be not infected by conuersing with
wicked persons (which is almost impossible, without a great measure of Gods
grace) yet if there be any spark of true goodness in us, we cannot choose but
be grieved above measure with their ungodly practices and sinful courses. As
it is said of Lot, who though by the grace of God he was preserved from
contagion in the midst of Sodom, which was as it were a pitch-barrell, even
a sincke of sin: yet his righteous soul was vexed (as though he had been
upon the rack (for so much the word signifies) with the uncleanly
conversation of the wicked and in seeing and hearing their unlawful deeds. 2.
Pet. 2.7.8. (...) Beza ibid.
And this was it that made David bemoane his estate, when he was banished from
his country, and constrained for the safety of his life, to abide among
uncircumcised people: Woe is me that I remain in Meshech, Psa. 120.5.
and dwell in the tents of Kedar. In like manner the Prophet Isaiah cried out
as it were in great passion, Woe is me: for I am undone, because I dwell in the
midst of a people of polluted lips. Jsa. 6.5.
So great a grief is it to the children of God, to be in such places, where
their eyes shall behold nothing but Gods dishonor, and their ears shall be
continually beaten with blasphemous speeches against God and all goodness.

Eras. de lingua.
should have a care to live amongst sound and healthful persons, and should
avoid the society of them that are subject to contagious diseases: much more
should we be careful to shun all familiarity with those that are wicked, if
we would preserve the health of our souls, because the diseases of the soul
do spread sooner, and infect worse, then the diseases of the body. And
therefore whenever we are in danger this way, Huiusmodi malum quoties vrget,
nihil est praetiosius quam pedes. In sola enim fuga salutis spes reposita est.
Erasm. ibid. Tam simus ab eis separati, quam sunt illi de Ecclesia profugi.
Cypri. lib. 1. Ep. 3. ad Cornel. fratrem. Sen. de tranquil. vitae.
the best remedy is even to take us to our heels and run away as fast as we
can: when a man's house is on fire, even gouty and lame persons find their
legs. If a serpent do but hiss, how fast does every man run away? when
we come by a noisome lake, that sends out venomous exhalations, we stop
our noses, and have away as fast as our feet can carry us. Much more should we
make haste to escape from lewd company, because these things cannot be so
dangerous to the body, as it is to the soul. As in time of the pestilence, we
would be loath to sit with a man that has the plague running upon him, for
fear of infection. So we should be as loath to converse with a wicked man,
because his company is more contagious. The time was, when as in the purer ages
of the Church, such was the zeal of Gods children, that they would not so much
as in words have any communion with ungodly persons. To this purpose it is
recorded of Polycarpus, who was St. John's Disciple, Agnosco, agnosc^
primogenitum Satanae. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 14.
that meeting Marcion a damnable heretic, who taking it ill that he did not
salute him, and asking him if he did not know him: yes says he, I know thee
well enough to be the first borne of Satan. And Mares the blind Bishop of
Calcedon, reproving Julian the Apostata for his idolatry, Histor. tripart.
lib. 6. cap. 14.
when the Emperor in scorn vpbraided him with his blindness, he made this bold
answer, that he gave God thanks for his blindness, that he could not see so
wicked a man as he was. So should it be with us, we should be so far from
approving of wicked men by our company and familiarity, as that rather both by
our words, and by our countenance we should show our dislike of them. The
prophet Jeremy professes what care he had in this case. I sat not, says
he, Ier. 15.17.
in the assembly of the mockers; but sat alone, and so must we rather sit
alone, then be in such company, where we shall be in danger to be drawn to
sin. Ier. 15.19. 1. Pet. 4.4.
Let them return to us (if they will) for we may not return to them. Let
them (as their manner is) speak evil of us, because we will not run with
them into the same excess of riot. Let them count us singular and unsociable,
let them count us surly, proud, and disdainefull, as if no company were good
enough for us. Better is it for us to endure all these reproaches, rather then
by conuersing with them to dishonor God. Satius eos irritare temperantia, quam
placare luxuria; and honestate etiam inimicitias prouoacare, quam tanta
deformitate lenire de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 27.
Better is it (as Saint Augustine says) in another case; to incense them by
our temperance, then to please them by dissoluteness: yea by our honesty to
provoke them even to enmity, rather then to pacify them by such deformity.
If we would take this course, we should not only preserve our selves from
the contagion of sin, but also by Gods blessing we might do good even to
the wicked. So long as we use them familiarly, and converse ordinarily with
them, we make them think well of themselves, and so we strengthen their
hands, that they cannot repent of their sins. Whereas, if we would always
shun their company, and browe beat them wheresoever we meet them, it
might be we should make them ashamed at the last. It might be, they would think
with themselves, why does such a man refuse my company? Surely he sees
something by me that is amiss. It may be my swearing, it may be my
lascivious talking, it may be my profaneness does offend him. If he that is
but a mortal man, cannot endure me for these things: how much less shall the
God of heaven endure me, Who is of pure eyes, and cannot see evil. And thus
it might please God, that this might be a means of their conversion, Heb.
1.13.
which were a happy thing.

Esau; he is fit for them. Yet these notwithstanding would be counted and
reputed good Christians. Heb. 12.16.
But they little know how they hazard their estimation with God and all good
men by this means. For hereby they give men occasion to suspect, that they are
not found at the heart, when they can be hail fellow well met with every
base and lewd companion. According to the old saying Noscitur ex socio qui non
cognoscitur ex se.
He that cannot be known by himself, may be known by the company that he
keeps. For Talis quisque solet haberi, cum qualibus agit familiarita em. Eras.
de lingua.
commonly every man is held to be such as his companions are. As we see birds
of a feather flock together. And therefore, as men are careful of their godly
credit and reputation in the Church, so let them take heed, what company they
frequent. But some will perhaps object for them selves, that they are strong
enough, there is no company can hurt them. No they hope rather to convert
those that are naught, and make them better, rather then receive any hurt by
them. Huic fiduciae non estnimis fidedum; praesertim quoniam natura nostra in
malum fertur prona. etc. Lod. viues. ad sapient introd
But alas this is a vain confidence. If they knew their own frailty, and how
prove they are to sin, they would not presume and over ween so much of
themselves. I hope they will confess, that the Apostle Peter had as much
strength, and as great a measure of grace as they: and yet we see how easily
he was overcome. He came into this wicked place for a good end, and he
tarried but a while there, and yet he was brought to a fearful fall: how
then shall they think to stand, that rush into all companies without any care?
But it will be objected, Is it not lawful then at all upon any occasion to be
in the company, or to have any dealing with wicked men? yes in some cases it
is lawful. And therefore, for our better direction, these cautions are to be
observed: First, that it be only for necessity. As we cannot avoid it, but
in ordinary matters of this life, we must converse with the wicked, 1. Cor.
5.10.
unless as the Apostle says, We should go out of the world. Secondly, that
we have a due vocation. Thirdly, Mat. 9.10.13. Act. 17.17.
that we labor to do them good. Thus did our Savior Christ converse with
Publicans and sinners, and his Apostles with such as were unconverted. For both
they had a calling to do it, and they sought their conversion. Fourthly, that
we be greiued at their sin, 2. Pet. 2.8.
as Lot was at the Sodomites. Fifthly, that we pray that we may not be infected
by them. But though We live in the midst of a naughty and crooked
Generation: Phil. 2.15.
yet we may be blameless and pure, as the sons of God, and may shine as
lights among them.

Psalm. 119.63.
For this cause David professes, I am a companion of all them that fear thee
and keep thy precepts. And in an other place, Psalm. 16.3.
All my delight is in thy Saints and in such as excel in virtue. Though David
were a King, yet he scorned not the company of the meanest and poorest, if he
were godly and virtuous, because it would be a means to build him up in grace.
And therefore to conclude: As David was careful in the choice of his servants:
Psalm. 101.6.
Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me:
so let us be careful of our companions. Let our eyes be to those that are
godly and religious, to such as fear God, that they may be our companions.

And a maid] As the high Priest does persecute our Savior Christ: so all his
family does further the matter. There is not one of any sort whatsoever, that
does not take part with their master against the doctrine of the truth. They
all savor of impiety and frame themselves to the humor of the high Priest.
Mat. 26.47.51 John. 18.18.
The servants assisted Judas in apprehending Christ. They attended in the house
for any further employment. And when the Priest began to rail upon him, and to
spit at him, Mar. 14.65.
the servants were ready to smite him with their rods. Yea we see even the
maids against the modesty of their sex, grow saucy and malepert, to meddle in
the cause and business whereof they have no knowledge. Doctr. Wicked masters
have their servants of their own disposition. Psalm. 133.2.


They were al trained up to persecute religion and godliness. Where we see the
picture of a wicked family. They all agree to persecute Christ and his
Disciples. Wicked governors of families for the most part have all their
servants of their own diposition. According to the common proverb, Like
master like man. As the ointment that was powered on Aarons head, ran down to
his beard, and so to the very border of his garments: So the impiety and
wickedness of the master runs about through the whole family, infecting
and corrupting all that are in it. It is in the family, as it is with a fish,
that first takes his infection at the head. And therefore as good Father
Latimer said, If the head of the fish be sweet, all the body is sweet, but if
the head stincke, all the body will soon be naught. So in like manner if the
head of a family be good, it is a great means to make the whole family good;
but if he be naught, there is little hope of all the rest. We see the truth of
this in the example of Herod, Luke 23.11.
who when he began to offer indignity to our Savior Christ, all his train
were ready to join with him. And when wicked Ahab could not abide the sincere
ministry of the word, 1. King. 22.8.
because he was reproved by it, all his servants were ready to feed him up in
his humor. As we see in the messenger, that went to call Michaiah, who told
him, that all the other Prophets declared good to the King with one accord, I
pray thee, 13.
faith he, let thy words be like theirs, and speak thou good. And when the
good Prophet would not flatter, but told the King plainly what he should trust
to, Zidkijah, 24.
the Kings Chaplain, smote him on the cheek. As in the comonwealth, if the
magistrate be profane, the subjects are little better; Pro. 29.12.
as Solomon says, Of a Prince that hearkeneth to lies, all his servants are
wicked. So in the family, which is as it were a little comonwealth in it self,
if the ruler be wicked, his children and servants are corrupted. The reason is,
because the example of a governor in his house, is as it were a law. For
children are naturally given to imitate their parents, and servants think it a
commendation for them to be like their master, either in good or evil. Yea for
the most part, they desire to fit themselves to their masters humors. If the
master be given to whoredom, 2. Samu. 11.4.
his own servants will be his bands and pandors, as we saw in the servants of
David. If he would have any man that stands in his way closely murdered, his
servants will be forward to effect it, 15.16.
as Ioab was in the case of Vriah: yea though it be his own brother, as we see
in the servants of Absalon. 2. Sa. 13.28.29. 1. Sam. 28.7.
If Saul have a desire to consult with a Witch, his servants will quickly hound
her out. So we see in our own experience at this day; if the master be a
Papist, the most of the servants lean that way. If he be a Neuter, his
servants have no great religion. If he be profane, and make no conscience of
swearing and breaking the Saboth, his servants will follow his steps. Yea it
may be observed, that let a man that is truly religious, or a godly minister,
come into some houses, where the master is void of the fear of God, and he
shall be abused and disgraced of all the servants, even from the greatest to
the least. So that a master may be known by the conversation and disposition
of his servants.

David protests for himself, Psalm. 101.2.
that he would walk in the uprightness of his heart in the midst of his
house. So should it be with all governors, that they may neither harten their
families in evil, nor hinder them in good. Servants think themselves
privileged by the examples of their masters, yea for the most part, examples
prevail more then stripes. If they be good, it is an exhortation to the
servants to draw them to good: but if they be evil, it is a provocation unto
evil. Yea they effect as much in the soul, as the sight of Jacobs rods
wrought with the Ewes, Genesis 30.37.38.39.
when in ramming time they were laid before them in the watering troughes. And
therefore as the Queen of Sheba pronounced the servants of Solomon happy, 1
King. 10.8.
that stood ever before him, and heard his wisdom, etc. So on the contrary
side, miserable is the state of those servants, that dwell in profane and
wicked houses, where there is nothing but examples of impiety. Many parents and
masters do complain, that their children and servants, though they hear
good Sermons every Saboth day, yet they reap no profit. And no marvel, when
as the evil example they see at home, does them more hurt, then all the
Ministers pains in the Church can do them good, especially considering, that
their nature is far more apt and prone to evil, then to good. And this is
the chiefest cause of all the disorder that is in families. Though servants
were little acquainted with sin before, they may learn it of their masters.
Heb. 2.13. John. 17.12. Ad magistrum respicit, quicquid a discipulis
delinquitur Bern. apolog. ad Guiliel. Abbat. Omne quod per. per a magitur te
praesente, id tibi turpius, Bern. de consid. lib. 4. Vera est sententia, qui
cum emendare alium possit, negligit, participem se procu^dubio delicti
constituit. Bern. devijs vitae.
But let all such masters take heed: for the time will come, that they shall
give a strict account to God, for all that are under their charge. O what a
comfort would it be to their souls, if when they shall be called to this
account, they could say in truth, Behold, here am I, and the children which God
has given me; or as our Savior Christ says, Those that thou gave me, and
committedst to my charge, have I kept, and none of them is lost. Otherwise, if
by their means, they have been corrupted, their case will be fearful. Yea
they shall make themselves guilty of the sins of their servants, which are
committed by their default. As if either by their evil example, or by their
conniuence and remissenes in punishing, they have given them occasion of sin,
those sins are their own, as if they had committed them themselves. As we see,
when the Israelites had broken the Saboth in going out to seek for Manna,
contrary to Gods express commandment, the Lord said to Moses: How long refuse
ye to keep my commandments and my laws. Moses had not profaned the Saboth
but the people, and yet he is rebuked for their sin, because they were
committed to his charge. Now there is never one of us, but we have sins
enough of our own. Psalm. 38.4
Even those which in our own persons we have committed, if we had grace to
feel it, are a weighty burden, Job. 9.3.
too heavy for us to bear, as David says. And if God should call us to
account, only for our own personal sins, we should not be able to answer
one of a thousand. And therefore, why should we charge upon our heads the
sins of our families?

Luke 16.8.
else they shall not be so wise as the children of this world are in their
generation: who as has been said, will have all their servants of their own
disposition. For the effecting of this, there is required 1. a diligent care in
the choice of them. And surely our care in this case, should at least be equal
with our care in other matters. When we are to stock our ground with sheep,
we are very careful, both that they be of a good breed, yielding wool of a
good staple, and also that they come from sound grounds. And when we begin to
plant an orchard, we do not gather plants and graftes in every hedge, but we
are careful to provide the best plants, Isa. 5.2.
as the Prophet speaks. Much more should we be careful in the storing and
planting of our families, to make choice of such as fear God, and are not
infected with gross sins. And this was the practice of David, which should
be our pattern in this case. Pal. 101.6.7.
Mine eyes, says he, shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. There
shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, etc. 2. Because such servants are
rare and hard to be found, there must be an endeavor, both by precept and by
example to make them such. This has been the care of all Gods children from
time to time. Abraham flitted often, Genesis 12 7.8. and 13.18. and 21.33.
and had no settled place of abode, yet wheresoever he came, he built an Altar
for him and his family to worship God. He did not excuse himself by his
unsettled estate, but howsoever he wandered up and down himself, yet he kept a
settled course for the service of God. And Jacob, Genesis 35.23. etc
returning from Padam Aram, purged his family from the corruption they had got
in Labans house, and brings them to the sincere worship of God. Ioshuah also
thought it not enough for himself to serve God, John 24.15. Job 1.5. John 4
53. Act. 16.15.34.
but he was careful also for his family. I and my house says he, will serve
the Lord. And Job sanctified his sons, and offered burnt offerings for them.
It is testified of the Ruler, whose son our Savior Christ restored to his
health, and of Lydia, and of the Iailour, that not themselves only, but their
household also believed in God. But the example of Cornelius, that godly
Captain, Act. 10.2.7.
is most pregnant for this purpose. It is said of him, that not only his
household servants, but even his soldiers also (a very rare thing in these
days) feared God. It is very like they were not so at the first: but his good
instructions and godly example had made them so. As we see in Abraham, Genesis
14.14. and 17.23. and 18.19.
who had in his house 318. servants, and all of them in some measure religious:
for they all submitted themselves to be circumcised by him. But this was
effected by his care in teaching them to keep the way of the Lord, as the Lord
himself commends him for it. If we would conscionably use the same
diligence, we should see the same blessing of God upon our families, that it
might be said of them, as was said of the houses of Aquila and Priscilla, and
Philemon, with others, that they are so many Churches of God. But alas, Romans
16.5. Philem. v. 2.
God may dwell in our Churches if he will, but there is but cold intertainment
for him in the most of our houses, where all religion and godliness is
banished, and nothing to be seen, but open impiety and profaneness. So that
they are so far from being the Churches of God, as that they are rather the
Chapels ofthe Devil. For there is no care in choosing good servants, and as
little care in laboring by good means to make them good. If they be
personable and serviceable, such as we may profitably employ in our business, it
is no matter what they are otherwise. Though they be never so ungodly, if they
will do their deed, as they say, they will serve the turn. Hence it comes
to pass, that masters are many times justly plagued in their servants. For 1.
they are unfaithful in their business, and deceive their masters
whereinsoeuer they trust them. And indeed if they be unfaithful to God (as all
irreligious persons are) how can it be expected, that they should be faithful
to man. Whereas if they were such as feared God, Dan. 6.4.
they would make a conscience of their business, and be faithful and trusty
in every thing committed unto them. As Abraham's servant, who being employed by
his master, in a matter of great weight, Genesis 24.12.
he does not loyter it, nor slack it but first he begins his business
with prayer to God for good success; and when God had guided him aright, to
his iourneyes end, 33. Genesis 31.38.39.40.
he would neither eat nor drink, till he had dispatched that he came for. The
like fatithfulnesse showed Jacob to Laban, though an hard and unconscionable
master, in the twenty years service which he performed to him, as himself
testified. Zech. 5.3.4. Genesis 30.27. and 39.5. Grextotus in agris Vnius scabie
cadit and porrigine porci. Inuenal sat. 2.
2. they being wicked, and their sins crying unto heaven for vengeance, they
endanger the whole family where they are unto the curse of God. For there is a
fearful curse hanging over that house, where swearers and blasphemers are
entertained. Where as if they were godly, the blessing of God would be upon all
that they go about. As even Laban confesses, that he perceived plainly, that
God had blessed him in his estate for Jacobs sake. And when Putiphar had
entertained Joseph to be his servant, the Lord blessed his house for Joseph's
sake, and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in the house and
in the field. 3. they infect the whole family, as we see by too much
experience; many children otherwise of good disposition, have been poisoned by
conuersing with dissolute servants. There is none of us, that would endure a
sealed horse in our stables least he should infect the rest. Nay we will not
admit into our houses, a servant that has the falling sickness, or any
other contagious disease in his body. Much less should we admit him that
has his soul loathsomely infected with notorious vices. 4. and last of all
they are a disgrace and a reproach to their masters. Pro 29.15. Genesis 34.30.
Solomon says of dissolute and unnurtured children, that they are a shame to
their parents. And Jacob said of his sons Simeon and Leui, after they had
committed that bloody outrage upon the Shechemites, that they had made him
stink among the inhabitants of the land. The same is as true of lewd servants,
that they discredit their masters, and stain their reputation amongst men.
And therefore in all these respects, let masters be careful both to choose,
and also to order their servants aright. The master in his family, should
perform all the offices of Christ in the Church. As a King, he should rule
and govern those that are under him, in the fear of God. As a Priest he should
offer up the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving to God in their
behalf. And as a Prophet, should teach and instruct them in the knowledge of
Gods will. He should be like the Seraphin, Isa. 6.6.7.
that touched the Prophet Isaiahs mouth with a coal from the Altar. So he
should go from his wife to his children, from them to his servants, and labor
to kindle in them a zeal for Gods glory. This care was in all the Patriarchs,
Aug. de ciui. Dei lib. 19. c. 16. Qui very Patres famil. sunt, omnibus in
familiae sua tanq am filijs ad c^lendum Deum consulunt. ibid.
as St. Augustine says, who though in the dispensation of their temporal
goods, they put a difference between their sons and their servants: yet in
the thing that concerned their souls, with equal love and care they provided
for both alike. And they are not worthy the name of household governors, that
in this respect have not as great care of all in their family, as of their
children. But because instruction will do little good, if their practice be
not answerable; therefore the person of a master should shine in his family as
a lamp, by the light of a good example: and he should represent such virtues
in his own conversation, as may stir up his servants to imitate the same.

We ought rather to obey God then man, Act. 5.29.
As we have a commendable example in the servants of Saul who utterly refused
to execute his cruel commandment upon Abimelech and his fellows. They would
not move their hands to fall upon the Priests of the Lord. 1. Sam. 22.17.
Only Doeg, that dogged and cursed Edomite, was a fit instrument for such a
wicked purpose. And indeed, 18.
though God command obedience to superiors: yet it must be in the Lord. And
howsoever servants are willingly and without grudging to perform whatsoever
duty belongs to their Masters, Ephesians. 6.7. Collos. 3.23.
yet it must be with this limitation; that they must reserve for God that that
appertains to him. Otherwise, if to please their Masters, they will work
wickedness in despite of God, they are sure to be damned with their Masters.
And howsoever their Masters shall have the greater damnation, because they were
principal in the trespass: Mat. 22.21.
yet they are like to perish also in their sin. It will little avail a
servant, when he shall be in Hell, to accuse his Master for it. It will boot
him little to say, I may thank my Master for this. Woe worth the time that
ever I knew him. He made no conscience of swearing, nor of profaning the
Sabbath, and his example made me think it was nothing. It was no dispensation
before God for Absoloms servants, that they had their Masters peremptory
commandment for murdering of Ammon. 2. Sam. 13.28.
Kill him and fear not, for have not I commanded you? No more will it be any
dispensation for others, to plead that either their Masters commandment, or
his example has made them sin against God.

A maid came to him.] We see in Peter the imbecilitie and frailty of man's
strength, if he be left to himself. For that same Peter, who before thought
himself so strong, as that he seemed not to take it well at Christ's hand, as
that he put him in mind of his weakness: for he made his boast, that
Though they should all be offended by him; Mat. 26.33.
yet would he never be offended. And when Christ told him in plain terms,
that he should deny him thrice, 35.
he answered very resolutely, Though I should dye with thee, Luke. 22.23.
yet will I not deny thee. Yea he was ready to go with him into prison, and
to death. And if need stood, Joh. 13.37.
he would lay down his life for his sake. Yea he that already though, in a
preposterous boldness, Mat. 26.51.
had given good proof of his manhood and courage, when as he stoutly drew his
sword, and rushed into the midst of the armed soldiers; even he, I say,
being left to his own strength, is so weak and feeble, that he cannot stand
before a silly gyrle. If he had been conuented before the high Priest, and
threatened with death, as his Master was, then it had been something for him to
shrink; but he never tarrieth for that, but is so terrified at the voice of a
weak maid, Ioh. 1.42.
that he denies his Master. He was called Cephas, even by our Savior
himself; which signifies a stone or a rock, as also his name Peter does. But
how unworthily does he behave himself of this so honorable a Surname, that
dare not confess Christ Jesus before this damzell, but denies him in this
shameful manner? Yea which does more aggrauate his sin, the Evangelist S.
John says that he denied before he were well in the house. For the maid that
kept the door, asked him the question as she let him in, Joh. 18.17. Doct. Gods
children are weak and feeble, if they be left to themselves.
and even then he told her he was none of Christ's Disciples. O cowardly
Peter, thus basely to fall before he came in sight of danger! Here then, as
has been said, we have a lively pattern of man's strength. Even the best of
Gods children are easily overthrown, if God leave them to themselves. Weak
and small means are of force sufficient to batter their faith, if God do
never so little withhold his grace. The Devil needs use no great conflict,
nor bring no great force, he needs not plant any great Ordinance or Canon
shot against us, to shake the walls of our faith; for even the strongest of us
all, if we be not held up with the hand of God, are ready to stagger at the
least blast of tentation; yea even at the noise of a leaf falling from the
tree. All the strength that is in any of us without Gods grace, is no better
then smoke, which vanishes with the least blast of wind. Before we be
assaulted, we are more then courageous (as the Apostle Peter was here) but
as soon as the least temptation is laid against us. Dulce bellum inexpertis.
We faint and are discouraged. Like many a coward, that on an Alebench will
kill up all before him; but bring him into the field in the face of his enemy,
where he shall hear the clattering of armor, and the doleful groans of dying
men on every side, his heart fails him, Plura nos terrent quam premunt; and
saepi^sopinione quam re laboramus. Senec. Epist. 13.
and he is ready to betake himself to his heels. Yea many times we trouble
our selves with vain and causeless fears, before ever the Devil bend his
force against us. It is with us, as it was with the Apostle Peter, when he
would needs walk upon the water to go to Christ. he thought he could have
done as his Master did; but as soon as ever he set his foot out of the ship,
Mat. 14.30.
he was ready to sincke, had not Christ caught him by the hand and held him
up. In like manner unless the Lord reach out the hand of his grace to support
us, we cannot but fall. As a staff in a man's hand, so long as he holds it,
it stands: but if he take away his hand, it falls to the ground: so we can
stand of our selves, no longer then the Lord stays us. As a young child that
is learning to go, if the nurse leave it, it falls, and peradventure
receives hurt. As we see in Mephibosheth Ionathans son, 2. Sam. 4.4.
who by the negligence of his nurse caught a fall, whereby he became lame of
his feet, even to the day of his death. So if God leave us to our selves, and
do not follow us with his grace, we are ready to fall into mischief. Hence
is it that the Apostle says, Romans 8.14.
that all the children of God are led by the Spirit of God. The Lord knowing
our weakness, in mercy sends his holy spirit, which leads us by the hand
like little children. And again, praying for the Colossians: first he desires
the Lord to endue them with knowledge. Yea that they may be filled with the
knowledge of his will, Col. 1.9.
Secondly that it would please God to sanctify them, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord etc. 10.
A man would think, that they that had such a measure of knowledge and grace,
should need no more: and yet the Apostle adds a third petition, that they
may be strengthened with all might through his glorious power, insinuating, 11.
that though a man have never so much knowledge, and be never so thoroughly
sanctified; yet if he be not strengthened also by the Lord, he cannot stand.
In like manner, he exhorts the Ephesians, Finally my brethren, says he,
Ephesians. 6.10.
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. So that without the
power of God, our strength is no better then weakness. And for this cause,
the Apostle Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.5.
that we are kept by the power of God to salvation; (...) praesidiu^ dicitur.
Aretius in locum and Piscator. Romans 8.37.
unless the Lord in his mercy did watch over us by his grace, and defend us
against all assaults, as it were with a guard (for so much the word signifies)
we could never be saved. There are diverse degrees of the grace of God in his
children. Sometimes it works powerfully and mightily in them: Phil. 4.13.
and so long they are more then conquerours (as the Apostle says) in all
temptations. Romans 8.35.38.39.
They are able with Saint Paul to do all things through Christ that
strengthens them. Yea in a Christian courage, they dare cast down the
gauntlet, and bid defiance to all the enemies of their salvation. Mat. 16.18.
So that though the gates of Hell were set wide open, and all the power of
darkness should issue, and sally forth upon them, 2. Cor. 12.9.
they could not prevail. This grace of God would be sufficient for them, to
make them stand against all assaults, Psalm. 125.1.
even like Mount Zion that cannot be removed

But this powerful operation and assistance of Gods grace does not always
accompany the godly, but sometimes it works more remissely and weakly, yea
oftentimes it is in a man as fire raked up under the ashes, so as he can
hardly perceive it or discern it. And when the case is so with a man, let any
temptation be offered, he presently falls.

Objection. Psalm. 103.14.
But it will be objected; that the Lord knows how great our frailty is: for
he made us, and therefore must needs know what is in us; why then does he
not always assist us with his grace? 2. Sam. 24.1. cum 1. Chron. 21.1.
why does he so often leave us to our selves, and even give us up to be
tempted of the Devil, as it is said of David, when he numbered his men? Is not
he now the author of sin.

Answer.
To this I answer First, that God is not bound to do this for any man. He has
once given them the first grace, the grace of sanctification; and he is not
bound, nor tied to give them the second grace, the grace of corroboration. And
therefore, far be it from us to charge the Lord to be the author of sin.
For he does nothing to make any man sin only privately, as we say, he
withholdeth his grace, which he may do, and do them no wrong. Again, we are
to know, that the Lord, whose wisdom is infinite, deep and unsearchable,
Psalm. 147.5. and. Romans 11.33.
has many excellent ends, for which he deals thus with his children. First,
that we may not think, that Gods grace is a natural faculty, which we should
be ready enough to conceive, if it were always in us alike. To which purpose
Saint Augustine has a sweet saying. Venit ad consolationem, recedit ad
cautelam. ne magnitudo consolationis extollat te; ne si semper apud te sit
sponsus, incipias contemnere sodales, and hanc continuam visitationem non iam
gratiae attribuas, sed naturae. Hanc autem gratiam cui vult, and quando vult
sponsus attribuit, non iure haereditario possidetur. Aug. in scala Paradysi:
Which treatise some ascribe to Bernard, under this title. descala Claustralium.
Fear not O Spouse, says he, despair not, think not that thou art
contemned, if the bridegroom hide his face from thee for a time, for all things
shall work together for thy good, and thou shall gain both by his coming and
by his departing: he comes for thy benefit, and he departs for thy
benefit: he comes to comfort thee, he departs to make thee more heedfull:
least the greatness of the consolation should lift thee up, least if he were
always with thee, thou should begin to despise thy fellows, and to
attribute this continual visitation, not any more to grace, but to nature. But
God gives this grace to whom he will and when he will, it is not held by
inheritance.

Secondly, God does it sometimes to try us. Not as if he were ignorant of us,
for he knows what is in man. Ioh 2.26.
But that we may better know our selves. So it is said of Hez^kiah, that God
left him to try him, 2. Chron. 32.31.
and to know all that was in his heart. And for this cause, was the Apostle
Peter left to himself at this time. He had a great conceit of his own
strength before, as though he could have done more then all the rest: but now,
the Lord a little withdrawing his assistance, he sees, there is no more in him
of himself, then in another man.

Thirdly, God does it to chasten some secret sin in us whereof we have not
yet repented. For it is nothing but iniquity that separateth between God and
us, Isa. 59.2.
and causes him to hide his face from us, as the Prophet says. But as soon as
ever we have found out that sin, and unfeignedly humbled our selves for it
under his hand, he returns again to our comfort.

Fourthly because we do not use Gods graces well when we have them, but wax
proud of them, as the Apostle says, he was left to be buffeted of the
messenger of Satan, 2. Cor. 12.7. Vulgar prouerbium est, quod nimia
familiaritas parit contemptum, Rececedit ergo, ne forte nimis assiduus
contemnatur. Aug. vbi supra.
least he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations. Yea, such is our corruption, that if we should never feel any
want of grace, we should in time begin to contemn God himself. It is a common
proverb, Too much familiarity breeds contempt. And therefore, the Lord
departs from us sometimes, least being with us continually, he should be
contemned.

Fifthly, because we desire them no more earnestly. For if we could pray
earnestly to God for his grace, Iam. 1.5.
he that gives to all men liberally and reproacheth no man, as Saint James
says, would bestow it upon us. But our negligence and carelessenesse in this
case, does even deserve that God should forsake us, as the same Apostle says,
Ye get nothing because ye ask not. Recedit, vt ab sens magis desideretur,
desideratus auidius quaeratur, diu quaesitus tandem gratius inueniatur Aug
ibid. Quamuis subinde suis dominus in certamine ne desictant, adiutorium tribu
t: perm^ttitu^ tamen f^tiga^i propriae infirmitatis on^re praegr^uata
mortalitas; sed cum in se ipsa nullum virtutis inuenit firmamentum, ad
poscendum diuinae pietatis cito recurrat auxilium. Fulgent de oret and
compunct, cordis. ad Probam. Epist. 4.

Praeterea, ne exilium depute mus pro patria, arram pro praetij summa; venit
sponsu^ and recedit vicissim; nunc consolationem affere^s, nunc vniuersum
statum nostrum in infirmitatem commutans: paulisper nos permit^it gustare quam
suauis est, and antequam plene sentiamus, se subtrahit, and q^asi alijs
expansis supra nos volitans prouocat nos ad vo^andum. Augustinus ibidem. Cant.
2.9. Quis non remissius and tepidius a^iet eum, quem se cogitat necessario
deferturum? quando ne hominem amicum possit quisquam amare fideliter, quem sibi
futurum nouit inimicum. Augustinus de Ciuitate Dei. Lib 12. Cap. 20. 1. Cor.
10.13.


Therefore God does worthily withdraw himself from us, that when we fool the
want of his presence we may more earnestly desire him, and desiring may more
diligently seek him, and having once besought him may at the last find him to
our greater comfort.

Last of all, the Lord does it to make us more earnestly to long after that
full perfection of grace, that shall be in the Kingdom of Heaven. If the Lord
should never deny us grace in this life, nor should be over ready to set down
our rest here, and should soon grow out of love with any better estate. And
therefore, that we may not take the place of our banishment for our country
as Saint Augustine says, nor the earnest of our inheritance for the full
payment, the Bridegroom comes and departs by course: some times ministering
comfort, and sometimes changing our whole estate into weakness. He suffers
us to have a little taste how sweet he is, but before we can fully feel it, he
with draws himself, and as it were flouttereth over us with his wings, to
provoke us to sly up to heaven. But howsoever the Lord for these and other
causes best known to himself, does forsake his children, for a while: yet
this is our comfort, he never forsakes us totally nor finally. Yea even when
he seems most of all to forsake us, he stands behind the wall, and
looks at us through the chinckes of the door, as Solomon says. Where he
compares the Lord to a nurse, that sometimes hides herself from her child,
to see what shift it can make without her: but still her eye watches over it,
that it take no hurt. So though the Lord, seem to hide himself from us in
some temptations: yet his gracious eye still attends us, and will not suffer
us to be tempted above our strength, Cant. 2.6.
but will give an issue with the temptation. And if at any time we feel our
selves in danger of fainting, then he runs to us with all speed, and
puts his left hand under our head, and his right hand does embrace us.

This Doctrine serves first for admonition. For admonition.
For it admonishes Solomon says; Pride goes before destruction, Prou. 16.18.
and an high mind before the fall. And whosoever he is that seems to
himself to be somewhat when he is nothing, Gal. 6.3.
he deceives himself in his own imagination. And therefore, acknowledging
our own want of strength, and our own inabilitie to stand without the
assistance of Gods grace, let us not be high minded but fear, Romans 11.20.
as the Apostle exhorts, yea let us work out our own salvation with fear
and trembling. It is true indeed, Phil. 2.12.
in respect of God we have no cause to fear, For his foundation remains
sure, and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2.19.
But in respect of our selves and our own frailty, we have great cause to
fear. For if it were not that the Lord does establish us by his strength, we
should hazard the forfeiting of our salvation eueryday. And therefore, Let him
that thinks he stands take heed least he fall. And indeed, 1. Cor. 10.12.
who can hope to stand, being left to himself, when as Peter who had made such
an excellent confession of Christ twice before, Thou art Christ the son of
the living God. And, Mat. 16.16. Ioh. 6.68.69.
thou have the words of eternal life etc. Who had wrought so many miracles in
the name of Christ, Mat. 17.2.
and had in some measure tasted of the joys of heaven, being present when his
Master was transfigured on the mount, could not stand but fell so shamefully.

Secondly, it admonishes us to trust in the Lord, that that which we are not
able to do of our selves, we may effect it by his strength, and by the power
of his might. Corroboration is an herb of grace (as I may term it) that
grows not in our gardens, but as all other good gifts, it is from above, Iam.
1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights. And if at any time it be dead in
respect of our feeling, it can never be quickened again by any blowing of our
own, but as it were by new fire given from heaven. And therefore, when we
feel our own weakness, we must have recourse to God by earnest Prayer, as
the Apostle Paul did in the like case. 2. Cor. 12.8. Psalm. 51.12. and 17.5.
And David having experience of his great frailty by his grievous falls,
prays unto God to stablish him, and under proppe him as it were with his free
spirit, and to stay his steps in his paths that his feet might not slide. And
our Savior Christ, knowing the manifold temptations wherewith we are beset;
and our inabilitie to withstand them, Math. 6.13.
has taught us in the Lords Prayer to double that petition, Lead us not into
temptation, But deliver us from evil

Petrus ex egregio praesumptore creber negator effectus est. Aug.
Thirdly, we are here admonished, not to be too rash and hasty in our promises
which we make to God, further then we know our own strength, least it befall
us, as it did the Apostle Peter in this place. He promised great matters, but
he was slack in performance. I grant it is necessary for us to vow sometimes,
that we may be more strictly tied to the performance of our duties: Eccles.
5.1. Willet contr. 6. quaest. 4. part. 3.
yet it is the counsel of Solomon, that neither our mouths be too rash, nor
our hearts too hasty in vowing. And among many conditions required in making
of vows, this is one, which is chiefly to be regarded, namely, that it be in
our power to perform them: otherwise, it is but a tempting of God, and gives
great advantage to the Devil. As we see in the Papists, who are very forward
to vow single life; but how they perform it, Math. 19.11.
the event shows for the gift of continency being not in their power, as our
Savior Christ says, All men receive not this thing, but they to whom it is
given: they defile themselves with fornication, and all kind of beastly
filthiness, yea even such as with modesty cannot be named.

Secondly, For confutation.
this doctrine serves for the confutation of a Peter is the foundation
whereupon Christ built his Church. But alas, they will make but a miserable and
a feeble Church, when the foundation is so weak, that it shakes at the voice
of a girl. It is like that house that was built on the sand, which could not
abide a storm. The maine argument which they press upon ever occasion, Mat.
7.26.27.
and which long since is worn thread bare, is that speech of our Savior to
Peter, upon that excellent confession of his. Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, etc. Mat. 16.18.
For why say they, did Christ give Peter this name, more then any other of the
Apostles, but to show that he was appointed to be the foundation of the Church.
But this place is most maliciously abused and wrested by them: and there are
diverse gross elenches in the argument they frame out of it. Fallacia
dictionis.
For First they change the Masculine gender into the Feminine, and the
Appellatine into a Proper name. For Christ did not say, upon this Peter: (...).
Fallacia compositionis.
which yet he might have said, seeing in the Greek tongue (...) and (...)
signify both one thing; but he says, upon this rock, plainly teaching us,
that we must seek for another fundation beside Peter, whereupon to build the
Church. Secondly they do jointly affirm those things of Peter, which our
Savior Christ spoke distinctly, both of the rock, whereupon the building of
the Church is laid, and of Peter, who is a part of the building: For so he
distinguishes, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock, etc. Thirdly, in the
person of Peter our Savior Christ spoke to all his Disciples, and therefore,
they should all be foundations of the Church as well as Peter, which were
absurd. Now that Christ spoke to them all, it may thus appear. He propounded
the question to them all and not to Peter alone, as is evident in the text, He
asked his Disciples, whom say ye that I am. And Peter answers, not for
himself alone, but for all his fellows. And therefore, the words of Christ
do not only belong to him, but to all the rest of the Apostles. Yea Peter
Martyr witnesses out of Origin, that this answer of Christ does not only
belong to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, but even to all that do imitate
the faith and confession of Peter. vor. 19. John 20.23.
And for the other part of the speech in the next verse, I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, etc. That it was spoken to them all, is
clear in the Evangelist Saint John: where Christ says to all his Disciples
after his resurrection, Whosoever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them,
etc. And thus does Augustine also understand this place, Inter omnes Apostolos
Ecclesiae Catholicae per sonam sustinet Petrus. Huic enim Ecclesiae claues
regni caelorum datae sunt, cum Petro datae sunt. Et cum ei dicitur, ad omnes
dicitur, Amas me? P^sce oues meas Aug. de agone Christiano.

1. Pet. 2.4.5.6. Ephesians. 2.20. Calvin instit. lib. 4. c. 6. sect. 5.6. 1. Cor.
3.11. and 10.4. Gualter homil. 10. in Mich. 4.1.


Amongst all the Apostles, says he, Peter bears the person of the Catholic
Church. For to this Church were given the keys of the kingdom of heaven: when
they were given to Peter. And when Christ said to him, he said to them all,
love thou me? feed my sheep. We see Peter is none of the foundation of the
Church let us see then what is the foundation. By the rock whereon our Savior
Christ promised to build his Church is understood, 1. Christ himself: as even
the Apostle Peter expounds it, when he says, that all Christians must be
founded upon that living stone, elect and precious, which is the chief corner
stone, as also the Apostle Paul says: yea he makes Christ the only
foundation, beside which none other can be laid. For other foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And he said in plain
terms, the rock was Christ. And this is most agreeable to the word of our
Savior Christ: for he says not, upon thee will I build my Church, but upon
this rock, namely which thou have confessed: Now let every man that has any
brains, judge whether it be more agreeable to the faith, and more behoofull
for the Church of God, to be founded upon Christ or upon Peter: upon the son
of the living God, whom Peter confessed; Mat. 16.23.
or upon Peter that so shamefully denied him: upon him, that subdued and
conquered Satan; or upon him, whom Christ presently after calls Satan: upon
him, that is called, and is indeed the corner stone, that fasteneth both the
walls together; or upon him, Plessis treatise of the Church cap. 7.
that by his carnal counsel was a stone of offense unto him. 2. The faith of
Peter whereby he confessed Christ. And indeed there is no great difference, but
all comes to one end, Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 6. sect 29.
whether of these opinions we hold. For Christ is the foundation of the Church,
not simply and absolutely, but as he is apprehended of the faithful, and
confessed by faith. To conclude, Ferus in Mat. 16.
it is very well worth our marking to consider, what Ferus, who was himself a
Papist, has written concerning this point in his commentaries upon this place
of Matthew. This place says he, is a chief place of all that Matthew has
written: neither is there any place that does more comfort the conscience. And
this the adversary of all goodness knew well enough: and therefore, he has
bent all his endeavor to wrest it from the true, natural and simple meaning,
and to draw it to disputations and strife of words: which also he has
effected. For concerning this place, we do nothing else but contend for
superiority, who should be the greatest; not considering, Mat. 20.25.26.
what our Savior said to his Disciples in the like case, The Lodes of the
Gentiles have dominion over them, etc. But it shall not be so with you. And a
little after he says: we must inquire what this rock is, whereon the Church
is built. The word rock in the scripture is some times taken for strength, and
firmness, Psa. 20.7.5. and 40.2.
and security: as in those speeches of David, He shall set me upon a rock, and
he set my feet upon the rock: where he means nothing else, but that he was
set in a sure and safe place, that is* in security; And therefore, when Christ
says, upon this rock will I build my Church, etc. he means nothing else,
but that he would build his Church upon a sure and immovable foundation,
against which all the assaults of the adversaries should not prevail. Note.
Hereby it is evident that Christ built not his Church upon Peter, nor upon any
other man: for there is no man so firm and constant, that he cannot be moved:
which also we plainly see in Peter. We must therefore seek for another
rock. In the holy Scripture Christ himself is many times called a stone or a
rock. as Isa. 28.16. Psalm. 118.22. 1. Pet. 2.4. Hear thou what Peter says?
namely that Christ is a stone, and he would have us to be stones also: which
is, when we are built upon Christ. Now he is built upon Christ, that believes
in Christ, and relieth on those things which Christ is able to do. The rock
then primarily is Christ, upon whom the whole Church is built, 1. Cor. 3.11.
according to that of the Apostle, Other foundation can no man lay; etc.
Again, because by true faith we are joined unto Christ, and so do also after
a sort become stones or rocks, therefore also Christian faith, and the firm
and constant truth of the Gospel, is that rock whereupon Christ has built
his Church. He that rests upon this faith, is a true member of the Church, in
what place of the world soever he be. And he that knows not this faith, is no
member of the Church, though he seem to be the chief in the Church. For the
Church relyeth on this truth, and the Church is but one. Thus far Ferus, which
sentence of his is agreeable and consonant in all things to the doctrine of our
Church, and indeed to the doctrine taught in the holy Scriptures. Where we see,
that God has not left us without sufficient witness of this truth, even in
the midst of the Church of Rome it self.

A maid came to him etc.] We see yet further here the punishment of carnal
pride, and vain arrogancy and confidence. For our Savior Christ of purpose
would have the Apostle Peter discovered of this gyrle, and of no greater
persons, to the end that his pride and boasting, whereby he had so highly
exalted himself before, might be corrected and beaten down, when he should
perceive himself to be overcome not of a man, but a woman; not of some stout
Giant, but of a weak and feeble porter. He had before in a vain conceit,
exalted himself above all his fellows, Though they should all be offended by
Christ, verse. 33.
yet he would not. Yea above Christ himself, to whom in a manner he does
closely give the lie, as though he had been deceived in him, when he told
him, he should deny him thrice. No, he was another manner of man then he
took him for: he would live and die with him: that he would. verse. 35.
But see how shamefully he is cast down. For his fall was so much the fowler,
by how much the servants that occasioned it, were the baser. A siely gyrle, and
she not free, but a bondmaide, bearing no great office in the house, but only
keeping the door, is made an instrument to beat down that high conceit he
had of himself. And this is the Lords ordinary proceeding with proud persons.
Doct. God beats down the pride of men by vile and base means. 1. Cor.
1.27.28.
He uses many times even by vile and base means to subdue and punish their
pride. According to that speech of the Apostle. God has chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things
of the world to confound the mighty things. And vile things of the world, and
things which are despised, has God chosen, and things that are not, (that is,
things which in men's account are nothing worth, so abject and base that they
are not regarded) to bring to naught things that are. Thus dealt the Lord with
Pharaoh King of Egypt: he was so proud at the first, as there was no dealing
with him, he scorned that God should command him to let his people go. Exodus
5.2.
Who is the Lord that I should hear his voioe and let Israel go? I know not
the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. But God made him know before he left
him, and that even by the weakest means that could be, He could have hissed
for some warlike nation; Isa. 5.26.
to have van quished him and led him away captive, Jer. 52.9.
as he dealt with Zedekiah. He could have sent Lions to have slain him, as he
did to the Assyrians that dwelt in Samaria: 2. Kings. 17.25. and. 2.24.
He could have sent Bears to have torn him in pieces, as he did to the
children that mocked Elisha. Exodus 8.
But he uses none of these means, Vide Aelianum. var. Hist. lib. 14. cap. 4.
but only sends frogs, and lice, and flies, and such like vile and weak
creatures, to plague him and to check his pride. And indeed, even these
things which in themselves are contemptible, were a greiuous annoyance to him,
verse. 3.
and to the whole Land. For his very bedchamber, yea his bed it self was
pestred with frogs etc. In like manner Goliath that mighty giant of Gath, 1.
Sam. 17.9.10.50.
that defied all the Host of Israel with proud and brauing terms, as if none
had been able to fight with him and overcome him, was quelled by little David
with a sling and a stone. Judge. 5.29. and. 4.21.
So Sisera the captain of Iabins Host that came against the Isralites in such
confidence of the victory, Iud. 9.53.54.
was slain by Iael a weak woman with a nail and a hammer. And Abimelech in
the hight of his pride, was also brought to his death by a woman, who from a
tower cast a piece of a millstone upon his head, and brake his brain pan. And
Herod, who was lifted up, and swelled in pride at the voice of those flatterers
that told him he spoke more like a God then a man, was suddenly smitten by the
Angel of the Lord, Act. 12, 22.23. Brentius in Luc. 22.56
and was eaten up of worms. And indeed, this is a worthy punishment for pride,
that the more arrogant a man is, the more he should be shamed and dejected,
Luc. 18.14.
as our Savior Christ says, He that exalts himself shall be brought low.
And therefore Peter is worthily more disgraced then his fellows, because he
had arrogated more to himself then they, though without cause.

I have not found, says he, Mat. 8.8.10. Mat. 3.11. and. 11.9.11.
so great faith, no not in Israel. John Baptist confessed of himself in all
humility, that he was not worthy to bear the shoes of our Savior Christ.
But he affirms of him, and that very earnestly, that he was a Prophet, yea
and more then a Prophet, yea that among them that are begotten of women, there
arose not a greater then John Baptist. The deeper the Well is, the sweeter is
the water: so the more humble any man is in his own conceit, the more
acceptable he is to God. And indeed, if we could seriously consider, how
unable we are of our selves, to do any thing that is good, without Gods
assistance, we should see there were no cause for us to be proud. Nay if we
had any found grace or virtue at all in us, their would be no place left for
pride. For as we see the sun the higher he is in the firmament, the shorter
shadows he makes, and the nearer he comes to the earth, the shadows of all
things are the longer. So virtue and grace the higher and the more eminent it
is, the less oftentation it makes. Whereas on the other side, where grace is
wanting, there is nothing but pride and arrogancy: even as the ears of corn,
that have nothing in them but light stuff, stand perking up above all the
rest; but they that are laden with full come, hang down their heads.

Secondly, this may be a good warning to vss not to contemn 1. Sam.
17.42.44.49.51.
The proud uncircumcised Philistim, when he saw poor David come to him with a
staff in his hand, he disdained him, and threatened to give his flesh to the
fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the field. Quem vidit dies veniens
superbum: hunc vidit dies fugiens iacentem.
Yet this David, by Gods assistance brought him groueling to the earth, and
afterward cut off his head with his own sword. Yea we see how troublesome
even gnattes and fleas, are unto us in Summer time. And indeed, there is not
the weakest creature in the world, but if God arm it against us, it is strong
enough to chastise us for our sins. As the Lord calls the grasshopper, the
canker worm, Joel. 2.25.
the caterpiller and the palmer worm (all of them in themselves silly
creatures) his great host, which he sent among them. And there is a memorable
history of the Archbishop of Mentz, that having put a great number of poor
people into a barn, promising them some alms, and having set it on fire over
their heads, the mice that were in it by the just judgment of God pursued him
to death. Sphinx. Aenig. mat.
And we read of a whole town in Spain, that was undermined and cast down
with conies. And diverse people have been driven from their habitations, by
the annoyance of moles, frogs, mice, and hornets and such like creatures. And
thus much for the occasions of Peter's sin, now it follows to speak of the
sin it self.

But he denied etc.] This is the sin of Peter, that he denied his Master. If
our Savior Christ had been but an ordinary friend to the Apostle Peter it
had been too much for him to have denied him in this manner. For as Solomon
says, Prou. 17.17 and 27.10.
A friend loves at all times; and therefore, he gives counsel in this case,
Thine own friend and thy fathers friend forsake not. And hereupon, when Husha^
David's friend had under a color, and by David's consent joined with Absalom;
the better to discover to David all his plots and purposes; Absalom thinking
he had revolted indeed, 2. Sam. 16.17.
entertaineth him in this manner, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? etc. But
Christ was not only Peter's friend, but he was his Master: yea, such a Master,
as had always been most kind unto him, and had continually graced him with
his favor. For first, Mat. 4.18.19.
when as Peter by his calling was but a poor fisherman, Christ called him to
be one of his Disciples, and made him a fisher of men. Yea he made him an
Apostle, which was the most high and honorable calling in the Church. Besides,
our Savior never wrought any great miracle, but Peter was always admited to
be present. As when he raised up Iairus his daughter, Mark. 5.37.
He suffered no man to follow him, but Peter and James and John. Mat. 17.1.
And when he was transfigured in a glorious manner on the mount, Peter was
admitted to be a beholder of it. Yea when he was in that grievous Agony in the
garden, Peter was called to be a witness thereof. He took Peter and the two
sons of Zebedeus with him. and 26.37.
All the rest of the Disciples were left at the door. Yea more then this, he
was even his God and his Lord, as himself had before confessed. All this then
does aggrauate his sin, in that having seen our Savior work so many
excellent miracles, as to walk upon the Sea, with a word to still the rage of
the winds, with a word to heal all manner of diseases, to restore strength to
the lame, sight to the blind, yea and life to the dead: all which convinced him
in his conscience, that he was the Son of God; yet notwithstanding he did so
shamefully deny him, Nescio an in altero hoc genus peccati tanti ponderis esse
possit, in beat^ Petro fuisse manifestum est. Quisquis enim forte in aliqua
persecutione graui negauit filium Dei, in comparatione Petri v^debitur leuius
deliquisse: si negauit quem non vidit, si negauit quem non agnouit, si negauit
cui nihil promisit. etc. Optatus. contra Donatist. lib. 7.

Doctr. Gods Children fall many times into grievous sins.


If Peter had never seen nor known our Savior Christ, if he had never
acknowledged and confessed him, if he had never promised him the contrary, it
had been something, but now after all this to deny him, it makes his sin
so heinous, as it is hard for any other man to commit the like.

This example of the Apostle Peter's fearful fall does teach us, that there is
no sin so grievous nor so heinous, no wickedness so odious and abominable,
but even the dear child of God, being left to himself, may fall into it,
except the sin against the holy Ghost. It is most true, that there are the
seeds of all sin whatsoever, naturally rooted and inbred in us, which if
they be not prevented, are ready to break out, upon any occasion that shall be
offered. Who would have thought, that the Apostle Peter Petrus qui omnibus erat
sanctitate praestantior, amore deuotior, fide robustior, etc. Christum negauit*
Bern. de c^n. dom. sermon. 6. Iuc. 7.37.38. Mar. 16.9. 1. Tim. 1.13. Gal. 1.13.
and
so excellent in grace, so devout in love, so strong in faith, could ever have
been brought to this pass, to deny Christ Jesus after this manner? So that
hereby it is evident, that in respect of their outward estate, many times there
is little or no difference, between the child of God and a reprobate. And this
is true, First before their conversion to God. When they live in such gross
and notorious sins as they may seem even to be shackled by the foot with
reprobates. As may appear in Mary Magdalen, who before her conversion was a
common strumpet, and possessed with seven Devils. And in the Apostle Paul
himself, who as he confesses, before he was called. Was a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and an oppressor. Yea he persecuted the Church of God extremely,
and made havoc of it. And he says of himself, Act 26.11.
and Titus and the rest of Gods children, Tit. 3.3.
We our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient, serving lusts and
diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and envy etc. So likewise, he
puts the Corinthians in mind, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.11.
what manner of persons they had been, before they were sanctified, namely
some of them had been Idolaters, Adulterers, Buggerers, Thieves, Drunkards,
Ephesians. 2.1.2.3.
and as wretched sinners as could be. And he concludes both of Jews and
Gentiles, that whiles they remained unregenerate, 2. Tim. 2.19.
they were by natuae no better then the children of wrath. Indeed in respect of
Gods decree, there is great difference. For the Lord Knows who are his,
though they be hid, as it were, over head and ears among reprobates: but in
respect of their outward conversation, there is no difference at all. Neither
is this any whit prejudicial to their salvation. Indeed if our salvation
depended upon any merits of ours, as the Papists say, then it were much
material, what manner of persons we were. But according to his mercy he
saves us, Tit. 3.4.
as the Apostle says, without respect of any thing in us whatsoever. And
therefore the Lord says, Isa. 55.8.
My thoughts are not your thoughts; neither are your ways my ways. When we
bestow a benefit on a man, we respect something or other in him; but it is not
so with God: he both begins and perfecteth the work of our salvation,
Ephesians. 1.5 6.
according to the good pleasure of his own will, and to the praise of the glory
of his grace. And indeed what can make more for the glory of God, then this,
to save a wretched and a miserable sinner, that never deserved any thing but
hell fire? Even as the clemency of a Prince appears most, in pardoning the
most capital offenders and horrible Traitors.

Secondly, this is true also even after their conversion, when as many times
they fall into such foul and enormous sins, that for the present, their
outward conversation is as bad, as if they were reprobates. And this appears
plainly in this example of the Apostle Peter, if there were no other proof of
it. It was not the quality of Judas his sin, that made it worse then Peter's,
but his gracelesnesse, that could not repent of it, as Peter did. Nay, if all
circumstances be considered, it may be Peter's sin will be found so heinous,
if not more heinous then the sin of Judas. For Judas was diverse times
crossed by our Savior Christ, John 12.6.7.
as namely, in the case of the ointment, yea he was openly shamed and disgraced
before all his fellows, when as in the hearing of them all, our Savior
discovers him to be a Traitor, pulling him as it were out by the poll, Mat.
26.23.24.25. Iahn 13.26.
when he gave him a soppe etc. Hence he conceived dislike of his Master, and
no doubt began to stomach him: and then briberie working on his covetousness
(for the Priests offered him money) he was easily drawn to do that he did.
Mat. 26.15.
But Peter was ever well beloved and respected of his Master, as has been
said, and was never out of grace and favor with him: and yet notwithstanding
he denies him. 1. Sam. 13.14.
Fearful also and woeful was the fall of David, as the Scripture has
recorded it. It may seem strange, that David, a man after Gods own heart, as
the Lord himself testifies, could possibly fall so far as he did. 2. Sam.
11. the whole Chapter
For if we consider the circumstances and degrees of his sin, it will
appear, that (final impenitencie excepted) a reprobate could scarce commit a
greater. For first, he commits adultery with Vriah his wife: after that,
he uses very vile and sinful shifts to save his credit, and to cover his
sin. As he sends for Vriah from the Camp, where he was fighting the
battles of God against his enemies, and would have had him to have gone and
layen with his wife, that so he might father the child. When he could not
persuade him to go home, he causes him to eat at his own table, and there
makes him drunk, thinking that then he would have done it. But when this
would not prevail neither: he that before, in the time of his affliction, was
so tender hearted, that his conscience checked him for cutting off the lap of
Saul's garment, 1. Sam. 24.6.
does now make no bones, to cause Vriah, an innocent and harmless man, to be
slain and made away. In like manner, Gene. 7.1. and 2. Pet. 2.7.8.
Noah and Lot, both of the^ righteous persons, as is testified of them, and
both of them having had so good experience of Gods merciful goodness in
preserving them; Gene. 6.8. Gene. 19.16. and 9.21. and 19.33. etc.
the one from the destruction of the old world, the other from the overthrow of
Sodom and Gomorrah: yet were both drunk in a shameful manner, and Lot to his
drunkenness added incest, even with his own daughters. Number. 12.7. Exodus 33.11.
In a word that Moses was so faithful in the house of God: he that found such
grace in the sight of God, that the Lord spoke to him face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend; he that had so great experience of the mighty power of
God, in so many glorious miracles: yea himself had been Gods instrument in
effecting them: he that had with such a great patience and meekness overcome
so many prouocations of that froward and perverse people: yet at the last was
so angered, and his spirit so vexed, Psalm. 106.32.33. Number. 20.10.12 Deuteronomy. 34.4.
that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips: which sin of his was so heinous,
as that the Lord would not therefore suffer him to enter into the land of
promise. Many examples might be produced for the further confirmation of this
point: but by these it may sufficiently appear, that though a man be never so
dear to God, and have received never so great a measure of grace and
sanctification, yet if he be left to himself, by violence of temptation he
may fall into great and fearful sins.

Object. 2. These. 3.3.
But some may say, God is able to stablish his children, as the Apostle says,
and to keep them from evil. Why then does he not always prevent them with
his grace, but suffer them to fall thus fearfully to the dishonor of his
name, and the wounding of their own souls?

Answer.
I answer as before, that God is not bound to follow any man with his grace,
after he has once regenerated and sanctified him. And herein God deals with
his children, as a father does with his prodigal son. Though he be able to
furnish him continually with money, and to supply all his idle and wastfull
expenses: yet when he sees that nothing will serve his turn, but that still
he lasheth it out without any measure, he gives him over, and leaves him to
himself, to be beaten with his own rod, as that prodigal youth was in the
Gospel that at the last coming home by weeping cross, Luke 15.14 15.16.
be may learn to be a better husband. And yet no man condemns this father
of cruelty or hard dealing to such a son but rather commends his wisdom.
So in like manner, when the Lord perceives his children to wax careless,
Enchir. ad Lau rent. cap. 10. Romans 8.28. Mala eis prosunt, quae alijs
facientibus obsunt. Mag. Sentent. lib. 1. disti 49. G.
in husbanding the graces which he has given them, when they begin to be
negligent in using the means to preserve and increase them, he justly
witholdeth his grace from them, and leaves them to fall into gross and
grievous sins. And yet such is the merciful goodness of our God, that even
this makes for our great and unspeakable good. That God, that in the beginning
by his divine power, brought light out of darkness, is able also out of the
greatest evil to bring the greatest good. To which purpose Saint Augustine
has a good saying, Almighty God being infinitely good, would by no means
suffer any evil to be in his works, unless by his power and goodness he
were able to dispose it to good. And the Apostle also says, that all things
work together for the best, to them that love God: yea even sin that is
hurfull to others, by Gods merciful dispensation is profitable to them. For
first, when the children of God are overcome of the temptation which they
strive against, and so fall into some great sin, it makes them displeased
with themselves, because they have so dishonored God, and so they begin to
take a better vewe of their own frailty and weakness, and are exceedingly
humbled thereby: Audeo dicere, superbis vtile esse caderein aliquod apertu^
manifestumque peccatum, vnde sibi displiceant, qui iam sibi placendo
ceciderant. Salubrius enim Petrus sibi displicuit, quendo sleuit; quam sibi
placuit, quando praesumpsit, iuxta illud. Psa. 83.16. De ciuit. Dei lib 14.
cap. 13. Sanctis vsque adeo Deus omnia cooperatur in bonum, vt si qui horum
deuiant and exorbitant, etia^ hoc ipsum eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia
humiliores redeunt atque doctiores; Petrus, Magist. Sentent. lib. 1. Distinct.
46 I.
whereupon Saint Augustine is bold to affirm, that it is profitable for them
that ouerweene of themselves, to fall into some gross and notorious sin,
that thereby they may be out of love with themselves, as before by thinking too
well of themselves, they had fallen. And he brings in the example of Peter;
for a proof of it; who as he says was more profitably displeased with
himself when he wept, then he was pleased with himself when he presumed
according to that in the Psalm, which he also alleges, Fill their faces
with shame, that they may seek thy name O Lord. This is far from the Devils
purpose, when he tempted us to sin; and yet see how the goodness of God
orders and disposes of it for our benefit. The Devil may in this case be
fitly Pherco ^asoni profuit hostis, qui gladio ^omicam eius aperuit quam sanare
medici non potorant.
compared to that combattant, of whom we read, that ran with his sword
against his adversary, thinking to have run him through, but Gods providence
secretly guiding his hand, he opened an impostume, which no Physicians could
heal; and so thinking to kill him, he preserved his life. So the Devil in
great rage thrusts sore at Gods children, seeking to wound them to death by
some notorious fall: yet by the gracious dispensation of God, he is so far
from hurting them, as that by this means he launcheth and lets out their
ulcers of privy pride and ouerweening of themselves. So that for all his fury,
he is but a Surgeon to heal our corruptions. Whereunto agrees that sweet
saying of Augustine. Nescit diabolus, quomodo illo and insidiante and surente,
vtatur ad salutem fidelium excelsifima sa^entia Dei. de Trinit. lib. 4. cap 13.
Little knows the Devil, how the wonderful wisdom of God uses his malice
and rage, to the salvation of the faithful. And Bernard says to the same
purpose Nequissimus ille seruns filijs seruit, vel inuitus. Quid ei tam
molestum, and quid nobis esse poterat tam i^ cundum, quam vt etiam malum eius
nobis cooperetur in bonum Bern. in Psalm. 91. sermon. 11. Rom 5.20. Luke 7 47.
Multi and magni sunt languores mei, multi and magni; sed amplior est medicina
tua. Aug. confess. lib. 10.
. That lewd servant (meaning the Devil) does service unto Gods children full
sore against his will. What could be so greiuous to him, and so pleasant and
comfortable to us, as that his evil should work for our good? Secondly, it
lets us see the exceeding goodness and bountifulness of God, in pardoning
and forgiving great sins: to the end, that when we shall find, that where
sin abounded in us, there grace abounded much more in the Lord, we may be
provoked to love him the more, as our Savior testified of the poor woman,
that washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head: Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. As a man cannot choose
but love the Physician, that has recovered him from some dangerous sickness:
so we cannot choose but love the Lord, who in mercy forgiueth all our sins and
heals all our infirmities. Psalm. 103.3. Thirdly, it makes us more wary for
the time to come, least we should f^ll into greater sins. As he that has
caught a fall, takes better heed to his steps: so the child of God, having
fallen into one sin, is made more heedfull, that he fall not further. He
will think with himself, I have fallen into this sin, I may fall into a
greater sin, if I be not circumspect: Psalm. 39.2.
and therefore, he resolves with David, to take heed to his ways that he
offend not. Fourthly, it causes us to run forward with more speed. As he
that runs in a race, or trauelleth in a journey, if he happes to fall, he
will not lie long, but will rise again with speed, and bestirre himself the
faster, that he may not be hundred or cast behind. Last of all, it lets us
see our own inability, that despairing of our own strength, we may more
earnestly crave the assistance of Gods grace. As David, after that fearful
fall of his, Psalm. 51.1^. and 86.11.
saw the corruption and weakness of his nature, and therefore prays unto God
to stablish him with his free spirit: yea to knit, and as it were, to chain
his heart unto him, that he might fear his name. O magnum donum, quod in
poenam dedit Deus insalutem vertit. Chrysostom.
So that we see how rich the Lord is in his mercy to his children, that causes
even their sins, which in themselves are damnable, to turn to the furtherance
of their salvation. But howsoever the children of God do many times fall
fearfully and grievously: yet this is their comfort, they can never fall
totally nor finally from the grace of God. It is true, there may be a great
decay and eclipse of grace, but yet it is so rooted in the heart, as it can
never utterly be lost. Indeed the most godly man that lives may commit such
sins, as by the due desert of them he might loose his prerogative of being
the child of God, but yet in regard of Gods election and free grace of
adoption, he remains still the child of God. For the Lord is not fickle and
inconstant in his love, Iam. 1.17. John 13.1.
to love a man to day, and to cast him off to morrow. No there is no
variableness, nor shadow of change in him. And therefore as our Savior Christ
says, whom he loves once, he loves to the end. Besides, in his greatest
falls, the seeds of Gods grace remain in his heart, whereby he is preserved
from final apostasy, as the Apostle says, 1. John 3.9. John 4 14.
He that is borne of God sinnet ^ not, for his seed remains in him. And our
Savior says, and 7.38.
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more a
thirst: but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life. And in another place, He that believes in
me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters of life. So that the graces of
God in his children, are not like those brooks, whereunto Job compares his
friends, that run like rivers in winter, but are dried up with heat in
summer, and fail out of their places: but they are such as spring continually,
and are never dried up till they have brought a man to life everlasting. For
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Romans 11.29. John 5.24.
Again our Savior Christ says, He that believes, has already passed from
death to life. So that if it be possible for a man to be brought from life to
death, and from heaven back again to hell, then is it possible for the child
of God quite to fall away, and become a reprobate. But the perseverance of the
faithful is more sure and firm then so. They are builded upon that immovable
rock Christ Jesus, Mat. 7.25.
and the greatest storms of temptations cannot make them fall. It may be
sometimes with the child of God, as it was with Eutychus, when being overcome
with sleep, he fell down from the third loft: Act. 20.9.10.12.
every body that saw him, thought he had been dead, there was so little
appearance of life in him: yet when the Apostle Paul came, and embraced him, he
bids them not trouble themselves, for his life was in him, and by and by he
recovered and came to himself. So the child of God, both in his own feeling,
and in the judgment of others, may seem to be graceless, and yet there is
grace remaining in the heart, though so weak, as it can hardly be discerned.
For as fire is often so raked up under the ashes, as that there is no token of
fire to be seen, there is neither light, nor heat, nor so much as any smoke;
and yet there is fire which with blowing, and supply of new fuel, will soon
kindle again: As trees in winter seem to be dead and withered, but yet there
is sap below in the root, which in the spring will appear, and cause them
to bud and flourish again: And as the sun may for a time be hid from our
sight by some thick cloud, and yet when the cloud is dispersed, it appears
again in perfect beauty. So the graces of Gods spirit may seem for a time to
be in a manner dead and extinguished in us: but in the end, they have their
lively and powerful operation as before. A woman that is with quick child,
may for a space never feel it stir within her: yet she is not discouraged,
but afterwads she feels it again. So peradventure, the child of God may for
a certain season, feel no stirring nor moving of Gods grace within him: but
yet herein he may stay himself, that if ever he felt it in truth, he shall in
good time feel it again to his comfort. And in this respect our estate is
far better then was the estate of Adam, even in his innocence; God had endued
him with an excellent measure of grace, but being all committed to his own
keeping, the Devil soon spoiled him of it. But God has provided better for
our security: for the grace that he bestows upon us, he does not trust us
with it, knowing our weakness, but he keeps it himself. As the Apostle
says, Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.4. 2. Tim. 1.12.
when Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in glory. So that now all the Devils in hell cannot bereave us of the least
saving grace that God has given us.

But it will be objected, Objection. 2. Tim. 4.10. 1. Tim. 1.19.
that there are examples in the Scripture, as of Demas, and others, that have
utterly fallen away, and made shipwreck of faith. And our Savior says in the
Parable of the seed, Luke 8.13.
that many that have believed, in time of temptation have fallen away.

To this I answer, Answer.
that there was never any man that was the true child of God, and a true
member of the Church, that ever fell away finally. Indeed, the Church has
always, (and shall be to the end) been pestered with hypocrites, which occupy
a room in it, but were never found members of it. And those fall away thick
and threefold, as Saint John says, They went out from us, but were not of us.
1. Ioh. 2.19.
The Church is compared to a net. Non omnes quos sagena trahit, pi^catorum vasa
recipient. Bern. de Conuers. ad Schol.
Now as all is not fish that comes to the net, as the proverb is. But the
net draws many things, which the fishermen never put in their vessels so
there are many received outwardly into the Church, as Simon Magus was, to whom
it may be truly said, as Peter said to him, they have neither part nor
fellowship in the privileges of the Church. Act. 8.21.
Again there is indeed a faith that may be lost, namely, when it is separate
from a good conscience, for that is a dead and a fruitless faith: but a true
lively faith, Luc. 2^ 31.32.
such as all Gods children have, can never be lost. For that prayer of Christ
in the behalf of Peter, is auailable for all the elect to the end of the
world, namely, that howsoever Satan in his malice sift and assault them, yet
their faith shall never fail. And though our Savior speak of some that
shrink and fall away in temptation: yet they are such as never had any root.
And the faith they seemed to have, it was but temporary, they believed only
for a time. The Galathians were the true Church of God, truly regenerate and
effectually called: yet were they snared by false doctrine, and fell
dangerously even to the extinguishing (as much as lay in them) of the graces of
God: yet were they not quite bereft of the spirit, yea Christ himself remained
in them still, though for want of godly graces, he was as it were without
form, as the Apostle says Gal. 4.19. David also after his fall was in the
like case: yet he had not utterly lost the spirit; for he prays unto God,
take not thy holy spirit from me Psalm. 51.11. And to this purpose Bernard has
a good saying Petrus cum peccauit, charitatem non amisit, quod peccauit potuis
in verit item quam in charitatem; cum eius se non esse m^n^itus est ^n ore,
cuius totus erat in cord ^ideoque negationem falsitatis continuo lachrimis
lauit ve itas charitatis. Sic cum David peccauit, charitatem non perdid^t, sed
obstup^^t in eo quo dammodo charitas, ad vehe meatem tentationis ^ctum and
charitatis in eo nequaquam facta est abolitio, sed quasit quaedam soporatio:
qu^e mox vt ad vocem irguentis Proph ^ae eu^lauit, contin^^o in illam
ardet^ss^a ^^ charitat ^co^fessio^e erupt, pecca a dom^no, and continuo auderit
etc Bern de amore Dei p. 2. 2. Sam. 12.23.
Peter when he sinned, lost not charity, because he sinned rather against the
truth, then against charity; when as with his mouth he denied himself to be
his whose he was wholly in his heart. And therefore the truth of charity,
with tears washed away the denial of falsehood. So when David sinned, he lost
not charity, but it was after a sort benumbed in him by the violence of the
temptation, neither was his charity quite abolished in him, but as it were
laid asleep; which as soon as it was awaked at the voice of the Prophet that
reproved him, he straigthway brake out into that most earnest confession of
charity, I have sinned against the Lord, and presently heard this answer,
The Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die.

This doctrine (to make use of it) serves first for our instruction, namely
that we be not too rash in judging and condemning our brethren. We see by this
that has been delivered, that a man may fall grei^ously and fearfully, and
James says, Iam ^.12.
Who art thou that iudgest another man. We may not set bounds and limits to
Gods mercy at our pleasure, to say such a man has committed such and such
sins, therefore he cannot be saved. This is too great presumption in any
man. Dei est nosse reum, illius far sentetiam. Tac eamus omnes homines. Solus
Deus iudicet peccatorem Opt. cent. Donat. l. 4. Et l. 7. In di^ iudicij sedebit
index filius Dei, qui agnoscit quid est suum, and quid alienum. Illius est
eligere quid condat in horreo and quid tradat incendio. Agnoscamus nos omnes
homines esse. Nemo sibi vsurpet diumi iudicij potestatem. Nam si sibi tantum
vendicet homo, quid in iudicio acturns est Christus? Satius sit homini, si de
peccato suo reus non sit, quam vt de alieno iudex esse desideret. Gal. 6.1.
It belongs to God only to know who is guilty in that manner, and it is his
prerogative (as one says well) to give sentence. And therefore let all men
keep silence, and let God alone judge who is a sinner. At the day of
judgment, the son of God shall sit as Judge, who knows what is his, and
what is none of his. It belongs to him to make choice, what he will lay up
in his barn, and what he will commit to the fire. Let us all acknowledge our
selves to be men, and let none usurp the power and authority of Gods
judgment. For if any man shall arrogate so much to himself, what shall be left
for Christ to do at the last judgment. Let it be better for a man, not to
be guilty of his own sins, rather then to desire to be a judge of other
men's sins. And therefore in this case let every one of us lay our hands upon
our mouths. And let us practice the counsel of the Apostle, Brethren (says
he) If a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least
thou also be tempted. Either we have committed as great sins our selves, or
if the like temptation were offered unto us, we should as readily yield as
they have done, if God should leave us never so little. And therefore we must
be pitiful toward them, and pray for their amendment. As he that has
recovered from some grievous sickness, pittieth those that are sick of the
same disease, and as he that is delivered out of prison, has compassion on
them that lie bound in misery and iron: Haud ignara mali, miseris succurrere
disco. D^do apud Virgil. Aenead. 1.
So the child of God, having by Gods mercy recovered from his sins, cannot
choose but pity those that are overtaken with sin. That which the Apostle
requires of Ministers, must in some measure be performed of all Christians,
namely, to be gentle toward all men, suffering sinners with meekness, 2. Tim.
2.24.25.
proving if God will at the last give them repentance etc. Yea by love we must
cover even a multitude of sins. 1. ^et 4.8.
And herein there is a manifest difference between the Godly and the wicked.
The godly cover many infirmities in others under one good gift, but the wicked
bury many good gifts under one infirmity.

Secondly, it serves for the comfort of all Gods children. For it is a glass
wherein they may behold the rich mercy of God, in pardoning such great sins,
that like sinners they may not despair. To which purpose Saint Paul has an
excellent speech, having related at large, what a wretched sinner he had been
before his conversion even the chief of all sinners; he says, that he was
received to mercy, for this end, 1. Tim. 1.16.
that Jesus Christ might show on him all long suffering to the ensample of them
that shall in time to come believe in him etc. where he plainly teaches us,
that Gods grace is not appropriated and intailed to some few, but is
indifferently offered to all, that are qualified aright to receive it. God was
not only merciful in forgiving the sins of David, and Peter, and such like;
but he is as merciful to forgive Cadit Petrus, vt reliqui caueant. Hugo in
locum. Considera and treme vir just, Petrus paulo ante communicans etc.
Caiela^. in hunc locum. Cuiuis potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest, Sen.
thou can bewail them as they did.

Thirdly we may here be admonished to take heed, that we suck not poison
out of this and such like examples of the falls of Gods children, by taking
occasion thereby to hearten our selves in our sins: but rather be made more
wary and circumspect over our selves. As a weak old man seeing a young lusty
man take a fall in the way before him, takes better heed to his steps,
least he fall also. So when we shall see, that the Apostle Peter, a man endued
with such a measure of grace, did notwithstanding fall so fearfully, we had
need look well to our selves, or else whither may we fall if we be left to
temptation as he was Nemo audebit de sua virtute confidere, quando
mutabilitatis periculum nec beatus Petrus potuisset euadere. Glossa ordin^r.
who dare now presume of his own strength, when this blessed Apostle, that was
a pillar, as it were, in the Church, is thus fearfully shaken? Nay rather, a
man should always suspect himself, and be afraid to fall, and when he shall
see such fearful tempests and such lamentable shipwreck of such excellent
men Cum videat tantorum virorli and cauendas tempestates, and slenda naufragia.
de Doct. Christ. Lib. 3.
as Saint Augustine says. And to this purpose Bernard gives good counsel
Vita foueam, in quam vides alium coram te cecidisse. Aliorum perditio tua sit
cautio. de cons. aedific. c. 46.
Shun the pit, says he, wherein thou see another fall before thy face. Let
other men's destruction be thy caution. And Aliorum ruinae vestra debent esse
exempla. de obed. and humil.

Non cadendi exemplum propositum est, sed si cecideris, resurgendi. Non sit
delectatio minorii, lapsus maiorum: sed sit casus maiorum, timor minorum Aug.
in Psalm. 51.


Augustine has the like saying. Other men's ruins should be your examples.
Now to the end, that we may not abuse these examples of Gods children, to the
encouraging of our selves in sin: let us consider first, that this was no
ordinary thing with them, to fall in this manner. It is testified of David,
even by the Lord himself, that he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Vriah. 1. King.
15.5. David then made no occupation of sinning. So we do not read, that ever
Peter denied Christ Jesus any more, no he was most constant in confessing of
his name, even unto death. Neither do we read that Noah or Lot were ever
overtaken with drunkenness again. And therefore the examples of their falls
can be no encouragement to them that continually add sin to sin; making
whoredom and drunkenness, and such like horrible sins, their ordinary
trade and common practice. These men sinned indeed, but it was of infirmity,
through the violence of temptation: and they did not lie along in their sin,
but renewed their repentance with grief of heart; and therefore God received
them to mercy, and forgave them their sins. But this is nothing to thee,
whosoever thou art, that sinnest presumptuously with an high band, and live
and lie in thy sin impenitently. God has no mercy for thee, so long as
thou continuest in this estate.

Again for our selves, let us consider what hurt we receive, whenever we
fall into any sin. For first of all, that spiritual comfort and joy in the
holy Ghost, which once we felt, 1. Pet. 1.8.
and which before was in us unspeakable and glorious, vanishes away, and our
souls are filled with horror, by reason of Gods displeasure, and the
conscience is made even the picture of hell. And therefore David after his
grievous fall, Psalm. 51.11.8.
desires the Lord to restore to him the joy of his salvation. And a little
before, in the same Psalm, he says, Make me to hear of joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Insinuating, that the the
horror of conscience, that follows upon the committing of sins, is like
the breaking of a man's bones, which is the greatest pain that can be. Yea, he
says in an other Psalm, Psalm 130.1.
Out of the deep places, have I called unto thee, O Lord: as though for the
time he had been in the bottom of hell. Secondly, we are made unfit to any
thing that is good: so that till we be restored again by repentance, we are
made unprofitable burdens of the earth. There is no cheerfulness in Prayer,
no life in hearing the word, no delight in receiving the Lords supper. Our
souls are dull and lumpish within us, as if they were buried in the bottom of
a dunghill, that we cannot lift them up with any feruencie, in the performance
of any holy duty. Thirdly, on the other side, we are made most apt and ready
to run into any sin. Whiles we lie impenitent in any transgression, the
devil cannot offer a tentation to us, but we are ready to yield, as may
appear in this example of Peter, as we shall see afterward. Fourthly, we are
sure to smart for it, for God will correct us with one rod or other, till we
be thoroughly humbled, as the Lord said to David: If thy children forsake my
Law, Psalm. 89.30.31.32.
and walk not in my judgments: if they break my statutes and keep not, my
commandments: Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with scourges. What a grief think we, Genesis 9.22.25.
was it to Noah, by reason of his sin, to become a laughing stock to his
own son? What a heart breaking was it to David, to be thrust out of his
Kingdom by Absalom his own darling? 2. Sam. 15.30.
It is said, that when he fled from him, he had his head covered, and went
barefooted, and wept as he went. Better were it therefore for a man to want all
the pleasure that his sins can afford, then to endure the smart and shame
that follows after, as the Apostle says: What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed. Romans 6.21.
Last of all, when a man by his sins has lost the feeling of Gods favor, it
is hard to recover it again. Peter wept bitterly, David cries earnestly, yea
he caused his bed every night to swim, and watered his couch with his tears.
So will it be with thee, whosoever thou art, that have by thy sin lost the
favor of God, it will cost thee many a broken sleep, many an aching heart, and
many a salt and bitter tear, before thou can be reconciled again. And
therefore, to conclude in all these respects, we should be careful by all
holy means to preserve our selves from sin, and not presume, because God
has been merciful in forgiving many great and grievous sinners.

Before them all.] This is the manner of his denial, that he does it openly
and publicly, he did not whisper it in the maids ear, but spoke it openly
in the hearing of them all. And this does greatly aggrauate his sin, that he
is not afraid of a multitude of witnesses. He is come to this pass, that he
cares not who hears him deny his Master. Doctr. These sins are most
heinous that are openly committed. Psalm. 139.12.


Here then we may learn, that as all sins are heinous: so especially that
which is openly and publicly committed. The very sight and presence of men
should somewhat keep us and restrain us from sin. It is true that even our
most secret sins are odious in the sight of God; because sees them as well
as if they were open. For as David says, The darkness hides not from God,
Ier. 23.24. Psalm. 19.12.
but the night shines as the day: the darkness and light to him are both
alike: he sees as well at midnight as at noonday. Neither can there be any
place so secret, wherein a man can hide his sins from the Lord. And
therefore, Hos. 4.2. Jsa. 3.9. Vultu morbum incessuque fatentur. Iuuenal,
satyr. 2.

vnius cuiusque casus, tanto mayor; ris est crim iniis quanto, priusq. is
caderet, maioris erit virtutis. Bern. de conc. aedif. cap. 5 s, 1


as David prays for the pardon even of his secret sins: ackowledging, that
God could know and see sins in him, when they could not see them himself.
But when men's sins break out as the Prophet Hosea says, into the open vewe
of the world: and when once the trial of their countenance does testify
against them; when they are come to that height of impudency in sinning, that
they declare their sins as Sodom, and hide them not, then are their sins
most odious. The reason is, because God thereby is most dishonored: especially,
if they be professors of religion that do offend. For all that profess
religion, live as it were upon a stage, where all men do eye them: and observe
their conversation. And if they commit any notorious sin; on the one side,
the godly, if they be weak are scandalized and offended. It is a great
temptation to one that is but newly converted to Christ, to see one that for
many years has made a great show of Christianity, to fall into such and such
sins. It weakeneth him excedingly, and does greatly endanger the salvation of
his soul. If the Lord do accurse him, that shall cause a blind man to go out
of his way: Deuteronomy. 27.18.
how much more shall they be accursed, that by their evil example shall turn
any man out of the way of righteousness. Mat. 1^.6.
And therefore, our Savior Christ denounces a fearful woe to him, that
shall by any means whatsoever offend or cast a stumbling block in the way of
any of those that believe in him: he says, It were better for him that a
mil-stone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea. If they be stung they are greiued: 2. Pet. 2.8
as Lot was with the wickedness of the Sodomites. On the other side, the
wicked, if they be yet indifferent, and not thoroughly confirmed, they are
mightly encouraged and strengthened in their wicked courses by this means. Nay
they think themselves justified, and as it were, privileged, when they see
men that would be counted Christians, live as dissolutely as themselves. And if
they be such as are already set down in the seat of the scorners, their
mouths are opened to blaspheme the holy name of God and the profession of
godliness. Ezech. 36.20. R^m. 2.24.
As the Prophet Ezechiel charged the Jews that were in captivity, and Saint
Paul to the Romans, that they polluted the holy name of God, and caused it to
be blasphemed among the Gentiles. 2. Sam. 12.14.
And so Nathan told David, that by that deed of his, he had caused the enemies
of God to blaspheme. And so it is at this day. Let a man that professes the
fear of God, and frequenteth Sermons, and seems to be more holy then the
rest, let him I say fall into any sin, and by and by all the ungodly and
profane persons are ready with open mouth to cry out: Lo, these are your
professors, there is no better in any of them. And this makes the Papists
among us to speak so ill of our religion (and yet they of all others have
least cause: Qui sunt in saeculi culmine constituti, aut plurimos secum
perdunt, aut secum multos in vta salutis acquirunt. Magna tales, aut paena
manet, multis praebens malae imitationis laqueum: aut gloriae, si multis
ostendant sanctae conuersationis exemplum. Fulgent de conuersione a saeculo, ad
Theodor. Senatorem. ep. 6.
for it were pity of our lives, if we were as bad as they) because many of us
live so wickedly. But as this is most heinous in all, so especially in those
that are superiors, and are set in any eminent place above others. They can
hardly fall from their estate, but they do much hurt. The hurt of one
principal member, or of some one of the vital parts of the body, does more
endanger the body, then the hurt of many others. So in like manner, the public
sins of any one principal member, either in the commonwealth, or in the
Church, or in the family, does far more hurt, then of a great many besides.
And first, for those that are rulers and governors in the commonwealth, their
evil example is very dangerous. For as when a great Oak falls in the wood,
it bears down all the vnder-growth that is within the reach of it: So when a
Magistrate falls, he draws after him by his example all that are under him
Quales in rep. principes sunt, tales reliquisolent esse ciues Cicer. Ep.
As we see by experience that as the Prince is, such is the people. As when
foolish Rehoboam, the son of wise Solomon, forsook the law of the Lord, all
Israel went with him. 2. Chron. 12.1. componitur orbis Regis ad exemplum, nec
sic inflectere sensus Humanos edicta valent, qua vita regent is. Mobile mutatur
semper cum principe vulgus. Clau.
According to that common saying: All the country follows the example of the
King: neither are his laws in so much force in this case, as his life:
whereunto agrees that speech of the son of Sirach: What manner of man the
ruler of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein, cap. 10.2. The
reason is evident, because their very example is a secret kind of law: for
this is the condition of Princes, as one says Quicquid faciunt praecipere
videntur. Quintil. deolam. 4. Flexibiles quamcumque in partem ducimur a
principe, atque vt ita dicam sequaces sumus. Plin. 29. Panegyr. Hosea. 5.1.
Gualt. ibid.
that what soever they do themselves, they seem to command it to others: Yea
and the people, for the most part, are naturally inclined, to counterfeit like
Apes the manners of their rulers. And therefore, the Lord calls the evil
conversation of the great persons in Israel, a snare and a net, because many
were taken and seduced by their evil example. Secondly for Ministers though
they have never such excellent gifts, yet their evil example does far more
hurt, then all their preaching can do good. For the people look more at the
life of a Minister, Loquere vt videam.
then they do at his doctrine, though it be never so good: and therefore, they
would have them speak in the Pulpit, that they may see it in their practice:
John 6.30.
as the Jews said to our Savior Christ, (though in another sense) what do
thou work, that we may believe thee? Hence it is, that nothing is so
pernicious to the hearers, as the lewd conversation of the teachers. And
therefore, Ier. 23.14.15.
the Lord reprooueth the Prophets among the Jews, because that they living in
filthine, ssecommitting adultery, and walking in lies; had by that means
strengthened also the hands of the wicked, that none could return from his
wickedness: Quod exemplo fit, id etiam iure factum putant. Cicer. lib. 4. ep.
3.
yea even from them wickedness was gone forth into all the land. And for
parents and masters, it has been showed already, what great hurt their evil
example does in the family to their children and servants.

That the Fox runs to the wood, and cares not who looks in his tail. So
they run to all kind of wickedness, and care not who sees them. Ier. 8.12.
and 3.3.
As the Prophet Jeremy says of the people in his time: Were they ashamed, when
they had committed abomination? nay they were not ashamed, neither could they
have any shame. For as he says in another place, they had a whores forehead,
Prouer. 7.9.
they could not be ashamed. As a common strumpet never blusheth at her
filthiness, so they never blush at any sin they commit, though it be never
so heinous. Solomon says of the whore-maisters in his times, that it was their
manner to seek out whore-houses. In the twilight in the evening, Job. 24.15.
when the night began to be black and dark. And Job says, The eye of the
adulterer waits for the twilight, 1. These. 5.7. Ephesians. 5.11.
and says no eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face. And the Apostle says
of his times, that they that be drunken, are drunken in the night. And hereupon
these sins are called by him works of darkness, because men used to shun
the light, and seek obscurity in the committing of them. Tenebrae minuunt
noxque atra pudorem. Ovid. Metam lib. 10. ^ucustoditis and apertis liminibus
peccant. Ne^ sunt gaudia, si qua latent. Martial. lib. 1. Epigram. 35. de
Laesbia meretrice abigerunt testem veloque seraque Mart, ibidem. Genesis 4.8.
Lucem ac aethera petit, and testecaelo peccat. Senec. in Hippol. Pudet non esse
impudentes. An. confess. lib. 2. Non solum non occultanda, verum etiam iam
praedicanda ac diffiamanda vi dentur. Aug. Enchir. cap 79. Non est Tucca satis
quod es gulosus; and dici cupis and cupis videri. Mart. lib. 12. Epigram. 41.
Pulchrum est monstrari digito and dicier. Hic est Pers. sat. 1.
For the night and darkness do diminish shame. But now whore-maisters and
drunkards are not ashamed to commit their villainies with open face, even in the
sight, and as it were, in contempt of the Sun. They expose their filthiness
to the vewe of the world, and take pleasure in no sin that is not notorious.
It is a shame says the Apostle even to speak of the things which are done of
them in secret. Ephesians 5.12. Mark I pray you, there were shameful things
committed in those days, and things which could not be well named with
modesty: but they were done in secret; they had a care to cover them and hide
them from the eyes of men: yea Cain himself, though a reprobate, would not
murder his brother openly, but calls him forth into the fields, where no
body should see, and their slew him. But now men are grown so shameless in
sin, that murder is committed even in the open streets, and whoredom by the
highway side, as we read of Absalon: that he lay with his fathers Concubines
in the sight of all Israel. 2. Sam. 16.22. Yea many are become desperate, that
they would be ashamed, not to be past shame in their sins. For they glory in
their shame, Phil. 3.19. and boast themselves in their wickedness, as David
said of Doeg. Psalm. 52.1. They are so far from seeking to conceal their
sins, as they publish and proclaim them to the world, as it were with a
Trumpet. It is nothing for them to be wicked, unless all the world know them
to be such. They in it, that they are known to be common swearers, and that
they are pointed at for drunkards and unclean persons. But alas, this is a
woeful pride, and a miserable boasting, for a man to boast of that, which
without repentance, will be the destruction of his soul.

Secondly we are all here admonished to follow the counsel of the Apostle,
who says, Take heed that ye walk circumspectly redeeming the time, because
the days are evil. Ephesians. 5.15.16.
we cannot but sin; for the cursed flesh with the corruptions and lusts
thereof, rebelleth continually against the spirit, and haleth us to one sin
or other. Neither are we to hope for better, so long as we carry about with
us this body of sin. But yet we must take heed, and use all holy means, so
to subdue and restrain these corruptions of ours, as they may not break out
into notorious sins, to the open dishonor of God, and public scandal of
the Church. Yea if it be possible, as much as lies in us, we must labor to
be free from all suspicion of evil. For if Caesar the heathen Emperor,
required this of his wife, much more ought it to be in all that profess
themselves Christians. As the Apostle exhorts, Abstain from all appearance
of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Sane interest tuae perfectionis and malas res, and
pariter species deuitare. In altero conscientiae, in altero famae consulis, De
considerat. lib. 3. Magnum est quidem and glory osum, and vsque ad caelum
omn^ii ore proferendum nunquam malis actibus locum ded^sse, sed mul^o fortius
est, nunquam falsis suspicionibus laborasse. De bono discipl. Luke 1.6. Ioh.
8.46.
The same counsel did Bernard give to Eugenius the Pope, when he told him, it
made much to his perfection to avoid both evil, and the show of evil. In the
one, he should provide for his conscience, in the other for his credit. And
Saint Augustine has a saying to the same purpose. It is (says he) a greater
matter and a glorious thing, and highly to be commended, never to have given
place to evil deeds: but it is a matter of greater strength, never to have
been subject to false suspicions. Let us all therefore take heed to our selves
in this respect, that so we may give no occasion of offense in any thing: nay
rather, may take away occasion from them that seek occasion, as the Apostle
says, that even our greatest enemies, that pry most narrowly into our
actions, may not be able to find an hole in our coats. But that we may
gain that testimony, which was given to Zachary and Elizabeth, that they
walked in all the commandments of the Lord without reproof. Yea that in
assurance of our own consciences, we may be able to say to our enemies in
some sort, as our Savior Christ said to his, Which of you can rebuke me of
sin? namely of notorious sin.

Saying etc.] This is the first degree of Peter's sin in denying his Master.
Some there are that in a preposterous affection, Peruerso fauore tract. 66.
(...).
and a corrupt favor (as Saint Augustine calls it) toward the Apostle
Peter, do labor to extenuate this fact of his, and will by no means grant
that Peter could commit so greiuous a sin, as absolutely and flatly to deny
Christ Jesus. But the blessed Apostle stands in no need of their apology,
being already reconciled to God, and received into favor. And if he did,
their defense of him could do him little good against so many and so manifest
testimonies of the holy Ghost, that does accuse him. Indeed charity requires,
that we should cover even a multitude of sins: but the obedience which we
owe to God, will not suffer us to extenuate that, which the holy Ghost does so
much amplify and aggrauate in the Scriptures. As this sin of Peter (as was
said in the beginning) was both foretold by our Savior Christ before hand, and
also was afterward recorded by all the Evangelists. Brent. in Lucam. 1. Pet.
4.8. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Hoc quam friuolum sit prudens lector intelligit. Si enim iste non negauit,
ergo mentitus est dominus qui dixerat. Ter me negabis. Aqui. in locum
And therefore every man may perceive, how frivolous a thing it is to go about
to defend him. For if he did not deny his Master, then Christ Jesus lied that
foretold it, and all the Evangelists, nay rather the holy Ghost himself, that
recorded it. Again, the Apostle himself does not acknowledge this
unseasonable kindness: who by and by being smitten in his soul with the
greatness of his sin, weepeth bitterly, testifying thereby, that he had
sinned more hainously against Christ; then he was able in words to express,
and so by his tears he reprooueth them, that take upon them to be his
Patrones. And to this purpose is that saying of Optatus, though otherwise much
addicted to the Apostle Peter Dubito dicere peccasso tantam sanctitatem. Sed
ipse hoc factum probat, qui and doluit amare, and fleuit vbertim: qui nec
daleret, nec fleret, si nulla interue nisset occasio. contra Donatist. lib. 7.
Mat 16.17.
I am afraid, says he, to say, that so great holiness did sin. But he
himself proves it to be true^, in that he sorrowed bitterly, and wept
abundantly, who would neither have sorrowed nor wept, if there had been no
offense. Here then we see first in general, that the Apostle Peter did sin
greatly, in that he confesses Christ while he was in safety, and now denies
him when he is in trouble. Whiles he was under the wing of his Master, he
makes a most excellent and famous confession of him, as we have seen before,
for which he is highly commended even by Christ himself. Blessed art thou
Simon, the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And again, when many of Christ's
followers began to fall off, and to forsake him; and he asked the twelve, if
they also would go away, Peter answered in the name of them all, Joh.
6.66.67.68.69.
Master to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. And we
believe and know, that thou art Christ the son of the living God.

Doct. We must confess Christ Jesus as well in time of trouble, as in peace.
Tempore duro est inspicienda fides.

Nequaquam par gubernatoris est virtus, cum placido aut cum turbato mari
vebitur. Tunc enim laudante nullo, ill iudatus inglorius subit portum. At cum
strident funes curuatur arbor, gubernacula gemunt, tunc ille clarus, and Dijs
maris proximus. Plin. secund. Epist. lib. 9. Mat. 7.24.25. Vtque comes radios
per solis eutibus vmbra est; Cum latet hic pressus nubibus, illa fugit. Ovid de
Trist. Mat. 13 21. Mat. 20.21.^2. Joh. 6.60.


But now that danger begins to appear, he shrinketh in the wetting, and
utterly denies him. Which does teach us, that it is not enough to confess
Christ and his truth in the time of peace, but we must allo stick to it, even
when trouble arises for the same. It is an easy matter to profess the
Gospel, while all is quiet, and the weather fair; but all the trial of
constancy is in adversity. The valor and courage of a Soldier is best seen
in the hottest skirmish; the skill of a Mariner is best discerned in the
greatest tempest; So the constancy of a Christian is best tried in the most
greiuous persecution: when a tree has taken deep root, it endures the
violence of wind and weather: when a house is builded on a sure foundation,
neither rain, nor flood, nor raging storms can make it fall. So it is a good
token that a man is rooted and grounded in the truth, when he shrinketh not
for every blast of wind. As the shadow follows the body so long as the Sun
shines, but when it is clouded, it vanishes away: so in time of prosperity
all men will be followers of Christ: but as soon as persecution or tribulation
comes for Christ's sake, they are gone. As our Savior says; Many with the
Sons of Zebedee would be Christ's Disciples, if he had an earthly Kingdom,
to advance them to places of honor, that one might sit on his right hand, and
the other on his left hand. But when it comes to this reckoning, that they must
pledge him of that bitter cup of the Cross, that he drunk of before them,
then I fear me, they would be ready to say with the carnal Capernaites; This
is an hard saying, who can bear it? Like the Isralites, that would feign go
to the land of Canaan, but they are loath to be so long tossed up and down in
the wilderness. And therefore, they are ever murmuring and complaning for one
thing or other. Our Savior Christ knew this before, Mat. 24. tot.
and therefore for the better arming of his Disciples against it, he foretold
them o it. Teaching us thereby, that we must not only profess Religion, when
there are many encouragements: but if the case be so, that we must follow
Christ with a cross on our backs: yet we must not shrink, Mat. 16.24.
but go after him through thick and thin, through fair and foul. And
indeed, there is great reason for this. For if Christ command us to love men,
not only that are our friends, but even our enemies also; Mat. 5.44.
or else our love is nothing worth. Much more must we be constant in our love
to the Lord, not only when his favorable countenance is turned toward us,
but even then when he seems to be our enemy, setting us up as a mark
against him, Job. 7.20. and 6.4.
and sighting against us with all his terrors, as Job says. The Apostle Peter
commands servants to be subject to their Masters with all fear, not only
if they be good and courteous, 1. Pet. 2.18.
but also if they be froward. Much more must we perform our service unto God,
not only when he is kind to us by his benefits, but also when he tries us by
affliction. The devil himself sees the equity of this. For he thought it
was not worth God have mercy, as we say, that Job feared God in his
prosperity. Does Job, says he, fear God for naught? Job. 1.9.10.
Have thou not made an hedge about him, etc. Thou have blessed the work of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the land. As if he should say, it were
pity that he lives if he should not fear thee in this estate. But says he,
11.
Stretch out now thy hand, and touch all that he has, and then see what he
will do, see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. So that if we be not
constant, and stand to our tackling, as well in adversity, as in prosperity,
even this sentence of the devil shall condemn us. And this has bin the
practice of all Gods children. This Apostle Peter, howsoever here, through
infirmity, he is afraid at the voice of a gyrle: yet after his repentance,
being confirmed of the Lord, he is not daunted with the menaces and
threatenings of the high Priests: but he tells them to their beards, Act.
^.18.19 20.
that he must rather obey God then man. Act. 21.11.12.
And let them do with him what they would, he could not but speak the things
which he had seen and heard. So likewise the Apostle Paul was resolute this
way. For when Agabus had, by the spirit of prophecy, foretold the troubles that
should befall him at Jerusalem and his friends: began to dissuade him from
going up thither, that so he might avoid the danger; he made them this stout
answer, saying, 13.
What do you weeping and breaking mine heart? For I am ready, not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. And
Shidrach, Meshach, and Abednego did not only serve the Lord constantly, when
they were in favor with Nebuchadnezzar, and were promoted by him, but even
when they saw the danger of the hot fiery furnace they continued constant. Dan.
3.16.17.18. and 6.10.
And Daniel would not discontinue his ordinary worship of God, though he knew
it was the peril of his life. The reason of this constancy in the faithful,
is not any natural strength that is in them. For that way they are exceeding
feeble, as we have heard: but first, that spiritual confidence they have in
God, whereby they are made bold and courageous as Lions against all oppositions
whatsoever: Prou. 28.1.
knowing, that whatsoever the Devil or deuilish tyrants are able to devise
against them, can hurt or endanger them, no more then those great Giants of
Babel endangered heaven with their tower. It is reported of the hill Olympus,
Genesis 11.4. etc.
that the top of it is so high above the clouds, Iul. Solinus polyhistor. cap.
13.
that if a man drew any letters there in the ashes at their yearly sacrifices
to Jupiter, they found them the next year as they left them, nothing at all
troubled either with wind or weather. In like manner the souls of Gods
children are mounted so high on the wings of their faith, above the reach of
all outward afflictions, that they do as it were contemn and despise them.
Psalm. 46.1.2.3. Si fractus illabitur orbis; Impauidum ferient ruinae Horat.
lib. 3. Ode. 3. Heb. 11.26. 1. Cor. 15.19:
And therefore they say with David. God is our hope and strength, a very present
help in time of trouble. Therefore will not we fear though the earth be
moved, and though the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. Though the
waters thereof rage and swell, and the mountains shake at the surges of the
same. Secondly they have respect to the recompense of reward, as is said of
Moses. Indeed as the Apostle says, If in this life only we had hope in
Christ, we were of all men the most miserable. If there were no better estate
for Gods children then in this world, it were the most wretched thing that
could be for a man to be a Christian. But as David says. Verily there is
fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. Now
this reward cannot be had but by enduring affliction for the name of Christ.
Psalm. 58.11.
The bearing of the cross must always go before the wearing of the crown.
Yea he that would have a crown of glory with Christ in his Kingdom, must
first have a crown of thorns with him in this life. He that desires to
reign with him, must first suffer with him, as the Apostle says. Romans 8.17.
But yet for our comfort, Quanto plus tormenti, tanto plus erit gloriae. Senec.
de prouid. diuina. cap. 3.
the more patiently we endure the cross here for his sake; the more glorious
shall our crown be at that day. Quanto fuerit robustior pugna, tanto
gloriosior dabitur illi^ corona. Bern. de caena. dom. sermon. 7 Romans 8.18. (...):
id est, collatis vtrinque rationibus, and subducto velut calculo aliquid certi
statuo. Beza. Quo longior vestra pugna, hoc corona sublimior. Cypr, lib. 2. Ep.
4.
And the sorer our conflict is, the more glorious shall be our garland. And this
the Apostle affirms on good ground. For having cast his account; and (as it
were) summed up his reckoning, he concludes (for so the word signifies) that
all the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory, which
shall be showed unto us. And in an other place, Our light affliction, says he,
which is but for a moment, causes unto us a most excellent and an eternal
weight of glory. 2, Cor. 4.17. Where he makes an elegant opposition between
our afflictions here, and our glory in heaven: the one is but light, and easy
to be borne, the other is massy and weighty: the one is momentanie and soon
at an end (for what is the whole life of man but a moment in this respect) the
other is eternal, and never fades away. To which purpose Bernard has a very
good saying In momentaneo hoc, latetaeternitas; in hoc leui pondus sublime and
supra modum. In Psalm. 91. sermon. 15. Luc. 22.28.29.30.
In this momentanie there is hid eternity; and in this light, an exceeding
weight above measure. And thus does our Savior Christ comfort his Disciples
against all the afflictions of this life. Ye are they, says he, which have
continued with we in my temptations: Therefore I appoint unto you a Kingdom
etc. As a traveler, that goes a long journey, though he have many a foul
and weary step, yet cheareth himself, that his repast at night will make
amends for all, according to the common saying, he never has ill day that
has a good night: So should we constantly and patiently pass through all the
difficulties of weelding, even through reproaches, persecutions, stripes,
imprisonment, and death it self; in hope of that crown of life, Apoc. 2.10.
which the Lord has promised to all them that are constant to the death.

Ioh. 3.1.2.
Like to Nicodemus, that came to Jesus to be instructed, but it was by night.
Though himself were a ruler of the Jews, Ioh. 19.38. and 9.22.
yet he durst not avouch his love to Christ. And Joseph of Arimathea, was also
one of Jesus his Disciples, but it was secretly for the Jews. He durst not be
to know of it. So the parents of the blind man to whom Christ had given
sight, durst not confess all that they knew of Christ, for fear of the Jews.
But this sin is very grievous, Heb. 10.38.
and therefore the Lord threatens, that if any man in faint-heartednesse for
want of patience do withdraw himself, his soul shall have no pleasure in
him. And the fearful and unbelieving, Apoc. 21.8.
which for want of faith in Gods promises (for that is the cause of
fearfulness) dare not stand to the profession of the truth, shall have their
portion among murderers, and whore-mongers, and sorcerers, and such like
persons, in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Neither is there any sin that in this life does he so heavy on the
conscience as this, when a man for want of spiritual courage, shall cowardly
betray and forsake the truth. As may be seen in the lamentable example of
Judge Hales, For. page 1282. and 1392 1393.
who in Queen Mary's time, being called before the Bishop of Winchester then
Lord Chauncelor, for proceeding against certain mass Priests, that were
indicted before him, according to the laws of King Henry the eight, and King
Edward the sixth, being then yet in force: did stand in defense of the truth
with good constancy. But afterward being committed to the Fleet, he was
there either by threatenings or flattery brought to yield unto his adversaries.
Which he had no sooner done, but he was grievously afflicted in his conscience,
insomuch as he attempted to lay violent hands on himself, and had killed
himself with his penknife, but that the merciful providence of God prevented
him. But afterward, being delivered out of Prison, and coming home to his
own house, he could never find rest, till he had fearfully drowned himself
in a little river. Mark. 8.38.
To conclude, our Savior Christ exhorting his Disciples to constancy under the
cross, he tells them: Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words,
among this adulterous and sinful generation, him shall the son of man be
ashamed of, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with all his holy
Angels. If we be ashamed of Christ Jesus, before a company of sinful men like
our selves, what is he the worse for it? or if we confess him before them,
what addition of glory has he by it. He is every way absolute in himself,
and can receive neither diminution nor access of honor by any thing that we
can do. But if he be ashamed of us before his heavenly Father, and the holy
Angels, if he do not then acknowledge us, what shall become of us?

And therefore, in the second place, let us be exhorted, to He is but an idle
Swain, that will let his journey for a shower of rain. So he is but an idle
Christian, that dare not show his head, when a little storm of persecution
begins to arise. He that is truly godly indeed, will willingly undergo
whatsoever trouble shall accompany his profession: as Moses did choose to suffer
adversity with the people of God, when, if he would have renounced his
religion, he might have lived in great pleasure in Pharaos court. Heb. 11.25.
When we once enter into the profession of Christianity, we must first cast
our accounts to see what it will cost us to be Christians, Luke 14.28.31.
as our Savior exhorts. We may not dream of ease and security, for then we
shall be deceived, But we must know, that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution, either one way or other. 2. Tim. 3.12.
And that we cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Act. 14.22.
but through many tribulations, and therefore, we must arm our selves against
them before hand that we may endure them. And to persuade us the better, let us
remember, Heb. 2.11.
that Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, though he were the immortal and
glorious God, yet in love to us, Was not ashamed to call us brethren; Yea
suffered all extremity for our sakes. It was great praise in Moses that being
so highly esteemed in Pharaos Court, Exodus 2.11. Act. 7.23.
yet he would vouchsafe to visit his poor brethren the oppressed Hebrews. It
was singular love in Joseph, Gen 45.3.4 and 46.34.
that being set next to the King himself over all the land of Egypt, yet he
was not ashamed of his brethren and of his Fathers house, though they were
heardsmen and shepherds. Ester. 4.4.
It was great virtue in Ester, that being so highly advanced, as to be made
Queen to so great a Monarch, Phil. 1.29.
yet she was not ashamed of poor Mordecai her uncle, a despised person. But
all this is nothing in comparison of this, that Christ Jesus is not ashamed of
us. And therefore, we must not be ashamed of him, nor of any cross that shall
befall us for his sake. For this is certain, that whosoever has faith given
him of God to believe in him, he has also grace given him to suffer for him,
as the Apostle says.

Doct. To dissemble our Religion is to deny Christ.
I wotte not what thou say.] We see that Peter does not here deny our
Savior Christ in plain terms: only he would shift off the matter as
cunningly as he could: and yet this speech of his must be one of denial, or
else he did not deny him thrice as our Savior had foretold. Where we may
observe, that he that does but dissemble his faith in Christ; is guilty of
denying him in the sight of God. Apud eos qui Christianae gratiae
participatione redempti sunt pe^e t^l est fidem noll^ ^ss^^cie quam negare.
Fulg. de myster. Mediat. ad Thras. Van. sal. regem. ib.
Among them that are redeemed by participation of the grace of Christ it is
almost all one not to maintain the faith and to deny it. It is true, Euasions
are not always unlawful, nor on some occasion to dissemble the matter. A bird
is not bound to fly into the net that is set for her. No more is a man bound
to expose and offer himself to danger. But so far as may stand with a good
conscience, and so far as he may do it without sin, it is lawful to
avoid it. When Samuel came to Bethlehem to anoint one of Ishai his sons to
be King in steed of Saul, 1. Sam. 16 1.2.3.4 5.
he does (and that by Gods direction) conceal the chief cause of his coming,
because it might endanger his life, if Saul should hear of it; and he takes
an heifer with him, as if he had come only to offer sacrifice. So we need
not discover all our purposes and intents, further then necessity requires.
But if we be once called to profess the truth, then there is no place for
dissembling. Apoc. 14.1.
But we must have our Fathers name written in our foreheads, that all the
world may see, we are not ashamed of our profession. It is a sin for a man
to refuse to give testimony to the truth, when he has a due vocation. If we
be not Martyrs, yet we must be Confessors, or else we are no Christians. And
this is that which the Apostle Peter exhorts us unto. Be ready always,
says he, to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope
that is in you. 1. Pet. 3.15. We must make it known what faith and Religion
we are of, without Vno eodemque silentio firmat errorem, qui loquendo non
astruit veritatem. Fulg. ibid
fear or shame, if occasion serve, else we betray the truth. Cum causa Dei
ventilatur in medium, and falsitas praeponitur veritati; qui pro persona qua
gerit, non resistit, de suo damnabitur silentio. De vijs vitae.
When the cause of God is discussed, and falsehood preferred before the truth,
he that according to the person he bears, does not resist it, shall be
condemned for his silence, says Bernard. This seems hard to a great many,
who think it a chief point of wisdom, to shift of all questioning of
Religion, with making mention of other matters. But let such persons know,
that they are in danger of a grievous and fearful fall. For as he that
falls from the first round of a ladder, is in danger to fall past all the
rest, till he come to the ground: So they that in the case of Religion, begin
once to halt or slide a little, and to depart from that free boldness, that
ought to be in confessing of Christ; for the most part do every day wexe
worse and worse, till at the last they fall to deny him in plain terms. He
that is truly godly, will neither be fearful nor bashful; but will show
his zeal for the truth, when occasion serves. He will say as Iehu did to
Iehonadab, but with a better affection, Come see the zeal that I have for the
Lord. 2. King. 10.16. Use.


This Doctrine in a word reproves all those that dissemble their Religion.
They count it a matter of great commendation for them to be close and secret,
that it may not be known what Religion they are of. They think themselves
very wisemen, Creed mihi, been qui latuit, been vixit etc. Ovid Trist.
because they carry themselves so as they cannot be discovered. But alas, where
they think most of all to hide themselves, there they most of all bewray their
own shame: and whiles they would conceal from the world what Religion they
are of, this their dissembling proclaims against them, that they are of no
Religion of God. For if Religion be in the heart, it will appear in the
words. Psalm. 45.1.
If the heart be inditing of a good matter, the tongue will be the pen of a
ready writer. If the heart believe to righteousness, the mouth will also
confess to salvation, as the Apostle says. Romans 10.10.
The zeal of Gods glory cannot be shut up in the heart, but as fire it will
either smoke or flame; it will show it self by one means or other. Quis enim
celauerit ignem, Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo? Paris Helenae apud Ovid.
Epist. Quis enim been celat amorem? Eminet indicio prodi^a flamma suo. Medea
Iaso^n. ibid.
A man cannot dissemble his love to his parents or his children. No, as the
common saying is, Love will creep where it cannot go: So it is not possible
for a man to dissemble his love to God and to the truth, but he must needs
show it by his plainness and opennesse in Religion, when occasion is offered.

And when he went out into the porch] Here follows the second degree of the
Apostle Peter's sin, together with the occasion thereof. He thought to have
escaped with his former dissembling of the matter, and therefore he withdraws
himself into the porch, hoping to have got away before he should be questioned
any more. But his enemies not satisfied with that which he had said, do
assault him afresh. Another maid saw him, as it is in the Text, and she
likewise charge him to have been one of Christ's Disciples. Now there may
seem to be some difference among the Evangelists in relating the several
occasions of Peter's denial. Matthew and Mark do both affirm, Mat. 26.71.
Mark 14.69. Luke 22.58. Lira in locum.
that this second denial was occasioned by a maid. But Luke says, it was by a
man. For the reconciling of these places, we are to know (as Lira well
observes) that the principal purpose of the Evangelists was to express the
threefold denial of Peter, and therein they all agree. But it was not their
purpose precisely to set down the persons that accused him, but only by
accident. And there is no contrariety in the matter: for the voice being first
uttered by a Maid, and received by a common applause, it is likely (as
commonly it falls out in such cases) that many came flocking about him, and
with one mouth, as it were, began to accuse him. Which Saint John seems
plainly to note, John 18.25.
when as speaking of this second denial, he says, there were many that charged
him to be one of Jesus his Disciples. But whether it were one or more that
occasioned this degree of his sin, it is not much material: we see he was
not long quiet amongst them. But as soon as he had shifted off one accusation,
presently he is tried with another. Doct. Gods children are seldom free from
tentations. Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam certamina desunt. Et quocum certet
men's pia semper habet.


Which may teach us, that the children of God are seldom free from
temptations, but for the most part one follows on the neck of another. As
David says of his outward afflictions, that they ouertooke one another, as the
waves of the sea, Psalm. 42.7. so is it also with inward temptations, the end of
one is the beginning of another Faelicitas nostra diabolo paena. de Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 2. cap. 29.
For seeing our felicity is a punishment to the Devil as Saint Augustine says,
therefore he remooueth every stone, to hinder the same, and to make us
partakers of his own damnation. Non vt sibi cedat, quod amisit; sed ne illuc
pauper de pulueresuscitatus accedat, vnde ipse in gloria conditus,
irreparabiliter cecidit. Bern. in Psalm. 19. Sermon. 6.
And this he does not in hope to recover his former estate, but because it
grieueth him, that we poor wretches, raised out of the dust, should come to
that glory, from whence he is irrecouerably fallen. Videns diabolus hominem per
obedientiae humilitatem posse ascendere, vnde ipse per superbiam corruetat,
inuidet ei, and factus est Satan. id est, aduersarius. Mag. sentent. lib. 2.
distinct. 21. A.
For perceiving that men by humble obedience might ascend thither, from whence
he is fallen by his pride, he enuieth him, and is become a Satan, that is,
Mat. 4.5.8. Luke 4.13.
an adversary unto him. Hereupon he is not content to have drawn a man to one
sin, but he labors to make him out of measure sinful. The Apostle Peter
had already done enough to damn himself, without the mercy of God: and yet
see, the Devil is not content with that, but presently he renueth his
temptation, that he may plunge him, if it were possible, as deep into hell as
himself. Thus dealt the Devil with our Savior Christ, though in vain. As
soon as ever our Savior had repelled and overcome one assault, he presently
begins afresh with him: yea when he was foiled indeed, and forced to retire,
he did not leave him for ever, but as Saint Luke says, he departed from him
only for a season: for he tempted him all his life time, either mediatly by
his cursed instruments, the Scribes and Pharisees or else immediately by himself
in the time of his passion. If he assailed our Savior Christ in this manner,
much more will he assail us. So that we are to look for nothing all our life
long, but a continual intercourse of tentations Jnstat anhelanti, prohibetque
resumere vires. Ovid Met. lib. 9.
a perpetual warfare, wherein Pax licet interdum est, pacis fiducia nunqua^.
Ovid. Trist.
there is no hope of truce with our enemy. Non est aliquod vitae tempus, in quo
non muscipulam tendit inimicus. Fulg. ad Probam. Epist. 4.
There is no part of our life wherein he sets not some trappe to catch us:
which caused Bernard to complain in many places. Dum viuimus, inter laqueos
currim^s: nusquam tuta pax, proh dolor, nusquam tuta quies vndique bella,
vndique hosts. de ordine vitae. Heu mihi quod vndique bella mihi video,
vndique tela volant, vndique tentamenta, vntlique pericula. Quocunque me
vertam, nulla securitas est. Et quae mulcent and quae tristant omnia timeo.
Nimirum vtrobique periculu^, vtrobique timendum. Bern. Meditat. ca. 14. 1 Samuel
29 4. Ne sit lessatan. 2. Sam. 19.22. Cur estis mihi lessatan. 1. King. 5.4.
En. Satan. Gene. 26.21.
While we live, says he, we run in the midst of sinners: there is no safety,
there is no security; but on every side wars, on every side enemies. Hence
the Devil is called Satan, that is an adversary, as the word is generally
used in the Scripture. As when the Princes of the Philistims opposed themselves
against David, whom the King would have taken to war with him: they said,
let him not go down with us to battle, least in the battle he be an
adversary to us. And when Abishai would have had Shemei put to death for his
railing against David, David answered, what have I to do with you, ye sons
of Zeruiah, that this day ye should be adversaries unto me? So Solomon
speaking of the great peace that God thad blessed his reign withal, he says,
there was neither adversary nor evil to resist. And when Jacobs servants had
dug a well, which they could not enjoy without much enmity and strife, they
called the name of it Sitnah: which comes from the same root. Mat. 13.39.
Apoc. 12.17. 1. Pet. 5.8. Quotidianis discimus experimetis, eos qui conuerti
deliberant, and tentari grauius a concupiscentia carnis; and vrgeri grauius in
operibus luti and lateris, qui Egiptum egredi and Pharaonis imperium effugere
moliuntur. Bern. de Conuers. ad Scholares.
Now the Devil is called by this name, after a peculiar manner, because he is
the greatest adversary of all, with might and maine impugning our salvation.
And therefore our Savior Christ calls him the enemy, by an excellency,
because there is no enemy so maliciously and with such a deadly hatred bent
against us as he is. But as he is generally an enemy unto all, so especial he
is an enemy to the godly. He had great rage against all men, but as the
Apostle John says, he was most of all worth with the woman (which was a type
of the Church) and with her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. And therefore Saint Peter exhorting the
faithful to watchfulness, he says, Your adversary the devil goes about,
etc. because he is their adversary above all others. As experience teaches
us, that they that begin to be converted unto God, are more grievously tempted
of the lusts of the flesh: even as the Israelites were more grievously
oppressed in the labor of Brick and Clay, Fit inimicus conuerso, qui
peccatori blandus extitit.

Mat 3.16.17. cum 4.1. etc. Mat. 6.13. Non quaerit illos quos iam sub egit, aut
gestit euertere quos iam suos fecit Inimicus and hastis Ecclesiae, quos
alienauit ab Ecclesia and for as eduxit, vt captinos and victos contemnit, and
praeterit: eos pergit lac essere, in quibus Christum cernit habitare. Cyprian
Lib. 1. Epist. 1 Luke 22.3.


when once they began to think of departing out of Egypt, and of forsaking
Pharaohs government. As the devil is friendly and flattering to a man, so long
as he continues in his sin: so he is a stern enemy to him when he is
converted. Hence is it, that as soon as ever our Savior Christ was Baptized,
presently the devil begins to tempt him without delay. And so he deals
withal Gods children. As Soon as a man begins to profess godliness, and
has once given up his name to Christ, he must instantly look to be tempted.
And this we are taught in the order of the petitons of the Lords Prayer. Where
we see the petition for strength against temptation, is set after all the, rest
signifying, that they that are most careful to seek the glory of God, and the
advancement of his Kingdom, to do his will and to depend upon his providence
for the things of this life, they that have any comfortable assurance of the
forgiveness of their sins; they of all other, are most subject to
temptation. Hereupon, our Savior told his Disciples, that the Devil had the
greatest spite at them of all other men; Satan has desired you says he, to
winnow you as wheat.

And because Peter was an excellent Apostle, one that had made such a glorious
confession of Christ Jesus, that he was the son of the living God: Math.
16.16.17.18.
and had received so high commendation from the mouth of Christ, one that was a
pillar in the Church of God; Gal. 2.9.
therefore, the Devil singled him out first of all, and assaulted him as we
have heard, and brought him to this fearful sin.

For reproof.
First, such as foolishly make their boast, that they were never tempted. No,
they thank God, the Devil never troubled them, they know not what temptation
means; But alas, if they could see it, they have little cause to boast in
this case, but rather they may suspect themselves, that they are yet under the
power and dominion of the Devil. Luke 11.21.
As our Savior says, When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, the things
he possesses are in peace. So long as the Devil has peaceable possession of
a man's heart, so long he never molesteth him: he willingly obeys the Devil
and delights in his service, and therefore what need the Devil oppugn him.
A King never lifts up his sword against his own loyal subjects, but if once
they begin to rebel, then he rayseth a power to subdue them to his obedience.
In like manner, so long as men are sworn subjects to the Devil, he never
stirs against them: but if once, by the grace of God, they begin to rebel
against him, and to shake off his yoke, then he rages and labors by all
means possible to reduce them into subjection. A dog though never so fierce,
does not bark at those of the household, but at strangers; he fawneth on all
that belong to the house. So the dogs of hell will never bark at men, as
long as they are of the Devils household, but when once they are made citizens
with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19.
and of the household of God: then they begin to take on. We see therefore, that
their case is very fearful, that are never molested by the Devil.

2.
A second sort of people to be here reproved, are they that think the Devil
is never near them, but when they see him. So long as they see him not to
appear in some visible shape, they care not. Indeed that they cannot endure at
any hand, oh no they spit at the very name of him, and cry out upon him foul
feind etc. but for his temptations they make no matter at all of them. But
poor souls, they are much deceived. For the Devil is always present in all
places, though they see him not. And his temptations are far more fearful
then his apparitions. For these are not so terrible to the eye, as they are to
the soul.

Secondly, it serves for the comfort of them that are For comfort. 2. Cor.
12.7.
But indeed, they have rather cause to rejoice: For there is no greater token
of Gods love. For whom the Lord loves most, them the Devil hates most, and
out of his hatred molesteth most.

Thirdly it serves for our admonition. First that we be For admonition
whether we have got the victory or no. For the Devil will return and set
upon us a fresh. The unclean spirit, as our Savior says, Luke 11.24.25.26.
will sometimes go out of a man: but if we take not heed, he will return
with seven spirits worse then himself. As the enemy if he be repelled in one
place, labors to make a breach in another: so the Devil, if he cannot
prevail by one temptation, he will try an other. For as the Apostle Peter
says, he does continually go about, 1. Pet. 5.8.
without intermission, seeking to devour us. Diabolus cum certamini manifest
cedit, ad hoc se victum demonstrat, vt vincat; ad hoc fugam simulat, vt
persequentem missis pro tergli sagittis occidat. Fulgent. de virg. and humil:
ad Proban Epist. 3.
Yea many times he seems to be overcome and vanquished, when there is no
such matter. Sometimes he will retire and give over the combat, and make as if
he were overcome, that he may more easily overcome us. Sometimes he will
counterfeit to run away, but it is to this end, that if we pursue him, he
may cast his fiery darts behind him (as the Parthians were wont to do in
fight) and kill us. And if he have overcome us we may not think he will leave
us so, for it is nothing with him to bring us to one sin; but by degrees he
will labor to bring us to the height of sin, that so without Gods mercy, our
condemnation may be the greater.

Cauere non minus necesse est, quam pauere. Bern. in Psalm. 91. sermon. Mat.
26.41. Si tot tentationibus plena est vita nostra, vt non immerito tota ipsa
tentatio dicatur; peruigili circumspectione opus est, and oratione ne inducamur
in tentatione^. Bern. in Psalm. 91. sermon. 5.
And therefore, in the second place we are to be admonished, to take heed to
our selves in regard of his assaults. It is not enough to be afraid of them,
but we must carefully avoid them. We must watch and pray, as our Savior
Christ exhorts, that We enter not into temptation. And indeed, if we be
beset with so many temptations, that our whole life is called a continual
temptation, we stand in need to be very watchful and circumspect, and to
pray that we may not be led into temptation. And the rather are we to perform
this duty; because of the Devils nature. For first of all he is most
malicious, and most desirous to do hurt. As himself confesses in that
answer he made to the Lord. I come, says he, from compassing the earth to
and fro, and from walking in it. Job. 1.7. Now the cause of this his toil (as
Saint Peter says in the place before alleged) is to seek whom he may
devour. Inimicus vt occidat, semper vigilat sine somno: and nos vt custodiamus
nos, nolumus euigilare sine somno. Aug. soliloq c. 16.
Shall our enemy watch in this manner for our destruction, and shall not we
watch for our preservation? he puts into our hearts evil thoughts, into
our mouths lewd speeches, into our members sinful actions. When we are awake,
he stirs us up to unlawful deeds, when we are asleep, to filthy dreams.
If we be merry, he makes us dissolute, and if we be sad he labors to
drive us to desperation. Ecce tetendit ante pedes nostros laqueos infinitos,
and omnes vias nostras varijs decipulis repleuit ad capiendas animas nostras,
and quis effugiet? laqueos posuit in diuitijs, laqueos posuit in paupertate:
laqueos tetendit in cibo, in potu etc. Aug. ibid.
He has set infinite snares before our feet (as Saint Augustine complains,)
and has filled all our ways with trappes to catch our souls, and who shall
escape them? he has set snares in riches, and snares in poverty. He has
laid snares in our meat, in our drink, in our pleasure, in sleep and in our
waking: He has laid snares in our words and in our works, and in all our
ways. Yea he has not only laid snares, but birdlime, Nec solum laqueum
posuit, sed and viscum Bern. Medit. cap. 14.
as Bernard says: whereby he ensnareth us in many sins. Though men never
sow tares nor cockle, yet, we see, as all ill weeds do, they grow of
themselves. But the Devil both sows and harroweth most busily, that he may
have a plentiful harvest of sin. But his malice does most of all appear in
this, that he lays snares for us even in our best works, and in the duties
of godliness which we perform. Let a man betake himself to prayer, the
devil will be at his elbowe to hinder him as we see in the example of
Iehoshua the high priest, who when he began to pray, Zech. 3.1.
Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. Let a man come to the hearing of
the word, the crows of hell will be busy about him, to pick up and steal
the blessed seed of the word out of his heart, least he should believe and be
saved, as our Savior says Luke 8.12. And if it come to pass, that by Gods
assistance we do repel the Devil, so as he cannot prevail against us: but
in despite of him and all his malice, we perform these and other holy duties
in some acceptable manner, then he labors to make us ouerweene of our
selves, and to be proud of those good things which are none of our own And of
all other temptations this is most dangerous, as the children of God find by
too much experience. For as one says well Euidentibus vitijs prouocat, in
quibus si palam superetur, illico superbiam periculosissime iaculatur: and
vitiorum author, in eo quod vincere non potest vitijs suis, vincit virtutibus
alienis. Armis quibus eliditur, s^rgit: and virtute qua deijcitur, deijcil.
Laudat qua se persp^^it superari v^rtutem, vt victus possit captiuare vin^^tem.
I^ij^it cordi iactantiam, vt grauiori lapsu de alto possit deijcere, si quos in
humilibus videt gradu firmiore pugnare Fulgent. Epist. 3. ad Probam.
he provoke us by apparent sins, wherein if he be openly overcome, by and by
most dangerously he casts pride into our hearts: and being the author of
vices, where he cannot overcome us by his own vices, he overcomes us by
our virtues. He rises with the weapons wherewith he is cast down and
foyleth us with the virtue whereby he is foiled. He commends the force,
whereby he perceives himself to be overcome, that being conquered, he may
captiuate the conqueror. He fills the heart with boasting, that he may cast
them down from high with a greater fall, whom he sees in humility to fight
more stoutly: So that we see, the Devil hides his subtle snares, not only
in the works of the flesh, which are easily discerned, not only in vices, but
even in spiritual exercises also, and in the very best works which we
perform. As David said of his bodily enemies, In the way wherein I walked have
they privily laid a snare for me. Psalm. 142.3. so deals the Devil with us.
He does not only labor to lead us out of the way by manifest error, but
where he sees us walking in good works, there he seeks to ensnare us.

Secondly as the Devil is thus malicious and desirous to hurt: so is he
exceeding strong, and (if God give him leave) able to do much hurt. For this
cause he is called a ramping and a roaring Lion. 1. Pet. 5.8.
And the Apostle setting out our spiritual conflict, he says, we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12.
that is, against weak and frail men like our selves, for then there were
some hope to make our party good, (for there is no man so strong, but another
may be as strong, to match him) but against principalities and powers, and
against worldly governors etc. Our Savior Christ who buckled with him and
overcame him, he acknowledges that he is strong: for he calls him a
strong man armed. And in these last days, Luke 11.21. Apoc. 12.12.
his rage being increased, because be knows he has but a short time; his
strength is also increased: for anger we see is the whetstone of strength. But
most of all our carelessenesse gives him great advantage and our negligence
armeth his diligence. Omnia facit diabolus, non ta^ potentia sua, qua^
negligetia nostra,
For, as one says, the Devil prevails not so much by his own power, as by
our negligence. And it is held for a rule in military policy Nil tuto in
host despicitur; quem spreueris, vale^tiorem negligentia facis Q. Curtius Lib.
6. 1. Chron. 21.1.
that it is not safe to despise any thing in an earthly enemy; for if we
contemn him, we make him stronger by our rechlessenesse.

Again as he is strong, so he is valiant and stout, daring to encounter with
any adversary. David was a puissant warrior, victorious in many battles, and
besides, for his godliness a man after Gods own heart; yet the Devil was not
afraid to grapple with him, but brought him to a fearful fall. Job was a man
of rare and excellent virtues, commended by the Lord himself to be a just man,
Job. 1 8.11. etc. Act. 5.3,
one that feared God and eschewed evil: yet the Devil assailed him very
feircely. and though he could not bring him to final Apostasy, yet he caused
him to utter in his passion many words of impatiency. In the Primitive Church
there was great godliness: yet the Devil was not afraid to put in his foot
there, but filled the heart of Ananias and Saphira to lie against the holy
Ghost. Act. 9.15. 2. Cor. 12.12.
The Apostle Paul was a chosen vessel unto God, to carry his name before the
Gentiles: and yet the Devil buffetted him grievously, as himself complains.
The Disciples lived always under the winge of their Master, and had him to
protect them, yet the Devil was not afraid to winnowe them, as a man
winnoweth wheat; Luke 22.31.
and how he prevailed, we see in this lamentable example of the Apostle
Peter, and in the fearful fall of Judas. Whereupon Saint Bernard says, Si
lupus non timuit intrare in gregem domini, vnam de duodecem, tam pauculo
numero, mactare and perdere; quid facturus est de grege commisso pastori. Bern.
de Cena dom. ser. 1. Ephesians. 4.24.
If the Wolf were not afraid to enter into the Lords flock, and to kill and
destroy one sheep of twelve so small a number, what will he do with that
flock that is committed to a shepherd? Nay to say more, though Adam in his
innocence did bear the Image of God in righteousness and true holiness, as
the Apostle says, and had strength sufficient to repel all assaults: yet the
Devil set upon him, and gave him such a wound as neither he nor any of his
posterity could ever have recovered, had not God in the riches of his mercy
sent Christ Jesus, that blessed seed of the woman, Genesis 3.1.15.
to break the Serpents head Nay to say yet more, though the Devil knew our
Savior Christ to be God as well as man, Mat. 8.29. and 4.1. etc.
and therefore by his divine power to be able to crush him in pieces, yet he
entered the lists with him, and assaulted him in a single combat hand to hand.
But there he met with his match, and was forced to retire to his shame. So that
we see, the Devil is no coward, but of a stout and undaunted courage. And if
he were not afraid to deal with these persons before named: much less will
he be afraid to deal with us, that are weak and feeble in comparison of them.

Last of all as the Devil is thus strong and valiant: so is he furnished with
exceeding policy and subtilty, which makes it a far more dangerous thing to
encounter him. If men of greatest valor were also wise and politic; and men
of greatest wisdom were strong and valorous, Sed mihi nec dicere promptum,
Nec facere est isti. And Ulysses says, that Ajax was rudis, and sine pectore
miles.
no men were able to resist them. And therefore, for the most part thief
properties in men are severed: and commonly we see, that they that are of
greatest strength, are not always the wisest men, and they that are endued
with greatest wisdom, are not always of the greatest courage. As Ajax
confesses of himself and Ulysses, And again tibi dextera bello Vtilis,
ingenium est, quod eget moderamine nostro. Tu vires sine mete geris. Ovid.
Metam. Lib. 13.
when they strove for Achilles his armor. But in the Devil both these are
joined, and that in a high degree. For as he is strong as a Lion, so he is
subtle and crafty as a Serpent. And therefore he is called a Serpent and an
old Serpent Apoc. 12.9. Quem astutu^, fecit tam natura subtilis quam longa
exercitatio maliciae huius. Bern. Med. c. 15.
Whose subtlety and crast is much increased by his long experience and
continual exercise: he has a thousand ways and fetches to deceive and
circumvent us, if we take not heed, as the Apostle says, we are not ignorant
of his enterprises. 2. Cor. 2.11. Yea he is very prompt and expert this way. He
has the art and method of deceiving, he can do that most compendiously which
others must effect by many circumstances. And therefore, the Apostle exhorting
us to labor for the whole armor of God, uses this as a reason, that we may
stand against the assaults, or rather, against the wiles and crafty fetches of
the Devil. Ephesians 6.11. Yea the better to cloak his subtlety, and to
bleare the eyes of men, he can and does many times transform himself into an
Angel of light. 2. Cor. 11.14. In a word, Sicut de Proteo dictum est, formas
se vertit in omnes, hostiliter insequens, fallaciter subuenie^s vtrobique
nocens. Aug. de Ciuit Dei lib. 10. c. 10.
like an other Porteus, he can change himself into all shapes; sometimes
pursuing as an enemy; sometimes pretending to help as a friend, but both
ways hurting and endangering us. Vt tristes decipiat, tristatur and ipse; vt
gaudentes illadat, singit se and ipse gaudere; vt spirituales defraudet in
Angelum lucis se transfigurat; vt fortes compri mat, apparet agnus; vt mites
deuoret, apparet lupus. August soliloq. cap. 17.
To deceive the sad, he counterfeiteth sadness; to beguile those that rejoice,
he counterfeiteth rejoicing; to defraud those that are spiritual, he
transformeth himself into an Angel of light; to subdue the valiant, he
appears like a Lamb; to devour the meek, he appears like a Wolphe*
Quicquid ration^s naturaliter habet di^bolus ad sallendum and decipiendum,
tanto acrius intendit, quanto eum magis possidet nocendi cupiditas Aug de
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. 6.
Yea whatsoever wit and reason he has naturally to beguile and deceive, he
stretches and straineth it so much the more vehemently and fiercely, by how
much the more he is possessed with a desire to do hurt. And therefore, he is
compared to a hunter. Psalm. 91.3. being as Saint Bernard says V^nator vtique
pessimus, and nequissimus, and callid ssimus. Venator qui cornis non sonat, vt
non audiatur, sed sagittat in occultis etc. Bern. in Psalm. 91. Sorm. 3.
a most lewd wretched and crafty hunter, a hunter that windeth no horn, least
he should be heard, but shoots in secret. So that as the beast is before the
hunter, so is even the subtilest man in the world before the Devil, easily
intrapped, unless God open his eyes to see and to avoid the snare.

Now as the Devil is thus malicious, and thus furnished both with power and
crast to do hurt: so he is much furthered by the corruption of our own cursed
flesh, which is so prone of it self to sin, as has been said already; as
also by the allurements of the world. He uses the pleasures, the profits and
the honors of the world, as so many baits to catch us. As we see the love of
the world made Demas forsake his profession. And therefore, 2. Tim. 4.10.
the Apostle calls it the present evil world. Not simply in it self, Gal.
1.4.
but because of the manifold prouocations to sin which it affoordeth. Again,
the Devil knowing that we are like dotterils, easily following the examples of
others, and led with any evil custom, therefore he sets them also before
our eyes, and thereby many times seduceth us. Yea he has his baits for all
humors and for all dispositions. He diligently and cunningly observes which
way our affections carry us, what we love, what we fear, what we hate, and
frames his temptations accordingly.

And therefore we see there is no place for security, but we stand in need
to keep watch over our selves continually. He that should lie all night in
the vast wilderness, where were nothing but ravenous beasts and venomous
Serpents, he had not need to sleep; but rather he had need to have the
eyes of Argus, and the faces of Ianus, that he might look round about him on
every side for fear of danger. So we being beset with so many temptations,
stand in need to be vigilant, that we be not surprised at unawares. When we
fear any invasion of foreign enemies, we see there is watching and warding
in all places. Much more should we watch and ward with all diligence against
this enemy, being a sworn enemy to our souls. If we knew that a Lion or a
Serpent were in our way, we would look about us very circumspectly. But there
is no Lion so feirce, not the she Lion robbed of her whelps: no Serpent so
terrible, or that has so venomous and poysonfull a sting, as the Devil has.
But it is in vain to watch, unless also we bend our selves to resist the
Devil when he assaulteth us. As the Apostle James and Peter do exhort us.
Iam. 4, 7. 1. Pet. 5.9. And that we may do it with better courage. Saint John
tells us that every one that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and the
wicked one touches him not. Namely to give him a deadly wound as Beza
observes. 1. Ioh. 5.18. Diabolus est tanquam leo rugiens. Gratias illi magno
Leoni de tribu Judah, rugire iste potest, ferire non potest. Bern. in Psalm. 91.
Sermon 12.
The Devil is indeed a roaring Lion, but thanks be to that great Lion of
the tribe of Judah, he may roar, but he cannot hurt us. Nay he is very
cowardly if he perceive that we stand fast, that we quit us like men as the
Apostle says, Cor. 16.13. He will not abide it if we resist him stoutly he
will fly from us. Iam. 4.7. Niliacus qualis serpens fugientibus in stat,
Jnstantes fugiens, quamlibet ante ferox. Sic vetus ille Draco, saeuus
mortalibus hostis, Te reprimente fugit, te fugiente premit. Beza in Emblem. Tam
pusillanimis est, vt victus ante ^^ conflictum, non telo sed tuba prosternitur.
Ber. ibi.
As the Crocodiles in Nilus do pursue them that run from them, but fly from
those that stand to them: So does the Devil, If he be resisted, he turns his
back, and only presses upon such as give him ground. But to the end we may
resist him indeed, we stand in need of armor, even that whole armor of God
Ephesians. 6.11. As they that know they have enemies lying in wait for them, will
not go abroad without their weapons: So we knowing that the Devil
continually lies in wait for us, we should never be unarmed. Soldiers when
their enemies are near, never unbuckle their armor, but sleep in it: so
should we never be unfurnished of our armor night nor day.

Now among all the parcels of that spiritual armor, which the Apostle
describes and commends unto us, there is none more necessary, nor more
behoouefull for us, then Prayer. For as Solomon says, The name of the Lord is
a strong tower, the righteous runs to it, and is exalted, Prou. 18.10. They
that by Prayer and confidence commit themselves to his protection, they are
sure to be as safely kept out of the reach of Satan, as if they were taken up
into an high and invincible Turret. And therefore, as Saint Augustine well
exhorts, Quanto maiorem videmus Diaboli potestatem; tanto tenacius Mediatori
est inhaerendum. De Ciuitate Dei. lib. 18. cap. 18.
the greater we perceive the power of the devil, let us cleave so much the
faster unto our Mediator. And the rather Aduersarius noster est, quem dominus
noster prior vicit; vt etiam nos in illo permanentes, vincamus per ipsum Aug.
de agone Christiano
because our adversary is none other, then he has overcome before, that we
abiding in him, might also overcome him through him. Non titubet Athleta
Christi, non lacesoat, non discedat a praelio; instet fortiter, dunicet
acriter, viriliter agat, and confortetur cor eius, quod cito veniet dominus,
and manu potenti conteret brachium maligni. Bern. de caena Dom. Ser. Deus nos
hortatur vt pugnem^, adiuuat vt vincamus. Certantes in bello spectat,
deficientes subleuat, vincentes coronat. Bern. Medit. cap. 14.

Doct. It is dangerous to be given to lying. Iam 3.6.


Let us not therefore stagger, let us not faint, let us not give over the
combat: but let us stand to it stoutly, fight valiantly, play the men, and let
our hearts be comforted, for the Lord will come speedily, and with strong hand
break the power of the malicious. For as God exhorts us to fight, so he
helps us to overcome: He beholds us in the conflict and combat; if we
faint, he aydeth us; if we overcome; he crowns us. And therefore, in all
tentations let us have recourse to him by earnest Prayer, that being
strengthened with all might by his glorious power, we may be able to resist in
the evil day, as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 6.13.

And again he denied.] He thought his dissembling and lying would have served
the turn. But perceiving it would not be, but still they pressed him and urged
him further, now for his credit sake he will not recall his former denial,
but tieth it, as we see, and affirms it with an Oath. As he made no
conscience of lying before, so he makes no bones of swearing now. Where we
see what a dangerous thing it is for a man to give himself to lying. They that
have once cracked the bonds of conscience in hope of any benefit or advantage,
they will not stick to go further, rather then miss of their purpose. The
end which the Apostle here respected in his former denial, was his own
safety: but seeing, that still he could not be quiet, he proceeds further,
and never cease till with the peril of his soul he has satisfied his
adversaries. When men's affections are bent and set on a matter, rather then
they will be frustrate, they are carried into many inconveniences, their
tongues, as Saint James says, being inflamed with the fire of hell. As we see
by common experience, when men have once ouer-shot themselves in telling a lie,
it is fearful to see, how for saving their credit, they will outface the
matter with horrible Oaths and execrations.

Cast off lying and speak every man the truth to his neighbor. Ephesians. 4.25.
And the rather, because either, if the matter be known, our faces shall be
covered with shame; or else we shall be drawn to sin more grievously, by
auerring and auouching our untruth with swearing and staring: whereas
otherwise, truth though it may be blamed, yet it shall never be shamed: and we
shall find to our comfort, that the bare testimony of one man that uses to
speak the truth, shall be of more weight and credit then a thousand Oaths.

Peter does in this place.

Doct. He that falls into a small sin, is easily brought to a greater.
With an oath.] See here the progress of sin. First, the Apostle makes a
lie, secondly he binds it and confirms it with an oath, and last of all, he
adds cursing. Whence we may observe, that he that falls into one sin
though never so small, is easily carried into a greater: and he that begins
but with a trifle, as he accounts it, many times rusheth headlong into foul
and heinous wickednesses, even such as before he loathed and abhorred. If the
Devil had at the first dash bidden Peter forswear, and curse himself in this
manner, no doubt he would have detested it extremely. And therefore, he is
more subtle then so, he begins with him in a smaller offense, and so at the
last brings him to that without any stay, which at the first he would never
have yielded to. It is true that Nemo repent fuit turpissimus. Iuuenal. ^at.
2. Non ad suminu^ peccati gradam simul ab exordio prosiliunt homines. Aug. de
trin. lib. 12. cap. 10.
no man comes to the height of sin at the first. Sicut nemo repent sit sum
mus, sed gradatim quisque ascendit, sic nemorepente fit pessimus, sed paulatim
descendit. Bern. de gradib. humilitatis.
As no man on the sudden becomes most excellent in Virtue, but every man
ascends by degrees: so no man on the sudden is made desperate in evil, but
descends by little and little. Sin is like a fretting canker, that
ouerspreadeth the whole body secretly before it be discerned. It is like a
serpent, if it get in but the head only, it will wind in the whole body.
There is such a combination of sin, that as in the linkes of a chain, if a
man draw one, all the rest follow; so if a man grant a little sin, a greater
will come after. And in this respect, the diseases of the soul are far worse
then those of the body. For they that are troubled with the stone, Eras. de
lingua.
are commonly free from other maladies. But there is no disease of the soul,
but it brings with it a troop of vices. If a man cast a stone into the
water, there arises presently a circle in the place, and presently after that
another, and so another, till at last all the water be full of circles from
bank to bank. In like manner, if a man commit one sin, another will follow
upon it, and after that another, unless the grace of God prevent him, till he
be out of measure sinful. Sin cannot endure to be alone, but it must have
company Peccatu^ quod per paenitentiam non diluitur, mox suo po^dere aliud
trahit. Bern.
yea the least sin, if it be not done away by repentance, will with the
weight of it draw on another. Wheresoever it finds entertainment, it
enlarges and spreads it self. If we give it an inch, it will take an ell,
Quo magis homines peccat, eo mayor crescit peccandi voluptas.
yea the longer we continue in it, the more it waxes sweeter and sweeter to
our corrupt nature: Quo plus isunt potae, plus fituntur aquae. Ovid.
so that the more we taste it, the more we desire it. As in the matter of theft,
men begin first with a pin, (as we say) and then with a point, till at last
they make no bones of any thing: So in all other sins a man first begins
with a little one, after that he comes to a greater, till at last nothing be
too hot or too heavy for him. The scriptures are plentiful in examples for the
proof of this point, both in the wicked and in the Godly. Cain was first an
hypocrite offering sacrifice indeed to God but only for fashion sake: after
that, Genesis 4.3.4, 5.8.
when he perceived that God respected his brother better then he did him, he
began to be angry and wroth, and he suffered that anger to boil within him,
till it became a deadly hatred, though most unnatural against his brother, and
in the end he murdered him. Absalom was first a wanton, 2. Chron cap. 13.15.16
etc.
after that most cruelly he butchered his own brother, and at the last,
rebelled against his own Father, and drove him out of his kingdom. Mat.
14.3.4.7.9.10.
Herod first lived in incest with his brothers wife to the breach of the
seventh commandment, after that he made a profane and rash oath, against the
third commandment; and in the end caused innocent John Baptist to be
beheaded, John. 12.6. Mat. 26.15.16.
contrary to the sixth commandment. Judas was first a damnable hypocrite, after
that he was extremely covetous, in such sort, as carrying the bag of
provision for Christ and his disciples, he many times played the thief, and
perverted it to his own private use, and last of all he was a traitor, and
betrayed his master. And as this is true in the wicked, so likewise even the
children of God, when they give way to one sin, unless the Lord in mercy by
his grace restrain them, they fall further to the wounding of their
consciences, and the endangering of their souls, as appears in the examples
of Noah, Lot, David, and diverse others, whereof we have spoken before. And this
is a very fearful thing, when God so forsakes a man, as that he lets him
fall without restraint, from one degree of sin to another. Psalm. 69.27.
So the Lord always deals with the reprobate, as David says, Lay iniquity
upon their iniquity, or as it is in our vulgar translation, Let them fall from
one wickedness to another. And howsoever the Lord suffers not his children to
continue in this estate, but mercifully reduces them by his grace and spirit,
yet as I said, it is fearful to enter into it.

Use.
And therefore, this doctrine serves to admonish us of two necessary duties.
First, that we be careful to take heed even of the least sin that can be.
For as S. Augustine says, Peccatii nullii adeo paruum est, quod non crescat
neglectum. Aug. de vert and sals. p^e^it. cap. 8.
there is no sin so little, but if it be neglected it will increase. Et q^i
minima asper^^t, ca^itan ma^ora. Gl^ssa ord^^.
And he that despises small sins, does easily fall into greater. We may not
then contemn any sin because it is little, but rather fear, least it
increase to be many. It may be, the sin we are addicted to, is not like a
Lion, to devour our souls at one morsel: yet we see that Parua n^cat morsu
spa^iosum vipera t^^rum. Ovid de rem^d.
many times little beasts if they be many, may kill a man Aug de december chordis.
The grains of sand are very small, and yet too much weight of it will sink
the ship. Flumina magna vides paruis de fontibus orta Ovid ibid.
The drops of rain are but little in quantity, and yet they make great
shoures and cause mighty floods which bear down all before them. Parna saepe
scintilla conte^pta, magnum excitauit incendiu^. Qu. Curt. lib. 6.
We see that many times a little spark of fire neglected, causes a great
burning, and a little fire, as S. James says, kindles a great matter. Iam.
3.5. And therefore if we desire to preserve our selves from coming to the
height of sin, to commit all uncleanness with greediness, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 4.19. Men's christo dicata sic caveat minora vt matora: quia a
minimis incipiut qui in maxima proruunt. Bera. de ordine vitae. Non solum
grauia sed and leuia peccata cauenda sunt. Multa enim leuia vnum grande
efficient. Bern. de consc^aed^s. cap. 46.
We must not only take heed of gross and heinous sins, but even of small
sins. Yea we must as well beware of the least as of the greatest, for
according to the proverb, Many littles make a great, and they that begin with
little sins, we see by experience, do often rush into greater.

Secondly, we must be careful to prevent the first beginning of sin, and
labor to kill it in the first sprouting. Principijs obsta, sero medicina
paratur, Dum mala per longas invaluere moras. Ovid. de remed. etc. Opprime dum
noua s^nt subita mala semina morbi. Nam mora dat vires and. Ibid.
Physicians give us counsel in the diseases of the body, to stop the
beginnings, least by continuance of time, they grow inueterate as we see by
experience. Many a disease that might easily have been cured at the first, and
many a wound that might soon have been healed, if it had been looked to in
time, afterward being suffered to continue ouerlong Cura in ipso vtero
p^ssimae matris praefocari germen. Bern. de consider lib. 3. Gual in Hos.
Homil. 21.
but if by negligence and delay it gather strength, it rages exceedingly, and
can hardly be extinguished. In like manner, sin at the first beginning might
easily be overcome, but if it be suffered to grow to any height it will be a
most hard matter to suppress it. As the Crow being about to breed, first
gathers little sticks and other matter to make a neast, and then lays
eggs, which by her heat she cherishes, til her young ones be hatched and
brought forth. So the Devil being about to produce sin, first he gathers
a great many vain and idle thoughts, whereof he makes his neast in the heart
of man, and there lays delights, as it were his eggs, which he so long
nourishes and fostereth, till his young brood of sin be hatched by consent,
and after brought forth by operation, as S. James lively describes the
beginning and birth of sin. Every man says he, is tempted, when he is
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is perfitted, brings
forth death. Iam. 1.14.15. Now as he that would hinder the breeding of the
Crow, does either pull down the neast as soon as it is made, or break the
eggs, or at least kills the birds before they can fly: so if we desire to
stay the birth of sin, we must resist it in the very first thought of it, not
giving entertainment thereunto, and if the Devil do buzze ill thoughts into
our hearts against our wills, we must take heed we yield not consent unto
them: at the least, if we have consented, let us use all good means to prevent
it before it come to action. And the rather, because the longer we give
entertainment to any sin, the harder it will be to overcome it. The
spreading of sin is like the spreading of the pestilence, which first
infecteth the air, the air being infected corrupts our breath, and that
conuaieth the infection into the vital spirits and the blood, and so it
ouer-spreadeth the whole body, and is past recovery; so sin by little and
little, and by degrees getting hold in the heart, disperseth it self into all
the parts both of body and soul, so as, without the grace of God, there is no
means to be freed from it. The longer that the Devil or any sin has had
possession in the heart, the harder will it be to dispossess them. Wood that
has long lain soaking in the wette will be long before it receive fire: so
the longer that any man's heart has been soaked or steeped in sin, the
longer will it be before it receive any impression of grace. Quae praebet latas
arbor spatiantibus vmbras, Quo posita est primum tempore virga fuit. Tunc
poterat manibus summa tellure reuelli, Nunc stat in immensum viribus aucta
suis, Ovid. de remed.

Nil assuetudine maius. O^id de art amandi.


A young plant may easily be plucked up by the roots; but if it grow till it be
a great tree, it can hardly be removed: So long as there is nothing but dust in
our floores, a light broom will serve to sweep it away: but if it be stiff
clay a broom will do no good, there must be a spade to spittle it out. In
like manner, so long as our sins are young, they may with little labor be
rooted out: but if once they be confirmed in our hearts, we shall find it a
very hard matter to displace them. Hence it is that the prophet Jeremy says,
Can the black Moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may
you also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Ierem. 13.23. Giving us
thereby to understand, that it is the most difficult thing in the world, for a
man to leave a custom or an habit of sinning, even as for a black Moore to
be made white, who is naturally so black as there is no means to alter his
hew. Though a man should wash him with nitire and much soap, yet it would not
prevail. And therefore, it is grown to a proverb, that when a man undertakes
any impossible thing, which cannot be effected, be is said to wash a black
Moore Ars sit vbi a teneris crimen condiscitur annis Ovid. Epist. Difficulter
reciduntur vitia quae nobiscum crescunt. Sen. de ira. Difficile est longum
subito deponere amorem. Catull. Epigram. 77. Dediscit animus sero, quod didicit
diu. Se in Troad.
Those vices which have grown up with a man from his childhood, it is a hard
matter to leave them. (c) And it is a matter of great difficulty to forget that
which a man has long learned. Sin before it grow to a custom, is in
comparison like a thread of tow when it seeles the fire, as it is said of the
cords that Samson was bound withal, Judge. 16.9. But after it be once confirmed
by custom, Ier. 2.22.
it is strong as a cart rope Isa. 5.18. Nay as a threefold cable, that is not
easily broken. Eccles. 4.12 Desinit esse remedio locus, vbi quae vitia fuerunt
mores fiunt. Sen.
when a man's vices are once grown to a habit in him, there is no hope of
remedy Inuadens omnia consuetudo pro lege obseruatur. Aug de december chordis. Lex
peccati est violentia consuetudinis, qua trabitur and tenetur etiam inuitus
animus. Aug. Confess. lib. 8.
. For custom we see is made a law, and in many cases it is pleaded for law.
Jn nonnullis ipsa sibi consuetudo naturam induisse videtur, Bern. in Ps. 9.
sermon. 10. Vsus cito inflectit naturam. Ambros offic. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Consuetudo natura potentior. Qu. Curtius. lib 5.
Yea it is an other nature, which it is hard for a man to put off. As we see in
children, when they have got a custom of using the left hand, of holding the
neck awry, or of looking a squint, they are hardly brought to leave it. Eras.
de lingua.
And some as Erasmus says, have got a foolish custom of coughing, or
belching, or sighing, etc. which for the most part they carry to their graves.
So it is in sin, when a man is fleshed in whoredom, he has much ado to
leave it. Nay, such persons seldom return again and take hold of the ways
of life, as Solomon says, Prou. 2.19. When a man has got a haunt of
drunkenness, we see by common experience, that he will scarce ever forsake it,
no, whatsoever means are used to reclaim him, he cannot but follow it still,
Prou. 23.35. So for swearing, when a man has once accustomed himself to it,
he cannot but swear almost at every other word. Yea, it is so ordinary with
many men, and their tongues are so inured with it, as many times they swear
when they never think of it. As many Dogs do bark Pro consuetudine non pro
feritate latrant. Seneca. Peccandi consuetudine etiam cum nescio pecco. Bern.
de consc. edif. cap. 29.
more of custom then of any fierceness of their nature, so I am persuaded, a
number of people in the world do swear more by an use that they have gotten,
then they do of set purpose. Now the reason why it is thus hard for a man to
leave the custom or habit of any sin, is first, because when sin has had
long entertainment in a man's heart, Cum magno dolor relinquitur, quod cum
magno amore possidetur. Bern. de caen. dom. Sermon. 10.

Quod sine illiciente amore non habuit, sine vrente dolor non perdit. Aug. de
Ciu. Dei. lib. 21. cap. 26.

Fruendis voluptatibus crescit carendi dolor. Plin. 2. l. 8. Epi. 5


it is loath to part with him, and he is as loath to part with it. It is between
sin and a man, as it is between two friends. If their acquaintance have
been but of short continuance, it never grieueth them to part one with
another: but if they have been ancient friends, such as have long conuersed
together with mutual comfort and delight, if it fall out that they must be
separated, Oh it goes sore with them, and they sing loath to depart. So when a
man has been but little acquainted with sin, it is no great grief for him
to leave it; But if he have lived long in it, and made it his darling sin,
and felt sweetness in it, as he thinks, then it is a grief to him to
forsake it. Ret^nebant antiquae amicae meae, succutiebant vestem meam carneam,
and submurmurabant. Aug. conse. lib. 8.
And therefore, Saint Augustine says, That when he began to repent, his old
lovers, meaning his sins, would have held him back, they caught hold of the
garment of his flesh, and whispered him in the ear, etc.

That which Solomon says of the sluggard, is true also of all sinners (for he
makes him as it were a type of the rest) he brings him in lying in his bed,
and loath to rise, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of
the hands to sleep. Prou. 24.33. So says the voluptuous person, yet a little
more of this sweet sin. The covetous man, yet a little more of this sweet
sin: Consuetudo in familiaritatem grauissima adducit. Sen. de tranquil.
vitae. Peccata quamnis magna and horrenda, cum in co^suetudinem venerint, aut
parua aut nulla esse creduntur. August. Euchiridion. Cap. 17. Quantis, quod
prae amaritudine prius exhorrebat vsu ipso male in dulce vertitur? Primum tibi
importabile videbitur aliquid; processi^ temporis, si assuescas iudicabis non
adeo grave; paulo post and leave senties; paulo post etiam delectabit. Ita
paulatim in cordis duritiem itur. Bern. de consider. lib. 1. ad Eugenium Papam.
and so every man is loath to leave the sin that he is most addicted to.
Again, the custom of sinning does harden the heart, that a man neither sees
nor feels his sins. And therefore, the Apostle exhorts us to take heed,
that our hearts be not hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.18. And
in another place he says, a man may bring such a hardness upon his heart, as
he cannot repent. Romans 2.5. but be even past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. to make no
bones of any thing. The word which the Apostle uses there, is borrowed from
laboring men, that daily handle the spade or the plough hales; As such men's
hands by continual use are so hardened and embrawned, that they may be cut with
a knife, and yet feel it not: so many men's consciences, which at the first
were tender and full of remorse, and would often smite them when they did
amiss, are made so hard by the custom of sinning, as nothing can move them.
It is a rule in Philosophy, that no clement is heavy so long as it is in his
own sphere. As for example, let a man that is skillfull in swimming, diue into
the bottom of the Sea, so long as he is under the water, he feels no weight,
though a mountain, as it were, of water lie upon his back, because the water
is in his proper place. But let him come out of the water and take but a bucket
full of it upon his arm, and it will be heavy. In like manner, so long as
sin is familiar to a man, that his heart is, as it were, the proper seat of
it, he never feels any weight of it, though it be ready to press and sink
him down to hell, yet he goes away with it, as if it were as light as a
feather. But if ever it please God to open his eyes, that he may see the
haniousnesse of his sins, then he will cry out with David, that they are a
weighty burden, too heavy for him to bear, Ps. 38.4. Saint Bernard has a very
good speech to this purpose. How many are there says he, to whom that same
thing which at the first was so bitter that they abhorred it, by use is become
sweet? At the first a thing will seem so heavy to thee as thou can not bear
it; in process of time if thou use to carry it thou will not think it so
heavy; Quisquis in primo obstitit repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor extitit.
Sen. in Hippol. Prima coitio est asperrima, si eam sustinueris, post illa iam
vt lubet ludas licet Terent. in Phorm.
within a while thou shall feel it light; within a while thou shall not feel
it at all; and in the end it will delight thee. And thus by little and little a
man comes to hardness of heart. And therefore, to conclude this point, if we
desire to be preserved from this height of sin, let us be careful to resist
sin betimes. Let us watch especially in the beginning of the temptation. For
then, as one says, is the enemy easily overcome, if we do not suffer him to
enter into the door of our heart, but as soon as ever he knocks, go over
the threshold to meet him without. And indeed, sin is most furious in the
first assaults, if it be stoutly resisted then, it will never get such hold in
our hearts as otherwise it would.

Doct. All wicked men agree to persecute the godly.
So after a while etc.] This is the third degree of the Apostle Peter's sin,
and the occasion thereof. The first and second assault was made against him by
one alone, and that a damsel: but now all that were present come together
against him. Where in a word we may observe that all wicked men agree
together to persecute Gods children. Because they perceived that Peter was one
of Ch^ists Disciples, out of that malice they had against Christ, they all set
upon him tag and rag, and bait him like a Bear at the stake. Thus has it
been in all ages from time to time. David complains of it in diverse places
Why says he, do the heathen rage, Psalm. 2.1.2.
and the people murmr in vain? The Kings of the earth band themselves, and
the Princes are assembled together against the Lord and against his Christ.
Where we see that Nations and peoples, Gentiles, Jews, Kings and Rulers, men
of all sorts, both within and without the Church, public and private persons
great and small do conspire against Christ and his poor Church. And again
They have consulted together, and have made a league against thee. The
tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, Psalm. 83.5.6.7.8
Moab and the Agarims. Gebal and Ammon, and Amalech, the Philistims with the
inhabitants of Tyrus: Ashur also is joined with them etc. And this was David's
own case. He had enemies both in Court and Country. Doeg, the Ziphims, Nabal
and diverse other were maliciously bent against him. Yea our Savior Christ
himself found no better entertainment. But as soon as ever he was borne, and
so all his life long, there were cruel enemies that sought his destruction, as
the Apostles confess in their prayer, that Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, Acts 4.27.
and the people of Israel gathered themselves together against him. And so it
is at this day, Let any wicked man pretend a quarrel, though never so unjust,
against one that fears God, and all the birds of that viperous brood will
violently flock together, and take part with him. Acts 2.3.12.13.
When the high Priests opposed themselves against Paul, how many were there
that were ready to join with them? Yea there were forty of a conspiracy,
that bound themselves by a solemn vow to kill him before they did either eat
or drink. And when Demetrius the silver smith was incensed against him, and
19.24.29. etc.
the whole City took his part, and raged most furiously against him and his
fellows, yea a great number of them not knowing what the matter was. Yea
though they have been at enmity and at odds before, yet in this case they
are soon reconciled. Luke 23.12.
As we see that Pilate and Herod were made friends in persecuting of Christ,
though they had been enemies one to another long before. The stories of that
bloody reign of Queen Marie do afford us plenty of examples for the
confirmation of this point.

And therefore, for the use of this Doctrine, Use.
we are here admonished to consider, what manner of Religion it is that we take
upon us to profess; even such, as has both the Sun, Moon and Stars against
it. We must take notice of this, before we give up our names to Christ, that so
we may arm and fortify our selves against it. We must not look for many to
assist us, and to take our parts, but rather to have almost all the world
against us. When the Apostle Paul came into trouble for the profession of the
truth, he complains, That no man assisted him, 2. Tim. 4.16.
but all forsook him. We must not look that it should be better with us.

Then began he to curse himself, etc.] These enemies of the Apostle Peter
were not yet satisfied: he had dissembled before, and forsworn himself: yet
that would not serve their turns, but still they press him further, and that
with greater violence then before: and therefore, he seeing their
importunity, is determined to feed their humors, though it should cost him
his soul.

Doct. When men begin once to fall from God, they have no stay of themselves,
etc.
And therefore, now he curses himself if ever he knew Christ Jesus. The
devil could have carried him no further, except it had been to desperation.
Here then we are taught, that they that once begin to fall from God, have no
stay of themselves, but without Gods restraining grace, run headlong into the
depth of iniquity. It is a true saying, He must needs run whom the devil
drives. And God knows, we are all wavering and ready to fall, as often as the
devil shall thrust us forward. Neither shall we ever make any stay, unless
God stretch out his hand, -- nam quis. Peccandi finem posuit subs^quando
recepit ^ectum semel attrita de fio^te ru^orem? Quis nam ham number est, quem tu
contentum videris vno Flagitio?
and hold us back. As a round stone tumbled down from the top of a steep
hill, is carried with violence till it come to the bottom; So when a man has
once given way to any sin, there is no hoe with him, till he come to the
bottom of hell, unless God pull him back. After that once the vigor and
liuelyhood of the spirit was extinguished in the Apostle Peter, if God had
still left him to himself, if a thousand several persons had questioned with
him about his Master, he would have denied him a thousand times.

Peter has fallen? And who are we then, that we should presume of our own
strength? There are some men that in a conceit of themselves, will stint
themselves how far they will go in the committing of sin. As they will go
to the Alehouse, and sit among good fellows, and drink what they think good,
but they shall not all make them drunk. But alas, we see that many times for
all these vain bragges, they are foulely and shamefully overtaken ere they be
aware.

Secondly, we must pray earnestly to God, to restrain the not to forsake us
over long, Psalm. 119.8. and 51.12.
as David says, but to establish us with a free spirit, that we may not fall
in this fearful manner. Otherwise, if we by our carelessness, and neglect of
the good means which God has sanctified, do grieve and quench the holy spirit
of God, it shall be just for the Lord, even to leave us over to the dominion of
Satan, to be held captives of him, and to be carried headlong into all
ungodliness.

Hitherto we have heard the fearful and lamentable fall of the Apostle Peter.
Now follows his repentance and rising again, which with like diligence is
also recorded by all the Evangelists for our comfort.

Wherein we are to consider. 1. The occasions or the means of it. 1. From
without himself. 1. Outward, viz. The crowing of the Cock. 2. Inward, viz.
Christ's looking back upon him, expressed, Luke 22.61.
2. From within himself, but occasioned by the former, viz. That he remembered
the words of Jesus, etc.
2. His Repentance it self. 1. His preparation to it. He went out of that
wicked place. 2. The manner of it. He wept, and that bitterly.



ANd immediately the Cock crew.] This is the first means which God uses for
the repentance of the Apostle Peter. For seeing in what a desperate state he
stood, he makes have to deliver him. He knew that if he should have continued
in this case, his heart would have been hardened by the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 3.13.
as the Apostle says. As it falls out with the wicked, who having once
tasted the sweetness of sin, 1. Pet. 4.4. Ephesians. 4.19.
do violently run to all excess of riot, and work all uncleanness, even
with greediness. And therefore the Lord being most careful of his children,
delayeth no time, but presently uses all means to recover them.

Doct. God will not suffer his children to perish in there sins. Ezekiel. 18,
31.32. and. 33.11.
From hence then we learn, that God will not suffer his children to perish in
their sins, but endeavors to reclaim them. This the Lord confirms by
the Prophet Ezekiel, saying, Wby will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? For I
desire not the death of him that dies. And he binds it with an oath. As I
live, says he, I desire not the death of the wicked but that the wicked turn
from his way and live. And our Savior Christ says, Luke. 19 10.
the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost. Luke 1.79.
And this we see first before their conversion, whiles they fit as it were in
darkness and in the shadow of death, the Lord in mercy visits them, and
gives light unto them and guides their feet into the way of peace, and
causes them to turn from the power of Satan unto God. Acts 26.18.
Abraham a long while lived in gross Idolatry in his Fathers house, Genesis
12.1.4.
even till he were seventy and five years old. But at the last, the Lord in
mercy called him out of his Contry, and from his kindred, and brought him to
the true knowledge of God. Acts 9.1.
The Apostle Paul before his conversion was a grievous enemy to the Church of
God, he breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord. But in the midst of his rage the Lord took pity upon him; 2.
and as he was furnished with authority from the high Priest, 3.4.
to bind all both men and women that were of that way: so dainely Christ Jesus
called unto him from heaven, and reclaimed him, and made him of a bloody and
cruel persecutor a most excellent Apostle, and a most painful preacher of
that faith which before he destroyed. Gal. 1.22.


Again after their conversion, if through frailty they fall into sin (as God
knows, there is no man that sins not, as Solomon confesses in his prayer,
1. Kings 8.46.
at the dedication of the temple) the Lord will not suffer them to lie along
therein, and as it were to sleep in death, but in his tender compassion, and in
the riches of his mercy he raises them up again. As David says of the godly
man. Psalm. 37.24. and 145.14.
Though he fall he shall not be cast off: for the Lord puts under his hand.
And again, The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, and lifts up all that are ready
to fall. And this our Savior Christ does teach us plainly in the parable of
the lost sheep, which the good shepherd will not suffer to perish, Luke
15.4.5.
nor to wander out of the way to destruction, but he leaves the rest, and as
though all his care were only for that which was lost, he goes after it, and
seeks it, and when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, and
brings it home with joy. For which cause, David prays unto the Lord saying.
Psalm. 119.176.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant. And the Apostle
Peter confesses Gods goodness to himself, and others in this case. We were,
says he, as sheep going astray, 1. Pet. 2.25.
but are now returned to the shepherd and Bishop of our souls. And thus the
Lord deals with all his children. Though he suffer them for a time to follow
their own fantasies, and to walk after the desires of their own hearts, yet
he forsakes them not for ever, but in his good time he stretches out his hand
to help and succor them. He suffered Peter to fall fearfully as we have
heard, but with all speed he raises him up again. So he suffered David to
commit very heinous and horrible sins, 2. Sam. 12.1. and.
and to continue and lie in them without repentance a long while: yet in the
end, having compassion on him, Psalm. 103.13.
as a tender hearted father has compassion on his children, he sent the
Prophet Nathan to him to awake him out of his sin, and to call him to
repentance. And afterward when his heart was lifted up by reason of the
strength of his people, 2 Samuel 24.10.11.12.
that he must needs have them numbered; the Lord caused first his own heart to
smite him and then sent the Prophet Gad unto him to humble him for the same.
Yea the Lord is so rich in mercy, that he offers this grace even to the
wicked also, though they in their profaneness contemn and reject the same.
When Caines heart boiled with malice against his brother Abel, the Lord said
enough to him, if he had had grace, to have prevented any further mischief;
Gene. 4.6.7.
Why art thou wroth, says he, and why is thy countenance cast down? If thou
do well, shall thou not be accepted, etc. And after he had slain him indeed,
the Lord left him not, 9.10.
but labored to bring him to remorse, when he asked him what was become of his
brother, and told him that his blood cried unto him from the earth. Gene. 6.3.


When the Lord had purposed to destroy the old world, because the wickedness
thereof was very great, he did first use all means to reclaim them. He gave
them an hundred and twenty years to repent in, and in the mean while, sent
Noah a Preacher of righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.5. Heb. 11.7.
to forewarne them of the danger, both by verbal and also visible Preaching,
in making an Arc for the saving of himself and his household. So he dealt
with the filthy Sodomites, Gene. 19. etc.
placing just Lot among them to labor their conversion, if it might be. When
Saul had stubbornely transgressed the commandments of the Lord, and had
thereby caused him to reject him; yet he left him not so, 1. Sam. 15.16.17 etc.
but sent Samuel to put him in mind of the heinousness of his sin. When Ahab
by horrible cruelty had bereft poor Nabaoth of his life and living, 1. King.
21.18.19.
the Lord sent Elias the Prophet to reprove him, and to aggrauate his sin
against him, that so he might be humbled. In a word, the Lord offered his
mercy to Judas; John 13.26.
when as before ever he had effected any thing, our Savior put him in mind of
the horriblenesse of his bloody thoughts against him, making it manifest, that
he was the man that should betray him. If the Lord be thus merciful, to make
so large a proffer of his grace to such as he knows will despise it; how much
more will he offer the same to his children, who will thankfully embrace it?

And hereof we have yet a most lively example in Adam, Genesis 3.6.8.9.15
and the Lords dealing with him. When he had disobeyed the commandment of
God in eating the forbidden fruit, and perceived, that thereby he had forfeited
that excellent glory of his creation, for shame and fear he was ready to
run away from God if it had been possible. But the Lord would not loose him
for all that, but sought him out in the garden, and preached unto him the glad
tidings of salvation by Jesus Christ. And hence is it that David says, Psalm.
121.4.
He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, but continually
watches for the preservation of their souls: and therefore uses all good
means whereby it may be effected. As here the crowing of the Cock was a
means to bring Peter to the sight of his sin, Mat. 26.34.
for this was the sign that our Savior had given him of his denial, that
before the cock crewe he should deny him thrice. And it was so much the more
effectual, because it fell out in the very moment and instant of his sin. He
had no sooner denied his Master, but as the Evangelist says here, immediately
the cock crewe. Yea Saint Luke says, that it was done before the word was
out of his mouth. And immediately, Luke 22.60.
says he, Whiles he yet spoke the cock crewe. Now hereby are signified all
outward means whatsoever they be, which God uses to awake us out of our
sins, that shaking off that drowsinesse, which for the most part possesses
the flesh, we may bethink our selves of our sins, and of the wrath of God
due unto them, and of some course to pacify the same. Which means if the Lord
should not use toward us, we would for ever lie securely in our sins,
and think our selves in best case, when our salvation is in greatest danger.
Many and diverse are the means which it pleases the Lord to use for this
purpose. As first and chiefly the Ministry of his word. Matthew. 3.3. Jsa.
58.1. Prou. 1.20.21. etc. and 8.1.2.3. etc. and 9.1.2.3. etc.
He sends his Misters as cryers, as John Baptist says of himself,
commanding them to cry aloud, and to lift up their voices like trumpets, to
preach the Doctrine of repentance, and to tell the people of their sins. And
Solomon in many places brings in Christ Jesus the wisdom of God, sometimes
crying alowd, in his own person, sometimes sending his messengers to summon
men to repentance. And for this cause, the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
that the Lord has furnished Ministers with gifts, for the work of the
Ministry; even for the gathering together of the Saints, and the aedification
of the body of Christ Jesus. 2. Sam. 12.1. and 24.1.
Thus dealt the Lord with David as we have heard before, sending the Prophets
Nathan and Gad unto him after his two great sins, to bring him to the sight
of his sin. 2. Chron. 36.14.15.
And thus dealt he with the rebellious Israelits, when they had trespassed
wonderfully against him he had compassion on them, and sent to them by his
messengers to call them to repentance. Yea he sent the Prophet Jonah to preach
repentance to the Ninevites. Ion. 3.4.
And hence is it, that the Apostle calls the Ministry of the word, Romans 1.16.
the power of God to salvation to every one that believes. And howsoever the
wisemen of the world do account it no better then foolishness; 1. Cor.
1.23.21.
yet it has pleased God even by that foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe. Secondly the manifold blessings and benefits wherewith he daily
ladeth us, Psalm. 68.18. Lam. 3.23.
and which he renueth toward us every morning; As there is never a one of us,
that have not good experience hereof continually, both in our souls and in our
bodies. How liberally and bountifully does the Lord sustain and feed us from
time to time? How carefully does the eye of his providence watch over us? and
how powerfully does the hand of his mighty protection preserve us from many
dangers, wherein by reason of our sins we might have perished every day?
Besides all those spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3.
wherewith he has blessed us in heavenly things in Christ Jesus. All which,
as the Prophet calls them, Hos 11.4.
are so many bonds of love, whereby the Lord labors to draw and allure us
unto him. As parents labor to win their young children by promising and
bestowing gifts upon them: so deals the Lord with us; knowing our weakness,
he does (as it were) woe us by many benefits. Hos. 2.8. Ezech. 16.8.9.
And therefore Moses tells the people of Israel, that the end why God
bestowed so many and so great benefits upon them was this, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
that they should love the Lord with all their heart, and with all their soul.
And Nathan, being sent to David after his adultery, vpbraideth him with the
great kindness which the Lord had showed him. Namely, that God had anointed
him King over Israel, 2. Sam. 12.7.8.
and had delivered him out of the hand of Saul, And had given him his Lords
house, and his Lords wives in to his bosom etc. And would (if that had been
too little) have given him much more: and therefore, his unthankfulness was
the greater, to trespass so hainously against so good and merciful a God. 1.
King. 14.7.8.
So does Ahijah the Prophet vpbraide Jeroboam that whereas God had exalted him
from among the people, and made him Prince over his people Israel etc. He
notwithstanding rebelled against him. Thirdly the corrections and chastisements
which God lays upon us. As the Lord himsele told David saying. Psa.
89.30.31.32
If thy children forsake my law and walk not in my judgments etc, Then will I
visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. And
Job says, that the Lord opens the ears of men, even by their corrections
which he has sealed. Job. 33.16.
Whenever God lays any rod upon our backs, either in our one persons, in
our bodies, in our goods, or in our names: or in our wives and children, or any
other that are dear unto us, it is for this end; that feeling the smart, we
may humble our selves under his hand. And whenever our stubbornness drives
the Lord to take this course with us, it is not without his great grief. As
the Prophet brings him in reasoning and debating the matter with the people
of Israel. How (says he) shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? Hos. 11.8.
how shall I deliver thee o Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I
set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me; my repentings are rouled
together. We see how the Lord is perplexed in himself, when the sins of his
people stirred up his displeasure. He cannot tell what course to take.

On the one side, the heinousness of their sins provoked him to punish them,
yea to destroy them as once he did Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about
them; but on the otherside his Fathers love and tender compassion moved him to
hold his hand, and to stay his judgments. His mercy did strive against their
wickedness. And when indeed he had brought evil upon them, and delivered them
up unto the power of their enemies, Judge. 10.16.
it is said, that his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel; as a tender
hearted Father many times corrects his son, when the tears stand in his
own eyes. And therefore, these also may be called bonds of love. For they
do not proceed from the wrath of God, neither are they any tokens of his
displeasure. No, he has promised, that though he whippe and scourge his
children peradventure sometimes till the blood follow (their stubbernesse so
requiring it) yet his mercy he will never take away from them. Psalm. 89.33.
And the Apostle says that whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, Heb. 12.6.11.
and scourges every son that he receives. And howsoever, for the present,
it be not joyous, but grievous; yet if we have grace to submit our selves
unto it, it brings with it the quiet fruit of righteousness Yea therefore
does the Lord nurture and Discipline us here with one rod or other, that we
may not be damned with the wicked world. 1. Cor. 11.32.
Fourthly, private and gentle admonitions, either by a man's friends, or any
other that have authority over him, as the Magistrate in the commonwealth,
the Minister in the Church, the father or Master in the family. And this our
Savior Christ shows, when he says that if a man use a kind admonition to
his brother in priuare, Mat. 18.15.
if it be done with godly discretion and holy gravity, it may be a means to
win him. Iam. 5.20.
And Saint James says, that if a man by good counsel shall convert a sinner
from going astray, he shall be an instrument to save his soul. David knew the
benefit of this full well, and therefore he so much desires it. Psalm. 141.5.
Let the righteous smite me, says he, for that is a benefit: let him reprove
me, and it shall be a precious oil etc. Fifthly, the reuilings and backbitings of
a man's enemies; which howsoever they proceed of malice in them, and a desire
to revenge, Amor caecutit in eo quod amat.
yet there may be a good use made of them. For our friends, either for the
love they bear us, do not see our faults, or if they do, in a kind of
niceness they dissemble them, and will not reprove them. Sicut amici adulantes
peruertunt: sic inimici plerumque litigantes corrigunit. Aug. confess lib. 9
Job. 31.36.
But our enemies will not halt with us in this case, but will aggrauate all our
faults against us, as much as they can. And though peradventure we be not
guilty of that particular crime which they charge us withal; but that with
Job, we may take it upon our sholders and wear it as a crown: yet it may
be, we are faulty in other things, which God would chastise in us by this
means. 2. Sam. 16.7.11.
And this use did David make of Shemei his railing against him. For howsoever
that he most unjustly accused him to have been a bloody man against the house
of Saul: yet David bad let him alone, For the Lord had bidden him do that he
did. Sixthly, the public judgments which God exercises in the world. Though
peradventure we feel them not our selves: yet if we either see them, or hear
of them, they are so many warning peales to call us to repentance; as the
Prophet says, Isa. 26.9.
Seeing thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall
learn righteousness. Last of all, the inward motions which the holy Ghost
raises up in us, and the good desire which God puts into our hearts. 2.
Sam. 24.10.
As we see when David had sinned, God caused his own heart to smite him. And
therefore he says, that the Lord did give him counsel, Psalm. 16.7.
and caused his reins to teach him in the night. When he was in his bed in the
night, and could not sleep, then the Lord filled his heart with holy
meditations.

This Doctrine serves first to commend unto us the great Psalm. 103.10.
Neither deals with them according to their deserts, but so lovingly
recalleth them by one means or other. Yea, it is as impossible for the Lord to
forsake his children, as it is for the most tender hearted mother in the world,
to forget her own child, and not to have compassion on the son of her own
womb. Isa. 49.15.


Secondly, it serves to admonish us, that whenever toward us. Which way
soever the Lord in mercy uses to reclaim us from our sins, 1. Sam. 3.10.
let us be ready to answer with young Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears. There should be an Echo (as it were) between the heart of every
Christian man, and the Lord, to answer him at every call. Psalm. 40.7.
Lo I come Lord, as David says.

Jerusalem. Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. How often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not?
They frustrate all the means that God can use toward them for their good. If
he call upon them by the ministry of his word, either like the deaf adder
they stop their ears, Psalm. 58.4.5.
and refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, though he be most expert in
charming: or else, for fashion sake they harken to it, and attain to some
knowledge, and 50.17.
yet they scornefully cast it behind their backs, and hate to be reformed by
it. If he allure them by his gracious benefits, 2. Chron. 32.25.
they do most wretchedly abuse them, not rendering unto the Lord according to
the reward bestowed upon them (as it was said of Hezekiah) but turning the
grace of God into wantonness, Jude X 4. R^m. 2.4.
and despising the riches of his bountifulness, not suffering it to lead them
to repentance. Yea when God has read them to the full, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
that they are waxen fat, they spurn with the heel, and regard not the
strong God of their salvation. Psalm. 35 12. and 109.4.
Thus as David says of his enemies, they render unto the Lord evil for good,
and hatred for his great good will. If he be angry with them for their sins,
and correct and chastise them, they are never the better. But with Ahaz, wicked
Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28.22.
in the time of their tribulation they trespass yet more against the Lord. As
the Prophet Jeremy said of the stubborn Jews, Ier. 2.30.
They have been smitten in vain, they have received no correction. Ier. 5.3.
The Lord has stricken them but they have not sorrowed; they have made their
faces harder then a stone and have refused to return. If he bring public
judgments upon the land, they do not regard them. If a Lion do but roar in
the forest, all the beasts are afraid, Amos 3.8.
as the prophet Amos says. But the Lord has roared from Heaven in his
fearful judgments, and yet no man trembles. Never age had more experience
hereof then this, wherein we live. How long has the noisome pestilence ranged
in all countries of the land? what fearful inundations of water? What
horrible fires in many places? And yet as though all were nothing, the most of
us pass our time in carnal security and sinful pleasures, Jsa. 5.12.
never regarding the work of the Lord nor considering the operation of his
hands. In a word, though God did raise up in us never so many good motions and
holy desires, yet by our careless negligence we strangle and extinguish them,
not suffering them to have that blessed effect of grace in our hearts which
otherwise they might. So that now the Lord may justly take up that complaint
against us, which once he did against the Jews. Jsa. 65.2.
I have spread out my hands all the day long unto a rebellious people etc. And
therefore we may fear, that as he has called upon us, and we have refused,
as he has stretched out his hand, and we would not regard; so the time shall
come, that we shall cry and call upon him, Pro. 1.24.26.28.
even till our hearts ache, and he will not hear us. Yea he will be so far
from pitying us, that he will laugh at our destruction, as Solomon says, And
therefore, whenever or howsoever it shall please the Lord to offer us grace,
let us pray unto him to enlarge our hearts, that we may willingly and readily
embrace it.

Then the Lord turned back, and looked on Peter.] This is omitted by our
Evangelist, but is recorded by Saint Luke. Luke 22.61.
And it is the second means of Peter's repentance. After the crowing of the
cock, our Savior looked back upon Peter, and by his beholding him provoked
him to bitter tears. The cock had crown already, and yet Peter never awaked,
nor remembered what Christ had said unto him, till he looked back. Now we are
not to think, that Christ's bare looking back did effect this. Ioh. 13.26.27.
For then Judas might have been converted too. For (no doubt) our Savior
Christ looked upon him, John 13.26.27.
both when he gave him the soppe, and made it known that he was the man that
should betray him; and also when he uttered that sweet and mild speech unto
him, when he came with soldiers to apprehend him Friend says he, Matthew.
26.50.
wherefore art thou come? and after when he offered to kiss him, Luke 22.48.
Judas says he, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Horrore
sceleris sui, co^^impij ferire voluit. Bern feria. 6. in Parasc.
words that might have broken his heart if he had not been more then
obdurate. So the Lord looked upon Cain, when he did so lovingly admonish him,
both before and after his bloody fact, but without any profit. But here as the
outward and bodily eye of Christ beheld Peter, so the influence of his grace
and spirit fell upon his heart. By looking upon him he derived into him the
secret efficacy of his spirit, and peirced his heart with the beams of his
grace, and that prevailed with him to bring him to repentance. Non enim si eri
poterat, vt in negationis tenebris permaneret, quem lux perspexerat mundi.
Glossa ordinaria.
For it could not be, that he should remain in the darkness of his
denial, whom the light of the world had so graciously looked upon.

Doct. All outward means can do no good without Gods blessing.
Where we may observe that all outward means which the Lord uses toward us,
will do us no good, unless they be accompanied with the powerful operation
of his holy spirit. The Ministry of the word is of all other means most
likely to do most good, because it is Gods own sacred ordinance, which
himself has sanctified for the working of grace: Romans 1.16.
as the Apostle says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the
power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. 1. Cor. 1.21.
And, It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
believe. And yet we see by experience, that there is no profit by it without
Gods blessing. Whosoever he be that is the preacher, though he be never so
rare and excellent for his gifts, Job. 33.23.
even one of a thousand, as Job says; though his learning be never so
profound, 1. Cor. 13.2.
that he knew all secrets and all knowledge which the world can afford:
Ezra. 7 6.
though he be never so prompt and export in the law of God, as is said of
Ezra that learned Scribe; Acts 18.24.
though he be as a mighty and as well instructed in the Scriptures as ever
was Apollos: though he be a Scribe never so well taught unto the kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 13.52.
able to bring forth of his treasure at al times things both new and old; 2.
Tim. 2.15.
Again, though he be endued with never so good a dexterity in opening and
dividing the word of God aright, Col. 4.3. 1. Cor. 13 1.
like a workman that need not be ashamed: though God have opened unto him never
such a door of utterance; yea though he could speak with the tongues of men
and Angels; And though beside all these excellent gifts, his pains were as
great as could be imagined; 2. Tim. 4.2.
Though he were never so instant in his labor preaching the word upon all
occasions, Acts 20.20.
in season, and out of season, and that not openly in the congregation, but
even from house to house, as the Apostle Paul did; And whatsoever the diligence
of the people be in hearing of the word: though they all stand up on their
seete, Nehem. 8.5.
while the word is in delivering, the better to shake off drowsinesse, as the
bearers of Ezra did; Luke 4.20.
and though all their eyes be fastened upon the Preacher, as the eyes of the
Nazarites were upon our Savior Christ; Though after they have heard it, they
search the scriptures never so diligently, Acts 17.11.
as the noble men of Berea did, and use never so many other good means of
meditation and conference etc, to help their memories; Last of all though the
doctrine that is taught be never so heavenly and gracious: yet there is no good
fruit can be looked for without the blessing of God. As every good giving, and
every perfect gift: so also the fruit and profit of the ministry of the word
is from above, Iam. 1.17.
and comes down from the father of lights. Hence it is that the Lord says,
I create the fruit of the lips to be peace, Isa. 57.19.
peace to them that are far off, and to them that are near. The ministry of
the word cannot minister any sound peace or comfort to a distressed
conscience, nor work any other gracious effect in a man's heart, unless the
Lord give a blessing unto it. And therefore the Lord has promised to give his
holy spirit as an inseparable companion to the word, to make it effectual.
Isa. 59.2^.
My spirit that is upon thee and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, from henceforth even for ever. Nisi Deus
interiori gratia me^te^ regat atque agat nihil prodest homini omnis praedicatio
veritatis. Aug. de Ciu. Dei lib. 15. cap. 6. Psa. 139.13.16.
So that unless the Lord by his inward grace do direct and move the heart, the
preaching of the truth will do a man no good at all. It is in the ministry of
the word as it is in the procreation of children. Though the natural means
thereof be by ordinary generation: yet all man's endeavor is in vain, unless
the Lord by his omnipotent and almighty power do fashion us and give us a
form, and cover all our members in our Mothers womb? As we see by common
experience, that many married persons of sound complexions, of strong
constitutions, and able bodies do notwistanding go, Genesis 15 2.
childlesse to their graves, as Abraham complained. For this cause David says
plainly, that children are the inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb his reward, Psalm. 127.3.8. He gives them and denies them to whom he
will. And the Prophet sets a note of attention before it. Behold, as if he
would have all men to take notice of it. And therefore, when Rahel being
barren, and envying the fruitfulness of her sister, cried out to her husband
in a foolish and distempered passion, Give me children or else I dye, Jacob was
exceeding angry with her, and said, Am I in Gods stead, which has withholden
from thee the fruit of the womb? When God has shut up thy womb and made
thee barren is it in my power to open it and make thee fruitful? Genesis 30 1.2.
In like manner though the ministers of the word by Gods own ordinance be our
spiritual fathers, to beget us in Christ Jesus through the Gospel. 1. Cor.
4.15. Yet all the fruit of their ministry is the gift of God. The most
excellent and worthy minister that lives, cannot beget nor convert one soul
to God without his blessing. Sicut corporis medicamenta que hominibus
adhibentur, non nisi ijs prosunt, quibus Deus operatur salutem; qui and sine
illis medijs potest, Cum sine ipso illa non possunt: et tamen adhibentur, and
si officiose fiat, inter opera misericordiae deputatur: ita et adiumenta
doctrinae, tunc prosunt animae adhibita per hominem, cu^ Deus operatur vt
prosint, qui potuit Euangelium dare homini etiam non ab hominibus, neque per
hominem. Aug. de doctr. Christiana.
As medicines for the body, which one man applies and ministers unto an
other, do only profit them to whom God works health, who is able to work
without those means, whereas they can do nothing without him: and yet they are
used, and if it be done in obedience to Gods ordinance, it is accounted a work
of mercy: so the helps of instruction being used by man, do then profit the
soul, when it pleases God to bless them, who could give the Gospel unto
man, neither from men nor by men. We see in the matter of Husbandry, that the
seed ordinarily fructifieth in the earth by the labor of man and the influence
of the heavens: and yet experience does teach us, that though the husbandman be
never so skillful in plowing and tilling of the earth, though he observe the
most fit seasons and opportunities that may be, and though he be never so
careful in making choice of the best and purest seed: yet many times the earth
deceives his expectation Isa. 24.5. So that as the Prophet says, they sow
much, and bring in little. Hag. 1.6. Yea the heaven and the earth, the common
parents of all things, become barren, and the Sun and the Moon do loose
their operation, unless the Lord by his divine power do give to every seed
his own body, 1. Cor. 15.38. Hereupon we read that Isaak sowed corn in the
land of Gerar, and had by estimation an hundredth fold increase: but it was not
his own endeavor that caused it, but as the reason is there rendered, so the
Lord blessed him. Genesis 26.12. And therefore David says, that it is God that
visits the earth, and makes it very rich and fruitful: It is he that by his
own appointment prepares corn for men: it is he that makes the earth soft
with shewers, and blesses the bud thereof: it is he that crowns the year
with his goodness, and covers the valleys with corn, so as men shout for
joy and sing. Psalm. 65.9.10.11.13, So is it with the ministry of the word,
though the Ministers be Gods husbandmen, and though they have never so much
both skill and will to discharge their duties, as has been said, and though
the seed which they sow be none other but that immortal seed of the word of
God. 1. Pet. 1.23. yet unless it please God to make it effectual, it will
bring forth no fruit at all. And therefore the Apostle says to this same
purpose, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it is God, and God only,
that must give the increase. 1. Cor. 3.6. It is one thing to minister visible
objects to the eyes, another thing to cause the eyes to see. It belongs to
the outward teachers to minister matter to their hearers; but it appertains
to the inward Master to open the heart to understand. As it is said of Lydia,
that God opened her heart, that she attended to the things that Paul spoke.
Act. 16.14. And as the eye and the object are not sufficient to cause actual
seeing, unless the eye be enlightened: so besides the instruction of the
outward teacher, it is necessary that the blessed Sun of righteousness Mal.
4.2. do shine in our hearts by the gracious beams of his holy spirit Non
quicunque ostendit via^, praebet etia^ viaticum itineranti Aliud illi exhibet,
qui facit ne deuiet, and aliud, (...) praestat ne deficiat in via. Ita nec,
quivis doctior statim and dator erit boni quodcunque docue^it. Porro duo sunt
mihi necessaria; doceri, and iuuari. Tu quidem homo recte consutis ignorantiae,
sed si verum sentit Apostolus, spiritus adiuuat infirmitatem nostram. Bern. de
gra. and lib. arbitrio.
He that shows a man the way as Bernard says, he does not by and by furnish
him with necessaries for his journey. It is one thing to direct a man that he
go not out of his way; and another thing to help him that he faint not in the
way. So neither is every Teacher by and by the giver of the good that he
teaches. Moreover, two things are necessary for me, to be taught, and to be
relieved. Thou O man do indeed provide well for my ignorance; but if the
Apostle think aright, it is the spirit that helps our infirmities. And
therefore it is said, that when the Apostles by virtue of Christ's commission
went forth and preached every where, the Lord wrought with them and gave a
blessing to their endeauours. Mar. 16 20. Joanne operante dabat Deus qui dando
non defuit. Et nunc operantibus cunctis, humana sunt opera, sed Dei sunt munera
Optatus in Donatist. lib. 5. Where he entreats largely on this point.

Non potest munus ab homine dari quod diuinum est. ibid.


We are only instruments in the hands of God, he strikes the stroke and
works the effect, making our labor effectual in the hearts of our hearers.
There must be two Preachers to the working of grace in the heart. The Minister
to preach to the ear, and the spirit of God to apply it and bless it to the
soul. And hence it is that the preacher is not called the giver, but the
Minister of grace. Who is Paul, says the Apostle, or who is Apollos, but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? 1. Cor.
3.5. It is the Lords prerogative, which he has reserved to himself, to be the
giver of all grace, as S. Peter says. 1. Pet. 5, 10. Ita plane conuersio
animarum diuinae vocis est non humanae. Simon piscator hominum, in hoc ipsum
vocatus and constitutus est a domino: incassum tamen and ipse laborans tota
nocte nil capiens, donec in verbo domini rete iactans, comprebendere possit
multitudinem copiosam. Bern. de conuers. ad Schol.
So then we see that the conversion of souls belongs to the voice of God,
and not of man. As the Apostle Peter labored all night in fishing and caught
nothing; but when as in the word of Christ he let down his net, he
straightway enclosed a great multitude of fishes. Luke 5.5.6. So the Ministers
of the word, whom God has called to be fishers of men Mat. 4.19. may long
let down their nets and make but a bad draught, unless the Lord vouchsafe his
blessing upon their labors.

This doctrine serves, first for the Ministers, For Ministers.
and secondly 2. Cor. 2.16.
if any good be effected thereby. For as the Apostle says, Who is sufficient
for these things? 2. Cor. 3.5.
There is no man that of himself is able sufficiently to discharge his duty
in the work of the Ministry: much less is he able to make his Ministry
effectual. No, all our sufficiency in this case is of God.

And this the Apostle confesses, where speaking of his great pains in
Preaching the word, namely that he labored more abundantly then all the rest
of his fellows, he straight way corrects himself as if he had arrogated
more then became him, Yet not I, says he, but the grace of God which is with
me, 1. Cor. 15.10. And in another place he says, The weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds, 2. Cor. 10.4. All
those strange effects that were wrought by the word in the hearts of men, to
convince their consciences and to humble them, come not from the great gifts
and pains of the Minister, but it is God that makes his word thus powerful.
We read of a great wonder that was wrought by the Apostle Peter's Sermon.
Three thousand Souls were converted by it. Act. 2.41.
But it was not Peter's zeal, or learning, or any thing else in him that
wrought it, but it was Gods work. As the Apostle said of another miracle, that
was wrought by him upon the Creeple that lay begging at the beautiful Gate of
the Temple. Why look ye so steadfastly on us, Act. 3.12.19.
as though by our own power or godliness we had made this man to go? The
name of the Lord Jesus has made this man sound, etc. So he might say of this.
It was not my endeavor that converted these men, but it was the Lord that gave
a blessing to his own ordinance. And therefore; whenever we see any
comfortable fruit of our labors, let us take heed we be not lift up to
ouerweene of our selves, but let us say with David, Not unto us Lord, Psalm.
115.1.
not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory etc.

2.
Secondly, it serves to admonish us, that we do not contemn our brethren,
though peradventure their gifts be far meaner then ours. For we see by
experience, that Gods blessing is not tied to great gifts, but many times it
pleases him to work most effectually by weak and simple means, and all for
this end, that the excellency of that power might be of God and not of us, 2.
Cor 4 7. 1. Cor. 1.27.29.
as the Apostle says. Yea God many times chooses the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise, and weak things to confound the mighty things,
to the end, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence. As we see that many
a weak and wearish man begets more children, then he that is strong and
lusty: so many a godly Minister of small gifts, making a conscience of duty,
does convert more souls to God, then many a man of great and profound
learning; which is not spoken to derogate any thing at all from the gifts of
learning, which are necessarily required to the furnishing of a man with
ability for his calling, but only to admonish all those with whom the Lord
has dealt liberally that way, not to despise them that are inferior unto them
in gifts, but rather in the spirit of meekness and love to embrace them, and
give them the right hands of fellowship, Gal. 2 9.
that so they may all join together in the edification of the body of Christ.
As St. Paul though he were a man of most excellent gifts, Phil. 1.1. 1. These.
1.1. 2. These. 1.1. Call. 1.7.
no way inferior to the greatest of the Apostles: yet he thinks not scorn
to join with, in the preaching of the Gospel, Syluanus and Timotheus, that
were but Nouices, as it were, in comparison of himself.

Thirdly for the people that hear the word it serves to For the herers of the
word.
that they ascribe not that to the instrument, which is only proper to the
efficient cause; namely, that they attribute not that to the Minister which is
due to the Lord. It is a gross kind of Idolatry which many men commit in
this case, to dote of some one man more then of all the rest, and to have such
an high conceit of his gifts above others, as to place him in a manner in stead
of God. It was a fault among the Corinthians, 1. cor. 1.12.
which also the Apostle reprooueth in them, that one said, I am of Paul another
said, I am of Apollos; and a third, I am of Cephas. etc. They were too much
addicted, some to one Minister and some to another, and in that respect did
despise all the rest, and did reverence men rather then Christ himself. So it
is at this day. Such a man says one for my money, nay he for mine says
another; and so every man as his own ptiuate affections lead him, doateth of
one Minister more then another. It is true, that God seldom or never works
grace but by his own ordinance as the Apostle says. Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Romans 19.17. Gal. 3.5.
And the greater that any man's pains and faithfulness is in preaching the
word, the more likely it is that he should do good in his place: But yet
notwithstanding, whatsoever good effect is wrought by any man's Ministry, you
must turn your eyes from the man to the Father of light, from whom all good
things do proceed, as has been said. I do not deny, but that if men feel
any blessed work of grace begun in their hearts by any man's Ministry, or
if it have pleased God to make any Minister an instrument of their conversion;
they are bound in conscience to make much of that man, Phil. 2.29. 1. These.
5.23. Non famulantibus, sed inuitanti and pascenti referendae sunt gratioe.
Optatus con. Donat. lib. 5^
and to have him in singular love for his works sake; but still they must give
God the glory and praise of all. For as one says well to this purpose. The
Ministers are but Gods servants to attend upon the guests that sit at his
table. All thanks and praise is due to the Lord, that so kindly inuiteth us,
and so bountifully feeds us, and not to the Ministers whom he has
appointed to serve us.

For Ministers and people together.

Et si loquamur iustitiam Dei and gloria^ Dei quaeramus: effectum tamen ab eo
solo sperare, and ab eo postulare necesse est, vt voci nostrae suae vocem
virtutis accommodet. Ad hanc autem vocem interiorem aures cordis erigi
admonemur; vt loquentem Deum intus magis audere, quam foris hominem studeamus.
Bern. de co^uers. ad Schol.


and you that be hearers of the word, that forasmuch as all the success of
our pains in preaching, and of your endeavor in hearing, depends only upon
Gods blessing; therefore, before either we come to preach, or you come to
hear, we commend both our labors to God by prayer. [a] For though we speak
the righteousness of God as Bernard says, and seek nothing but the glory of
God: yet we must needs hope for a blessing from him alone, and we must
entreat of him alone, that the voice of his grace may accompany our voice. And
to this inward voice must you lift up the ears of your souls, and desire
rather to hear God speaking inwardly, then man speaking outwardly. The neglect
of this duty is the cause, why the word is so ineffectuall in many places, as
it is. For first, many of us that be Ministers, come to preach our selves, and
not Christ Jesus: and to vent our own gifts, and let them take wind, and not
to seek the salvation of our hearers; and therefore, God denies to work by
our Ministry. Again a number of you that be hearers come for gapeseede, to
gaze the Minister in the face, or to see the variety of men's gifts, or to
gleane up some quaint phrases and witty sentencess and not with any desire to
further your own salvation; and therefore, you go away as you come without
Gods blessing. And so the word is made fruitless and unprofitable unto you.
Whereas if we would account the souls of Gods people dear and precious in
our sight, Phillip. 18.
and long after the salvation of them all from the very heart roots, as the
Apostle says, and therefore, before we come to deliver his word, crave Gods
blessing by earnest prayer upon our labor; and if you would come to hear the
word with a desire to profit and to grow in grace by it, and for that end
would pray to God to open your hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, that you
may diligently attend to that that shall be taught, it would appear, that you
should reap more profit then by one sermon, then you do now by twenty.

Then Peter remembered etc. The Apostle Peter never came to himself, he never
began to bethink himself of the heinousness of his fact, before such time as
the Lord by the means aforesaid had moved his heart. But what did Peter in the
mean while? did he any whit further or help forward himself to repentance?
Surely he did as much as lay in him to further himself to hell. For as we
have heard, he was swearing and cursing himsele in most horrible manner that
he never knew Christ. But after that he was outwardly rowsed by the crowing of
the cock, and inwardly awaked by Christ's looking back upon him, then he
began to consider the danger of that estate wherein he stood.

From hence then we learn, Doct. The whole work of our conversion is from
God alone. Romans 9.16. Heb. 12 2.
that the whole work of our conversion is from God alone. There is not the
least endeavor in any man to further the work of grace in himself, as the
Apostle says. It is not in him that wills nor in him that runs, but in
God that shows mercy. And for this cause, our Savior Christ is called both
the author and also the finisher of our faith. Yea whatsoever good work is
wrought in any of Gods children, Phil. 1.6.
the Lord by his holy spirit does both begin and perform the same. Yea if
there be but any will or desire to do good, it is from the Lord. Phil. 2.13.
For it is God that works in us both the will and the deed of his good
pleasure. And therefore we read, Act. 2.47.
that in the Primitive Church The Lord added to the Church from day to day such
as should be saved. It was not in their power to join themselves with the
Church of God, and to become true members thereof; but it was the gracious
work of the holy spirit of God. But most fully and clearly does the Prophet
Ezechiel set out the truth of this point, speaking in the person of God. A new
heart says he will I give you, Ezech. 36.26.
and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart
out of your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my
spirit within you, 27.
and cause you to walk in my statutes etc. Where the Prophet wholly disableth
man for the work of his regeneration, and ascribes both the beginning and
progress thereof unto the Lord. For as there is not any softness in a stone,
nor the least disposition to be made soft and pliable: so in the stony heart
of man, there is no root from whence this blessed work of grace might be
produced: no inclination to good whereby it might be furthered: no faculty
wherewith it might be effected. As we were not able at the first to effect our
natural generation, and make our selves men or women: nay as our Savior
says, Mat. 5.36.
we cannot make our hair white or black; So it is not in our power to effect
our spiritual regeneration, to make our selves the sons or daughters of God.
But we must confess in both respects, Psalm. 100.2.
as David says. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves.

And for this cause the Apostle says, we are his workmanshippe created in
Christ Jesus unto good works etc. Epbes. 2.10. And this made David to pray,
Create in me a clean heart O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me. Psa.
51.10. acknowledging, that there was nothing at all in him, whereby this work
might be furthered, but God by his almighty power must miraculously create it
of nothing. Sicut in natiuitate carnali, omnem nascentis hominis voluntatem
praecedit operis diuini formatio: sic ia spirituali natiuitate nemo potest
habere bonam voluntatem motu proprio, nisi men's ipsa, id est, interior homo
noster reformetur ex Deo. Fulg de incarnat. and gra^. Christi. cap. 19.
And indeed, if the matter be well considered, the work of regeneration will
be a far more hard and difficulte work, and of greater labor, then was the
work of creation. For as David says, By the word of the Lord were the heavens
made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Psalm. 33.6. and he
commanded and they were created. Psalm. 148.5. As we see in the story of the
creation, that when God began to raise this wonderful and glorious frame of
heaven and earth, and to furnish them with variety of creatures, he did but
speak the word saying, Let there be this and that, and presently it was so.
Genesis 1. But for effecting our regeneration, there was a great deal more to
do. Christ Jesus must leave the heavens, and the glory which he had with his
Father, and be incarnate in the form of a servant, and suffer a shameful and
an accursed death, to the killing and subduing of our sins, and the efficacy
of his resurrection to the reviving and quickening of us to newness of life.

Praegrauatus animus quasi po^dere suo, a beatitudine expellitur; nec redire
potest, effusts and perditis viribus, nisi gratia conditoris sui ad
paenitentiam voca^tis, and peccata co^dona^tis. Quis enim infelicem animu^
liberabit a corpore mortis, nisi gratia Dei per Jesus Christum? Aug. de Trin.
lib. 12. cap. 11.
And to this purpose S. Augustine has many excellent sayings. The soul of
man, says he, being as it were oppressed with the own burden, is expelled and
banished from blessedness, and having spent and lost his strength, cannot
return but by the grace of his maker, calling him to repentance, and forgiving
his sins. For who can free a miserable soul from the body of death, but the
grace of God in Jesus Christ? And again, Ad malum eius prior est voluntas
hominis, ad bonum vero eius prior est voluntas creatoris eius: sieve vt eam
faceret que nulla erat; sieve vt reficiat, que lapsa perierat. Aug. de ciuit.
dei. lib. 13. cap. 15.

Si qua^do steti per te st^ti, sed qua^do cecidi per me cecidi, and semper in
luco ia cuissem nisi tu me erexisses; semper caecus fuissem, nisi tu me
illuminasses; quando cecidi nunquam surrexissem nisi tu mihi manu^ porrexisses.
Aug. Soliloqu. cap. 15.


To the evil of man his own will goes before: but to any thing that is good,
the will of his creator goes before. Whether it be to make that which was not
at all, or to renew and repair that which was lost by his fall. And in another
place. Restat vt recte dictum intelligatur, Non est volentis etc. vt totum Deo
detur, qui hominis voluntatem bonam and praeparat adiuuandam, and adiuuat
praeparatam. Nolentem praeuenit vt velit; volentem subsequitur, ne frustra
velit. Enchir. cap. 31. Act. 9.1.2.3 Prou. 30.20.
It remains, says he, that that speech of the Apostle be well understood,
It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs etc. That the whole
work may be given to God, who both prepares the good will of man that it may be
fit to be helped by grace, and also aideth it being prepared. He preuenteth him
that is unwilling that he may be willing, and follows him that is willing,
that he may not will in vain. And hereof we have very pregnant examples, both
in the unregenerate before their conversion, and also in the regenerate, when
they fall into sin after grace received. For the former, what disposition was
there in the Apostle Paul to further his conversion, till the Lord called unto
him from Heaven? was he not posting to hell as fast as he could? was he not
as opposite to God as might be? For it is said. He was breathing out
threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord. And he had
procured a Commission from the high Priest, to bind all that were of that way.
And for the latter, beside the example of the Apostle Peter in this place; is
it not evident in David, who lay a long time after his fearful sins of
adultery and murder, and never thought of repentance, at the least for the
space of three quarters of a year (for the child that was begotten in adultery
was borne, before there is any mention made of his repentance) but even as
Solomon said of the Adulterous woman, she eats and wipeth her mouth, (as
though it had never been she) and says, Prou. 30.20.
I have not committed iniquity: so did David set a good face on the matter, and
bear it out all this while, as though he had never offended. And as it is said
of Esau, that after he had sold his birthright, he rose up and went away never
considering what he had done: Genesis 25.34.
so for any thing we find to the contrary, David never felt his heart to smite
him for his sin, but slept securely in it, till the Lord sent the Prophet
Nathan, by the ministry of the word to awake his drowsy conscience.

Solomon in that excellent prayer of his desires the Lord, to bow their hearts
unto him, that they may walk in his ways, etc. 1. Kings 8.58. So that it is
blasphemous to hold, that the will of man should work with Gods grace in any
thing that is good. Indeed as they are works and actions, so they proceed from
the will of man: but as they are good works, they are only the works of
grace, as our Savior Christ told his Disciples, without me ye can do
nothing. John. 15.5. And so says David of the work of Prayer, Thou preparest
their hearts, and bendest thine care to them. Psalm. 10.17. And the Prophet
Isaiah speaks generally of all good works, Thou also have wrought all our
works for us. Isa. 26.12. And to this purpose the Master of sentences has a
good saying Paratur volu^tas hominis a Deo, and a domino gressus eius
diriguntur. Non quia hoc sine nostra voluntate agatur, sed quia voluntas nostra
nil boni agit, nisi diuinitus adiuue tur. l. 2 di 26. A.
Man's will is prepared of God, and his steps directed of the Lord, not
because this is done without our will, but because our will cannot do any
thing that is good, without Gods assistance. And Fulgentius is very plentiful
in the proof of this point. Nunquam redire velle potest ouis errans, nisi
fuerit boni pastoris inquisitione praeuenta, and humeris reportata. Fulg. de
incar. and gra. Chr. c. 22 Reuera and vt velimus, misericordiae praeuenientis
illuminamur dono; and vt curramus, misericordiae subsequentis fulcimur auxilio
ibid. cap. 18. and 19.

Gratia Christi gratis indignis ita tribuitur, vt ipsa in nobis and exordium
and profectum bonae voluntatis operetur. Ibid. cap. 1. Ne deputes viribus tuis
quod viam mandatorum Dei currere delectaris. Haec enim omnia nullatenus
haberes, nisi a Deo munere gratuitae donationis haberes. Non hoc homini dat
natura sed gratia. Fulg. epist. 6. ad Theodorum Senate. Non quisquam hominum
sieve ad cogitandum, sieve ad operandum quodcunque honu^ potest esse idoneus,
nisi fuerit munere gratuito diuinae opitulationis adiutus. Phil. 2.13. 2. Cor.
3.5. Ab ipso est initium bonae volunta^is, ab ipso facultas boni operis, ab
ipso perseuerantia bonae conuersationis. Fulg. ad Probam. epist. 4. Hominis
conatus ad bonu^ and cassi sunt, si a gratia non adiuuentur; and nulli, si non
excitentar. Bern. de gra. and lib. arbit. Spiritus sanctus est omnipotens
artifex, creans hominis ad de^u bonam voluntatem, formans affectionem, dans
virtutem, iuuans operationem. Bern. de vita solitaria Firmissime tene, diuinis
mandatis obedire neminem posse, nisi quem Deus gratia sua praeuenerit. etc.
Aug. de fide ad Pet. Diacon. cap. 29.


The wandering sheep says he can never desire to return, unless the good
shepherd prevent it by seeking it up, and lay it on his shoulders, etc. So
Bernard and Augustine etc howsoever the Papists boast that they make wholly for
them. But to the end that the truth hereof may better appear, we must
distinguish the actions of man into three sorts. Some actions of men are
natural, namely such as are common to him with other creatures, as to eat,
drink, walk, sleep, and such like. In all which it is true that man has
freedom of will: but yet so, as he is not able to do any of these things, to
any good or godly end. Yea, though men's thoughts be free, yet their actions are
not free. It is not as free for a man to do or not do, as it is to will or
not to will. And therefore, the Prophet Jeremy says, O Lord I know that the
way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to walk and direct his
steps. Ier. 10.23. The Apostle James reproves them that say, To morrow we
will go to such a City etc. and tells them that they ought to say. If the
Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that. Iam, 4.13.15. Again,
some actions of man are Moral, as all Oeconomical and Political duties, and
such like. In these he has no free will of himself to choose the good and
refuse the evil, to embrace the virtue and decline from vice, but as he is
wholly directed and governed by the spirit of God. For the mind is overwhelmed
with much darkness, the judgment is not found, the will is not cheerful, and
the strength is unable to perform any thing. So that he may say as Medea
said. Video meliora proboque, -- Deteriora sequor Ovid. Metam. lib. 7.
Splendida peccata. Romans 14 23.
I see what is good and approve it, but I follow that which is evil. If it be
objected, that the Heathen men wrought many excellent duties, and were endued
with many worrhy morrall virtues, I answer, First that the corruption of their
nature was not purged, but only inwardly restrained by the Lord, least like
brute beasts they should have been carried headlong to the destruction of
mankind. Secondly, the virtues which were in them were no gifts of nature, but
special graces of God, bestowed upon them for the good of humane society,
though they came not from the sanctifying spirit. Thirdly, whatsoever
commendable thing was in them, it was stained and blemished with ambition, and
affectation of vain glory. In a word, all their virtues and all the duties
they performed, were no better then so many glorious sins, because they were
not done in faith. For Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Last of all, some
actions of man are spiritual. Wherein we are to consider man with a threefold
difference. First as he is before his conversion. Where his will is altogether
corrupt, inclining only to that which is evil. Indeed the soul with all the
faculties thereof in respect of their essence remained sound, even after the
fall of Adam, but their strength and ability to any spiritual good is utterly
lost. To which purpose one faith very well. Peccans ille qui sine peccandi
necessitate creatus est, in eo quod animae salutem delinquendo perdidit; etiam
illa cogitandi quae ad Deum pertinent, amisit protinus facultatem Expoliatus
enim vestimento fidei, carnaliumque concupiscentiarum vulnerib^s sauciatus; sic
iacuit oppressus ditione peccati, vt nullatenus aliquod bonae voluntatis
initium habere potuisset, nisi hoc Deo gratis donante sumpsisset, etc. Fulg. de
incarn. and gra. Chri. cap. 13.
He that was created without necessity of sinning, falling into sin; as by
his fall he lost the salvation of his soul: so also he quite lost the faculty
of thinking of those things which appertain to God. For being bereft of the
garment of faith, and wounded with the wounds of carnal concupiscence: he lay
so oppressed under the dominion of sin, as he could by no means have any
beginning of a good will, but by the free gift of God. As the Apostle says,
when ye were the servants of sin you were free from righteousness. Romans
6.20. And another Lapsus homo voluntate, non aeque ex voluntate resurgere iam
liberum habit. Quia and si datum fuit voluntati posse stare ne caderet; non
tamen resurgere, si caderet, etc. Bern de gra. and lib. arbit. Libero arbitrio
male vtens homo, and se perdidit and ipsum. Enchir. cap. 29. 1. Cor. 2.14. Romans
5.6. 1. Sam. 7.3. Iere. 4.4.14. and 7.3. and 18.11. Ezech. 18.31.
Man being fallen by his own will, it was not in like manner free for him to
rise again by the same. Because, though it were granted to his will, that he
might stand and not fall, yet it was not granted him to rise again if he
should fall. For a man cannot so easily come out of a pit, as he may fall into
it. Man by his will alone fell into the pit of sin; but his will is not
sufficient to make him able to rise again. And S. Augustine, speaking of Adam,
he says that man abusing his free will, lost both himself and it. And this
is clear also in the whole course of Scripture. For beside that the
understanding is so darkened, that the natural man cannot perceive the things
of Gods spirit: the will also is wholly turned away from God, and man has no
strength at all for the performance of any holy duty. As the Apostle says,
When we were of no strength, Christ died for us. But it will be objected, that
God in many places commands us to direct our hearts unto the Lord; to break
up our fallow ground, and take away the foreskinne of our hearts: to wash our
hearts from wickedness, that we may be saved: to amend our ways and our
works, to return every one from his evil way, and to make our ways and our
works good: to make us a new harr and a new spirit, etc. Now either a man has
power in himself to do these things, or else to what purpose does the Lord
command them? he may seem to mock us, if he require such things at our
hands, as we are no way able to perform. I answer, that the Lord in
commanding these things, has no intent at all to establish free will. Neither
does he teach us what we are able to perform, but what himself may justly
exact of us. And we are bound to do them, though we be never so unable. For
there is no reason, but the Lord may demand his debt, though we be unable to
pay it.

Again the Lord urges the performance of these things for this end to show us
our weakness and infirmity, which before we knew not, and so by this means
even against our will drives us to the throne of grace, that we may find
grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4.16.
Furthermore, these precepts for the most part, are intended to such as have
the grace of God in them, whereby they are enabled to do much in the
furtherance of their own salvation. As Saint John says Every man that has
this hope in him, 1. John 3.3.
purges himself even as Christ is pure. Last of all, they are enjoined in
respect of the endeavor we should use, and the means which we should apply
our selves unto for the effecting thereof. For when a man does carefully use
those holy means which God has appointed, then he may be said in some sort
to wash himself etc. So that God does not mock us in commanding these
things, Gualt. in Zecha. Homil. 1.
but they rather mock God, that boast of their own weak and feeble strength,
and wax proud against his grace, even of those gifts which he has given them.

Secondly we are to consider man as he is in the very act of his conversion,
where in respect of the grace which outwardly preuenteth him, his will is
merely passive: he being in the hands of God, Romans 9.21.
even as the clay in the hands of the potter; for all his strengrh is
extinguished, whereby he might either prepare himself unto grace, or receive
it of himself when it is offered. For as the Apostle says, he is dead in
trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1. Colos. 2.13.
Now a dead man is merely passive in the work of his vivification, and has no
ability to stir hand or foot in the furtherance thereof, no more then
Lazarus had power to come out of the grave till Christ called him. Ioh.
11.43.44.
Yea a man is not only dead, but also stubborn and froward of himself, and
can do nothing but rebel against God till he be wrought upon by his grace.
As our Savior says No man can come to me except the father draw him, Dei est,
inquam, Dei est omne quod possumus. Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Ioh. 6.44. But yet in respect of the time, wherein his conversion is wrought,
a man is not like a stock, but while he is healed by the holy Ghost, he is
also active. In the very act of conversion the will of man is not idle, nor
without all motion and sense as a dead image, but it follows the spirit of
God that draws it for in one and the same moment, God moves and boweth the
will, and causes us to be willing indeed: but yet so, as all the efficacy of
the work is from the spirit of God, who of unwilling makes obedient, of slow
and dull he makes us run. As the Apostle says of himself, that howsoever
he did wholly oppose himself against God before his conversion: yet when the
Lord had wrought upon his heart, he was not disobedient to the heavenly
vision. Act. 29.19. Non violenta necessitate, sed insundendo suauitatem per
spiritum sanctum. Epist. P. Diaconi and aliorum ad Fulgentium, etc.
For God does not draw us by any violent necessity, but by sweetning and
softning our hearts by his holy spirit And to this purpose is that speech of
Saint Augustine Deus cuius potentie non est numerus vel terminus, and cuius
misericordia supra omnia opera eius, quandoque ex lapidibus suscitat filios
Abraha, dum duros and nolentes acquiescere cogit vt velint. Aug. in scala
parad. Ambros. de vocat. gentium. l. 2. c. 9. Phil. 4.13. Romans 8.13.
God, says he, whose power is infinite and boundless, and whose mercy is over
all his works, sometime even of stones raises up children unto Abraham,
whiles he makes them that are hard and unwilling, to consent and become
willing. Thirdly, man is to be considered as he is after his conversion.
Where because the grace of God bears rule, there is a readiness to obey and
a constancy to persevere, but still proceeding from the spirit. As the Apostle
says, I am able to do all things through Christ which strengthens me: And
exhorts us to mortify the deeds of the flesh, but not by any power of our
own, but by the spirit. And thus we see that man of himself has no freewill
to any thing that is good, nor any ability to cooperate with the grace of God.

Secondly, this doctrine serves for our humiliation and Iere. 31.18. Lament.
5.21.
Convert thou me and I shall be converted. And turn thou us unto thee O Lord,
and we shall be turned. Da domine quod iubes, and iube quod vis. Soliloq.
cap. 18.
And Saint Augustine had that sweet prayer often in his mouth. Lord give grace
to do what thou commaundest, and then command what thou will. Otherwise there
can be no good looked for in any of us. And therefore Moses makes this the
cause why the people were no more moved to repentance, by all the gracious
proceedings and administrations of God toward them in the wilderness; Deuteronomy.
29.4.
namely, that the Lord had not given them an heart to perceive, nor eyes to
see, nor ears to hear unto this day.

Doct. The remembrance of the word of God will recover a man from his sins.
Remembered the words of Jesus.] This is the last occasion of the Apostle
Peter's repentance. He remembered the words of Christ wherein he forewarned him
of his fall and withal considered that he had done accordingly; and this
wrought upon his heart to move him to repentance, which does teach us that the
remembrance of the word of God is an excellent means to recover Gods children
from their falls. This is confirmed by the testimony of the Apostle Saint
John, 1. John 3.9.
where he says, that Whosoever is borne of God sins not: for his seed
remains in him, etc. that is to say he sins not impenitently, he lies
not along in sin: though sometimes through infirmity he fall into sin, yet
the seed of Gods word always abides in him, and straightway reduces him into
the way again. And David makes the remembering of the word of God, and the
examining of a man's life thereby, an effectual means to redress his ways,
yea though he be a young man, in whom the heat of his affections is more
violent. Wherewith, says he, shall a young man redress his way? in taking
heed thereto according to thy word. Psalm. 119.9.
We read in the book of Nehemiah, that when the people of Israel had sinned
in taking them wives of the Idolatrous Nations, and had lien in that sin a
long time without repentance, Ezra that learned Scribe put them in mind of the
heinousness of their sin, Nehem. 8.18. and 9.1.2. etc.
by rehearsing to them the law of God in that behalf; which wrought so upon
their consciences, as presently they repented of the fact in sackecloath and
ashes. Yea though peradventure, while the word is in preaching, it does little
affect a man; yet if afterward, by some occasion, he can call it to his
remembrance it will stir him up to repentance. For the word (as also the
Sacraments) does not only profit a man for the present while he hears it,
but it is many times effectual afterward. And therefore, it is called
long-lasting food, the strength whereof abides with a man even all his life.
Yea as Physic, with a man takes which no great desire, nay many times even
against the stomach, does yet work profitably upon the body: So the word of
God, which a man at the instant hears with no great devotion, may afterward
be called to mind with great benefit. Adam at the first did not regard the
word of God as he should, when he told him, Gene. 2.17. and 3 11. etc.
that in what day he tasted of the forbidden fruit, he should die the death:
but afterward, when the Lord put him in mind of it again, he remembered both
what God had said, and what himself had done, and so came to repentance: 2.
Chro. 33.2. and ^ 2. King. 21.16.
Manasses thought it no sin to commit Idolatry, and to cause the streets to
swimne with innocent blood, even from corner to corner: But after God had
humbled him by captivity, the remembrance of the word brought him to a sight
of his sin, and made him seek reconciliation with God. Yea which is more;
The remembrance of the word is a notable means to prevent the falling into
sin, and not only to recover a man that is fallen. As David says, he hid
the word of God in his heart, Psa. 119.11.105
that he might not sin against him. And to this purpose he calls the word
a lantern to his feet, and a light unto his path. As a man that has a
candle and a lantern carried before him, may keep himself from falling in a
dark night: so if a man always carry the word of God before him, it will
preserve him from falling into sin. Psalm. 19.11.
And he affirms by his own experience, that the word had made him
circumspect and wary in all his ways, that he might not offend. And Saint
James says, James 1.25.
that the hearing of the word with remembrance of it does make a man a doer of
the work. The word is a wonderful means being well remembered to keep a man
in a holy awe and order, that he shall not break out into sin. Yea it is
possible, by remembering the precepts of the word, to be armed against all sin
whatsoever. As Solomon testifies at large: Prou. 2.10.11.
When wisdom, says he, enters into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy
soul. Then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee
And deliver thee from the evil way etc. 12.
And a little further, And it shall deliver thee from the strange woman etc.
And again, 16.
he exhorts to bind the precepts of the word upon our heart, and to tie them
about our neck^; That is always to have them in remembrance and before our
eyes: and he gives this reason. and 6.21.
It shall lead thee when thou walk; it shall watch for thee when thou
sleep; 22.
and when thou wakest it shall talk with thee. 23.
For the commandment is a lantern and instruction a light, 24.
etc. to keep from the wicked woman etc. Where he ascribes a singular
efficacy to the word of God diligently remembered, to preserve a man not only
from sin in general, but even from that particular sin of whoredom, the
inticements whereof are so pleasing to the flesh. So that it is apparent that
it will even break the neck of all our sins. Whereas on the contrary side
the forgetfulness of the word is the cause of all evil. When men are
forgetful hearers, as Saint James faith, and cast the word of God behind their
backs, Iam. 1.24.25. Psalm. 50.17.
no marvel if they fall into any sin. And indeed, what knowledge soever they
have of the word otherwise, yet when they fall into sin, they forget all. As
David no doubt knew well enough what a filthy sin adultery was; 2. Sam. 11.4.
yet for the present his eyes were blinded, that he had not the use of his
knowledge, and so occasion being offered he was overcome. If Zech. 53. Ecclc.
23.11.
swearers, Iere. 17.27. Nehem. 13.18.
if prophaners of the Sabbath Gal. 5.21. 1. Cor. 6 9.10. Ephe. 5.5.6.
if covetous persons, whoremasters, and drunkardes could but remember the
fearful threatenings denounced in the word against those sins, doubtless
they would never be so cruel to their own souls, as to rush so desperately
into these sins, 2. Cor 4.4.
or to continue so impenitently in them as they do. But the God of this world
has blinded their minds and for the time raced out of their hearts the
remembrance of the word, and so holds them captive in sin.

This doctrine, to make use of it in a word, Use.
does serve to admonish us, not only to be careful that the word may often
sound in our ears, but also to do our endeavor, to remember and lay up the
instructions thereof for the amendment and reformation of our lives. And to the
end we may the better perform this duty, we must often and diligently
meditate of the word which we have heard: As the Lord commanded Joshua saying.
Josh. 1.8.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein etc. A man can never perform the duties that God requires,
nor avoid the sins that God forbids, unless he occupy himself in
meditating of the word. And therefore David makes it a property of a godly
man, Psalm. 1.2.
to meditate in the law of the Lord day and night. And he says, it was his
own practice. O how I love thy law! and 119.97.101.
it is my meditation continually. And this made him refrain his feet from
every evil way. This is a notable means to confirm and strengthen the memory
that it may retain the word. Yea when the word is almost forgotten, meditation
of one piece brings in another. A Scholar though he be never so apt and
capable to conceive of his lecture as soon as his Master reads it unto him,
yet if he do not meditate of it afterward, it will profit him but a little:
so in like manner, though a man do never so rendily apprehend the doctrines of
the word; yet if he do not by meditation call them to remembrance, and, as it
were, riuet them into his mind, they will easily be forgotten. And therefore,
Psalm. 62.11.
David says that when God spoke once, he heard it twice; Namely he heard it
once in the Tabernacle from the mouth of the Minister: and by meditation at
home, caused his memory to repeat it to him again. And this should be the
practice of us all, if we desire to reap any found benefit by the word.

Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice.] Our Savior Christ being
God and knowing what should come to pass, foretold that Peter should deny him.
It was decreed before that it should so fall out, and it could not otherwise
be. Why then, may some say, is Peter to be blamed? Nay rather, why should not
his fact be excused, seeing he did no more then God had determined, and
Christ foretold? Quicquid patimu^ mortale genus, Quicquid facimus venit ex alto
Sen. Mala. 3.6. Isa. 14.27.24.
For the resolving of this question. We are to know, that it is true indeed,
that all things that are done in the world fall out by the providence of God,
and that his purposes can by no means be altered, as the Lord says. I am the
Lord: I change not. And in another place. The Lord of Hosts has determined it,
and who shall disanull it? And a little before, Like as I have purposed, so
shall it come to pass, and as I have consulted it shall stand. For as the
Apostle says, Iam. 1.17.
With God their is no variableness, nor shadowing by turning. Yea it is true
also, that seeing Gods providence is the first immutable cause of all things,
it does impose such a necessity upon all second causes, that their effects
cannot be hindered, nor the manner of doing them be changed, nor the time of
producing them be deferred. And yet nevertheless, man in all his evil
actions must needs be culpable. For it will not follow from hence that the
will of man is any way forced or compelled, but that it does willingly and of
the one accord desire whatsoever it will. For God rules and governs the will
of man according to the nature of it, and no otherwise. Now the nature of the
will is to will whatsoever it lusts, whether it be good or evil, freely and
willingly, not by constraint or against the will: for otherwise it were no
will, but a nilling tather. So that Gods foreknowledge is no cause at all of
the evil actions of men. And this Peter Martyr illustrateth by an apt
similitude. Pet. Martyr. Loc. com. clas. 2. cap. 2.
We, says he, do often stand by and behold men playing together at some
game: notwithstanding we cannot say, that the knowledge and sight which we
have of their gaming, does impose any necessity upon them; though while we
behold them in their game they do necessarily play. As therefore that
necessity does not infringe the nature of their will: so likewise the
foreknowledge and decree of God does not compel the will of man. But it will be
objected; why does not God overrule the will of man, seeing he is able, and
hinder him from falling into sin? I answer, that man indeed, who is under
the law, if he should not hinder evil from his neighbor, when it lies in
his power, should be blameworthy: as our Savior says: Mark 3.4.
that not to save life when a man has ability to do it, is to kill. But God
is above the law, and therefore, that is good in him which is evil in man. Yea
he, does it always to a good end. For he knows, that man being by nature
evil cannot but sin, unless he be prevented by the especial assistance of
his grace; and that he cannot but fall unless the staff of his spirit do
support him. Psalm. 23.4. and yet in great wisdom he suffers him to fall,
partly to declare his justice in punishing of sin, Gualt in Zech. Homil. 5.
partly, to manifest his mercy in pardoning sin, and partly, to show man his
frailty and weakness, that he may be more heedfull for the time to come. Thus
God directs the sins of the godly and the wicked to a good end, that the one
may become more wary afterward, and the other besides their meaning and
intent may execute the judgments of God. Thus was David by his adultery made
more temperat, thus was Peter by his denial made more stout in confessing of
Christ, and thus was Paul by his cruel persecutions made more fervent and
earnest in preaching of the truth. Deus sicut bonarum naturarum optimus creator
est; ita malarum voluntatum iustissimus ordinator. Vt cum male illae vtuntur
naturis bonis, ipse been vtatur etiam voluntatibus malis. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 11.
c. 17.
And to this purpose Saint Augustine has a good saying. That God, as he is
the best creator of good natures, so he is the most just orderer and disposer
of evil wills: that when they use their good natures ill, he may use their
ill wills well. Quis tam impie desipiat, vt dicat Deum malas hominum
voluntates quas voluerit, quando voluerit, vbi voluerit, in bonum non posse
conuertere? Euch. ca. 97
And in an other place. Who, says he, is so wickedly foolish, as to say, that
God cannot turn to good whatsoever evil wills of men he will, when he will,
and where he will? We must not therefore cast the cause of our sins upon
God, as though we were any whit the more excusable, because we do nothing but
what God has fore known and determined.

Judas in betraying Christ did no more then God had determined, for our Savior
says, The son of man goes as it is written of him. Yet Judas is not excused
for all that. No, Christ pronounces a woe against him, and says, it had been
good for him, if he had never been borne. Mat. 26.24. The Jews in crucifying
of Christ did no more then that which God and his counsel had determined to be
done. Act. 4.28. and 2.23. and 3.18. And yet their deed was most damnable and
accursed in the sight of God. Pharaoh in opposing himself so rebelliously and
stubbornly against God: what did he else, but that which the Lord foreknew and
fore told also to Moses and Aaron: Exodus 3.19. and 7.3.4. And yet for all that
the Lord is justly glorified in his confusion. Exodus 9.16. God has decreed,
and as our Savior Christ says it cannot be avoided, but offenses will come,
and there is a necessary use of them, for the trial of Gods elect: and yet woe
is that man by whom they come. It were better for him that a great millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the Sea. Luke 17.1.2.
So the Lord calls the army and tents of the Assyrians, Gualt. in Joel.
Homil. 5.
which he threatened to send against the Israelites, his army and his tents;
and he makes that cruel tyrant Senacharib the executioner of his word Joel.
2.11. And he calls him the rod of his wrath, and the staff of his
indignation Isa. 10.5. Whereby we see, that when God will have his judgments
executed, he uses many times the help of wicked men.

And yet they are not thereby excused, when with sword and fire they make
havoc of all. For it is their own malice that carries them to wickedness:
and the ambition, the covetousness, the cruelty or whatsoever other corruption
did set them on, is from themselves, and is not instilled into them from above.
But God in his wisdom and justice uses their malice to a good end, either to
exercise the faith of his children, or to punish the wicked. If it be objected
that they fulfill the will of God, which no man can resist, Romans 9.19.
as the Apostle says, and therefore they may seem to be without blame: I
answer; howsoever this be true: yet the actions of evil men do differ in the
end which God and they do properly aim at. And that that they do, they do
it not in obedience to the will of God, but to fulfill their own desires;
howsoever God that brings light out of darkness, directs their actions to
the glory of his name. And to this purpose the Master of sentences says well,
Videtis quia non quid faciat home, sed qua voluntate consider andum est. In
eodem facto inuenimus Deum, quo Judam Deum benedicimus, Iudam detestamur* quia
Deus cogitauit salutem nostram, Judas cogitauit pretium quo vendidit dominum.
etc. lib. 3. did. 21. C.
that we must consider in every action, not what a man does, but with what
intent he does it. We find God; says he, in the same action wherein we find
Judas; we bless God, but we detest Judas: because God intended our salvation,
and Judas intended the price for which he betrayed his master. So that a diverse
intent makes diverse actions. The like we see in Joseph his brethren. When they
sold him into Egypt, they fulfilled the will of God, for by that means the
Lord provided for his Church in the famine as Joseph says, Genesis 45.5.6.7. and
50.20. But did they intend this in selling of him? Nothing less; they only
did it in revenge, to satisfy the hatred they had conceived against him. So
that though wicked men do the will of God; yet it is both beside their
knowledge, and against their will, and therefore they are without excuse. D.
Whittakers answer to Cam^ians 8. reason.
The will of God is ever fulfilled (says Hugo de Sancto Victore) and wicked
men are not therefore excused, because the will of God is performed in them and
by them: for that they are not directed by their own will, to fulfill the will
of God, but by his secret Omnes di^^e prouidentiae seruiunt, sed alij obediunt
taquam filij, and faciunt cum ea quod bonum est: alij ligantur vt serui, and
fit de illis quod iustum est. Ita Deus omnipotens, dominus vniuersae creaturae,
qui fecit omnia, sicut scriptu^ est valde bona. sic ea ordinauit, vt and de
bonis and de malis been faciat. Et paulo post. Sic fit vt and malus homo and
malus Angelus, diuinae prouidentiae miluent, sed nesciunt quid boni de illis
operetur Deus. Aug. de agone Christiano.
providence. And in this case S. Augustine speaks divinely. All men says he,
do serve the providence of God; but some obey as children, and do with it
that which is good, and others are bound as slaves and servants, and there is
done in them that which is just. Thus God almighty, the Lord of all creatures,
who made all things, (as it is written) exceeding good, has so ordered them,
that he does that which is good, both in the good and in the bad. And a little
after. Thus it comes to pass, says he, that both evil men and evil Angels
do fight under the banner of Gods providence, but they know not what God
works by them. Besides, how could they know that that which they do is the
will of God, seeing God has commanded the contrary in his law. For not the
secret, but the revealed will of God, must be the rule of men's actions. And
therefore it is in vain to pretend the will of God as any excuse for our
sins.

So he went out,] This is the preparation whereby he addresseth himself unto
his repentance. Being now awaked, as we have heard, and brought to the light
of his sin, he presently departs out of that wicked place. There he was
first drawn to sin, and therefore, he cannot endure to tarry any longer in
it. He has now conceived such an hatred and detestation of his sin, that
he abhors every thing that had been any occasion thereof.

Doct. When men repent, they must avoid all occasions that might hold the^
still in sin.
From whence we learn, that when a man once begins to repent of any sin,
he must carefully avoid all occasions that might hold him still in his sin.
For as at the first we are of our selves very apt and prone to fall into sin
(as we heard in the beginning) so also after we have repented of our sin,
we are as prone to fall back again into it, if our care be not the greater
Vt paene extinctum cinerem si sulphur tangas, viuet and ex minimo maximus
ignis erit, etc. Ovid de remed amoris.
It is with our corrupt nature, as it is with the fire. When the fire is almost
out, that there is but a little spark left, if you put gunpowder or brimstone
or such like matter to it, it will kindle again, and easily grow to a great
flame: so when a man by the grace of God, and by daily exercise of the work of
mortification has almost subdued his sins, if he be not still careful to
avoid all occasions, they will break out again, and grow to as great an
height as before. Whatsoever it is that has been any occasion to draw us to
sin at the first, will easily prevail with us again, if we be not the
more wary and vigilant. When a man by taking cold has fallen into some
dangerous disease, and is at the last recovered of it, he will be more
heedfull ever after. So should we be in this case; and the rather, because as
well in the soul as in the body, a relapse is most dangerous. Ictus piscator
sapit. Terretur minimo penae stridore columba, Vnguibus accipiter saucia facta
tuis. Vitaret caelum Phaeton, si viueret, and quos Opta uit stulte, tangere
nollet equos. Ovid. Trist.
The burnt child (as the Proverb is) dreadeth fire. The horse that has been
plunged and foiled in some quackmire, can not easily be drawn into it again
Tranquillas etiam naufragus horret aquas. Qui semel est lasus fallaci piscis ab
hamo, Omnibus vnea e^bis era subesse putat. Ovid. de Ponto.
The Mariner that has suffered shipwreck is for ever after afraid of the
sea, even when it is most calm. The fish that has once been: wounded with the
hook, is always suspicious of the bait. -- que bellua ruptis cum semel
effugit reddit se praua catenis. Hor. lib. 2. sat. 7. Vulneribus didicit miles
habere metum. Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 10. 2. Pet. 2.20.
The beast that has once been caught, and has broken the snare, will hardly
be intrapped again.

If nature have made all creatures thus careful to prevent bodily dangers,
much more should we be careful in the case of our souls, that when once by
the mercy of God, we have escaped from the filthiness of the world, we be
not tangled again therein, least the latter end be worse then the beginning,
as the Apostle Peter says. But among all occasions of sin, there is none
more dangerous, as has been said, then evil company. For if a man forsake
not his former evil companions, they will easily prevail with him to hinder
the gracious work of his repentance, and to hold him still in his sin. And
therefore the Apostle Paul testifies of himself, that when he was converted
from his persecuting, by the heavenly vision, he did not return to Jerusalem
to the high Priests, Gal. 1.17.
for no doubt they would have befooled him, and would have labored by all
persuasions to draw him to their part again, Acts 9.19.26.
but joined himself to the disciples of Christ, that by conuersing with them
he might be the more confirmed. And so did S. Peter in this place. Now the very
company and place where he was brought to deny his Master was odious unto him.
If he had done thus at the first he had never been overtaken with so great a
sin.

This serves first for the just reproof of all those, that still. These men
may talk of repentance; but the truth is, they never came where true
repentance grew. For as he that has surfeted of any meat, will take heed
how he be too bold with it again: so he that sees the hurt that has
redounded to him by his sin, will take heed how he medleth any more with
it, or the occasions of it. As he that has been stung with a serpent, will
take heed how he treads in the green grass: so he that has been stung of
sin, Eccle. 21.2.
that biteth like a serpent, as the son of Sirach says, will be more
circumspect for the time to come; especially, if lewd companions have prevailed
with him before, he will now shun all manner of society with them. And indeed
how can a man delight any longer in his company, that has been a means to
bring him almost into hell?

I have put off my coat, Cant. 5.3.
how should I put it on? I have washed my feet, how should I defile them? by
the mercy of God I have put off the filthy rags of my sins, how should I put
them on again? I am washed in some good measure by the spirit of God from my
corruptions, why then should I defile my self any more?

(...), proripuit se Bez.
Went out.] The Evangelist Saint Mark relating his story uses a word of great
signification: as much as he rushed out of the doors, both signifying the
dislike of the place and company where he was brought to sin, Doct. We must not
stand to debate in the motions of the spirit, but presently proceed to
execution.
and also the have that he made to seek reconciliation with God. As Soon as
ever he was once awaked, as it were out of a deep sleep, and convinced in his
conscience of the heinousness of his sin, he deferreth no time to repent of
it, but runs as fast as his feet could carry him. From whence we may
observe, that when God puts any good motion into our hearts, or raises up
any good purpose or desire within us, we must not stand to debate the matter,
but must presently proceed to execution. In worldly business deliberation is
very necessary: Deliberandum diu, quod statuendum semel. Seneca.
and it is held a great point of policy to deliberate long, before a man
determine any thing. But in this case it is dangerous to stand to deliberate.
We should rather presently lay hold upon the occasion, as soon as it is
offered, and even redeem the time by godly wisdom, Ephesians. 5.16.
as the Apostle says. The reason is. First, because all delay breeds danger.
Sed mora damnosa est Ovid. Metam. lib. 11. Mat. 26.19.
This men know well enough in other things and therefore are careful to
prevent occasion: yea it is said of Judas, that when he had compacted with the
high Priests to deliver Christ Jesus unto them, he sought opportunity to betray
him. If he sought opportunity to bring to pass so devilish a purpose as this
was: much more should we seek opportunity, to effect the godly purposes that
God by his spirit works in us. Otherwise, the Devil will easily turn us out
of the way. Secondly, Qui non est hodie, eras minus aptus erit.
if we let slip the opportunity of well doing, when God offers it us, we
shall be more unapt and unfit for it afterward. The seal must be set on,
while the wax is pliable, the iron must be wrought while it is hot:
otherwise, we see by experience, that if either of these be suffered to cool
again, they wax harder then they were before. So if our hearts be once in
some measure softened by the work of Gods grace, if we suffer them to cool
again, they will not so easily receive impression, as at the first. Eccles.
5.3. Deuteronomy. 23.21.
And therefore that which Solomon exhorts in the case of vows, is generally
to be practiced in all holy purposes, and good desires; we must not defer,
nor be slack to perform them. And hereof we have plentiful examples in the
children of God. David says of himself. Psalm. 119.59.60
I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies, I made
have and delayed not, to keep thy commandments. And in another place, I will
pay my vows unto the Lord even now in the presence of all his people. and
116.14.
He would not take any days with God, but what soever good duty he had
purposed, he would presently perform it. So the prodigal son, after he had
been beaten with his own rod, and thereupon once resolved to go and humble
himself to his father, Luke 15.18.19.20.
did not debate any longer about the matter, but forthwith rose up and went his
way. And Zaccheus having a great desire to see Christ, and 19.6.
and being bidden by him to come down from the tree, it is said, he came
down hastily, and received him joyfully. The good Eunuch being once
instructed in the knowledge of Christ by Philips preaching, and finding
opportunity that he might be Baptized, would not let it slip, Acts 8.36.
but said to Philip, see here is water, what does let me to be baptized? And
Cornelius that devout captain, after that the Angel had commanded him to send
for Peter that he might resolve him in the thing wherein he doubted, did not
defer the time, and 10.33.
but sent for him immediately. Now as this is generally to be done in the
performance of al holy duties so especially in the work of repentance.
Whenever God works in us any good resolution to forsake our sins, Heb.
12.1.
we must admit of no delay, least the allurements of sin, and the subtilty of
Satan do cause us altogether to neglect it. When we once begin to think of
parting with our sins, they will entice us strongly not to leave them, they
will hang fast upon us, and embrace us, as the Iuy does the Oak, that we
shall have much ado to shake them off. Judge. 19.5.6.7.8.9. etc.
As the father in law of the Leuite that came to seek his Concubine, when he
saw him preparing himself to depart, by earnest entreaty caused him almost to
stay two days longer then he would have done. So when our sins shall
perceive that we are making preparation to depart from them, they will set
upon us to persuade us, if it be possible, to stay yet a while longer; till at
length, if we take not heed, the good motions of Gods spirit will be quite
extinguished in us. We must therefore be resolute in this case, and stop our
ears against all allurements; though never so pleasing. As Abraham's servant
that was sent to provide a wife for his son Isaak, when he had had good
success, and had well effected the business which he came for, hasted home
again to his master. And when Rebeccaes friends requested him to stay ten
days, because they were loath to part with her on the sudden, he would not
yield at any hand. No, Hinder me not, says he, Gene. 24.54.55.56.
seeing the Lord has prospered my journey; but send me away, that I may go to
my master, So should we suffer nothing at all to hinder us from returning to
the Lord by repentance; but even make have to forsake our sins upon the first
motion thereunto. Yea as the Apostle exhorts, we should even betake us to our
wings, 1. Tim. 6.11.
if it were possible, and fly away from them. As Lot was warned to have out of
Sodom, and to escape for his life, Gene. 19.15.16.17.
that he might not be destroyed in that fearful punishment of the City: so
should we make al possible speed to come out of our sins, least otherwise
persisting in them, they be the destruction of our souls. Make no tarrying
says Ecclesiasticus to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day:
Eccle. 5.7.
for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security
thou shall be destroyed, etc.

The use of this doctrine is first general, Us. 1. general
to reprove all those that are careless and negligent this way, who have many
good purposes put in their hearts by the Lord, but for want of timely
prosecuting of them, they never profitte them. As namely, to give instance in
some particulars. There are many that while they are hearing the word of God
are very well affected, they are convinced in their consciences of the truth of
it; and the sins which they hear reproved, for the present they purpose to
forsake; and the duries they hear commended, they have some desire to
perform: so that as Agrippa said to Paul, Acts 26.28.
thou have almost persuaded me to be a Christian: so they are almost persuaded
to a better course But because they follow not these good motions, but, as our
Savior says in the parable of the seed, they depart away about other
business, Luke 8.14.
when they have heard the word, therefore, they become altogether fruitless
and ineffectuall. Others there are, who when the hand of God is upon them by
sickness or some other visitation, so long as they feel the smart of the rod
upon their backs, they purpose and promise great reformation: but as soon as
ever the Lord has removed his rod, they never remember it more; 2. Pet. 2.22.
but return to their former courses, as the dog to his vomit. And herein they
deal with the Lord, as the people of Israel did, who when God brought any
calamity upon them for their sins, they presently returned, and sought God
early etc. But they flattered him with their mouth, Psalm.
78.33.34.35.36.37.56.57.58.
and dissembled with him with their tongue. For their heart was not upright
with him, neither were they faithful in his covenant. For within a while, they
turned back and dealt falsely, starting aside like a broken bow etc. And for
this cause, the Lord compares their repentance to the morning cloud, Hos. 6.4.
which though it cover the face of the heaven for a time, yet is in a moment
dispelled and scattered with the wind: and to the morning dew, which is soon
dried up with the heat of the sun, as if it had never been. Yea they are
like unto Mariners that are in danger of shipwreck by reason of some tempest.
Who because life is sweet, and a man will give skin for skin, Job. 2.4.
Jonah. 1.5. Acts 27.18.19.
even the dearest thing that he has for the safeguard of his life, as the
Devil said of Job, do cast over board even their richest wares to lighten the
ship; yea sometimes the very tackling of the ship which is most necessary for
them: but as soon as ever the storm is ceased, and the Sea is calm again,
they are sorry that they have cast out so much, and labor to recover again
something of that which they had lost. So these men, when the storm of Gods
anger disquieteth their souls, and that they think there is no way but one
with them, they pretend to empty themselves of all their sins. The swearer
makes great protestation to leave his swearing. The drunkard his drunkenness.
The whoremaster his whoredom etc. But if it please God to restore them to
their former health, it grieueth them much that they have bound themselves in
that manner, Ipsias penitenti^e agunt paenitentiam Ambros. de paenit. ^t. l. 2
c. 9.
and they recover afresh the sins which they made show to have forsaken: thus
as it were repenting of their repentance, as Ambrose says. And of this we
have a fearful example in the Jews. The Lord had brought the Chaldeans
against them for their sins, who beseiged Jerusalem with a great army.
Whereupon the people being in a strait, hypocritically, as their manner was,
humbled themselves before God, and finding that among many sins, whereby they
had provoked the Lord to wrath against them, this was one of the greatest, that
they had made of their brethren the Hebrews bondslaues, and kept them so
contrary to Gods commandment Deuteronomy. 15.1.22. Iere. 34.10.
they made a solemn covenant, that every one should let his servant and his
handmaide go free; and accordingly they obeyed and let them go. But when God
upon this their fained humiliation had sent the Egyptians to invade Chaldea,
and so had caused them to raise their seige, it is said, that the people
repented of their covenant, 11.
and caused the servants and the handmaides whom they had let go, to return,
and held them in subjection as before. This was a wretched and a woeful
repentance. And therefore if at any time our lips have promised, and our
mouth has spoken any thing to God, Psalm. 66.13.14.
when we were in affliction, as David says, let us not defer the time, but
as soon as ever God has enlarged us, let us with all speed address our
selves to perform it. It is strange to see with what great eagerness men
pursue and posecute their worldly desires. He that would be rich, I warrant
you, he foreslacketh not his time, but as it is in the Psalm, Psalm. 127.2:
he rises early, and goes late to bed, and all his life he eats the
bread of sorrow. Yea many times, men make exceeding great have, to effect and
bring to pass their sinful purposes. Their feet run to evil, and they
make have to iniquity. Yea they turn to their race, with as great violence,
Isa. 59.7. Jere. 8.6.
as the horse rusheth into the battle: They work all uncleanness even witb
gredinesse, Ephesians 4.19. Mich. 2.1.
as it were striving who shall have the maisterie in sin. And when they plot
and devise wickedness on their beds, as their manner is, it is not long before
they practice it, but as soon as ever the morning is light they go about it.
And so did that wanton damsel that daunced before Herod, and pleased him so
well, that he promised to give her whatsoever she would ask, even to the
half of his Kingdom; Mark 6.25.
when her mother had persuaded her to ask no other reward but John Baptists
head, it is said, that she came in straightway with great have, as though she
had thought every minute an hour, till she had obtained it This earnestness
that is in wicked men in this case, shall condemn our coldness and
remissness, that suffer so many good desires to be quenched in us, for want
of diligent following of them. And therefore, if we have any good purpose let
us not defer it, let us not give place to the Devil, and strangle our good
motions by profaneness, but let us immediately prosecute them, that they may
have the good effect of grace in us.

Use. 2.
Secondly more particularly, this doctrine serves to reprove all them, that
do put off the special work of repentance, though the Lord call them
thereunto, and offer them never so fit opportunity. Some because they are young
and lusty, think it too soon to think of repentance. They must yet follow
their pleasures, and take their swinge, as they call it, and afterward, when
they are old and good to nothing, then it will be time enough to turn to God.
That which Solomon spoke in jest and in derision, they all take in good
earnest. Eccles. 11.9. Verba lenta and semnolenta sunt, Modo, ecce modo sine
paulutum; Sed modo and modo non habebat modum, and sine paululum in lo^ gum
ibat. Confess. lib. 8.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes, etc. And S. Augustine confesses, that before his conversion this was his
practice. But how dangerous this is, he shows elsewhere. Dicet aliquis
iuuenis sum, faciam quod me delectat modo, and postea paenitentiam agam.
Quomodo si dicat, percutiam* me gladio crudeli, and postea vadam ad medicum de
honest. mulier.
Some man says he, will say, I am young, I will now take my pleasure, and
afterward I will repent. Which is as much as if he should say, I will wound my
self dangerously wirh a sword, and when I have done, I will go to the
Physician. And therefore, in that excellent Book of his confessions, he
speaks to all young men in his own person, persuading them not to defer
the work of repentance. Quamdiu cras cras, quare non modo, quare non hac hora
sinis turpitudinis meae. Non est creed mihi sapientis dicere viuam: sera nimis
vita est crastina, viue hodie Mar. l. 1. Epigr. 16. -- properat viuere nemo
satis. idem. l. 2. Epigr. 90. Cras hoe fiet. idem. Cras fiet, etc. -- sed cum
luxaltera venit, Jam cras hesternum consumpsimus. etc. Pers. sat. 5.
How long says he, shall I say to morrow, to morrow? why do I not now? why
do I not this hour make an end of my filthiness? yea the very Heathen Poets
have condemned this procrastination in all good purposes and would have men to
lay hold on the present time. And indeed, there is very great reason why it
should be so. For otherwise, if a man continue in his sins without repentance
till he be old, he shall find it a most difficult matter to overcome them,
partly, because they will be grown so headstrong, and so confirmed by custom,
that they will hardly be subdued. It is as easy for the Black Moore to change
his skin, and for the Leopard to change his spots, as for a man to forsake
an old sin. Ierem. 13.23. And hence it is, that young men by continuance and
long custom, make their sins of a double dye, even crimson sins, as the
Prophet says. Isa. 1.18. Yea they are like a disease in the bones, whereof if
one recover, many do rot away. And partly, because as sin gathers
strength: so we in our old age become weaker in all the faculties and powers of
body and soul, and therefore far unfit for the great work of repentance in
mortifying and subduing our sins. It is reported of Alexander that great
Conqueror, that when his Master Aristotle persuaded him to forbear the wars
till he were grown to a full and perfect age: he answered in this manner. I
fear least if I tarry till I come to that age, I shall loose the heat and
vigor of my youth. So may we answer al tentations whatsoever, whereby we
shall be persuaded to defer our repentance till we be old. And indeed
old age is a burden and a sickness it self, Senectus ipsa est morbus.
Terrent. Phor. Diog. Laert. in vita Dionis.
and therefore altogether unable to undergo so great a task as this is. Yea
the Philosopher called it the Haven of all evil, because innumerable maladies,
and cramps and aches, and sicknesses do flock thither, as into a common
receptacle. And this does Barzillai confess to David. I am this day says he,
fourscore year old, and can I discern between good or evil? Has thy
servant any taste in that I eat or drink? 2. Sam. 19.35.
Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and women? Wherefore then should
thy servant be any more a burden unto my Lord the King? He confesses, that
his age had so decayed all the powers of body and soul, as that he was utterly
disabled from attending on the King. Much more shall a man be disabled from
attending the work of grace. And hence it is that Solomon calls the days of
old age, Eccles. 12.1.
evil days. Remember now says he, tby creator in the days of thy youth,
before the evil days come. Not because they are evil in themselves, but
because of the manifold miseries that do accompany them. So that if a man
shall be careless in his youth, and think when he is old to do great
matters, to frequent the Church and hear the word etc. He may peradventure be
deceived. For many times we see the strong men, Verse 3.
that is the legs that should carry the body, do bow themselves, and wax
faint and feeble: or if their strength continue, yet the hearing decaieth, the
doors are shut without. 4.
If he say yet he will read the word privately, though he be not able to go
abroad: alas how can he do that when his sight shall fail him, when they
wax dark that look out by the windows? 3.
If he shall yet think to meditate of the word for the comfort of his soul:
alas he shall feel so many aches in his bones, so many cramps in his ioints,
and so many pains in all parts of his body, as he shall have little leisure
to think of any thing that is good. And therefore as all men would condemn
him for a fool, that having a great burden to be carried, would lay it on the
back of a poor weak beast, that has enough to do to bear up it self, and
let a stronger go empty: So likewise is it great folly in any man to exempt his
youth which is strong and lusty, from the task of repentance and to impose the
same upon his decrepit old age, which is ready to sink under the own burden
Esto, multa tibi annorum curricular esta^t, adolescens es vtique ad senectutem
victurus and senium, quid necesse habes amittere tanta tempora, perdore tanta
lucra? Nihil praetiofius tempore. sed heu nihil body vilius aestimatur.
Transeunt dies salutis, and nemo recogitat: nemo sibi non reditura momenta
perijsse causatur. Bern. declamat.
Yea if a man were never so certain, that he should both come to old age and
that it should be no hindrance to him in the work of repentance: why should
he loose such a time, and deprive himself of such advantage which his youth
offers him? It is lamentable to consider, that though nothing be more
precious then time, yet nothing is more basely acounted of. The days of
salvation pass away and no man regards it, no man considers that his time
which will never return again, does perish from him. Again, it is the
greatest injury unto the Lord that can be, for a man to consecrate the prime
days of his youth to the service of the Devil, in the pursuit of sinful
pleasures, and the dog days of his old age to the Lord. Herein men deal
with God as the people of Israel did. Who if they had ever a lame, or a
scabbed, Mal. 1.8.
or a sick beast, they would bring that to the Altar, as though any thing had
been good enough for the Lord, but all the fat and well liking they kept to
themseues. So these men reserve the flourishing days and strength of their
youth, and deuote them to their own purposes: and serve God with the rotten
bones of their old age.

Others there are, that because they are yet in health, think that they need
not repent, but may still take their pleasure in sin, and so put off the
work of repentance till they be sick and lie a dying: an hour before the
last gasp is soon enough to begin this business. Non dico saluabitur, non
dico damnabitur: It Is vero age paenitentiam dum sanus es.

Si vis agere penitentiam quando iam peccare non potes, peccata te dimiserunt,
non tu illa. Mag. sentent. lib. 4. Distinct. 20. A. Qui prius a peccatis
relinquitur quam ipsa relinquat, ea non libere, sed quasi ex necessitate
condemnat. Aug de vera and falsa paenitentia. cap. 17. Job. 21.13. and 24.24.


Saint Augustine being asked what he thought of such a man, made this answer:
I do not say he is saved, nor I do not say he is damned. But I would advise
thee to repent while thou art in health. The reason is, first because if a man
do not repent till he be weakened and disabled with sickness, his sins
forsake him, he forsakes not them. What thanks is it for a drunkard to give
over drunkenness, when he is not able to go any longer to the Alehouse? or for
the whoremaster to leave his whoredom, when he has no strength for the
performance and execution of his filthy desires? A man should willingly of
himself part with his sins even while he is able to commit them, and not by
constraint, when there is no remedy. Secondly, there is great danger that death
should prevent him before this time. For do we not see many taken away on the
sudden, before ever they look or prepare for it? They spend their days in
wealth, and suddenly they go down the grave, as Job says: and are cropped off
as an ear of corn. Have we not examples every day almost of some that go
well to bed at night, and are sound dead in the morning? and of others that
drop down by the high way side, and dye in the field? As the candle burns
bright for a time, but if one blast of wind come over it, it is put out, and
there remains nothing but a stinking snuff: so many a man flourishes for a
while, but in a moment God takes away his breath, and there remains nothing
but a filthy stink of his sins, whereof he had not repented. We may not
take upon us to determine peremptorily of such, Romans 11.33.
because the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out. But yet the case is fearful, and that which befalls one may befall
another. Death is fitly compared to an Archer: For as the Archer sometimes
shoots over, and sometimes short, sometimes on the one hand and sometimes on
the other, but at last he hitteth the mark. In like manner, death sometimes
shoots over thee, and hitteth thy superiors, sometimes he shoots short
and hitteth thy inferiors: sometimes he shoots on thy right hand and takes
away thy friends, sometimes on thy left hand, and kills thy enemies, Arist.
problem. loc. 34. Omnem creed diem tibi dilux isse supremum: Grata superueniet
quae non sperabitur, hora. Horat. l. 1. Epi. 4.
but at the last he will hitte thy self: thou know not how soon. And
therefore, it was good counsel that Eleazar the Jew gave to one that asked his
advise in this case. Namely, that a man should repent one day before his death:
and when the other replied, that no man knows, says he, the day of his
death: therefore, says he, repent to day least it be too late to morrow.

But suppose that this do not befall them, but that they dye an ordinary
death; yet for the most part there are so many hindrances in sickness,
Quoniam multa sunt quae impediunt and languentem retrahant: periculosissimum
est, and interitui vicinum, ad mortem protrahere remedium. Aug. de vera and
falsa paenitentia. cap. 17.
as a man can have but little leisure for this business. For besides the
painfulness of the disease, which is no small impediment in this case, a man
shall be so accombred with taking order for his worldly estate, and so vexed and
disquieted with the weeping and wailing of his friends, that he can little
attend to think of his soul. And therefore Saint Augustine says well, that
seeing there are so many pulbackes to hinder a man at that time, it is most
dangerous and near to destruction, to put off the remedy until death.

But be it, that he prevent much of this trouble in his health, by setting
his house in order before hand as the Prophet Isaias commanded King Hezekiah.
2. Kings. 20.1. yet many times by the judgment of God upon him, he dies
suddenly, bereft of all sense and feeling of his sins, and of all comfortable
assurance of the pardon of them, and possessed with dullness of heart and
drowsinesse of spirit. As one says well. Saepe moriens obliuiscitur sui, qui
dum viueret oblitus est Dei. 1. Sam. 25.37.38.
A man oftentimes forgets himself when he lies a dying, that forgot God
while he lived. Thus was it with Nabal, his heart dyed within him, and he was
like a stone: he had a fair time as we say, he lay sick ten days after
before he dyed. But how could he repent, when his heart was dead before? Our
times are full of such. And I fear me, it is the case of a number of those,
whose death the world so much admireth and commends, that they dye like
lambs. I wish they dye not rather like blocks, giving no comfortable
testimony of their faith in Christ, or sorrow for their sins. And such are
they that David speaks of, that there is no bands in their death, Psalm. 73
4.19.
but they depart as meekly or as still as a child in the cradle, and yet for all
that he says, they are suddenly destroyed and horribly consumed. Yea our
Savior has taught us, that a man may have good words in his mouth and call
upon God, and yet go to the Devil. Mat. 7.22.23. Last of all, though he
escape all these dangers, yet who can tell whether God will hear him when he
cries at the last gapse or no? Iustum est, vt a Deo contemnatur moriens, qui
Deum omnipotentem contempsit viuens. Prou. 1.24.28. Quid enim quod differas? An
vt plura peccata committus? Ambros. de penitent. lib. 2. cap. 11.
For is it not a just thing, that God should contemn him in his death that
contemned God almighty in his life? And has not the Lord threatened in plain
terms, that because he has called, and men refuse, and has stretched out
his arms and none would regard: therefore they shall call and cry upon him,
even till their hearts ache, and he will not hear them? And therefore, let us
not defer this so gracious a work, but presently address our selves to
repent of our sins: otherwise the longer we put it off, the more we shall
increase the number of our sins.

But notwithstanding all that has been said, it is strange to see how the most
men labor to confirm themselves, and to harden their hearts in their sins:
And all because God is merciful. It is true indeed that God is rich in mercy.
Ephesians. 2.4. Yea his mercies are over all his works. Psalm. 145.9. And therefore
if men would make a right use thereof they should rather be led to repentance
thereby, then any way settled in security Romans 2.4. For as Bernard says
well, Quae mayor iniquitas, quam vt inde a te creator contemnatur, vnde plus
amari merebatur? Quae mayor iniquitas, quam cum de potentia Dei non dubitas,
quinte destruere possit, qui condere potuit: confisus tamen de multa eius
dulcedine, qua speras eum nolle vindicare cum possit, malum pro bonis, odium
pro dilectione retri buas? Certe si talis est qualem putas, tanto nequius agis
si non amas, etc. Ab sit tamen ab eius perfectione, vt quod dulcis est, iustus
non sit; quasi simul dulcis and iustus esse non possit. cum mel or sit iusta
dulcedo, quam remissa: imo virtus non sit dulcedo sine iustitia. Bern. de
gradib. humilitatis
what greater iniquity can there be then that thy creator should for that be
contemned of thee, for which he deserved more to be loved? What greater
iniquity can there be, then that seeing thou doubtest not of Gods power, but
that he that made thee, is able to destroy thee: yet thou trusting in his great
mercy, whereby thou hopest that though he can, he will not punish thee, do
render him evil for good, and hatred for his good will. Surely, if he be
such a one as thou imaginest, thou dealest so much the more lewdly, if thou
do not love him. And if he suffer any thing to be done against himself,
rather then he will do any thing against thee; what malice is it in thee, not
to spare him, who spares not himself in sparing thee? But far be it from
his perfection, that as he is merciful, so he should not be just, as though
he could not be both just and merciful together: especially considering, that
mercy is better when it is just, then when it is remiss: yea mercy is no
virtue without justice. Quanto duitius Deus expectat vt emendetis, tanto
grauius iudicabit si neglexeritis. Aug. de vanitate saeculi.
Yea the longer that God in mercy expects thine amendment, so much the more
grievously will he punish thee if thou neglect it. Deus quantum patris pietate
indulgens and bonus est, tantum iud cis maiestate metuendus est. Cyprian. Sermon.
5. de lapsis.
For look how indulgent and gentle the Lord is in the kindness of a Father,
so much is he terrible in the majesty of a Judge. Parauit calum, sed parauit
and tartarum. Parauit refrigeria, sed parauit etiam aeterna supplicia. Parauit
inaccessibilem lucem, sed parauit etiam perpetuae noctis vastam aeternamque
caliginem. idem. lib. 2. Epist. 7.
And as he has prepared heaven, so he has prepared hell. As he has
prepared a place of comfort, so he has prepared also eternal torments. As he
has prepared the light which none can attain unto: so he has prepared also
the vast and eternal mist of perpetual darkness. To this purpose agrees
that saying of Saint Augustine. Multum delectat omnes peccatores, quia
misericors and miserator dominus, etc. Sed si amas tam multa initia, tunc ibi
and vltimum quod ait and verax. Si enim nihil aliud diceret, nisi misericors
and miserator dominus, etc. quasi iam conuerteres te ad securitatem and
impunitatem, and licentiam peccatorum, faceres quod velles, etc. Et si quis te
been admonendo obiurgaret, obsistere impudenti front, Quid me terres de Deo
nostro? ille misericors est, etc. Ne talia homines dicerent, vnum verbum
addidit in fine, quod ait and verax, and excussit laetitiam male prasumentium,
and induxie timore pie doletium. Augu. de december chordis. Heb. 10.32. and 12.29.
Gal. 5.22.23. Job. 39.16.17.18
It is very pleasing, says he, to all sinners, that the Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger etc. as it is Exodus 34.6.7. But if thou love so many
beginnings, fear that which he says at the last, that he is true also. For if
he should have said nothing else but merciful and gracious etc. thou would
straight fall to security, and promise to thy self impunitie, and take
liberty to sin, and to do what thou will etc. And if any man should
admonish and reprove thee, thou would resist with an impudent forehead and
say, why do you terrify me with our God? he is merciful etc. Least men should
speak in this manner, he has added one word in the end, where he says, that
he is true. Whereby he has shaken off the joy of evil presumption, and has
brought the fear of godly sorrow etc. Yea as the Scripture has highly
extolled the mercy of God to repentant sinners, so it has fearfully set out
his rigor and severity against the impenitent. It is a fearful thing, says
the Apostle, to fall into the hands of the living God: and our God is even a
consuming fire. There is nothing so cold as lead, and nothing so scalding if it
be heated: there is nothing so blunt as iron, and nothing so sharp if it be
sharpened: there is nothing so calm as the Sea, and yet in a boisterous weather
there is nothing so tempestuous. So likewise there is nothing so merciful as
God, and yet if he be provoked, nothing so terrible. Whosoever will live in
sin and yet dream of mercy, he deceives himself. For as there is no law
written against them that have the fruits of the spirit; so there is no Gospel
written for them that bring forth the fruits of the flesh. A presumptuous
person may be fitly compared to the Ostrich, which lays her eggs in the
earth and makes them hot in the dust, as Job says, and when she goes from
them, she takes her marks by the seven stars. Afterward when she would
return, she looks to the star, and under it seeks them; but it being
removed in the mean while, she cannot find them, and so her eggs are
trodden under foot and broken by wild beasts, so that she seldom brings
forth any young. So a sinner that presumes too much of Gods mercy, sometimes
by the instinct of the spirit has some good purposes to do well, but he
quickly departs and leaves them, presuming that by the mercy of God he may
return to them again when he list: but while he deferreth to prosecute
those good purposes and to bring them to effect, Christ withdraws his mercy
from him, and so they are trodden under foot by the Devil. And therefore it is
good to keep the golden mean between the mercy and justice of God, Proinde
diligentes misericordiam Dei, and metuentes iustitiam, nec de remissione
peccatorum desperemus, nec remaneamus in peccatis, scientes quod illa omnium
debitae sit exactura aequitas iustissimi iudicis, quae non dimiscrit
misericordia clementissimi redemptoris August. de fide ad Petrum Diacon.
that loving the one, and standing in awe of the other, we may neither
despair of the forgiveness of our sins, nor securely continue in them:
knowing that the equity of a most just Judge will exact all those sins of
all men, which the mercy of a most kind redeemer has not pardoned. Indeed the
Lord is long before he punish, but yet forbearance is no quittance Raro
antecedentem scelestu^ deseruit pede paena claudo. Horat. li. 3. ode. 2 Psalm.
140.11. and 50.21.22. Ezech. 18.21.22
and it is seldom seen, that punishment is so lame, that it cannot overtake a
sinner. Evil says David, that is the punishment of sin shall hunt, and
pursue like a bloudhound, the wicked person, and bring him to destruction. And
howsoever the Lord many times sees and says nothing, yet in the end he will
reprove sinners and set in order before them the things that they have done.
But they have Scripture to allege for their warrant in this case. For the
Devil has made them wise to their own destruction. Has not God, say they,
promised, that at what time soever a sinner does repent of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, he will put all his wickedness out of his remembrance? Yea
there are many that have never a word of Scripture besides, which yet have this
sentence at their fingers ends, for they make it the very Necke-verse of their
souls. It cannot be denied, but the saying is true: for it is the holy word of
God. Omni homini in hac vita potest vtilis esse paenitentia, quam quocunque
tempore homo egerit, quam libet ini quus, quam libet annosus, si toto cord
renunciauerit peccatis praeteritis, and pro ijs in conspectu Dei, non solum
corporis, sed etiam cordis lachrymas fuderit, and malorum operum maculas bonis
operibus diluere curauerit; omnium peccatorum indulgentiam mox habebit. Nunquam
peccanti indicta esset pro peccatis deprecatio, si deprecanti non esset
remissio concedenda. Aug. de fide ad P. Deacon.
And without all doubt, repentance may be very profitable for every man in
this life, which at what time soever a man shall perform, though he be never
so wicked, and have never so long continued in his sin, if with his whole
heart he renounce his sins past, and in the sight of God shed for them the
tears not of body only, but of his soul, and shall endeavor to wash away the
stains of his ill deeds by good works, he shall straightway obtain the pardon
of all his sins. For God would never have enjoined a man to crave the
remission of his sins, if he had no purpose to grant it. [c] But as God is true
in his promises to such as do repent: so is he also true in his threatenings to
impenitent sinners. And Qui verus est in promittendo, verus est etiam in
minando. Aug. de vera and faals. paenit. cap 7
though he have promised pardon to him that repents: Firmissime tene, and
nullatenus dubites, neminem hic posse hominem paenitentiam agere, nisi quem
Deus illuminauerit, and gratuita sua miseratione conuerterit. Aug de fide ad
Pet. Diaconum. cap. 28. 2. Tim. 2.24.25. Jere. 31.18. Lament. 5.21. Psalm.
80.3.7.19. Romans 9.18.
yet he never promised repentance to him that continues in his sins. Neither
is it in any man's power to repent when he will. No, as all other good gifts
came down from above from the Father of lights, so repentance also is his
gift. Qui promisit paenitenti veniam, non promisit peccauti penitentiam.
And we are to believe it as an article of our faith, that no man can here
repent, unless God enlighten him and convert him by his free mercy. And
therefore the Apostle exhorts Timothy, to suffer evil men patiently proving
if God at any time will give them repentance etc. And for this cause the Church
of God does so often use this prayer, Convert thou me, and I shall be
converted. Turn us again unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned. Turn us
again O Lord God of hosts etc. And as repentance is Gods gift, so is he a most
free giver, he is not tied to any man. But he gives it, as it pleases him
self. For he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. And as
Esau could not obtain the blessing which once he contemned, though he sought
it with tears. Heb. 12.17.
So if a man contemn the means of repentance in his health, it may be he
shall not obtain it when he lies a dying. But there is (say they) one example
in the Scripture, of the thief on the cross, who had spent all the course of
his life in sin, Luke 22.43.
and yet repented at the last gasp, and was received to mercy. But alas, one
swallow makes not summer. And of one example without a precept nothing is to
be concluded. The Lord in great wisdom, that men at the last gasp might not
altogether despair, has left one example of extraordinary mercy in this case,
and he has left but one, that no man should take occasion to presume. And yet
such is the perverseness of our nature, that this one, (though but one in all
the Bible, and that an extraordinary one, and that for this one many a thousand
have perished) serves to encourage us to looseness of life. What folly is
this against all sense and reason to set our selves in a way wherein so many
have miscarried? Would not all men condemn him of madness that should go
about to spur his Ass till he speak, because Balaams Ass did once speak?
Number. 22.28. Josh. 10.13. 2. King. 20.11.
or him that should think to have the Sun in the firmament either to stand
still, or to go back again, because it did so to Ioshuah and Hezekiah? So it
is as great madness in any man, to harten himself in his sin by this one
example. And if we mark it well, we shall find in this one, for that little
time that he lived, more excellent good works, then many of us perform in all
our lives. For he confesses his sins, and earnestly prays for pardon of
them. He shows a marvelous strength of faith in Christ, that he did
acknowledge him to be his Savior and a King, when he was in the lowest degree
of his humiliation, even when he hanged upon the Cross. He reprooueth his
fellow-theefe for blaspheming of Christ, and patiently submits himself to
his deserved punishment.

These and many other notable fruits of faith appeared in this Convert even in
this short time, whereby it is likely, that if he had lived, he would not have
been inferior to any of the Saints. But because God has never made any such
promise, that a man may repent at his own pleasure, Multos solet serotina
paenitentia decipere. Aug. de vera and falsa paenitentia. cap. 17.

Vit vt fiat fructuosa, non sit sera. Aug. in Psalm. 52. Psalm. 32.6. 2. Cor. 6.2.


, and because late repentance is seldom true repentance: therefore it is good
for every man to lay hold of repentance, whenever God offers any means
thereof. The scripture gives us no day at all in this case, but always urges
the present time. There is indeed an acceptable time, as David says, and a day
of grace. But the Apostle tells us, it is presently to be embraced. Now says
he, is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, and it may be either
now or never. And therefore, the Prophet exhorts saying, Seek the Lord while
he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Isa. 55.6.
Is there a time then when the Lord will not be found? and is there a time when
he will be far off from men? yes doubtless, there is a time when God will
absent himself as the Prophet Hosea says, Hos. 5.6. etc. Prou. 1.28.
They shall go with their sheep and with their bullocks to seek the Lord;
but they shall not find him, for he has withdrawn himself from them. And
therefore, to conclude this point, as we desire to find the Lord favorable
unto us in our greatest necessity: whenever he puts into our hearts any
good purpose to repent of our sins, let us with the Apostle Peter in this
place presently address our selves to put it in execution, least if we defer
the time, the Devil by his subtle sleights do circumuent us, Romans 2.5.
and hold us still in our sins, and so harden our hearts that we cannot
repent.

And wept bitterly.] This was an outward sign of his sorrow, expressing the
inward grief of his heart. No doubt he called to mind the heinousness of his
sin, and aggrauated the same, both by the former familiarity he had had with
Christ, and the continual kindness wherewith he had embraced him, and also
with his own unthankfulness in shamefully denying so good a Master. Whereupon he
is so affected as if Christ Jesus should for ever reject and cast him off. If
there had been neither Devil nor hell to take vengeance of him for his sin:
yet his heart at this time was so touched, as he could not but grieve. Now the
greatness of his grief appears by this, that there is no mention of any
words that he uttered, but only of his tears Curae leaves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent. Senec.
he was so overwhelmed with sorrow, that it stopped the course or passage of
his speech, and only manifested it self by his bitter weeping whereupon S.
Ambrose says, Jnuenio quod fleuerit, non inuenio quod dixerit. Recte plane
sleuit and tacuit, quia quod de fleri solet, non solet excusari: and quod
defendi non potest, ablui potest. I^auat enim lachryma delictum, quod voce
pudor est confiteri. Ambros. Sermon. 46.
I find that Peter wept, but I find not what he said. And well did he weep,
and hold his peace, because that which uses to be lamented cannot be excused:
and that which cannot be defended, may yet be washed away. For tears do wash
away the fault, which a man is ashamed to confess with his voice. And
therefore the Apostle Peter here Mittit legatos pro suis doloribus lacrymas.
Aduocatione sunguntur ex imo pectore prolati gemitus, dolorem probantes
commissi criminis and pudorem. Cypria l. 2. Ep. 7.
sends forth his tears as Ambassadors of his sorrow, his sighs fetched
forth of the very bottom of his heart do plead for him, bewraying both his
sorrow and shame for the crime he had committed. And standing thus affected, if
he might have gained all the world, he would not have done the like again.
Where we have the lively picture of a true penitent person. He that unfeignedly
repents does lament and bewail his former sins, Doct. The picture of a
true penitent person.
and for ever after conceiueth such an inward hatred against them that he
utterly forsakes them. And therefore repentance was thus described by the
ancient Fathers, namely Mala praeterita plangere, and plungenda iteru^ non
committere. Amb.

Anteacta peccata flere, and fleda non commit. Greg.


that it was nothing else, but for a man to bewail his sins past, and to
commit them no more. And indeed these two are the most essential parts of true
repentance. First then (to speak somewhat of them both) there is required a
sorrow and a grief for sin. And therefore, the Lord exhorts his people, to
turn to him with fasting and with weeping and with mourning. Joel 2.12.
Repentance must be accompanied with weeping and mourning. And when the Apostle
had so sharply rebuked the Corinthians, for not censuring the incestuous
person, and proceeding against him according to the quality of his fault, their
hearts were thereupon possessed with godly sorrow. 2. Cor. 7.9.10. Concerning
tears we are to know that they are accounted additions and necessary
appendices of repentance: and they are very profitable for the enforcing of our
prayers Lacrymae tacita quodammodo preces sunt. veniam non postula^t, and
merentur; causam non dicunt, and misericordiam consequuntur. Ambr. sermon. 46.
yea they are of themselves secret and silent prayers. They do not crave, and
yet they obtain the pardon of sin: they plead not a man's cause and yet they
obtain mercy Humiliu^ fletus magnus est concupiscentiae carnalis interitus.
Lacrymae quae ex compunctione veniunt, inimicu^ vincunt. Fulg. ad Probam.
epist. 4. Aret. proble^. loc. 34. de panite^tia.
Yea they help much to the mortifying of the flesh, and ouercoming the
tentations of the Devil. And they are profitable also by their example, in
that they are a good means to stir up others to do the like. But yet they
are not always tokens of true repentance, because they may be, and are many
times in hypocrites, as well as in Gods children. As we see Esau shed abundance
of tears, and cried, Hebr. 12.17. Gene. 27.38. and yet never repented of his
profaneness. Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 10. cap. 10.
Besides we see by daily experience that tears often come from other causes.
And sometimes from grief and sorrow, when the humors of the head are as it were
wrung with a sudden cold, and so tears are forced out of the eyes: som^imes by
sudden joy, which loses the passages and pores about the eyes and so makes
way for tears. Sometimes impotent persons when they cannot have their wills,
for very anger fall to weeping, And sometime, they that are tender hearted,
will weep with beholding the miseries of others. But they only are true
tears, which flow from a man's eyes for his sins.

Now this mourning and sorrowing for sin must be serious and in good
earnest; not only before others as hypocrites Addidit and lacrymas tanqua^
mandasset and illas Ovid. Metam lib 6. Si quia adest, iussae prosiliunt
lacrymae. Mart. lib. 1. Epi. 34. Plus ostentatio doloris exigit, quam dolor.
Quotusquisque sibi tristis est? C^arius cum audiuntur gemunt; and taciti
quietique dum secretum est, cum aliquos v^derint, in fletus nouos excitantur.
Senec. lib. 16. epist. 99. Zech. 12.12.13.14. Luke 7 37.38.
do, who in the presence of others have tears at command, but never mourn
alone by themselves. Such tears are counterfeite, like the tears of an Onion,
Lacryma nihil citius arescit Eras. adag.
and they of all other are soon dried up as the saying is. But hearty sorrow
and true tears love a secret place. That which our Savior Christ says of
fasting and prayer, that it should be done in secret, that our Father which
sees in secret may reward us openly. Mat. 6.6.18. is true also in this case.
And therefore the Lord speaking of the great mourning and sorrow that should
possess men's hearts for their sins, they shall mourn every family apart,
and their wives apart. And we see Peter here went out into some solitary place
to weep, he would not weep in the high Priests house before them all, for
they would have scoffed at him, but he betaketh himself into such a place,
where he might do it most freely. I do not deny, but that Gods children
many times do weep in the presence of others, but it is because the abundance
of their sorrow is such as they cannot otherwise choose. As the woman that
washed our Savior Christ's feet, came into the Pharisees house, and wept
before all that were at table. And in public humiliation, when the Church
meets together to prevent or turn away some judgment of God, there is
qublique and open weeping. But especially, when a man is alone, his tears have
full scope. Then he pulls up the sluices and floodgates of his eyes, and
guiueth them free passage. As we see in David, who wept not so much in the day
time, when he was among others, but when night came, that he was alone in his
bed, then he wept so abundantly, that he watered his couch with his tears.
Psalm. 6.6.
And that good King Hezekiah, lying sick on his bed, though he could not go
from those that stood about him, Isa. 38.2.3.
yet it is said, he turned his face to the wall, that he might weep as
privately as he could, Indeed, it is a true saying, though it were spoken
with a profane mouth Ille dolet vere, qui sine test dolet. Mart. lib. 1
Epigr. 34.
he sorroweth ttuely, that has no witness of his sorrow: no witness I say,
but God and his own conscience.

Again we must not think that a little sorrow, or a few tears will serve the
turn. But we must have great measure of grief, and with Peter in this place,
we must weep bitterly Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer, defleamus. Alto
vulneri diligens and longa medicina non defit: paenitentia crimine minor non
sit. Cypri. Sermon. 5. de lapsls.
Look how grievously we have sinned, (...).
so greatly should we bewail our sins. A deep wound must have a large
plaster: and our repentance must not be less then our fault. It is true, it
is no matter of merit for a man to weep more or less. We may say in this case
as the Apostle says of meats. It is not our sorrow that makes us acceptable
to God. 1. Cor. 8.8. But yet much sorrow is a token of great repentance, and on
the other side, where there is but a little sorrow, there is but a little
repentance. And therefore S. Augustine has described repentance Est
paenitentia quaedam dolentis vindicta, puniens in se quod dolet commisisse. De
vera and sal. paenit. cap. 8. 2. Cor. 7.11. Magis cord fundendae sunt quam
corpore. Fulg. ad Probam. Epist. 4. Joel. 2.13.
to be a certain kind of revenge, whereby a sorrowful man does punish that in
himself, which it grieueth him to have committted. And Saint Paul says, that
revenge is one of those blessed fruits, that do accompany true repentance,
even a cruciating of all the body, and a sobbing to make the heart to ache, that
the tears that a man sheddeth in this case, may seem to come from the heart,
rather then from the body. And hence is it that the Lord calling the people to
sorrow for their sins, does not require some light sorrow, or some small
measure of grief, but such a sorrow, as should even rent their very bearss.
And David says, that a man's heart must be contrite and broken, Psalm. 51.19.
even beaten to powder, as it were with godly sorrow, or else his repentance
will never be acceptable to God. This is not only required, but has also
been practiced by Gods children for other men's sins. 2. Pet. 2.7.8.
Righteous Lot had his soul vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked
Sodomites. And the Prophet cries out in like manner. My leanness, Isa. 24.16.
my leanness; woe is me, the transgressors have offended, yea the
transgressors have grievously offended: he did so grieve at the transgressions
of the people, that he beecame exceeding lean withal, as the doubling of the
word imports. The Phrophet Jeremy likewise is full of passion in this
behalf. Iere. 4.19.
Sometimes he cries out as if he were in great perplexity. My belly, my
belly, I am pained, even at the very heart: my heart is troubled within me, I
cannot be still etc. and 9.1.
Sometimes he wishes that his head were full of water, and his eyes a
fountain of tears, that he might weep day and night etc. and 13.17.
And he tells them, his soul shall weep in secret for their pride, and his
eye shall weep and drop down tears. Psalm. 119.139.
And David says, that his eyes did gush out with rivers of water, Luke
19.41.42.
because men kept not the law. Yea our Savior Christ himself wept for
Jerusalem, bewailing the stubbornness of the people, that would not be
reclaimed: yea which is more; the Lord had absolutely forbidden the Priests in
the law, Leuit. 21.10.11.
that they should not mourn upon any occasion, no not for the death of their
Father and Mother, but they must even overcome their own natural affection in
that case. And when God had fearfully slain Nadad and Abihu, and 10.2.6.
the sons of Aron with fire from heaven, for offering strange fire upon the
Altar, Aron is commanded, that for his life, he shall not mourn, nor show
any token of sorrow for them. And yet mark, they that might not weep for any
worldly matter, Joel. 2.17.
are commanded not only to weep, but even to howl and cry for their own
sins and the sins of the people. If this be required of us for other men's
sins, much more must we strive to a great measure of sorrow for our own
sins. Our sins should be our greatest sorrow. Nothing in the world should
come so near our hearts as they. And therefore, the Lord says, that when men
are once brought to a true sight of their sins they shall mourn for them,
even as one that mourns for his only son, Zech. 12.10.
and be sorry at one is sorry for his first borne. As nothing more wounds
the heart of a tender father, then to loose his only son, the Image of his
name, and the hope of his house: so nothing should pierce the heart of a man so
deeply, as the consideration of his sins. And hence is it, that all the
penitentiaries in the Scripture, are not brought in with a sigh or a tear or
two, but with exceeding great sorrow, to give us to know, that slender sorrow
in repentance is but hypocrisy. The people of Israel that lamented after the
Lord for their sins are said to have powered out buckets of tears, 1. Sam.
7.2 7.
as it were, unto the Lord. Psalm. 6.6.
And David says, that he wept in such abundance, as he caused his bed to
swim and watered his couch with his tears. In both which places, though
there be an Hyperbolicall excess of speech, (for it is not possible for men to
fill buckets with tears, nor to cause themselves to swim in their beds) yet
it signifies that there was an exceeding great and unspeakable measure of
grief Cura, dolorque animi, lacrymaque alimenta fuere. Ovid. Met. li. 10
Again he says, his tears were his meat, day and night. Psalm. 42.3. And in
an other place, he says, he was bowed and crooked together, and made even
black with mourning all the day, Psalm. 38.6.
he was naturally of a very good complexion, ruddie and of a good countenance
and comely visage: 1. Sam. 16.12.
but his continual mourning had so changed bim, as if he had been disfigured
with sickness. Isa. 38.3.
And good Josiah, that his very heart did melt within him for grief. And that
poor penitent woman in the Gospel, 2. King 22 19. Luke 7.38.
shed such plenty of tears, as she washed our Savior Christ's feet with them;
And indeed it is no small measure of sorrow that is sufficient in respect of
the greatness of our sins. For if we had an hundred eyes, and should weep
them all out; and if we had a thousand hearts, and they should all break a
sunder with remorse and sorrow for our sinnnes, it were too little, Lacrymae
nobis doerunt, antequam causae dolendi. Senec. de breuit. vitae.
and we should sooner want tears, then matter of mourning.

Neither must this sorrow be only for fear of punishment. For such kind of
sorrow proceeds from self love and may be in the reprobate. As we see in
Saul, Ahab, Judas, and others. In regard whereof, the Lord told the Jews that
when they fasted and humbled themselves, they did it not to him, neither did he
approve it. Zech 7.5.
But this sorrow must only be for the displeasure of God. And therefore, the
Apostle calls it godly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7.10. (...).
or a sorrow according to God; namely, such a sorrow as respects no other
thing but this, that a man has by his sins displeased and offended so good a
God, and so merciful a Father. And indeed, Estque pati paenam quam meruisse
minus. Ovid. de Ponto.
to an ingenuous nature, it is a greater grief to deserve, them to suffer
punishment. As appears plainly in the example of David, and other of Gods
children. But we shall have occasion to speak more of this point when we
come to entreat of the repentance of Judas.

Last of all, this sorrow must not be for a time, Stella in Luc. 22.26.
but it must be perpetual. Stella reports of the Apostle Peter (upon what
ground or by what authority I know not) that in all the rest of his life, it
was his manner, to rise out of his bed every night at the crowing of the cock,
and to spend the time till morning in prayer, weeping so abundantly, that his
face was withered with tears. Whether this be true or no, it is not much
material. But howsoever, we are to know, that forasmuch Est paenitentia
assidue peccantibus, assidue necessaria. Aug. de vera and falsa panit, cap 8.
as we sin every day, therefore repentance is necessary every day. Quid
praeter plorare restat? quid nisi semper dolere in vita? vbi enim dolor
finitur, deficit and paenitentia. ibid cap. 13.
And indeed what can a man do in regard of his manifold sins but weep and
mourn all his life? for where sorrow cease there repentance fails. Sit
paenitentia continua and amara comes aetatis meae. Aug. de contrit. cordis, in
oratione ad finem. Psalm. 6.6. Iere. 9.1.
And therefore, let us make repentance a continual and sorrowful companion
unto us through our whole life, as David did: who did not only weep now and
then for his sins, but it was his continual practice. Eeuery night he caused
his bed to swim. And the Prophet Jeremy wishes that he could weep day and
night for the sins of his people. Much more (no doubt) would he do it for
his own sins.

And as there is required this sorrow for sins past and present so there must
be also a forsaking of sin for the time to come. As we do not read, that
ever this Apostle denied his Master any more after this, but as it is evident
in the Acts, he was most bold and constant in confessing him and his truth,
even to the beardes of the greatest enemies thereof. It is not sufficient for
us to be inwardly sorrowful, but withal we must put away our sins, and
testify the inward repentance of our hearts by the outward reformation of our
lives. Frustra dolemus praeterita, nisi iusta accedat emendatio. Aretius.
proble. loc. 34. de paeuit.
Nay it is in vain for us to bewail our sins past, unless there follow a
due amendment afterward. As Bernard writ to Eugenius the Pope Non ambigo te
quoque ista deplorare, at frustra istud, si non and emendare studueris. Bern.
de Considerat l. 1
I make no question, says he, but thou bewailest these things, but that is to
no purpose, unless thou do also labor to reform them. Vera confessio and
vera paenitentia est quaendo sic paenitet hominem peccasse, vt crimen non
repetat. Bern. de cons. aedif. ca. 53.
And therefore, he describes true repentance, to be this; when a man so
repents that he has sinned, as he will do so no more. And in his
meditations he has a sweet saying to this purpose Verus penitens semper est
in labor and dolor. Dolet de praeteritis, laborat pro futuris eauendis. Sic
plangit commissa, vt non co^mittat plangenda. Jrrisor enim est and non verus
paenitens, qui adhuc agit quod paeniteat. Sergio vis esse verus paenitens,
cessa a peccato, and noli amplius peccare, quoniam inanis est paenitentia, quam
sequens coinquinat culpa Meditat. cap. 4.
A man, says he, that truly repents, is always in labor and sorrow, he
is sorrowful for his sins past, and labors to take heed of sin to come,
he does so bewail the sins he has committed, as he will no more commit
things that are to be bewailed. For he is but a mocker and not truly penitent,
that still does that whereof he repents. If therefore thou will be a true
penitent person, cease from sin, and sin no more, for that repentance is
vain which after-sinnes do defile. Si permanent opera, frustra voce assumitur
paenitentia. Mag. sentent. lib. 4. Did. 15. G.
Yea so long as a man's former evil deeds do remain, it is in vain for him
to talk of repentance Qui agit penitentiam, non solum diluere lacrymis debet
peccatum suum, sed etiam emendatioribus factis operiro and tegere delicta
superiora, vt non ei imputetur peccatum. Ambros. de paenit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
For he that repents must not only with tears wash away his sin, but
also by amending of his life, he must cover and hide his former
transgressions, that they may not be imputed unto him. Qui tundit pectus, and
non corrigitur, solidat peccata, non tollit. Aug. de discipl. Christiana.
Otherwise, if a man thumpe himself on the breast in token of grief, and is
not reformed, he confirms his sins rather then takes them away. And this
does Solomon affirm when he says, that he that confesses and forsakes his
sins, shall have mercy. Prou. 28.13. And therefore, though Samuel saw that
the Israelites were very sorrowful for their sins, and lamented before the
Lord, yet he further enioyneth them to put away their strange Gods from among
them. 1. Sam. 7, 2.3. And the Apostle Peter, seeing the people even pricked and
wounded in their hearts with sorrow for their sins, is not satisfied with
that, but exhorts them to amend their lives Act. 2.37.38. insinuating, that
without this, their sorrow might be hypocritical. And the King of Nineveh,
proclaiming a public fast, to auert and turn away the judgment threatened by
the Prophet, does not only command them to cry mightily to God, but withal,
that every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is in
his hands. Jonah. 3.8. And indeed if a man might continue his former sinful
course and yet satisfy God with a few tears, who would ever forsake his
pleasure? It were the sweetest thing in the world, for a man to live in sin.
But to mourn, and weep, and pretend sorrow, and yet to retain a man's sins
in his right hand is to mock God. But God will not be mocked, as the Apostle
says. Gal. 6.7. Paenitentiae remedium ptocati sit, non peccandi incentiuum.
Vulneri enim medicamentum necessarium est, non vulnus medicamento: quia propter
vulnus medicamentum quaeri^tur, non propter medecamentu^ vulnus defideratur.
Ambr. de paenit. lib. 2. cap. 9. Isa. 58.3.4.5.6.
Repentance and sorrow for sin should be a remedy against sin, and not a
provocation to it. As a medicine is necessary for a wound, and not a wound for
a medicine; for the medicine is sought for by reason of the wound, but the
wound is not desired because of the medicine. And therefore when the Jews
began to brag of their fasting and outward humbling of themselves, as though
God had been beholding to them for it, the Lord does utterly reject the same,
because, howsoever they humbled themselves outwardly, yet they continued to
oppress their brethren as cruelly as ever they did. And therefore, he
persuades them, that if they would have their fasting to be acceptable to
God, they must loose the bands of wickedness, and take off the heavy burdens,
and on the contrary side do works of mercy. So that we see there must be a
forsaking of sin and an outward change and reformation of our life, or else
our sorrow will not be available.

Neither must we think it sufficient for us to forsake some sins, and retain
other some: but we must endeavor to forsake all. Si vellet dominus ex part
peccata reseruari, habenti septem daemonia, manente vno, proficere p^tuerat sex
expulsis: expulit autem septem, vt omnia crimina simul eijcienda doceret.
Legionem etiam ab alio eijciens, neminem reliquit ex omnibus qui liberatum
possideret, ostendens quod si etiam peccata sint mill, oportere de omnibus
paenitere. Aug. de ver. and falsa paenitent. cap. 9. 1. Sam. 15.3. 1. Pet.
2.11. Collos. 3.5.8. Leuit. 14.8.
If the Lord would have had part of our sins reserved, he might have done
much good to the poor woman that had seven Devils, to have cast out six and
left but one. But he cast out seven; to teach us, that all our sins must be
abandoned. And when he cast forth a legion out of another he left not one of
them all to possess the party: still giving us to understand, that if a man
have a thousand sins, he must repent of them all. Whatsoever sin it is
that a man lives in, though it be never so sweet and pleasant, though never
so profitable and gainefull, though of never so long continuance, he must
avoid it. When God sent Saul in expedition against the Amalekites, he gave
him a strait charge, that he should destroy all that pertained unto them, and
that he should have no compassion on them, but slay both man and woman, both
infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both camel and ass. So when we
begin to subdue our sins, those cursed Amalekites, which fight against our
souls, we must spare none, how dear soever, but put them all to the sword,
both small and great. We must mortify all our earthly members, and cast away
all things whatsoever are displeasing unto God. In the time of the law, the
Lord commanded the Leper, that when he was cleansed, he must shave off all his
hair. He must not suffer one old hair to grow, for fear of infection. In
like manner, a man that sets himself seriously to repent, he must not
retain any one of his former sins. As David says, that they that are truly
godly, Psalm. 119.3 and 101.4.
do work none iniquity, none at all: And he professes for himself, that
he would know none evil. That is, he would no approve or give liking to any
sin. And great reason there is, why it should be so. For first, even one
sin that a man continues in with delight, infecteth and marreth all his good
actions, as a little scarre staineth the beauty of the fairest face, Eccles.
10.1.
and a few flie-blowes causes the sweetest confection of the Apothecary to
stincke and putrify. Again as one wound or one disease may be deadly, as
well as twenty: so one sin that a man lives in without repentance, may be
damnable to his soul, Gal. 3.10.
as well as an hundredth.

This doctrine serves first, to stir us up to labor for Solomon says, that
a stone is heavy, Prou. 27.3.
and the sand is weighty etc. but sin is heavier then them both. David that
felt the weight of his sins, complains, Psalm. 38.4.
that they were a weighty burden, too heavy for him to bear; Yea that they
lay upon his soul like a mountain of lead and made him go bowed and crooked
very sore. And in an other place, 6. and 40.12.
he says, his sins did so oppress and sway him down, as he was not able
to look up. Yea our Savior Christ inuiteth all them that labor and are
laden; Implying, that where sin is rightly felt, it is a heavy and a
wearisome lode. And no doubt this was it, Luke 18.13.
that made the poor Publicane express such tokens of grief and shame for his
sins, when he durst not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote his
breast, saying: O God be merciful to me a sinner. Aug. de vera and falsa
poenit. c. 14.
And indeed, if a man shall consider the quality of his sin, and aggrauate
it by the circumstances of time and place, and by his continuance in it, and
shall call to mind, upon how light temptation he was brought to commit it, and
how often he has iterated the same, he cannot choose but even groan in godly
sorrow under the burden thereof. Non laborat exonerari peccato, cui non videtur
nimium. Aug. ibid. cap. 2: Quanto magis quis intelligit mala sua, tanto amplius
suspirat and gemit. Aug. de contritione cordis.
Otherwise, if a man be not thus conceited of his sin, he will never sorrow
for it, nor sigh to be disburdened of it. He that shall think his time to be
as light as a feather, and never sees any hurt that comes by it, no marvel
if it never grieve him. Secondly, without sorrow for sin there can be no
true repentance. It is in vain for men to say, they repent every day they
rise, and yet never show any token of remorse. It may be upon some occasion
they may cease the committing of sin, but till their hearts be broken with
sorrow; Genesis 37.28. and 42.21.
they never repent of it. Joseph's brethren had left their cruelty toward their
brother for many years, yet they never repented of it indeed, till by his
rough handling of them in Egypt, they were brought to the sight of their sin,
Sam. 11. and 12
and touched with sorrow for the same. And David though he had given over his
adultery, yet he never repented of it, before Nathan awaked him by denouncing
the judgment of God against him. Yea such as are destitute of godly sorrow,
are so far from repenting of their sins, that whenever any occasion is
offered, they are ready to fall into them again, though in some carnal
respect for a time they have forborne them.

Thirdly, without this sorrow there can be no sound comfort: we must never
look to feel comfort in the forgiveness of our sins, unless withal we
have our hearts possessed with sorrow for committing of them. The Lord will not
impart the least drop of his mercy to any, which have not first been
baptized with the baptism of their own tears. There were never any of Gods
children thoroughly comforted, but they were first humbled. For God is not like
a foolish Physician, that will apply a medicine, where there is no disease: nor
like a foolish Surgeon, that will lay a plaster, where there is no sore. But
the conscience must first be wounded with a sense of sin, Hos. 6.1.
before the Lord will power in the Oil of his mercy, to heal the same. Mat.
9.12.
For as our Savior says, They that be whole need not a Physician, but they
that are sick. And therefore he promises ease and refreshment, only to such
as are weary and laden with the burden of their sins. Et 11.28.
David first with bitterness of heart confessed his sins, before Nathan gave
him any hope of the pardon of them. 2. Sam. 12.13.14.
And they that were converted by Saint Peter's Sermon, were first pricked in
their hearts with remorse for their sins, before the Apostle ministered one
word of comfort to them. Zech. 13.1. and 12.10.
The Prophet Zechariah says, that there shall be a fountain opened for sin
and uncleanness. But who are they that shall have the benefit of it? only such
as do mourn exceedingly for their sins. As there is no sin so great but
by repentance and godly sorrow it is pardonable: so there is no sin so
little, but without repentance it is damnable. Aut continui dolores cruciabunt
poenitentem vitam meam, aut cruciatus aeterni vexabunt puniendam ammam meam.
Necesse est, peccatorem flere, vel hic, vel in futuro. Aug. de contrit. cordis
in oratione. Psalm. 51.17.
Either continual sorrows must afflict a man's penitent life, or else eternal
torments shall vex his damnable soul. And of necessity a sinner must weep
either here or elsewhere.

Last of all, this godly sorrow for sin is most pleasing and acceptable unto
God, as David says, The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit; a contrite
and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Whereupon St. Augustine
says, Intucamur que madmodum vbi Deum dixit nolle sacrificium ibidem Deum
ostendit velle sacrificium. Non vult ergo sacrificium trucidati pecoris, sed
vult sacrificium contriti cordis. De ciuit. Dei lib. 10. cap. 5. Isa. 66.2.
Psalm. 56.8. Apoc. 21.4.
Let us consider in what sense: where he has said that God will have no
sacrifice, in the same place he shows that God will have sacrifice. He will
not then have the sacrifice of a slaughtered beast, but he will have the
sacrifice of a contrite heart. And indeed, this is the chiefest sacrifice of
all other. And therefore the Lord has promised especially to have respect to
him, that is of a contrite heart. Yea the Lord takes such pleasure in a man
thus affected, as there is never a tear falls from his eyes in remorse for
his sins, but presently he puts them in his bottle, and at the day of
judgment he will wipe all tears from the eyes of his children. And therefore
we must labor to be sorrowful, and not suffer any sin to escape us
without some remorse.

Secondly, this doctrine serves to reprove them that are Siccoculum genus,
pumiccos oculos habent, nequeunt lachrymam exorare vt expuant vnam modo. Plaut.
in Pseudolo. Act. x. scae. 1.
so dry eyed that they cannot grieve for their sins, nor wring out one tear
of true repentance for their misdeedes. Howsoever in other matters they have
tears at command, and in any worldly cross or calamity, they take on and
weep, as Rahel did for her children, and will not be comforted. Mat. 2.18.
Isa. 22.4. yet in this case, when they should mourn for their sins, every
tear is as big as a millstone: there is no remorse, no compunction, nor touch
of heart at all. Deucalio^ va. cuum lapides iactauit in orbem, vnde homines
nati durum genus. Virg. Georg. lib. 1.
No their hearts are as strong as a stone, and as hard as the nether millstone,
as Job speaks of Leuiathan Job 41.15. they cannot sorrow. Gualt. in Zech.
7.12. homil. 14.
As the Adamant is of such an invincible hardness, that it cannot be softened,
neither with the hammer, nor with fire, and thereupon it has the name in the
Greek tongue: so the hearts of these men are so hardened, and made past
feeling with the deceitfulness of sin, that the word of God, which is
compared both to a hammer, and to fire, cannot work upon them. Ier. 23.29.
This is a most fearful estate, if men had grace to discern it. For there is
no arrow of all Gods quiver more dangerous then hardness of heart. It is
incident to all men to sin: but it is only peculiar to reprobates, not to be
moved for their sins. Peccata prae oculis habeo nec gemo, erubesce^da video,
nec erubesco, dolenda intueor, nec doleo, quod est mortis signum and
da^nationis indic^u^. Membrum enim quod dolorem no^ sentit, mortuum est, and
morbus insenfibilis est incurabilis. Bern. Meditat. cap. 12.
For a man to have his sins before his eyes, and not to grieve for them; to
see shameful things and not to be ashamed; to behold lamentable things and
not to sorrow; is a sign of death, and a token of damnation. For the member
that has no feeling is dead, and the disease that is insensible, is past cure.
Many do glory and boast, that they never felt any thing yet that came near
their hearts. But this, if they could see it, is a worse sign unto them, and
more prodigious, then if a blasing star hanged over their heads, or if an
Angel from heaven should pronounce them to be accursed. Ira Dei est non
intelligere delicta, vt sequatur paenitentia. Cypr. l. 1. Epist. 3.
For it is the greatest token of Gods anger that can be, for a man not to
understand his sins, that he may repent of them. It is a lamentable thing,
to see many weep more for the loss of a horse, or a cow, nay for a dog,
then ever they did for their sins. If we can sigh, and groan, and mourn in
outward calamities: what a shame is it that we cannot weep for our sins? I
do not deny, but that some are of that nature, that they can hardly weep for
any thing. And I doubt not but such may repent soundly without tears. Satis
durus est cuius mentis dolorem oculi carnis nequeunt declarare. Sed sciat
culpabiliter se durum, qui deflet damna temporis, vel morte amici, and dolore^
peccati lachry^^^non estendit. Non v^que est et q^s ^e excuset, non habere
fontem lachrymarum, qui vnquam lachrymis ostendit dolorem temporal^am. Aug. de
vera and falsa poenit. cap. 9.
But if ever a man can weep for any thing, he may shrewdly suspect his
repentance, if he cannot weep for his sins. But most of all are they to be
reproved, that are so far from sorrowing, that they rather laugh both at
their own and other men's sins; As Solomon says of the wicked fool, that
makes a mock of sin. Prou. 14.9. that it is a pastime to him to do
wickedly. Prou. 10.23. and that he rejoices in doing evil. Prou. 2.14. Yea
they take themselves to be graced by their sins, and boast of them, as if it
were for their credit. They put on pride as a chain as the Scripture says,
meaning, that as a proud man glories in his gold chain, so they glory in
their sins. Thus did the King of Babylon rejoice in his cruel oppression.
Gualter ibid. homil. 4.
Hab. 1.15. Now this must needs be an infallible token of desperate and
incurable malice, when as men are not content to commit sin, but besides, do
glory in them, and seek to gain reputation thereby. Which affection the
Prophet David reprooueth in Doeg, that cursed Edomite. Psalm. 5.2 1.
by boastest how thy self, sairh he, in thy wickedness, O thou man of power
etc? This is a sinful boasting; and to glory in this manner, is to glory in
that whereof a man might rather be ashamed. And all such rejoicing as the
Apostle says not good. Yea woe be to them that laugh in tbis manner, 1. Cor.
5.6.
for the time shall come, when they shall wail and weep. Luke 6.25.
Yea they shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of mind. Isa.
65.14.
And they that now make but a jest of their sins, shall one day be so
confounded with fear and horrible dread, Apoc. 6.16.
as they shall cry to the mountains and rocks to fall upon them, and hide them
from the wrathful presence of him that sits on the throne

Last of all, this doctrine serves to reprove those that meats they are
loath to swallowe all down at once, least they should loose the relish of it;
and therefore, they hold a little under the tongue, Job. 20.12.
as Job says. So they are loath to forgo the pleasure of all their sins at
once; and therefore that which has been most sweet unto them, Acts 5.2.
they retain still. As Ananias and Saphira kept back part of the price; so
they keep back part of their sins. 2. Kings 5.15.
And with Naaman the Syrian, they say God be merciful to us in this thing:
they must needs have a dispensation for one sin or other. They deal with
God in this case as Saul did when he went against the Amalekites: 1. Sam. 15.9.
he destroyed a great part with the edge of the sword, but he spared Agag the
King, and the better sheep, and the oxen, and the fat beasts, and the lambs,
and all that was good etc. but every thing that was vile and naught worth that
they destroyed. So it may be, they will destroy some of their sins that they
set naught by, but those that are pleasant and delightsome, or fat and
gainefull, them they retain and cherish still: yea even they that pretend to
empty their hearts of all their sins, yet do not deal so sincerely as they
should. Saul would have persuaded Samuel that he had done Gods commandment
in destroying the Amalekites. 1. Sam. 15.14.
Yea says Samuel, have thou so? What means then the bleating of the sheep
in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? So a man may hear the
bleating of many oaths, and the lowing of many cursed speeches even from them
that would seem to be most reformed. But let us not deceive our selves. For
unless (as has been said) there be as well a renouncing of sin, as a
seeming to sorrow and grieve for sin, we never yet came where true
repentance grew.

And thus we have heard the repentance of the Apostle Peter; and as in his
fall we have seen the Image of a greiuous sinner, so in this we have seen
the picture of a true Convert. Many will fall with Peter and other of Gods
children, but they will not rise with them by repentance. These men deceive
themselves: such examples as this will do them no good. Thou see that Peter
was as ready to repent of his sins, as he was to commit them. Let me say to
thee as our Savior Christ said to one in another case, Luke 10.37. Ipsi Petro
statim dimisit, quia amarissime sleuit. Et tu si amarissime fleas, Christus ad
te respiciet. culpa discedet. Ambros. Ser. 46. Luke 13.3.
Go and do thou likewise: then may the comfort of this example appertain
unto thee. If thou can weep bitterly with Pettr, and forsake thy sins as
he did, then God will have mercy upon thee as well as upon him. Otherwise,
that sentence of our Savior Christ remains true, Except ye repent ye shall
all perish.

Now howsoever there be not any plain story of Peter's repentance, either in
the Gospels, or in the Acts, besides this mention of his; tears yet it is most
certain, that he did truly and unfeignedly repent. Our Savior assured him of
it before his fall, when he said: I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not and when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren. Luke. 22.32. Again as
here he denied Christ thrice: Quia dominum tertio negauerat, tertio
confitetur: and quoties culpam delinquendo contraxerat, toties gratiam
diligendo conquirit: Qui ante lacrymas praeuaricator extitit; post lacrymas
pastor assumptus est, and alios regendos accepit, qui prius se non rexit.
Ambros. ibid. Mark 16.7.
so after his resurrection he confesses him as often. And he that before
became a reuolter, is now made a Pastor of the Church. And the woman to whom
the resurrection of Christ was first made known, are commanded by the Angel
to go and tell Peter by name, that as he was most afflicted by reason of his
sin, so he might be most comforted. Besides, the holy Ghost has used him as
a penman in writing the sacred Scriptures, which he would never have done, if
he had continued impenitent. And therefore let our repentance be unfeigned as
his was, and we shall obtain the pardon of our sins as he did.

THE REPENTANCE OF IVDAS.
MAT. 27.3.4.5. 3 Then Judas which betrayed him, when he saw that he was
condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver
to the chief Priests and Elders.

4 Saying, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood. But they said, what
is that to us? see thou to it.

5 And when he had cast down the silver pieces in the Temple, he departed, and
went, and hanged himself.


WE have handled before the repentance of the Apostle Peter, in whose
conversion we have seen a notable token of Gods mercy toward repentant
sinners. We are now to entreat of the repentance of the traitor Judas: in
whose wretched end we have a fearful example of Gods wrathful judgment
against wicked hypocrites.

In the former chapter, the Evangelist has declared the obstinate and wilful
malice of this damnable traitor; namely how first of all he conspired with
the high Priests, Verse. 14.15.16.
and compacted with them for a sum of money to deliver his Master
treacherously into their hands. And afterward when our Savior made it known
to his disciples, that one of them should betray him, how impudently he carried
himself not once blushing at the matter, Verse. 25.
but setting as good a face on it as any of the rest: and lightly passing by
the good admonition that our Savior gave him, not suffering it to prevail
with him to repentance, or to bring him to any detestation of his fact. Verse.
47.
And last of all, how he came as the Captain and leader of that rabble of
soldiers that were sent to apprehend him, Verse, 49.
and how with a false kiss, in token of frie^dship, he betrayed him into their
hands. And now in this chapter, he sets out his miserable end, well
beseeming so vile and wicked a life. And he describes it very diligently.
First, because it serves to illustrate and set out the innocence of our
Savior Christ, and also, that it may be an example to others, wherein it may
appear, what an end they are to look for, that are not afraid for love of
money to betraye the known truth. And therefore, it shall not be unprofitable
thoroughly to discuss that which the Evangelist has written concerning Judas.
In whose repentance there are many good things to be seen, though it want
the chief and principal; namely, faith in Christ Jesus: which only, if if it
had been added, we should scarce have found so notable an example of
repentance in all the Scriptures. For in outward appearance it excels the
repentance of Peter by many degrees.

But for our better direction in the profitable handling of it let us consider
in it.

Two general parts.
1. His repe^ta^ce where. 1. The circumstances of it, viz. 1. The person
described. 1. By his name Judas. 2. By the hainousnes of his sin that
betrayed him. viz. Jesus.
2. The time, when it was too late. viz. When he saw that he was condemned:
2. The parts of it, which are three. 1. His contrition: He repented himself.
2. His confession, which is first in order, though set after. And it is. 1.
Propounded. viz. he confessed his particular sin. I have sinned in betraying
innocent blood. 2. Amplified, by the answer of the high Priest. What is that
to us? See thou to it.
3. His satisfaction, where. 1. He brought again the money he had received. 2.
When they would not take it, he cast it down in the Temple.


2. His miserable end, where. 1. His preparation to it: He departed. viz. into
some secret and solitary place. 2. The manner of it. He hanged himself.

Judas.] This is the first thing to be considered according to the order
propounded, to wit, his name: Judas which was one of the twelve.

Which affords unto us this first instruction, namely, Doctrine. No outward
thing can make a man a good Christian with out inward sincerity.
that no outward thing can make a man a good Christian, without the inward
sincerity of the heart. It is not a man's calling, though never so divine and
honorable; it is not his company, though never so godly; it is not his
learning, though never so great; it is not his civil honesty, though he carry
himself so as no man can justly blame him; it is not any other privilege in
the world, that can commend a man to God, unless withal he be sincere and
sound hearted. Judas here had all these, and yet we see he is a damnable
hypocrite. For his calling he was an Apostle, as St. Peter says, Act. 1.17.
He was numbered with us, and obtained fellowship in this ministration. A
calling more honorable then any other in the Church of God, Gal. 1.1.
because the ordination was not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father. His company was such as for godliness could not be matched
in all the world: for he was conversant with Christ and his Disciples: his
learning such as he was a Preacher. For he was sent with the rest, Luke
9.1.2.6.
and went and preached as well as any of them. Last of all, his carriage was
most civil, for howsoever he had a false heart aganist his master, yet he
dissembled his treason so cunningly, as it could not be discerned: for when our
Savior Christ had told his Disciples that one of them should betray him, they
were all so far from suspecting of Judas, that they rather misdeemed
themselves. Mar. 14.19. Religionem simulabat in facie, quam non habebat in
mente sanctitatem praetendebat in vest, quam alienabat a cord: soris agnus in
publico, intus lupus in occulto ^oris Discipulus Christi, intus Discipulus
Diaboli. De coena Domini. sermon. 3. Ier. 7 4.9.10.11.14.15. Genesis 4 3.4.5. Mar.
6.20. etc.
Master is it I, says one: Master is it I, says another? but no man had so
much as an evil thought of Judas. So true is that which Bernard says of him:
he counterfaited religion in the face, which he had not in his mind: he
pretended holiness in his apparel, which was far from his heart: without he
was a Lamb in public; but within he was a Wolf in secret: outwardly he was
the Disciple of Christ, inwardly he was the Disciple of the Devil. The
Scripture is full of examples to this purpose. The Israelites thought
themselves far in Gods favor, because they had the outward service of God
amongst them, they made their boast. The temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, etc. yet because in hypocrisy they nourished many grievous sins, and
made the house of God no better then a den of Thieves; therefore the Lord
threatens to reject them, and to cast them out of his sight, as he had done
their brethren before them. Kain was as forward in offering sacrifice as Habel,
but because he did it not in sincerity, therefore the Lord had no regard,
neither to him, nor his offering. Herod seemed to respect John Baptist, and to
be so far in love with his preaching, as he entertained him (as some think)
for his household Chaplain: yet because he would not forsake his incest, he is
branded for an hypocrite. Mat. 25.1.^.
The foolish Virgins were as forward to meet the Bridegroom as the wise; but
because their lamps were not furnished with oil, they were rejected. Mat.
22.11.12.13.
That guest that wanted the wedding garment, came as readily to the marriage as
any that were invited, and shufled himself among them, as though there had
been nothing amiss in him. But as soon as the King came in, he presently
discovered his hypocrisy, and punished him accordingly. Mat. 3.9. Job. 8.39.
Act. 13.46.
The Jews boasted much of their privilege, that they had Abraham to their
Father. But because they gloried only in the bare name and naked title of
Abraham, and would not do the works of Abraham, therefore they were cast off,
and the Gentiles received into favor. Act. 5:1.2.
Ananias and Saphira made as great a profession of Christianity, as any in the
Primitive Church, and were as ready to sell their possession for the relief of
the poor, as any of the rest: but because they did it not from a single heart,
but dissembled and lied unto the holy Ghost, therefore the hand of God was upon
them in a fearful manner. Simon Magus seemed to believe the Gospel, and to
be as desirous to be baptized as any other: yet because his heart was not right
in the sight of God, Act. 8.13.21.
the Apostle Peter told him, he had neither part nor portion in that business.
All these examples, and many more that might be produced, do sufficiently
confirm the truth of the doctrine propounded, that nothing in the world but a
sincere and upright heart can commend a man to God.

To make use it of then. It serves first, for the just reproof of all those
that flatter themselves in respect of an outward profession. But alas it is
not that which will serve the turn. This is no true note of a good Christian.
But rather as our Savior said in an other case, ye shall know them by their
fruits. The Devil will suffer a man to hear the word, to receive the
Sacraments, and to perform any outward service unto God: If he can but fill
their hearts with hypocrisy, he desires no more. Hence is it that so many
walk disguised, counterfeiting to be that they are not, loving the vizard,
rather then the true face of a Christian. They do ill and profess well. By
outward ostentation they seem to be good, but by deed and action they are
too bad. Aliud habet animus, aliud resonat sermo. Optatus. lib. 1. Aliud cord
occultat, and aliud voce denuntiat. Cypr. lib 1. epist. 2
They harbor one thing in their heart, and utter another in their speeches.
Sub Christiana professione viuunt, and Christi praecepta mananifeste peccando
contemnunt. Fuco iustitiae iniquitas tegitur. Fulg. Epist. 3. ad Probam.
They live under a Christian profession, and yet by open sinning they contemn
the precepts of Christ. They cover their iniquity with the counterfeit color
of righteousness. Religionem quam praetendunt in verbo, non ostendunt in
facto. Bern. de caena dom. Ser. 3
They pretend Religion in word, but do not show it in deed. Malti in
Christiano vocabulo gloriantur, and perdite viuunt passionem enim Christi and
annun tiant prositendo, and ma^e agendo exhonorant. Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib.
16. cap. 2.
Many glory in the name of a Christian and yet live licentiously, for they show
forth the passion of Christ by their profession, but dishonor it by their
action. Comptus in verbo, turpis in facto Bern. de co^sc aed. ca. 3^.
Their words are glorious, their deeds are infamous. Int^oisum turpis
speciosus pe^e decor^. O^id. Forts candidi, intus sordidi: verba sanctorum
habent, vitam sanctorum non habent. Bern. de ordine vitae. Gal. 3.27. Psalm.
115.5.6.7. Joh. 2.25. Mat. 23.25.27.
They have a fair outside and a foul inside, they have the words of Saints,
but they have not the lives of Saints. Hypocrites are the Apes of Gods
children. There is no virtue which the child of God has in truth and
sincerity, but the servant of the Devil will make show of it, and counterfeit
it in hypocrisy. In their countenance they will appear very modest, in their
speech grave, in all their behavior sober and temperate. They will counterfeit
meekness, humility, chastity, and many excellent virtues: But if a man could
look into their hearts, he should see they have not put on Christ Jesus, as
the Apostle says but the Devil rather. They may fitly be resembled to
Banckcrupts, who wanting substantial wares to furnish out their shoppes
withal, do fill up the vacant places with goodly painted (but empty) boxes.
So these having no substance of religion to commend themselves to the Church of
God, do yet make a flourish with shadows of holiness. They are like the
Idols that David speaks of: They have mouths and speak not; they have eyes
and see not. They have ears and hear not; they have hands and touch not,
they have feet and walk not. etc. Our Savior Christ, that best knows what
is in man, compares them to platters that are clean on the outside, but
within are full of bribery and excess; and to painted sepulchers, which
appear beautiful outward, but within are full of dead men's bones and all
filthiness. They are like apples of Sodom, which seem very fair to the eye;
but if a man crush them in his hand, there is nothing but cinders and ashes,
woeful monuments of the fearful overthrow of that place. They are like the
Ostridges, which have very goodly wings, as though they could fly aloft: but
such is the grossness, and heaviness of their bodies, that they cannot raise
themselves from the earth. In a word, they are like many trees, which, whiles
they grow, seem to be very straight and sound timber: but when they are cut
down, they prove hollow hearted and good for nothing. Quis magis impius? an
profitentes impietatem, aut mentientes lanctitatem? Bern. Apol. ad Guli. Abb.
So that it is hard to say, who is the more wicked: whether he that openly
professes impiety, or he that falsely counterfeiteth holiness Nomen
Christiani ille frustra sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur. Quid enim tibi
prodest vocari quod non es? and nomen tibi vsur pare alienum? Aug. de vita
Christ. ad sororem viduam. Gal 6.7. Luke 16.15.
It is in vain for a man to take upon him the name of a Christian, that does
not imitate Christ. For what will it profit a man to be called that which he
is not, and to usurp a name which is none of his own? Such may flourish for a
time, and deceive the eyes of men with a vain show of piety: but God cannot
be mocked, as the Apostle says; And therefore, our Savior told the
hypocritical Pharisees, ye are they that justify your selves before men, but
God knows your hearts. You make such a show of holiness, as that the people
doteth upon you, and admireth you for the only men, but God that knows your
hearts, sees you to be damnable hypocrites. Yea and many times, even in this
life, the hypocrisy of many is discovered to their shame. Simulata ilico
patescunt, and operose licet impressus sucus leui sudore diluitur, Petrarch. de
vit. solit. Omne sincerum permanet, quae simulata sunt, diuturna esse non
possunt. Bern. de ord. vitae
It is a true saying, that things that are counterfeit, cannot long continue.
False coin is soon discovered: and the face, though never so curiously and
artificially painted, will soon bewray it self. Nemo potest personam diu
far fictam, sicta cito in naturam suam recidunt. Seneca de Clem. lib. 1. cap.
1
No man can long bear a fained person: for fained things do soon return to
their own nature. When men love to be hypocrites, dissembling holiness and
pretending outward sanctimony, God in justice will in time unmask and uncase
them: and then the sin which they have labored to hide, Nihil simulatio
proficit; paucis imponit leuiter extrinsecus inducta facies. Quae decipiunt,
nihil habent solidi. Tenue est mendacium, perlucet, si diligenter inspexeris.
Sen. l. 11. Ep. 80.
shall appear in open veiw; and the virtue, which they have made show of, shall
be seen never to have been in them in truth. As it is said of Heraclides, who
by a cunning devise would have been accounted a God, that at last all was
revealed, and he (...). non qualis putari voluit, sed qualis erat. Diogen.
Laert. in eius vita. Josh. 7.19.20.
was seen, not as he desired, but as he was indeed: so many times it
befalls hypocrites. As we see in the examples of Kain, Ananias and Saphira,
the man that wanted the wedding garment, Simon Magus, Elimas the sorcerer and
diverse other notorious hypocrites, who were all found out and discovered by
the hand of God. Yea we may observe even in our own experience, that some who
outwardly lived an honest and a civil life: yet lying hypocritically in some
secret sin, have been constrained before their death, with Achan to give
glory to God, and to disclose the same to their one shame. But if it do fall
out, that they escape this judgment in this life, and do closely carry their
hypocrisy to their graves: yet at the day of judgment, when the thrones shall
be set and the books opened. Dan. 7.9.10. the vizard shall be pulled from
them, and their hypocrisy laid open in the sight of men and Angels. It may be
with an hypocrite in this life, as it is in a great snow. Haec est vere
dementia, non cogitare nec scire, quod mendacia non diu sullant: noctem tamdiu
esse quamdiu illucescat dies: clarisicato autem die and sole oborto, luci
tenebras, and caliginem cedere. Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 3. 1. Cor. 4.5.
When the snow covers the face of the earth, all appears white and clean:
but when once the Sun rises to melt and thawe away the snow, many filthy
quagmires and other loathsome places are discovered. So it may fall out, that a
man may have the reputation of a good Christian all his life: but at the day of
judgment, When the Sun of righteousness shall arise. Mal. 4.2. then shall
things be lightened that have been hid in darkness, and the counsels of men's
hearts shall be made manifest. And then as every man that is found sincere
shall have praise of God; so all dissemblers shall have, their faces covered
with shame and disgrace.

Zacharias and Elizabeth we may be truly righteous before God Luke 1.6. Estote
Christiani: valde parum est vocari Christianus. Aug. de 10 chordis.
Let us labor to be Christians indeed, else it is to small purpose to be
called Christians. Religionem quam tenemus in vest, seruemus in mente; and
sanctitatem quam habitus exterior palliat, intus animus teneat. Bern. de caen.
dom. Ser. 3.
If we would be Christ's Disciples, let us keep the Religion in our hearts,
which we pretend in our apparel, and let us retain that holiness in our
minds, which our outward habit cloaketh and covers. Estote discipuli
Christi, non in salsitate, sed in veritate; non in vest, sed in cord. Bern.
ibid. Sermon. 1.
Let us be the Disciples of Christ, not in falsehood, but in truth: not in the
garments, but in the heart. Non confidamus in latitudine soliorum, in
expansione ramorum, in viriditate frondium. ibid. Sermon. 10. 1. Pet. 3.4. Psalm.
45.13.
We must not stand so much on the largeness of our leaves, nor on the
spreading of our branches, nor on the greenness of our boughs, considering,
that every branch though never so flourishing, if it bear not fruit, it must
be cast into the fire to be burnt: as our Savior says Ioh. 15.6. And herein
we may all go to the school to a covetous worldly man. There is no man but
he had rather be rich, then be accounted rich, he had rather be wealthy,
then seem to be wealthy. So should we rather desire to be godly and
religious indeed, then to seem to be so. It is true, that outward holiness
and the fruits thereof are necessary to commend us unto men: but our chiefest
care and endeavor should be, that the hid man of the heart (whither only the
eye of God can pierce) may be adorned and beautified. It is said of Salomons
spouse, which was a type of the Church that howsoever her clothing, which did
set her out to the world, was of brodered gold: yet her chiefest beauty and
greatest glory was within. So should it be with us, we should labor for a
good inside, whatsoever the outside is. That which the Apostle says of
Circumcision is true also of Religion. That is not religion which is outward in
the flesh, Romans 2.28.29.
but that is true Religion before God (as Saint James calls it) which is
within the heart: whose praise is not of men but of God. Al actions without
this; though never so fervent, are but froth like the hot enterprises of Iehu;
who made great boast of the zeal which he had for the glory of God. Come with
me, 2. King. 10.16.31
says he to Ionadab, and see the zeal that I have for the Lord: but for all
this, his heart was not upright in the sight of God. Acts 24.16.
But the Apostle Paul was otherwise affected, who endeavored himself to have
always a clear conscience toward God and toward men. First and principally, he
studied to approve himself to God, and then afterward to men also. And this
is that which God especially respects, as he said to Samuel. 1. Sam. 16.7.
God sees not as man sees for man looks on the outward appearance, but the
Lord beholds the heart. And when David, lying on his deathbed, exhorted
Solomon his son to serve God with a perfect heart, 1. Chron. 28.9.
he uses this as a reason to persuade him. For the Lord, says he, searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of thoughts. To conclude,
this is a man's greatest comfort, both in this life, 2. Cor. 1.12.
as the Apostle Paul says, This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness we have had our conversation
in the world, etc. And also at the hour of death. And therefore, when Hezekiah
that good King had received the sentence of death, and for any thing that he
knew, was to leave the world, in a comfortable assurance of his own
conscience, he betaketh himself to God. Jsa 38.3.
I beseech thee Lord, says he, remember how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, etc.

Never age was more fruitful of religions, and yet never less religion in any
age. And therefore it stands us upon to take good heed, least whiles we
approve that which is counterfeit for current, we be seduced and drawn either
into error in religion, or into corruption in manners. And therefore we must
pray with David in the like case. Psalm. 141.4.
Incline not mine heart unto evil, that I should commit wicked works with men
that work iniquity. And because hypocrites are so common, we must desire the
Lord to discover unto us who are indeed true members of the Church, that we
may join our selves to them: and who are dissemblers, that we may avoid them,
Psalm. 15.1.
as David does. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? etc.

Which betrayed him.] This is the sin of Judas; wherein we may consider first
the occasion, and secondly the quality of it. The occasion of his sin was
covetousness, as may appear in the former chapter, where he went to the high
Priests, and asked them, Mat. 26.15.
What they would give him to deliver Christ unto them.

From hence then we may learn, Doctrine. A covetous man will commit any
sin, though never so heinous. 1. Tim. 6.10. Metropotis omnium vitiorum.
Subtle malum, secretum virus, pestis occulta, doli artifex, matter hypocrisis,
liuoris parens, vitiorum origo, criminum fomes, virtutum aerugo, tinea
sanctitatis, etc. Bern. n ps. 91. sermon. 5. Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5.
that a covetous man may be easily drawn to commit any sin, be it never so
heinous. There is nothing too hot nor too heavy for him. And therefore the
Apostle says, and not without cause, that covetousness is the root of all
evil. Yea the Heathen man called it, The head of all vices. It is as Bernard
says, A subtle evil, a secret poison, an hidden plague, a deviser of craft,
the mother of hypocrisy, the breeder of envy, the fountain of vices, the
nurse of sin, the rust of virtue, the moth of holiness, etc. In a word,
there is not any one of all the ten Commandments, but a covetous man will
easily yield to break it. First, the Scripture has put it out of question,
that every covetous man makes his riches his Gods. And the reason is evident:
for a covetous person loves his riches more then God, he had rather forsake
all religion, then part with any of his commodities. And we have experience of
many, that only in hope of gain renounce the religion, which they seemed to
profess, and become Papists. Again, he fears the loss of his riches far
more then the loss of Gods favor: he is less afraid to break any of Gods
Commandments, though it be to the provoking of his wrath; then he is to
diminish or impair his out ward estate. And he trusts more in his wealth
then he does in God. As we see in that rich man in the Gospel, who secured his
soul, Luke 12.19.
because he had much goods laid up for many years. And therefore the Apostle
wills Timothy to charge rich men, 1, Tim. 6.17.
that they trust not in uncertain riches. If there were not a disposition in
them hereunto, this charge were needless. It is the corruption of our nature,
that is the occasion of all Gods precepts.

Moreover, a covetous man for gain will not stick to worship Images. Let a
man come to him, as the Devil did to Christ, Mat. 4.8.9.
with abundance of wealth, and say, all this will I give thee, etc. he will
quickly fall down and worship the most abominable Idol in the world. Again,
false swearing and perjurie which is a breach of the third commandment, is
many times a branch that springs from this cursed root: when as men set not
only their tongues, but their honesty also to sale for advantage. And for the
Saboth there is no greater cause of the profanation thereof, then
covetousness. Luke 14.18.19.20.
For men have their Farms to see, or Oxen to attend, or merchandise to follow,
or one business or other, that they cannot come to the exercises of religion.
Or if they do come for fashion sake, or for fear of law, and sit before the
Minister, Ezech. 33.31.
yet as the Prophet says, their heart goes after covetousness. Or if they
do attend for the time: yet presently they depart away to their worldly
business, Luke 8.14.
and so the cares of this world choke the word, and make it altogether
unprofitable. And as covetousness treads under foot all the duties of the
first table: so also it neglects all the duties of the second. It will cause
a man to rebel against all his superiors that God has set over him. No bond,
either of nature or duty can prevail, where covetousness bears sway. How
many inferiors have been corrupted with money, to betray those whom they
should have loved? As Judas here was hired to betray his Master. And Dalilah
was allured by bribes and rewards, Judge. 16.5. etc.
to betray Samson her beloved into his enemies hands. But we need not go
far for examples in this case. There was never nation under heaven had
greater experience hereof, then this of ours in the days of our late
Sovereign Elizabeth of blessed memory. Morton. Saunders. Parrie. Lopes, etc.
Every year there rose up some unnatural wretches, who not regarding the oil
of the Lord, wherewith she was anointed, sought by all means possible to
cast her sacred Crown to the ground, and to lay her Honor in the dust: and to
betray their native Country which should have been most dear unto them, into
the hands of foreign enemies. It is the cause of much murder and blood shed,
as Solomon says. Prou. 1.19.
Such are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; he would take away
the life of the owners thereof. Whosoever stands in his way betwixt him and
his lands, he says, as the husbandmen did in the Gospel, Come let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours. Mat. 21.38.
And thus did covetous Ahab cause innocent Naboth to be put to death, that he
might possess his vineyard. 1. King. 21.2.
It lay very commodiously for him, and was a continual eie-sore to him, and
therefore he must have it, though it cost the poor man his life. Yea many
times it makes men so unnatural, Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.
that they do not spare the life of their own parents. At least, it they
proceed not so far, yet they are as sick of the Father as may be, and wish
him fair laid in his grave, that they may enjoy his living. It causes cruelty
and oppression as the Prophet says. Micah. 2.2.
They covet fields and take them by violence, and houses, and take them away.
By hard and unconscionable dealing they grind the faces of the poor: yea,
they pluck off their skins from them, Isa. 3.15. Micah. 3.2.3
and their flesh from their bones: yea, they break their bones, and chop them
in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh for the Caldron: and they leave not the
bones till the marrow. Zeph. 3.3.
It causes whordome and adultery; As we see by common experience, that many
both men and women, by gifts are drawn to embrace strange flesh, and to forget
the covenant of their God, as Solomon speaks, Prou. 2.17. It is the cause of
theft and wrongful dealing. It was covetousness that made Achan steal the
things consecrated to God, as himself confesses. I saw, says he, Josh. 7.21.
among the spoil a goodly Babylonish garment, and 200. shekels of silver, and
a Wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, and I coueted them, and took them.
And it was covetousness that made Judas a thief, Joh. 12.6.
when as carrying the bag, he falsely purloyned that to his own private use,
which was given by others to the common benefit of Christ and all his
Disciples. Yea which is the worst theft of all: it makes a man a thief to
himself, whiles he defraudeth his own belly, to increase his wealth. Now he
that is a thief to himself, whom will he spare? as Sirach says, cap. 14.5.
Opum vt suarum habet cura^; verum ijs, vt ex alienis, nihil capit emolumenti.
Diog. Laert. in vita Bi^nis.
He carketh and cares for his riches, as if they were his own: but he reapeth
no benefit by them; as if they were another man's. And herein covetousness
shows her self a most cruel Tyrant. She leads a wretch up and down
through fields, and woods, by sea, and by land, and all to heap up a deal of
wealth, and when he has done, she only gives him leave to look on it, but
not to use it. She makes him toil and take great pains to fill his barnes
and his garners, his coffers and his chests, and then she hides the keys,
and denies him the use of all. So that he is like the Ass that carries a
heavy lode of gold and silver all day, and at night eats hay himself.
Diuitias locupletis habes, animum sed egeni. O suc cessori diu^s, egene tibi.
Sphinx aenigmat.
In a word, he has riches in great abundance, but withal he has a beggarly
mind, and howsoever he be rich to his heir, yet he is poor to himself. It
causes lying: As the Soldiers that kept Christ his Sepulcher, were hired with
large money to report, when Christ was risen from the dead, Mat. 28.12 13. 2.
Sam. 16.3.4.
that his disciples came by night while they slept and stole him away. It
causes slandering: As Ziba in a greedy desire of Mephibosheth his living,
falsely slandered him to the King, of no less crime then high treason. Finally,
it causes many men to bear false witness in matters of controversy. As there
is a wicked generation, that Ego vero libenter mentiar tua causa; and si quando
me vis peierare, paratu^ fore scito. Cic. pro Qu. Rosc. Comaedo.
haunteth Westminster Hall, styled by the name of Knights of the Post, who for
a small matter may be hired, to give testimony any way, of that which they
never knew. Thus we see what a spawne of sin is engendered of this one vice of
covetousness. Besides, every calling both in Church and commonwealth is
corrupted with it. For Ministers, I fear me, we may over justly renew the
complaint of Bernard, Ipsa quoque Ecclesiasticae dignitatis. officia in turpem
quaestum transiere. nec in his animarum falus, sed lucrum quaeritur diuitiarum.
Jn ps. 91. sermon 5. Ezech. 34.3.
that the duties of the Ecclesiastical dignity are turned into filthy lucre,
and they seek not the salvation of souls, but the gain of riches. We have
too many that care more to eat the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool,
then to feed the flock committed unto them. Insomuch as there is a very
reproachful proverb spoken of our calling (and I would none of us had given
occasion of it.) That if covetousness were lost, it would be found in black
coats. And are not many of our Magistrates like the sons of Samuel, 1. Sam.
8.3.
that turned aside after lucre, and took rewards, and perverted judgment? Do
not many of them love gifts and follow after rewards, Isa. 1.23. and 5.23.
that they cannot judge the fatherless? etc. Do they not many times justify
the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from
him? Amos. 5.12.
And do they not oppress the poor in the gate? Let a man that is never so
wicked take a gift out of his bosom, and may he not with many Officers of
justice wrest the ways of judgment? Prou. 17.23.
as Solomon says. Pecuniosum hominem, quamnis fit nocens, neminem posse
danari. Cic. in Verrem. Proem. primae act. Ierem. 5.27. 2. Pet. 2.15. Isa. 5.8.
Act. 1.19.
Nay may not that ancient proverb be renewed again, That a Money-man can
hardly be cast in his cause, though it be never so badde? And is it not true
of many, that the Prophet spoke of some such in his time, that as a Cage is
full of Birds, so are their houses full of Bribes, and of the wages of
unrighteousness, whereby they are become great and waxen rich, joining house
to house, and land to land? But let them take heed, that their fields prove
not like that which was bought with Judas his money, Aceldama, even a field of
blood. And as covetousness prevails with Magistrates, so also with all sorts
of people. It makes Landlords rack their rents so unmercifully, that the poor
Tenant cannot live in any comfortable sort. It makes Lawyers defend many bad
causes, and set fair colors on false matters, to delude the right. It makes
tradesmen to use false balances, Micah. 6.11.
and deceitful waights, which are abomination to the Lord, Prou. 11.1.
or if they have true waights, yet to falsify them by deceit. Amos. 8.5.6.
Yea to make the Ephah (that is, the measure) small, and the shekel (that is,
the price) great: and to sell even the refuse of their wares. So true is that
saying of Ecclesiasticus. Eccles. 10.9.
There is nothing worse then a covetous man: there is not a more wicked thing
then to love money for even such an one would sell his soul.

And therefore to make use of this doctrine, Use. Math. 7.17.
let us be admonished to be out of love with this corrupt tree, which brings
forth such evil and cursed fruit. Let us follow the counsel of our Savior
Christ. Take heed, Luke 12.16.
and beware of covetousness. And as much as lies in us, let all our
conversation be free from it. Coll. 3.5.
But because it is an hereditary evil, bred in the bone, and therefore will
hardly out of the flesh: We must use all holy means to mortify and subdue it
that it may not have Dominion over us: Especially, Psalm. 119.36.
we must continually use the prayer of David, Incline my heart unto thy
testimonies, and not to covetousness.

Betrayed him.] The quality of Judas his sin is treason, even high treason
against the King of glory Christ Jesus. A sin most heinous, if we consider
the circumstances of it. Mat. 16.16.
He knew that Christ was the Son of the living God, as Peter had confessed
him. He had heard many sweet and gracious Sermons of our Savior, wherein
many terrible judgments were denounced against sin, and many comfortable
promises made to them that repent. He kept company with Christ, and saw his
kindness toward all his Disciples. He was employed in as honorable a calling
as any of the rest, Mat. 26 21, 25. John 13.26.27. and 6.70.
as we have heard before. In a word, Christ had diverse times admonished him,
and used means to bring him to repentance, and yet all this could not keep
him from betraying his Master, whom he should have loved; and his God, in whom
he should have believed.

Doct. No sin so heinous, but an hypocrite may fall into it.
Whereby we are taught, that there is no sin so heinous, nor so grievous,
but an hypocrite may fall into it. If a man in hypocrisy make much of one
sin, though never so small, he is easily drawn to any sin, if occasion be
offered. Gene. 4.8.
If the heart be not found, the Devil will prevail with a man in whatsoever
he list. Kain being an hypocrite, how easily was he brought to a most
unnatural sin, even to embrue his hands in his brothers blood. Mark 6.27.
Herod counterfeiting only a love to the word, was soon brought to put
innocent John Baptist to death. Acts 5.1.2.3.
Ananias and Saphira pretending holiness which they never had, did most
impudently lie against the holy Ghost. So Judas in this place. Nothing at all
could do good on him. They that of purpose came to apprehend Christ, returned
converted by his doctrine, affirming to the high Priests, John 7.45.46.
that man never spoke like him. But this hypocrite nothing could move.

It is reported of Darius, Aelian. var. Hist. lib. 6. cap 14.
that when some of no mean place about him had conspired to kill him, as he
was an hunting; he was not a whit afraid, but commanded them to bend their
weapons against him, and looking sternely upon them, he asked them, why they
did not execute that they came for. But they, when they saw his undaunted
courage, did not only leave off their enterprise, but also were so stricken
with fear that they cast away their spears, and alighting from their horses,
with all humility yielded themselves unto his mercy. Our Savior Christ did
more to Judas and yet coul not reclaim him. John 13.27.
For after he had undertaken to betraye him, he puts him in mind of the
greuiousnesse of the fact, and bids him, to do quickly what he meant to
do. And when he came to put his treason in execution, Mat. 26.50.
he spoke to him in the mildest manner that could be. Friend (says he)
wherefore art thou come? And again, when he came near to him, to kiss him.
Judas, says he, Luke 22.48.
betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? words which might have broken an
heart of Adamant, and yet they could not move him. Now the reason why
hypocrites do make no bones of any sin, is, first, because howsoever they
dissemble holiness, 1. Tim. 1.19.
yet they have made shipwreck of a good conscience, as the Apostle says, and
therefore, rush headlong upon every occasion into any wickedness. Again, they
are in subjection to Satan, who has them in his snare, as a dog in a
chain, and therefore, 2. Tim. 2.26. 2. Pet. 2.19.
he leads them whether he list. He can no sooner bid them go, but they
are ready to run. And hence is it that the Prophet joins an hypocrite and a
wicked man together. Every one says he, is an hypocrite and wicked, Isa. 9.17.
because he that is an hypocrite will easily yield to any wickedness. And
indeed, it is just with God that hypocrites should be given over in this manner
to notorious sins, whereby they may come to open shame: that so they may either
be brought to repentance, or else receive a more just condemnation.

Use.
Let this therefore be a warning for us, to make us take heed of hypocrisy.
There is far more hope of a notorious wicked man that never made profession
of Religion, then of a dissembling hypocrite, that has a show of godliness,
2. Tim. 3.5. Luke 23.40.41.
but denies the power of it. That thief that was crucified with our Savior
Christ, had led a most dissolute life all his days, and yet he was at the
last converted. Whereas this hypocrite Judas living long disguised in the
habit of holiness, could never be reclaymed, but perished miserably in his
sin. And therefore, let us be careful, as we profess our selves to be
Christians, so not to harbor the least guile in our spirits: Psalm. 32.2. 2.
Cor. 1.12. Acts 24.16.
but in all simplicity and godly pureness to have our conversation in the
world, and to keep always a clear conscience toward God and toward men.
And this will minister more sound comfort to us, both in life and death, then
all the world is able to afford.

Betrayed him.] As the fact it self was heinous, for the servant to betray his
Lord, and the Disciple his Master, so the manner of the treason, does make much
to the aggravating of it. For he did it dissemblingly, under color and
pretense of love and duty. First he saluted him kindly, God save thee Master,
Mat. 26.49.
and then, as though he had meant him no hurt, he came to him, and kissed him.

Doctrine. A shame to pretend friendship, and intend hatred. Psalm. 12.2.
From whence arises this doctrine, that it is a shameful thing for a man
outwardly in words and gestures to pretend freindship, and inwardly in heart to
conceive hatred, and intend mischeife, to bewray one thing with the mouth, and
to conceal an other in the heart. David complains of his times, that men did
flatter with their lips, and spoke with a double heart, or with an heart and an
heart: making show of that which they never purposed. And again he says,
they speak freindly to their neighbors when malice is in their hearts. Psalm.
28.3. Simulatores mali, ad^ungentes se ficta charitate, captantes omnes motus,
om^ia verba sanctorum, in omnibus laqueos inquirentes. Aug. in Psalm. 41.6.
And thus dealt David's enemies with him, that came when he was sick under
pretense of kindness to visit him, but their hearts heaped iniquity within
them, and whatsoever infirmity they saw in him, when they came forth, they
told it and blased it abroad. Psalm 41.6. Such were the false brethren which the
Apostle speaks of, that came in privily, only to spy out their liberty.
Gal. 2.4. Iere. 9.5.8.
Thus was it in the time of the Prophet Jeremiah. Every one, says he, will
deceive his friend, and will not speak the truth. Yea, one will speak
peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he lays wait
for him. They cover the venom of their hearts with the honny of their
tongues. As David says. Mel in ore, verba lactis; fol in cord, fraus in
factis.
The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war was in his heart:
his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were swords Psalm. 55.21. The
Scripture is full of examples in this case. The Devil, when he came to tempt
our first parents to sin, he gave them sweet words, and pretended a great
care of their good estate, when his purpose was to bring them to confusion.
Gene. 3.4.5. and 4 8. 1. Sam. 18.17.
And Kain with fair speeches enticed his brother Habel into the fields and
then rose up and slew him. Saul pretended great love to David, in offering him
his daughter in marriage; 2. Sam. 3.27.
but his intent was to make him perish by the hand of the Philistims. Ioab
spoke peaceably to Abner with his tongue, but with his hand he wounded him to
death. So likewise, and 20.9.^0.
he saluted Amasa as kindly as might be, and took him by the beard to kiss
him: but secretly he smote him with his sword in the fifth rib, and shed out
his bowels to the ground. and 13.26.27.28
Absalom earnestly invited his brother Ammon to his sheep-shearing feast, as
though he had loved him entirely: but most treacherously he caused his
servants to kill him, Mat. 22.15.16.
as he sat at table. The Herodians came glauering and flattering to our Savior
Christ, as if they had had a reverent opinion of him, Luke 20.20.
Master, say they; we know that thou art true and teach the way of God
truly, etc. But for all this, they came as spies, if it had been possible, to
entangle him in his talk. And thus did Judas as we have heard, betray his
Master with a kiss, that his treason and falsehood might be the less
suspected. Stella in Luc. cap. 22.
Whereupon one says, he came near him as a servant, but he was a thief; he
saluted him as a Disciple, but he was a traitor; and last of all he kissed
him as a friend, but he (...) a traitor; and last of all he kissed him as a
friend, but he was a deadly enemy. Amoris pignore vulnus in flixit charitatis
officio sanguinem fudu pacisque instrume^to mo^tem ^rogauit. Ferus in Math. 26.
By the pledge of love he gave him a wound, by the duty of charity he shed
his blood, and by the instrument of peace he procured his death. Neither do we
want experience hereof in our days, as the Apostle prophesied of the last
times. 2. Tim. 3.4. For do we not daily see Frons omnium familiaris; multorum
animus iratus: iracundiae occultae; insidiae apertae. Cic. pro L Flacco.
that many have friendly and familiar countenances, that have angry and
wrathful minds? and is there not often hidden displeasure, where there is open
flattery? This is a very odious and an abominable thing. Tuta frequesque via
est per amici fa^ere nomen: Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crime habet.
Solomon compares him, that under pretense of friendship is an enemy, unto a
potshard ouerlaid with silver dross. Prou, 26.23. And David says, that his
enemies came about him like Bees. Psalm. 118.12. and very fitly, as one
observes; because the Be has sweet honey in her mouth, and a venomous sting
in her tail. Yea, and such kind of persons are most dangerous, taking away
the use of humane society. For how can a man live and converse safely with
that man, that blows both hot and cold, as the Satyr said, Altera manu f^rt
lap. them, altera ostentat panem. P^aut. Aulular.
that carries fire in the one hand, and water in the other? Though a man be
never so wary and circumspect: yet he can hardly in this case avoid danger.
Nullae sunt occultiores Insidiae, quam ^e, quae latent in simulatione officij,
aut in aliquo necessitudinis nomine. Nam came, qui palam est aduersarius, facile
cauendo vitare po^sts: hoc vero occultum, intestinum, ac domesticum malum, non
^^do tion existit; verumetiam opprimit, antequam perspiccre, atque explorare
potueris. Cic. in Verr. lib. 1.
For there is none more secret and hidden treachery, then that which is cloked
with pretense of friendship. An open adversary may easily be shunned, but
this close mischief will oppress a man before he can perceive it. As David
says of his enemies. Surely, mine enemy did not defame me; for I could have
borne it: neither did mine adversary exalt himself against me; for I would
have hid me from him: But it was thou, O man, my guide and my familiar, etc.
Psalm. 55.12.13. By this means it comes to pass, that a man cannot tell whom
to trust. -- Non hospes ab hospite tutus. Non socer a genero. -- Ovid. Metam.
lib. 1.
If there be falsehood in fellowship, it is not safe for any man to trust his
friend. Yea, he must keep the doors of his mouth, from her that lies in his
bosom. Mich. 7.5.

This doctrine serves to admonish every one of us, Use.
to take heed of this sin. As we desire to approve our selves to be members
of the Church in this life, and heirs of Gods Kingdom afterward, we must
speak the truth in our hearts. Psalm. 15.2.
We may not pretend love to any man in word and in tongue only, but we must
love in deed and in truth. Especially, 1. Ioh 3.18.
we must keep all bonds of friendship inviolable, with those that trust us and
rely upon us.

Then, when he saw that he was condemned. Aquinas in locu.
] Aquinas moves a question, how Judas could see this, when as yet Christ was
not condemned. For Pilate had not yet examined him, much less pronounced
sentence against him. But he answers out of Origin, that he easily saw what
the end would be, because he perceived, Verse. 1.2.
that the chief Priests and Elders had taken counsel to put him to death, and
for that purpose had delivered him to the Deputy. Now when he saw the matter
was come to this pass, then he began to repent himself of that he had done.
It is like, that he thought before, that Christ might escape, and that there
was no danger of death. But now, seeing indeed what the issue would be, his
conscience is troubled, and his heart begins to smite him. He could never
before see the heinousness of his sin, till he saw that this was the end of
his treason, that so innocent a person should be put to death. And now at the
last coming to himself, he begins with sorrow and grief to weigh the
enormitie of his fact, and to be displeased with himself for it.

Doctrine. Men's eyes are blinded before the committing of sin, and opened
afterward.
Where we may observe the craft and subtilty of the Devil, that he dazeleth
men's eyes, and blindfolds them, that they cannot see the foulness of their
sins, till he have brought them whether he would: but afterward, when it is
too late, he lets them see what they have done. Non permittit Diabolus cas
qui non vigitant, videre malum antequam persiciant. Aquinas in locum.
First he extenuateth a man's sins, to draw him on the more easily; but
afterward, he aggrauareth them, and makes them appear out of measure
sinful: he seduceth them with a false persuasion, as though either no hurt
at all, or at least not much hurt would follow upon their sins. Male humanis
ingenijs natura consuluit, quod plerunque no^ futura, sed transacta
perpendimus. Qu. Curtius. lib. 8.
Yea there is even in nature a disposition, never to weigh the issue of a thing
thoroughly, till it be done and past. Which being furthered by the Devil, must
needs be so much the worse. Hence was it, that Judas never saw the
heinousness of his bloody thoughts against his Master, till he was condemned;
otherwise he would never have done so cruel a deed. He had often heard from
our Savior Christ himself, that he must be betrayed, and delivered into the
hands of the high Priests, and by them be crucified. He had heard a grievous
woe denounced against him that should betray him, Mat. 26.24.
that it had been good for that man, if he had never been borne. But the
Devil soon extinguished the remembrance of these things, and made them no
better then a tale told to a deaf man. No doubt, he made him believe, that
Christ should never be put to death; but that he might enrich himself with
the money, and yet his Master should do well enough. He persuaded him, that
either his own innocence would acquit him, when he should be brought to his
trial; or else, if his enemies should be so malicious, as to condemn him
without cause, yet by his divine power, he could easily when he listed, Mat.
8.26. Luke 8.29.30.
rescue himself out of their hands. It was not likely, that he that with a
word could still the raging of the Sea, and with a word could cast out a legion
of Devils, would suffer mortal men to prevail so far, as to put him to
death. Besides, he had had experience of Christ's power in this case. When the
men of Nazareth, Luke 4 29.30.
offended at his preaching, thought to cast him headlong from the top of an
hill, he passed through the midst of them, and went his way. Yea, when
himself with a rabble of Soldiers came to apprehend him in the garden, Joh.
18.6.
he did but speak a word, and they all went backward, and fell to the ground.
But now, perceiving contrary to his opinion, that he was condemned to death,
at the last he acknowledges the grieuousnes of his sin, and is touched with
remorse. As the Devil dealt with Judas, so he deals with all sinners: he
leads them long hoodwinckt through many sins, and at the last, when their
eyes are opened, that they see the odiousness of their sins, but cannot see
the mercy of God, he casts them headlong into horror and anguish of heart.
Adam and Eve saw no harm by themselves, Genesis 3.7.
till they had indeed eaten the forbidden fruit; but then their eyes were
opened, and they saw their nakedness, and in it their misery. Peter saw
nothing in the denying of his Master, till the cock crew, Mat. 26.74.75.
and Christ looked back upon him, but afterward his heart melted within him,
and he wept bitterly. David saw nothing in his adultery and murder, but slept
full securely, and never thought worse of himself for it, till Nathan the
Prophet awaked him: 2. Sam. 12.13.
then he cried, out in the bitterness of his soul, I have sinned against the
Lord. The reason why the Devil does thus blind men's minds, is this: He knows
they would never be caught, nor brought to commit sin, if they should see the
danger of it. And therefore, he is most careful to hide that. If David and
Peter had seen as much before, as they did after, they would never have fallen
in so fearful a manner. And herein the Devil resembles the fowler, Frustra
iactatur rete ante oculos pennatorum. Bern. in Psalm. 91. sermon. 13
that will not spread the bare net before the birds, but straweth corn, or
uses stales, or some thing or other, to allure them and draw them to it. And
the fisher, that covers his hook with a bait, the better to beguile the
fishes. If he should cast a naked hook into the water, he should catch but a
little fish. Genesis 3.5.
So the Devil, when he fished for Adam, he baited his hook with hope of
preferment, 2 Samuel 11.2. I sh. 7.21. 2. Kings 5.20. 1. Sam. 15.21.
persuading him that he should better his estate, and become like God
himself, knowing good and evil. To catch David, he baited his hook with
pleasure and delight. He caught Achan, Gehezi, and Judas in this place, with
gain and profit. And he ensnared Saul with pretense of religion. Thus he
deals still with every man: knowing his disposition, and how he is inclined,
he fitteth his baits accordingly. He never comes bluntly and rudely to a man,
and bids him simply transgress Gods Commandment, but always uses some
devise or other, to make his sin please him. He entiseth the drunkard with
voluptuousness, he allureth the thief with hope to better his estate, he
draws on the whoore-master with delight of the flesh. Yea and all this while,
he does what he can, to extenuate the sin, and make it seem light, making
but little mole-hils of great mountains. As he persuades men, that drunkenness
is but good fellowship; that adultery is but a little dalliance, and a trick of
youth; that pride is but a desire to be handsome and cleanely, and that
covetousness is but an honest care to live in this world. But afterward, when
he has wrapped them in indeed, then he aggrauateth every sin, and lodeneth
and ouerwhelmeth the soul and conscience with unspeakable horror. Iul. Solynus
Polyhist. cap. 27.
And herein he is like the Panther, which has the body all over painted with
little spots, very pleasant to the eye, and delightsome to the smell; whereby
many beasts come very hastily to gaze upon her. But withal she has a very
ugly and grimme face, which makes them afraid to come near. And therefore,
because she is slow of pace, and cannot by running get her prey, she hides
her face, and shows only her painted skin, to allure the beasts within her
reach, and then suddenly she deuoureth them. In like manner, the Devil
seldom appears in his own ugly shape and likeness, for then every one
would be afraid of him: but always appears under some colorable pretense
or other, that he may more easily deceive poor sinners.

Use.
This doctrine serves for our admonition, that we take heed we be not
beguiled with false persuasions, and so fall into grievous sins, least when
the filthiness and heinousness of them shall be once brought to our
knowledge, we be not able to bear the horror that will follow upon them.
Sin may well be compared to the strumpet that Solomon speaks of, Prouer.
7.13. At the first it will flatter a man, and use many persuasions to allure
him: but if he yield and consent, he shall be as an Ox that goes to the
slaughterhouse, and as a Fool to the stocks for correction. Till a dart
strike through his liver, etc. Verse. 22.23. That which is spoken of the bread
of deceit, Proverb. 20.17. is true of all sin whatsoever; That at the first
putting into the mouth, it is sweet as Manchet, it has a pleasant relish, but
afterward the belly is filled with gravel. The pleasure that accompanies the
committing of sin, is not so certain, as the heart-burning and horror of
conscience that follows afterward. Aug. in Psalm. 58.
Saint Augustine compares sin to a kind of bramble, called Christ's thorn,
which at the first sprouting is like an herb, soft and tender, but after there
follows sharp prickles. So sin at the first is pleasing to the flesh, but
afterward it leaves a prick in the conscience, which whosoever would not
feel, he must now strike himself with the prick of repentance. As the
flower breeds a worm, which afterward eats and consumes it: So sin,
that a man lives in with delight, breeds a worm that gnaweth the
conscience, and vexes it with endless woe, Voluptas transijt, peccatum
remansit. Bern. de vijs vitae.
which remains and abides when the pleasure is vanished and gone. Transit
totus ille pruritus delectationis imiquae, and voluptatis illecebra tota breui
finita est: sed amara quaedam impressit signa memoriae, and vestigia faeda
reliquit. Bern. de conuer. ad Schol Cito praeterit quod delectat; permanet sine
fine quod crueciat. Aug. de honest. mulierum.
And indeed all the itching delight, and all the inticeing pleasure of sin,
is soon at an end: but it imprinteth bitter tokens in the memory, and leaves
foul footsteps in the soul. Qui in principijs norunt, praedicant: qui in fine
experti sunt, non iniuria execrantur. Iul. Solinus. cap. 24.
And therefore w^e may say of sin, as was said of the river Hypanis, (which
is sweet and wholesome at the spring head, but after falling into an other
river, the nature of it is changed, and it is exceeding bitter) that all that
taste of it at the first, do like and commend it, but they that have experience
of the end of it, have cause to curse it.

We use to say, we will not buy gold to dear. Why then should we buy the
momentanie pleasure of sin at so high a rate? when the fish has swallowed
the hook, had she not better have been without the bait? when the bird is
caught in the net, had she not better have wanted the corn that allured her?
Let us therefore learn to know the enterprises and sleights of Satan, as the
Apostle calls them 2. Cor. 2.11. and the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.13.
least we be circumuented therewith. Mentitur, vt fallat; blanditur, vt
noceat; bona promittit, vt malum tribuat: vitam pollicetur, vt perimat. Cypr.
Lib. 1. Epist. 8.
The Devil, as one says, lies, that he may deceive us, flattereth, that he
may deceive us, flattereth, that he may hurt us; he promises us good things,
that he may do us a mischeife; he promises us life, to the end he may kill
us. He promises pleasure, but God knows Nocet empta dolor voluptas.
it is dear bought; there is never a dram of it, but it brings a pound of
sorrow. And therefore Saint Augustine complains greatly in this case. O
peccata, quam faciles aditus habetis, dum suadetis: and quam difficiles exitus
habebitis? dum suadetis inungitis; sed postquam suaseritis, vsque ad mortem
animae pungitis. Delictae mea, an eratis tum tam noxia sutura, cum animam meam
vestra dulcedine pulsabatis, cum cor meum vestra dulcedine vngebatis? cur hoc
ante celabatis? and cur me tradebatis. de contrit. cordis. Math. 16.26.
O my sins, how easy passage had you into my heart when you began to
persuade me, and how hard will your issue be? when you began to persuade me you
flattered me; but after I was once persuaded, you wounded me even to the death
of the soul. And a little after. O my sins, says he, were you like to prove
thus hurtful, when you allured my soul with your sweet pleasures? Oh why did
you conceal this before? Oh why did you betraye me? etc. Again the Devil
promises profit, but alas, what will it profit a man to win the whole
world, and loose his own soul? Had not Judas been better without his thirty
pieces of silver? Had not Achan been better without his goodly Babylonish
garment, and his silver and wedge of gold? And had not Gehezi been better
without his talents of silver, and change of garments? Let us therefore,
evermore suspect the Devil, and pray to God to open our eyes in all
temptations, that before we commit sin, we may see it in the true likeness
of it, how odious and ougly a thing it is, how dishonorable to God, and how
hurtful to our own souls, then would we never fall into such gross sins
as otherwise we do.

Repented himself.] Hitherto we have spoken of the circumstances of Judas his
repentance: now follow the parts of it: which are three, his contrition, his
confession, and his satisfaction. This is in a manner all that the Papists
require in repentance, that there be contrition in the heart, confession of the
mouth, and satisfaction of the work. And therefore, by their doctrine Judas
repented truly. But let us examine them severally, and we shall see, that he
was far short of true repentance.

And first for his contrition. It cannot be denied, but that he had a great
measure of sorrow in his heart, but his sorrow was not right, nor such as it
should be. He saw indeed what punishment he had deserved, his conscience was
vexed with the guiltiness of his sin, and with fear of hell fire, which he
saw burning before him, yea felt already kindled within him: and this made him
grieve. Otherwise, he never sorrowed, for that by his sin he had so highly
offended and displeased God. (...).
And this does the word signify, that is used in this place: which properly is
as much as to be sad and pensive after any deed done: Beza. Paenitere.
and it answers to the Latin word, which signifies to be Penitent: and may
be used as well in evil part, as in good. For it does not properly contain
any change of the mind and life unto better; but simply expresses a kind of
heaviness and coffeehouse, causing a man to wish that undone which he has
done, be it good or evil. Some call it contrition, which is nothing else but
an high way to any grievous sin, and so at last to desperation. So that here
it signifies nothing else but the sorrow wherewith Judas was swallowed up,
after he considered the foulness of his sin. But there is an other word,
(...)
many times used in the new Testament, which properly signifies to be wise
after any fact, and so to be sorrowful for the fault committed, as to reform
it: Resipiscere.
answerable to the Latin word that signifies to repent, and therefore,
properly it is never taken but in the good part.

From hence then we may gather this instruction, Doct. Only godly sorrow
causes true Repentance. 2. Cor. 7.10.
that every sorrow for sin, though it be never so great, causes not true
repentance; but only godly sorrow. This the Apostle Paul affirms in plain
words, when he says, that godly sorrow causes repentance, never to be
repented of: namely when a man is grieved for his sins committed, not for
fear of punishment, but because he has offended God, that has been so
good, so gracious, and so merciful a Father to him. Even as a good Son, when
he sees his Father angry he is sorrowful, not so much for fear of the rod,
as because his Father has been so loving and so kind unto him. So it is with
all Gods children, as appears by many examples in the Scripture. When David
had committed those great sins of adultery and murder, and was reproved for
them by the Prophet Nathan, he confessed with great remorse and anguish of
heart, 2. Sam. 12.13.
I have sinned against the Lord: Psalm. 51.4.
and in another place, Against thee, against thee only have I sinned etc. All
the judgments that Nathan threatened against him, which were graat and fearful
did not so much affect him as the dishonor which by his sins he had done
against God. And again when he had numbered his men, 2. Sam. 24.10.
his heart smote him, and he cried out, I have sinned exceedingly in that I
have done. The pestilence which raged so horribly in the land, did not so much
move him, as his pride against God, in presuming more of the strength of his
soldiers, then of Gods protection, whereof he had so good experience. So the
Church of God considering the great indignity she had offered to her spouse
Christ Jesus, that she would not open to him, though he entreated her so
fair, Cant. 5.2.3.4.
but suffered him to stand without, till his head was full of dew, and his
locks wet with the drops of the night: she was so affected, that her very
bowels were moved within her. And the Apostle Peter, as we have heard before,
seeing how grievously he had sinned in denying his Master went out, Mat. 26.75.
and wept bitterly. If there had been neither heaven nor hell, neither reward
nor punishment, yet this very unthankfulness to so kind a Master, would have
caused him to sorrow as much as he did: when this affection is once in a man,
then he begins truly to repent, and never before. Then he is displeased
with himself, then he loatheth and detesteth his sins, whereby he has
offended God, and then he begins seriously to bethink himself, what course
he may take to please God. So did David, being greiued because he had so
hainously offended God, he prays, Psalm. 51.4.10.
that God would create in him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within
him, that so he might walk more acceptably before the Lord, for the time to
come. So also the godly Israelites in Ezra his time, Ezra 9. the whole Chapter
and 10.3.
when they had with great grief of heart bewailed their sins against God,
they resolve to make a covenant with God, and solemnly to bind themselves, to
put away their strange wives, whereby they had so much dishonored him. And so
is it withal the faithful, even as a good child, having by his untowardness
vexed his Father, is careful afterward to please him by all means possible.

There is another sorrow, which the Apostle calls a worldly sorrow, which is
always ineffectual: 2. Cor. 7.10. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore. Oderunt
peccare mali formidine paenae. Sunt quos peccasse paenitet, propter presentia
supplicia, displicet enim latroni peccatum, quando agitur de paena: desit
vindicta, reuertitur ad crimina. Huic concordant, qui consitentur inuiti non
amore boni sed vt sagiant damnum and incommodum saeculi. vtilis ergo erit
paenitentia, si sit spontanea. De vera and fulsa paenit. cap. 9. Genesis
4.11.12.13 Exodus 9.27.34. and 10, 16.17.20 1. Sam. 15.24 25
for it arises only of fear of punishment, and when that is once taken away,
they return to their former sins, as greedily as the dog to his vomit.
Whereupon Saint Augustine says well. There are some, that repent that they
have sinned, by reason of present punishments. For the robber is displeased
with his sins, when he is brought to punishment for them: but take away the
punishment, and he returns again to his former faults. Like unto him are
they that confess their sins against their wills; not for any love of good,
but to avoid the loss and punishment of the world. So that, repentance will
be profitable, if it be voluntary. And on the contrary side, that which is
extorted and wrung from a man for fear of punishment, is always unprofitable.
Kain mourned exceedingly and cried out saying My sin is greater then can be
forgiven me: but it was not for his hypocrisy in Gods service, no for his
cruel murdering of his brother, but because of the punishment that God
inflicted upon him. Pharaoh howled and took on and confessed him self a
sinner, but it was not in any detestation of his sin, but for the great
plagues that God had brought upon him and his land: and therefore when they
were removed he was as wretched, and as disobedient as ever he was before.
Saul was sorrowful and acknowledged his sin, but it was only in regard of
Samuels threatening, that God had rejected him, and would take his Kingdom from
him and therefore, he was so far from amendment of life that he became every
day worse and worse, as appears in the whole course of the story. Achab also
humbled himself and put on sackcloath, as though he had been very penitent:
1. King. 21.27.
but it was for fear of the vengeance that Eliah had denounced against him and
therefore there was no reformation in him, as may appear in that he
persecuted the Prophet for telling him the truth. and 22.8.26.27.


Use.
This end may serve to stir us up to labor for godly sorrow, that we may
mourn for sin, because it is sin, and because it displeases God. And this
will be exceeding forcible to expel our sins: for when this affectation once
comes into the heart, sin goes out: it will not lodge nor settle there
unless it be cockered and made much of. Zech. 12.10.
When a man once bewaileth his sins, and lamenteth for them, as he would do
for the loss of his only Son, then he cannot choose but detest them: then
even his dearest sins, wherein he has taken most delight, will be bitter as
gall, and most odious unto him. Now the means whereby this sorrow may be
attained are these. First, to consider the manifold blessings of God toward
us, and our unthankfulness to him. Lament. 3.23.
When a man shall consider how gracious God has been unto him, renewing his
mercies toward him every morning, and withal, how unthankful he has been,
rendering evil for good, and hatred for his good will, it cannot choose but
much affect him. 2. Sam. 12.7.8.
When David called to mind what great things God had done for him, that he had
advanced him to be King over Israel, and had delivered him out of the hands of
Saul, and as Nathan told him, if that had been too little, he would have given
him much more: that wrought remorse and sorrow in his heart. Ezra. 9.8.9.
Nehem. 9.7.8.9.10. etc. Iere. 5.25.
The like we see in the people of the Jews in the time of Ezra and Nehemiah.
Secondly, to call to mind and thoroughly to weigh the ill effects that follow
upon sin. Namely, that they hinder good things from us, Zech. 12.10.
and pull down many curses upon our heads: but especially, that by them we
peirced and crucified Christ Jesus. When a man shall be persuaded of this, it
will make him mourn more then any thing. James 4.9.
It will cause him to afflict himself, to sorrow and to weep, to turn his
laughter into mourning, and his joy into heaviness. Thirdly, to attend
diligently unto the Ministry of the word, that so our sins may be laid open,
and our hearts smitten with grief for them. Acts 2.36.37.
Thus was it with the hearers of Saint Peter when they heard their particular
sins, and the haniousnesse of them discovered by his preaching, it is said,
they were pricked in their hearts. But it is not the bare hearing of the word
that will effect this; it must be laid up in the heart, that so the continual
remembrance of it may wound the soul, when need requires. As the Lord says
by the Prophet, he will write his laws in their hearts by his spirit, Jere.
33.31. Ezech. 36.27.31
and then shall they remember their own wicked ways, and shall judge
themselves worthy to have been destroyed. Last of all, to take heed of
presumptuous sins, otherwise our hearts will cease to smite us, or if they
do, we shall not feel it: as we see in the example of David, 1. Sam 24.6.
whose heart did always smite him in his infirmities; 2. Sam. 24.10.
as after the cutting of the lap of Saul's garment, and after the numbering of
his men: but after those great sins of adultery and murder, he had either no
check nor touch of conscience at all, or if he had any, it was so, that he
had no sense nor feeling of it til, 2. Sam. 12.1. etc
Nathan the Prophet came to him, and awaked him out of his security.

I have sinned.] This is the second part of Judas his repentance, namely his
confession: which though it be set down after his restitution, yet no doubt
it was in order before it. And therefore we will handle it first. And first we
will speak of it in general, and then more particularly examine the matter of
it. In this confession of his, we see he goes very far. First he
confesses his sin openly and publicly, without any regard of his credit, he
cares not who hears him. Secondly, he does not only confess in general
terms, I have sinned, but he lays out his particular sin, I have sinned,
sairh he, in betraying innocent blood. Herein he went a great deal farther
then many will do at this day: and yet he went not far enough. For many
things were wanting in him which are required in true confession: which that it
may the better appear, let us consider the doctrine of true confession.

Wherein we are to observe, first, Doct. The nature of true confession.
the person to whom we must confess our sins: and secondly, the manner how
we must confess them. For the person, we are to know, that first and
ptincipally we must confess our sins to God: as David did, I acknowledged
says he, my sin unto thee: for I thought, I will confess my wickedness
unto the Lord. Psalm. 32.5. And the reason is. First, because all sin is
committed against God; as David says. Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, against thee
only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. It is true, we may and do
wrong and hurt men by our sins, as David highly injured Vriah by his sin,
but as it is a sin, the chiefest dishonor is against God. And so was Joseph
persuaded, when he would not yield to the allurements of his Mistress. How can
I do this great wickedness, and sin against God Genesis 39.9. And yet withal
he confesses in the same place, that it would have been a great offense
against his Master, considering what trust he had reposed in him Solus Deus
misereri potest: veniam peccatis quae in ipsum commissa sunt, solus potest ille
largiri, qui peccata nostra portauit. Cppr. Ser. 5. de Lapsis. Mark 2.7. Job.
34.31. Isa. 43.25. 1. John 1.9.
Seondly, because God only can forgive sin. The Scribes and Pharisees, though
they were corrupt in many things, yet in this they held the truth, when they
said Who can forgive siinnes but God only? And Elihu in the book of Job
affirms it very confidently Surely, says he, it appertains unto God to
say, I have pardoned, I will not destroy. And the Lord himself testifies as
much saying, I even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own
sake etc. So that it is evident, that our sins must be co^essed unto God. Now
here Judas failed. For no doubt if he had unfeignedly confessed his sins to
the Lord, he had obtained the pardon of them according to that saying of Saint
John: If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins.

Secondly, we must confess our sins also to men, and that both publicly and
privately, as the quality of the sin requires. For public confession, if a
man's sin have been public to the offense and scandal of the Church, and he
has been excommunicate for it, he ought publicly to acknowledge the same,
and earnestly desire to be received into the felloship of the Church again. 1.
Cor. 5. 2. Cor. 2.
Thus was that incestuous person, that was delivered to Satan for his sin,
upon his humiliation restored. And indeed, there is a very necessary use of
this open confession: first, in respect of God, who is thereby much glorified,
as before he had been dishonored. And therefore, when Joshua labored to bring
Achan to a free and hearty confession of his sin he says. My son, Josh.
7.10.
I beseech thee, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto
him, and show me now what thou have done, etc. Secondly, in respect of the
Church, both that the congregation that has been offended, may be satisfied,
when it sees the sinner converted: and also that others may be terrified from
committing the like sins, as the Apostle says. Them that sin rebuke
openly, that the rest may fear. 1. Tim. 5.20.
And last of all, in respect of the sinner himself, that he may thereby be the
more humbled, as the incestuous person was, 2. Cor. 2.7.
before spoken of. Whereas otherwise, if it be made a money matter, few or none
will regard it. David performed this of his own accord. When he had
dishonored God, and scandalized the Church by his grievous sins, and had
caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, he penned the 51. psalm, 2. Sam. 12.14.
to testify his repentance to God and the world, and to remain in the Church
to all posterity. Mat. 3.6.
And John Baptist admitted none to his baptism, but such as first made humble
confession of their sins. And the coniurers being brought to true repentance,
came into the Church, and confessed, Act. 19.18.
and showed their works. And thus was it always in the ancient Church, where
all notorious offenders were excommunicate, and debarred from public prayers,
and the use of the Sacraments. They remained apart in the Church, and heard
Sermons, that thereby they might the better be brought to the sight of their
sins. And after a certain time, they were admitted to prayers, but yet in a
seat by themselves, called the seat of the penitents (as they say, it is the
use at this day in Scotland.) But when the Sacraments began to be administered,
they departed. At the last, being thoroughly humbled, with bitter tears they
craved pardon of the congregation which they had offended, and so were restored
and received again. Tripart. hist. lib. 9. cap. 30.
And this discipline did St. Ambrose exercise against Theodosius the Emperor,
who having made a great slaughter of the Thessalonians, was kept out of the
Church for the space of eight Months, and after being admitted, he did not
stand, nor bow his knees only, but fell flat on his face upon the floor, and
tearing off his hair with his hands, and bedewing the pauement with his
tears, he desired that his sin might be forgiven. Amplector prompta and plena
dilectione, cu^ poenitetia reuertentes, peccatum suum satisfactione humili and
simplici consitentes. Si qui aute^ sunt, qui putant se ad Ecclesiam non
precibus, sed minis regredi posse, aut existimant aditum sibi non
lamentationibus and satisfactionibus, sed terroribus facere: pro certo habeant,
contra tales stare Ecclesiam Domini, nec castra Christi inuicta and fortia, and
Domino tuente munita, minis cedere. Sacerdos Dei Euangelium teneus, and Christi
praecepta custodiens occidi potest, vinci no^ popotest. Lib. 1. Epist. 1.
And this was the practice of St. Cyprian, as himself testifies. I do
willingly, says he, and lovingly, embrace such as return penitently, and
confess their sins, with humble and unfeigned satisfaction. But if there be
any that think they may come again to the Church, not by entreaty, but by
threatenings, or suppose to procure their admittance, not by lamentations and
satisfactions, but by terrors; let them know for a certainty, that the Church
of God stands out against such persons; and that the invincible and strong
tents of Christ, guarded by the Lords protection, will not give place to
threatenings. The Priest of God, that holds the Gospel, and keeps the
precepts of Christ, may be killed, but he cannot be overcome. And this was
the resolution of Saint Ambrose, when he heard that the Emperor was coming
toward the Church, before he was absolved. Ego vero praedico, quod cum ingredi
sacra limina prohibebo: si vero Imperium in tyrannidem mutabit, necem libenter
suscipiam. Vbi supra.
I protest, says he, I will debar him from going over the holy threshold,
and if he will turn his power into tyranny, I will willingly die in the
quarrel. To this purpose St. Augustine has a good saying, Qui multos offendit
peccando, placare multos oportet satisfaciendo; vt Ecclesia prius offensa per
culpam, in conuersione flectatur in misericordiam. De vera and falsa poenit.
cap. 11.
he that has offended many by sinning, ought to pacify many by making
satisfaction; that as the Church has before been offended by the trespass,
so by the repentance it may be moved to compassion. And indeed he that is truly
touched with a sense and feeling of his sins, will not be tender of his own
credit, nay he will not care how much he disgraceth himself, so that by his
confession he may glorify God, and edify the Church. And therefore, they may
justly suspect their repentance, that having publicly offended, cannot be
brought to make public confession. And as this public confession is required,
so in private offenses, private confession is also necessary. First, in respect
of our selves, that by emptying our hearts into the bosom of another, we may
receive comfort. And this is that which St. James exhorts, saying: Iam. 5.16.
Acknowledge your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may
be healed. But here we are to know, that a man is not bound to confess his
sins only to the Minister, and to none else (as the Papists teach men to lay
open their sins to a greasy bald Friar) but he may make choice of any other
Christian friend, of whose godliness and faithfulness he has good
experience. Jsa. 50.4.
Yet because every godly Minister has from God the tongue of the learned, and
therefore knows best to minister a word in season to him that is weary:
therefore, it is fittest to make choice of him. Psalm. 19.12.
Neither is a man bound to make confession of all his sins, as the Papists
would have it, (for who can tell how often he offends?) but only of such as do
most afflict his conscience. Secondly, in respect of others: And first of such
as we have offended by our sins, according to the rule of our Savior Christ,
Mat. 5.23.24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, Leave there thine offering before the
Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, etc. Now here Judas
failed, in that he goes to the high Priests and confesses to them, but does
not prostrate himself before his Master, whom he had betrayed, and desire him
to forgive him his sin: which if he had done, Arbitror quod etiam Judas
potuisset tanta Dei miseratione non excludi a venia, si poenitentiam non apud
ludae or sed apud Christu^ egisset. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
so great is his mercy to poor sinners, he might have obtained pardon.
Secondly, of such as to whom we have given occasion of sin, or have been
any means to draw them to sin. And in this Judas did well. For in going to
the high Priests, he does not only confess his own sin, but withal gives
them occasion to repent likewise. For if he sinned in betraying Christ Jesus,
surely they also sinned in apprehending, condemning, and putting him to death.
And thus we see the persons, to whom we are to make confession of our sins.

Now for the manner, we are to know, that every kind of confession will not
serve the turn. And therefore, these properties are required. First, it is not
enough to confess our sins in general, as ignorant men use to thump
themselves on the breast, and say, I am a sinner, but we must confess our
particular sins. If any man shall object, that this is needless, because God
knows our sins better then we our selves do, 1. Ioh 3.20.
for he is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. I answer, that it
is true indeed, all our sins are most perfitly known to the Lord. Psalm.
139.3. etc.
Who is accustomed to all our ways, as David says. And therefore, we do not
confess our sins to inform God, but we do it for our own benefit, that
thereby we may be brought unto godly sorrow, which is attained by a distinct
acknowledgement of our sins. And thus have the children of God confessed
their sins. When David had numbered his people, and his heart did smite him
for it, he confessed particularly, I have sinned exceedingly in that I have
done. 2. Sam. 24.10.
And in the title of the 51 Psalm, he confesses his adultery in plain
terms. And so does the Apostle confess how he had persecuted the Church, Act.
22.19 20.
yea by name, how he had been a great stickler in the Martyrdom of blessed
Steven. Yea Judas in this place performed this duty. And surely, if it were not
necessary, the Devil would never labor to hinder it so much as he does (as
we see how hard it is to bring one of an hundred to do it as they ought) for
he knows, that if once men come to a true sight of their particular sins,
and so to godly sorrow, his Kingdom will soon decay, and therefore, he makes
men so unwilling to yield to it, as they are. Secondly, we must in confessing
our sins aggrauate them to the uttermost against our selves, and not
extenuate them, as the manner is, for men to make very light of their sins,
and if they never do worse, they hope they shall do well enough. But we must
labor to make our sins appear most vile and heinous. For soothing of our
selves in sin, will take off the edge of our sorrow, that we shall neither
see them, nor grieve for them as we ought. And therefore, Ezra 9.6.
Ezra confessing his own sins, and the sins of his people, he says, Our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up to
heaven. And Daniel confessed, that to him and the people of Israel, Dan.
9.5.6.7. Psalm. 51.4.
there belonged nothing but open shame. And David acknowledges his sin to
be so heinous against God, as he might justly condemn him, and do him no
wrong. And the Apostle Paul, speaking of his persecuting the Church, Gal. 1.13.
does set it out to the full, he says. He persecuted the Church of God
extremely, and wasted it, or made havoc of it. And 1. Tim. 1.13. he says, he
was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and an oppressor. Yea ver. 15. the chief
of all sinners. Neque hoc dicebat menticudi praecipitatione, sed existimandi
affectione. Qui enim perfect examinando scipsum intelligit, suo peccato
nullius peccatum par esse existimat, quod non sicut suum intelligit. Bern. de
vita solitaria.
which as Bernard well observes, was not spoken by way of lying, but as he
thought in his heart. For he that by due examination does thoroughly understand
himself, thinks no man's sin like his sin, because he understands not
another man's sin, as he does his own. Yea Judas here does not only confess
in particular that he had betrayed his Master, but that he had betrayed his
innocent Master, which makes much to the aggravating of the fact. Much more
must we do the like. And indeed if this were duly performed, it would make us
loath and detest our sins, whereas so long as we make light of them, we
shall never be out of love with them.

Thirdly, we must confess our sins with a sense and feeling of them: we must
feel our sins lie heavy upon us, and even press us down like a mass of
lead. Mat. 11.28.
And this our Savior Christ insinuates, when he calls only such unto him,
as are weary And laden, even ready to faint under the burden of their sins.
And this does David confess, Psalm. 38.4.6.
my sins, says he, are as a weighty burden, too heavy for me. And again,
I am crooked and bowed very sore: as though his sins had lain so heavy upon
him, that they made him go groueling. And, no doubt, Luke 8.13.
the poor Publicane was thus affected, when for shame he durst not lift up
his eyes to Heaven, but smote his breast, saying. O God, be merciful to me a
sinner. When men run away with their sins, as though they were as light as
a feather, it is an evident token, they never felt the weight of them.

Fourthly, we must confess our sins willingly and freely. A man may be
compelled and forced to confess his sins, by the rack of Gods judgment, as
Judas was in this place, but that is nothing worth. We must be as forward and
as ready to confess our sins to the glory of God, as we were to commit them to
his dishonor. Whereupon Bernard says well. Confessio vt perfecta sit, tria
debet habere. scil. vt sit voluntaria, nuda and munda. Voluntaria, scil.
propria deliberatione and proposito. Nuda, vt nude prout gessit, consiteatur
peccatu^ suum Munda, ne peccatum suum praedicet sicut So doma, sed pura and
simplici intention se accuset. Bern. in speculo Monach.
Perfect confession must have three properties: namely, it must be voluntary, it
must be naked, and it must be pure. It must be voluntary, that is, of a man's
own deliberation and accord. It must be naked, that a man may confess his
sin nakedly, as it was done: and it must be pure, that a man do not declare
his sin as Sodom, but purely and simply accuse himself. And thus did David
ingenuously confess his sin. Psalm. 32.5. Then, says he, I acknowledged my
sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought, I will confess
against my self my wickedness, etc. Fifthly, we must confess our sins in
faith in the promises of God. As with the one eye we must behold our sins, and
the heinousness of them, so with the other eye we must look upon the mercy of
God, wherein he is rich in Christ Jesus, to forgive us our sins, as the
Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 1.18. and 55.7. He that wants this, saileth as it
were, in a bottomless ship, and cannot possibly shun the shipwreck of his
soul. Salubris conuersio duplici ratione consistit, si nec poenitentia
sperantem, nec spes deserat poenitente. Et panlo post. Judas qui Christum
tradidit, peccati sui poenitentiam gessit; sed salutem perdidit, quia
indulgentiam non sperauit. Digne quidem paenitentiam gessit, quia peccauit
tradens sanguinem iustu^: sed ideo sibi fructum poetitentiae denegauit, quia
peccatum traditionis suae, ipso quem tradidit diluendum sanguine non sperauit.
Fulg. Epist. 7. ad Venant. de poenit. and retribut.
For as one says. Saving conversion consists in two things, that neither
repentance be without hope, nor hope be without repentance. And a little
after: Judas that betrayed Christ, repented of his sin, but he lost
salvation, because he hoped not for mercy. And worthily indeed did he repent,
because he sinned in betraying innocent blood: but therefore he denied himself
the fruit of his repentance, because he could not believe, that his treason
might be washed away, with that blood which he betrayed. Sola sides inter
Judam and Petrum discreuit, vt hic poenitendo and credendo saluatus sit; ille
poenitendo and non credendo perierit. Muscut. in locum. Poenitentia quae ex
fide non procedit, vtilis non est Aug. de vera and falsa poenit. cap. 2.
And here was the maine difference between the repentance of Judas and Peter.
They both repented: But Peter repenting and believing is saved: Judas repenting
and not believing is damned. And so is it with all the wicked. Kain, and
Pharaoh, and Saul, and diverse confessed their sin, but because they wanted
faith to believe the pardon of them, their confession brought them to
desperation.

Sixthly, as we must confess our sins, so we must earnestly pray for the
pardon of them. Thus did David. I have sinned, says he, exceedingly in that I
have done: 2. Sam. 24.10.
therefore, now Lord, I beseech thee, take away the trespass of thy servant.
And how earnestly does he beg the pardon of his other sins in the 51.
Psalm? Thus also did the prodigal Son, and the Publicane. Luke 15.21. and
18.13.
It is true, we must humble our selves even below the ground, in the
acknowledgement of our sins, coming to the Lord, as it were, with ropes
about our necks, as Benhadad did to the King of Israel. 1. King. 20.32.
But yet withal, we must crave the pardon of them. And to this does the
Prophet exhort us, saying. Hos. 14.3.
Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him. Take away all
iniquity and receive us graciously. And boldly may we do this, because the
Lord has proclaimed himself to be so merciful, Exodus 34.7.
that he forgiueth iniquity and transgression, and sin, that is, sins of
all sorts, though never so heinous in their nature. Now, this could not Judas
perform. He confessed and aggrauated his sin against himself, but he had
not the heart, to give one rappe at the door of Gods mercy for the pardon of
them. And therefore, the Lord might justly say to him, as once he said to an
other. Of thine own mouth will I judge thee, O thou evil servant. Luke 19.22.

Last of all, we must confess our sins with a purpose to forsake them. As
the Prophet exhorts, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
ungodly his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, etc. There must be a
desire to part with any sin whatsoever, else there is no true repentance. But
of this point enough has been spoken before in the repentance of Peter.

Use. 1.
This doctrine serves first for our instruction, that if we hope to speed
better then Judas did, we must confess our sins better then he did. And
that we may do it, we must first labor to see and acknowledge our sins.
Quomodo culpam suam co^fitebuntur, quam nec esse putant. Bern de grad. humilit.
For how can a man confess his sins when he thinks them not to be sins?
And therefore, David says, I know mine iniquities, and my sin is always
before me. Psalm. 51.3. we are apt to flatter our selves through self-love,
and hardly are we brought to take notice of our sins. As we can not see the
spots that are in our own faces, so we cannot discern the sins of our own
souls. In other men's sins, we are very quicke-sighted; but in our own, we
are as blind as Beetles. And therefore, in this case, we stand in need of a
glass. As proud persons use their glasses to see their beauty: so must we
use the glass of Gods law, but to another end, to show us our deformity.
We must therefore duly examine our selves by every one of the Commandments,
that so we may come to the sight of our sins. And when once we know our
sins, then without all dissembling, we must confess them unto God. Apparet
toties opus misera^tis, quoties fit co^fessio poenitentis. Aug. de vera and
falsa poenitent. cap. 5. and cap. 10. Quanto pluribus quis confitebitur in spe
veniae turpitudinem criminis: tanto facilius co^sequitur misericordiam
remissionis.

Homo per veritatem stimulatus peccata sua confitetur: Deus autem per
misericordiam slexus, confitenti miseretur. Omnis enim spes veniae and
misericordiae in confessione est. Nec potest quis iustificari a peccato, nisi
prius fuerit confessus peccatum. Bern. de conscien. edif. cap. 1.


And so much the rather, because otherwise there is no hope of pardon. For this
is the condition annexed unto the promise of the pardon of our sins. If we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. 1.
Ioh. 1.9. And Solomon says, He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall
have mercy. Proverb. 28.13. And the Apostle tells us, that if we would judge
our selves, we should not be judged. 1. Cor. 11.31. It is not with the Lord as
it is in earthly Courts, Confess and be hanged. No, the Lord will not take us
at the advantage, and condemn us by our own confession, but if we confess,
he will forgive, if we judge and condemn our selves, he will acquit and
discharge us. To which purpose Bernard has a sweet saying Video Dauidem
dicentem peccaui; and audientem, Dominus transtulit peccatum tuum. Considero
Mariam si non verbis, tamen operibus, sua public crimina consitentem, and
dominum pro ea raspondentem, dimissa sunt ei multa peccata. Respicio principem
Apostolorum negantem timide, stentem amarissime; Dominum respicientem. I^^um
felicem Latronem intueor, se accusantem; Christum and Dominum promittentem.
Hodie mecum eri^ in Paradise. O quam sublimis ista confessio, per quam de
patibulo ad regnum, de terra ad caelum, de cruce ad paradisum, latro da^natus
and crucifixus ascendit. Ber. de vijs vitae. Est apud Deum pium iudicem ipsa
agnitio culpe, impetratio veniae. Bern. Meditat. cap. 11. Ante Dei conspectum
cuncta peccata sunt scripta: sed quod tibi scribit transgressio, hic delet
confessio. Bern. de consc. aedif. cap. 38.
I see David, says he, saying, I have sinned, and receiving answer from the
Prophet. The Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die. I consider
Mary Magdalen, if not in word, yet in deed confessing her sin, and the Lord
answering in her behalf, Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much. I
behold the chief of the Apostles, denying fearfully, weeping bitterly, and
Christ looking back upon him with the eye of his mercy. I see that blessed
thief accusing himself, and Christ the Lord promising him, This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Oh how notable was this confession, whereby the
thief that was condemned and crucified, ascended from the gallows to a
Kingdom, from earth to heaven, from the Cross to Paradise. This then is an
high commendation of Gods mercy, that when a man lays open his sin, God
covers it: when a man acknowledges his sin, God pardons it. Besides, if
we do often confess our sins unto God, it will not suffer us to go far,
nor to lie long in any sin; but will hunt it out, before it be warm and
settled in us: yea it will chain up the the unruliness of our nature, that it
shall not break out to the dishonor of God, as otherwise it would. Let us
therefore pursue our sins by this means, and if we desire to come to
perfect health of our souls, Quicquid conscientiae stomachum grauat, totum
vomitu purae confessionis euomere ne differas. Bern. ibid. cap. 56.
whatsoever sin does surcharge the stomach of the soul, let us not defer
to cast it up by the vomit of a pure confession.

Use. 2.
Secondly this serves for the just reproof of all those, that will not
confess their sins. Many will not confess before God: It is a corruption
that we all have by kind, to dissemble our sins, and to excuse our selves
for them. As Adam when he was examined, posted the matter from himself to his
wife. Genesis 3.12.13. Use. 2.
The woman that thou gave me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat. And Eve
quickly cleared her self and laid all the blame upon the Serpent. The Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat. So is it with all the sons and daughters of
Adam, they are loath to make any confession of their sins even to the Lord.
Much less will they confess them to men. Where is there a man, that of his
own accord, either publicly or privately will make confession of his sin?
Men's sins break forth every day to the public scandal of the Church, but
where is there a man to be found, that has any care to make satisfaction? Nay
so long as the matter may be bought out with money, they scorn and contemn
the most godly Minister that shall reprove them.

Again they fail in the manner of their confession. It may be, they will
confess their sins in general: but for any particular confession it is
impossible to bring them to it. And they are so far from aggravating their
sins, that they rather extenuate them by all means possible; I am not alone:
nor I am not the first, nor I hope I shall not be the last. Sunt qui
consitendo sicut sabulam enarrant suorum Historiam peccatorum, and aegritudines
animae suae sine confusione dinumerant, and pene sine paenitentia, and sine
affectu doloris. Bern. de vita solitaria.
And for any grief and sorrow for their sins, they are so far from that, as
that rather they take a pride in them, delighting as much to talk and make
report of the sins they have committed, as they do in telling of a merry
tale. And if we should examine their confession by all the other properties
before spoken of, it would appear that they fail also in all the rest.

I have sinned.] It may seem strange what should move Judas to confess his
sin in this manner. There was no Court of inquisition concerning his fact,
he was not conuented before any authority: There was no Magistrate to examine
him, no witness to accuse him, no Judge to condemn him. Nay rather all the
world was on his side: If any man should have called the matter into question,
no doubt his great Masters that set him on work, would have backed him, and
borne him out: What then should cause him, without regard of his credit, to
come forth in this manner, and thus publicly to confess his sin? Surely,
though no body else accused him; yet his own conscience accused him, and that
extorted and wrung from him this confession.

Where we see the property of an evil conscience. Doct. The property of an
evil conscience.
So long as a man does well, his conscience will excuse him: but if he do
evil, it will accuse him. Every man's sins are written in the book of his
own conscience: which he continually carries about with him, as a domestical
witness: yea a man's conscience is instead of a thousand witnesses; yea a
thousand armies of witnesses, which take particular notice of every thing he
does, and do always dog and accuse him for the same. Scelus aliquis tutum,
nemosecurum tulu. Senan Hippol.
So that if it were possible for a man to escape all apprehension and
accusation in the world: yet his own conscience would arrest him and hale him
to judgment. Peccata mea celare non possum, quoniam quocunq, vado, conscientia
mea mecum est, secum portans quicquid in ea posui, sieve bonum sieve malum.
Servat vino, restituet desuncto depositum quod accepit. Si malefacio, adest
illa. Sic, sic in propria domo babeo accusatores testes, iudices, tortores.
Ber. Medit. c. 13 Quocunque me verto, vitia mea me sequuntur, and quocunque
vado, conscientia mea non me deserit; sed praesensassistit, and quicquam facio,
scribit. Ideirco, quanquam bumana subtersugiam indicia, iudicium propriae
conscientiae fugere non possum. Et si hominibus celo quod egi, mihi tamen
quinoui malum quod gessi celare nequco. De consc. aedif. cap. 32. Anima ipsa
coacta est proprio assistere tribunali. Bern. de conuers. ad Scholares.
Whereupon Bernard says well. I cannot hide my sins, because whethersoeuer I
go, my conscience is with me, carrying with it whatsoever I have laid up in
it, be it good or evil. It keeps for me while I live, and it will restore
unto me when I am dead, that which I have committed unto it. If I do amiss,
it is present and privy to it. And thus have I in mine own house (nay in mine
own bosom) my accusers, my witnesses, my judges, and my tormentors. And in
another place: Which way soever I turn me, my sins follow me; and
whethersoeuer I go, my conscience never forsakes me, but always stands by
me, and writes whatsoever I do. So that although I could shun the judgment
of men; yet I cannot escape the judgment of mine own conscience. And all
though I could conceal from men that I have done: yet I cannot conceal it
from my self, that am privy to the evil I have committed. And therefore, as
man himself is a little world of wonders, so the greatest wonder that is in
him, is his conscience, which does often summon a man, and draw him to the
bar of Gods judgment. And this office does it exercise in us by the
ordinance of the most wise God, that though no body do accuse us, Paena autem
vehemens, ac multo saeuior illis, Quas aut Caeditus grauis inuenit, aut
Rhadamanthus, Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. Juuen. sat. 13.
yet in our selves we might be excusable. And least we should imagine that we
can escape the tribunal of God, he has erected it in our own consciences.
Hence is it that the conscience is called Gods Vicar, and such a one as is most
quicksighted, that the least sin we commit (which is no small punishment to
a wicked man) cannot possibly by any means escape it

And this we see in the example of Adam and Eve, who though there was no body
but themselves privy to their sin, nor that could accuse them for it: Habes
Adam abscondentem se, vbi Deum cognouit esse praesentem; and quaesitum latere
voluisse, and vocatum a Domino ea voce, quae latentis morderet affeotum hoc
est, Adam vbi es? hoc est, cur te abscondis? cur lates? cur fugis eum quem
videre desiderabas? Ita grauis culpa est conscientiae, vt sine Judice ipsa se
puniat, and velare se cupit; and tamen apud Deum nuda sit. Ambr. de paenit.
lib. 2. cap. 11.
yet their guilty conscience caused them to hide themselves, when they
perceived God to be present; and to seek covert, even when God sought for
them, and called them, and that with such a voice, as might gnaw their souls,
namely, Adam where art thou? that is to say; why do thou hide thy self why
do thou seek corners? why flyest thou from him, whom before thou have so
much desired to see? So greiuous (as one says) is the guilt of conscience,
that without a Judge it punishes it self, and desires to cover it self, and
yet it is naked before God, For this cause the conscience is called (...),
because it is privy to all the actions of a man's life, and accuses or excuses
him accordingly, as the Apostle says. Romans 2.15. And howsoever it be said of
wicked men, that they have no conscience, because for the time they have no
touch of conscience: yet in truth conscience it self can never dye. The
Lethargy cannot benumbe the conscience. And though an universal
forgetfulness should possess a man, that he should forget even his own name
Messala Corninus post aegritudinem proprij nominis oblitus est. Iul. Sotinus.
cap. 7.
(as we read some have done) yet he can never forget his sins, the
remembrance of them can never be wiped out, because the justice of God and not
nature has engraven them. Bern. de conuersione ad Scholares.
And therefore, Bernard very fitly compares the memory in this case, to a
thin skin of parchment: which does not only receive the ink on the out
side, but drinks it in, so as the letters can never be got out, unless the
parchment be torn; so as long as the memory is sound and not destroyed, no
rason in the world can scrape out the stains which sin has made in it. And
this we see by common experience. For when a man has committed evil, and is
examined for it, though but upon suspicion: yet his sin smites the
conscience, and the conscience smites the heart: which being smitten, calls
for succor of the blood whereby the outward members forsaken, are empaled like
a piece of earth. The heart again being assaulted, drives back the blood
into the face, which is the seat of shame, Conscia purpureus venit in ora
pudor. Ovid. Amorum lib.
and so the guilty person blusheth when he is accused: Heu quam difficile est
crimen non prodere vultu. Ovid. Metam.
so hard is it for a man not to bewray his guiltiness by his countenance. Yea
many times, malefactors have come forth and confessed their fault, when no man
has pursued, or once suspected them.

From hence then we are to be admonished, first, not to Who sees me? I am
compassed about with darkness; the walls hide me; no body sees me; whom
need I fear? Ecclesiasticus 23.18. Nam quoto cuique eadem honestatis cura
secreto quaepalam? Multi famam, conscientiam panci verentur.
And there is not one of a thousand that makes any bones at sin, so he may
carry it cleanely and closely. Yea the most men stand more upon their outward
credit then upon their conscience. But let us not deceive our selves. Though
we think our selves never so secret and sure, yet our own conscience will
reply: I see thee, and I will accuse thee, and be a witness against thee.
Quid tibi prodest non habere conscium habenti conscientiam?
And therefore, Plin. Sec. Ep. l. 3.
as one says well, what is a man better, for having no body privy to his
sins, when he has a conscience within him? For if our own heart condemn
us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all things. 1. Ioh. 3.20.

Secondly, for as much as this witness of God, and this Hic murus abeneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
bulwark of brass against all oppositions whatsoever. And as it cannot profit
a man to have all men commend him and speak well of him, if his own
conscience do accuse him: Conscia men's recti. famae mendacia ridet. Ovid. Fast.
so it cannot hurt him to have all the world condemn him, so long as his
conscience, which is most privy to his heart, does take his part and defend
him. Perfecta and absoluta cuiusque excusatio testimonium conscientiae suae.
Bern. de Consider. l. 2. 1. Ioh. 3 21. 2. Cor. 1.12.
For the testimony of a man's conscience is his best defense: for if our heart
condemn us not, then have we (not only comfort in our selves, but also)
boldness toward God. And this was the Apostles triumph, as himself says.
This is our rejoicing even the testimony of our conscience etc. And thus much
of the confession of Judas in general. Now we come more particularly to the
matter of it.

Joh. 6.64.
In betraying innocent blood.] It is certain that Judas did not believe that
Christ was the Son of God, as our Savior himself does testify, neither had
he any sincere affection toward him, but was maliciously bent against him:
and yet notwithstanding, he is constrained to acknowledge and confess, that it
was innocent blood which he betrayed.

Doctrine. Innocence has many times the commendation of a man's enemies. 1.
Sam. 24.18. and 26.21.
Where we may observe, how great the force of true innocence is, that many
times it strikes the minds of those that are envious, yea enemies to a man,
and causes them, even against their wills, to give testimony unto it. Saul
did envy David most maliciously, and sought by all means possible to make him
away, and yet David did so carry himself toward him, that he was
constrained twice to testify of him Thou art more righteous then I.
Nebuchad-nezzar was hardly conceited of Shadrach Meshach and Abednego, Dan.
3.26.
and counted them rebellious, because they would not worship his golden image,
and therefore meant to have consumed them in the hot fiery furnace; but when
he saw their miraculous preservation, with his own mouth he pronounced them
to be the servants of the high God. So in this place Judas that betrayed
Christ, being now convinced in his conscience, is made a witness of his
innocence. Whereupon one says, Magnum Dominica innocentie testimonium est, dam
accusator cuis and consite^^^ scelere, and reus est de ^^ercede. Ambros. Ser.
50.
It is a great testimony of the Lords innocence, that his accuser does both
confess his wickedness in betraying him, and also is guilty of taking a bribe
to that purpose. And not only Judas, but many others that bare little good
will to Christ, did yet confess him to be innocent. As Pilates wise advised
her husband, saying, Mat. 27.19.
Have thou nothing to do with that just man. And Pilate himself washing his
hands said, 24.
I am innocent of the blood of this just man: and many times testified to the
Jews, Luke 23.13.14 15.
that he could find no fault in him. 47.
And the Centurion that saw what fell out at his death, pronounced, Of a surety
this man was just. And thus has it been in other ages. Plinius Secundus
though he were an enemy to the Christians, and a persecuter of them under the
Emperor Traian: yet seeing their conversation Soliti sunt stato dicante lucem
conuenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum inuicem; seque Sacramento
non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta ne latrocinia ne adulteria
committerent, ne sidem fallerent, etc l 10. epist. 61
he could not but certify his Master, that they were harmless persons. They
were wont, he says, to come together at set times, and to sing Psalms to
Christ as unto a God: and to bind themselves by a solemn oath, not to do any
wickedness: but that they would not commit theft; robbery, nor whoredom, and
that they would not falsify their faith etc. Gualt. in Zephan. homil. 11. 2.
Cor. 4.2.
And Cornelius Tacitus maintains also the credit of the Christians against
the slanders of Nero, who would have laid the blame of setting the City on
fire upon them. And thus it is at this day. Many that bear a deadly hatred
against Gods children, and wish an utter riddance of them, yet cannot but
commend them: yea many times though they revile them with their tongues, yet
they think well of them in their consciences. And therefore the Apostle Paul
says, We approve our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Though peradventure not to their lips: yet to their souls in the presence of
God.

This may serve to admonish us, first, that when we see Naboth did, yet when
they Pascitur in viuis liuor, post sata quiescit. Ovid. amor. lib. Eccles. 49.1.
are dead, there is an honorable mention of them in all men's mouths. Who was
worse spoken of, and more reproached then the Prophets and Apostles while they
lived? and yet now the remembrance of them is sweet as honny in all mouths,
Prou. 10.7.
and as music at a banquet of wine. So true is that saying of Solomon, The
memorial of the just is blessed.

Vt ignis in aquam coniectus, continuo restinguitur and refrigeratur: sic
salsum crimen in purissimam and castissimam vitam collatum, statim concidit and
extinguitur. Cicero pro Qu. Roscio Comaedo. Doct. Christ died not for his own,
but for our sins. Jsa. 53.9. 2. Cor. 5.21. Heb. 9.14.
For as fire cast into the water is straightway quenched and put out: so a
false report raised against an innocent and blameless life, quickly dies, and
is extinguished. Or if it do fall out, that the flaunders of our enemies
prevail against us: Yet the spirit of glory shall rest upon us, as the Apostle
Peter says. 1. Pet. 4.14. which shall sufficiently counteruaile all the
railings and reuilings of men.

Innocent blood.] In this that Judas confesses Christ to be innocent, this
doctrine may be gathered, that Christ suffered not for his own, but for our
sins. For as the Prophet Isaiah says, he had done no wickedness, neither
was any deceit in his mouth. And the Apostle testifies, that he knew no
sin: and in another place, that he offered him self without spot to God. It
is true, he felt all the infirmities of our nature, as hunger and thirst,
weariness etc. And was in all things tempted in like sort as we are, but
still without sin: and 4.15.
he was wholly harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. and 7.16. 1. Pet.
1.19.
In a word he was a Lamb most immaculate and without spot. The Devil indeed
tried and sifted him to the bottom, but he lost his labor, he could find no
corruption in him: Diabolus in Christo nihil inuenit praprium; sed per ipsum,
ius quod habebat ta alijs amisit antiquum. Bern. de caen. Dom. Scr. 10
as our Savior himself faith. The Prince of this world comes and has
naught in me. Ioh. 14.30. It was our sins therefore, for which he suffered,
as the Prophet says. Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and
broken for our iniquities. And he bare our sins in his body on the tree. 1.
Pet. 24. And he was made sin for us that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. 2. Cor. 5.2. Whereunto agrees that saying of Augustine. Delicta
nostra sua delicta fecit; vt iustitiam suam nostram iustitiam faceret Aug. in
psalm. 22.
He made our sins his, that he might make his righteousness ours. And
another says, Christus quomam peccata no^ habuit propria, portare dignatus est
aliena. Fulg. de passione Dom. 2. Sam. 24.17.
Christ because he had no sins of his own, was content to bear other men's
sins. And therefore, as David, when he saw his people lamentably smitten
with the pestilence for his sins, cried out with great passion. Behold I have
sinned, yea I have done wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? So may
we justly say, when we think upon the sufferings of our Savior. It is we
Lord that have sinned, it is we that have transgressed against thee, as for
this innocent Lamb, thy son Christ Jesus, alas what has he done? And indeed,
if he had had any sins of his own, he had never been able to have borne
the infinite weight of Gods wrath due unto them: he must first have satisfied
for his own sins, before he could have been an acceptable sacrifice for
our sins. But it will be objected, if Christ had no sin, what needed he
then to have been baptized? I answer, that howsoever Christ was baptized, yet
still he was without sin. As one says well, Christi curo de Spiritu Sacto
concepto, inter alios non petuit in remissionem peccatorum tingi, quae nullum
videbatur admisisse peccatu. Optat. in Donat. lib. 1. Mat. 3.14.
his flesh being conceived by the holy Ghost, could not be baptized with
others for remission of sins, because it never committed any sin. And this
did John Baptist himself acknowledge, when he put him back, saying, I have
need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me?

There were other causes therefore besides sin, for which it pleased Christ
to be baptized. First, as himself says, that he might fulfill all
righteousness. Mat. 3.15. As in his Circumcision he had fulfilled the law of
Moses; so he was also to submit himself to Baptism, which he knew to be
the ordinance of God. Secondly, that he might sanctify the element of water
for our sanctification, and for the washing away of our sins. Christi care
ipso Iordane sanctior invenitur, vt magis aquam ipsa descensu suo mundauerit,
qua^ ipsa mundata sit: Opt. in Donar. lib. 1.
Christ's flesh, says one, was holier then Jordan it self, so as it rather
cleansed the water by going down into it, then was cleansed by it. And Bernard
says. Baptizatus est Christus, non se in aquis, led aquas in se Sanctificans,
vt per cas Sanctificaret nos. Bern. Ser. 6. in Parase.
Christ was baptized; not to sanctify himself in the waters, but to sanctify
the waters in himself, and in them to sanctify us. Thirdly, to commend unto
us this humility. As St. Augustine says. Christus de Spiritu Sa^cto generatus,
regeneratione no eguit. In aqua autem voluit baptizari a Ioanne, non vt eius
iniquitas vlla dilueretur, sed vt magna commendaretur humilitas. Aug. Enchir.
cap. 48.
Christ being begotten of the holy Ghost, needed no regeneration. And yet he
would be baptized of John, not that any iniquity of his might be washed away,
but to commend unto us his great humility. Last of all, he was baptized for our
example, that we might not shun baptism, which our Savior was content to
undergo: As the same Father says. Baptizatus est Dominus propter superbiam
futurorum, vt nemo aspernaretur baptizari. Aug. in Psalm. 91.
The Lord was baptized, to prevent the pride of them that were to come, that no
man might think scorn of baptism.

This serves first, to commend the exceeding love of Christ toward us, that
he would be contented to suffer such unspeakable torments for our sakes.
Greater love, says he, then this, has no man, that a man bestows his life
for his friends. And yet this love of his was greater, for we were not friends,
but enemies to him. And therefore, the Apostle says, Herein God sets out
his love to us, that when we were sinners and enemies, Christ dyed for us. When
the Jews saw our Savior Christ shed a few tears for the death of Lazarus
his friend, Use. 1. Joh. 15.13. Romans 5.8.10. Ioh. 11.36. Romans 12.1. Demus illi
vita^ nostram, qui nobis dedit vitam suam.
Behold, say they, how he loved him. But far greater was his love to us,
which caused him to shed even the dearest drop of blood in his heart, for us
his enemies. And therefore, we should be careful to love him again, and to
testify the same, by consecrating our selves an holy and an acceptable
sacrifice unto him, as the Apostle exhorts.

Use. 2.
Secondly, it sets us see the heinousness of our sins, in that nothing in
the world could satisfy the wrath of God conceived against us, but only the
sufferings of Christ, which should make us mourn for our sins, above all
things, and for ever after detest and abhor the same. When we shall consider
that our sins did pierce the very heart of Christ Jesus, and shed his blood,
it will make our hearts rise within us at the committing of the least sin
whatsoever.

What is that to us.] This was the answer which the high Priests made to the
confession of Judas. In the distress and discomfort of his soul he came to
them. For he knew that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Mat. 2.7.
and that men should resort to them for comfort and direction, he knew that
they sat in Moses his seat, Mat. 23 ^. Luke 11.52.
and that they had the key of knowledge, as our Savior Christ says, and
therefore should be able to relieve men that stood in need of comfort. But see
how little they respected him. What is that to us? say they, see thou to it. As
if they should say, In that thou have sinned in betraying innocent blood, it is
nothing to us, but thou art too blame for it. And therefore, there is no reason
why thou should object the matter to us. Look thou to it, how thou may
escape: it is thy sin, it is none of ours. Here was cold comfort: These were
miserable comforters, as Job says. Job. 16.2.5.
They should rather have strengthened him with their mouth, and the comfort of
their lips should have assuaged his sorrow. But let us a little consider this
speech of theirs: It is strange they should make so light of the matter as they
do: for it is most certain, their hand was deeper in the fact then his. Ioh.
7.1.11.32. Mat. 26.3.4. and Ioh. 11.47.53. Mat. 26 15. and Luke 22.4.5. Ioh.
18.3.
They often laid wait for innocent blood, sometimes seeking for him themselves,
and sometimes sending their Officers to take him. And before he was
apprehended, they had consulted and determined to put him to death. They had
couenanted with Judas for money to betray him into their hands. They received a
band of Soldiers of Pilate, and appointed them to Judas for the apprehending
of him. They suborned and produced false witnesses against him, that they might
seem to observe some show of judgment. Mat. 26.59.60. At the last, when by a
solemn oath they had extorted from him a confession of the truth, namely, Mat.
26.63.64.65.66.
that he was Christ the son of God, without any further examining of the
cause, they condemn him most guiltless. And having rashly condemned him, they
deliver him over to the Deputy, Mat. 27.1.2.
that he might put him to death. How then does all this nothing concern them?
But be it so. Let it be granted, that they are without blame in this case, and
that Judas only was the cause of betraying of him: why then do they not revoke
the judgment, and deliver the innocent person from condemnation? why do they
not reuerse that which they had corruptly judged? why do they not, now that
they know the truth, alter their wicked sentence? Moreover, being Priests of
the Lord, to whom it appertained by their sacrifices to purge the sins of the
people, why do they thus scornefully reject this confession of a sinner,
especially considering, that themselves had caused him to sin? why do they
not comfort him in his repentance, and by their expiations procure him the
pardon of his sin? Or if his sin be vnexpiable, as it is, why do they not,
being Judges and Elders of the people, punish him according to the law, for
being guilty of innocent blood? Here are then diverse sins bewrayed in this
answer of theirs.

Accusatio Sacerdotum est, quod poenite^tiam non egerunt, etia^ Judah
poeaitente. Hugo Cardin. in locum.
First, we see the hypocrisy of these wicked chief Priests, that though they
were (no doubt) convinced in their consciences by this confession of Judas, yet
are not brought to any acknowledgment of their sin, much less to repent of
it. Nay, indeed they could never endure at any hand to be put in mind of
their sin, that so they might come to amendment. Which of all the Prophets
could they hear with patience, if once he began to touch their sins? Nay,
did they not persecute him in this case, as an Heretic, and a contemner of
their sacred dignity? The reason was, first upon a false conceit they had,
that they could not err, nor do amiss. It was their saying of old. The law
shall not perish from the Priest, Jerem. 18.18. Hos. 9.7.
nor the counsel from the wise, etc. Yea they counted themselves men of the
spirit, as though none had the spirit of God but they. As Zidkijah said to
Michaiah, 1. King. 22.24.
When went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? And these later
ones were still of the same mind. For when the Officers that were sent to
apprehend our Savior Christ, returned with this answer, Ioh. 7.46.47.48.
Never man spoke like this man. What, say they, are ye also deceived? Does any
of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? as though they could not be
deceived. And when the blind man, that had newly received his sight, spoke
somewhat boldly unto them concerning Christ Jesus, they thought great scorn
with it. John 9.34.
Thou art altogether, say they, borne in sin, and do thou teach us? Under
this pretense they always bare out the matter, and would not endure that any
body should reprove them. When Pashur the Priest had heard that Jeremiah had
prophesied against him, he smote him, and put him in the stocks. Jere. 20.1.
Amos 7.10.
And when Amos the Prophet spoke against the sins of Amaziah the Priest of
Bethel, he complained of him to the King. Yea the Pharisees could not endure
that our Savior Christ himself should reprove them, for when he had
denounced many woes against them, one of them steppeth up, and tells him,
Master, in saying thus, Euke 11.45.
thou put us to rebuke, as though that had been a heinous matter. And thus
is it with the Pope at this day, he cries out with open mouth, that he cannot
err: and that all judgment is in his power, and that he must be judged of
none. Did. 40. cap. Si Papa.
Yea it is to be read in plain words in his own decrees. That the Pope is
not to be judged of any man, though being careless of his own and his
brethrens salvation, he should draw innumerable souls with him to hell.
Secondly, from this persuasion that they could not err, did arise a damnable
pride, which made them think it a shame to confess any fault. And therefore,
they maintained all their deeds though never so heinous.

Now from this particular example, Doct. Wicked men cannot endure to hear of
their sins.
we may for our instruction gather this general Doctrine, that it is the
property of all wicked men, not to endure to hear of their sins, especially
if they be great persons, or have any authority. Peccasse se non anguntur:
obiurgari, moleste serunt, Cic. de amicitia.
As the Heathen Orator could say, They are not grieved at all that they have
done amiss, but it grieueth them to be rebuked for it. They cannot abide the
liberty of the Ministry of the word, in ripping up and laying open their
sins. But they will chop Logic with him, whatsoever he be, that shall take
upon him to reprove them, and will justify themselves and their actions
against him. As Saul did when Samuel reproved him. 1. Sam. 15.20.
Yea, says he, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way
which the Lord has sent me: as though Samuel had done him a great deal of
wrong, to challenge him in that manner. So the Prophet Malachie brings in the
people always answering again when they are accused. Mal. 1.6.7.
The Lord tells them they had despised his name, and 3.8.13.
they answer very sawcily, wherein have we despised thy name? He tells them
they have spoiled him: wherein have we spoiled thee? And he tells them their
words had been stout against him, why say they, What have we spoken against
thee? Hos. 4 4.
And the Prophet Hosea affirms as much of the people with whom he had to
deal, that though their sins were heinous, and such as caused the Lord to
commence an action against them: yet they might not be reproved for all that,
but were ready to fly in his face that should do it. Ezech. 13.10.1^
Yet, says he, let none rebuke nor reprove another: for thy people are as they
that rebuke the Priest. So long as the Minister does stroke their heads in
their sin; Iere. 6.14.
so long as he daubeth with untempered mortar and sows pillowes under men's
arme-holes, healing their hurt with sweet words, saying peace, peace, when
there is no peace; So long as he will not open his mouth against them, or if
he do, so long as he goes fair and far off, as we say, or else frames
himself to please their humors, 1. Kin. 22.13.14. 1. Pet. 4.4.
as Ahabs servant would have persuaded Michaiah: or which is worse, will be
content to run with them to all excess of riot: so long he is a man for
their tooth, and so long they affect and love him: But if he will needs deal
sincerely, and will not spare the proudest of them, Isa. 58 1.
but will lift up his voice like a trumpet, and show them their sins; then as
the Prophet Jeremiah complained, Jere. 15.10.
he is a contentious man, a man that strives with the whole earth, no body
can endure him. Prou. 15.12.
As Solomon says, a scorner loves not him that rebukes him. 1. King. 13 4.
Hence was it that when Jeroboam heard the Prophet inueighing against the altar
that he had set up, he presently bids, Lay hold on him. And this was it that
made Ahab hate Michaiah, and 22.8.
even because he would be so plain with him. Gal. 4.9.1
And the Galatians counted the Apostle Paul their enemy, because he told them
the truth. The reason hereof is, first, because as our Savior Christ said,
their deeds are so evil, that they cannot endure the light of the word. Every
man, says he, that does evil, hates the light, John 3.19.20.
neither comes to it, least his deeds should be reproved. Secondly, because
of the swelling pride of their flesh. For as a toad if it be pricked, swells
till it burst withal: Eccles. 12.11.
so they being pricked with the goade of reproof, as Solomon calls it, they
swell and cannot brook it. Thirdly, they are so highly conceited of
themselves, that they think scorn to be reproved of so base a man as they
account the Minister. As Amaziah King of Judah, when the Prophet reproved him
from the Lord for his Idolatry. What says he, 2. Chron. 25.15.16.
Have they made thee the Kings, Counselors? cease, why should they smite thee.

This doctrine may admonish us, Use.
to take heed of this sin. There is in every one of us so much self love,
as makes us very prone to it. But we must labor to subdue it, and yield our
selves meekely to the reprehension of the word that so we may come to the
acknowledgement of our sins, without which, as has been said, there can be
no true repentance. If these chief Priests, as they could not but be convinced
in their conscience, so they had freely and sincerely acknowledged their
sins, they might have found savor with the Lord: but they rather, as we
see, maintain their sins, and therefore they perish in them. Qui ad mortem
peccant, tantam habent ignorantiam and caecitatem, vt nec turbentur in
sceleribus, nec paenitentiae dol^re crucientur. Glossa ordinar. in locum. Heb.
13.22.
As indeed it is a token that a man sins unto death, when he is so
ignorant and blind, that having his sins discovered to his conscience, yet
is not moved at all with them. Let us therefore suffer the words of
exhortation, as the Apostle says, and though we be sharply reproved, let us
submit our selves. Thus have the children of God done from time to time. 2.
Sam. 12.13.
When Nathan had ripped up David's sin to the quick, he humbled himself
with all meekness, and said, I have sinned against the Lord. So when the
Prophet Haggai had rebuked the people of his time, Hag. 1.12.
for neglecting to repair the Temple of the Lord, it is said, they were so
far from stomacking the matter, Acts 2.37.
that they feared before the Lord. And the Jews that heard the Apostle Peter's
Sermon, wherein their very particular sin was laid open, they were pricked in
their hearts, and cried out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? So the
Corinthians being reproved by the Apostle Paul for suffering the incestuous
person unpunished, were so far from taking offense at it, as that they
humbled themselves by godly sorrow unto repentance. 2. Cor. 7.10.11. Yea, we
should indeed desire such a Minister as may awake us to the sight of our
sins, and not suffer us to sleep securely in them. As David does, Psalm.
141.5. Let the righteous, says he, smite me, for this is a benefit: and let
him reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil, that shall not break my head:
for within a while I shall even pray in their miseries: he would be so far
from being stirred thereby, as that in token of his thankfulness, he would
pray earnestly to God for them.

What is that to us?] As these chief Priests are not moved to any remorse for
their sin by Judas his confession: so they do not comfort him, whom they
saw wounded in his conscience, but leave him to himself to sink or swim:
Which was another sin of theirs. Of which Saint Augustine speaks in this
manner. Judas paenitens, iuit ad Pharisaeos, reliquit Apostolos. Nihil invenit
auxilij, sed argumentum desperationis. Dixerunt enim quid ad nos? tu videris.
Si peccasti, tibi sit: non tibi succurrimus, non peccata tua charitatiue
suscipimus, non comportanda promittimus, non qualiter deponas* onus docemus.
Quid enim nobis misericordiae, quinec opera sequimur iustitiae? Isset ad
fratres, ad condiscipulos. Juit ad diuisos, and diuisus perijt. Aug. de vera
and fall paen cap 12.
Judas when he repented, went to the Pharisees for comfort, and left the
Apostles, but he found no ease at their hands, but rather matter of
desperation. For they said, What is that to us? See thou to it. If thou have
sinned, at thine own peril be it: we will not relieve thee, we will not in
charity undertake to bear thy sins, we will not teach thee how to cast off
the burden of them. For what have we to do with mercy, that follow not the
works of justice? He should have gone, says he, to his brethren and fellow
Disciples; he went to the divided ones, and perished divided; alluding both to
the manner of Judas his end, that burst asunder in the midst, etc. and also
to the name of the Pharisees, which as some Caelius Rhodig lectionum
antiquarum. li. 5, c. 9.
think were so called, because by a strict kind of life which they led, they
had sequestered and separated themselves from others. And herein they verified
that speech of our Savior, which he spoke in another sense. Mat. 23.4.
They laid an heavy and a grievous burden upon him, and would not help to
ease him with one of their fingers.

From whence arises this doctrine, Doct. They that are distressed in
conscience should be comforted. Iere. 23.1.2. Ezech. 34.2.4.
that it is a grievous sin, not to comfort those that are distressed and
afflicted in conscience. The Prophets every where reprove the neglect of it.
Woe be to the Pastors, that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture,
says the Lord: ye have scatered my flock and have not visited them. And the
Lord commands the Prophet Ezechiel to prophecy against the shepherds of
Israel, because they had not strengthened the weak, nor healed the sick, nor
bound up the broken etc. And the Prophet Zechariah cries out against
Idole-shepheards, that look not for that which is lost, Zech. 1.16.17.
nor secke the tender lambs, nor heal that which is hurt etc. Whosoever he is
that takes upon him to be a Minister, should have both skill and will for the
performance of this duty. For his skill, 2. Tim. 2.15.
he must study to show himself a workman that need not be ashamed, dividing
the word of truth aright. He is the steward of the Lords house, Luke 12.42.
he must give every one his portion of meat in due season. He must know the
estate of all men and frame his instructions accordingly. As all meat is not
fit for all stomachs: but they that are weak and sick, must have food of
more easy digestion and better nourishment, then they that are strong and in
health: so all instructions will not serve for all men. They that are sick in
their souls, with a sight and feeling of their sins, must have the promises
of the Gospel applied unto them, for their comfort. And therefore, he must
pray to God to give him a tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4.
that he may know to minister a word in season to him that is weary. And for
his will, he must know, that this is one maine end of his calling, whereunto
withal diligence he must apply himself, even to preach the Gospel to the
poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captive and
recovering of sight to the blind etc. Luke 4.18.
He must be like that good Samaritaine, seeing men wounded in their
consciences he must bind up their wounds, Luke 10.33.34.
and power in wine and oil to supple them and refresh them. He is a Physician
for men's souls, and therefore he must apply unto them the blame of Gilead,
Iere. 8.22.
even the sweet comforts of the Gospel, that the health of Gods disttessed
people may be recovered. If it be the duty of all Christians to comfort the
feeble minded, 1. These. 5.14.
as the Apostle exhorts, much more does it appertain to the Ministers of the
word, that are chiefly set apart thereunto. Yea it is ooe principal part of
Prophecy, 1. Cor. 14.3.
that is, the Ministry of the word. He that prophesies, says the Apostle,
speaks unto men, Romans 15.4.
to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort. As it is one property of the
word to minister comfort, (as the Apostle says,) Whatsoever things are
written aforetime, are written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scripture might have hope: Psalm. 19.8.
and David says, The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart. So
the Minister must apply it in such sort, as it may have this comfortable
effect, in the hearts of those that stand in need of it. 1. Sam. 1.9.
For this cause, Eli the Priest sat upon a stool at the door of the
Tabernacle, that he might be ready at all times to perform this duty. Acts
9.17. and 16.28. etc.
Thus did Ananias comfort the Apostle Paul being exceedingly cast down, with
the vision which he had seen. And thus did Paul and Silas comfort the Iayler
that was ready in the horror of his conscience to make away himself.

Chyrurgion do only cut and lance men's sores, and never bind them up; if he
only apply corrasiues, and no lenitiues; he is rather a Butcher then a
Chyrurgion. In like manner if a Minister do only beat men down with the
terrors of the law, and never labor to raise them up with the comforts of the
Gospel; he is an hangman and an executioner rather then a Minister. And
therefore, we must labor to take a right course in administering the word. We
must not preach the law alone, nor the Gospel alone, but both together: and
yet both in their right order. The law must go before, to beat down the pride
of men's hearts, and the Gospel must follow after, to minister comfort unto
them. When Nathan had thoroughly humbled King David, 2. Sam. 12.13.
with denouncing Gods judgments against him for his sins, then he spoke
peace unto him again, saying. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not
die. Act. 2.37.28. etc.
When the Apostle Peter saw the effect of his Sermon, that it had pricked and
wounded the people in their hearts, he was most ready to comfort them again
with the promises of mercy.

Secondly, this doctrine also serves to teproue all those, that have no
ability to perform this duty. A number (God knows) are ignorant persons, of
no gifts for this work of the Lord, and besides, are so given over to the
world, as they have no desire to come to knowledge. So long as they may eat
the fat, Ezech. 34.3.
and cloth themselves with the wool, they care not what becomes of the poor
sheep. They have more regard of the gain of riches Apud eos non animarum
salus, sed lucrum quaeritur diuitiarum Bern. in Psalm. 91. Sermon. 5.
as one says, then of the salvation of men's souls. But alas, this
intolerable defect never shows it self more shamefully or with greater
hurt, then when men stand most in need of spiritual comfort, namely, at the
hour of death, or in the time of some great affliction. For as shepherds that
want skill to help a poor sheep out of the ditch, cut his throat in time, to
make it man's meat, that it may not be said, it died in a ditch: so these
miserable comforters, are driven to take some indirect course, whereby for want
of knowledge, they slay many a poor soul. And thus in many places are the
miserable and desperate calamities of the people provided for, when their
necessity does most of all require better comfort.

Interpreter, Job. 33.23. 2. Cor. 5.19.
as Job says, able to deliver aright the reconciliation made betwixt God and
man, the word whereof is committed unto him: able to open the covenant of
grace, and rightly to lay down the means how this reconciliation is wrought,
and to apply the same accordingly: and so to declare to man his righteousness:
that is to say, (as that reverend and worthy man of blessed memory, Master
Perkins does expound it) when a poor sinner by his sins, is brought down to
the gates of hell, and by the preaching of the law to a true sight of his
misery, then it is the duty of a Minister, to declare to him his
righteousness, namely, that howsoever in himself he be, as he is, as foul as
sin can make him, and the law can discover him to be: yet in Christ he is
righteous, and by Christ so justified, as he is no more a sinner in Gods
account: and also to maintain the same for the quiet of his conscience,
against all the power of darkness whatsoever. Now this cannot be done without
a special gift from God. And therefore, we are to pray earnestly unto him,
that the knowledge of Christ Jesus and of heavenly things may not only swim
in our brains, but may also be engraven in our hearts, and imprinted in our
souls by the finger of God, 2. Cor. 1.4.
that so we may be able to comfort them that are in affliction out of the
feeling of our own hearts: even by the comfort, wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God.

See thou to it.] The chief Priests are so far from comforting Judas in his
distress, that they do rather despise him, and in a manner laugh him to
scorn. They hired him, and set him on work, Doct. Traitors are hated even of
those that have benefit by the^.
and yet now that they have effected what they would, they do not respect him.

Where we may observe, the just reward and punishment of traitors: they are
odious even to them that have benefit by them. And this we are taught even by
the light of nature. It is not likely, Erasmus de lingua.
says one, that any wiseman can from his heart wish well to a trayour. For as
they that stand in need of the gall or poison of beasts for a medicine, do
only take delight in them, as long as they have use for them; but when they
need them no longer, they detest and abhor them: so there is no man loves a
traitor, but whiles he has occasion to abuse his villainy: when he has
brought that to pass by him which he desired, he hates him as a most wicked
wretch, and dares not repose any trust in him, whom he has found treacherous
to those, to whom he should have been faithful. Nemo vnquam sapiens
proditori credendum putauit. Cic. in Verrem. Lab. 1. and paulo post. Habet
honorem vt proditori, non vt amico fidem.
For how can he be thought faithful to a stranger, that has betrayed his
friend. Ovid. Metam. lib. 8. magni fiduciae regni. Dij te submoueant, o nostri
infamia saech, Orb suo, tellusque tibi, pontusque negetur, etc.
When Scylla, the daughter of Nisus, had spoiled her father of his fatal
hair, which was held a great stay to the Kingdom, and had brought it to Minos
the enemy of her country, howsoever he were content to take the benefit of the
treason, for the furthering of his victory; yet he abhors her, that was so
unnatural: and though she offered to swim the Sea after him, yet he
regarded her not. When Antigonus had abused a fellows treachery to betray his
enemy, and when his friends marvelled, that having brought his purpose about,
he did not any way gratify the fellow; he made this answer, that he loved
traitors so long as there was any use of their treason, but afterward he hated
them.

Plutarch reports the like of one Rhimotalcus a Thracian, who revolted from
Antonius to Augustus, Proditionem amo, proditorum odi. Pet. Mart. loc. com.
class. 4. c. 1^
and after the victory did most insolently and out of measure boast of that he
had done. Whereupon Augustus turning him to one of his friends said unto him. I
love treason but I hate the traitor. And Peter Martyr makes mention of one
Lasthenes, who having betrayed Olynthus, the City where he dwelt, unto the
Macedonians, thought he should have been had in great honor of them for the
fact; but finding the matter to fall out far otherwise, (for the soldiers
called him nothing but traitor all over the camp) he complained to King
Phillip, who made him this answer, that his countrymen were very rude and
homely fellows, and could not tell how to call things, by any other but their
own proper names: they call, says he, a spade, a spade; and so a traitor, a
traitor. And thus the man, contrary to his expectation, was had in derision,
and laughed to scorn at all hands. So that we see treason is so heinous: that
it is execrable even to a man's enemies. Princes do sometimes reward them
indeed, but it is not because they think them worthy of it, but because they
would stir up others to do the like, if need require.

Use.
And therefore this in a word, may be a warning to all men, that seeing
traitors are thus odious, even to those to whom they have done service, they
take heed of treason, and contain themselves in all bounds of loyalty,
toward those to whom they owe duty.

It were well, if our treacherous and false hearted Papists, which viperlike,
seek to gnaw out the bowels of their native country, would think of this.
Those fugitive persons among them, that run beyond the Seas, and offer their
service to their holy Father, for subuerting the land, have some experience of
the truth of this. For all the reward they get is this, to be sent back
again, that by the hand of the Magistrate, they may receive deserved
punishment for their traiterous designs. And doubtless, if their mischeiuous
imaginations should prosper and take effect, which the God of heaven forbid,
they should gain little by the match. For though their fact might be
acceptable: yet themselves would be odious, even to those that set them on
work.

And brought again.] This is the third part of Judas his repentance, namely
his satisfaction. That it might appear that his sorrow was not dissembled and
counterfeite, but true and unfeigned, he brings again to the high Priests
the money which he had reciued of them; and when they would not receive it,
whether they would or no, he cast it down in the Temple. This was very
commendable in him: but yet here he failed, that he was careful to make
satisfaction to men, but had no care to reconcile himself to God, whom by his
sin he had most of all offended. It is true in this case, which our Savior
Christ says in another case. This ought he to have done, Mat, 23.23.
and not to have left the other undone.

But here in the example of this wretched man we are taught, that there is no
true repentance, Doct. No true repentance without restitution. Leuit. 6.1.2 etc.
where there is not restitution made of goods unlawfully gotten. The law of God
was made very strict to the Jews in this case. If any man deny that which was
taken him to keep, or that which was put to him of trust, or does by robbery
or by violence oppress his neighbor, or has found that which was lost, and
denies it, and swears falsely, he shall restore the robbery, etc. Number.
5.6.7.
And in another place, When a man or a woman shall commit any sin etc. When
they shall confess their sin which they have done, and shall restore the
damage thereof with his principal etc. Luke 19.8. Exodus 22.1. 2. Sam. 12.6.
And indeed this is a part of justice, which gives to every man that which is
due unto him. And we have a memorable example of it in good Zaccheus, who
being converted, stood forth and made protestation in the presence of Christ,
that if he had taken ought from any man by forged cauillation, he would restore
him fourefold. As it he should say, I know that I have deceived many by
impostures and cosening tricks, which is nothing else but theft in the sight
of God, and therefore I will make restitution, according as the law inioyneth
in that case. Now this was the law for theft, that, if a man steal an ox or a
sheep, and kill it or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for the ox and
four sheep for the sheep. And hereupon David adjudged the man that had taken
from his poor neighbor his only sheep, that he should restore the sheep
fourefold. And no doubt a man that truly repents, is so affected, that he
cannot endure about him, that which he knows to be another man's, and not his
own. Whereupon Saint Augustine has a good saying, Pessimum genus hominum est
quod sceleris penam relaxari, and id propter quod scelus admissum est,
possidere cupit. ^ui paententi medicina non predest. Si e^im res aliena propt^r
quam peccat^m est, cum reddi possit non redd tur; non agitur paenitentia, sed
^^^gitur. Si autem veraciter agitur, non remititur p^catum nisi restituatur
ablatum. Aug Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
There is, says he, a lewd kind of people, that would have the punishment of
their sin released, and yet would enjoy the thing for which their sin was
committed. But the medicine of repentance does these men no good. For if other
men's goods, for which a man has transgressed, if they may be restored, be
not restored, he does not repent indeed, Leuit. 6.5.
but only counterfeit repentance. But if a man repent truly, the sin is
never remitted: unless that which is wrongfully gotten be restored. And this
is also employed in the law of God, where the party delinquent, is commanded to
make restitution in the case before mentioned, and to give it unto him to whom
it appertains, the same day that he offers for his trespass: as if it
were in vain for him, by oblations to expiate his sin, unless first he
restore that which he has wrongfully gotten. Not that restitution does purge
a man's sins before God, for Christ Jesus alone is the propitiation for them,
1. Joh. 2.2.
as the Apostle says; but because it is true repentance. For wheresoever there
is true repentance, there is an acknowledgement of sin: and where sin is
acknowledged, there is a loathing, an abhorring, and a detestation of it. Now
it is sin not only unlawfully to take away other men's goods, Ephesians. 4.28.
but also unlawfully toretaine them. And therefore, the Apostle says, Ezech.
18.17.
Let him that stole, steal no more etc. But so long as a man does wrongfully
retain other men's goods, so long he steals. Jonah. 3.8.
And the Prophet Ezechiel makes it the mark of a godly man, to restore the
pledge unto the dobter. And when the King of Nineveh called his people to a
general humiliation for their sins, amongst other duties, he urges this as
most necessary, that every man turn from the wickedness that is in his
hands. And certainly, true repentance never goes before, but a desire to
make restitution

This doctrine serves, first to reprove all those that neglect this duty. They
think it a shame to restore any thing, but they think it no shame to gather
what they can by hook or by crook, by right or wrong. But there are two sorts
of people, that are especially taxed in this place.

Against sacrilege.
First our sacrilegious church-robbers, who unjustly turn the reuennues of the
Church unto their own proper use. Whatsoever has been given in great
devotion by our fore-elders to the maintenance of Gods worship, they take it
away, Aelian. var. hist. lib 1. cap. 20.
as being forsooth too much too large allowance for a Minister. And herein they
deal with us, as Dionysius dealt with Jupiter Olympius, who took from him a
massy garment of gold, which Hiero had dedicated to him of the spoils of
Carthage, and gave him a woollen cloak, saying that the other was too heavy
for summer, and too cold for winter, but this was fit for both seasons. But
this is a far more greiuous sin, then the world takes it to be. Solomon
says, It is a destruction for a man to devour that which is sanctified. Prou.
20.25. When a thing is consecrated to holy uses, if any man afterward meddle
with it, it will be his destruction, as the bait is to the greedy fish. Quam
sit malum quamque solliciti effugien dum si quis de hoc quod Deo vouerit, aut
aetinere, aut re petere aliquid mortifera praeuaricatione pertentet; exemplo
sunt Ananias and Sapphira; quos de praetio agri quandam partem insideliter
subtrahentes non solum vox Apostolica tanquam diuini iuris inuasores
increpauit, sed etiam seueritas iustitiae diuinae occidit. Si quis igitur rem
dominio iam deuotam, carnali viotus illec ebra, crediderit deni^o
rereposcendum, non est legitimas (...) suae poss^ssor, sed diumi iuris
pronunciatur inuasor. Fulg. Epist. 1. de coniug. deb. Mal. 3.8.
VVhereupon one says well, how evil a thing it is, and how carefully to be
avoided, for a man by deadly preuarication to go about, either to retain or
to ask again that which he has consecrated to God; Let Ananias and Saphira
be an example: whom, vnsaithfully withholding some part of the price of the
land, not only the voice of the Apostle did rebuke, but also the severity of
Gods justice did slay, as inuaders of Gods right. So that if any man being
overcome with carnal inticements, shall think he may require that again
which is already devoted to God, he is not a lawful possessor of that which
is his own, but is pronounced to be an inuader of that which appertains to
God. And hereupon the Prophet Malachie tells the people of his time, that in
withholding their tithes and offerings from the Levites, they spoiled God
himself. Will a man; says he, spoil his Gods? yet have you spoiled me. But
ye say wherein have we spoiled thee? in tithes and offerings. God accounts
that to be taken from himself, which was either denied, or badly paid to the
Priests and Levites. The reason is because they were occupied in Gods
Ministry, and God who by right might have exacted much more at the hands of
his people had assigned them the tithes for their wages. And indeed, there were
many things in this sin, which were joined with the proach and tontempt of
God himself.

For first of all, they bewrayed themselves to be profane contemners of the
grace of God, seeing they grudged to be at any cost for those things, whereby
the Lord sealed his presence unto them, and whereby he testified that he had
set his house among them.

Secondly, there was a manifest transgression of Gods law, who had professed
that their tithes were due to himself, Leuit. 21-30.
and that he had given them to the Levites. For so it is said in the law. All
the tithe of the land, both of the seed of the ground, Number. 18.21.24.
and of the fruit of the tree, is the Lords; it is holy to the Lord. And in
another place: I have given the children of Leui all the tenth in Israel for an
inheritance, for their service which they serve in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation.

Thirdly, there was gross ingratitude, in that they denied the tithes of their
fruits unto him, who by his liberality had given them their life, and all
things tending to the maintenance thereof.

Fourthly, it was a token of impiety, that for their own private benefit they
suffered the Levites to fail, and so the service of God to fall to the ground.

Last of all, it was a part of injustice, to deny to the Leuite that wages,
which was due and appointed unto them by the Lord. So plentiful and so
manifold was this sin, which God in this place vpbraideth them withal. And
therefore, Mal. 3.9.
mark what follows upon this. You are cursed with a curse; for ye have
spoiled me, even this whole nation. Wheresoever this sin is suffered, there
the curse of God hangs over the whole land. This may very fitly be applied to
our times. For though the Leuiticall Priesthood be abrogated by Christ, yet
the ministry of the Church remains still to the end of the world. And the
Lord has appointed that the Ministers of the Gospel should be maintained
still. Mat. 10.10.
Our Savior says, The labourer is worthy of his wages. And the Apostle
proves it at large, that there is maintenance as due to the Ministers of the
Gospel, as ever it was to the Priests in the time of the law. 1. Cor. 9.14.
The Lord, says he, has ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel. And how careful the Primitive Church was to provide for
their teachers, may appear in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. But when
once it pleased God to convert Kings and Emperors unto the knowledge of
Christ, they very bountifully enriched the Church, and assigned unto it tithes
and other reuennues. Which order was so inuiolably kept for a long time, Qui
decimas ^aicis donaret, inter maximos Haereticos non minimus babeatur. Willet.
contr. 2. quaest. 3.
as that there was a decree, that whosoever should estrange tithes from the
Church, and give them to the use of Lay persons, he should be accounted not
the least among the greatest Heretics. But when superstition began once to
grow, and the ancient discipline of the Church was decayed, then began many
abuses about Church reuennues. For the Pope first of all, alienated the
property of tithes, and erected impropriations (rightly so called, as
altogether improper for them that have them) for the maintenance of a sort of
lazy Monks and Friars, which like Locusts have devoured the Church. And this
appears even in our own stories. For when as in the reign of Henry the
third, the Bishops of England made suite to the Pope, that impropriate
benefices might be restored to then first use, at the contrary request of the
Monks, the Pope determined they should stand as they did. But the Pope is not
only too blame in this case, but many also of our own Ministers are in fault.
For when ambitious spirits began to strive impudently for Church-liuings,
they were content basely to stoop on their knees, as Camels do for their
burdens: and to lay their livings in the lap of every Dalilah, to shave at
their pleasure, and to take away from them that wherein their strength
consisted. Hence part of the tithes and reuennues is sold away, part is taken
away from the Church by Noble men, and part translated to other uses, by the
decrees of Princes: so that now the poor Church of God is constrained, either
to satisfy the covetousness, or to minister fuel to the prodigality of
private persons: and all men take pleasure to spoil those things, which our
devout forefathers bestowed upon the Church. As the Soldiers dealt with the
garments and coat of Christ, Mat. 27.35.
they parted his garments and cast l^ts: so do these men deal with the
possessions of the Church. They share and divide amongst them the goods of the
Church, and cast lots for them, and in the mean while, suffer Christ Jesus to
hang miserably upon the Cross. Some devour, some spoil the Churches goods,
and in the mean while suffer the Ministers of the Church and the true Teachers
of the Gospel to starve and pine. Thus they crucify Christ, and cast lots for
his garments. And this sin is so much the more heinous, because a great number
of those that are guilty of it, would be counted great Professors, and very
religious. They may not be termed wasters and spoilers, but friends and
favorers, yea defenders of the Church. But shall I tell them how they defend
it? Brentius in Luc. 23.
Even just (as one says) as the Soldiers defended Christ, when he hanged upon
the Cross. It is the commendation of that good Centurion, that out of his love
to the Nation of the Jews, Luke 7.5.
he built them a Synagogue. This man shall rise up in judgment against these
persons, who by transferring Church-goods to their own private gain, as much
as lies in them, do pull down Churches. With what face dare they boast
themselves to be Christians, when they offer such injury to Christ, in his
poor Church and Ministers? Romans 2.22.
how can they profess that they abhor Idols, when thus grossly they commit
sacrilege? The very Heathen men have condemned this sin. They could not
endure the spoiling of their Gods in any whosoever he were. And therefore,
Aelian. Var. Histor. l. 5. c. 16.
when a young child at Athens, had taken up a plate of gold, that fell out of
Dianaes coronet, he was brought before the Judges: who set before him gugawes
and rattles to play withal, and the plate also, and when the child refused the
trisles and took the plate again, he was not spared for the tenderness of
his age, but was punished as a Church-robber. And the civil laws are
altogether against it: holding, that the things of God (such as are our Sacrum
dicitur, quicquid mancipatum est cultui diuino, vt Ecclesia, vel res Ecclesiae.
Magist. sentent, lib. 3. distinct. 27. C.
tithes and reuennues of the Church) ought not to belong to Lay persons; And it
is well spoken by one to this purpose: That whatsoever is designed as proper to
divine worship, is of right and justly reputed holy; of which sort is the
Church, and all things of the Church, or belonging to it. And surely such and
so heavy have been Gods judgments denounced and executed against these
sacrilegious Church-robbers themselves, that by color of their impropriations
deprive the godly Levites of their proper livings, and drive them out of their
countries, that we cannot otherwise esteem of such intruders upon the rights
of Gods Church, then as men given over to the God of this world, having made an
irrecouerable shipwreck of a good conscience. For to seize upon the
Church-liuings, and thereby to bring the Ministers to extreme beggerie, what is
it else, but after the manner of the Jews and Gentiles, though under some other
pretense, yet with no less cruelty, to persecute and make hauock of the Church
it self? And therefore, the Lord may justly take up the same complaint against
us in this behalf, as he did before against the Jews. For Christ himself is
spoiled, when those things are spent upon profane uses, which should serve for
the maintenance of his Ministers. For tithes are due only to the Church, and
cannot be alienated to any other use, nor turned to the maintenance of Lay
men. For where tithes are paid, there must be a matter of giving and receiving.
Phill. 4.15. 1. Cor. 9.11.
The Minister gives spiritual things, as the Apostle says, and receives
carnal things. Now because Lay men cannot perform this duty, they have
nothing to do with the tithe: for not keeping the condition, they cannot
claim the covenant. Qua front qua conscientia oblationes vultis accipere, qui
vix valetis pro vobis nedum pro alijs Deo preces offerre?
With what face, or with what conscience can they receive tithes and other
offerings, that cannot offer up prayers for themselves, much less for others?
I do not press this, as though I mean to determine, that the Ministers of
the Gospel might not be maintained by some other means. For I am persuaded,
that it is in the power of civil Magistrates, to allow any other maintenance
to the Minister, so that it be competent. But this I say, that for as much as
tithes are by law established amongst us for this purpose; to be the hire of
the Lords laborers, and the wages of his workmen: it will be as great a sin
to defraude the Minister of his portion, as to keep back the meat or wages
from an ordinary labourer. Which as the Apostle James says, Iam. 5.4.
is a sin that cries loud in the ears of God for vengeance. And yet for all
this, the matter is come to this pass, that he is well, that can catch
anything from the Church: Yea, I could name a Knight of no small worth in the
Country, that maintained openly, that a small allowance is fittest for a
Minister, to keep him sober for reckoning, least having too much, he should
wax idle. Indeed it is true, they that never were sincere hearted, are soon
corrupted with preferment. As God knows, we have experience of too many, who
whiles they had but a poor maintenance, were very diligent and painful
Preachers: but after they have added steeple to steeple, and living to living,
the fire-edge is taken off them, and then (as though now they had got that they
preached for) they wax so hoarse and so rusty, as if some bone stuck in their
throats, that they can hardly preach at all. But they that entered into the
ministry with a sincere affection, and made the glory of God and the
salvation of his people, and not filthy lucre, the end of their preaching,
Honos alit arts, and omnes incenduntur ad studia gloria. Cicero. 2. Chro.
32.25.
are by preferment stirred up to greater diligence in their callings; and the
more bountiful that God is unto them in their maintenance, the more careful
are they to render according to the reward bestowed upon them: wretched
therefore and wicked are they that are thus minded, whosoever they be. And
this is the misery of our Church, that it is pilled and polled in this manner:
Nehem. 13.10.
and that by this means many faithful Ministers of excellent gifts, are
brought to extreme poverty, because as it was in the days of Nehemiah, The
portions of the Levites are not given. Nay, in many places the Minister has
scarce the allowance of Michah his Leuite, Ten shekels is of our coin 23.
shillings, 4. pence, every shekel being 2. shillings 4. pence.
which was ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and his
meat and drink. Judge. 17.10. For I know a Minister that has but bare four
pounds to live on for the whole year. Hence comes it to pass, that many
young scholars of great hope and singular towardness, do leave the study of
Divinity, and betake themselves to the Laws, or to Physic. And hence the
Church is pestered, 1. Kings 12.31.
I say pestered with Ieroboams Priests, such as were never brought up in the
schools of the Prophets, but taken from base trades, and as one says well,
John Lambert holy Martyr.
were made Priests before ever they were good Clerks. Hence it comes to
pass, Prou. 29.18.
that prophesying fails in many places, and therefore the people perish.
Hence is it, Job. 16.2. and 13.4.
that many that have care of men's souls, are miserable comforters, as Job
says, Physicians of no value. Hence is it, that the poor people of God are
pitifully dispersed, Mat. 9.36. Ioh. 4.35.
and scattered abroad as sheep without a shepherd. Hence is it, in a word,
that the Regions are euerywhere white unto the harvest, Mat. 9.37.
but few laborers to put in the sickle. I do not all this while plead mine
own cause: I thank God, none of these ravenous Harpies, and greedy
cormorants, have preyed upon my Church. But I have all the reuennues of it,
with as little prejudice as the most of my brethren. But as the Prophet said in
another case. For Zions sake, I cannot hold my tongue, Jsa. 62.1.
and for Ierusalems sake, for the poor Churches sake, I cannot cease. And I
would to God, that all we that be Ministers, and have any thing to do with
these persons, be they never so great, would even cry aloude against them,
Isa. 58.1.
and spare not, but lift up our voices like trumpets, to rowse and awake them
out of this sin. Here we should all be right Boanerges, Sons of thunder,
Mar. 3.17.
to threaten and thunder out the judgments of God against this horrible sin
of sacrilege. But alas, we may cry till our hearts ache, before we shall
prevail with the belly that has no ears: unless Christian Magistrates, Isa.
49.23.
who are nursing Fathers to the Church, do by their power work a reformation.
Mr. Perkins in a Treatise of the duties of the Ministry.
This sin, as a worthy Minister in our Church once said, is the Kings evil,
and therefore no hand but his can heal it. There was indeed the like
calamity in the Church of the Jews, but it was only then, Judge. 17.6.
when there was no King in Israel; but every man did that, which was good in
his own eyes. But seeing we have, by Gods blessing, a wise, a godly, and
religious King, let us pray to God, to put into his heart that care of
Nehemiah, for the good of the Church, that he will not suffer every man to
rob and spoil it as it pleases his covetous mind, but cause them, and
compel them to bring their tithes of Corn, Nehem. 13.11.12
and Wine, and Oil, even of all their fruits unto the house of God. And in the
mean while, let all such persons know, that they must one day give account of
their sacrilege unto God. The laws of men do rather Patronize then punish
them, Psalm. 119.126.
and therefore, let them be sure, that God will at last take the matter into
his own hand. Horrible are the examples of Gods judgments upon this sin in
former ages. Dan. 3.2.3.4.5.5.6.30.
Balshazzar King of Babylon, abusing the holy Vessels of the Temple unto
profane uses, was first wounded inwardly with terror of conscience, and
afterward was cruelly murdered. And we read in both the books of Maccabees
of 1. Mac. 9.54 55.56.
Alcymus, 2. Mac. 3.24.25.
Heliodorus, and 4.39.41.42.
Lysimachus, and 5.15.16. cum ^.5.6.7.8.9 10 28.
Antiochus, and 13 4 5.6.7
Menelaus, and 15.30.31.32.33. Dan. 4.24. Leuit. 5.15.16.
Nicanor, all notorious Church-robbers, and all came to fearful ends. Now God
is still as just as ever he was, and detesteth this sin as much as ever he
did, and therefore at the last, they may assure themselves, to receive the like
punishment, unless they prevent it by speedy repentance. And therefore, as
Daniel said in the like case to Nebuchad-nezzar, Let my counsel be acceptable
unto them, and let me advise them in the fear of God, to break off this
their sin by righteousness. Let them make restitution of that which most
unjustly they have so long detayned, that so there may be a healing of their
sin. And this does the law of God require at their hands. If any person
transgress and sin through ignorance (much more if he do it wilfully,
against his knowledge, and against his conscience) by taking away things
consecrated unto the Lord, he shall then bring for his trespass offering unto
the Lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with two shekels of silver
for a trespass offering. So he shall restore that wherein he has offended,
in taking away of the holy things, and shall put the fifth part more thereto,
and give it unto the Priests: so the Priest shall make an atonement for him,
and it shall be forgiven him. Where we see, there is no hope of forgiveness,
where there is not some conscionable restitution made in this behalf. And
therefore let all those that have any Impropriations in their hands, be hereby
moved to make some restitution, in whole or in part, as their estates may
bear, as some already have done, to the disburdening of their own conscience,
and to the good example of others.

Another sort of people, Against oppressors.
that are to be reproved in this place, are cruel and merciless oppressors:
that fill their houses with the spoils of the poor, beating them to pieces,
and grinding their faces with hard and intolerable exactions. Isa. 3.14.15.
Yea it is held a matter of policy by the great Nimrods of our days Rustica
gens est optima slens, and pessima gaudens.
to keep the poor people under by all means possible: and therefore they
laden them with heavy burdens and grievous impositions: sometimes racking
their rents above measure, sometimes enclosing their commons: and sometimes
depopulating their houses, that it may be truly said of many, Isa. 59.7. Job.
20.19. and 22.9.
desolation and destruction is in their path. Wheresoever they set their foot,
they make havoc of all. They spoil houses which they never builded, they
cast out widows empty: and by decaying of tillage, they take away the
gleaning from the hungry, as Job says. Job. 24.10.
As it is said of an herb called Cardamum or garden Cresses, that it soaketh
the moisture from the roots of all other herbs and makes them wither: and of
the Eagles feathers, that they consume the feathers of all other birds; so
wheresoever these cruel oppressors come, none can thrive by them, that are
within their reach. They are like the beast called a Beuer, that biteth so
sore; as he never loses his teeth, till he have broken the bones ( Iul.
Solin. cap. 23.) So do (...) break the bones of the poor, and chop them in
pieces as flesh for the pot. Mic. 3.3. S. Ambrose complains greatly of such
persons in his times. Semper auarus alieno vtitur, alieno se pascit damno; est
illi praeda egest is alterius, est illi laetitia fletus alienus. Quot amissa
deplorant, super quae inuasi ple rique gratulantur? Jnnocens rusticus perditum
ingemiscit iuuencum; and tu in corus tuum excolere disponis, and fructus te
putas posse capere exgemitibus alienis vidua tota supellectile dispoliatam
domum suam dolet, and tueadem supellectile domum tuam ornatam esse laetaris.
Dic mihi O Christian, non compungeris, non constringeris, cum vides in
hospitio tuo lacrymas alienas? Dicit scriptura sancta, carnem a be^^ijs
discerptam ne comeditote; Cur quod hostilis bestia superabit, tu saeuior bestia
de vorasti? Aiunt plerique lupos leonum subsequi solere vestigia, and non long
ah eorum venatibus aberrare; scil. vt rabiem suam rapina satient aliena, and
quod leonum saturitati remanct, id luporum rapacitate consumatur. Sic and isti
auaritiae lupi, vsurariorum vestigia subsecuti sunt, vt quod illorum rapacitati
supersuit, horum cederet feritati. Ambr. de Auaritia and Anania Sermon. 59.
The couetuous man, says he, always uses that which is another man's, and
feeds himself with another man's loss, another man's poverty is his prey,
another man's weeping is his rejoicing. Of how many things do poor men bewail
the lost, which these having invaded do rejoice? The harmless husbandman
mourns for the loss of his ox; and thou purposest to till thine own field
with him, and think that thou may reap fruit of another man's sighs. The
poor widow greiueth to see her house spoiled of all her stuff, and thou art
glad that thy house is decked with it. Tell me O thou Christian; art thou not
touched with remorse, and art thou not vexed when thou see in thy dwelling
the tears of others? The holy Scrpture says, ye shall not eat any flesh that
is torn of beasts in the field: but shall cast it to the dog (Exodus 22.31,)
Why then have thou like a more savage beast, devoured that which the enemy
has overcome? It is a common saying that the Wolves do use to follow the
footsteps of the Lions, and not to be far off when they hunt for their prey,
namely, that they may satisfy their own hunger with the rauine of others:
that that which remains of the Lions fullness may be devoured by the wolves
greediness. In like manner, these Wolves of couetuousnesse, follow the
footsteps of usurers, that whatsoever is left of the rauenousnesse of the one,
may come to the cruelty of the other. And have we not experience of this in
our days? When as many rich men finding some young prodigal heirs, wrapped
in the wretched bonds of cruel usurers; under pretense of friendship, do
furnish them with money from time to time, till at last they strippe, them
quite out of all their living, and then, as we say, set them on lea-land, and
bid the Devil split them.

This oppression is a greiuous sin, far worse then theft. For theft for the
most part is done secretly and by deceit, but this is committed openly and with
violence. God commended his poor people to the mighty men of this world, not
that they should spoil them, but that they should defend and releive them. And
if he shall be cast into hell, that has not given of his own, whether shall
he be sent, Mat 25 41. Luke. 16.19.
that has invaded and seized upon that which was another man's? If he shall
burn with the Devil, that has not clothed the naked: where shall he burn,
that has spoiled him of his clothes? If Christ say, Depart ye cursed etc.
Mat. 25.41. for I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, he may say to these
oppressors, I was hungry and ye took from me that which I should eat: that
which you gave to to your hawks and hounds ye took our of my mouth etc. We
do not read that the rich glutton took any thing from Lazarus, only he
gave him nothing. Neither does Abraham say unto him, Son, remember that the
poor man had meat to eat, and thou tookest it from him, etc. and yet we see,
he is in hell in torments. What therefore shall become of such, as make hauock
of the poor? And therefore as one says Multum metuenda est nobis illa
sententia comminantis, omnem arhorem non serentem, etc. Quod si sterilitas
mittetur in ignem, rapacitas quid meretur? Et si iudicium sine misericordia
crit illi, qui non facit misericordiam, quale iudicium crit illi, qui fecerit
and rapinam? Fulg. de dispensat. Domi.
we have great cause to fear that sentence of Christ, that threatens, that
every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into
the fire. For if barrenness must be cast into the fire, what does ravening
cruelty deserve? And if he shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no
mercy, what judgment shall he have that exercises oppression? Neither will
it avail them to say they give alms and relieve the poor: for God abhors
that alms, that is given of the tears of other men. Illam Deus cleemosynum
abhominatur and reprobat, quae de lachrymis praestatur alienis. Quid enim
prodest, si tibi benedicat vnus, vnde plures maledicunt. Aug. de vita
Christiana. Prou. 14.28.
And what good will it do thee, says one, to have one or two to bless the
for that, for which a great many curse thee? As indeed the whole commonwealth
has cause to cry out of these men; for their courses are injurious and
hurtful universally. Solomon says, In the multitude of the people is the
honor of the King, and for want of people comes the destruction of the
Prince. So that in the judgment of the holy Ghost, these depopulators, that
lay all wast before them, are the greatest enemies to the state that can be.
Well in a word let them be afraid of the voice of the oppressed. The Lord
charged the Isralites that they should not trouble any widow nor fatherless
child. For says he, If thou vex or trouble such, Exodus 22.22.23.24.
and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry. Then shall my
wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be
widows, Job. 34.28.
and your children fatherless. And Job says of oppressors, that they have
caused the voice of the poor to come before the Lord, and he has heard the
cry of the afflicted. So that we see, the wrongs and injuries that are done to
the poor, do ring a loud peale for vengeance in the ears of God. And surely
the Lord will not be slack to execute it, unless they do prevent it by
repentance. There is a fearful threatening in the prophecy of Habakkuk, Hab.
2.9.10.11.12.
against the cruelty of the Babylonians, and in them against all oppressors.
Woe be to him, says he, that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house,
that he may set his neast on high to escape from the power of evil. Thou have
consulted shame to thine own house, by destroying many people, and have sinned
against thine own soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it. Woe unto him that builds an house
with blood, and erecteth a City by iniquity. Where the Prophet gives us to
understand that howsoever wicked men, by all their hard and unmerciful
dealing, do labor to advance their houses and their posterity, and to make
them great when they are gone, yet they shall fail of their purpose; for God
will heap shame and contempt upon them, causing all the world to ring of their
cruelty, so that, as Solomon says, their name shall rot and stincke, Prou.
10.7.
that they shall never be mentioned but with disgrace. And though by their
unconscionable courses they have done much evil to others: yet they have hurt
themselves most of all. For by raking and scraping in this manner, they have
brought upon themselves a most irrecouerable loss, even the loss of their
souls. And though peradventure their power and tyrany be such as no man dare
once mute against them, yet they shall not escape for that: for their own
houses, which they have built with blood and cruelty, shall witness against
them. Yea every stone in the wall, and every beam in the roof, shall with
loud outcries accuse their unrighteousness. Where, by the way, it is worth
the observing, that he says, the stones and the timber shall, as it were,
sing of these things by course. As if he should say; These mighty men take
great delight in Music, and they have their consorts in their houses: But the
Lord will raise up other Song-men, who by course, as they do in Quires, shall
chaunt out their grievous oppressions, with a loud and shrill voice, and shall
answer one another in this manner. The one side shall sing, Woe be to him that
builds a Town with blood; and the other shall answer, And to him that
erecteth a City by iniquity. And have we not experience of this even in our
own days? Do we not see Nemo habet iniustum lucrum sin, iusto damno. August.
de connen. 10. praecept. Pauca male parta, malta been comparata perdunt.
that goods heaped together in this manner do seldom prosper? But either the
curse of God is upon them, while the owner is alive; or else if he rest with
them, and leave them to his children, yet the third heir seldom enjoys
them? Oh that all oppressors would seriously consider these things: that
seeing the examples of Gods judgments in this case daily before their eyes,
they might learn by other men's harms to take heed to themselves.

Secondly, this serves to admonish all men, Si Judas resignat pecuniam male
acquisitam, qua front retinet vsurarius vsuram? etc. Hugo in locum.
that possess any thing unlawfully, to restore it: otherwise this example of
Judas, shall be a witness against them at the day of judgment. If it be that
so the party to whom the wrong has been done be dead, and so no restitution
can be made him, then inquiry must be made for his childten, or some of his
kindred, and it must be restored unto them. But if there be neither child nor
kinsman to be found, then it must be given to the Lord, for the benefit of the
Church, and for the relief of the poor. And this was precisely commanded in
the law of God. Numb. 5.8.
But if the man have no kinsman to whom he should restore the damage, the
damage shall be restored to the Lord for the Priests use; Implying, that if any
man have any kinsman, he must be preferred in this case: but if there be none,
then it must go to the Lord. Men must not give ear to the persuasions of of
the Devil, nor of their own flesh, and so neglect this necessary duty. But
if they desire peace in their souls, they should with both hands thrust from
them, whatsoever it be, that they have wrongfully gotten, and say unto it with
indignation, as the Prophet says to the relics of Idolatry, Isa. 30.22.
Get thee hence. But it will be objected what if the thing thus gotten be a
matter of weight, so as by making it known, a man should incur the danger of
his life; what course must be taken in this case? I answer, that though the
case should stand so, yet this holy duty may not be omitted. Only the matter
must be wisely and discreetly handled, that restitution may be made by some
third person, and the parties name concealed, that so no danger may ensue upon
it. But what if a man be so poor that he is no way able to make restitution?
Then surely his poverty is some dispensation unto him. For, as the saying is,
where nothing is to be had, there the King must loose his right: and
necessity has no law. But yet though a man be never so poor, he must
testify his desire to restore, if he were able, and no doubt but God in his
mercy will accept of it. For that which the Apostle says of alms, is true in
all other cases. If there be first our willlng mind it is accepted according
to that a man has, 2. Cor. 8.12.
and not according to that he has not.

And cast them down in the temple.] We see here that the money which Judas
loved so well, as for it he would betray his Master and his Savior: now when
the sense of his sin lies heavy upon his soul, is become vile and
abominable unto him, and such as he cannot endure any longer to behold. He
thought he should have been made by it as we say, but it fell out otherwise.
Hinc patet, quod cupiditas sua nihil valuit sibi. Lira in locum.
His couetuousnesse as one says, did him no good: for he desired that which
when he had it, his conscience was afraid to use.

From hence then we may gather this doctrine, Doct. Ill gotten goods are
detestable to the owners.
that goods ill gotten are many times detestable even to him that enjoys
them. A good lesson for all such as for love of money make shipwreck of a good
conscience. The time will come, that being moved with great repentance as Judas
was in this place, they shall be constrained to cast that from them, which now
most couetuously, by right or wrong, they catch and rake together. And many
times it falls out, that couetuous wretches have but little joy in their
riches, for gathering whereof they sell their souls to the Devil. Josh.
7.17.18.21.24.25. 2. King 5.22.23.27. 1. King. 21.16.19.27.
Achan had small comfort of the prey he had gotten, and Gehezi of his talents
of gold, and Ahab of Naboths vineyard. Howsoever they were sweet at the first,
yet no doubt they wished afterward, that they had never meddled with them. And
howsoever it does not always fall out, that such men are made spectacles of
Gods wrath in this open manner: yet whenever the hand of God is upon them in
any calamity or affliction, then their consciences will pursue them with
horror, for the least thing they have unlawfully gotten. And this is that
which the Prophet threatens, namly, that they shall cast their silver in the
streets, Ezech. 7.19.
and their gold shall be cast far off: they shall not satisfy their souls,
nor fill their bowels, etc. When the wrath of God shall once awake a man's
conscience, and present his sins before him, that which before was most dear
unto him, shall be now so odious, as he shall cast it from him, and shall not
be able to endure the sight of it. He may devour substance, Job. 20.15.16.
as Job says, but he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his
belly, and he shall suck the gall of Aspes, etc. This saw Saint Augustine
full well, when he said, Epist. 121. ad Probans.
there was more desolation, then consolation in them. Yea, look how many
treasures men purchase by iniquity, so many punishments do they heap up
against themselves: yea they nourish a firebrand, which one day will kindle the
wrath of God against them. And therefore, one says well. Rich men rejoice in
their riches, Gualt. in Mich. cap. 6. verse 10.
but their joy will not last for ever. For even against their wills, and
whiles they are thinking of other matters, the stings of conscience do come
upon them, and do so disquiet them, as now they begin to hate that, which
before they loved as their life, and to abhor it as a deadly poison, and many
times when no body urges them, they forsake it of their own accord. Iniusta
lucra breues habent voluptates, longos aute^ dolores.
Iniust gain, says Jerome, has short pleasure, but lasting sorrow. And
Eligas damnum potius quam iuiustum lucrum, illud enim semel tantum te dolor
afficiet; hoc vero semper. Luke 8.14.
S. Augustine says, choose rather loss then ill gotten gain: for that shall
greiue thee but once, but this will torment thee for ever. Hence is it, that our
Savior Christ compares riches unto the hawthorne, which in the springtime
has a very pleasant flower, and yet withal it has a sharp prick. So riches,
how glorious so ever they be to the eyes of covetous persons, yet they are but
pricking thorns, especially if they be ill gotten, which will prick both hand
and heart. Neither is their nature changed to this day. Though some indeed do
dye as swine in a ditch, blockish and senseless, as Nabal was, 1. Sam. 25.37.
whose heart dyed within him, and he was like a stone: yet others there are,
who on their deathbeds have cursed the time that ever they were so rich, and
have wished that they had never gone further then their spade.

This serves, first to reprove all such, as heap up riches Qui rem faciunt
quocunque modo. Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1. -- lucri bonus est odor ex re Qualibet
-- Iuuen. sat 14.
whether by hook or crook, by right or wrong: that think the smell of all
gain to be good, which way soever it comes. For eue^ as many times the
greedy fish while she hunteth after the bait, is caught and choked with the
hook: so these gredy Cormorants, which with an insatiable desire do hunt after
riches, many times get such a sting in their conscience, as torme^teth their
souls with endless woe.

What will it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul? Mat.
16.26.


And thus we have handled the several parts of Judas his repentance. Let us in
a word apply it to our selves. We see what he performed in his repentance: we
must be careful to supply that which he wanted, or else our repentance will
do us no good. But I fear me, if due examination were had, it would appear,
that many of us never go so far, in the work of repentance, as Judas did.
How then can we hope to be saved, since Judas did all this that we have heard,
and yet is damned? Shall he be sorrowful for his sin, shall he confess
his sin in particular manner, and shall he make restitution of that which he
has gotten unlawfully, and yet go to hell? And shall we do none of all these
things, and hope to go to heaven? Oh let us not deceive our selves. As our
Savior Christ said to his Disciples. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20.
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. So say I in this case. Except
our repentance go beyond the repentance of Judas, and all such as Judas was,
we shall never be saved. Shall Kain cry out, Genesis 4.13. Exodus 9.27.
My sin is greater then can be forgiven me? Shall Pharaoh confess his sin,
and acknowledge that God is righteous? 1. Kings 21.27.
Shall Ahab humble himself before the Lord in sacke-cloth and ashes? Shall
Simon Magus be sorry for his sin, Act. 8.24.
and desire the Apostle Peter to pray for him? Nay, to say yet more, shall the
Devil himself believe and tremble, Iam. 2.19.
and yet be all of them damned? And shall we do nothing at all? shall we
never be moved, and yet hope to be saved? Nay rather, all these shall be so many
witnesses against us, at the great and dreadful day of judgment.

He departed.] This is the preparation unto Judas his wretched end that
followed. He shunned the sight of men, and his conscience tormenting him, and
driving him to the gallows, he went aside, and sought some secret place. If he
had conuersed amongst men, it is likely he might have been prevented: and
therefore, the Devil draws him in to some solitary place.

From whence arises this instruction, Doct.
that it is very dangerous for men to live in solitariness. Solitariness is
very dangerous. Eccles. 4.10. Genesis 2.18.
Woe be to him (says that divine Preacher) that is alone. The reason is,
because he lies open to tentations, and offers himself to the snare of the
Devil. Hereupon the Lord said, It is not good for man to be himself alone. If
not in Paradise, whiles man was innocent, much less now, that he is wholly
corrupted. And we see when the Devil encountered with our Savior Christ, Mat.
4.1. Genesis 3.1.2. Genesis 34.1.2. 2. Sam. 11.2.
he made choice of the wilderness, implying, that such places are fittest for
his working. And therefore, we read, that when Euah was straggling alone from
her husband, curiously viewing the pleasures of the garden, the Devil set upon
her, and caused her to taste the forbidden fruit. When Dinah, Jacobs daughter,
was wandering alone from her Fathers Tents, idly to see the fashions of the
country, Shechem the son of Hamor caught her, and defiled her. And when
David was walking alone on the top of his house, he was tempted to lust after
Bathshebah, and to commit adultery with her. So that we see what occasions of
sin are offered unto us when we are alone, and how ready we are to yield
unto them. And therefore Vnum primo aggr^ssus, vt lupus ouem secernere a grege,
vt accipiter columbam ab agmine volantium separare tentauerat. Nam cui non est
aduersus omnes satis virium, circumvenire quaerit solitudinem singulorum. Cypr.
lib. 1. epist. 1. Mich. 2.1.
one says well, that as the Wolf labors to separate the sheep from the rest
of the flock; and the Hawke to sever the Pidgeon from the rest of the flight:
So the Devil labors to single out men from the society of others, that so
he may the more easily overcome them. For he that has not strength enough to
set upon al together, seeks to circumuent them one by one. Yea, the greatest
iniquities, and grossest sins, that have been done in the sight of the
world, were first plotted and purposed, warped and contrived by men alone. As
the Prophet Michah says of wicked men, They work wickedness upon their beds,
and when the morning is light, they practice it. And we have all experience of
this in our selves. For we are no sooner from company, but armies of ill
thoughts and desires (like so many swarms of Bees about a man's ears) are
soliciting and offering themselves unto us. And this the Heathen man knew
also, when he said; Nemo est ex imprudentibus, qui relinqui sibi debeat. Tunc
mala confilia agitant, tunc aut alijs aut ipsis futura pericula struunt. Tunc
cupiditates improbas ordinant, tunc quicquid aut metu, aut pudore animus
celabat, exponit. etc. Seneca. Epist. 10.
There is no indiscreet or foolish man, that ought to be left to himself. For
then evil counsels do molest him, then he deuiseth danger either to himself
or others. Then he frames evil desires, then the mind lays open, whatsoever
either for fear or favor it concealed before, etc. And we want not examples
of many, that being alone, have fallen into fearful dangers.

This serves first of all, to reprove the Papists, who so Eremitical life, as
though it were the most excellent and the most perfect estate. But we see by
this that has been spoken, that they expose themselves to a thousand dangers.
Yea they tempt God, and not knowing their own strength or weakness, rather
do as it were dare and provoke the Devil to the combat. But they say they are
strong, and fear no danger. I answer with our Savior Christ in another case.
He that is able to receive it, Mat. 19.12.
let him receive it. If they have attained to such a measure of strength; it is
well. But in the mean while they sin against the Church, Heb. 10.25.
in breaking off the communion of Saints and in forsaking the fellowship of
their brethren, as the Apostle says.

Secondly, it serves to admonish all men, to avoid solitariness, Cedet amor
rebus; res age, tutus eris. Ovid. de remed. amoris.
and so he shall prevent many occasions of sin. We that profess our selves
to be Christians, should be ashamed, not to spend our solitary hours, at
least as well as the Heathen man did, who Nunquam se minus otiosum, quam cum
otiosus: nec minus solum quam cum solus. Et in otio de negotijs cogitabat, and
in solitudine secum loqui solebat: vt neq, cessaret vnquam, and interdum
colloquio alterius non egeret. Cic. offic. l. 3.
professed of himself, that he was never less idle, then when he was idle,
and never less alone, then when he was alone. For when he was at leisure, he
thought of his business, and when he was alone, he used to talk with
himself, so that he was never idle at any time, and yet stood inno need of
the conference of others. Much more should we be occupied in good Meditations,
and have our hearts continually stand bent therein, least the Devil returning,
as our Savior says, Mat. 12.44.
and finding our souls empty, and swept, etc. he fill us full of all
ungodliness. But of all other, Melancholi ke persons are in greatest danger
this way. And therefore, one calls Melancholy the Devils forge, wherein,
unless Gods grace do prevent him, he frames and works much mischief. As we
see by woeful experience, that many times he prevails so far with such
persons, as he causes them to lay violent hands upon themselves. And
therefore, they are most carefully to perform this duty. And if when they
have done all they can, they cannot preserve themselves from the Devils
tentations, they must as speedily as may be, run into company; Eccles. 4
9.10.
for as Solomon says, Two are better then one, for if one fall, his fellow
will lift him up.

Qualis vita, finis ita.
Went and hanged himself.] This is the end of Judas. A woeful end, but yet
agreeable to his former life, according to the common saying; As the life is, so
is the death. A wicked life, a wretched death: Post redditum pretium laquca se
suspendit, vt qui se mulctauerat pecunia, mulctaret and vita. Intelligens enim
quantum scelus admiserit, non sufficit ei sacrilegij carere mercede, nisi
careret and salute. D^gnum enim se morte iudi^^uit, quod Christum vitam omnium
tradid^sset. Ambr. seem. 51. de Judah Iscar.
whereupon one says, That after he had restored the money, he hanged himself,
that as he had deprived himself of the money, so he might also deprive
himself of his life. For understanding, what an horrible sin he had
committed, he thought it not enough to want the wages of his sacrilege,
unless he were without his life also. For he judged himself worthy of
death, in that he had betrayed Christ, who was the life of all. Now as I said,
his end was very horrible, and very fearful. For besides that he made away
himself, the Lord showed a strange token upon him in his death; For when he was
hanged, he brast asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. Act.
1.18. There is an old Tradition, whereof Beza and Aretius do both make
mention; that when Judas hanged himself, he leaped down so desperately, that
he brake the rope, and so lived still. But not contented therewith, in a most
furious mood, he cast himself headlong from the top of a steep hill, where
he lay swelling after a wonderful manner, till a Cart went over him, and
crushed out his guts, whereupon he stuncke so filthily, as no man could endure
to come near him. Whether this be true or no, we have no certain knowledge,
and therefore we need not believe it, unless we will. But be it true or
false, that which the holy Scripture has recorded of him, is fearful
enough. And yet this was not all his misery. For as the end of his body was
very wretched, so no doubt in his soul, he went directly from the Gallows to
hell. For so, says the Evangelist, that when Judas had hanged himself, he
went to his own place, Act. 1.25. that is to Hell. To which purpose Saint
Bernard has a good saying. Pulchre omnino Petrus Apostolus filium perditionis
in locum suum abijsse testatus est, quod in nere crepuit medius, aerearum
collega potestatum: vtpote e^e very Dei and very pariter hominis, qui de coela
venisset, operaturus salutem in medio huius terrae proditorem, nec coelum
reciperet, nec terra sustineret. Bern. in Ps. 91. sermon. 7 Suspendit se laqueo,
vt se ostenderet coelo torraeque, perosum. Aqum. in locum.
Very well did the Apostle Peter testify, that the son of perdition went
unto his own place, in that he brast asunder in the midst in the air, being
made a companion of the powers that rule in the air, that is of the Devils.
For when he had betrayed the true God and true Man, that came down from
heaven, to work our salvation in the midst of the earth, neither the heaven
would receive him, nor the earth sustain him.

Doct. Wicked hypocrites come to a fearful end.
From this example we may learn this lesson; that howsoever hypocrites and
wicked men may flourish for a time, yet at last, for the most part, they perish
and come to a fearful end. Judas was in great account before, so long as he
continued with the Disciples, but now his hypocrisy being discovered, he
dies a dogs death, and becomes his own Hangman. Neither was this the
case of Judas alone, but diverse others living wretchedly, have dyed miserably,
and have been so forsaken of God, as that they have been their own
executioners. 2. Sam. 17.25.
Achitophel that was a type of Judas, reuolting from David, and taking part
with traitorous Absolon, by the just judgment of God, hanged himself as Judas
did. 1. Sam. 31.4.
Saul openly transgressing Gods Commandment under pretense of religion, and
persecuting poor David, even against his conscience, at the last, being
deprived of all comfort fr m God, fell upon his own sword and killed himself.
Abimelech, a bloody wretch, who to obtain the Kingdom had slain seventy of
his own brethren, Judge. 9.54.
being afterward wounded with a piece of a millstone, that a woman cast down
upon him, desperately commanded his Page to run him through, and so he died. 1.
King. 16.10.11 16.17.18.19.
And Zimri, having by treason made himself King of Israel, and being pursued
by the people and Captains of the host, shut himself into the Palace, and
set it on fire over his head, and so ended his days. And howsoever it does not
always come to pass, that God do arm the hands of wicked men in this manner
against themselves; yet they seldom escape some fearful judgment, even in
this world. In terrorem populi.
For as earthly Princes do use to hang up notorious malefactors in chains,
for the terror of others: so it pleases the Lord by some famous judgment or
other, to make horrible sinners spectacles of his wrath to all the world, Deuteronomy.
13.11. Leuit. 10.2.
that others may hear and fear, and do no more such wickedness, as Moses
says. Thus Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, presuming to offer strange
fire upon Gods Altar, were instantly devoured with fire from heaven. Thus, when
Corah and his company conspired against Moses, Number. 16.30.31.
God brought a new judgment never heard of before, he caused the earth to
open her mouth, and swallowe them quick. 2. Chron. 21.18.19.
Thus Iehoram, that wicked King, that had most unnaturally embrued his hands in
the blood of his own brethren, was smitten by the Lord in his bowels with an
incurable disease, whereof he languished for the space of two years, and then
his guts rotted out of his belly, and so he died. Act. 5.5.10.11.
Thus Ananias and Saphira, for their deep dissembling, were suddenly stricken
dead by the hand of God. And thus was proud Herod, Act. 12.23.
for persecuting the Church, smitten by an Angel of the Lord, and was eaten up
of worms. So true is that which Job says, Job. 20.7.
that wicked men shall perish for ever like their dung, and they that have
seen them, shall say, where are they?

Use.
This may serve to admonish every one of us, to take heed of hypocrisy, and of
all gross sins, least continuing in them without repentance, some fearful
judgment of God light upon us to our confusion. Judas we see perished
horribly: but as one says well, Brentius in locii. 2. Pet. 3.9. Psalm. 50.21.21.
the more horrible his destruction was, the more carefully should we endeavor
to repent of our sins betimes, least we also perish in like manner. Happy
are we, if other men's harms can make us heedfull. Though God as he is
patient toward all men, do spare wicked men long, and suffer them to go on
in their sins without punishment; yet he will not spare them always, but in
the end he will reprove them, and set before them the things that they have
done, yea he will tear them in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver
them. Prorsus confirmo, audeo dicere; non potest male mori, qui been vixit.
Aug. de Discipl. Christ.
For as that speech of Augustine is most true, that he that has lived well
cannot die ill; so it is most certain, that he that has lived ill, cannot
come to a good end.

Hanged himself.] Death of it self, even by nature, is very horrible to a
man, so as the Heathen Philosopher called it the Extremum terribilium.
most terrible thing in the world, and Job says, it is the King of fear, Job
18.14. And therefore it must needs be some great tentation, that shall make a
man kill himself with his own hands, when by course of nature he might live
longer. There must be something, that he is more afraid of, then he is of
death; which by procuring his own death he seeks to escape. Now, what should
this be that Judas should so much dread in this place, that should drive him
to this fearful issue? Surely, it Animus culpe plenus, and semet timens.
Senec. in Hippol.
was nothing else but the honor of his conscience. The wrath of God had made
an earthquake in his soul, which made him tremble and quake for fear. He
saw hellfire already burning before him: nay, a spark of it was now kindled
in his conscience, which rather then he would endure, he chose to die a
dogs death, and to be his own hangman. Whence arises this doctrine, that
the horror of conscience is the greatest misery in the world. If there were
no other proof, this example of Judas is proof sufficient. For Domini
traditorem non invenio a iudice esse damnatum; non damnat eum Pilatus, non
da^nat populus, sed, quod grauius est, se ipse co^demnat, and cessante iustitia
iudicatur. Quem enim alter iudicat, potest vtcunque esse excusabilis, reus aute
sine excusatione est, qui conscientiae suae iudicio condemnatur. Quem alter
iudicat, potest quandoque a suo ind^ce sperare indulgetiam; qui seipse iudicat,
a quo indulge^tiam postulabit? Ambr. sermon. 50. de accus. Dom. coram Pilato.
as St. Ambrose says, he was not condemned by any Judge; Neither Pilate nor
the people did condemn him: but which is more grievous, he condemned himself,
and though the course of justice ceased, yet he is judged of himself. He that
is judged of another, may peradventure find some excuse: but he is guilty
without all excuse, that is condemned by the judgment of his own conscience.
He that is judged of another, may sometimes hope for mercy from his Judge; but
he that judges himself, to whom may he sue for mercy? And a little after. Hoc
Sacrilegi solet esse iudiciu^, vt impietatem suam ipse dum recordatur, and
puniat: scelus suum dum recognoscit, and vindicet. Omniu^ enim supergreditur
sententias, qui a sua conscientia sua sententia co^demnatur. Tali ergo Judas
poena damnatur, vt idem sui and reus sit sceleris, and iudex vltionis.

Cogente co^scientia vnusquisque erit accusator and iudex suus. Bern. de consc.
adif. cap. 32.


This, says he, is commonly the judgment of a sacrilegious person, that while
he remembers his impiety, he does punish it, and while he calls to mind
his wickedness, he does revenge it. For it surpasses the sentence of all men,
when a man is condemned in his conscience by his own sentence: with such a
punishment therefore is Judas condemned, that he is both the person arraigned
for his sin, and also the Judge to inflict the punishment. As the conscience
of a man before he commit sin, is a bridle to restrain him: so when the
deed is done, it is a whip to lash and scourge him for it. Nulla paena grauior
est praua conscientia, proprijs agitata stimulis. Bern. ibid. cap. 46. Genesis 3.8.
Neither is there any punishment more grievous then an ill conscience, vexed
with the own stings. But the misery is so much the greater. First, because in
this case a man has no confidence in God; he dare not go with any boldness
to the Throne of grace, as the Apostle says, Heb. 4.16. to seek for help in
time of need. As a Traitor, that has offended his Prince, dare not present
him self before him, but with fear and trembling: so a sinner, whose
conscience tells him, he has offended God, dare not with any comfort come
in his sight. As we see, Adam and Euah, when they had transgressed, howsoever
before, the presence of God was most comfortable to them; yet now they hid
themselves, and would not have been found. I heard thy voice in the garden,
says Adam, and I was afraid, and therefore I hid my self. So is it with all
the Sons and Daughters of Adam. So long as they carry about them a guilty
and an accusing conscience, so long there is nothing but a fearful
expectation of judgment and violent fire. Heb. 10.27. Job. 15.21.
There is a sound of fear continually in his ears, which does afright him
unspeakably.

For as the wiseman says, it is a fearful thing, Wisd. 17.10.11.
when malice is condemned by her own testimony; and a conscience that is
touched, does ever forecast cruel things. For fear is nothing else, but a
betraying of the succors, which reason offers. And hence is it, that the
wicked, Apo. 6.15.16.17
though otherwise never so great in this world, do hide themselves in dens
and among the rocks of the mountains, and say to the mountrines and rocks,
Fall upon us, and hide us, from the presence of him that sits upon the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is
come, and who can stand? They had rather be buried under a world of mountains,
1. John 3.20.
then once appear before the presence of God And no marvel, for as the
Apostle says If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, Tit.
3.11.
and therefore will much more condemn us.

Secondly, because he has no hope of any mercy from God. For he sins being
damned of his own self. If he be so severe against himself, much more will
the Lord be severe: Yea the guilt of his sin pursues him night and day, (as
David says, My sin is always before me. Psalm. 51.3.) and therefore, he
can hope for no mercy.

Thirdly, because he has no peace, but his conscience is even the picture of
hell according to that saying of the Prophet Isa. The wicked are like the
raging Sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no
peace, says my God to the wicked. Te conscientiae stimulant maleficiorum
tuorum, quocuque aspexissi, vt furiae sic tuae tibi occurrunt iniuriae, quae te
respirare non sinunt. Cicer. Paradox. 2.
Which way soever he looks, his sins, like so many furies of hell, present
themselves before him in fearful shapes, and will not suffer him to breath.
Nec recipit somnos, and saepe cubilibus amens excutitur, paenamque luit
formidine paenae. Claudian.
Nay he cannot be quiet in his bed, which is the place of rest, but many
times starteth out of his sleep with fear of vengeance. For as Job says cap.
18.11. fearfulness makes him afraid on every side, and drives him to his
feet: so as many times he flees when none pursues him. Prou. 28.1. Thus did
Kain Genesis 4 14. restlesly pursue himself from place to place, being vexed
only with the terrors of his own conscience. Me fugio, scelerum fugio
conscium omnium Pectus, manumque hanc fugio, and hoc caelum, and Deos, and dira
fugio scelera quae feci nocens. Sen. in Thebaid. verba sunt. Oedipi, etc.
For this cause S. Agustine very fitly compares an ill conscience to a
brawling wise. Nolunt intrare d^mos suas, qui habent malas vxores. Jutraturi
sunt enim ad taedia, ad murmura, ad amaritudines, ad euersiones, quia non est
domus composita, vbi inter virum and vxore^ pax nulla est. Si ergo miseri sunt,
qui cum redeunt ad parictes suos, timent ne aliquibus suorum perturbationibus
euertantur, qua^to sunt miseriores, qui ad conscientiam suam redire nolunt, ne
ibi litibus peccatorum euertantur. A^g. in Ps. 34
For men that have such wives, have no will to come into their own houses. For
they shall come to irkesomenesse, to scolding, to grief, and to ruin; for
there is no quiet in the house, where there is no peace between man and wife.
And therefore, if they be miserable, that when they come to their own houses,
are afraid to find molestation, how much more miserable are they, that dare not
retire themselves into their conscience, least they should be disquieted with
the strife and debate of their sins? And last of all: because he has no joy
nor comfort, but the worm of conscience continually gnaweth and tormenteth his
soul. Isa. 66.24. Hic est vermis qui non moritur, memoria praeteritorum. Semel
iniectus, vel potius innatus per peccatu^, hesit firmiter, nequaquam deinceeps
auellendus. Bern. de consid. lib. 5.
Now this worm is nothing else, but even the remembrance of his former sins;
which being once bred in the conscience, cleaves so fast, as it can never be
removed. And this is that which the Apostle says, that wicked men do pierce
themselves through with many sorrows. 1. Tim. 6.10. Which as it is said. Prou.
17.22. dries up the bones. It may be sometimes they seem to be merry, whiles
peradventure their conscience is benumbed, Est canis in molli stertens men's
conscialecto; Abrupto somno mordet acerba canis. Sphinx aenigmat.
but God knows it is no sound mirth, they rejoice in their faces, and not in
the heart. 2. Cor. 5.12. It is but from the teeth outward: when once their
conscience is awaked, then even in laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the
end of that mirth is heaviness. Prou. 14.13. Heu quantum misero paene men's
conscia donat! Lucan. Nil est miserius quam animus hominis male conscius.
Plaut. in Mostell.
So fearful a thing is it for a man to be afflicted with a guilty
conscience. And no marvel, for they behold the angry countenance of God, and
apprehend his intolerable indignation, and displeasure against them for their
sins. Solomon says, of the wrath of an earthly King, that it is as
messengers of death, Prou. 16.14. and 19.12. like the roaring of a Lion. Much
more fearful and terrible is the wrath of the King of Kings. And therefore
David says: Psalm. 76.7. Thou, even thou art to be feared; and who shall stand
in thy sight, when thou art angry? Even the children of God themselves, upon
the least apprehension of Gods anger, have been exceedingly perplexed. Job
complains that the arrows of the almighty did ranckle within him, the
venom whereof did drink up his spirit, Job. 6.4. and 7.20
and the terrors of God did fight against him. And in another place, he
says, that God had set him up for a mark that he might spend his arrows upon
him. David affirms, Psalm. 32.4. and 51 8. and 55.4.5. and 88.6.7. and 130.1
that the hand of God lay so heavy upon him day and night, that his natural
moisture was turned into the drought of Summer. Yea, that all his bones were
broken with it. Yea, as if he had been even almost in hell, he says, Out of
the deep places have I called unto thee, O Lord. Hezekiah cries out that God
had broken all his bones like a Lion: Isa. 38.13.14.
and that he was so oppressed with grief, as he could not speak, but
chattered like a Crane, or a swallow, and mourned like a done. Yea our Savior
Christ himself, who being for our sins to tread the Winepresse of his
Fathers wrath, as it is said Apoc, 19.15. was in a fearful agony and sweat
great drops of blood trickling down to the Ground. Luc. 22.44. and when he
hanged on the cross, being broken for our iniquities, he cried out in the
bitterness and anguish of his soul My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Mat. 27.46. If Gods children be thus afflicted with the sense and feeling
of Gods wrath, who yet notwithstanding are inwardly supported by his grace and
spirit: surely much more are the wicked overwhelmed and swallowed up with it,
being utterly forsaken of God, and left destitute of all manner of comfort. As
we see in Belshazzar, who being frighted with inward fears, upon the sight of
the hand writing over against him, his countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him, so that (as if he had been shaken with an earthquake)
the ioints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smot one against the other,
Dan. 5.5.6. And in Foelix, who when he heard the Apostle Paul (though being a
prisoner, and standing at the bar) discoursing of the judgment to come, he
was so terrified, that he trembled, and could not endure it. Act. 24 26. So
true is that saying of Solomon, The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear it? Prou. 18.14. Neither is
there any thing in the world, that can minister any ease or release unto a man
in this case. To which purpose Saint Augustine has a sweet saying. Inter omnes
tribulationes humanae vitae, nulla est mayor tribulatio, quam conscientia
delictoru^. Namque si ibi vulnus non sit, sanumque sit intus hominis, quod
conscientia vocatur, vbicunque alibi passus suerit tribulationes, illuc
confugiet, and ibi inueniet Deum. Si autem ibi requies non est propter
abundantiam iniquitatis, quoniam and ibi non est Deus quid facturus est homo?
Quo consugiet, cum caeperit pati tribulationes? Fugiet ab agro ad ciuitatem, a
publico ad domum, a domo ad cubiculum, and sequitur tribulatio. A cubiculo iam
quo fugiat non habet, nisi interius ad cubile suum. Porro si ibi tumultus est,
si sumus iniquitatis, si flamma sceleris, non illuc potest confugere. Pellitur
enim inde, and cum inde pellitur, a scipso pellitur, etc. August. in Psalm. 46.
Cui nec virtuteresisti, Nec telis armisque potest. Ovid. Met. lib. 9.
Among all the troubles of man's life, says he, there is no greater trouble
then a guilty conscience. For if there be no wound there, and if a man's inward
parts be sound, which is his conscience, in what other part soever he shall
be afflicted, he may fly thither, and there he shall find God. But if there
be no quiet there, by reason of the abundance of iniquity, because God is not
there neither, what shall a man do? Whether shall he fly when he begins
to suffer trouble? Let him fly out of the field into the City, out of the
streets into his house, out of his house into his chamber, and trouble will
follow him. But he has no whither to fly from his chamber, unless it be to
his bed. And if there be a mutiny, if there be the smoke of iniquity, and
the flame of sin, he cannot fly thither to find refuge. For he is driven
from thence, and being driven from thence, he is driven from himself, There
is no sickness, but Physic has a medicine for it; there is no sore but
Chyrurgerie has a salve for it: there is no restraint of liberty, but riches
may purchase freedom: there is no banishment, but favor may recover a man
from it: there is no disgrace, but time will wear it out. But there is no
Physic can cure, no Chyrurgerie can heal, Quid nunc diuitiae, quid fului
vasta metalli Congeries? Claudian.
no riches can ransom, no favor can relieve, no time can assuage a distressed
conscience. Belshazzar before spoken of, had all outward delights that his
Kingdom could afford him, yea he was now in the midst of them, and yet they
could not all help him, against the horror of conscience. No more then a man
that is condemned to die, can be cheared with any outward comforts whatsoever.
-- cur tamen hos tu Euasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti Men's habet
attonitos? and surdo verbere caedit? Occultu^ quatiente animo tortore
stagellum? Juuen. Sat. 13
So that though no body else do punish a malefactor for his sins, yet the
inward stripes and lashes of his own conscience are punishment sufficient.

This doctrine may serve to admonish us, first of all to labor the peace
whereof passes all understanding: yea which is a continual feast in all
estates whatsoever Phil. 14.7. Prou. 15.15. It is lamentable to see, how
careful men are to avoid all other troubles, and how careless to escape the
trouble of mind; in comparison whereof all others are nothing. Conscia men's vt
cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Pectora pro merito spemque metumque suo.
Ovid. Fastor.
Yea the whole life of man is either comfortable or discomfortable according to
the state of the conscience. Magna vis eius est in vtraque partem, vt neque
timeant ij, qui nihil admiserunt; and paenam semper ante oculos versari putent,
qui peccauerunt. Cicer. pro Milone.
And great is the force of a man's conscience either way, so that they that have
done no evil, are secure, and fear nothing: and they that have sinned, do
always look for punishment. And therefore, it stands us in hand, by all
means possible to pacify our conscience, that so we may have comforr in all
estates. For as one says well, Nihil iucundius, nihil tutius, nihil dulcius
bona conscientia: premat corpus, trahat mundus, terreat diabolus, and illa erit
secura. Bona conscientia secura erit, cum corpus morietur, secura, cum animae
coram Deo praesentabitur, secura, cum vtrumque in die iudicij ante tribunale
terrificum iusti indicis statuetur. Cum mundus omnis volubilitate
circumrotetur, ploret, redeat, pereat, transcat, nunquam marcessit bona
conscientia. Subijciatur corpus in paena, in ieiunijs mace^ctur, verberibus
laniet^r, eculeo distendatur, gladio trucidetur, crucis supplicio affligatur,
and secura erit conscicatia Bern. de conscien. aedifican. cap. 22.
there is nothing more pleasant, nothing more quiet, nothing more sweet and
comfortable then a good conscience. Let the body vex a man, let the world hale
him, let the Devil terrify him, and yet it will be secure. A good conscience
will be secure, when the body dies, it will be secure when the soul shall
be presented before God; it will be secure, when both body and soul shall
stand before the terrible bar of the just Judge. Though all the world be
turned topsie turuie, though it weep, though it laugh, though it perish,
though it vanish, yet a good conscience never shrincketh. Let the body be
brought under with punishment, let it be macerated with fasting, let it be
torn with stripes, let it be stretched upon the rack, let it be slain with
the sword, let it be hanged upon the gallows, yet the conscience will be
secure.

Secondly, it may admonish us, above all things to take heed of sin: least it
breed a worm in the conscience, to gnawe and to wound the same with endless
woe. For as it has been said already, howsoever pleasure may accompany the
committing of sin, yet honor of conscience always follows after.

Psalm. 41.1.
Blessed is he, says David, that judges wisely of the poor. We know not
how soon we may drink of the same cup our selves. And therefore we should
pray for them in their distress. It was the fault of Jobs friends, that seeing
him cast down with the hand of God, Job. 19.2. and 16.5
they vexed his soul, and tormented him with words of reproach. Where as
rather, they should have strengthened him with their mouth, and the comfort of
their lips should have assuaged his sorrow.

the beginning of sorrow, as our Savior Christ says. Mat. 24.8. And as the
children of God have only in this life, the earnest. 1. Cor. 1.22. and the
first, fruits. Romans 8.23. of that happiness which they shall fully enjoy in
the Kingdom of heaven: so on the other side, the wicked have here but even a
taste only of that misery, which shall be heaped and powered upon them in
hell. And therefore Saint Bernard says well. Quid illic confusionis erit, quid
miseriae, quid doloris, quando iam immortalis factus interior ille conscientiae
vermis, tanta malignitate corrodet, sed non consumet animam infelicem. Bern. in
declamat. 1. Cor. 2.9.
what confusion, what misery, what sorrow shall there be there, when that
inward wo^me of conscience shall gnawe the wretched soul with such cruelty,
and yet shall not consume it? As neither eye has seen nor ear has heard,
nor heart can conceive the joys, that God has prepared for them that love
him: so no tongue can express, no heart can imagine, what horrible torments
are prepared for the wicked. Happy, and thrice happy are they, that shall
never feel them.

Hanged himself.] This proceeded not from Aretius in locum.
repentance but from desperation. For though he confessed his sin, as we
have heard; Facilius desperatione cucurrit ad laque^m, quam humilitate veniam
deprecatus est. Aret. probl. de peccato in spi. sanct.
yet he was more ready, by desperation to run to the gallows, then by
humility to crave pardon. And therefore, Sceleratior omnibus O Judah, and
inselicior extitisti, quem non paenitentia reuocauit ad Dominum, sed desperatio
traxit, ad laqueum. Glos. ordin. in locum.
as one says, he was more wicked and more wretched then all men, in that his
repentance could not bring him to the Lord, but desperation drew him to the
rope: he could not for his life give one rappe at the mercy gate of God, for
the forgiveness of his sins: but was overwhelmed with honor of conscience
by the apprehension of Gods wrath. And herein Judas is a pattern of all
reprobates, whom the Devil leads, as it were hoodwinckt, a long time into
many great and fearful sins, and at the last, when their eyes are opened,
that they see the heinousness of their sins, but see not the mercy of God,
he casts them headlong into despair, and causes them to cast off all hope
of comfort and salvation. Penitentia humani animi sine gratia Dei, quanto ma^or
est, tanto est periculosior: absorbet enim hominem abundantiori trislitia, and
desperationem inducit: talem fuisse iudae paenitentiam, hic exitus comprobat:
Caietan. in locii. Lira in locum.
For repentance, without the grace of God, the greater it is, the more
dangerous it is: for it swalloweth up a man with more abundant sorrow, and
brings desperation. And such was the repentance of Judas, as this end of his
proves. And herein he sinned more, then he did in betraying his Master:
because, Lyra notes, in betraying of Christ, he sinned directly against his
humanity, but by his despair he sinned directly against his deity; because
he sinned against the infiniteness of his divine mercy. Now this his
desperation proceeded from two causes. First from the greatness of his sin,
in betraying him, of whose innocence and holiness he had so good experience.
Secondly, because he had heard our Savior Christ (whom he knew to be a
true Prophet, whose words should never fail) pronounce his damnation against
him: for so he threatened, Lira in locum.
when he discovered his treason. VVoe be to that man, Mat. 24.35. and 26.24.
by whom the Son of man is betrayed; it had been good for that man, if he
had never been borne.

Doct. It is a grievous sin to despair of Gods mercy.
From whence we may gather this inctrustion, that it is a most grievous sin
to despair of Gods mercy. As that wretched Kain did, when hearing the
judgment, which God had denounced against him, for killing his brother, he
cried out in the horror of his soul, My sin is greater then can be
pardoned. Genesis 4.13 And indeed, Quid aliud est desperare, quam Deum sibi
comparare? August. de vera and falsa paenit. ca. 5.
he that despaireth of the forgiveness of his sins, what does he else, but
compare God to himself? Which is a great derogation from the Lord, that his
high and glorious Majesty, should be likened unto a vile and sinful man.
Besides, he does offer horrible indignity, and notorious injury unto the
Lord. For, as much as in him lies, he denies many of his most glorious
attributes and properties, as namely, his love, his truth, his power, his
justice, and his mercy. For his love, If it were such, as our sins could
hinder it, it should be inferior to the love of man. For what offense can be
so great from one man to another, but love will easily procure the pardon of
it? As we see especially between parents and children. It is not possible,
for a child to commit any offense so great, but upon his submission and
reformation, his Father will forgive him. Though his affection be for a time
estranged: yet he will easily receive him into favor again. And therefore
the Prophet says, Can a woman forget her child? and not have compassion on
the Son of her womb? Isa. 49.15.
as if he should say, it is not possible. But the love of the tenderest and
dearest mother in the world, is but like a drop of water to the maine Ocean,
in respect of that love, wherewith the Lord our heavenly father loves us, that
are his children. So that we may say of our greatest sins as the Apostle
says of all outward afflictions, Romans 8.39.
they are not able to separate us from the love of God, that is in Christ
Jesus. If the love of the church to Christ Jesus her blessed spouse, Cant. 8.8.
be so strong, as much water cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown
it: 1. Pet. 8.8.
much more is his love to us so fervent, as an Ocean of our sins cannot
quench or drown it. If the love of men do cover even a multitude of sins,
1. Pet. 8.8.
yea all trespasses that can be committed; Prou. 10.12.
surely the infinite love of God, will cover our sins, be they never so many.
Besides, the Lord is no changling in his love, to love a man to day, and upon
some dislike to cast him off to morrow; but whom he loves once, to the end he
loves them: Job. 13.1.
and it is not our sins though many and great, that can alienate his
affection. Nay, having out of the abundance of his love, given us his own
son, Romans 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things necessary for our salvation?

Secondly, for his truth. He has made many gracious promises unto us, that if
we confess and forsake our sins, Prou. 28.13.
we shall have mercy, Ezech. 18.21.22.
that if we return from all our sins which we have committed, etc. all our
transgressions which we have committed, shall never be mentioned unto us, etc.
but as the Prophet says, God will have mercy upon us, Isa. 55.7. 2. Tim. 2.13.
1. Ioh. 1.9.
for he is very ready to forgive. Now he is faithful in the performance of
his promises, as the Apostle says. He abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself. But if we confess our sins, as he requires, he is faithful to
forgive us our sins. And therefore, for a man to distrust the forgiveness of
his sins, after he has truly repented of them, is to make God a liar. If we
have but the word of an earthly Prince, it is a disgrace not to trust unto it.
Much more is it a disgrace unto the King of heaven and earth, not to stay and
rely our selves upon his word. For as St. Paul says, Let God be true, and
every man a liar. Romans 3.4.

Thirdly, for his power. We know it is infinite: And though our sins were as
crimson, yet he is able to make them white as snow: and though they were red
like skarlet, yet he is able to make them as white as wool, Isa. 1.18. Hence
is it, that the Lord himself says. I have put away thy transgressions like a
cloud, and thy sins as a mist. Isa. 44.22. insinuating, that though our
sins be never so many, yet he can as easily take them away, as he can
scatter the clouds with the wind, or disperse the thickest mist with the heat
of the Sun. And the Prophet Micah expresses the same with great force of
words, saying: He will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into
the bottom of the Sea, cap. 7.19. where he alludeth unto that great overthrow
which the Lord gave Pharaoh and his host in the red Sea. Giving us thereby to
understand, that though our sins did march never so furiously against us, and
exercise most cruel tyranny in our souls and consciences: yet the Lord is
able to subdue them, as he did Pharaoh and his host, whom he overwhelmed in
the bottom of the Sea. To this purpose St Augustine has a good saying: Qui de
Deo non praesumit veniam, non animadvertit, plus peccato suo Dei posse
cleme^tiam. Si enim sentiret Deum magis bonum quam se malum, quicquid in se
iustitia non inueniret, a Deo magis bono expectaret. Et quidem diffidit, qui
summi boni bonitate maiorem sua nequitia non sentit. Ille enim solus diffidat,
qui tantum peccare potest, quantum Deus bonus est. Cum sit autem nullus qui hoc
possit, qui timet de se malo, praesumat de meliore. Adbuc qui diffidit, and
suam nequitiam Dei pietati comparat, finem imponit diuinae virtuti, dans finem
infinito, and perfectionem diuinitatis auferens deo Aug. de vera and fall.
poenit. c. 5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.5.6. Collos. 2.14. 1 Job. 1.9.
that he that hops not for pardon at Gods hands, does not consider that Gods
mercy is more powerful then his sin. For if he thought that God is more
good, then himself is evil, whatsoever righteousness he finds not in
himself, he would expect him from God, that is better. And surely, he is
distrustful, that does not think the goodness of the Lord to be greater then
his wickedness. For let him only distrust, that is able to sin so much, as
God is good. But seeing there is none that can do this, let him that fears,
because himself is evil, presume of him that is better. Moreover, he that
distrusteth and compares his wickedness to Gods goodness, puts an end to
the power of God, limiting that which is infinite, and taking away from God the
perfection of his deity.

Fourthly, for his justice, for as much as it is fully satisfied in Christ
Jesus, who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree: and was
wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our sins: and upon whom the
Lord has laid the iniquity of us all; he should be very unjust, if he
should not forgive them unto us. If a man be indebted, and not able to pay the
debt, if his surety discharge it for him, and cancel the bond, there is no
reason, the creditour should exact it again. In like manner, Christ our
surety, having paid that debt which we ought to the wrath of God, and having
cancelled the handwriting that was against us, it cannot now stand with Gods
justice, to demand the debt any more of us. And therefore, the Apostle says,
that if we confess our sins as God is faithful, in regard of his promise,
so he is just also to forgive us our sins, he will stand to that
satisfaction, which Christ has made unto his justice.

Last of all, for his mercy, it is unspeakable: David says, 1. Chro. 21.13.
Nehem. 9.17.
his mercies are exceeding great. And Nehemiah in his prayer, calls him a God
of mercies, gracious, and full of compassion, of long suffering and of great
mercy. And David says, Psalm. 17.7. and 25.6. and 36.5. and 103.11. and 145.9.
Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 51.1. Isa. 55.7.
his mercies are marvelous, they are tender mercies. Yea so large, as they
reach up to the heavens, and as high as the heavens are above the earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Yea his mercies are over all his
works. He is rich in mercy. Yea he has a multitude of mercies. And therefore,
the Prophet exhorting the wicked to forsake his ways, and to return to the
Lord, he uses this as a reason to persuade them, because he will have mercy
upon him: for such is his gracious disposition, that he is very ready to
forgive. A lively type whereof we have in the Father of the prodigal Son:
who though his son had greatly offended him, by his former riotous courses;
yet as soon as he was coming to acknowledge his fault, and to seek to be
reconciled unto him, his father was so compassionate, and so tender hearted
toward him, that he could not tarry till he came at him, but ran to meet
him; and when he saw him, he did not loath him for his rags and tatters, but
fell upon his neck and kissed him. Luke 15.20. So likewise, though we have
never so much displeased the Lord by our sins: yet if we humble our selves
before him by unfeigned repentance, he will not abhor us, though we be never
so wretched, but will receive us graciously into favor again. And therefore,
as one says well to this purpose, Quis non videat, qua^ sit impium, quamque
sacrilegum, si homini per poenitetiam praeteritorii malorum ad bona conuerso,
credatur cuiusque peccati dari non posse remissione^. Si peritus est medicus
noster, omnes potest infirmitates nostras sanare, si misericors Deus noster,
vniuersa potest peccata dimittere. Non est perfecta bonitas a qua non omnis
malitia vincitur; nec est perfecta medicina, cui morbus aliquis meur^ibilis
inuenitur. Fulgent. ad Venant. Epist. 7.
who sees not how wicked and sacrilegious a thing it is, to think, that if a
man turn to God by repentance for his sins past, he cannot be forgiven? If
our Physician be skillful, he is able to heal all our infirmities, if our God
be merciful, he is able to forgive all our sins. It is not perfect
goodness, which cannot subdue all wickedness: nor it is not perfect physic,
to which any disease is found incurable, alluding to that saying of David,
Psalm. 103.3. And a little after he says. Qualecunque sit peccatum, a Deo
quidem potest remitti conuerso, sed ille sibi remitti non sinit qui desperando,
contra se indulgentiae ostium clauscrit. Ibid.
Whatsoever the sin be, God is able to forgive it to him that repents. But
he will not suffer his sin to be pardoned, who by despairing shuts up
the door of mercy against himself. For it is the promise of our Savior
Christ, Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened. And a little after: Iustus est Deus and
misericors; Sicut ergo potest, per iustitiam danare auersum, sic potest per
misericordia semper saluare conuersum. Nulla prolixitas temporis vel acquitati
diuinae vel pietati praeiudicat. Si diuturnitas peccatorum Dei vinceret
misericordiam, non in aetate mundi nouissima Christus veniret, vt peccatum
mundi pereuntis auferret. Ibid. Mat. 6.12. Luke 17.4. Mat. 18.22. Exodus 34.6.7.
Iam. 1.17. Psalm. 103.13.
God is just and merciful; and therefore, as by his justice he can condemn a
sinner; so by his mercy he can always save him that conuerteth. There is no
length of time, that can be prejudicial to the justice or mercy of God. If
long continuance of sin could overcome the mercy of God, Christ would not
have come in the last age of the world, to take away the sins of the world,
that was ready to perish. Our Savior himself has taught us in the Lords
prayer, every day to crave the pardon of our daily sins, whatsoever they be,
and how often soever they have been committed. And no doubt, he that has
commanded us, to forgive one another seven times a day, yea seventy times
seven times; will much more forgive us, as often as by sound and hearty
repentance we turn unto him. And this the Lord himself declares, when he
proclaims his name before Moses. For there he calls himself the Lord
Jehovah, constant in his love to us ward, always abiding the same, in whom is
no variableness nor shadowing by turning. Strong; and therefore every way able
to work our salvation, in despite of all the enemies thereof. Merciful,
bearing even the affection of a tender mother toward her child. As there
needs no eloquence, to persuade a mother to pity her own child: so there
needs no persuasions, to move the Lord to take compassion on us, as David
says. As a father has compassion on his children: so has the Lord compassion
on them that fear him. Romans 4.5.
Gracious, though we in our selves be most unworthy, he stays not till we
deserve his love, but, as the Apostle says, he preuenteth us, Justifying us
freely by his grace, when we are ungodly: he can find matter in his own
nature, and in the merits of Christ to love us, Micah. 7.18.
though he find none in our selves. Slow to anger, though we provoke him daily
by our sins, yet he does not take advantage against us, but still mercy
pleases him, as the Prophet speaks, etc.

This doctrine serves to admonish us, to take heed of this fearful sin of
desperation, and to trust at all times in the mercy of God for the forgiveness
of our sins. For as we have heard, God is as ready to forgive, as we can
be to ask forgiveness. And therefore, Bernard says well: Tardius videtur
Deo veniam pe^^tori ded^sse quam illi acc^passa Isa. 30.18. Sic ^^^m festinat
mis^ricors Deus absol^cre reum a tormento conscientiae suae, quasi plus cruciet
misericordem Deum compassio miseri, quam ipsum miserum compassio sui. De
conscient, aedis. cap. 38.
It seems longer to God to give the pardon of sins, then it does to a
sinner to receive it, according to that of the Prophet, The Lord stands
waiting that he may have mercy upon us. For the merciful God does make such
have to absolve a sinner, from the torment of his conscience: as though the
merciful God had more compassion of a poor wretch, then he has of himself.
And Saint Augustine says: Non possum terreri multitudine peccatorum si mors
Domini in metem venerit, quoniam peccata illum vincere non possunt. Extedit
b^achia tua in cruce, and expandit manus suas paratus in amplexus peccatorum.
August. Manual. cap. 23.
I cannot be terrified with the multitude of my sins, if I can but call to
mind the death of our Lord, because my sins cannot overcome him; he has
stretched out his arms upon the Cross, and spread abroad his hands, as being
ready to embrace poor sinners. So that Quecunque necessitas co^^t ad
poenitudine, nec quantitas criminis, nec breuitas teporis, nec horae
extremitas, nec vitae enormitas, si vera contritio, si pura suerit voluntatii
mutatio, exclud^t a venia: sed in amplitudine sinus sui matter charitas prodigos
suscipit reuertetes; and omni sepore Dei gratia recipit poenitetes. Cypr. ser.
de Coen. Dom.
as another Father says: Whatsoever necessity drives a man to repentance,
neither the greatness of his sin, nor the shortness of the time, nor the
extremity of the hour, not the enormitie of the life past, if there be true
contrition, and an holy change of his will, does exclude him from pardon, but
the Mother charity admits her prodigal children into the largeness of her
bosom, when they return: and the grace of God at all times receives sinners,
when they repent. For the Scripture witnesses, that he despised not the
Thief, that confessed his sins; nor Marie Magdalene that washed his feet
with her tears; nor the Woman of Canaan, that besought him for her Daughter;
nor the Woman that was taken in adultery; nor Matthew sitting at the receipt of
custom; nor his Disciple that denied him; nor Paul that persecuted his
Disciples; nor the wicked Jews that crucified him. But yet this must not
encourage any man, to presume too far of Gods mercy, as though he might live
as he list, and yet have the pardon of his sins. For the Lord has denounced
a fearful threatening, against all such impenitent persons. He that blesses
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
although I walk after the stubbernesse of mine own heart; The Lord will not
be merciful unto that man: 20.
but the wrath of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against him, and
every curse that is written in this book, shall light upon him, and the Lord
shall put out his name from under heaven. So that the mercy of God, how great
soever, is restrained only to repentant sinners.

Hanged himself.] This fearful example of Judas, gives us occasion,
Question. Whether it be lawful for a man to kill himself?
in the last place, to discuss that Question, Whether it be lawful for any
man to lay violent hands on him self, and to procure his own death? Many
causes there are, which drive men to these desperate courses: but they may be
reduced to two heads; either for avoiding of evil, or for procuring of good.

For the first. Many there are, that when some great calamity is either
threatened against them, or lies heavy upon them, which they think they are
not able to bear, seek to escape it, by offering violence to themselves. As
some to prevent bondage and thraldom, Plutarch. in cius vita.
as Cato Vticensis, because he would not be in subjection to Caesar, killed
himself. Some in a long and languishing sickness have desperately ended their
days, to rid themselves from their pain, as Plinius Secundus makes mention
of one, that in this case famished himself to death. Some having made
themselves odious in the world by their wickedness, with Nero, when he saw
himself censured of the Senate, and hated of all good men: begin to loath
their lives, as being ashamed to live any longer. And we have both heard and
seen, that many wretched misers, having hoorded up corn in hope of a dearth,
when it has fallen out contrary to their expectation, have for very grief
hanged themselves.

Again, some to prevent sin, whereunto they were like to be forced: or being
forced, to shun the reproach and infamy that might redound unto them, have
killed themselves, as Lucretia did among the Romans, -- Nemo polluto queat
Animo mederi, morte sanandum est sed is. Hercules furens apud Senecam.
when she was ravished by Tarquinius.

Last of all, some not able to bear the horror of their conscience, by reason
of Gods wrath, have sought to free themselves, by being their own
executioners: as did Saul and Judas, and diverse others.

For the second: Some in a preposterous desire of everlasting happiness, have
wilfully shortened their lives: As one Cleombrotus, who having read Plato his
book of the immortality of the soul, that he might the sooner attain to
it, cast himself headlong from a wall. Others have made away themselves for
vain glory, to get them a name: As Curtius among the Romans, 2. Maccab.
14.41.42. etc.
and Razis among the Jews, and many others.

But we are to know, that it is not lawful for any cause whatsoever, for a
man to deprive himself of life. The truth whereof may appear by many reasons.

First, death in it self naturally is evil, inflicted upon mankind for a
punishment of sin: yea it is one of Gods enemies, as the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 15.26.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death? And therefore, no man
should wittingly and willingly procure it to himself.

Secondly, that same natural affection, which is in all men, should restrain
them from so desperate cruelty against themselves. Otherwise they rebel
against God, who is the author of nature; which we see, the very brute beasts
will not do. They may peradventure goare and tear one another, but whatsoever
extremity they are in, they will never hurt themselves. So that for a man to
be accessarie, much more principal in working his own decay, is most
monstrous and unnatural, and most heinous both before God and Man.

Thirdly, the Commandment of God, that was given to the Fathers before Moses,
does utterly condemn it: where the Lord says, Genesis 9.5.
I will require your blood wherein your lives are; at the hand of every beast
will I require it, and at the hand of man, Loc. com. clos. 2. cap. 9.
etc. Which place Peter Martyr interprets more plainly to the purpose, after
this manner; I will require your blood at your hands: namely, if any man kill
himself. But to retain the ordinary reading, if God will require man's blood,
at the hands of a beast, that has no understanding: much more will he
require it at a man's own hand, if he shed his own blood. And this was
repeated again, when the law was given on Mount Sinai, where the Lord
expressly charge, Thou shall not kill. If it be not lawful for a man to kill
another, much less is it lawful for him to kill himself. As Saint Augustine
says well. Si non licet priuata potesta e bominem occidere, cuius occidend:
i^centiam lox nulla concedit: profecto etia^ qui^eipsum occid^t, hom^^da est.
Judas cum se laq^co susp ^dit, scelor ^tae illius traditio ^s a^xit potius,
quam exp^au^t co^m^ssam et^^cum se occid^t ^^^eratum ho^^^^m occid^^. De ciu^t.
Dei. lib. 1. c. 17. P^x^mus lum eg^^^^t mihi. Terent.
If it be not lawful, by any private power to kill a man, whom the law gives
no license to kill: then surely, he that kills himself is a murderer. And
therefore, Judas when he hanged himself, did rather increase the guilt of his
wicked treason, then any way expiate it, though when he killed himself, he
put to death a wicked man.

A man is bound to exercise the greatest charity toward himself, because
every man is nearest to himself. And therefore, if a parricide be most
odious, because by how much his parents are the nearer, by so much his fact is
the wickeder: then questionless, none are more wicked then they, who wilfully
perish by their own hands, because none are so near themselves as themselves.

Fourthly, our life is the gift of God, it is he that united the soul and
body together; and therefore, without great impiety, they cannot be
separated. F^dus quod ha^anus cum corpore, non quand^^^^que volumus, possumus
abrumper^^sed legitimam eius resolutionem pat^enter nos expectare oportet, and
interim quae legitimi faederis sunt obseruare. Bern. de vita solit.
We may not, when we think good, break off the league and covenant we have
with the body; but we must patiently wait for the lawull dissolution thereof,
and in the mean while, we must duly perform, whatsoever belongs to a
lawful covenant.

Fifthly, it is an injury to the Commonwealth and to the Kingdom, for by this
means a subject (in the multitude whereof the strength of the Kingdom
consists) is taken away.

Sixthly, neither the Patriarcks, nor Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Martyrs, would
ever offer violence to themselves, whatsoever outrage and cruelty they endured
from others, or whatsoever affliction God laid upon them. Maluit sanctus Job in
sua carne mala perpeti, quam illata sibi morte cruciatibus carere. Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 24 Job. 7.15. and 14.14. Mat. 10.16. Luke 21.12.
Job was afflicted with greiuous calamities both outward and inward: insomuch
as in his passion he says, My soul chooses rather to be strangled and to
die, then to be in my bones: yet for all this, he never sought to rid himself
by death, but professes with great constancy. All the days of mine appointed
time will I wait till my changing come. Our Savior Christ told his Disciples,
that he sent them into the world, as sheep in the midst of wolves, and that
they should be persecuted, and delivered up into prisons, and brought before
Kings and rulers for his name sake: yet he never bids them work their
deliverance, by bereauing themselves of their lives: but rather exhorts them,
Luke 21.19.
to possess their souls by patience: and when they are persecuted in one
City, he bids them she to another. Matthew. 10.23.
So likewise he told Peter, that when he was old, he should stretch forth his
hands, John 21.18.
and another should gird him, and lead him whether he would not, to show, that
he must suffer of another, and not of himself. Yea our Savior himself,
though by his death he was to work the redemption of mankind: yet he would
not by any means make away himself, but tarried for others to put him to
death. Yea he always kept himself out of their hands, till the very hour
which his father had appointed was come.

Seventhly, they that have come to this desperate pass, to be the murderers
of themselves, have for the most part bin most wicked and notorious sinners: as
we see in the example of Zimri, Achitophel, Abimelech Saul and Judas in this
place. Whereupon one says, Agnoscere delictum, proijcere argenteos, non vereri
Iudaeos, omnia haec laudabilia fuerunt: at suffocari, non hoc ingnoscibile, sed
Daemonis opus est. Hugo in locum.
For Judas to acknowledge and confess his fault, to cast down the money he
had received for his treason, not to be afraid of the Jews: all these things
were commendable; but to hang himself, this was not pardonable, but it was a
work of the Devil. Last of all, even many of the heathen men, by the light of
nature have condemned this fact. Plato In Phaedone.
alleges two reasons why it is unlawful. First, because it is not lawful
to kill another man's servant. But every man is the servant of God. And therefore,
one says of this deed of Judas, Non videt Judas quia non conuenit seruum Dei
seipsum expellere de hac vita, sed expectare Dei iudicium. Aquin. in loc.
that he saw not that it was not meet for the servant of God to deprive
himself of his life, but rather to expect the judgment of God. Secondly,
because soldiers are condemned, if they cowardly leave their standing, and
run away without the leave of their General. He that brought us into the
world, and set us in our several places ought to have the calling of us hence:
before which calling of his we must not willingly depart. Quare and tibi and
pijs omnibus retinendus est animus in custodia corporis, nec iniussu eius a quo
is^e est vobis datus, ex hominum vita migrandum est, ne munus humanum
assignatum a Deo defugisse videamini. Cice. in somnio. Scip. Loc. com. clas. 2.
cap. 9.
And to the same purpose the Orator has a good saying; that every good man
must retain his soul in the custody of the body, neither must he depart out
of this life, without his warrant that has given it him, least he should seem
to refuse the charge which God has assigned him. Yea it is condemned by the
general consent of all Christian Kingdoms. Where if a man offer violence to
himself in this manner, all his goods are confiscate, and himself is denied
Christian burial. And indeed, if the Canons of the Apostles, as Peter Martyr
witnesses, do condemn them that wilfully do geld themselves, and call them
no better then selfe-murderers: And if the Apostle reprove them, that in a
color of Religion, do not spare their bodies. Col. 2.23. but superstitiously
do excruciate them without any necessity, as the Priests of Baal did 1.
Kings. 18.28. and as the Papists many of them do at this day: how much more
are they to be condemned, that utterly kill and destroy the body? And
therefore, Saint Augustine In sanctis Canonicis libris nusquam nobis divinitus
praeceptum aut perm^ssum reperiri potest, vt v^l ^psius ad^pis^^ndae
immortalitatis, vel vllius carend^ cauendiue mali causa, nobis m^tipsi^ necem
iuferamus. De ciuit. Dei lib. 1 cap. 20.
is very peremptory in this case, affirming that there is neither precept nor
permission to be found in all the Canonical Scriptures, that either for
attaining of immortality, or for preventing or avoiding of any misery, we
may procure our own death. As the pleasures of this world, though never so
great, should not make us love this life, more then we ought: so all the
calamities that the world can lay upon us, should not cause us to abridge the
time of our life. Yea, forasmuch as the faith of Christians does endue them
with heroical constancy, no misery nor coffeehouse whatsoever, should
cause them to lay violent hands upon themselves. And indeed it is to be
feared, least while by this means they seek to shun a temporal calamity,
they fall into an eternal and everlasting misery: As the fish that leapeth
out of the boiling pan into the burning fire. And therefore if any be so
assaulted, as they begin to loath their life, and which is worse, intend to be
more cruel to themselves then homicides, let them remember, that they have
somewhat more to loose then a temporal life. Woe be to them, says the
wiseman. Ecclesiasticus. 2.15. that have lost their patience: much more in such
a desperate and distrustful manner, as this is. Neither is it true fortitude
and courage, what so ever foolish men pretend to the contrary. The Heathen Poet
could say. Furor est, no moriare mori.
It is a madness, by death to prevent death. And Saint Augustine says. Magis
men's infirma, quae far non potest vel duram corporis seruitutem, vel stultam
vulgi opinionem. Maiorque animus merito dicendus est qui vitam aerumnosam magis
potest far quam fugere. De ciuit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 22
It is rather a weak and abject mind, that cannot endure either the thraldom
of the body, or the foolish opinion of the common people. And that is worthily
to be called a more stout and valiant mind, that can rather endure a wretched
life, then shun it. Regulus maluit hosts far seruiendo, quam eis se
auserre moriendo. victores dommosferre quam mortem sibi inserre maluit. Ibid.
cap. 24.
And therefore, he prefers the constancy of Regulus far before Cato, for
that he had rather endure his enemies, by serving of them, then by death to rid
himself out of their hands.

Again, they that by this means desire either to revenge, or to eschew
another man's sin, it is to be feared, they fall into their own. Nonne satius
est flagitium committere, quod penitendo sanctur, quam tale facinus, vbi locus
salubris penitentiae non relinquitur. Aug. ibid. cap. 25.
And is it not better for them, as one says, to commit a sin that may be
healed by repentance? And therefore, Saint Augustine concludes this question
in this manner. Ibid. cap. 26.
This we say, this we affirm, this we approve by all means, that no man
ought willingly to kill himself: neither for avoiding of temporal miseries,
least he fall into perpetual: nor for the sins of another man, least he
that was not defiled by another be guilty of a grievous sin himself: nor
for his own sins past, in regard whereof he stands more in need to live,
that they may be healed by repentance: nor for the desire of a better life
after death, because they that are guilty of their own death, can hardly
look for a better life afterward.

Objection.
But it will be objected, that in the first persecutions of the Church, there are
examples of many, that to preserve themselves from sin, have procured their
own death. As namely Eusebius. Eccles. hist lib. 8. cap. 12
in Antioch a certain noble woman, with her two daughters, that were virgins,
cast themselves into a river, least they should be compelled to offer
sacrifice to Idols. And two other godly virgins, rather then they would endure
the violating of their chastity, drowned themselves in the waves of the Sea.
Ibid. cap. 17.
And one Sophronia, whose husband was governor of Rome under Maxentius, when
the Emperor by his messengers enticed her to whoredom, made her husband
acquainted with the matter; and perceiving, that he for fear of the tyrant,
had given his consent, she entreated the messengers to stay till she had made
her ready; and going into her chamber, and first on her knees making her
prayers to God, she fell upon a sword and killed her self. These and many such
like examples, are highly commended by writers of those times; as though these
facts had been done by the instinct of the holy Ghost: as Sampson, who
procured his own death to to be revenged of the Philistims. But we are to know
that the comparison holds not between Sampson and these persons. For it is
certain indeed, that that which Sampson did, he was moved to it by the spirit
of God. For at his prayers, God restored him his former strength, which before
he had lost. Judge. 16.28.29.30. Heb. 11.32.
And the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, gives testimony of his faith
and piety, and reckons him in the Kalander of the Saints. But the like
cannot be truly said of any of these. Nay Saint Augustine seems utterly to
disallow the fact, speaking of Lucretia Si non est ea impudicitia, qua inuita
comprimitur: non est haec iustitia, qua casta punitur. De Ciuit. Dei lib. 1.
cap. 19.
that if it be not inchastitie when a woman is ravished against her will: it
is no justice when a chaste person is punished. The like example have we of
Judge Hales in our own stories: who as we have heard before, Fox. Mart. page
1393.
having for fear consented to the Bishops in Queen Mary's time, was afterward
so troubled in his conscience for it, that he would have killed himself with
his penknife, had he not been prevented. But still he could never rest, nor be
quiet in his mind, till he had drowned himself in a little brook near to
his house. Though we cannot approve of this fact of his, and such like: yet
we are not altogether to despair of his salvation. For no man knows whether
God that shows mercy Inter pontem and sontem. Aug.
in a moment, did give him rerepentance in the instant of his death. The
judgments of God are secret and unsearchable: Romans 11.33.
we cannot comprehend the unmeasurable depth of his mercy. And therefore, we
should leave the final judgment of these cases, to his determination, Act.
10.4^.
Who is ordained of God to be Judge of quick and dead. Others there are, that
in frenzy and distraction of their brain, do make away themselves: who
howsoever they may be blamed for other sins formerly committed by them: yet
in this case, they ate rather to be pitied then rashly censured. For they
have not free election, and therefore, the action is not to be reputed as done
by them. Again, we are to consider the whole course of their former life, and
to judge according to that, rather then by any sudden accident. Indeed if
their life has been wretched and ungodly, and they die in this manner, there
is great cause to doubt of their estate. Prorsus confirmo audeo dicere, non
potest male mori, qui been vixit. Aug. de discipl. Christ.
But if they have lived in the fear of God, and have given testimony of their
godliness in the former course of their lives, we are to hope well of them,
whatsoever their end be. But still it is a fearful case for a man to go out
of the world in this manner. And therefore it behooves every one of us, to
take great heed of the assaults of Satan, who often times perplexeth our minds
with the consideration of our sins, and Gods displeasure conceived against
them. As he dealt with Judas, so he deals continually: when a man is about
sin, he eggeth him forward, and deuiseth excuses and pretenses, to make him
sin more securely. But when the deed is done, and the conscience smitten
with remorse for it, he straightway is at hand; and that which before he
extenuated, persuading a man, that it was but a small marter; now he agrauateth
to the uttermost, and labors to bring the conscience (already vexed and
tormented) to utter desperation, and never leaves, till he cause the poor
sinner to make away himself, unless God in his mercy prevent it. So likewise,
when he finds a man oppressed with some grievous calamity, he persuades
him, that God has forsaken him, and therefore, it is best for him to rid
himself, by offering violence to his own body. But in both these cases the
sweet and gracious promises of the Scripture, do afford us most firm and
sound consolation. And therefore, we should arm our selves with a constant
faith in them, Ephesians. 6.16.
that so we may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. We must
stoutly and valiantly resist these and such like assaults: and not suffer our
selves by any persuasion of his, to be drawn away from God. We must take
heed that we fall not into these fearful snares of Satan: and pray
earnestly, as our Savior has taught us, Mat. 6.13.
that the Lord will not lead us into temptation: that is, that he will not
withdraw his grace from us, and so suffer us to be overcome. And if at any
time, any grief or sorrow lie upon the soul: which we are not able to bear,
let us not for all that give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27.
and to such horrible motions as he will be ready to suggest: but let us
resort to some faithull Christians, especially to some godly Ministers, who are
best able to relieve us in such cases, with comfort out of the word of God; and
that burden which we are not able to bear by our selves alone, let us lay it
on their shoulders; that so they supporting us by love, Ephesians. 4.2. Gal. 6.2.
and helping to bear our burden, as the Apostle exhorts, we may be preserved
from this fearful fall of desperation.

FINIS.

