A Guide unto godliness, most worthy to be followed of all true Christians:
A TREATISE WHEREIN is set forth the folly of man in prolonging the amendment of
his sinful life, together with the chief causes thereof, and sovereign
remedies against the same.

Written in Latin by John Riuius: Englished by W. G.

Imprinted at London by Gregorye Seton, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Hedghogge at the West end of Paul's.

To the right reverend father in God, Gylbert by Gods merciful providence
Bishop of Bath and Wells, W. Gace wishes peace and salvation in Christ.
YOU are not ignorant, as I think (right reverend Father) that the corruption
of our age is become even lamentable, and the enormities which now do
reign, very great and grievous. For piety now prevails with fevv, but
sin seduceth many, and the most part sleep in senseless security. Virtue
and godliness are almost quite exiled, vice and wickedness almost wholy
embraced: me^ for the most part are become not godly but godles, not virtuous
but vicious, professinge one thing in words performing another in works: as
swift as the swallow to run unto vanity, as slow as the worm to follow
virtue and piety. If any proof be sought hereof, we need go no further then
to daily experience and usual examples: For to confess that there be some in
deed which serve the Lord with unfeigned fear and dutiful obedience, yet
without all dout the greatest part do live very leudly, and are too too slack
and remiss in matters of their salvation. In steed of humility many now a
days use hautines, in steed of prayer prating in steed of fasting feasting,
in steed of alms avarice, in steed of setting forth Gods glory with their
tongue which was made and given the^ especially to that end, herrible
dishonouring of his holy name by most wicked and unlawful oaths, in steed of
chastitye adultery, which is now counted almost no sin, in steed of plain
dealing deep dissembling, in steed of hearty good will hatred and malice, so
that there is almost no faithful friendship or loyal love left amongst us.
But I cannot stand to rehearse al, so great is the corruption and so many
fold are the vices which at this day do reign: yea many are so far from
leading a life which beseems Christians, that in virtuous behavior and
living they are far inferior to many of the heathen, as in sanctity to
Socrates, in abstinence to Aristides, in integrity to Phocion etc: That I may
omit many other which were with sundry virtues very plentifully endued, who
notwithstanding had only the light of nature and rule of reason to direct
them.

If then this age of ours be such, that all kind of vice so mightily
prevails, virtue and godliness being little or nothing regarded, which as I
said by daily experience and usual examples before our eyes is plainly proved,
so that the virtuous actions of many of the Heathen may be to a great number
in these our days as it were lanterns of light, and patterns and examples to
imitate and follow: If I say the case be thus (as undoubtedly it is) how
requisite are such remedies as may reduce men from such lewd living to the
doing of their duty?

By consideration of the premises (right reverend father) I was moved to
employe some time to english this treatise, thinking that it will be very
profitable in these our days, wherein sin so abounds, forasmuch as in the
same is set forth the folly of men in prolonginge the amendme^t of their
sinful life, as also the chief causes which move them so to do, with
singular and sovereign remedies against the same: whereupon I have entitled
it (and that not amiss as I think) A GVIDE UNTO GODLINESS, for that it
reclaimeth men from sin, vvithdravveth them from vice, and shows unto them
the right and plain path to piety and virtue. Now what is better for men
the^ to follovv such a guide? what more profitable then to walk in such a
path? which shall plainly appear, if we consider from whence they lead and
vvhither they direct, namely from vice to virtue, from sin to godliness, from
the servitude of Satan to the liberty of Christ, from the snares of the devil
to the fatherly favor of our most gracious God.

As concerning vice or sin from whence this Guide leads us, it is
undoubtedly a thing foul and filthy, as by testimonies of the Scripture may be
plainly proved. David says: VVash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, cleanse me
from my sin, purge me from my wickedness etc. Now what do we use to wash?
what to cleanse and purge but that which is vnclea^ and defiled with filthiness?
Moreover to omit how almost every sin is punished some way or other even in
this life, how great a discommoditie is it that this vice or sin brings
unto us, in that it moves the Lord to vvithhold his benefits and blessings
from us? Most fervent is the love of the Lord God, yet the waters of
wickedness are able to quench it: exceeding great is his liberality and
bounty, infinite is his clemency and mercy, yet sin is able to close his
hand, and to cause him to detein his benefits from us, sin is able to make
him of a gracious giver a vvrathfull revenger, of a favorable father a sharp
and severe judge: the like may be said of the rest of Gods benefits. Finally
the end of sin is eternal torments and perpetual pains. Many things
might be spoken pertinent to this purpose, some I only briefly touch, many
more I willingly omit, thinking these sufficient.

Whereas this Guide directs us to virtue and godliness, it is a thing
assuredly of a very great importance. For that whereunto it guides us, far
exceeds all vvorldlye wealth, all terrene treasures. Noblenes of birth is a
thing much esteemed, yet is it received of our forefathers by succession:
Riches are much regarded and had in great price, yet are they subject unto
many casualties: Beauty is a thing much loved and liked, yet is it also very
frail and fading: Health of the body is much to be wished, yet is it diverse
and sundry ways mutable: strength of the body is of many much made of, yet is
it by sickness abated, by age adminished and waste. Howbeit virtue or godliness
comes not by succession, but from the special grace of God, the fountain of
all goodness: Virtue is not subject to vvorldly changes and chances, it is not
by adversity altered, by torments abated, by enemies taken away, neither by
any other worldly means fails, unless man through his own defaulte, be
the cause thereof. It remains as well with the sick as the whole, with the
old as the young. Finally as they that follovv vice and persevere in sin, are
the servant of sin and slaves of Satan: so they that embrace and exercise
true virtue and godliness, are not bond but free, not servants but sons, even
the sons of God, and heirs annexed with Christ. For true godliness does
undoubtedly proceed from a sincere faith, as the fruit from the tree, the
effect from the cause. Now in whom soever such a faith is, they are free
from the curse of the law, from the tyranny of Satan, from the danger of
death, from the horror of hell: they have God to their father, Christ to their
brother, they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven as the word of God
witnesses.

Forasmuch the^ as the Guide which we have spoken of, does lead from that
which is foul and filthy, which kind of things we are wont commonly to
detest and loath, from that which excludes us from the fruition of Gods
benefits, from that which has so bitter and grievous an end, even eternal
death and destruction, and not only this, but also directs us to that which
is so precious and profitable, which proceeds from the grace of God the
fountain of all goodness, which is not subject to world^y mutations, which is
an undoubted fruit of a true faith, and therefore they that be endued
therewith are the sons of God and heirs of eternal blessedness: Forasmuch I
say as this Guide does thus lead and direct, who ought not to be most
willing to follow the same to their no small commodity and profit?

Thus have I (right reverend father) bin brief and short in a matter wherein I
might have bin larg and long. Howbeit I think those things which I have
entreated of sufficient to cause the Christian reader the better to love and
like, the more vvillinglye to read and peruse this present treatise, and also
to embolden me to presume to publish the same under the protection of your
reverend name, forasmuch as by the premises is proved that it conteyneth
matter very good and godly, and therefore is agreing to your Christian
conversation, not for any instruction where right grave and great learning
abounds, but only for well liking where good will is not vvanting, which
I earnestly desire and heartelye wish, being little or nothing doubtful
thereof. And now to conclude, the Lord God grant for his Christ's sake, that
after ye have run the race of this mortal life, ye may reap the fruit of
an unfeigned faith even the salvation both of body and soul.

Amen.
Your Lordships to command and use in the Lord. W. Gace.

A Guide unto godliness, most worthy to be followed of all true Christians.
IF they that will be counted Christians, did so much dread and mislike the
thing it self, as they do at this day detest the name and profession of
Epicurea^s or Sadducees: they would no less surely refrain themselves from
all evil doing, and embrace virtue and godliness, then they do now with an
obstinate mind follow vice and naughtines, and live lewdly and ungodly:
neither would they any less keep the commandments of Almighty God, then
they are now void of all fear of his divine majesty. But truly all of us
almost do bear a mind not so much alienate and estraunged from the thing it
self, which our life, deeds and conditions do witness, as we do dread the
disdain of the word, and utterly mislike the bare name of the thing. For
what? Either can they believe the immortality of the soul, who live almost
like beasts: or can they be persuaded that there are rewards prepared in
heaven for the godly, and punishments appointed in hell for the wicked, who
almost in nothing stick to break the commandments of God, and run
hedlong unto al vice, either as though they verily thought that God is a thing
vain and feigned, or did believe that the soul is extinct and does perish with
the body? Now to confess that there are some, which both fear God, and do
nothing doubt that he will in time to come either punish or reward every one
as he has deserved, of which sort surely there are very few: what one is there
among a great number, whom the fear of Gods justice does either revoke from
sin, and evil doing, or induce to amend and reform his life? Wherein thou
may worthelye lament and bewail the case of us all, and marvel at our
folly, blindness and madness, who in such shortness and uncertainty of this
life do so behave our selves, that being now become even very old, when as
our dying day is not far of, we do not so much as think of amendinge our
manners, much less go we about to do the same, being yet young and in our
flourishing years. I oftentimes entering in to consideration of this folly, and
(as it were) dotage of men in deferring the amendment of their sinful life, do
think it good to search out the causes why in so weighty a matter (whereon
dependes salvation) we behave our selves so slacklye and slothfullye. For
these being once found out, and made manifest, it will not be afterward hard
(as I think) to find some remedy to cure this evil.

Of the first cause why men differ the amendment of their life.
FIrst therefore the chief and principal cause hereof I think to be our
incredulity. For if we did believe those things which are contained in ye
holy scriptures, of the judgment to come, of the voice of the Archangell, and
the trumpe of God, of the judgment seat of the Lord before which we must all
appear, also those things that are mentioned of the punishments in time to
come of the wicked, of the life and immortal felicity of the godly, of the
resurrection of the bodies to gether with the souls either unto assured glory
or certain pain: If I say we did believe these things not to be a vain or
fond fable, we would surely endeavor to live far otherwise, neither would
we so daily differ and prolong the amendment of our life. For who living
wickedly is not either stricken with horror in his whole body, or does not
altogether tremble in his mind and heart as often as he remembers the last
judgment? In which men must give an accounte before the tribunal seat of God
of all their thoughts, purposes, sayings and deeds, and every one must for
himself plead the cause of his life. O judgment worthelye dreadful to the
wicked, the memory whereof ought never to slip out of our mind. For if the
righteous shall scarcely be saved (as says the Apostle) where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? The son of God himself shall sit the judge of
all men which have bin from the creation of the world, being then severe,
sharp and inexorable, who is now an aduocat^ with the father for them that be
guilty. All shall be called to the examination of the life which they have
led, the secrets of all hearts shall be opened: every man's conscience shall
accuse reprove and convince him. In fine God will with just severity and
rigor punish the wicked, and graciously and mercifullye save ye godly, that
is, he will reward every man according to his works, as the Apostle Paul says.

Neither shall evil deeds only be judged here, as adultery, fornication,
incest, sorcerye, murder, sclaundering, theft, extortion, sacrilege,
surfeiting, riot, dronkennes, usury, and such like sins: neither only all
idle, railing vain, foul, filthy, light, fond, foolish, rash, immodest,
presumptuous words, and all other whereby godly ears are iustlye offended:
but also the secret wills of me^, ungodly wishes and thoughts, wicked
affections and such as disagree with the law of God, as wrath, hatred,
contention, enmity, spite, envy, euel will, pride, covetousness, desire of
that which is an other man's and not our own, and other of like sort. Who is
there then that verelye believes that the last judgment shall come, whom the
remembrance thereof does not reclaim from sinning and retain in his duty,
being otherwise ready, and prone to offend. Well said one of the ancients:
Whether I eat (says he) or drink, or do any thing else, me thinks I hear
that voice always sound in mine ears: Arise ye dead and come unto judgment.
As often as I think upon the day of Judgment, I tremble for fear in my whole
heart and body etc.

If therefore the flesh stirs up any man to lust and filthy pleasures, if
to gluttony and surfeiting, if to other vices and naughtines, let him
remember the day of the last judgment. If prosperity (as it often comes to
pass) does puff up any, if riches do make any proud and insolent, if honor,
dignity, rule do cause any to be over stout and presumptuous, let such
straight call to mind the judgment seat of God. If wrath stir up any to
take revenge, if envy and malice possess any man's mind, if avarice move
thee to fraud or extortion, if the world allure any to ambition, pride, riot,
if the devil provoke any to blaspheme God, and to other sins and wicked
deeds, let him think upon the voice of the Archangell, let him believe that he
shall plead his cause before the judgment seat of God, let him earnestly dread
the sentence of the judge that condemns the wicked to eternal fire.

I would to God, I would to God I say this day of judgment did never slip
out of the minds of men, then would we all endeavor to do our duty. Princes
would procure the prosperity and se to the safety of the people, which God
has committed unto ihem, they would defend and preserve their liberty, they
would establishe and maintain good and wholesome laws in their common wealth.
Again the people would show themselves obedient and loyal to their princes,
they would not grudge at their rule and authority, they would not refuse to
pay tribute and custom, they would give unto them due fear and honor.
Every man would love his wife as himself. Wives would reverence their
husbands, and be subject unto them as unto their head. Parents would bring up
their children in the discipline and nurture of the Lord, as the Apostle Paul
teaches.

Children on the otherside would obey their parents in the Lord, and give unto
them due reverence and honor. Servant would obey them that are their
masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling and singlenes of
their hearts as unto Christ, as the Apostle Paul admonishes. Masters would
deal more gently and courteously with their servants, knowing that they
themselves also have a master in heaven. Pastors would have that care of the
Lords flock which they ought. Rich men would relieve the penury of the
poor with their substance. Widows would give themselves day and night unto
prayer. Poor men would suffer their poverty patientlye, seeing it pleases
the Lord they shall live in that state. He that has a wife would be as
though he had none. He yt is single would have care of those things that
pertain to the Lord. What should I make many words? Every one would do
his duty from his heart, if that day of the last judgment did never depart
out of our minds, when as God will require of us an account of our whole life
and all our actions, and will reward and punish every one according to his
desert.

We see in the time of a great plage or sickness when death is daily before our
eyes, how careful all are to reform and amend their life, at the least such
as do not falsely usurp the name of Christians. What then? Ought we not at
all times, at all hours, yea and almost every moment to think of the
amendment of our life, to be touched with unfeigned and bitter grief of mind
for our sins, and to pacify gods wrath with earnest and hearty repentance,
seeing that by reason of the uncertain chances which be incident unto us in
this life death is daily imminent, and we ought to be verily persuaded yt
almost every hour it is present and does hang over our heads? Let him that is
wise therefore endeavor (as I have said) so to lead his life, as men for the
most part are wont in the time of some great plague or sickness, at which
time they being as it were wakened out of sleep, begin to have some mind
and care to amend their life, to avoid and detest sin, to love and embrace
virtue and godliness, briefly are wont by true repentance to pacify God being
iustli offended at their sins. Let every one the^ continue such a one being
now delivered from fear of ye plague, as he purposed with himself to be when
ye plague most reigned and raged.

There is none but he does confess, that the hour of death is uncertain,
albeit it be most certain that we shall at one time or other dye: Now, how
foolish a thing is it to fear death hanging over our heads every moment, and
in the mean season to think nothing of amending of our life? But thus it is.
In adversity, as in the time of a great plague, in the time of famine, war,
earthquakes, in the time of some greeeueous and dangerous disease of the body,
we acknowledge Gods most just wrath and indignation against sin: sin: But
when we have the world at will, and things are on every side prosperous: we
stick not to abuse his bounty and goodness, neither do we then remember
death yt hangs over our heads every hour, neither the last judgment,
neither ye voice of the Archangell, whereof Paul speaks, writing to the
Thessalonians, neither the sound of the trumpe of God, neither of hell or
eternal punishment, neither the fire that shall never go out, neither that
darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The memory of which
things ought never to depart out of our mind, neither when we rise in ye
morning nor when we go to bed at night, whether we dyne or sup, whether we
are occupied about any earnest matter, or recreate our mind with some honest
pastime. But all these things seem fables to ye wicked, namely the last
judgment, the tribunal seat of the lord, yt voice of yt Archangel, ye trumpe
of God, the eternal pains of hell fire. And as the heathen did in time past
think those things false, wc the Poets were wont to speak of, concerning
hell, the river in hell yt always burns, the judges Minos and Rhadamanthus,
the place, abode and punishment of the wicked, whereupon came that saying of
Seneca: The poets deluded us (says he) and put us in vain fear: so many
count for trifles and fables, and utterly conte^ne as vain threats those
things which at this day are read in the holy Scriptures, of hell, of eternal
death, of the fiery lake, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, also of ye
resurrection of the soul and body either to everlasting pains or eternal
glory. When as al these things without doubt strike horror into the^ yt be godly
in deed, and do fear god aright, and as one says, they are almost afraid to
hear the^ once named or spoken of. Thus have thou the chief and principal
cause, as I think why all of us almost do so prolong the amendment of our life.

Of the second cause why man differreth to amend his life.
LEt us now come to the second, which is hope of Gods pardon and favor: a
hope great in deed, but surely false and altogether uncertain. With this
hope the continual enemy of mankind the Devil holds man in sin and by
daily setting before him Gods lenity and gentleness, keeps him from fearing
his justice. But as God does easily pardon the penitent, and fatherly
forgeiueth such as return unto goodness: so he leaves not unpunished, neither
suffers unrevenged, such as with an obstinate mind persevere in wickedness. In
vain therefore do they hope for pardon, who do not heartily repent for their
sins committed. The devil notwithstanding by setting this hope before man,
brings to pass that he sins securely, and never has any earnest
cogitation of amending his life, but despises the riches of Gods bountifulnes,
patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God
leads him to repentance, that I may use the words of the Apostle Paul
writing to the Romans. Let man here call to mind that which our savior says
in the gospel of Matthew. Repent, (says he) your former life, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. And that which the Lord says in Esaias: Which of
them shall I then regard? Eue^ him that is poor and of a lowly troubled
spirit, and stands in awe of my words. Christ says moreover in the gospel
of Luke: Unless ye repent, ye shall al likewise perish. And Peter in the Acts
says: Repent ye therefore and convert, yt your sins may be put away. I omit
six hundred other places in the Scriptures which tend to the same end, that
is, which teach that none can hope and trust for pardon of his sins, but he
that repents. For in vain (as I have said) does he hope to have remission
and forgiveness whose heart is not touched with true repentance.

Now albeit no repentance be to late before God, which the example of the
these mentioned in the gospel does declare, for God desires not the
destruction of sinners, but rather that they repent and live: Who
notwithstanding sees not how dangerous a thing it is to differ the
amendment of our life? Well was it said of one, that none has ever had God so
favorable unto him, yt he could promise himself to live till the morrow.
Death oftentimes comes upon men unawares, so yt they have no time so much as
to think of repenting and amendinge their life. I will not here rehearse those
things which Pliny declares in his natural history of sudden deaths,
farasmuch as nothing almost is more common and usual even at this time also. It
is not many years since there were two old men in this country both
inhabitants of one and the same city, who the same night they did lie with the
strumpets to who^ they used to resort, yt one lost his life by an Apoplexy,
the other was stabbed in with a dagger, so both of them died suddenly, with how
great peril of their souls let every one think with himself.

I confess it in deed to be true, yt it is common to the godly as well as to ye
wicked, to die suddenly, and that yt is true also with the wiseman says, yt the
righteous man with what death so ever he be prevented shall be in rest: How
dreadful a thing is it notwtstanding that the impenitent person should suddenly
be overtaken with death after such a sort? Of how many have we heard oftentimes
who even when they were tippling and making god chere, falling unto strife and
brawling among themselves, have bin thrust through one of an other? Of how
many, who being taken in adultery, have by the sword lost their lives: Of how
many, who playing at the dice, have bin slain of them that played with them?
That I may say nothing of them who falling from their horse have broken their
necks, who have perished suddenly in the sea by shipwreck, finally, who either
byfalling of houses, or by some other chance have died a sudden death. Although
then y^ God does desire rather the repentance then death of a sinner, as in
deed he does, it is notwithstanding a very perilous thing by reason of the
uncertain chances which be incident unto us, to differ the amendment of our
life upon hope of Gods mercy.

Thou must repent in time, while thou do yet live, and art in good health.
But thus stands the case: A young man takethe his pastime and pleasure,
gives himself to banketting and riotous living, promises himself to live
many years, and therefore thinks nothing of reforming his life, but
differreth this thing until old age, whereunto notwithstanding it is
uncertain whether he shall ever come. For what one among many thousands
lives until old age? Now what does he that is become very old, and is as
it were even at deaths door? To morrow says he it shall be done, and again,
it shall be done to morrow: so he willingly deceives and vaynly flattereth
himself, seeing, as I have said, no man can promise himself to live till the
morrow, no no man knows whether he shall live until the evening.

In ye mean season me^ so daily differring and prolonging ye amendme^t of
their life, death oftentimes comes upon them unawares, as we may see almost
every day: and yet can not other men's harms make us to beware, so does the
devil always draw us on and allure us with a vain hope of Gods pardon, and
of a long life. Now although it neither ought, nor by any means may be denied,
that the penitent obtain gods grace and favor at all times, neither may it be
said that he who is now about to yield up the ghost, and in yt very agonye of
death, should despeire of pardon: who notwithstanding is so unwise, that he
does not rather desire that which is safe and boyde of all danger, then that
which is joined with exceedinge great peril? Wherefore rather then there
should be any scruple or doubt, let us think in time of amending our life,
let us not differ it from day to day, especially seeinge it is uncertain
whether we shall live until to morrow. As concerning the clemency and
gentleness of God, let that always remain in our mind, which Cyprian says in
a certain place: As favorable, (says he) and gracious as God always is by
the love of a father, so much is he to be feared by the majesty of a judge. So
shall it come to pass that the fear of Gods punishmente will reclaim us from
sinning, and hope of Gods pardon will not lull us a sleep in over much
security.

It is too much to say how Priests in the papacy do flatter themselves with
this hope of Gods clemency, who al their life time keep concubines, and under a
pretense of single life company with harlots freely and without punishment, never
thinking of reforming their life, or putting their concubines away. And in the
mean season knowing themselves guilty of this dishonestie, and unclean and
wicked life, they do notwithstanding almost every day celebrate divine
service, and come to the mystical and holy table, feeding unworthily of y^
bread of the Lord, and unworthily drinking of his holy cup. Now how horrible
a thing is it, and how full of peril and danger, alwais to live in yt state, in
which if death come upon thee, there is no hope at all of thy salvation? In
vain therefore do they flatter themselves with hope of gods mercy who so keep
co^cubines, and do with an obstinate mind persevere in wickedness, neither ever go
about to put away their strumpets, or to amend their life, neither do repent
truly and from their heart, neither with weeping and sighs crave pardon of God
for their wickedness committed. But (will some man say) they ask pardon of God
oftentimes, they often beseech his clemency to forgive them. For in ye end of
their evening prayer they say almost daily: Convert us O God, and turn thine
anger away from us. Also in the end of morning prayer: Thou O Lord, say they,
have mercy upon us. So at other times also they often pray, that God will have
mercy on them, that he will be favorable unto them and forgive them. I hear
it: neither do I here stand to decide with how earnest attention of mind,
with what zeal and ferueney of spirit they do that. But be it yt they pray
with a mind ardent and lifted up unto God, and with a most serious and earnest
affection: what then? What does this avail if they put not away their
concubines with intent never to receive them again, and do persist in a settled
purpose and determination to live chastely afterward, do also persevere in
endeavoring to amend their life, and in continual repentance for their
wickedness committed? Now because they do not this, as the thing it self
plainly shows, who can doubt, but they either believe those things to be a
fable, with the holy scriptures tech of ye last judgment, or else do too much
flatter themselves with a vain and false hope of Gods pardon? O horible face of
y^ popish church. They which ought to ouersee, guide, govern and teach
others, and yt as well by example as word they behave themselves so, that others
are meruelously offended by them. When the laity come to the Lords table, with
what reverence, with what fear and trembling, with how devout love and
godliness do they the same?

How do they prepare themselves to confess their sins, and to ask pardon
of God? How do they endeavor to their vttermoste, yt no scruple or doubt
remain in their mind and conscience? how certainly and firmly do they
determine with them selves to amend their manners and reform their life? Now
what do the Popish Priests? These forsooth (as one of their own profession
says) make have from the wicked company of their concubines to go to the
alter, and this they do very often unpunished without all shame. They have no
care to amend their life, they think not of putting away their harlots,
finally they are touched with no grief in their minds by considering their
sin: and not to use many words, they seem christians in name only and
word, but in very deed are plain heathen.

How many occasions have they to repent and turn unto goodness: they visit
such as are afflicted with grievous diseases, they hear the^ confess their
sins, they comfort the^ and give them wholesome exhortations, and are
oftentimes present with them when they yield up the ghost. Moreover they
celebrate their funerals and exequies, and with great ceremony bury them and
commit their bodies to ye earth: they walking in the temple oftentimes read
Epitaphs and verses graven upon tombs and sepulchers: they oftentimes hear
and read of the coming of the lord, of the resurrection at the last day, of
the voice of the Archangell, of the trumpe of God etc. So yt by these means
they may remember not only the dead, but even death it self hanging over
their heads every hour, they may remember also the last judgment, the
tribunal seat of the Lord, and many other things which might move them to
amend. But seeing by all these they are not brought to repent, one of these two
must needs be true, either that they count a fable those things which they
read in the holy scriptures of the judgment to come, and are with the
Epicureans persuaded that the soul is extincte and does perish with the
body: or else (as I have said yt they flatter themselves with a vai^ and false
hope and trust of Gods mercy.

Of the third cause why men drive of to reform their life.
THe third cause why we prolong ye amendment of our life, is the custom of
sinning, which has now almost the force of nature.

Now as it is very hard for every one to overcome his own nature, so the force
of custom also is almost invincible, which men truly say to be as it were
another nature. Neither is it said amiss of one yt those vices are hardlye cut
of which do as it were grow up with us. How tenderly and gently parents bring up
their children from their infancy, we al do know. From their tender age they
are accustomed to delights and pleasures. They abstain not from foul and
silthy words, and such as are wicked and blasphemous against God: they wear
sumptuous and gorgeous apparel: they do al things stoutly, boldly, and
impudently, nothing modestly or reverently. They honor not their parents, they
reverence not old folks, they disdain their equales: briefly what soever they
list, they think is lawful for the^ to do. They are reclaimed from naughtines
neither with shame of men, nor with fear of God. They have no care of religion
and piety toward God, much less of virtue and honesty among men. What should
I use many words? Parents do at this day by their own example mar and
corrupt their children, yt they can with no authority correct their manners.
Whereas in deed it becomes parents neither to say any thing before their
children with is unseemly to be spoken, neither to do any thing which may seem
dishonest to be done: but rather so honestly and virtuously to lead their life,
yt children may set their example before the^ to follow, and looking into all
their manners and life, into all their sayings and deeds as it were into a
glass, may learn even from their tender age, what things are to be don, and
what to be avoided. For he yt by his manners teaches those things which he
detesteth in his children, while he blames and rebukes the^, reproves his
own faults. With what face can he find fault with his children when they offend
who marreth them by his own example? With what gravity can he disalowe that
in them which another may reprehende in him with like severity?

Let parents therefore remember that it is necessary for them to live
virtuously and honestly: that they must necessarily provide, that no blemish or
dishonesty appear in their life, whereby they may with greater authority
correct the manners of their children, lest that those faults which they
blame in them, be found in themselves, and their rebuking of them be to no
purpose, and so by their own fault they make their authority to be despised
and light ly set by of them. Hereunto pertayneth yt saying of the Poet: How of
a father vvilt thou bear
the countenance, and use
The liberty, when thou in age
thy self do worse abuse?


Also that saying in an other Poet of Nausistrata reproving her husband, who
was angry with his son because of his lover, he knowing himself guilty of a
more grievous offense: With what countenance (says she) will thou blame him?
And that which Artemona says in Plautus, Is it meet that a father should
thus nurture his children? art thou not ashamed hereof? But let us here what y^
young man alleges for himself, who accuses his father of extreme folly. My
riot, (says he) I will impute to my father, I was under no severe discipline
and correction, I was under no law of a well ordered house, which might frame
a right a young man's manners, and withdraw him from vices which be incident to
his age. I was after a sort procured of my father to riot and naughty living.
etc. So did not that Tobias a man virtuous and beloved of God, who (as his
history declares) both taught his son even from his childhoode to fear God,
and abstain from all sin, and also set himself before him as an example of
godliness to imitate and follow. After this sort ought parents to bring up
their children, teaching them from their tender years the fear of the Lord,
and by their own good example moving them forward to all virtue and godliness.
For if contrariwise they give them overmuch liberty, and suffer them to
accustom themselves to sinning while they be yet young, they shall hardly or
never afterward be reclaymed to goodness. It is not like that he will live
honestly being now old, who lived dishonestly and wickedly when he was young,
neither that he who was ill brought up being a child, will take good
instructions when he is grown in years. So great a thing is it to be
accustomed to any thing from tender age, as it is said of one, and as another
says: It is long ere the mind forgets that which it was long in learning.

From whence a^e at this day so many adulterers, so many ruffians, so many
retchles and prodigal persons, so many disers and other wicked and ungodly
livers, but even as it were out of this fountain of evil education and
instruction of children? Seeing then it does much concern the common wealth,
that children be godlily instructed and vertuouslye brought up, there is great
diligence to be given of parents and masters in this behalf. For if this were
done, vice would not so prevail as it has don, which can by no laws
otherwise be sufficiently anoyded. And whereas laws punish offenses and
naughtines already committed, but good bringinge up provides that nothing be
committed worthy of punishment, and whereas laws do reform vices, but good
bringing up does quite remove the^, it manifestly appears of how much more
importance this is to the commodity of the commonwealth the^ y^ other. That I
may not add hereunto yt they which are ill brought up, do afterward cast of
al fear and reverence of laws, whereby punishment is appointed to vice and
naughtines. Wherefore y^ chief care of wise governors of cities has always
bin, not how they should punish wicked and naughty persons, but by what means
they might best bring to pass, that the Citizens would commit nothing worthy
of punishment. Now because they trusted they could at the last bring this to
pass, if youth were virtuously trained up from their childhoode, and parents
did godlily bring up and instruct their children, they thought it was their
duty to have an especial care hereof. But let us now proceed and go
forward to the rest.

Of the fourth cause why man differreth the amendment of his life.
THe fourth cause of differring the amendment of our life, is wealth and
prosperity, which oftentimes makes men, being as it were drunken with
prosperous fortune, so secure, that they very seldom remember God, ney, her
think of amending their sinful life. Whereupon one of the ancients said
well: Of prosperity (says he) comes riot, and of riot, as all vices, so
impiety toward God.

And Seneca affirms that men's minds are luld a sleep with overmuch
felicity as it were with a continual dronkennes. Hereunto pertains that
saying of Paul unto Timothee, where he bids him charge them that are rich
in this world that they be not high minded, and that they trust not in
uncertain riches but in the living God, that they do good, and be rich in good
works etc. If that saying of Publius be true, that fortune makes him foolish
whom she over much favors, it appears surely how great the security of
men is in prosperity, and when things fall out according to their desire,
which security afterward brings forth all kind of wickedness, For hereby it
comes to pass that we feel not the wrath of God against sins, which in
deed we ought to fear eue^ every hour, also yt a certain senslesnes and
drousines possesses men's minds, so that neither the fear of Gods punishmente
does reclaim them from sinning, neither do they scarce remember either death
or the last judgment.

Our Savior in the gospel according to Luke has in a goodly similitude set
forth this security of men in prosperity, where that rich man whose ground
had brought forth fruits plenteously, thinking not of amendinge his life, or
repenting for his sin, neither of releuing and succouring the poor, but
being careful of building his barnes greater, and laying up his fruits,
thought thus with himself: I will gather all my fruits and goods together,
and will say to my soul: Soul thou have much goods laid up for many
years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. But in this security
and as it were dreaming of long prosperity, what does God say unto him? O
fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Do thou not see,
yt while the rich man dreameth that he shall enjoy a secure and quiet life,
deintie dinners, and sumptuous suppers, costly and delicate bankets, the joys
and plesures of this world, and thinks now all things safe and sure, do
thou not see I say that while he vainly looks to enjoy all these things,
sudden destruction is ready to fall upon him, according as ye Apostle Paul
says? The holy Scripture therefore bids us watch always, bids us be
prepared at all times for the coming of the Lord: an excellent admonition
assuredly, if we did not contemn it. But as in ye time of Noe, when they were
eating, drinking, marrying, the flood suddenly destroyed them all, and as when
Lot was departed out of Sodom, they al perished suddenly by fire from heaven: so
does y^ last day of every man's life come suddenly and unawares upon him.

S. James going about to shake of this security y^ of rich and welthy of the
world, what does he say? even as follows: Go to now, ye rich men, says he,
weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Your riches are
corrupt, your garments are moth eaten: your gold and silver is tankred. Ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth and in wantonness, and have merely kept continual
feasts and bankets. Let here that rich man mentioned in the Gospel come into
thy mind, who was clothed with purple and fine silk, and fared deliciously
every day, but at the last leaving this life, he is continually tormented in
hell. Surely overmuch wealth and prosperity suffered him not to think of
amending his life. Hereunto pertains that saying of our Savior in the
Gospel of Matthew: It is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And again: It is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. This
our Savior as it were interpreting in ye Gospel of Mark. How hard is it,
(says he) for them that put their trust in riches, to enter into the kingdom
of God? Hereunto tends that whereas Christ calls riches and delights of
this life, thorns which choke that leede of the word of God, yt it can not
spring up, and bring forth fruit. This therefore is the cause why God
sometime sends adversity, and chasteneth them who^ he loves as y^ apostle
says, even unto this end, yt he may shake of our security, and stir us up to
fear him and call upon him, who^ for ye most part in prosperity we do too
much forget, also yt he may prick us forward to acknowledge our sins, and
heartily to repent for the same, moreover that he may move us to desire after
heavenly things, and to despise those that be human and earthly.

For in them who have the world at will, meruelously reigns that carnal
security, which is counted among the most heinous sins, and sloth and
sluggishnes, yea and as it were a certain senslesnes and drousines with a
contempt of divine things possesses their minds: briefly in godly and
virtuous actions they are faint, remiss, slothful, and without all courage
and spirit. By all these words and many more I can scarce sufficiently
express that which I think, such is the greatness of this sin. Now the
Scripture declares that in prosperity and abundance of wealth men are made not
only secure, but also almost blind, and oftentimes ungodly and wicked.
Whereupon is that saying of Moses: He was well fed, grown thick, and laden
with fatnes: so he forsook God his maker, and regarded not the rock of his
salnation. They provoke him to anger with strange Gods etc. So David when his
enemies were on every side subdued, being secure and thinking all things to be
safe, falls into adultery, and defiles himself with the slaughter of an
innocent man. He that before when Saul persecuted him, had behaved himself
very well, in prosperity became utterly unlike himself: so much does it
concern him that stands, again and again to take heed least he fall. Now
after he had committed these sins, in how great security did he live a long
time? For as though there had bin no danger, because God is merciful, he went
to the tabernacle, he celebrated Sabbats and festival days, he was present at
sacrifices and offered them, like as others did: and not to use many words he
lived with a secure mind. But when God by the Prophet Nathan denounces unto
him punishment and vengeance, and puts him in fear and terror, then at the
last he returning to himself, perceives what he had committed, weyeth with
himself the grieuousnes of his offense, and conceiueth great grief by
reknowledging his sin, openly confesses the same, humbly craves the mercy
of God, desires to be washed from his iniquity, to be cleansed from his sin,
and to have the filthiness of his offense wiped away: neither does he in the
mean season refuse the punishment which god had threatened against him, neither
seeks to avoid that scourge which he had deserved.

I would to God there were not like security in us, who for the most part live
with such a secure mind, as though all things were well, neither do we
acknowledge our offenses, nether fear the severe judgment, and grievous and
heavy wrath of God against sin. So arre is it of that how great sins we
commit, so greatly we do also lament the same, as the most holy martyr of
Christ S. Cyprian says. But that I may return to our former matter, and knit
up all in few words: No man can be saved, but he whose sins are forgiven,
and none has his sins forgeuen but he that asks pardon of God: now none
asks pardon of God, but he that desires to return into Gods favor: neither
does any desire this from his heart, but he that is thoroughly grieved for his
sins: and none is grieved for his sins, but he that acknowledges them, and
feels the wrath of God against sins. This he does not who is secure, and
touched with no care of his salvation: but for the most part he is such a
one with whom all things go prosperously forward, and who is, as it is said
of one, drunk with sweet and prosperous fortune. It is therefore manifest
hereby, that prosperity and fortunate affairs do cause that men seldom
think of amendinge their life.

Of the fifth cause why man prolonggeth the reforming of his life.
THe fifth cause of differring the amendment of our manners from day to day, is
hope of long life. For although there be none, albeit he be but young, who
knows assuredly, as he says in Cicero, that he shall live til ye evening:
Notwtsta^ding there is almost none so old, but he thinks he may live yet one
year more. An old man cries out in a certain comicall Poet, saying, shall I
being threescore and five years of age become a new married man, and marye an
old criple to my wife, do yet persuade me unto this? But at this day old men
being almost four score years of age mary wenches that be scarce yet fiftene
years old: So do they hope no less then striplings or young men, that they
shall yet live a long while but how wisely y^ thing it self is able to show.
And perhaps to some it may seem a thing foolish and fond, to be woers being so
old, as for us we determine thereof neither way: only this I know well, that
they which mary Virgins at that age, albeit they be now old and even very
criples, are notwithstanding carried with hope of living yet longer. This hope
therefore is the cause, why almost no man does earnestly think of reforming
his manners, or of rendering an accounte to that high judge of the life which
he has led. All differ and put of from day to day, as much as they can, so
profitable and necessary a thing. How greatly do I fear least the very
heathen shall in the last judgment vpbraid us with this slothfulnes, who do so
late or almost never at all think of reforming our manners and amendinge our
life. Whereas not a few of the Heathen in time paste were wont daily to use
this custom, before they gave themselves to sleep, to consider with
themselves, according to Pythagoras precepte, what they had done that day
either well or ill. Which the Poet Virgill, speaking of a good and wise man,
has declared in manner as follows: HE does not close his eyes to take
the sweet and pleasant sleep,
Till all things done the day he weyes
with cogitation deep.
Thinking, what did I pretermit?
what have I done in season?
What not? why was this naughtly done?
and why that without reason?
Why did that mind prevail with me,
which altered had bin best?
Why when I had the poor releud,
did grief possess my breast?
Wherefore did I that thing desire,
which good is to deny?
Why did I gain prefer before
virtue and honesty?
Has any man by me bin hurt
by word or deed this day?
Why does nature then discipline
with me bear greater sway?
Thus weying things both said and done
from morning until night,
That which is evil does work him grief,
but good does him delight.


Of this custom Seneca also says somewhat, which I can not but add and
annexe hereunto. He therefore speaking in a certain place of calling the mind
daily to give an accounte: Sextius did this, (says he) the day being ended
when he went to his nightly rest, he demanded of his mind in this sort: what
evil of thine haste thou reformed this day? What vice have thou resisted? in
what respect art thou better? And a little after he adds: What, says he, is
more goodlye then this custom to examine ye whole day? What sleep follows
after such examination of a man's self, how quiet is it, how sound and free,
when ye mind is either praised or admonished, and the viewer and grave censor
thereof does know of ye conditions of it? I use this custom and do daily
examine my self. When ye night is now come I consider what I have don ye
whole day, I call to mind and wey my deeds and words. I hide nothing from my
self. I pass nothing over. For why should I fear any of mine errors, when I
can say: se thou do this no more, I do now pardon thee. In such a disputation
thou did speak too carnestly: do not, hereafter deal with the unskillful.
Thou did admonish such a one more freely then thou ought, and therefore
did thou not amend him but offend him. Hereafter take heed, not only
whether that be true which thou say, but also whether he to whom thou
speak will suffer the truth to be spoken unto him. These things says
Seneca and many other concerning the same matter, which I would to God we did
thoroughly print in our minds, and set them before our selves to imitate and
follow, yea and did cause our children also to use this custom. Surely if we
did this, either I am very much deceived, or else we would endeavor to lead a
life more agreeable to a christian profession. But now what do we? we merrily
banquet and feast together, we have tables furnished with dainty delicates, we
give our selves to immoderate eating and drinking: we do scarce once in a year
require an account of our selves of our life past, either ask pardon for our
sins, or determine to return into Gods favor. So far is it of yt daily
before we give our selves to sleep, every one examineth his own conscience,
and co^sidereth with himself what life he does lead: or being wholly displeased
with himself does with weping and mourninge and knocking his breast prostrate on
the ground ask God forgiveness, promises to live better hereafter by Gods
help and assistance, and endeuoreth to persevere in his purposed determination
to lead a godly life. And albeit we do not these things, yet in that state
yt we are, we dare be bold to take sleep, yea and to sleep very soundly: in
which state if soden death should come upon us (as there is none who
certenlye knows, whether he shall in the morning rise safe out of his bed
or no) there were no hope left of our salvation. But none of these things come
into our mind, so much do we flatter our selves with hope to live long:
which hope notwithstanding, when we see it oftentimes deceive others, how
childish are we, or rather how unwise who think our selves exempt out of ye
number of such, as it were by a certain special privilege?

Of the sixte cause why many that are blinded with popish superstition drive
of to amend and reform their life.
NOw remains the sixth cause why many in the papacy prolonge the amendment of
their life, but especially such as are of the richer and welthier sort: and
this is not only that trust which is conceived of pardon and remission of
sins by popish bulls and indulgences, but also a certain vain and false
hope of deliverance from the pains of purgatory, by yearly sacrifices and
masses, and by the helps and means of Priests and Monks: also by the alms
deeds and good works of their friends that are alive, as fastings, prayers,
vigils, pilgrimages, and other such like.

For some of the^ both affirm that by indulge^ces may be obtained remission of
sins, and are not ashamed to say that the soul which is tormented in the
fire of purgatory, does fly unto heaven even at the very same instant that y^
money is thrown into y^ basin: and also do think that the departed are helped
by other men's works and merits, which both the scripture it self and the
ancient fathers do utterly deny, affirming that in this present world one may
help another either by prayer or good counsel, but that when we come before
the judgment seat of Christ every one must bear his own burden: and not
to use many words, as death fyndeth every man, so is he judged of GOD.

How execrable then is that sluggishnes of men, who live with so secure a
mind in sin and wickedness? For if they were touched with any care of their
salvation, they would surely keep some measure in sinning, and think of the
last day of their life: as for example (that I may speak particularly) he that
is at enmity with his neighbor, would endeavor according to the commandment
in the Gospel to be reconciled: whoremongers and adulterers would remember
that God will judge them, as the author to the Hebrews says: murderers,
sorcerers and all liars would never forget that lake which burns with fire
and brimstone, where John in his revelation writes, that their portion shall
be: covetous persons, drunkardes raylers, would always have in memory, that
they shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD, as y^ Apostle Paul witnesses
writing to the Corinthians and Ephesians: rich men would never suffer to slip
our of their mind, that our Savior says it is hard for them that trust in
riches, to enter into the kingdom of GOD: briefly all of us in general would
without doubt be myndfull of that unquenchable: and eternal fire which
Christ threatens in the Gospel to the wicked and ungodly, and every one
would for him self fear that answer which was made to the foolish Virgins:
I know ye not: also that saying concerning y^ slothful servant: Cast that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth: Moreover that of the man which had not on a wedding garment,
Bind him hand and foot and cast him into utter darkness. etc. Finallye
that saying of our Savior to the wicked, Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire. O too too stubburne and obstinate ones, whom these things
do nothing move: O Epicureans which bebeleeue not these things: O wicked
and ungodly persons which laugh and scorn at these things: O mad men and
unmindful of their salvation who neglect these things. But they neglecte
them who think they shall obtain pardon and remission of sins, by bulls
and indulgences of the Pope, and trusting in this persuasion drive of from day
to day the ame^dment of their life.

Now there is another cause also which make many thus prolong and differ,
namely for yt they are persuaded yt because of a goodly worship which they give
to S. Barbary, they shall not dye but being very contrite, and having first
received the Lords supper. For this superstition of worshipping S Barbary has
possessed the minds almost of all in the papacy. Whereupon they have
appointed a fast unto her to be observed every year: and painters set her
forth holding the holy cup and bread in her hand. Moreover this is an other
cause also for that they have provided long before, that when their dying day
is come, they may be admitted into the family of S. Fraunces, and being dead
may be buried in S. Fraunces habit. For this opinion also is fixed in ye minds
almost of all, that the devil has no power over them who attain to this,
forasmuch as the Monks have together with their habit imparted unto them their
merits and good works, which are done in their whole order, as masses, divine
offices, prayers, preachinges, studyes, fastinges, abstinence, vigils, labors,
and other such like. For hereupon the Monks, leaving always that which is
sufficient for themselves to obtain salvation, if there be any overplus, as
always there is some, are wont not to impart the same freely unto others, but
to fell it unto them for money. This therefore is a cause also, as I have
said, why they never think of amending their life, who have so bought with
money the participation of monks merits and deeds. But it shall be needelesse
here to ref^ and confute this manifest error of popish indulgences, and this
very fond and vain superstition of worshipping of Saints, seeing that both
others before us, and we also have often done the same in sundry places.

Thus have thou (gentle Reader) the chief causes, as I think, why we do
either neglect or differ ye amendment of our life. There be also other as it
were second causes he^eof* ^s daily company, society, and conversation with
the ungodly and wicked, who are touched with no fear of God, much less
follow virtue and goodness, or live holilye and uprightly. Now the familiarity
and company of such men is with all diligence to be avoided of them, who have
care of their souls health. Evil words, as it is most truly said of one,
corrupt good manners: and another says, by keeping company and living together
with the wicked, thou thy self also do become wicked. Here let parents
remember that they must have an especial care that they suffer no naughty and
lewd person to have any familiarity with their children, and that they see
and mark, what youth it is and with what manners they be endued, which are much
or daily in their company, do live familiarly with them, or seek to insinuate
into their friendship and favor. For every man does almost become such a one
as they are whose company he uses. And truly in deed is it said of one, yt
he which touches pitch is defiled therewith. But let us hear what another
says who cannot away with our religion: Manners says he, are taken of them
with whom we be conversant, and as certain diseases pass from the body to
them that touch it, so does ye mind also insert them that be next it with the
evils thereof: The drunkard brings his companions to ^oue well wine: the
unchaste person makes the stout and valiant, if it may be, effeminate and
wanton: covetousness pours her poison into them that be next it: The same
may be said on the other side of virtues, etc. He therefore that desires to
live vertuouslye and godly, and to keep himself pure and clean from
wickedness, which all Christians ought to desire, let him shun and avoid the
company of the wicked. For they that give themselves wholly to their company,
and are daily conversant, feast, eat and drink, be merye and make good
cheer with them, they I say do hardly ever think of amending their life,
neither can they easily sever themselves from y^ pleasant company of their
companions. Wherefore notwtstanding they frequent godly sermons, are admonished
of good men and such as have authority, and they themselves being moved with
fear of Gods punishmente, do desire and that unfeignedly to reform their
manners, yet for all this I can not tell how they always differ and drive of
from day to day, neither can they for the most part ever either truly
repent or turn to the right way. In the mean season death oftentimes suddenly
and unawares comes upon them being thus secure and careless. For as every
man's death is certain, so is the hour thereof most uncertain. And therefore
are we commanded in the Scripture to watch and be always prepared unto the
last day of our life, according to the saying of our Savior Christ in the
gospel of Luke: Be ye prepared (says he) for the Son of man will come at an
hour when ye think not.

There is also another cause at this day why many of the common sort prolonge
and drive of the amendment of their life. For there be certain and those very
devour fellows, for we must suspect no other of the^, howbeit not very wise
and wary, who in sundry places preach much of the grace of God, of
forgiveness of sins, and of other things that pertain to salvation, and
do very diligently and with great earnestness handle the same: but they say
either nothing at all or else very little of a new life in Christ, of the
sanctifying and quickening of the holy ghost. But he that will be counted a true
Christian in deed, must, according to the doctrine of Paul, dye to sin,
and live unto righteousness, must put of the old man, with his works, put
on the new man and live as it becomes the Gospel of Christ: must not
commit adultery or whoredom, must not be at enmity with his neighbor, must
not be covetous, an vserer, envious, must not be proud and high minded. And
the holy ghost is given of God to them that believe and call upon him, that he
may stir up new motions in the heart, and as it were regenerate the will of
man, and move him forward to all duties of godliness, to all virtues worthy of a
christian man, and unto a life agreeable to the profession of the Gospel, where
of we have elsewhere spoken more at large. Now how much do thou think are the
minds of the ignorant offended by these or such like sayings of some? If thou
be an adulterer (say they) if a whoremonger, if a covetous person, or defiled
with any other sin and wickedness, believe only, and thou shall be safe.
There is no cause why thou shoul dest fear the Law: for this Christ has
fulfilled and made satisfaction for the sins of mankind. These sayings do
without doubt grievously offend godly ears, and minister occasion to lead a
wicked life, and are cause that men think nothing of reforming their manners,
but obstinately persevere in sin and ungodliness, yea they do encourage them
unto al wickedness, and as it were cut of such means as might move the^ to
repent and amend. How much better did Paul, who as Luke mentions in the
Acts, not only preached of yt faith which is in Christ, unto Felix and
Drusilla his wife, but entreated also diligently of righteousness, and
temperance, and of the judgment to come: so that Felix was stricken with terror
while Paul disputed. The same Paul also witnesses moreover in the Acts, that
he did not only preach to the Gentiles that they should repent and turn unto
God, but admonish them also that they should do works worthy of them that
had repented. Thus have thou gentle Reader the causes which commonly move us to
prolonge and differ the amendment of our life: it remains now that we
briefly show what remedy may be found for this evil, although we have done
the same partly already.

Remedies against the causes aforesaid, and first against man's incredulity
which was said to be the first cause why he differreth the amendment of his
life.
AGainst our incredulity then concerning the judgment to come, the
punishment of the wicked, the immortal felicity of the godly, very much
undoubtedly (unless we had rather seem then be Christians in deed) will
prevail the aucthoritye of our God and Lord Jesus Christ, if we have in
remembrance, and always as it were before the eyes of our mind his sayings
which are in sundry places of the Scripture concerning these things, as is
that in the Gospel of John (that of many I may rehearse only a few) The
hour shall come (says he) in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice: and they shall come forth, that have done good, unto ye
resurrection of life: but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
condemnation. etc. This is the will says he in another place, of him that sent
me, that every man which sees the Son and believes in him, should have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. Moreover in the
Gospel of Matthew speaking of ye last judgment, among other things he
shows what sentence he shall pronounce of the godly: Come, says he, ye
blessed of my father: inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world. And contrariwise of the wicked: Depart from me, says
he, ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. And a little after: and these shall go into everlasting pain, but
the righteous into life eternal. O dreadful voice of the judge that condemns
the wicked to everlasting fire. If fear of Judges on ye earth does astonish
the guilty, how ought that heavenly judge to make them afraid? or what terror
ought he to strike into the wicked through remorce of conscience for sin? If
thou do so fear a Judge on the earth, from whom not withstanding thou may
appeal unto others, how much more ought thou to fear the sentence of that
Judge, from whom there is no appealing? Depart, says he, from me, ye cursed.
How dreadful a thing will it be to be separate from God himself, who is the
chief and sovereign good: to be driven from the company of the godly and holy
spirits: to be excluded from the eternal blessedness of the heavenly kingdom,
which is so great, that it can neither in words be expressed, neither in mind
comprehended, nor by any cogitation of man conceived: and not only this, but
also to be committed to extreme and everlasting pains in hell, and to be
condemned to fire yt shall never go out, in respect whereof our fire is mere
yse, finally to be with the devils an infinite time and for evermore, without any
expectation or hope of better state?

What? think thou, if these things came into men's minds, they would live
so leudlye? Howbeit they think not of that which Peter witnesses in the Acts
of the Apostles, that Christ is ordained of God a judge of quick and dead:
whereof Paul makes mention writing to Timothee. And the same Paul in his
second Epistle to the Corinthians says: for we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are
don in his body, according to that he has don, whether it be good or evil. In
this judgment (as the same Paul testifies) shall be revealed and made open
before all whatsoever is now hid in the depth of man's heart, and as it were
obscured with darkness. Which thing how dreadful it will be to the wicked,
it neither can be sufficiently expressed, neither well conceived. If in this
life he, whose deeds, being in every respect filthy, and very sinful and
wicked, should be made manifest in the company and assembly of all sorts of
men, had rather the earth should swalow him up, then to have so many
witnesses of his sins and wickedness: how do we think shall we be affected,
when the hearts of the wicked being opened, all our thoughts purposes and
deeds shall be brought to light before the whole world, before the angels of
god, before all the saints?

If we count it here a miserable and wretched thing, to be carried to prison,
what a thing will it be to be cast into eternal torments? If it be a dreadful
thing here to be punished with exile or death, what a thing will it be to be
exiled and banished from that heavenly country for evermore, and for the body
with the soul to be tormented with continual death? If it shall be most
pleasant to the godly to hear when the Son of God shall bid them inherit
the kingdom prepared for them from the foundations of the world: how
dreadful and terrible to the wicked think we shall that voice of the Judge
be, condemning them to everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angls?
If we believe these things concerning the judgment to come, the reward of ye
godly, and deserved punishment of the wicked: Why do we, so live as though
there were neither heaven nor hell? If we do not believe them, why will we be
counted and called Christians?

Let us therefore shake of this security which possesses our minds, and y^
sluggishnes and slothfulnes, yt dulnes and drousines which is come upon us. For
we have not to do with trifling matters but with such as concern the salvation
of our souls y^ inheriting of the kingdom of Heaven, the life blessed and
immortal. Now, now therefore I say, while we live and are in health, while
there is yet time for pardon, while we have him an advocate in heaven, whom
hereafter we shall have a judge, let us endeavor to amend our life, and not
differ so long, till sins rather forsake us then we them. Neither let us
ever be unmindful of the day of Judgment, and the dreadefull voice of the
Judge bidding the wicked depart from him, neither of the pains of hell and
that everlasting fire. Let us have always in mind the shortness of our life,
the certainty of Death and the uncertainty of the hour thereof, which is
such, that no man can promise to him self that he shall live till to morrow,
no not so much as one moment longer. Whereupon well surely says Seneca: it is
uncertain, says he, in what place death looks for thee, and therefore look
thou for it in every place. Wherefore the less certain and continuing that
the life of men is, so much more, while they may, ought they to think of
repentance.

Remedies against the second cause for which men drive of to amend their life,
which was said to be hope of Gods mercy and pardon.
WHereas upon hope and trust of Gods goodness and clemency thou prolongest the
amendment of thy life (that we may now speak some thing against the second
cause) thou ought in no wise to be moved thereby so to do. Christ when he
came called sinners in deed, but to repentance of their former life, not unto
liberty and license to sin. As God is merciful, so does he graciouslye
forgive, howbeit them that repent, not such as obstinately persevere in
wickedness. Christ bare our sins in his body on the t^ee, says S. Peter. I
grant it, but what adds he? that we being delivered from sin, should live
unto righteousness. Christ gave himself for us, says Paul writing to Titus:
There is none that denies that, but what follows in the same place? that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works. Christ has washed us from our sins in his
blood, as John says in his Revelation. I confess it, but not to this end,
that we should again defyle our selves with the filthiness of sin and
wickedness. We have Christ an advocate with the Father, howebeit, if we
repent our former life, and so fly unto him.

I will, thou will say, hereafter lament mine evil life. But how know thou
whether thou shall live one momente longer, much less so long while thou
bewail thy sins and amend thy life? Call to mind what God says to that
rich man mentioned in the Gospel who in great prosperity promised himself
to live yet many years: Thou fool, says God, this night will thy fetch
away thy soul from thee. Thou haste cause to fear least the same happen unto
thee. I hope (thou will say) it will be better with me then so. But what if
this hope deceive thee? for here one may worthily cry, O vain and deceitful
hope. Now if this come to pass (which I would in no wise should) thou
shall perish for ever, and willinglye cast thy self into everlasting
destruction. And thou can not deny but it may come to pass in so great
vncertaintye of thy life. What follye is it then to bring thy salvation in
doubt, by differring and prolonginge that thing, whereby thou may presently
provide for the same. Why dooste thou not therefore forthwith amend thy life
rather then with so great peril of thy salvation nourishe such vain and
deceitful hope.

God is merciful, thou will say. True it is, but he is also just. Whereas
then thou trusts in his mercy, why do thou not also fear his justice? I
have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, says the Lord by the Prophet. It
is true, but what does he add by and by after? But that he turn from his
way and live. Turn then unto the Lord, as Joel exhorts, with all thine
heart, with fasting, weepinge, and mourninge. Turn thee to the Lord thy God,
for he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger and of great goodness, as
the same Prophet says. Hereunto makes that saying of Ezechiell: If the
ungodly will turn away from all his sins that he has done and keep all my
statuts, and do the thing that is judgment and right, doubtless he shall
live and not dye. And a little after: Have I any pleasure in the death of a
sinner, says the Lord God, shall he not live if he return from his ways? To
the same effect tends that saying of Esai: Let the ungodly man forsake his
own ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and turn again unto
the lord, so shall he be merciful unto him, and to our God, for he is very
ready to forgive. The Prophet declares that God is gentle and merciful, but
to such as repent and acknowledge their sins.

Do thou therefore first repent, return unto goodness, ask pardon of thy
sins with weeping and mourninge, be sorye even from thy heart for thy
offenses committed, forsake thine own way, and turn unto the Lord thy God:
and then conceive sure trust of thy salvation, neither despeire of pardon,
neither doubt of Gods goodness and clemencye. In the mean season remember that
which our savior says in the Gospel: that there is joy in heaven for one
sinner that repents and turns unto God, more then for ninety and nine just
men, which need none amendment of life. Yea let this thing greatly stir thee
up to repent, considering with thy self how desirous the Angels are of thy
salvation, and how they rejoice and be glad at thy repentance. But that does
singularly well please thee which is in the book of Psalms: The Lord is good
and gracious and of great mercy. But hear again what is also in the same
book: Thou hate all that work iniquity: and again: The countenance of the
Lord is against them that do evil. John (will some man allege) says in this
wise: He that believes in the Son has eternal life. But what does the same
John say moreover? He that commits sin is of the devil, and he that says
he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar. John Baptist
bears witness of Christ: Behold says he, the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sin of the world. But what says he in another place? Repent and
bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life. Peter as Luke mentions in the
Acts says in this sort: We believe through the grace of y^ Lord Jesus Christ
to be saved. But what does the same Peter say also in another place of ye same
book? Amend your lives therefore and turn, that your sins may be put away.
Christ himself says in the Gospel of John: God so loved the world yt he has
given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish but have everlasting life. But what does he also say in the Gospel
of Matthew: Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into ye
kingdom of heaven, but he yt does the will of my father which is in heaven.
Thou beleeuest that which Paul says, that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners. Believe then the same Paul also, when he affirms that
sorcerers, adulterers, whoremongers, murderers, thieves, extorsioners, covetous
men, proud persons, drunkards, slaunderers, such as be envious and malicious
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. For if thou be verelye persuaded yt
Paul does speak truly here, or rather the holy Ghost by the mouth of Paul,
thou then plainly see, that thou can conceive no trust of Gods mercy,
nether hope for salvation from him, as long as thou live wickedly and
ungodly. For faith as it learneth out of ye Gospel yt God is gracious and
merciful to them yt repent, so does it also learn that he is angry and oftended
with them that obstinately persevere in sin. There is no cause the^, that thou
should upon hope and trust of Gods favor and pardon, prolong the amendment
of thy life, and so deceive thy self. Repent first, and return into ye right
way, and the^ be bold to promise to thy self largely of Gods elemency and
mercy. Now as none can well repent, but he yt hops for pardon, as Ambrose
has truly said: so he can not hope for any pardon, who does not unfeignedly
repent. I will moreover add hereunto somewhat out of ye book of Jesus the
son of Sirach before I proceed any further: Say not, says he, I have sinned,
and what evil has come unto me? For ye Almighty is a pacient rewarder, but he
will not leave thee unpunished. Because thy sin is forgiven, be not without
fear to heap sin upon sin: neither say, ye mercy of God is great, he will
forgive my manifold sins. For like as he is merciful, so goes wrath from
him also, and his indignation comes down upon sinners. Make no tarying to
turn unto the Lord and put not of from day to day. For suddenly shall the
wrath of ye Lord break forth, and in time of vengeance he will destroy thee.
Thus much says Jesus the son of Syrach.

Remedies against the third cause for which we prolonge the reforming of our
life, which was said to be the custom of sinninge.
But the custom of sinning does hinder thee that thou causte not return unto
goodness and amend. For most commonly it comes to pass that thou shall even
against thy will do those things whereunto thou have accustomed thy self
from thy tender years. For as Cyprian says, it is not suddenly and quicklye
left, which having bin long used has in continuance of time much increased.
When does he learn to spare and spend moderatlye, who has bin long
accustomed to sumptuous suppers and deintie delicates? And when does he frame
himself to wear common and simple apparel, who has of a long time bin
clothed with gorgeous garments, glittering with gold and other precious
ornaments? It must needs be, that according to the custom, drunkenness do
with forcible prouokements allure, pride puff up, wrath inflame, extorsion
disquiet, cruelty prick forward, ambition delight, lust carry headlong. etc.
So that it seems very hard by any means to overcome the custom of sinning,
which is now almost turned into nature.

Howbeit thou must notwithstanding endedeuour to do it, if thou haste any
care of thy salvation. But by what means thou will demand? If by little and
little good custom shakes of yt which evil custom has brought in: If that
which evil custom has as it were ingraffed, by good custom thou do endeavor
to pluck up. Now nothing is so difficulte and hard as Seneca says, which the
mind of man can not overcome. That therefore thou may over come the force
of custom which is almost invincible, there is more need of a certain
willingness of mind then of striving and labor: although thou must add these
also, if thou will weaken, pluck up, and as it were quite root out that
which has taken deep root and is firmly fixed. Go to therefore with a
good courage, begin and do thine endeavor with a good hope, trusting
especially to the assistance of God, and thou shall have prosperous success.
At ye first perhaps when thou do begin, that long continued custom of
sinning will seem unto thee even invincible: but when thou come to the
trial, thou shall soon perceive, that that which was supposed could not be
done without great difficulty, is not a matter so troublesome or hard as thou
had thought. So does it fall out oftentimes, that in doing we find that
light and easy, which in the beginning seemed heavy and hard. Brieflye
whereas that excellent Poet said of the companions of M^estheus. They prosper
well: they able are because they so do seem


Trust without all doubtinge that it shall be so with thee also. Only (as I have
said) go to with a good courage, and an assured hope of prosperous success,
and the endeavor and care to live godlily will daily more and more like and
delight thee, and virtue will meruelouslye allure thee to love it, then which
(as one truly says) there is nothing more fair, nothing more beautiful,
nothing more amiable. Finallye thou will never cease to rejoice on thine own
behalte, for tht thou haste begun to reform and amend thy manners: so great
pleasure will thou take hereof, and dailye more fruit and more. And thou will
without doubt now confess that to be true which our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ says in the Gospel of Matthew: My yoke is casye, and my burden is
light. Hereunto makes that which Jerome says in a certain place:
Ouermuche custom of sinning, says he, makes the way to virtue hard and
grievous, but if this custom be contrariwise altered, the way to godliness
is found plain and pleasant. Thus says he no less truly then elegantly.

If so be yt Stilpho the philosopher, as Cicero witnesses, when he was
inclined both to drunkenness and lechery, did so not withstandinge by learning,
bridle and repress his vicious nature, that no man ever saw him drunken, no
man ever saw any appearaunce of unlawful lust in him: why may not thou
through Gods help and assistance by little and little subdue, and at the last
quite shake of (that I may so speak) an evil custom, although it has
continued even a long time? An heathen man over came nature, shall not a
Christian overcome custom? especially if he earnestlye endeavor to do the
same, if he have great regard to himself, if he do after a sort force
himself, and nothing at all favor or further his pronenesse to evil: if in
respect of his imbecillitie and weakness, he does with ardent prayer crave Gods
help and assistaunce: if he desire that the holy Ghost may be given unto
him, which may stir up new motions in his heart, and assiste and further his
study and care which he has to live well. But let us now proceed to the
rest.

Remedies against the fourth cause for which me^ differ to amend and
repent, which was said to be wealth and prosperity.
LEt them whom welthe and prosperity makes secure (for this was ye fourth
cause of differring repentance) call often to mind that dreadful saying which
is in the Gospel of Luke: Woe be to you that are rich: for ye have received
your consolation. Woe be to you that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe be to you
that now laugh: for ye shall wayle and weep. Neither let that depart out of
their mind which is said to the rich man in the Gospel: Thou fool, this
night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Let them remember also those
things which we have spoken of before, concerning them whom the flood suddenly
destroyed when they looked for nothing less: of them which perished in Sodom
by fire from heaven: of the rich men whom the servant of God S. James bids
weep and houle for the miseries that shall come upon them: also of the rich
man mentioned in Luke, which was clothed in purple and fared deliciously every
day, who being dead is tormented in hell fire. Let us then shake of all carnal
security: Let us not forget God in our prosperity: Let us fear the wrath of
the eternal Judge, before whose tribunal seat we must all stand, and every
one for himself plead his own cause, his conscience accusing him, being
witness of all things that he has done either well or ill.

It most commonly comes to pass, that prosperity puffs up men's minds,
that such as flow in wealth wax insolent and proud, that riches make men stout
and stately. Let us therefore always suspecte and mistruste our good fortune
and prosperity: let us again and again take heed that temporal telicitie be
not cause unto us of eternal misery and destruction. What must we then do?
Paul in few words declares in his first epistle to the Corinthians: It
remains says he, brethren, that they which have wives be, as though they had
none, and they yt weep, as though they wept not: and they yt rejoice, as
though they reioiced not: and they that buy, as though they possessed not: and
they that use this world as though they used it not: for ye fashion of this
world goes away. The Apostle shows here, yt there ought to be none or very
little care of wives, of prosperity or adversity, of wealth and riches, finally
of all terrene and earthlye things: but our chief and almost only care
ought to be of eternal and heavenly things. Not without cause does Paul bid
Timothee charge them that be rich, that they be not high minded, and yt they
trust not in uncertain riches but in the living God. And David in ye book of
psalms says. If riches increase, set not your heart thereon. Riches are not
condenmed, which even the godly have often possessed, but trust which is
reposed in riches, and stoutnes and insole^cy which comes by them. For riches
and prosperity are wont for ye most part to make men stout and lofty whereupon
is yt saying in a certain commody, because they have gotten a little money they
are become high minded. Let him therefore yt is welthy and rich, and who in all
his affairs has prosperous success, both give thanks unto god, and take good
heed yt he become not insole^t and proud: let him put no trust or affiance in
his fortunate estate: let him have an especial care, lest yt a certain
security creping upon him (as it commonly comes to pass) he forget God: let
him beware that he become not void of all sense of Gods wrath against sin,
so that a carnal carelesues possess his mind, and he wax altogether slothful
and sluggishe. Unless he take diligent heed of these things, it is to be
feared assuredly, least that, resting in his present prosperity, he be carried
away with a false and vain joy: and least flatteringe himself with hope
that his good fortune shall long continue, and having cast of the fear of God,
death come upon him in the mean season in this his security: for the last
day of man's life is then most commonly wont to come when it is least looked
for.

Let always therefore this saying of the Apostle be before the eyes of our
mind: When they shall say, peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction
come upon them. Wherefore let us not sleep, as Paul admonishes, but let us be
vigilant and sober. Let us not say, We shall have peace, and no evil shall
come unto us: neither let us say as they whom the Prophet Esaias speaks of: We
have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement: and
though there go forth a sore plague, it shall not come unto us. Many
testimonies of Gods wrath against sin may be found here and there in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, many examples of the punishment of the
wicked, which every one reading to his own commodity, may be moned thereby to
shake of that overmuch security which is commonly incident to men in ye time of
prosperity. I mind not here to rehearse them all, least I should be too long
and tedious. Let us always have before our eyes those things which Moses
mentions came to pass in the former ages of the world, concerning the
destruction of mankind by the flood, concerning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorthe how they were consumed to ashes by fire from heaven: also those
things which histories both sacred and profane declare of the most grievous
and often calamities of the people of Israel, how they were often carried
captive of Barbarous nations, for the neglect of piety and godliness: Finally
those things which we read of the utter destruction and ruin of the city
of Jerusalem. For all these things are written (as Paul says to the
Corinthians) to admonish us upon whom the ends of the world are come. Now how
God has often punished all sorts of men for sin, it would be long as I
have said and needelesse to rehearse: I will speak only of one for examples
sake.

When that noble king David, whom God dearly loved, at such time as being
secure and idle he lived in great prosperity, had fallen into adulterye, and
had increased the same offense by the murder of an innocent man, with what
miseries, and calamities was he not afflicted of God, even after that having
acknowledged his sin and repented, he was restored to Gods accustomed grace
and favor? For God punished him with the death of his son newly borne, with
the conspiracy of the son against the father, with his sorrowful flighte
out of the city of Jerusalem, with the forcing of his concubines by his own
Son, with the reuolting of the people from him, finally with great
mortality and death of his citizens. So great and horrible is the wrath of God
against sin. If a man so holy did not escape unpunished for his sin
committed, no not when he had obtained pardon, and was reconciled into Gods
favor, as in the hystorye of the Kings is declared: How think thou will
it fall out with others, who are nothing at all grieved and troubled in mind
for their sins, but do securelye offend and heap one sin upon another,
finallye who with an obstinate mind persevere, in wickedness? Let us therefore
shake of slothfulnes, and that carnal and careless security which commonly
comes upon us in ye time of prosperity: Let us live in the fear of the
Lord, and with fear and tremblinge procure our salvation: let us not suffer
our selves to be entangled with the allurements of the flesh: let us by
continual prayer resist satan's te^tations. And thus much shall suffize
concerning this point.

Remedies against the fifth cause for which man prolongeth the amendment of his
life.
NOw to speak of such as being led with hope of long life, do differ the
amendment of their manners, these do willingly deceive themselves: and of that
which they excedingly desire they have a vain hope, and do fondly dream, and
so they wittingly and willingly perish, being alive and beholding their state
they be in, then which no folly can be said to be greater. If these be nothing
moved with those things, which wise me^, yet no professors of Christian
religion, have committed to writing concerning the shortness and uncertainty
of this life, as is that of one who said that man a is buble, and of another
who calls him a dream of a shadow: at the least let y^ man beloved of God,
holy Job I mean, move them, who says that man has here but a short time to
live: Let the servant of God S. James move them, who says that man's life is
as a vapor, that appears for a little time and then vanishes away: Let him
that cannot lie, the Son of God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, move
them, who bids us watch, because we know neither the day nor the hour:
Finally let experience it self move them, if thou think that to be more
certain. Thou sit often with thy friends, being sick or diseased, and
lying without hope of recovery, thou art sometimes present with them that give
up the ghost, thou hear the groninges of them that dye, thou see the dead
carried forth, thou also do accompany them to burying, thou see the bodies
committed to the earth, thou hear men lament the death of their friends,
thou read Epitaphs and inscriptions of tombs, thou meetest them that wear
mourninge apparel: all which things ought worthily to stir up in thee a
remembrance of the shortness of this life, and of death that is daily imminent.

If the death of strangers do nothing move us, yet let the death of our
familiers and neighbors move us: let our own perils in which we often are,
and the grievous diseases that we fall into move us: and where as we consider
not our infirmity by the example of others, let us at the lest by our own
weakness acknowledge the imbecilitie and frailty of mankind, and of our
common nature, Which if we shall do, we shall then perceive that there is no
cause why we should flatter our selves with a vain and false hope of long
life. But, will some man say, I may in old age amend my life and repent: in
the mean season I will take my pleasure. I hear this: but who certenlye
knows that he shall live until old age? Dooste thou think that it will be in
thy power to repent when thou will, who now neglectest and pretermittest the
time and occasion of the same being offered? Thou art deceived truly, thou art
deceived I say, if thou so do think. God of his goodness whereby he desires
rather the amendment then destruction of a sinner, when it seems good unto
him, calls thee to repentance, and (as he says in the revelation) he
stands at the door and knocks: open thou to him knocking, hear him calling
thee, and whither he calls follow thou: despise not the riches of his
bountifulnes and lenity, least after thine hardness and heart that can not
repent, thou heap unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, as Paul
says writing to the Romans. Remember what the same Paul says to the
Corinthians: We beseech you (says he) that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. For he says: I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in y^ day of
salvation have I succored thee: behold now the accepted time, behold now the
day of salvation. The Apostle shows here, yt the time of repentinge being
offered of God, is not to be neglected, and that the like occasion is not
always given. Hereunto pertains that saying to the Galathians: While we
have time, let us work that which is good. And one of the ancients said not
amiss: He yt has promised pardon to the penitent, has not granted so much
as ye morrow to him that dissembleth. Take heed therefore, least by
prolonginge the amendment of thy manners, and that upon hope of long life, thou
do wittingly and willingly tempt the Lord whose goodness inuiteth thee unto
repentance: which we are forbidden to do by ye commandment of God, as is
declared in Deuteronomie.

It does not seldom happen, that in the time of contending and brawling, of
playing, of drinking and tippling some is suddenly slain, so that he can not
repent for his sin, when as we in the mean season by the singular benefit
of God have time and space granted to return unto goodness. Let us not then
abuse this so great goodness of our most gracious God, who does as it were
look for occasion to take pity upon us. Let us amend our life, lest that
being suddenly prevented with the day of death, we seek space to repent, and can
not find the same. And truly he yt has promised pardon to ye penitent (as I
said even now, but it must be eftsoon repeted) has not granted so much as the
morrow to him that continues in sin.

But yt sinner, will some man say, may repent and fly unto God for mercy, when
he lies now visited with sickness. In deed it is not to be denied that this may
be: but mark how many impediments be hear, which can scarce be overcome.
For to omit the regard which he ought to have to make his last will and
testamente, the care of his wife and children, the grief of his sickness, and
such like, which seem perhaps of small importance: How will Satan at that
time besturre himself, what means will he not attempt, that he may drive
miserable man to despeyre of his salvation because of his innumerable sins
committed? For then especially, if ever, he puts in thy mind what soever
evil thou have through thy whole life from thy childhood either thought,
willed, said, or done, and those offenses that be otherwise grievous of
themselves, he increases and amplifieth: Finallye he goes about by all means
to take from man all hope of pardon, and to drive him to despeire of his
salvation because of the multitude and greatness of his sin. Hereunto may be
added the remorse of a guilty conscience, the great fear of death being now
before man's eyes, the sorrowful and bitter cogitation of the tribunal seat
of the Lord, yt terror of Gods judgment which do sore amaze and astonish, the
horror of hell fire: but who can rehearse all the impediments, and all the
causes which will hinder thee that thou can not think of repenting?

Do not therefore, do not I say, if thou be wise, differ the amendment of
thy life until the last day thereof. For this is a thing full of peril and
danger. That I may not add here unto, that such repentance, forasmuch as it
is urged by necessity, and forced with fear of hell, rather then proceeding
from a ready willingness of mind, shall little prevail unto salvation. But there
is no repentance to late before God. I confess it is true in deed: for in
what hour so ever a sinner repents, God will no more remember any of his
iniquities: and (as the Prophet says in another place) The Lord desires the
repentance of a sinner, rather then his death and destruction. But what if
sudden death come upon thee unawares, that thou shall have no time to lament
thy sin, or to think of repenting? For that which may chance to all, is to
be looked for of all. Call to mind the sudden destruction of them who perished
by the fall of the tower in Siloam, as it is in Luke. What it thou be suddenly
taken with such a disease or sickness, that thou shall lose thy right
understanding and fall into rauing and madness, which we have seen oftentimes
to have come to pass? Now if this chance (as undoubtedly it may) that hope
to repent which the sinner had in prolonging the amendment of his life, is then
utterly frustrate and vain. That which may come to others, may also come to
thee: think not thy self exempt from that which is common to all. For true is
that saying of Publius: It may chance to every one that may chance to any.

Cast of therefore hope of long life, then which nothing assuredly is more vain
and deceitful: do not dream that thou shalt have opportunity, neither
appoint the time when thou will repent: Finally do not with this so vain hope
further thy folly or rather madness in differring the amendment of thy life. If
thou be wise, repent at that time when thou can yet sin. For if thou
purpose then to repent, when thou can now sin no more, surely thou have not
forsaken sin, but sin has forsaken thee. Moreover it is to be feared, lest
that thou which wilt not repent when thou may, shalt not be able, when thou
would. For the judgments of the omnipotent God are unsearchable in punishing
the sins of men. As God of his goodness and clemencye, is wont to give space
to repent, to them that be willing thereunto, and ready and fit to receive
mercy, and in the mean season to suffer sinners with much patience and
leuitie, til they return unto goodness: so when he sees one desperately
dissolut and naught, deluding Gods long sufferance, and now worthy of
destruction, he cease any more to keep him from falling into voluntary
perdition and (as the Scripture speaks) he blinds the desperate, and
bardneth the obstinate: neither looks he any more for his conversion, neither
gives to the condemned time to repent or occasion to amend. For God has
appointed every one his day and measure, beyond which neither can man proceed
in sinning, neither will God any longer differ the punishment of sin. Which
thing surly ought worthily to stir up al without delay to repent, and to
endeavor to receive yt grace offered unto them. But seeing we have spoken
sufficiently hereof, we will now proceed to speak of other matters.

Remedies against the sixth cause for which many in the Papacy differ and
neglecte the reforming of their life.
SVch as differ the amendment of their life upon confidence in popish pardons
and indulgences, do, as the proverb is, trust to a broken staff, and lean
to a ruinous wall: as also they that worship S. Barbary, and they that provide
that they may be buried in S. Fraunces habit. For what is there any where in
the whole Scripture concerning these tryfles? What in the volumes of the old
Testament? What in the books of the Prophets? What in the doctrine of the
Gospel? What in the writings of ye Apostles? Finally which of these things
was either in the Primative Church observed, or by the true general judgment
and consent of the Church at all times received and allowed as profitable to
salvation, much less as necessary? He therefore that lamenteth not his sin
before his death, can not obtain salvation albeit he be furnished even with a
thousand popish pardons and bulls. Wherefore unless thou will bring thy
salvation in doubt, omitting these trifles, repent thy evil life: reknowledge
thy sin, and be hartelye sorye and greatly grieved for the same, with
earnest prayer and tears crave mercy of God, and fly for succor and refuge
to the only merits of Christ, with a firm faith and assured hope to obtain
Gods grace and favor for Christ his sake, whom the father has given to death
for us: So will it come to pass that God will take pity upon thee, forgive
thy sins, and receive thee into favor for his sons sake. For he is our
advocate with god, who makes intercession for us, and reconcileth and
pacifieth our heavenly father being offended at our sin and wickedness, as
John in his first Epistle general teaches.

East of therefore all regard of popish indulgences, of that superstitious
worship of S. Barbary, and of the habit and clothing of S. Fraunces, by which
things no man can have any hope to obtain salvation. Fly unto Christ
himself, who is our mediator and advocate, as I have said, the throne, of
grace, the reconciliation for the sins of ye world, the Lamb which was
slain from the beginning of the world: briefly our righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, as the Apostle says to the Corinthians.

Do not then (that I may return to my purpose) do not I say, prolong the
amendment and reformation of thy manners trustinge to indulgences and other such
trifles, especially, in such shortness of this life, the hour of most certain
death being so uncertain. Which death forasmuch as it is daily imminent, by
reason of the uncertain chances, which be incident unto us, may even at this
very instant come upon thee unlooked for: surely by reason of the shortness of
our life as it is said of one it can never be far of. How dangerous a
thing is it then to live in that state, in which if sudden death overtake thee,
there is no more hope of thy salvation? That thou may avoid this danger, see
thou always live godlily, acknowledge thy sins, fly humbly to God for
mercy, ask pardon and forgiveness, and through Christ hope and look for
salvation from God. Resort also often to the ministers of Gods word, and ask
of them godly instructions and spiritual comfort. And that thou may be
stirred up to remember the promises concerning remission of sin, and be more
and more confirmed concerning the good will of God toward us, come often to
the Lords table, and as Christ has instituted, feed of that body which was
once offered for ye sins of mankind, and drink that blood which was shed
for the remission of our sins: and so being mindful of the Lords death, give
heartye thanks to God for so great benefits, and sing hymns and praises unto
him both privately with thy self at home, and publicly in the assembly of the
faithful abroad.

A most fruitful admonition to avoid evil company.
NOw (that I may go forward to other matters) endeavor as much as thou may
always to sever thy self from the company of the wicked, and to associate
thy self as near as can be with the virtuous and godly. And (as one
admonishes) be conuersaunt with such as may make thee better, admit such
into thy company as thou may amend. It is a matter of no small importance
whose familiarity thou use, and with whom thou daily live. For as we are
infected with ye company of ye wicked, as with a certain contagion: so by daily
living together with the virtuous and such as fear God, we are almost
reformed and amended. Be therefore familier and a friend with these latter: as
for the other think thou ought to have nothing to do with them. The same
does Solomon command in his Proverbs. Paul also writing to the Corinthians,
does so earnestly dehort from the company and society of the wicked in all
things, that he will not have us so much as to resort to the table with them:
If any that is called a brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or a worshipper
of Idols, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extorsioner: with him that is such
see that ye eat not. There be in deed other causes, I grant, why he will
have such to be avoided, either lest we should seem to allow their lewdnes
and wickedness, or that such, when they see all men shun their company, may
be ashamed and amend: but surely this is not one of the smallest causes, least
the contagion of their vices should infect others, if any have familiarity
with them. For as a little leven leueneth a great lump of dough, so
oftentimes the example of one does mar and infect a great number.

Now although it be in deed difficult and hard to forsake the aquaintance
and familiarity of them, with who^ thou have long lived delightfully and
pleasantly, thou must notwythstanding with might and maine attempt the same,
and very diligently endeavor to sequester and sever thy self from the
company of such. Only be willing and earnest in the matter, and without
doubt it will go better forward then thou look for. And because according
to the greek proverb, the beginning is half of the whole, and again, as
Horace says, he that has well begun, has half done: see in any case thou
do begin, and doubt not of the success by considering the difficulty. If
(as it commonly falls out) thou do eftsoon think upon the feasts, merry
meetings, and such other vain and fond delights which thou have had with them:
if thou often even against thy will remember thy merry mates and companions, see
thou do then forthwith call to mind the shortness of this life, death that
hangs over our heads every hour, the last judgment, the tribunal seat of
the Lord, hell fire and eternal condemnation: and so (as the saying is) drive
out one nail with another. If thou call to mind these things, and do thus
speak with thy self: Thy fellows and pleasant companions inuit thee unto
them, suppers, dinners and merry meetings allure thee, what do I? If thou do
earnestly say this with thy self, what do I? then reason after a sort
gathering her strength, will subdue thy desire, and thy will will yield to
reason exhorting to that which is best. Take therefore time (as I have said) to
think upon these things, and deal advisedly in them when any such thing
come into thy mind by the suggestion of Satan, cast of all remissenes of mind,
neither do straighte give place to thy desire, nor run whither the devil
would drive thee. Do the companyons inuit thee to drink and make merry with
them: See thou then call to mind that which our Savior says in a certain place:
Take heed (says he) that your hearts be not overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Also that which Paul says: Be not drunk with wine wherein is
excess: and again drunkerds and gluttons shall not inherit the kingdom of
heaven. Also that which Peter says: Be sober and vigilant: moreover that
saying of Esayas: Woe be unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness.
Remember that thou must obey the authority of God and his Apostles, rather
then follow the will of wicked me^: and that thou must yield unto reason
exhorting unto that which is best, rather then consent to the devil moving
thee to that which is worst: finally that thou must rather resist that evil
spirit, then grieve the holy spirit of God. Do not therefore, do not (I
say) run to thy ruin and destruction for the pleasant company of thy
companions, but to the uttermost of thy power, sequester thy self from them,
and let eternal salvation be more dear and precious unto thee, then a short
delighte of worldly joy and pleasure.

A right pithie and profitable exhortation to forsake vice and embrace virtue.
Again and again think thus with thy self, (that I may now come to the
last point) that he does not truly repent, neither is, or may be counted a
Christian, who continues in sin and wickedness, neither that there is any
true faith in him, who sins against his conscience, and commits an
heinous offense. Let us not therefore be Christians in name only, being far
of from ye thing it self: neither let us boast of faith in words alone, but
let us truly and unfeignedly repent, let us turn to God with all our heart:
let us, not trusting to our own strength, but to the help and assistance of
God, endeavor to reform vice by virtue, always to live godlily, justly,
innocently, uprightly, holily, chastely, soberly, temperately, profitably to the
Church of God, friendly to the life of man, and (as Paul says) as it
becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Let us moreover daily desire of our heavenly father by our Lord and savior
Jesus Christ, that he will give unto us his holy spirit, who may govern,
guide, teach, sanctisie, raise up, comfort and quicken us: for Christ in the
gospel has promised that his heavenly father will give the same spirit unto
us if we by hearty prayer ask it of him. And let us not resist the holy Ghost,
by yielding to our wicked desires against our conscience, neither let us expel
or grieve him, that I may use the word of the Apostle Paul. Let us walk in
newenesse of life, let us not serve sin, let us give up our bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God: let us mortefie the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof, let us keep our selves unspotted of the world:
let us be renewed in the spirit of our mind, and put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness: let us be followers of
God as dear children: let us walk worthy of the Lord, and as it becomes
saints, forbearing one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace: let us be gentle and loving one toward
another, let us love our enemies, let us bless them that curse us, let us do
well to them that hate us, let us pray for them that hurt and trouble us, let
us give meat to the hungrye, drink to the thirsty, relief to the needye,
let us harbor strangers, cloth the naked, visit the sick, admonish him that
is out of the way, instruct the ignoraunte, help the perplexed with our
counsel, comfort the afflicted, reconcile such as be at discord and
variance, despise worldly honors, contemn vain glory, brieflye let us not
seek after wealth and riches, let us endeavor always to subdue and repress
our natural corruption and wicked affections: and let us not only take heed
least our hearts be at any time overcome with surfettinge and drunkenness, but
let us also by fasting and due abstinence prepare our selves to prayer: and
among so many deceites and invasions of Satan, the world, and the flesh, let us
with ardent prayer ask help of God: Let us not be proud in prosperity, or
discouraged in adversity: whatsoever we do, let us do all things to the
glory of God: let us not regard only our own matters but rather, those
which are other men's. Moreover let us so behave our selves that none be
offended by us, but that we may by our good example bring other to virtue and
godliness: finally let us pray daily and without intermission, in all things let
us give thanks, let v^ ^lwaies aspire to heavenly things let us contemn humane
and earthly.

These things are hard, thou will say. I confess it: yet are they agreeable to
a christian profession, and needeful to salvation. Let us then do our
diligence, that we may cast of al remissenes of mind, let us not overmuch favor
our selves nor yield to our own infirmity, or ever willingly be cause that the
grace of God be in vain in us. Let us not only not fall into sin wittingly,
but let us also valiauntly resist ye assaults of Satan, never yeeldinge unto
him through cowardice or sluggishnes. Now what is not to be judged light,
whereby thou may come to yt life which abounds with all good things, and to
those eternal joys? Not without cause says the Apostle Paul: I count that the
afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be
showed unto us. Hereunto makes that which is said in another place: The eye
has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. For how great a
thing is it (which can neither by force of words be expressed, nor by thought
of man conceived of what sort it is) to be a citizen and inhabitour of heaven,
to be an heir of God, an heir annexed with Christ, to possess the kingdom
prepared for the godly before the beginning of the world, without end to
behold that sovereign good, to enjoy the most comfortable co^templation of
the countenance of God, to be conversant in the company of Angels, to have
society with the blessed spirits, to be in the assembly of the righteous:
together with the angels, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the
Martyrs, finally with all the godly enjoying blessed immortality and life
everlasting, together I say, with all these to celebrate with hymns and
praises the eternal God the fountain of all glory?

What? are not all the miseryes and molestations of this life to be counted
light, if thou look unto the glory to come, so yt we ought worthelye to be
ashamed of our sluggishnesse and remissenes? who when he remembers these
things, namely the kingdom of heaven, the life immortal, everlasting
blessedness, ioies exceeding great and infinite, the company of Angels, finally
the society of all who after their life led godlily upon the earth, shall
enjoy a life most blessed and eternal: who I say, when he remembers these
things, is willing to carry on the earth, and does not rather with Paul desire
to be dissolved, and delivered out of the prison of this body: Let us not
therefore count these things heard, after which so great commodities do ensue,
especially seeing on the other side, they that keep not the commandments of
God that are needful to salvation, shall not only be excluded from that
felicity whereof we have spoken, but also be cast headlong into hell fire and
eternal death: thrown into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth: afflicted with most grievous pains and continual torments, in the
company and society of the devils and the wicked, without any hope of better
state, that is, being always in extreme and utter desperation, then which
there can be no torment more grievous or great.

Whom would not all these things greatly fear from sinning, namely the horror
of hell, the pains that never shall have end or measure, eternal death, the
fire that shall never go out, unspeakable torments, the company of the
devils, the society of the reprobate, and wicked, fear, anguishe, tremblinge
everlasting and infinite, and such as the mind of man can not comprehend,
nor any words express. Whom, I say, will not that day of wrath terrify, as
both the Prophet and Paul to the Romans calls it, a day of affliction and
anguish, a day of calamity, and miserye, a dark and glomie day, a cloudy and
black day, when God will reward every man according to his works. I would to
God the cogitation and remembrance of these things were always before the
eyes of our mind. Truly if they were, either I am much deceived, or men would
more diligently observe the commandments of Almighty God, they would more
refrain themselves from sin and euel doing, they would embrace virtue and
godliness, and endeavor to live holily and uprightly. What? ought that also
nothing to move us, that virtue is sometimes rewarded here on the earth, as
vice and wickedness is plagued and punished? And yt I may omit to say any thing
of the conscience whereof we have spoken in other books, we will entreat of
those things which thou may almost handle with thy hands much more be hold
with thine eyes. For that I may speak of a most common vice, what
inconveniences and evils ensue of surfettinge and drunkenness? hereof (as one
says in his historye of the world) comes palenes of color, hanginge
cheeks, sore eyes, trembling hands, troublesome sleep, and unquiet rest in
the night: hereof comes stinking breath, ache of ye head, a weak memory, a dull
wit: hereof come oftentimes grievous diseases, as great ach of ye joints, the
gout, apoplexies, as both ye physicians affirm, and almost daily examples do
teach. As for lecherye, how often do we see it in our age punished with the
french pocks, as also immoderate carnal pleasure with the palseye, blerednesse
of the eyes, tremblinge of the sinews? What shall I say of prodigalitye and
ryotte, has it not brought many to poverty and penury? What of Adultery, is
it not sometimes a present punishment, and is cause of infamy always after?
Moreover who^ has not his wrath often hurt? unto whom has not pride procured
hatred? What should I speak of envy? is it not a punishment unto it self?
and does gnaw and consume it self? so that it was said rightly of one: The
tyrannes of Sicilie found no greater torment then envy, and of an other also:
An envious man does pine at the prosperity of another. Now concerning
covetousness, is not he whose heart it possesses disquieted with a desire
always to increase his substance, and afflicted with fear to lose that he
has? For a covetous man is not content with that which he has, and he fears
also least he shall not still retain the same. Do thou not plainly by the
premises see that even here upon earth vice and wickedness oftentimes escapes
not unpunished? Now if this little move us, yet those eternal torments in
hell which the Scripture threatens to the wicked ought worthily to move all,
and greatly to stir us up and prick us forward without all delay to amend our
life, if we count not those things a fable which the holy Scriptures teach of
the life immortal of the godly, and of the pains eternal of the wicked.

I will rehearse what is wont, mightelye to move me, and as it were inflame me
to live godlily, if perhaps the same may minister occasion to other to amend
their life. Thus do I often think with my self: What, I say, Riuius, if at
this very instant thou should depart out of this life, what think thou
would become of thee? Think thou thy self sufficiently prepared to dye? For
although thou reposest thy trust, as thou ought in deed, in the infinite
clemency and goodness of GOD, think thou notwithstanding that thou have no
cause to fear his justice? How many thousand christians are committed to
everlasting pains, how many young men, old men, men of middle age, women,
folks married, unmarried, finally how many of every state, age and sex, whose
sins were both far fewer and much lighter then thine? O dreadful judgment
of God, yet righteous and just. How many Jews are there in hell, how many
idolaters are tormented with continual pains? Who if they had bin converted
to the faith of Christ, as by Gods goodness and grace we are, they would perhaps
have lived far better on the earth then we at this day do, and also would
have avoided those eternal torments: O execrable ingratitude of ours, O
senselessness of man's heart. What, I say, if thou should hear that which
was spoken of the Prophet unto Ezechias: Prepare thy self, for thou must dye
and shall not escape: what would thou do in this case? Thou would wyshe
I think, a time to live, wherein thou might bewail thy sins, unfeignedly
repent, and ask mercy of God. Why then dooste thou not that daily, and
through thy whole life which thou would then do in a moment of time?

By thinking of these things I am wont (as I have said) to be much stirred up
and inflamed to live godlily, also hereby am I terrified from sinning, and
moved to crave mercy of god. Let therefore such as think good, set the same
before their eyes. There is scarce any man who purposes not to forgive his
enemies before he go hence, let him then forgive him now. There is scarce any
who desires not to return into Gods favor, let him return therefore now:
There is scarce any who thinks not to amend his life, let him amend it
therefore now. Brieflye whatsoever thou would do at the point of death,
do the same through Gods help and assistance, while thou live and art in
health: that is, that I may speak particularly, repent continuasly, fear God
unfeignedly, love him with thy whole heart and most entirely, repose all thy
trust and confidence in him alone, call upon him in adversity, give him thanks
in prosperity, praise, extol, and confess him at al times, singe willinglye
hymns unto him, remember him always in thy prayers, wishes and desires:
commit thy self to his goodness, and submit thy self to his will: set his
example before thee, and imitate the same in deserving well of men: finally
endeavor to be like unto him in loving thine ennemies.

Moreover be patient in adversity, humble in prosperity, diligent in thy
duty, temperate in thy living, comely in thine apparel, just toward thy
neighbor, liberal toward ye poor, gentle and courteous in ye company of me^,
patient to suffer injuries, a furtherer of peace and concord, chaste, shamefast,
sober, to conclude in all things upright and entire. And forasmuch as thou art
not able to perform these things by ye only strength of nature, fly unto God
for help and assistance, acknowledge thine infirmity and weakness: pray daily
unto God humbly and heartily, that he will give thee his holy spirit, which
Christ has promised in the gospel that he will give unto us if we ask it of
him. If thereforr thou desire that the same spirit may be shed on thee
abundantly through Jesus Christ, then those things that could not be done by
the strength and power of nature, shall by his aid and help be accomplished.
Only let there be no fault in thy self, neither yield thou willinglye to
thine evil desires, but have an especial care to shake of all remissenes of
mind. For the holy ghost does not help such as be slothful and sluggishe,
and sit idle with their hands folded together, but such as are doing, and put
to all their strength and endeavor: and counts the^ worthy of his help,
which labor to repress and subdue their natural corruption, and have a
continual combat and fight with the evil affections of their mind. Let us not
do then as that contriman did which is mentioned in a certain fable, who when
the carte that he drove stuck fast in the mire, called to God for help he
himself in the mean season standing idle and doing nothing.

Moreover let the presence of God in every place, which thou can by no
means avoid, greatly fear thee from sinning, and stir thee up to live
holilye and vertuouslye, seeing thou must needs have God a witness and be holder
of al thine actions. If so be thou would not have a man to come in unto
thee, when thou committest any unseemly or dishoneste thing: how much more
ought that reverence and shame which should be in thee for that God beholds
thee, revoke thee from sin and wickedness? Thou fear to have man know of
thy sin: dare thou then attempt any thing the Lord God beholding thee,
which thou durst not commit in the sight of man? especially seeing that whom
thou haste now a witness and beholder of all thy doings, him thou shall have in
time to come thy censor and judge. One of the heathen admonishes, that we must
so live as though we lived in the sight of men: that we must so think, as
though men might always see into the depth of our heart. And again the same
heathen man says: So, says he, do all things, as though some man beheld
thee. It is profitable undoubtedly for thee to set a keeper over thy self,
and to have one whom thou may behold, and whom thou may think to be
privy to all thy cogitations. A great part of sin is taken away, if there
be a witness present with him that is about to sin. These things says that
heathen man, which let every one think spoken to himself. If thou therefore
purpose to do any dishonest or ungodly thing, before thou attempt the same
think thus with thy self: What do I? Shall I enterprise to do that GOD
being witness thereof, and beholdinge me, which I durst not do in the
sight of a mortal man? Shall I by this deed procure the displeasure of the
Lord GOD, when I would not willinglye lose the favor of a man that is my
friend? Shall I grieve the holy Spirit of GOD, that that wicked spirit may
rejoice over me? Has Christ therefore redeemed me with his blood, that I
should voluntarilye yield my self to the servitude of Satan? has he
therefore delivered me from sin that I should wittinglye and willingly fall
into the same again? Has he therefore made me an heir of the kingdom of
heaven, that I should through mine own defaulte deprive my self of such an
inheritance? Where is now that ardent love toward GOD? Where is reverend
fear and honest shamefastness? Where is pietye and faith? Do I thus thank
God for his innumerable benefytes? Do I thus thank Christ for my salvation
purchased?

Do I thus give my self to be guided of the holy Ghost? Do I come with
these deeds to the table of the Lord. Do I thus look for the coming of
Christ? Shall death find me in this wise occupied? Shall I thus come to the
judgment seat of God? Do I so much favor my self that evil desires
prevail against me, the infirmity of the flesh overcomes me, and sin
reigns in my body? Am I so void of all vigor and valor, that like an
effeminate person I resist not these motions of the mind? Do I so see that
that is better and follow that which is worse? of these and other like things
(for who can rehearse all) if thou daily think with thy self, thou shalt not
easily commit any thing which is unseemly or dishonest. To conclude then, what
soever thou art about to do, be verily persuaded that God is present (as he is
in deed) and does behold all things that thou do, him see thou fear, let
the reverence which thou ought to give unto him who is in every place,
keep thee from doing any evil. For as one says. He witness is and arbiter,
he all thinks does behold and see,
Which in man's mind conceived are:
before him all shall judged be.


This also may move thee much to live well, if thou continually consider that
in thy spiritual regeneration thou wast made the son and heir of God, and
which is the greatest dignitye, the brother of Christ, and an heir annexed
with him. For who is not greatly inflamed unto godliness, who does not with a
certain reverend fear and shame fastnes detest sin and wickedness, when he
calls to mind that he has God to his father? Do not therefore, do not I
say, ever forget this benefit: he that has adopted thee to be his son, se
thou love, reverence and honor, and not offend in any thing whatsoever:
Submit thy self to his will, follow his commandments, obey his precepts:
Think that not only the participation of his inheritance, but also the
imitation of his goodness and virtue does pertain unto thee: so that albeit
thou can not by imitating attain to the excellency of the goodness which is
in this thy heavenly father, yet must thou in will come as near as may be, and
count it a most unseemly thing to degenerate therfrom. If thou do any thing
unawares that may displease this thy father (as the frailty and weakness of
mankind is great) let the same strike such grief into thy mind, that thou will think thy self worthy of any punishment, who haste offended so gracious
a father: and be not quiet in mind, before thou have by true and heartye
repentance pacified him. So far is it of that thou should ever wittingly
sin, or commit any offense against thy conscience. And surely he that
remembers that he is the son and heir of God, the brother of Christ, and
heir annexed with him, is terrified from sin and wickedness, not so much with
dread of ye last judgment, of eternal torments, of the fire that shall never
go out, as with fear of offending his heavenly father: and endeavors to
live godlilye, to hurt no man, to deserve well of all after the example of his
father, being moved thereunto not so much with hope of an heavenly reward and
everlasting joy, as with a certain exceeding and unspeakable love toward God
his father. He that believes Paul, that his body is the temple of the holy
ghost that dwells in us, does easily abstain from sin, and defiles not
himself with unlawful lust. Finally he that doubts not that he is admitted
into the number of the Saints, omitteth not to follow also the virtues of the
Saints, as piety toward God, and love toward our neighbor.

Of the cause why purposing many times to live godlily, we persist not in our
good purpose, and what means may be found to remedy the same.
But what is the cause (will some man say) that whereas we sometime think and
purpose to live vertuouslye, godlilye, chastely, and soberlye, yet we do not
constantlye continue in the faithful fulfillinge of that which we have so
well determined? That I may aunsweare in few words, the chief and
principal cause hereof is the natural naughtiness and corruption which is in
us, and that pronenesse to sin which sticks as it were in our very
bowels and marowe: that is, the very flesh which we bear about, wherewith
the inward man has a sore and grievous fight, and almost a continual
combat, as Paul does witness. This therefore we must always resist when
it provoke us to unlawful lust and filthye pleasures, to gluttony and
surfettinge, to lasciviousness and lecherye, finally to any other filthye
factes or dishonest behavior, and with godly studies, exercises, abstinence
and fastings bridle and bring under the force thereof, and with continual
fobrietie and temperance of life repress and subdue the same. For this cause
our Savior commands that our hearts be not oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness: and Paul forbids us to be drunken with wine, prohibiteth
gluttony and excessive drinking, and wills us to be vigilant and sober.
Hereunto must be added daily prayer and calling for Gods help and assistance,
without which all the endeavor that we bestow in bridlinge the flesh and
repressing the force thereof, is frustrate and in vain.

But the motions of the flesh being after a sort subdued, there is moreover the
world and the devil our deadly enemies, wherewith we have a continual fightifor
nether will these suffer us to presist in our purpose and determination to live
godlily and well. For ye world provoke to ambition, pride, riot, to wrath,
hatred, envy, impatiencie, sclaunderinge: and ministers occasions to other
sins which no man can rehearse, moreover it marreth men with evil examples,
and corrupts them with sundry offenses. The devil cease not to induce and
move man to y^ neglect of Gods word, to incredulity and diffidence, to a false
persuasion of himself, to an obstinate persisting in evil, to blaspheme the
Lord God, to impugn the known truth, to hypocrisy, superstection, idolatry,
and other infinite and innumerable sins, and offenses.

What is then to be don, thou will say in this case? Surely we must valiantly
resist our enemies, we must cast of all remissines of mind and faintnes of
courage, and with ardent and earneste prayer crave Gods aid and help, and
trustinge there unto not despeire of the victory. But let us here what Paul
says concerning this matter writing to the Ephesians: Finally, my Brethren
(says he) be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the
devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against worldly governors, the princes of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in the
hie places. A little after rehearsinge by name the armor of Christians, he
wills them to stand with their loins girt about with verity, having on the
breast plate of righteousness, taking the shield of faith, whereby they may
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: he wills them moreover to take the
helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God,
and exhorts them to pray always. Thus have thou the armor wherewith thou
must fight against our adversary the devil, who never omitteth day, no not an
hour, nay scarce one moment but he alwais assaileth us, and like a roaring lion
goes about, seeking whom he may devour, as the Apostle Peter says.

Let us therefore being fenced and furnished with this armor which Paul
prescribes, valiantly resist him, and he will fly from us, as says the
Apostle James. Let us daily desire Gods aid and help: Let us pray unto God
that he will not lead us into tentation: Let us beseech him that for Christ's
sake he will deliver us from that wicked fend, which is the continual enemy
of mankind. Howbeit let us take special head, that we fall not wittingly into
sin, whether ye devil would drive us, and into voluntarye destruction, neither
that we yield to our own imbecility, but with a stout courage resist Satan,
and desire of the eternal God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
will help our infirmity and weakness. And because the devil does not always
set upon us with open force, but assayleth us also privily and by secret
means, and (as one says) flattereth that he may deceive, smileth that he may
hurt, allureth that he may slay and kill: let us do our endeavor, that we may
wisely and warely avoid the snares that he lays for us, and that we may
give him no occasion to assail and oppress us of a sudden and unawares.

Head may be more easily taken, says Cyprian, where fear is manifest. Let us
therefore shake of sluggishnes and overmuch security in our life, and fear
that under every stone as ye saying is, there is a scorpion, and let us not be
quiet and secure as though al things were safe and sure. None is sooner
overtaken (as a certain hea then mau says) then he that fears nothing: and
security is very often the beginning of calamity. Do not then, if thou haste
once overcome thine enemy, look by and by for peace, as though thou were
already pa^e all peril. Thou must always stand in the battle, and as it
were prepared and ready to fight, so that Cyprian said well, that in the world
there is nothing but continual conflictes with the devil, and daily fighting
against his assaults and invasions. We encounter says he, with covetousness,
with uncleanness, with wrath, with ambition: we have a daily and grievous fight
with carnal vices and worldly allurements: the mind of man being as it were
besieged and on every side compassed with the invasions of the devil, does
scarce withstand every one, does scarce resist them. If covetousness be
conquered, lust rises up: if lust be repressed, ambition succeeds: if
ambition be contemned, wrath does exasperat, pride puffs up, drunkenness
inuiteth, envy breaks concord, zeal dissolueth friendship. etc. Now as
we ought not to be proud or presumptuous being once victors, so neither
ought we straighte to be discouraged or cast away our weapons when we are
overcome. What must we do the^? To take away the former ignomie, let us more
fiercely assail the enemy and put away the shame before received by new
valor and valiantnes: no otherwise then that champion mentioned in a certain
Poet, when he had fallen heavily to the earth, being nothing terrified with the
fall. He comes fiercer to the fight,
ire does his courage move again:
Shame stirs his strength and valor which
he in himself knew to remain.


HOwbeit we must encounter with the enemy, trusting not so much to our own
power and prowess, as to Gods help and assistaunce. Thus have thou y^ cause
why for the most part we persist not in our purposed determination to live
virtuously and according to Gods will. For the cause as I have said, is our
natural corruption and pronenesse to sin: also the world offering daily
inumerable occasions and means to all kind of wickedness: finally the devil,
always thinking of our destruction, and omitting not scarce one moment of
time, either with open force, or by privy and secret means to assail us.

God the father of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, vouchsafe with his aid
and assistance to help us, and with his holy spirit to confirm and
strengthen us, having such a sore and continual conflict with so many
enemies, whom we are very weak to resist, that by his help we may repress
the motions of the flesh, and not be carried away with the allurements thereof,
that we may subdue our vicious nature, and be able valiantly to resist the
world always ministering occasions and means to infinite sins, and the devil
on every side assailinge us, and attemptinge all means to destroy us: and
that not only a servile fear, which the law brings, namely of Gods
vengeance and eternal punishment, may revoke us from sin, and wickedness,
being terrified with Gods wrath and judgment, and stricken with dread and
horror of hell: but much rather yea specially a free fear with a certain honest
shamefastnes and virtuous reverence toward GOD may move us not easilye to
commit any thing, which may displease our most gracious and favorable
father: and may also make us of our own accord to avoid vice and embrace
virtue, and by love and charity keep us in doing our duty, so that if we
commit any offense unawares, as the imbecilitie of man is great, the same may
bring so great grief and disquietnesse of mind unto us, that we shall take
no joy of our life, for that we have offended so louinge and merciful a
father, until we have by heartye repentance pacified him again. Finallye the
eternal God for his son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake grant,
that in such shortness of this life, in such vncertaintye of the hour of
death, we may not prolonge and drive of from day to day the amendment of our
manners: but that acknowledging our sins, we may without all delay
endeavor to return unto goodness, truly and heartelye repent, and by
unfeigned repentance of our sins, pacifye our heavenly Father: Moreover with
the Publican mentioned in the Gospel, humblye and with knockinge our breaste
implore Gods favor and mercy: Fynallye that we may be willing and careful
to do those things only which are acceptable to God, that we may reform
vice with virtue and that through Gods assistance we may by all means endeavor
to lead the rest of our life hereafter godlily, holily, innocently, chastely,
soberly, temperatly, profitably to the church of God, friendly to the life of
men, agreeable to a christian profession, and also persevere in this our good
purpose and determination.

The Conclusion.
THus much I thought good to write concerning the folly of men in prolonging
the amendment of their life. The very matter it self which I took in hand
to entreat of, has enforced me to speak of such things as to the virtuous
and them that love God, are very pleasant and delectable, but to such as will
seem Christians, when they are nothing less, very unpleasant and grievous. We
have spoken many things, yea and have so earnestly repeated the same, that we
may seem almost tedious to the reader, concerning the shortness and
uncertainty of this life, concerning death which by reason of the uncertain
chances that be incident unto us, is daily imminent, and does oftentimes come
upon men suddenly and unawares, which the godly do heartily desire, and
willingly suffer when it so pleases God, but the wicked do wonderfully dread
and fear. We have spoken of the general resurrection, of the coming of ye
Lord, of the last judgment, when all shall be called to the examination of the
life which they have led, the day whereof being dreadful to the wicked, the
godly think shall be to them joyful and happy. For then approaches their
redemption, then comes the time of comfort and refreshing, as the Apostle in
the Acts says, and as Tertulian says, then is the day of Christian
rejoicing.

We have spoken moreover, what rewards are appointed after death for the
godly, and what punishments for the wicked. For the godly shall ascend unto
God, and in heaven enjoy a life most blessed and everlasting. For what great
felicity is it, always to behold God, to be exhilarated with a perpetual
and most pleasant contemplation of his cositenance to see him as he is, whom we
now see through a glass darkely, as the Apostle Paul says: finally to
abound with all good things, to be partakers of so great delights and joys as
no man is able sufficiently either in cogitation to comprehend, or in words to
express? Contrariwise the wicked shall be thrown hedlong into hell, there to be
tormented with most grievous and everlasting pains. For there is no eloquence
of any man so great, which is able in words to utter, nether ye wit of any so
sharp, yt it is able in cogitation to conceive ye lest part of those torments
which ye wicked shall suffer in hell, being condemned by ye just judgment of God
to eternal fire. Finally, we have spoken of sundry other things, which, as I
have said, shall be very pleasant to ye godly, but to the wicked very unpleasant
and grievous: as of the sense of Gods wrath against sin, of shaking of
security in the time of prosperity, of repenting unfeignedly, of the amendment
of our manners, of the reforming of our life, of a daily fight with our
adversaries, the world, the flesh, and the devil, and of other such like
things, which it is not here needful to repeat. These things are in deed
hard and unpleasant, but, as I hope wholesome and profitable. For physicians,
as one well witnesses, do cure grievous diseases with sharp remedies, and as
Cicero says unto Octauius, No remedies which are laid unto wounds do so
procure grief, as they that are wholesome.

The eternal God, the father of our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ, grant that
in this so corrupt and wretched age, this our treatise (howbeit if any will
earnestlye peruse the same) may somewhat contain ye godly in their duty, and
confirm them in the best part: and may give some occasion to the wicked, I
mean such as be not past hope, to return unto goodness: finally that this
sharp medicine which is given yt health may be recovered thereby, may have
force and power to help and heal them that be as it were sick and almost
desperate. Which he, without whose help all the endeavor of men is frustrate
and in vain, even the Lord God almighty grant: To whom be praise, honor, and
glory for ever.

Finis.
IMPRINTED at London by Gregory Seton, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Hedgehogge at the West end of Paul's.

Anno. 1579.


