The true report of a late practice enterprised by a Papist, with a young Maiden
in Wales, accounted emongst our Catholics in those parts for a greater
Prophetise, then ever was the Holy Maid of Kent, till now on Sundaie being
the iiij. of March this present year 1582. in the Cathedral Church at
Chester, before the whole assembly then at a Sermon she confessed, how she had
been seduced by a ronegate Priest, and how by his instructions she had feined
to see certain Visions, which likewise follow in due form. The pervsyng
whereof, the reformed Protestaunte shall find cause worthy to laugh at: the
wilful Papist matter to be ashamed at: and all sorts of people good example
to be warned at: Truly set down without any manner of parciallitie, by Barnabe
Rich gentleman.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari. Perused and allowed according to the order
appointed.

Imprinted at London by Robert Walley dwelling in Paul's Church yard. 1582.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Fraunsis VValsingam Knight, principal Secretary
to her Highness and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel:
Barnabe Rich wishes increase of honor, continuance of health and happy
estate.
AS in all Actions and attemptes (Right Honorable) it is most requisite to
choose out such as are most politic and prudent performers, so in causes of
protection it is most necessary to account of such as are greatest favors
of the cause, whereupon: knowing your Honor to be a Pillar and underprop of
true Christianity, a maintainer of Religion, and a zealous professor of the
Gospel, J thought it not amiss, to offer these trifles (in wisemens
Judgementes, yet divine miracles in the wilful and Ignorant Papists opinion)
to your Honor, to be safcundited under your grave title, and the rather, for
that my simplicity shall find sauegarde under so Honorable a name, and my
good meaning (which would stretche far if ability were corespondent) might
be manifest unto you, who have bound me by several good turns, and in whom
those in necessity always find refuge.

May it please you therefore to give it the ouerreading, and as it deserves,
the laughyng at, and as your Honor likes of the miracles, so imparte it for the
straungenes to those shall best like you. And thus J most humbly take my leave.

Your Honors in all serviceable duty to command. Barnabe Rich.

The report of a late practice enterprised by a Papiste.
THe unadvised regard of the world now a days (courteous reader) in
pubilshing printed untruths, to bring in variety of vanities (for the better
satisfiyng of idle heads) almost withdraws my mind from my pretensed
purpose. But for that I am most assuredly persuaded, and not induced only by
reports, but confirmed by learned and discrite beholders, my self being an
eye witness to some part, it makes me therefore nothing doubtful to lay
open to the world, a thing of most assured verity, and with all a most
pestiferous practice of a groshedded Papiste but lately put in ure: Not
doubtyng but that all things shall draw to a good exigent, since the grounds
be so certain.

And whereas it may be wondered, why amongst the rest my self only adicted to
Military profession, should dare presume to enter into those matters, which by
Antichrist and his vpholders are deemed to be more then demi heavenly: Know
you, that two special causes have drawn me to it: The one the seriouse
persuasions of dear friends, namely (amongst many others) Master Richard
Ioyner a Physician dwelling in Chester, sometimes a disciple of the Popes, and
a chief companion in Oxenford, with our late hallowed, Saint Edmunde Campion,
and now (by Gods permission) both him self freed from his former follies, and
desirous that others should be warned of the like.

My second reason is, for that I find the matter so simple, as I esteem it
to insufficient to deserve the ouerlooking of the learned, and yet so
pernicious, as it could not escape the scoff of a Soldier, who as in time of
war, he is bound to his Countries behoof with his Pike, so in causes that
grow within compass of his conjecture (being profitable to the Commonweal)
^e is not to with hold his pen.

So it is, that having been in Irelande upon her Maiestes affairs, I made my
return accompanied with the worshipful Captain Thomas North, brother to the
right honorable the Lord North Captain Thomas Maria Wyngfeeld with sundry
others that can likewise testify a truth in this cause, it was our chance to
ariue at Chester on Satirdaie being the third of March this present year
1582. where amongst other matters of worthiness, we heard great good
report, of that grave and studiouse divine Master Goodman, who as we
understood the next day was appoincted to preach, we being desirous to stay
our Journey on the Sabbath day, addressed our selves to Church, where to our
great edification, we heard the learned discourse of Master Goodman, whose
bolsome aduertisements, tended to the confusion of error, admonishyng his
hearers, to beware of the subtle practices of Papists, which were
continually busied with sedusing the simple and ignorant.

In the end of his Sermon, there stood forth in open veiwe a young Maiden,
called by the name of Elizabeth Orton borne in Orton Madocke in the County of
Flint, and Dioces of Chester, about the years of fourteen or fifteen of
proper personage, and the Daughter of Ihon Orton yet living, and dwelling in
Orton a foresaied. This young Maiden, before the whole assembly there present
after the Sermon, delivered this protestation Verbatim as follows.

The Confession of Elizabeth Orton uttered by her the fourth of March last
past, in the Cathedral Church of Chester.
GOod people, you shall understand, that J Elizabeth Orton have been seduced by
a vile runnagate Papist, named Sir Hughes, once Scholemaster in Orton Madocke,
where my father dwells, who having (as J right well perceived since) an
intent to deceive the simple and Ignorant people, and to carry the^ from the
light of the Gospel into the darkness of Papistrie, abused the simplicity
of my tender years, and brought me to believe, that if I would not do as he
instructed me, J could never be saved, and so puttyng me in fear that my soul
could not otherwise escape eternal damnation, he wrought me at length to yield
to his persuasions and allurements, and caused me to take upon me, that J saw
Visions of the fire of Purgatory, and affirm that I was laid therein, and of
the Mass, and of the Mother of Christ, and sundry others which of truth J did
not see: But now being of more discretion then at that time I was, and knowing
better of true Religion (God be therefore thanked) then at that time J did, I
do here before God and you protest, that those Visions which are reported to
be seen of me, J never did see neither did know, what such matter means,
neither did ever see any Mass, or any sign of fire of Purgatory, or any such
thing in vision or out of vision, but was misseled by the wicked counsel, and
false practices, of that naughty fellow Hughes, to affirm and say, J saw
such things as J did indeed never see, whereof J do heartily desire you all
to beware of traiterous Papists, and to take heed how you harken or give ear
to such forged and vain tales and reports, as are raised upon those unseen
visions of mine, and to pray to GOD for me, that it would please him to
forgive all my offenses, and this offense especially, which I committed of
simple Ignorance, being thereunto persuaded, by such a crafty and subtle
seducer.

Her speech being thus ended, Master Bauyan the Mayor of Chester inuicted
Master North, Master Wyngfeeld, and my self to go home with him to Dinner,
where we found very worshipful entertainment, there dined likewise other
Aldermen and Towns men of Chester, amongst who^ I enquired, what might be the
meaning why the young Maiden had made this open protestation, I was answered,
that it was now almost two years past since she had feined in Vision to see our
Savior Jesus Christ, with the Virgin Mary his Mother, S. Anne our Ladies
Mother, Mary Magdalene, Saint Ihon Babtist saying Mass, accompanied with the
Apostles: and that she had seen Purgatory and been in Purgatory, with many
other like revelations, the which she either so cunnyngly counterfeited, or at
the least her beholders that were present during the time of her ecstasies, were
so credilous, or peradventure willing to have furthered her in her purpose,
that it was straight ways imagined, by a multitude of dull headded Papists in
those parts, that God had raised that little young Prophetese, to the great
glory of their holy Father the Pope, and to the high advancement of their
little wheaten God: And although that since that time she had passed the
examinations of so Honorable as the Earl of Darby, and so reverend as the
Bishop of Chester with sundry others, yet she still stoutly stood to her
tacklyng, mainetaynyng her unseen revelations to be true, till now at the
length by the admonitions of this good father Master Goodman, she was become
penitent, confessed a truth, and in our presents, and that open assembly so
disclosed and detested her error as you have heard.

After this, I had inteligence of a Pamphelet that was secretly spread, wherein
was described the manner of her Visions, penned by some Archpapist that was
ashamed to put to his own name, and yet of such accoumpt amongst our
Catholics in those quarters, that it carries better credit then either the
Epistles of Saint Paul, or the Gospelles of the four Evangelists: and by
the reports of sundry credible personages, diverse Copies of it are sent over
the Sea as a precious present, some to France, some to Rome, but very many
into Irelande.

The Copy of this Pamphelet was given me by Master Gondman, the which when I
had ouerlooked, I found in it such profounde and deep doctrine, as although
before me in my younger days, I had over read the famous Histories of Sir Beuis
of Hampton, of Sir Guy of Warwick, of the Friar and the Boy, of Howleglas, of
Friar Rushe, and sundry other like, yet I dare boldly affirm, that this for
matter and circumstaunce does far exceed and go beyond them all: yea, and
nothing put down but might be approved by good authority, and thoroughly
confirmed by Legenda Aurea: Were it not pity then that so worthy a work as
this, should be still thus smothered up amongst our Catholics? the which
questionles if it were published and brought to light, could not be but
accoumpted of, even amongst children and fools.

Receive then with reverence this precious piece of work in due manner, as it
was first penned by that great Clarke Johannes sieve nomine, saving that in the
margent I have coated down certain principal poinctes worthy to be noted:
willing thee (freendly Reader) before thou adventure to peruse it, first to
sanctify thy self with Crossynges and blessings, it skilles not how few,
Pater nosters in Latin the more the better, half a dosen of Creedes may very
well suffice, but as many Aue Mary's as will fill a quarter Sack, this done,
fear not then thou may read it at thy pleasure: But if thou will use it to
thy better avail, read it fasting, then make thy Dinner with a pound of
Potato Roots, and I warrant thee it shall make thee as holy as a poke full of
the Popes pardons, and thus follows the text.

The true report of two miracles or visions that appeared unto Elizabeth
Orton, Daughter to Ihon Orton of Orton Madocke, being in the County of Flint
and Dioces of Chester, the one, the first of February, the other, the four and
twenty of the same Month in this present year. 1580.
An honorable thing no doubt, to publishe lies.
Understanding by the testimony of Raphaell the Archangell, it is an honorable
thing to publishe the works of GOD, and readyng in the Monumentes of the
ancient fathers, the holy Bishops did use to declare unto the people, What a
multitude of Fathers he has brought her for his encouragement, he has named S
Augustine who blamed a Gentlewoman, we can not tell wherefore.
such Visions and Miracles as had happened amongst them, whereof S. Augustine
himself so well liked, that he blamed greatly a noble Gentlewoman of his
acquaintance for not revealing the power of God showed upon her.

Wherefore, being encouraged by the wholesome admonition of an Angel, and
examples of so many grave fathers of great antiquity, I am the rather induced
to communicate unto the devout Reader, certain merueilous Visions that our
Lord has reueiled of late unto a young girl, to the increase of his honor,
His Honor you must understand the Mass, his enemies be the Protesta^tes, ye
poor afflicted flock are the Papists.
confusion of his enemies, and comfort of his poor afflicted servant, whom
he has yet stayed, within the unity of his Catholic Church, protestyng
faithfully that in this writing, I shall neither add nor deminishe Nor yet say
truth.

Her friends that were furtherers of so notorious a lie, whose zeal toward
Popery is such that they care not what they do to maintain their folly. He
fears aforehande yt you will smell out a lie, therefore you must needs believe yt
all is true, otherwise a lie is not worth the tellyng.


any thing, but sincerely report (as nere as my memory can bear away) what I
have learned of the party her self, and other her friends, that were
witnesses of so great a wonder, in whose honesty and credit I have such
affiaunce, that I am sure they would not be abashed to justify the truth what
they have seen and heard before any man living, wherein if some thing should
seem to the hearers incredible, let him not measure Gods omnipotent power by
his own infirmity, but with all meekenes let him endeavor to apply these
heavenly Visions, as a special warnyng to him self, for the amendyng of his
own life: And because the matter may be of the Reader better conceived, I
will first declare what the company (that remained with the said young wenche)
did observe, during this ecstasy, and then I will open her Vision, as by
diligent examination, I received it from out her own mouth.

This girl having to name Elizabeth Orton, being about the age of thirteen
or fourteen years, and brought up according to the corruption of the time, in
ignorance and liberty, Somthyng in knauerie instructed by obstinate Papists.
upon Candelmas even at eight of the Clock within night, this present year
of our Lord 1580. sittyng by the fire, A matter to be wondered at, to se a
woman weep.
began to weep suddenly, whereat the beholders were suddenly amassed,
especially because they knew her to be in perfect health, and in her own
fathers house, where she might be most bold, and while she thus continued,
or rather increased her weepyng, one of her friends demanded the cause of her
heaviness, unto whom she made no answer, wherewith incontinently a whole
fountain of tears issued from her eyes most habu^dantly, very lamentable to
the beholders, and falling down upon her knees before her stepmother, with
others that were present bitterly weepyng, sobbing and sighing, she spoke as
follows.

My time is appoincted, I have to remain but a little space with you,
wherefore if I have offended any of you all, as I know I have done, even as
you look to obtain forgiveness of God for your own sins, I desire you for
his sake to forgive me (a miserable sinful creature) those things wherein I
have offended you. The which words being uttered with merueilous vehemency,
made all the company that heard the same astonished: And when they had answered
we forgive with all our hearts, she arose and thanked them, whereupon
incontine^tly turnyng from them, she stared and fixed her eyes toward one
place, as beholding some body, and ioynyng both hands in most reverent manner
said these words: Jesus forgive me, Jesus forgive me a sinful wretch, sweet
Jesus forgive me, wateryng her prayers with salt tears. Afterward pausing a
while and turning again to the assistaunce, she spoke again on this wise.

God himself I thank him of his goodness has freely forgiven me my sins
and wickedness, I know it, I know it, A badde forgiveness, if you mark the
sequel.
for he has so promised me, lo where he stands, behold I see him, let me
go to him, let me embrace him, I see him stand here before my face,
accompanied with his holy Mother, behold she stands by him, and russhyng her
self with very great strength, offered toward the place where she said
Christ appeared unto her, castyng both her arms abroad, as one ready to
embrace, then ioynyng them again to her body very fast, she said: Now I have
him, I have him in mine arms, O good Lord forgive me, thou know what great
desire I have to come unto thee, fie fie on this wretched world, here is no
goodness in it, I defy the world, I defy the world.

With these words and the like, she moved her audience to great remorse for
their sins, and admiration at the sight, the rather, because they understood
by her sober wise aunswers to all their demaundes, that she had the perfect
use of her wit and memory.

After this staiyng her self awhile, and being somewhat more quiet, the
assistauntes hoped the fit was ended, but lo, besides their expectation, she
began again to be pitifully troubled, with intolerable pains, and to power
forth tears as before she did, but yet more haboundantly, that they seemed
to drop down both her eyes bigger then Hailestones, vtteryng moreover these
words with great veheme^cie.

Peruse this circumstance well, and tha^ tell me if a wise manne would believe
that any du^ce hedded Ass, would so far ouershoote himself to persuade so
mea^e a vanity, for an undoubted virtue.
O Lord have thou provided for me this Purgatory the which I see before my
face, burning with Pitche Rosin and Brimstone: Lord I thank thee thou have
freely forgiven me, and now O Lord, the blessed Virgin thy Mother has
likewise promised forgiveness, but yet she has not forgiven me as thou have
done, I must enter into this fire that does so extremely burn, good Lord I
had rather wallowe my naked body the space of four and twenty hours in
angerie sire, then once to put the end of my finger in this fire of
Purgatory, which burns so merueilously: then casting her eyes aside,
ioynyng both her hands together, with very devout gestures and blubbered
cheeks, in most pitiful manner she spoke as follows.

O blessed Virgin and holy Mother of God, forgive me as thy holy Son has
done, and suffer me not to go to yonder fire to be tormented in this wife.

Here you may se what a cruel hatted gentlewoman our Lady is.

This doctrine is far fette I can tell you


She continued a certain space most earnestly crauyng pardon of the holy
Mother the Virgin, not for her sins (to my simple judgment) already
forgiven her by Christ, but for the temporal punishment due to her sins,
that then was represented before her eyes, as it shall appear anon more
plainly by her own words to the holy Virgin: In the mean time let the
Reader understand that her pardone was denaied, where at you shall have no
such cause to marvel, in beholding the Mother of mercy so hard to be
entreated, O wisely considered.
if you consider that she might committ some sin against the holy Virgin,
that deserved condign punishment, although to say the truth unfeignedly, I
believe that our blessed Lady did therein more for her, then if she had quite
released her pains, as they can best testify, who have ever sithence
perceived in her life wonderful alteration.

But to return again where I left, A great grace of God that it did not
set the house on fire.
the seely wenche beholding this fire to draw nerer and nerer, and fearing
that she could not escape it, at last yielded her will to Gods determination,
vtteryng these words to the Mother of Christ.

Well blessed Virgin Mary, since it is thy will (good Virgin) I should enter
into this fire, because I can not have forgiveness at thy hands I must be
contented, and now I go into it, Jesus help me, Jesus be merciful unto me,
wherwt immediately, she made a show, both by gesture of body and words,
uttered in such lamentable wise, that all the lookers on were fully persuaded,
this tender girl to endure unspeakable torments, the space of one hour and
more, sustainyng to their judgments, Or wisema^ able to believe.
greater panges then pen is able to write or tongue is able to express, for
it seemed more terrible then a woman's pains in travail with Child, or a man
when the stitch teareth his body in pieces, and wounds the heart to death:
In so much that the beholders wondered greatly, how her young and tender flesh
could endure the same, for she burned within as well as without, that the heat
broyled up to her mouth, This fire is more hot then the scorching flames of
Love.
and her skin scorched with such excessive heat, that hardly could any man
abide to touch her to be brief, for very pain her eyes were covered with a
mist, and her mouth fomed, that all the company assistauntes dispaired of her
life, and were fore grieved to see so heavy a spectacle, and to hear so
pitiful a voice pearcyng their ears, oh, oh, oh, O good Lord I burn, good
Lord I burn.

The rest of her words were such as became the servant of God, never ceasing,
whilst her body lay in the fire, to occupy her tongue with praising God, and
calling upon his holy name, for help and ease of her pain, utterly defiyng
the whole world, withal the vanities thereof, sin, and all sinful means:
To conclude, being come at the last to an end of her punishment, and feeling
her poor body unable to endure the pain, she said: oh that I had one drop
of water to cool this cruel burning heat wherein I am, Lord, Aqua vitae, a
precious ointment against the fire of Purgatory.
Lord, if it be thy will send it me: and forth with one of the standers by,
spilt upon her a little Aqua vitae, whereupon in their conceipte, the burning
slaked somewhat, for she said, Lord I thank thee now some of the great heat
is cooled, I thank thee good Lord.

Finally, being thoroughly released from all her pains, she called often upon
a young Maid named Alco Ioua, who had been buried the same day, and stretching
her arm from her, as if she took her by the hand, criyng earnestly upon her
to stay till she was ready, for she would come with her: and this is the
effect of her words and behavior during the first ecstasy, that they could
bear away who were nearest unto her as I learned out of their mouths by
several examinations: Much more then is here written she said, and did as
devoutly as heart could wish, but their wits were so ravished to behold
such a lamentable sight, that they had no mind nor leisure to mark every
thing particulerly. Nevertheless, by this that is spoken, He that will not
credit this tale, it were pity but he should want a merry tale.
I hope the devout Reader shall find sufficient instruction to credit the
Vision, that depends wholly upon the girls report in order as follows.

After all her troubles now ended, and the Vision now vanished, some of the
company did conueie her to bed, where she had a short slumber very unquiet,
and lo this while her senses were so taken, that to their judgments she lay
stark dead, but being at the length awaked, she did complain that all the
joints of her body were so weary, as if they had been stretched out of the
Rack.

About this time, her Stepmother began to examine her what she had seen and
heard, but she desired respite, because of her weariness, whereof her said
Mother being ill apaied, expected better opertunitie, and within five hours
after, understanding the girl to be in very good mood, she brought with her
certain of the company, that had been present, who demanded forthwith
whither she did remember her talk to them the night before, whose answer
was, that she neither remembered them to be in place, nor any communication
between her and them, wherewith they were not a little amassed, having also
known her to be in very perfect health and broad wakyng all the said while,
therefore persuading the^ selves, that she could not endure those troubles
without some strange alteration of mind, they exhorted her earnestly to open
what she had seen and heard, wherewith she spoke as follows.

Yesternight as I sat by the fire, my heart and conscience was grievously
troubled with sencible remorse for my sins, then followed tears in such
haboundance, that I had no power to refrain them, and lo this while appeared
unto me, a goodly fair bird, having the body of a Sparhauke, the face of a
Man, the beak of a Pigion, and feathers of diverse colors, making great
speed toward me, It should be some Purseuaunte from the Pope by his ^ied
cote.
lightyng upon my breast, and with his wings covered the same, and very
softly first laid his bill on my forhead, then on mine eyes, lips and breast,
that being done, he declared that he was a messenger from God, chargyng me to
be ready at an hours warning, and to ask them forgiveness whom I had
offended, and so varnished away from my sight.

This saying made me to fear yt my time was now come, and that the Angel (for
so I took him to be) would fetch me, within a while after, having asked
forgiveness, behold I might see our Savior Christ, She knew them at the
first sight.
with the blessed Virgin his Mother, and lastly the fire of Purgatory
outragiously burning before me, wherein I lay punished from the breast
dounewarde, head, arms and shoulders being free from all pain.

The assistauntes hearing of Purgatory, were very desirous to understand the
color and nature thereof, etc. Who answered them again, that this fire of
Purgatory, The description of Purgatory.
seemed to her in color very blewe, and vehement in burning, faster boylyng
then any water seethyng, and without interruption, casting like Mountains
great waves, not forward as the Sea, but upward, especially when there lay
any soul tormented, for it appears That is, when ye Pope is charitably
disposed, and gives a free pardon with out money.
sometime void of souls, and then it seems to be more calm.

To be breef, Here you may earne to make Purgatory.
this fire in his nature did nothing agree with our fire, the matter that
burned therein was Pitch, Rosine, Grease, Brimstons and boylyng Lead, all
contained in a large Furnace: More I can not remember, saving that I asked
forgiveness: and so ended her vision, Whereof I doubt There is none, unless
he be some arrant heretic that will ever doubt of this
some incredulos person will make small account, that the saying of S. Paul
may vee verified in them, Animalis homo non percepit ea que sunt dei: A
sensual man understands not those things that are of God: And I for my
part believe it as verily as I think him to be honest that pende it down.
for mine own part I am assuredly persuaded that all is most true, as having
received it out of her own mouth, with whose good nature and virtuous
disposition, I am thoroughly acquainted withal, therefore I need not fear to
conclude of her with the holy Scripture, In furnace probabit electos dominus,
and quasi holo castum accepit eos in eternum: In a Furnace our Lord has
received his chosen, and as a burnt offering he has accepted them for ever:
Laus dei Amen.

When it seemed convenient to the wisdom of God, that his servant should be
released of her troubles, it pleased his divine goodness at parting to bestow
on her a gift, what she should feel in her self, a deadly hatred to sin in
token of his being with her. For immediately after, what great care she did
take to forgo ragious oaths, idle talk, with other pleasures of the world,
and breefly what thing so ever besides she understood to be an offense
against God, If you mark this sequel well, you shall easly perceive our
aucthors whole drifte, who yet hitherto though he has played the fool, and set
down matter fit for Children to spout withal, yet now if his wit would
serve him, he would feign play ye knave but that God knows his conceit is so
gross, that every fool may find it.
such of her friends and acquaintance as know her familiarly can witness the
same: Nevertheless, being amongst them conversant, who had no true knowledge
of God, she prayed still of the new English Primer, and refreined not the
Service now used in Churches, but by the way it is to be noted, that all her
friends as many as were privy unto her first Vision, of purpose conspired to
tread underfoot the miracle, more tenderyng the favor of men, then the
displeasure of God. Notwithstanding, he to whose divine power nothing is
impossible, would not have so miraculous a work to be long secret, for
within three weeks after and three days, being the Feast of Saint Mathias
the Apostle, about seven of the Clock at night, the foresaied young wenche
sitting by the fire, began to weep, as in her former Vision she had done,
wherewith the company about her suspected a storm, and lo immediately in
their hearing she said Jesus welcome: and rising up, offered to go toward
the place where he appeared unto her, but one of the company stayed her, to
whom she spoke as being somewhat offended, what will you not suffer me to
embrace my GOD, let me go to him: and because she was somewhat unruly, they
laid her in her bed, where three strong persons had business enough to
hold her, for she made much ado to rise on her feet, criyng still O God I
see thee, O that I might embrace him, but perceiuyng her little body to weak,
she reached her arm toward the place whereupon her eyes were fixed, saying:
come lord come, let me have thee by the hand, behold I see him before my face,
holdyng in the right hand a You know they must needs have ca^dell light at
that time of year, for by 7. a clock it is dark in February.
Wax Candle burning together with the blessed Is not here good rule think
you, yt being so few women in heaven as they say there is, and yet three of
the chefest of the^ should be out of their lodginges at that time of night
Virgin Mary, S. Anne the holy Virgins Mother, Mary Magdalene, and Saint
Ihon Babtist, whom I see here hard by my beds side, and turnyng from them
again, she said with very great vehemency, O Lord, he reaches his hand
toward me, let me go to him, let me embrace him, wherewith immediately by
meare force in dispite of them all, she rose upon her feet, and spreadyng
both arms she joined them again fast to her stomach, vtteryng these words:
I have have him now in arms, O good Lord I have thee, Jesus help me, leave me
not sweet Jesus leave me not: never ceasyng to call upon his holy name. But
one of the assistauntes being weary to hear the often repetition of Jesus,
of Christ, and of our Lady, desirous to put her to silence, said unto her:
content your self Elizabeth, we see Christ as well as you do: Whom she
answered with indignation, fie upon thee shameful wretch full of iniquity
and sin, how falsely do thou lie, it is not possible for thee nor any
wicked creature to look upon him, no corporal eyes can have the sight of his
glory: mine eyes dasell and smarte to behold his Clothes, much more then if
I gazed against the Sun beams at noone, when they are strongest: And more
she spoke with a loud hollow voice in the throat: Nay, thou shall as dearly
buy it as I have done before thou see him. And having no sooner ended her talk,
there came upon her a merueilous great terror and fear, whereof insued
tremblyng of her body, pantyng of her heart, woorkyng of her veins, fomyng at
her mouth, falling grouelyng on her bed for pain, struglyng, and criyng out
most pitifully, defiyng ye world, and all sinful creatures therein (for so
she termed them) and calling without intermission upon the holy name of Jesus,
to be delivered from all pains, which lasted two hours long, most ruthful
to the beholders, and nothing inferior to her former punishment when she lay
in Purgatory: and this (as I suppose) chanced, for fear she should feel
again the foresaied torment, being (as it is evident by her own speech in
their hearing) already represented before her eyes, for she called often Ales
Ioua, and Mistress Conway her Grandmother, at length she was admonished in her
Vision, to procure that S. Ihons Gospel written by a Priest, might be tied
about her neck: Whereof being very desirous, one of the assistantes offered
her the Gospel in writing, which she repelled quickly as made by him, whom
she knew to be a sinful man, and considering no lawful Priest was to be
had, Priests be no sinful men.
she called importunatly for the Minister of Orton, but the messenger loitered
and went not: whereof she informed the assistauntes, desiring them in all haste
to send for him, but one of the company replied again, and confirmed it with
an oath, that the messenger had gone, whom bitterly she rebuked, and sharply
admonished, that he had sworn falsely, that which in deed after diligent
inquisition, was found to be true. And now the said Minister being come, he
offered her the foresaid written Gospel, two sundry times, perswadyng the
same to be his own doing, the which she refused, and witted him to take the
pains him self, for she knew well he did but delude her: at the last,
reachyng the Gospel of his own hand written; she accepted it thankfully, and
the sign of the Cross being made by her appoinctment in the end thereof, it
was tied fast about her neck, and the same foulded croswise by her
appointment: whereupon she had presently better rest as they supposed.

Being demanded, why she desired the Ministers help, her answer was, that
This could not be true, for both Christ and Saint Ihon Baptist stood by,
and they were both Priests, or else the Pope would never have suffered them to
have said Mass, now Christ was the first that euersaid Mass on Maundie
Thursdaie, when he said hoc est corpus meum, and Saint Iho^ Baptist song
mass, as you shall perceive by ye which follows presently.
although he was a Minister, yet being in heart a Catholic, she took him to be
more fit then any other that were about her, and hoped that GOD would not be
offended, knowing her present necessity and want of a lawful Priest.

Here I would wish the Catholic Reader to understand, that Saint Ihons
Gospel may be lawfully used, by the learned judgment of the famous Jesuit
Father Robertes: But whereas Gods holy spirit stirred the girl in all haste
to send for this minister, it is to be referred to his secret dispensation,
whose good will and pleasure was (as it seemed) to have him in place, that he
might also bear witness to the truth against him self and his own
profession, according to the testimony of our Savior Christ: Ex ore tuo, te
iudicabo serve iniquam: O naughty servant, I will judge thee out of thine
own mouth. Immediately after, she uttered many words in his hearing to the
detestation of the This same Protestants Religion has so displaced our holy
Father, that the devil himself will never be able to salve ye sore again.
Protestauntes Religion and Service, as hereafter follows: the which truly
at that instant did work in his heart great remorse.

About this time, one of the company reached to her a little Crucifixe, You
may perceive by this, that there was good company.
the which she received with very great reverence, and caused it to be laid
in her bosom, taking occasion thereby, to call upon Christ crucified, whom the
picture presented, crauyng still for mercy and forgiveness: but what need I
(said she) to have the Picture of Christ, when I see him present before mine
eyes, and poincted her finger toward him.

Then she fell to exclaim against the Religion of the Protestauntes, and
dispising it wonderfully uttered these words: Fie upon this wretched world,
and fie upon the naughty Religion now used, fie upon their wicked and
accursed Church, most abominable in Gods sight: I will never enter into it
as long as I live, to hear their accursed Service, unless I be carried thither
by force: O that you did now behold the difference that I see between both.
This is like to be true, you might perceive that one of them had a crucifixe
so ready.


With these words and the like, she wearied the ears of the hearers, as being
(in deed) the^ selves of the same Religion, that the holy Ghost through her
mouth accounted damnable and accursed.

Thus I have declared the effect of her doings and sayings, during the
second ecstasy, as nere as I could carry the fame away, by the relation of
those that were about her all the said time: And now remains her If the
Vision contain as good matter as this that is past, it is worthy the hearing.
Vision to be opened, which by Gods help shall be laid down sincerely, as
I received it from her own mouth word for word, and thus it follows.

This honest company he might have said.
The assistauntes whom our Lord did especially elect to be witnesses of this
strange miracle, gatheryng by her words and behavior, that she had now seen
and heard greater mysteries, then in her former Vision. Therefore, For fear it
should have been forgotten, and what pity had that been.
being not able to content them selves any longer, the next day after,
earnestly desired to hear the truth of the last ecstasy, as they had heard of
the first, to whose expectation as duty required condescending, she uttered
the same after this manner and form.

Yesternight standing by the fire in the old Hall (as you know) amongst the
rest of our family, there appeared unto me a goodly old man all in white, who
after he had made two or three turnynges before my face, returned to the new
Parler, The old man went out of the old Hall into the new Parlour.
from whence he was come as we thought, whither also I followed him to see what
he did, but missing him there, I made have toward the upper Chamber, where I
hoped to find him, and lo suddenly no small number of Wax Candles burned in
my fight, whereat gazing with great admiration (for that I had never seen the
like before) and perceived the foresaied old Here you may see the wisdom of
God, to send an old man of his arra^de for had it bin a young man, it had been
somewhat suspicious, but they had good store of candell light, yt was the best.
man him self again approached nere me, I was afraied: but he comforted me
saying, be not afraied, for here is none will do thee hurt: then pausing a
little he said moreover, art thou contented to do after me: I answered that
I would gladly do after him if he came from God, I am (said he) doubt
nothing: Whereupon I wild him to tell his message, wherefore with very
familier speech, he admonished me of my nature, much inclined to vice, body
subject to great troubles and dangers, whereof I should feel shortly the
effect, if I would not prevent the same in due time: therefore he exhorted me
to fast and pray, whereby he said I should overcome my evil destiny.

As he thus communed with me, behold I did see our Savior Christ and his
Apostles after him, accompanied with the blessed Virgin Mary, Saint Anne the
holy Virgins Mother, and Mary Magdalene: Wherewith the audience interrupting
her talk, examined the Maid of their habit and forms: who told them that
Christ and Saint Anne did wear Purple roabes, our Lady Scarlet, all the rest
white garments down to the ground, It should seem he had come lately from
the Barbers.
our Saviors bearde somewhat short, and the heirs of his head thin, and
both in color very black, the heir of his holy Mothers head was Abraham
color, hangyng down her shoulders most decently, her face shined brighter
then any Crystal, her voice amiable beyond measure: but her blessed Sons
countenance she could not discribe, because of the lightness thereof, for her
eyes dazzled to behold his Roabes, It should seem his roabes were of Purple in
Gr^^ne, for yt is a very clear color able to dasell our eyes.
and his voice seemed to her terrible as Thunder, that she shaked for fear at
every word, holdyng continually in his right hand a Wax Candle burning.
Saint Anne was of low stature with a hoarie head: That was Christ's
graundmother.
Mary Magdalene she marked not, saving that she rembreth certain white places
in her head, by pluckyng the heirs for sorrow, cariyng in her hand a peuter
bottle full (as it seemed) of some Belike it was Aqua vitae for some of her
friends that were in Purgatory.
liquour. Much she rehearsed of the Apostles perticulerly, the which I have
omitted here to avoid tediousness. And so having satisfied their requests,
she returned to her former talk, as hereafter follows.

As soon as this heavenly quire had presented them selves before me, I began
forthwith to fear that they might be some wicked Sprites or Goblines:
whereupon Christ stepped toward the place where I stood, and reached me his
hand to be felt, the which I did handle as the hand of any other man, where
withal he spoke these words.

A ghost although it appear in the form of man to thy sight, yet being
handeled, it has not flesh and bones, as thou may feel in mine: and then
he repaired again to his former place.

After this, my guide (whom I supposed to have been Saint Ihon the Babtist)
labored much to reconcile me unto Christ, the which he said might not be,
unless I would reconcile my self unto his Church, and continue in a right
faith: for he certified me that I was blindely led, and lacked the true
knowledge of his holy will, often repeatyng that I believed amiss: At length
being not able to avoid his importunity, I demanded whither I must believe
as my neighbors do, meaning the Catholics, who absent themselves from the
new Service now used: Even so said he, believe as they do, and absent thy
self also from that wicked Service if thou will be saved: Whereat I stayed a
long time, and seemed as one very loath to yield, for castyng in my mind the
dangers and troubles that might ensue thereof. In the mean space he travailed
much between Christ and me, perswadyng still in his name to promise amendment.

But understanding that his persuasions could take no place, he represented
before mine eyes the fire of Purgatory, and threatened sharply to plundge me
therein if I would not relent: the sight whereof so frited me, that I yielded
to forgo the Church, as I would have done gladly to abide any worldly torment,
rather then I should be laid again in that burning furnate: Clapped hands, and
so it was a bargain.
and ioynyng my hand to his, I confirmed the former promise, the which I
mean by Gods grace to parforme, for any punishment in this world, because I
can not feel greater, then already I have suffered in Purgatory: Ye may
perceive ye we^che though she was young, yet she had wit to make her bargain
And withal I added, unless I be brought thither by maine force: wherewith
he replied, that they are blameless who be forsed, and their compellers
aunswerable for the fact. To conclude, after many words he commended unto me
Beads hallowed, as of singular virtue to pray withal, and far exceeding
the Beads vnhalowede Much more talk he had with me that I have utterly
forgotten, but in the end findyng me very tractable, he commended me unto a
Catholic Priest by name, demaundyng whither I knew such a one (this Priest
had been at that instant in the Parish Church adioynyng, openly proclaimed for
a sedicious person and seducer of the people) my answer was that I knew him
not, whereat he seemed to be angry, chargyng me that I uttered an untruth,
for I had seen him twice (the which indeed sit hence I remember well) and
commaundyng to search for him amongst the Apostles, whom diligently perusing,
I said that I could not find him: whereupon he replied, then thou know him
well, learn of him what to believe, his counsel if thou follow thou shalt
be saved: It should seem he was some of our Ladies chaplines, that she
undertook so much for his honesty.
Follow his counsel said our Lady and thou shall be saved I warrant thee:
the which I had no sooner promised to do, but lo incontinently I was conveyed
into a Church very little, where I beheld an Altar furnished for Mass, with
a goodly Crucifixe of pure gold, placed in the midst thereof, and at either
end tapers burning, before the which on either side stood Christ and his
Mother, having roles of Wax Candles burning, foulded about the wrist to their
arms, the rest kneelyng down devoutly before the Altar, and the Angel that
I had seen in the beginning of my first vision in the likeness of a ^ir^s,
fittyng upon the said Altar, then stepped forth Saint Ihon (before named) and
first sprinkeling the company about with holy water, That was fort^are of
Buibeggers Saict Ihon Baptist a Massyng Priest.
went straight toward the Altar, where he began Malie in his foresaied white
garments, saving that now I marked he had a Cross on his breaste, an other on
his back about the midst, where he preached in Latin, an unknown language
unto me as I supposed: Pershe knew it was latin.
in the mean time I counted the Apostles, whose number I remember well to be
just eleven, all the which at elevation very devoutly knocked their breasts.
Thus having received him self alone, for I did see no body Communicate with
him, the Mass ended, In came the Serten and put out the ca^delles, and so
the Cock crewe and it was day.
the lights were putt out, and the sight vanished: therewith immediately mine
eyes were opened, that I beheld you all about me, and so ends her Vision.

But afterward being examined by a Catholic of the Mass more perticulerly,
You may perceive that the Chalice was but silver* though the Crucifixe were
gold.
she described in very good order diverse things belongyng to Mass: as the
silver Chalice, shorter and brother then the Communion Cup, the Host with
letters therein graven, and the Ceremonies also she noted, as his standing
before the Altar, the book removed by one that attended and served, That was
when he said Dominus vobiscum.
the turning of his face toward them: Briefly, in all poinctes agreeable to
the Mass after the Roman use restored by the counsel of Trent, and
preached by the Seminary in England. Finally, certain Gentlemen being moved
with the fame of these news, made means to see ye said young girl, the eight
of April, This can not lie, when all is set down so per^^^^e.
Anno. 1581. and entreated to understand out of her mouth, what they heard of
her by others, but she had utterly forgotten all, in so much that being asked
diverse questions, as her being in Purgatory, and at S. Ihons Mass, and she
remembered nothing: whereat the said Gentlemen were greatly astonished: at last
one of the company suspecting the malice of the ghostly enemy, caused her to
make sign of ye Some gentilman that had great experience in the virtue of a
Cross.
Cross on her forhead and breast: whereupon incontinently, she opened both
the Visions at large, and uttered and more then she could remember at any time
before. Yea and more then ever was heard of before to be true, and yet this is
no lie for see here witnesses enough to confirm a greater lie then this.


VVitnesses.
Thomas appe Jones Orton, Recorder to the Right Honorable the Earl of Darby.
Ihon Orton, servant to the Earl of Darby. Ihon Edwardes. servants to the
Lord Chaunceler of Irelande. Ihon Humfey. servants to the Lord Chaunceler
of Irelande. Ihon the Minister of Orton. Edward appe Jones Orton. David his
servant. Ihon Ortons Wife. Owen Werch Thomas his Sister. Annis Werch Thomas a
servant Maid, with an other Maid servant. Gyles Orton, with diverse others.
TEll me now (freendly Reader) is not this pretty stuff to be made so much
account of, must not this Religion be profounde, that is propte up with such
Pillars as this, and yet thou see that the greatest fortification of our
holy Fathers doctrine, consists in Dreams, old Wives tales, Vnknowwen
scriptures, Traditions of men, strange Miracles, Fables, and Follies.

Truly our country is to be lamented, in which the Gospel having reigned
long, and Religion flourished so many years, yet Superstition prevails so
much, that they be ready to be lead away with such evident shows of
folly, that unless their eyes were bleared with too much impudency, it were
not possible they should be so deceived. But what Ass but would have been
ashamed to have penned down so ridiculous a matter, under such a show of
verity, but that he knew amongst whom to send it: For truly the foolish
credulity of the simplest sort of our ignorant Papists is such, that tell
them a tale of a Mass, Purgatory, of holy Water, of the sign of the Cross,
or of any other such like vanity: and they are streght lead in belief of
such things, to be more then divine, that (in deed) do most deserve to
be laughed at. You may see they are driven to a bare shifte, that (for want of
better matter) would foiste in a Religion with such trashe as this, but
unhappy they that are so blinded in error, that they should not be able to
descerne vanity from verity: And this is the cause why they restrain the
Laietie, from the readyng of the Scripture, for otherwise it were not possible,
that such Fables could be so preciously accoumpted of: And this is the cause
that I have laid open these Visions, to the vewe of the world, that those
that be wise might laugh, at the doltishe devises of our seducyng Papists,
who under a show of learning, deceiues the simple sore with such manifest
untruths. But yet to lament the weakness of those that be ignorant, who be
still ready to entertain such trifles, as divine and heavenly mysteries, to
feed them in their farther follies.

But I must needs blame our aucthour, what so ever he was, who (as it seems)
having been long time schooled in the liyng Legend of Antechrist, has yet
forgotten the cheifest axioma that longes to his profession, which is, oportet
mendatem esse memorem, who lies must be careful to remember, for in knittyng
up his Visions, where he would have made greatest show of verity, even there
he lays in sight most manifest untruths: which I will not touched in
particularities, for that they be freuilous, yet will I note them in general,
for that they be odious, and deserves no better answer, then a scoff or a
mock.

His exordium taken from the sanctified Archaungell Raphaell might well have
stand, if his cause had been just, but now it is confessed, that all these
Miracles were but fantasies, and the Prophetess in her Patheticall ecstasies,
but a silly Maiden, seduced by a runnegate Papist, as now it is proved: And
the matter it self if it be wisely marked, is enterlarded with contrariety of
untruths: in one place she could discribe the roabes which Christ should
wear, to be of Purple color, and presently she feineth them to be more
brighter then the beams of the Sun: and although she knew Christ, with his
mother the Virgin Marie, his Graunde mother Saint Anne, with Marie Magdalene,
and Saint Ihon the Baptist, even at the first sight, both of her first and
last Visions, yet when Saint Ihon should come to say his Mass, she was
afraied of them, and took them to be Goblins, till Christ had given her his
hand to be felt.

The assistauntes so many times spoken of, our aucthour would persuade they
were Protestauntes, and therefore wearied with her exclamations against
Religion now used, yet who would believe any word to be true, when one of
them had a Crucifixe so ready to present, and the rest was so foolish to
suffer her to take it. The Apostles when she coumpted them, she says were
just eleven, I wonder where the twelfe was, or who it was that was missyng,
but it might be that this Vision was revealed before Mathias was chosen in
Judas room, or else it was Saint Peter that was missyng, for he is Porter in
heaven, and therefore could not be spared out of his office, and I think if
he had been there, he had been a fitter man to have said Mass, then Saint
Ihon, for that he himself was our Pope, and therefore should have so much the
better experience.

Thus thou may see (gentle reader) that variety, and impossibility are the
two best st^ynges that our aucthour has to his bow, who findyng no other
means to maintain his uncertainties, thinks under disseblyng untruths, to
draw the simplicity of the common sort, from the truth and right Religion.

But admit that these feigned Visions had been senciblie seen, and that some
apparaunce had been made of these surmised Revelations, should we therevppon
straight ways establishe a Religion, without any further examination, how they
might stand with the will of God. Our learned Fathers lead by the spirit of
Wisdom, when they heard of such Visions or Revelations, they brought them
straight to the touchestone comparyng them to the holy Scriptures, if they
found them such as tended to the glory of God, they admitted them for good,
if otherwise misleadyng to ignorance and error, they condemned them as
illusions sent by the Devil. But is there any thing more repugnaunte to
Christian belief, then that God is not sufficient to forgive us our sins, but
we must have a quittaunce sealed from our Lady, and she that was wont to be
called our Lady of Pity, is now become a gentilwoman of too much cruelty.
But our aucthour very wisely excusing the matter, thinks there was some
sin, that was committed against her self, and though that both her soonne
Christ and she had forgiven all the rest, yet she might not forgive that. And
believe me this may well be true, for the Pope himself is of the same
condition, for he has Pardons for him that will kill his father, for him that
should commit incestious fornication with his mother, for him that should be a
rebel to his Prince, a traitor to his Country, to be short, Treason,
Murder, Robbery, Adultrie, Bauderie, Buggerie: and what not but our holy
Father will forgive you, so you do not touch himself, nor none of his brood:
but the least offense that may be committed against any of these, though God
and our Lady both would forgive ye, yet I can tell you the Pope will never
do it. But what a pretty wipe has our aucthour given here to our holy
fathers Bulls, who ye Devil will make any accoumpte of them now hereafter
this, for the Pope though he be Christ's Vicar, yet he is none of our Ladies,
and though he may dispense with matters in controversy between us and God,
yet he has nothing ado between us and our Lady, unless it be by the way
of entreaty, and our Lady I perceive when she is angered, has a woman's
stomach, she will not easily be pacified, and then there is no shift but you
must to Purgatory, for Christ's forgiuesse will do you no good, and the Pope
can pardon no more, then Christ is able to forgive: And therefore I perceive
the Proverb to be true, the house is too unquiet where the good wife wears
the breeches, and yet you see it is so in heaven.

When Marie Magdalen went to the Sepulcher with tears to seek Christ, to
whom although he first showed him self, yet she might not so much as once to
touch him, yet our young Prophetess, who as our aucthour affirms was
ignorant, an heretic, one that was severed from the Popes Church, and
therefore by their own Canons and General Counsels condemned, not worthy
to touch any of their holy relics, and yet she might be suffered to
embrace Christ in her arms.

The matter that our Author by these Visions would fainest induce you unto,
consists especially in these three points. First he would bring you in good
likyng of their blessed Mass. Second, he would make you afearde of their
dreadful Purgatory: And lastly, it greeues him to the heart that any body
should go to Church to hear the word of God: for if they could once bar
us from readyng the Scriptures, all the pain were past, all the rest would be
easily brought to a good pass.

Now, first for the Sacrifice of the Mass, who doubts (unless directly
blinded) but they must resolutely conclude, that our forefathers, Adam, Lot,
Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, with the rest are stopped from the fruition of
Heaven, in that they could not be partakers of the Real reception of the
Sacrament, unless it were through faith in beleuyng and spiritual feedyng, by
the which we are likewise made partakers all of one body, and all through one
faith.

For Purgatory, if it grow by the multiplication of our sins, either in
excess or defecte, what shall we imagine of the Thief on the Cross, who by
Christ's own words was assured this: To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: He never spoke word of Purgatory. Or what of Mary Magdalene, whose
sins were freely forgiven her by Christ, without going to Purgatory. And
what of the poor Publicane, that acknowledged him self a miserable sinner, and
yet was justified by Christ. Or who now hence forward will give any credit
to Saint Paul, who writing to the Hebrews 9. says: There is no remission
of sins without blood. When our Catholics making him a manifest liar, has
found a way to salve all sores through the fire of Purgatory.

But be that would be better confirmed in this poinct, let him read Ihon
Frith against the Bishop of Rochester: sir Thomas Moore, and Ihon Rastell,
where they shall find this fantastical Purgatory so undermined, that no
Papist but might be ashamed once to make mention of it.

Now lastly as before I have said: the Pope is very unwilling that the
Scripture should be in a known language amongst us: but in the steed of
them, he has bequeathed us Legenda Aurea, the life of Christ, written by a
fifth Euaungelist, named Bonauentura: We have likewise their Festival, with
such other stuff. These we may read in English, you may easily guess why,
but the Scriptures we must not hear but in Latin, because they say it is
dangerous that we should read the Scripture in a known language: so that the
right construction of this sentence, Beati qui audiunt verbum dei and
costodiunt ipsam, after the interpretation of our holy Father, may thus be
understood: Blessed are they which hear the word of God and knows not what
it means. These matters have been by many men so Clarckly discoursed, and of
so long a time so learnedly confuted, and therefore by me lightly ouerpassed: I
do but only aim at the intent and wish the wisest to laugh at the error.

Thus (gentle Readers) you see the course of these unnatural Antichristians,
who when they find no one way, to maintain their ungodly opinions, seek by
sequester dealinges to oppress the truth. But dissimulation is espied by his
contrary, and truth speaks in no corners: Religion that is in it self
perfect, requires no fabulous miracles to confirm it: but where vanity is
workemistris, then all things are confirmed with shadows.

Truly it seems strange unto me, that either blinded error should seduce
us so sarre, or suppositions of good meaning blind us so greatly, where the
good work is so freuilous.

Let not the God of this world so much bleare your eyes, be not led away with
every blast of report: Simon Magus, though he be his crafts master, he is
yet found out by a professed Apostle: and the ungracious practices, and
Ceremonious intentes, of our foolish Masmongers are proved friuelous, being
looked into by the true Religion. O call your selves home, and remember from
whence you are fallen, be not seduced by false Gods, to forsake the true Lamb,
that sacrificed for you.

God is truth, and he that worshippeth him must worship him in spirit and
truth. Let not fantasies misgouerne you, let not your hearts be hardened
against wholesome admonitions.

Arm your selves with the readyng of the word of God, so then charm the
Charmer never so wisely, he shall not yet be able is compass you.

Peruse the old Fathers, examine the holy Scriptures, confer indifferently
both literal and substanciall interpretations, and you shall find that
Antichrist the Pope, does but dissemble with you, and that all his allegations,
are but falsifications. The poor Publicant shall be justified, and the proud
Pharisie shall be condemned: Not he that cries Lord Lord, but he that does
the will of the Father. Much babblyng makes not Religion, nor burning Tapers
zealous Orisons: But that Lord that knows the heart and raines, reueileth his
wisdom to Infantes, and confounds the wisest in their own ouerwenynges.

The practices that of late days have been brought into this Realm, might
confirm our Papists neither to be zealous nor honest. Did not Campion sell
Pardons to imploye his money against her Majesty? did not they of that
confederacy, sell the death of her highness with the cheifest Pillars of the
state. But the Lord preserved Elizabeth to the comfort of all true English
minds, and iniquity is fallen into the pitfall, that he has prepared for
other.

And here I must somethyng expostulate with some our hollow hearted subjects,
how they can without blushyng, pronounce that they love her Majesty, when they
daiely entertain those Jesuits which seek her destruction.

How may we accoumpt them subjects, when they reiecte laws: or men of
religious conscience, when in their demeanours they are so traitorous.

My friends, turn away your face from leasinges, desire the Lord to deliver
you from liyng lips and a deceiptfull tongue, and he will make you spectacles
of his mercy.

Let not forlorn hope misleade you, or fained miracles withdraw you, nor old
wives prophesies so misgouerne you, but with all submissio^ acknowledge
gracious Elizabeth your sovereign Queen, who as you are malefactors can and
will punish you, so in your humble and hearty submission, no doubt she will
receive you to mercy. The Lord increase her Majesty's reign, preserve her
Counsel, continue Religion in the zealous subjects, and grant amendment to
the abstinat Papists. Amen.

FINIS.

