THE Coppie of a Letter sent from M. Rider, Deane of Saint Patricks, concerning
the News out of Ireland, and of the Spaniards landing and present estate there.

At London Imprinted for Thomas Man. 1601.

The Coppie of a Letter sent out of Ireland the sixteenth of October. 1601.
THere is landed in Kingsall, twelve miles from Cork, an hundred and twelve
miles from Dublin, four thousand poor sea-beaten Spaniards, fifty Friars,
twelve Nuns, one hundred Priests, two hundred whores; so the Popes holiness
will presently erect, according to his ancient Catholic faith, upon this new
dreamed Conquest, a Frierie to preach to the quick, and a Chaunterie of
Priests to pray for the dead, and a most damnable pestiferous Stews of Nuns
and whores, for both their recreations, Secundum vsum Ecclesiae Romanae. These
are in distress, a Hen is worth five shillings, a little carrion Cow six
pounds, yet no man will scarce bring these to them: Some wild Kerne sold
them thirty such Cowes in the day, and very honestly stole them again at
night. They expected the country would have joined with them, but they do
not, but stand all for the Queen. The Lord Deputy and the President of
Munster are there ready to the battery and assault, so soon as the great
Ordinance comes to him. They have no wood but what they fight for. Our
Captains and soldiers would feign assault them with Pike, Musket, Sword and
Target: but my Lord Deputy will not suffer it. The Spaniards offer to the
Irish six shillings a day for a horseman, and three shillings for a footman:
the Irish ask a months pay before hand: the Spaniards doubt they will not
serve them, but run away, and the wild Irish doubt they will pay them one
week, and hang them the next week: and so they have no hope. The Irish
Priests promised them one thousand Irish Hobbies, to be delivered them within
ten days after their landing, and so they brought one thousand brave
saddles: but alas they cannot perform to them ten tits to carry earth to
their fortifications. The Lord Deputy, and the President of Munster have
showed themselves very honorable and politic, or else things had not gone so
well. Tyrone burns within sixteen miles of Dublin, but now he is feared out of
the country, by the country: he can pleasure the Spaniards in nothing: the
Spaniard and Rebel are almost desperate the Spaniard curses the Priests, the
Priests curses the Irish the Irish curses them both: So I send strange
news, from such as would be Catholics and Christians, Friars and Nuns,
Priests and whores, cursing and bannings: but contrariwise, the English have
time to pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

FINIS.

