A SERMON concerning the punishing of Malefactors.

Preached at Paul's Cross, the first of October, by Charles Richardson,
Preacher at Saint Katharines near the Tower of London.

Prouerbers 20.26. A wise King scatters the wicked and causes the wheel to
tread over them.

EX AVARITIA (...)


LONDON, Printed for William Butlar, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Bulwark, near to the Tower of London. 1616.

To the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Lincoln, increase of grace in this
life, and assurance of glory in the life to come.
Right Honorable,
I Am bold to present unto your Honor, this plain and homely Sermon,
beseeching you to accept it as a sincere (though a poor) testimony of that
most dutiful affection which I owe unto you, in regard of that great
kindness, and undeserved respect, which your Honor has ever borne toward
me, for these many years wherein I have been known unto you. The greatest
Monarchs have vouchsafed, to receive poor presents at the hands of such, as
were not able to afford greater gifts. And I have had so long and so good
experience of your Honors noble disposition that way, as I doubt not, but this
gift, how mean soever, shall be welcome for the affection of the giver. I
confess the Doctrine of the Sermon was chiefly applied to the Magistrates of
this city, before whom it was preached. But because I know, that there is as
much need of reformation in the cuntry as here, especially in the matter of the
Sabbath, and because God has now advanced your Honor to a great place of
eminency in the cuntry, I hope it will not be offensive, that I have presumed
to make you the Patron of it. I have long been a witness of your Lordships
great zeal in this respect. And therefore I doubt not, but as God has now
given you more means and greater power, so you will more earnestly set your
self to reform those gross abuses, whereby God is so much dishonored, and
his holy name and Gospel so highly profaned. The Church of God has had a
long expectation of great good from your Honor. Now the time, by Gods mercy is
come wherein you may glad the hearts of many of Gods people, by countenancing
and supporting the despised ministry, and by curbing and repressing the pride
of insolent Papists and Atheistes, who daily more and more manifest their
impudency against the truth and servants of God. But I take too much upon me.
You have been so long exercised in godliness, as I doubt not, but of your
self you will be forward enough to every good work. I pray God bless your
Honor together with your most virtuous and religious Lady, the hopeful Lord
Clinton your eldest, son, that right noble Theophilus, and all the rest of
your worthy childen. And the Lord enlarge your heart that you may render unto
him according to the reward bestowed upon you.

Your Honors in all humble duty and service, CHARLES RICHARDSON.

A Sermon concerning the punishing of Malefactors.
Psalm 101.8. Betimes, or early, will I destroy all the wicked of the land:
that I may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord.


THIS Psalm was penned by the Prophet David, as appears by the title, for it
is called A Psalm of David. And howsoever the time when it was penned be not
expressed: yet the Psalm it self seems to intimate, that he made it at his
first coming to the Crown. For the argument of it is a solemn vow, wherein
the Prophet binds himself, to the performance of his duty, in the due
ordering and governing of himself, his family, and his Kingdom. Now this vow
is first propounded in the first verse, I will sing Mercy and Judgment, to
thee, O Lord will I sing. And then expounded in the rest of the Psalm. Wherein
we are to consider, 1. What he promises for himself. 2. What he promises
concerning others. For himself he promises two things. 1. That he will
endeavor to do well, namely, to be an example of good unto others, both in
his public and private conversation. 2. I will do wisely, etc. 2 That he will
be careful to preserve himself from evil, both from occasions offered
without, by evil objects and evil examples. 3 I will set no wicked thing etc.
And also from occasions within his own heart, where he knew there was matter
enough to corrupt him, though there were no outward provocation at all. 4 A
froward heart etc. Concerning others we are to consider. 1 What he promises
concerning those that should have access to him. And because he knew, that two
sorts of persons would seek to insinuate themselves into his favor, such as
were maliciously sclanderous, making other men's disgrace a step for them to
climb by: and such as were ambitiously proud, aspiring to places of honor
without desert, therefore he shows how he will carry himself toward them. 5
The one he will destroy, the other he will not suffer, that all other wicked
persons might know, what entertainment they were to look for at his hands. 2
What he promises concerning such as he was to employ, either as Counselors of
Estate, in the affairs of his kingdom, or as servants in the businesses of
his family: where he shows. 1 What manner of persons he will make choice of.
Ver. 6. Mine eyes shall be to the faithful of the land, etc. 2. Whom he would
refuse verse. 7. namely deceitful persons, and such as tell lies. 3. What he
promises concerning all his Subjects and his whole Kingdom in general. And
because the comfort and peace of good subjects consists in taking away the
wicked, he promises to suppres all such to the uttermost of his power, in this
verse which I have chosen. And thus we see how these words do depend upon the
rest of the Psalm.

Wherein, for our more orderly proceeding, we are to consider four things in
general. 1. King David's justice and severity in punishing offenders, in these
words. I will destroy the wicked, and cut off the workers of iniquity. Wherein
we may note. 1. The action which he will perform, set out in two words, destroy
and cut off. 2. The object of the action, or the persons on whom he will
execute Justice in this manner, namely, the wicked, and the workers of
Iniquity. Where the latter phraise expounds the former. 2. His equal
proceeding therein, he will destroy All the wicked and cut off All the workers of
iniquity, without partiality. 3. His diligence, he will do it betimes,
without delay. 4. The end why he will do it betimes, without delay. 4. The end
why he will do it, that Jerusalem the City of the Lord, may be purged from
evil.

I will destroy. This is not so to be understood, as if the Prophet would
inflict a like punishment upon all offenders, for that were injustice. For as
there is difference of offenses, so there must be difference of punishments.
All offenders must be punished, but (as we shall see afterward) every one
according to the quality of his falt. Our instruction then from hence is this;
That they that are in authority, Prou. 20.26
are bound to punish the wicked. Solomon says, A wise king scatters the wick
d and brings the wheel over them. And the Lord commanded Moses, that if any
man did fasly accuse his brother, look what punishment soever he should have
suffered, if the accusation had been true, Deuteronomy. 19.19 21.
the same punishment should be inflicted upon the accuser himse fe. Ye shall
do to him as he had thought to have done to his brother. Thine eye shall have
no compassion: but life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
foot for foot. And in an other place, if a man by due examination of his
cause, were found worthy to be beaten, Deuteronomy. 25.1.2. Leui. 24.16
the Judge must cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face.
Again, the Lord gave a special and a strict charge, that he that blasphemed
the name of the Lord should be put to death: all the congregation should stone
him to death. So likewise, Number. 5.301
whosoever did any thing presumptuously* was to be cut off from among his
people. I confess that men at the first are to be allured to obedience by
rewards and other gentle courses, but if that will not serve the turn, then
severity must be used, Praemio et paena. Solon.
and punishments must be inflicted. Whereupon the Philosopher said, hat the
common wealth was vpheld by two things, namely by rewards and punishments. But
howsoever, if there be not severity to keep men in awe, the common wealth
cannot be well governed. And therefore it was the commandment of Artaxerxes
King of Persia unto Ezra, that whosoever would not do the law of his God, and
the Kings law, he should have iudg^ment etc. And there are many reasons which
may further confirm the truth of this point. For first if pu^ishment be not
inflicted upon offenders* much evil and hurt will follow thereupon as namely,
first of all the offender himsefe, and others also are animated and encouraged
in their lewd courses: Their hands are streng^hened that they cannot return
from their wickedness, as the Prophet says in another sense. Ier. 23.14.
Maxima peccandi ille cebra impunitatis spes. Cic. Milone.
The greatest provocation that can be, is hope of impunitie. Neither is any
greater cause of evil, then liberty to do evil. Because Eli would not
correct his sons, but rather stroked their heads when they did amiss,
therefore they behaved themselves so vilely in their places, as by reason of
their sin, men abhorred the Offering of the Lord. And because David did so
cocker Adoniah, as he would not displease him from his Childhood, to say, 1.
Sam. 2.17 23.24. 1. Ki. 1.5.6.
Why have thou done so? Therefore there was none more ready to take the Crown
from his Fathers head. As it is in private families, so it is in
Commonwealths, when men are not punished according to their deserts, they
become more dissolute. And therefore Bernard says well, Nulla maio mali c^
usa, quam licentia mali. Cas.
Impunitas incuriae soboles, insolen iae matter, t^ansgressionum ^ut. ix. Ber.
de Consid. l. 3.
Impunitie is the brood of carelessness, the mother of insolency, the nurse of
transgressions. Ad pecca^dum p aecipi tes f^n, qui impune peccant. Tract. 1.
contra Demetr. Alex ab Alex. lib. 3 cap. 5. Psalm. 10.5.6 Eccles 8.11.
And Cyprian, They that sin without controlement, run headlong to sin.
Impunitie is the fuel, that feeds the fury of dissolute and unbridled
persons. And therefore, it was wisely provided by the Romans, that their
Magistrates should never come in public without their Officers, to bear
halberds and rods before them, for the terror of those that should offend. As
wicked men deal with Almighty God, so do they deal with the Magistrate his
Deputy. David says of the wicked, that because his ways always prosper, and
the Judgments of God are out of his sight, therefore he says in his heart, I
shall never be moved, nor be in danger, and, God has forgotten, he hides away
his face, and will never see. And Solomon says, Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of
men is fully set in them to do evil. So when the Magistrate is negligent in
punishing offenders, they and others are more emboldened to sin. We read in
the book of Judges, Iud. 17 6 and 18 1 and 19.1. and 21 25.
of many grievous abominations, that were committed among the Israelites as
namely Micahs making of a graven and a molten Image, and consecrating of a
Leuite for Idolatrous service: the Danites spoiling their brethren by force of
Arms, and sacking of their cities* the horrible abuse offered to the Levites
wife etc. And the cause of all is said to be this In those days there was no
King in Israel there was no Magistrate nor Law to punish them, but every man
did that which was good in his own eyes.

Secondly, when men are suffered to transgress without punishment, the wrath
of God is provoked, and public calamities are pulled down upon the land. The
Lord told the people of Israel, that if blood were shed in the land, and the
murderer not put to death, Number. 35.33
the land was defiled and made liable to Gods heavy displeasure. When Ahab
charged the Prophet Elijah, that he was the man that troubled Israel, 1. Kin.
18.18.
and caused that great famine that was in the land: he answered boldly, That it
was he and his Fathers house that troubled Israel, in that he suffered so much
Idolatry to be unpunished. When Achan had stolen the consecrated thing, the
wrath of the Lord was so kindled against all the Host of Israel, Josh. 7.11.12.
that they could not stand, but were discomfited before their enemies. Ye^, the
Lord threatened, that he would be no more with them, unless they destroyed that
person from among them. When that villainy was committed upon the Levites
Concubine and the Beniamites would not deliver those wicked men that had done
it, Judge. 20.12.13. etc.
that they might be put to death to put away evil from Israel, the Lord
stirred up the rest of their brethren to make war e against them, till the
whole Tribe was almost destroyed. 2. Sam. 21.1.
So long as the murder committed by Saul upon the Gibeonites, was unpunished,
the Lord sent a grievous famine upon the land of Israel three years together.
And whiles Jonah, that had fl d from the pr sense of God, Jonah. 1.4.
was in the Ship, a great wind and a mighty Tempost, raised by the Lord
pursued the Ship, that it was like to be broken, and all the Mariners in
danger of drowning. On the contrary side, wh^^ ^^ c^ is executed upon wicked
doers, the wrath of God is turned away, and he is pacified and appeased. When
the wrath of Lord was kindled against Israel, Number. 25.3.4.
because he had joined himself to Baal-Peor: the Lord himself commanded Moses
to take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against
the sun, that the indignation of the Lords wrath might be turned from Israel.
And according, when Phinehas* Ps. 106.30.
in an holy zeal, had thrust through the man of Israel and the Midianitish
woman with a spear, the plague ceased from the children of Israel. And David
relating the same story said, that Phinehas stood up and executed judgment,
and the plague was stayed. When Achan and all that belonged unto him were
stoned unto death, Josh. 7.25.26. and 8. tot.
the Lord turned from his fiery wrath against Israel, so that whereas before
their enemies chased them and smote them, Jonah. 1, 15
now they achieved many great and famous victories. When Jonah was once cast
into the sea, 2. Sam. 21.9.14.
the sea presently ceased from her raging. When the seven sons of Saul were
hanged up in Gibea of Saul as the Gibeonites requited God was then appeased
with the land And in a word, 1. King. 18.40.45.
when Eliah had slain the fou^e hundred faulse Prophets and idolatrous priests
of Baal, whereas before there had been neither d^aw nor rain for a long time,
the Lord presently sent rain in abundance, whereby the former famine ceased.
And therefore, if Magistrates desire, either to prevent the judgments that are
threatened, or hang over the land, or to remove those that are already
inflicted, they must carefully look to the punishing of such as by their
wickedness increase the wrath of God upon the land. Nehem. 13.18.


Thirdly, where wicked men escape unpunished, yea not only so, Prou. 28.28 and
29.2.
but (as often it falls out) are exalted, there the good are grieved and
discouraged: yea, as Solomon says, they are constrained to hide themselves and
to sigh and mourn for sorrow. It is a true saying, Bonis nocet qui malis
parcit.
he hurts the good, that spares them that are evil. The Apostle
insinuates, that Magistrates ought to provide, that those that are under them
may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 1. Tim.
2.2.
But it cannot be, that men should live peaceably and quietly, unless wicked
men by punishments be restrained and kept in awe, for they will be so insolent,
as a man of a quiet disposition cannot dwell by them; but the more he shall
seek for peace, Psalm. 120.7.
the more will they be bent to war, as David says of his enemies. Neither is
it pos^ible that godliness and honesty should flourish where wicked persons
are uncontrolled. For as weeds let grow do ouertoppe the good corn, and
choke it: so lewd persons left at liberty, hinder the growth of piety and
godliness.

And as all these evils do follow upon the neglect of this duty: so on the
contrary side, much good will redounde to the commonwealth, where it is
carefully and diligently put in practice. As first of all, the party delinquent
is by this means reformed, and brought to live in better order. For that that
Solomon speaks of children, is true also of elder persons, that foolishness
is bound in their heart, Pro. 22.15.
but the rod of correction shall drive it away from them. And therefore, he
says in another place. and 20.30.
The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within
the bowels of the belly. And hereof we have an example in the incestuous
person, who being excommunicated and delivered unto Satan, was thereby brought
to such humiliation and repentance, 2. Cor. 2.6.7
that the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to receive him again into the
bosom of the Church, least he should be swallowed up of overmuch heaviness.
And many amongst us have confessed, that had it not been for correction, they
had never come to good. But if it be so, as sometimes we see it comes to
pass, that a man is so hardened in evil, as that by punishment he cannot be
quite reclaimed: yet he is so curbed and kept in awe, as he dare not sin so
boldly as otherwise he would. Meliores sunt quos dirigit amor, sed plu es quos
co^^igit timor
For howsoever it be true, that the better sort are directed by love, yet the
greater sort are corrected by fear. Oderunt peccare mali formidine pocnae.
And even the worst that are, will abstain from evil for fear of punishment.

Secondly, by the punishment of malefactors, others will be admonished to walk
more warily. The Lord told Moses that when due punishment should be inflicted
upon the false witnesses, Deuteronomy 19.19 20. and 21.21
The rest should hear and fear, and should henceforth commit no more any such
wickedness among them. And commandment is given, that the stubborn and
disobedient Son should be stoned with stones, that all Israel may hear it
and fear. 1. Tim. 5.20 Prou. 21.11.
And the Apostle charge Timotheus, to rebuke them openly that sin, that the
rest also may fear. And Solomon says expressly, that when a Scorner is
punished, the simple will be wise. Animaduersiones quo notoriores, eo plus ad
exemplum emendatione inque proficiunt. Sen. de ira. l 3.
And doubtless, public chastisements and punishments are very profitable for
the example and amendment of others. Vt fulnuna pancorum periculo cadunt,
omi^unsmetu. sic animadue^siones terrent latius quam nocent.
For as the Thunderbolt falls with the danger of a few, but with the fear of
all: so the terror of punishments teaches further then the smart. Metus ad
omnes, poena ad paucos peruenit. Cic. pro A Cluentio. Punitis malis f^iunt
iusti attentiores, et Chrysostom. in Ps. 7.
For the fear is extended to all men, but the punishment to a few. To this
purpose Chrysostom^ has a good saying. (d) When the evil are punished, says
he the righteous are made more careful. For as a sound man when he sees one
that is wounded either feared or launced, is made more careful of his own
health: so when a man sees a malefactor brought to deserved punishment, he is
admonished to take heed of such courses. It was a true saying in the general
of the Proconsul to Cyprian at his Martyrdom, though ill applied to him in
particular In sanguine tuo caeteri descent discipli.
In thy blood the rest will learn discipline.

Lust of all, when as by due execution of Justice dissolute persons are cut
off, the whole body of the Commonwealth is preserved from infection Cic. in
M. Anton. Phil. 8.
As in a found body, if there be any thing that endangereth the rest of the
body, we suffer it be feared and cut, that some one me^b^r may rather perish
then the whole body: so in the body of the Commonwealth, that the whole may be
preserved, let all that is hurtful be cut off. Cuncta prius tentand^,s^d ^um
dicab^le vulnus Ense residendum, ne pars sincera trahatu. Ovid Metam lib. 1.
All other courses (^s the Poet said are first to be taken; and all other
means to be used, but if the wou^d be incurerable, it must be cut off, that
the found parts be not infected. Truncatur (...) a^tus, vt l^ceat reliquis
securum viuere membris. Claudian.
And sometimes we cut off a joint, that the rest of the members may be without
fear.

And thus we see the necessity of the performance of this duty: Now for the
better effecting thereof, it is necessary that good Laws be established, and
that they be carefully and duly executed. It cannot be denied, but that we
have in this kingdom as good and as wholesome Laws, as any nation in
Christendom, only it is to be lamented that the execution of them is so much
neglected. It were to be wished that they that have authority in this case,
would be careful, that the Laws made with so good advice, and so great
wisdom, may not be like an abor^iue fruit, dead as soon as they are borne.

Law, though never so excellent, without execution, Leges vel obliuione vel
contemptu pabolit^e, securi orem lu^uni fecere. Cor. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. 2.
Chr. 34.4
are but like a body without a soul, like a sword that rusteth in the sheath,
and like a medicine that is not applied. b And as one says well, when the
Laws are abolished, either by forgetfulness or contempt, they make men more
secure and riotous. Now the Laws will never be well executed, nor abuses
reformed, unless the Magistrate, as much as lies in him, see it done with his
own eyes. There is a worthy president thereof in good Josiah of whom it is
said, that when he began to root out idolatry, they brake down in his fight
the Altars of Baalim, and cut down the Images that were upon them. Yea he went
throughout all the land of Israel, to destroy the Altars, and the groves, and
to break and stamp to powder the images, etc. and then returned to Jerusalem:
he would not trust his officers with the business, but saw it done himself.
Sabel. Ennead. 5. lib. 4.
When the Romans had nominated Titus Manlius Torquatus to be Consul, he
aleadging the infirmity of his eyes, refused the honor, and said, he should
bring in a very evil and pernicious example, (...).
if he should undertake to govern the commonwealth with other men's eyes. And
therefore Homer requires of a Magistrate, that he have eyes before and behind
that he may look every way. Otherwise, if they refer all to under officers,
who it may be, either love the sin themselves, or else are many times
corrupted with bribes, they shall easily be deceived.

This doctrine does serve: first, for the reproof of all those, Use 1.
that being in authority, are not careful to punish disordered persons. As
there are many that are too indulgent, and wink too much at those that deserve
punishment. Some because they are guilty themselves, cannot with any face
punish sin in others. If the Magistrate be a swearer, or a drankard, or a
whore-maister, or a prophaner of the Sabboath, how can he set himself to
punish these vices in other men? Others, again there are, that forbear to
punish malefactors, because they would be counted pitiful and merciful men,
not remembering the old proverb, that foolish pity wareth the city. Multi
ibi nomen crudelita it is imponunt etc August de bono discipl.
Many says Saint Augustine, call that cruelty, when for love of discipline,
the fault committed is revenged by the punishments of the offender: whereas the
sentence of him that punishes, satisfies the law, and redoundeth to the good,
not only of them that are present, but even of them also that are yet unborn.
Seueritas vtilitate publica rependitur. Cor. Tac: Annal lib. 14.
So that, the severity that is used in this case, is recompensed with the
public benefits. Maluit Domitius crudelis in animad. vertendo, quam in praeter
mittando dissolutus videri. Cic. in ver. lib. 5. Number. 12.3. Exodus 32.27.28. 1.
King. 2.5 6.7.8.
It is said of Domitius, that he had rather seem cruel in punishing, then
dissolute in sparing. Moses was a very meek man, above all that were upon the
earth: and yet he batheth his hands in the blood of his brethren, when they had
dishonored God, by making and worshipping the golden calfe. And David that was
al his life of so mild a disposition, and so tender hearted, that when
opportunity was offered him twice, he would not lay his hands upon Saul though
he were his mortal enemy, yea his heart did smite him, when he had but cut
off the lap of his garment, yet at his death he makes a bloody will, and
charge Solomon that he should cause the gray head of Ioab and Shemei to go
to the grave with blood. Both of them by this cruelty sanctified their heads,
whiles they executed the vengeance committed unto them by God which otherwise,
by sparing they should have pollunted. Calvin instit. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect.
10. Exo. 32.29
As Moses bad the Isaelites concecrate their hands to the Lord, every man upon
his son and upon his brother. Others yet there be, that use too much
conniuencie in this case, because they would be thought to be quiet and
peaceable. And this is commonly the fault of such as he annual Magistrates,
who because they are not long to continue in place of authority, are loath to
be too busy and too meddling for their time. They desire every bodies good
word, let them that come after them, look to the reformation of things that
are amiss. But they forget in the mean while the Apostles exhortation, who
says, follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. Heb. 12.14*
So far as peace may stand with holinesset so far a man should labor to be
peaceable, but if it cannot stand with holiness war is to be preferred
before such peace. When Iehoram asked Iehu, Is it peace Iehu? he answeted, What
peace, 2. Kin. 9.22
whiles the whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel, and her witchcrafts are great in
number? So should every godly Magistrate resolve in a holy zeal, never to be
at peace with wicked persons, so long as their sins are unpunished. Last of
all* there be others, that are ready to speak and write for leaude persons, to
rescue them, as it were from, the hand and stroke of the Magistrate. As we see
by common experience, that there is none so vile, but one or other will
entreat for him, abusing that favor or credit which they have with men of
authority, to the countenancing and bolstering up of ungodliness, Well, let
all these persons know, that if by any of these means they subduce a
malefactor from deserved punishment, they make themselves guilty of his sin.
It is a true saying, Iudex damnatu, cum no cens absoluitur.
the Judge is condemned when the offender is absolved. qui non votat peccare
cum potest iubet Sen. Prou. 24.24 and 17.15.
And he that does not restrain a man, when it is in his power, does command
him to sin. Again, Solomon says, He that says to the wicked, thou art
righteous, him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall abhor him. And
in another place, He that justifies the wicked is abomination to the Lord
Giving us to understand, that whereas they think by this means, to winn the
favor and estimation of men, they make themselves odious both to God and all
good men. Besides the Scripture makes it clear and evident, that by this
remissness they make themselves liable to the wrath of God. When the Lord
sent Saul in expedition against the Amalekites, and gave him a charge to smite
them, 1. Sam. 15.3
and to destroy all that appertained unto them, and to have no compassion on
them, but to stay both man and woman, 8.
infant and suc^ling, etc. And he contrary to this charge, took A^ag the King
alive, Samuel was sent to tell him, 23.
that because he had in that manner cast away the word of the Lord, the Lord
had cast him away from being K ng. And whereas Ahab had by Gods assistance
discomfited Benhadad the King of Syria, and had not put him to death, 1. King.
20.42.
but upon certain conditions had let him go, a Prophet was sent unto him with
this message. Because thou have let go out of thine hand a man whom I
appointed to die, thy lif^ shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people. Malefacctors and wicked persons by the law of God are appointed to die,
the Lord has given Magistrates a charge to that purpose, if therefore they,
for foolish pity, or any other respect let them escape, they may justly fear,
that Gods hand will be upon themselves. And many times we see by experience,
that a wicked wretch reserved from due punishment, proves a continual
vexation to him that has spared him. As the nations that inhabited the land of
Canaan being not cast out and destroyed by the Israelites, Josh. 23.13. Iud 2.3.
as God had commanded them, were made by the just judgment of God, A snare and
destruction unto them, and a whippe on their sides, and a thorn in their eyes.

Secondly, this doctrine does serve to admonish all that are in authority,
Romans 13.4.
to set themselves with care and conscience to perform this duty. The
Magistrate must not bear the sword for naught, as the Apostle says, he must
not be like a Scarre-Cro^e to let the birds pick strawes out of his nose, but
he must draw the sword that God has put in his hand, to cut off such as will
not otherwise be reclaimed. And herein he must spare none. If a pecuniary m^^^
be to be inflicted, qui non habe in ac^e, luat in corpore.
he that has it not in his purse, let him pay it on his skin. If he deserve
a corporal punishment, the Magistrate must not omit it, Deu. 19.21
his eye must have no compassion. And herein he has the example of our Savior
Christ, who coming to drive the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, does not
prepare his ears to hear them, but a whippe to scourge them. Bern. de consid.
lib. 1.
He makes no words, nor receives any answer, for he sits not as a Judge,
but pursues them as a revenger. The Magistrate must do likewise, his zeal
must be inflamed against the general impudency of the times, he must make
ungodly persons afraid of his countenance, so as they shall not dare to come
in his sight. As Job says, that when he was in prosperity, his authority did
so terrify the wicked of his time, that they durst not show their heads, they
were chased from among men, Job 30.3.4.5.6.
and were constrained to flee into wilderness (...) and there to hide
themselves in ol^^i^s of rivers, and holes of the earth, and rocks, where they
cut up nettles by the bushes, and the iuriper roots were their meat. Yea the
least sin that is must not escape unpunished. We see by experience, that many
times a little itch turns to a filthy leprosy, that spreads it self over
the whole body: so a mass of evil does often arise of a small beginning. A
grain of poison is enough to take away a man's life, and the least evil is
sufficient to spoil a whole city. Casus in p^li^
And therefore in evils we are not to respect the weight of them, but the
danger, not the greatness, but the contagiousnesse. The least mote of evil,
as one says, is not to be neglected. The Magistrate must take heed that by
the name of a little eui l, he be not dece^ued with this paralogisme, forgive
this, this is but a small falt, and forgive this, this is but a small fault,
and so every fault shall be accounted small, and none shall be punished. As in
a diseased body, Physicians labor to leave no corrupt humor, that may
endanger the body: so the Magistrate must leave nothing in the commonwealth,
that may be hurtful to it. Part^^ saepe scin^^lla neglecta magnum excitauit
incendium. Curt. lib. 6.
A little spark not regarded, has many times raised a great f^re: so a little
evil neglected, has often turned to a great mischife. But as the Magistrate
must punish all sin in general, so more especially such as make most to the
dishonor of God, as blasphemous swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, profanation
of the Sabboath, and such like.

Now herein many Magistrates are much to blame. They are severe enough to
punish the least disgrace that is offered to their own persons. But let God be
never so much dishonored, and his Sabboathes never so greatly polluted, there
are but a few that do regard i^. I confess there has been a good beginning
made this last year, for the reformation of the Sabboath. The right honorable
the Lord Mayor that now is, and the other officers that assisted him, have
taken great pains in restraining the abuses and disorders, that are in
Ta^^rn^s and Alehouses on that day. I wish the like care may be continued in
the next year. And therefore I would entreat the Lord Elect that is to
succeed, that the example of those that have gone before him may encourage him
to undertake this good work of the Lord. He shall find it an easier matter
then it was before, because the ye are already well broken to his hands,
ungodliness is already well curbed, it were pity that by any future
remissness, it should get head again. And let me exhort the right
worshipful Sheriffs, that are newly come in place: that as they are famous in
this respect, that they are brothers by nature (a thing seldom or never seen
before in this city) so also they would join together in brotherly
affection, that with one heart and one hand they may set themselves, to the
uttermost of their authority, to punish and root out all ungodly persons. So
shall they transfer a blessed memory of their names to all posterity, and no
doubt the Lord will remember them in goodness for the same.

There is another sort of wicked persons, that deserve to be severely pun shed.
And they are those which foolish people call wise men and wise women: but
indeed are wisards and sorce^ers, very ^i^mes of the devil, that take upon
them by the a^^^ of the devil to help men to things that are l^st or stoine.
These are so odious in the sight of God, as he can by no mea^es endure them.
Let none be found among you (says the Lord that vs^th witchcra^^ ^r is a r
garder of times or a sorcerer, Deu 18 10 11.12.
or a ^k^^er or that c^^^^^^eth with spirits, or a soothsayer^ or that a ^eth
counsel of the dead For all that do such things, are ^bho^ nation unto the
Lord. And therefore ^e has given express commandment, that they shall be
put to death. Thou shall not suffer a witch, (and and these upon the point are
no better to live. And again, If a man or woman have a spirit of divination,
Exo 22.18 Leui. 20.27
or so h^saying ^a^ doubtless these have they shall die the death, they shall
stone them to death, their blo^d shall be upon them. An as David says of idols
that all that trust in them are like unto them? Psalm. 115.8
So all that (...) unto these instruments of the devil, are every w^nt as
abomi^able to God as themselves are. And therefore he does precisely condemn
all such pract^ses. Leu 19.31.
Ye shall not regard them that work with spirits neither soo^h sayers: ye shall
not seek to t em ^o be defiled by them I am the ^o d your God. And in another
p^a^* If any turn af er such as work with spirits and after sooth sayers to
go a who^^ing after them: Leu. 20.6.
then will I set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his
people. And how severely th s threatening was execu^ed, (...) a^ pea^e in two
fearful examples. The one is of Ahaziah king of Israel who being h^rt with a
fall out of a window, 2. Kin. 1.2 3.4.16.1*
sent messengers to enquire of Baa^zebub the God of ^kron, that is of the
devil, to see whether he should recover of his disease or no. But the Lord
sent him word by his messengers, and after caused the Prophet Eliah to tell him
to his face, that because he had enquired of Baal zebub, as if there had been
no God in Israel, therefore he should not come down off the bed, on which
he was gone up, but should dye the death. And it came to pass accordingly.
The other is of Saul who, ^s the Scripture says in plain terms; 1. Chron.
10.13 14.
died for his transgressions, which he committed against the Lord, even agai
st the word of the Lord which he kep^ not, and because he sought and asked
counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, and asked not of the Lord therefore
he^ slew him, etc. Seeing then this practice is so damnable, and so much
displeasing unto Go, it shall be a work worthy the care of a Christian
Magistrate, by due punishment to restrain the a^e.

Bu^ of all other, there are none that do so much deserve to be pu ^shed with
all severity, as our traitorous Pap sts tha^ viperous brood, who being
nourished in our bosoms do most unnaturally seek to eat out our bow ls.
Cic. in Cat. 4
They that have so often sought by horrible conspiracies to take away a l our
lives, are not worthy for one moment to enjoy the benefit of their lives: much
less are they worthy to partake in the privilege of subjects. It was the
Orators rule against Cataline; and it holds in all such as he^ is that qui
reipub. hostis est ^s ciuis ste null modo potest, ibid.
he that is an enemy to the Common-wea th cannot by any means be a true
subject. Neither shall our Magist ates need to fear to be counted cruel in
punishing such seditious and rebellious persons as these.

Nay rather, if they be most severe in this case, they shall be thought
merciful: but if they be remiss and negligent, they shall be subject to the
imputation of extreme cruelty to their Country and Commonwealth. Now among
these, there are none to be proceeded against with more extremity, then their
Priests and Jesuits, the ringleaders of villeny. But I give them a wrong name:
they deserve rather to be called Iudasites, then Jesuits, for they are far
more like to Judas, then to Jesus: as Cyprian said of some such as they are Non
potest esse cum christo qui imitator Iudae mal^^ esse quam Christi. sermon. 6. de
orat dominica.
he cannot belong to Christ, that had rather imitate Judas then Christ. Their
Church has long delighted in barbarous cruelty Crudelibus morsibus pasta et
Christianorum sanguine opinata. Optat. lib. 2 Revel 17.6. Revel. 18.6. Psalm.
137.8.9.
it has been fed with cruel bits, and fatted with the blood of Christians.
It is that scarlet colored whore which the Apostle John says, is drunken with
the blood of Saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and that
without any respect either of sex or of age not sparing the infant in the
mothers belly And therefore, it were to be wished, that Christian Magistrates,
according to Gods commandment would reward them as they have rewarded us, and
give them double, according to their works: and in the cup that they have
filled to us fill them double. They are the children of Babel worthy to be
destroyed (as David says.) And therefore, Blessed shall he be that rewards
them at they have served us. Blessed shall he be that takes their children,
and dasheth them against the stones. Still these wretches do thirst for blood,
ol^ that they might once be satisfied: but in that sort as Queen Tomyris dealt
with blood thirsty Cyrus, who having overcome him in battle, caused his head
to be cut off and cast into a barrel of blood provided for the purpose; and
then insulting over him said. ^go te sanguine saturabo Herodotan Clio.

Sic pereant et qui moliti talia per gunt. Psalm. 124.6.


I will give thee blood thy belly full.

Beloved, we have cause to give great thanks to almighty God, who has so
often deliued us from those apparent misch efes, which they had intended
against us. The Lord has not given us over for a pray unto their teeth, We may
truly say to the glory of our God that preserves us. Our soul is escaped
even us a bird out of the snare of the foulers: 7 Cic in Cati. 1
the snare is broken and we are delivered. Suffer not, I beseech you suffer not
the safety of the land and kingdom to be any more endangered by their means.
Iud. 8.20.21.
But you that have authority indeed, you that have strength in your hands,
rise and fall upon them, as Gedeon did upon Zebah and Zalmunna, we that be
Ministers may cry out against them, and inferior Magistrates may seek to
punish them, and both be laughed to scorn for our pains. It is you that have
greater power, that must do the deed. A Gell. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Strike therefore, and strike home, that both head and tail, both the great
Jesuits and the inferior Priests may be cut off before they devise any more
treason. It is good policy, not to recompense benefits and good turns,
before they be performed and done: but is a point of great folly not to prevent
intended villenies, but to linger and stay till they be committed, and then to
think to punish them, when the mischief that is done cannot be undone. How it
comes to pass I know not, but the truth is they have too much liberty. Even
those of them that be in prison, are little restrained by their imprisonment.
They have the Masses as ordinary and as common, and there is as great resort
of many sorts of people to them, whom they seduce and pervert, as if they were
in their own houses, yea they can at their pleasure go abroad all the city
over. And yet they are not ashamed to cry out of heard and cruel usage, that
they are like to be famished, and I know not what. Indeed I am sorry for
their heaviness. He that shall look on the cheeks of many of them, will
think they are better fed then taught. They know well enough, that in
Queeene Marias time, the poor servants and Martyrs of Christ, endured other
manner of persecution at their hands. They were mannacled and fettered, and
kept in the stocks night and day, 1. King. 22.27.
yea not only their feet, but their necks also. They were fed with the bread
of affliction, and the water of affliction. These men walk up and down in
their bravery, and eat of all the dainties that may be, and yet are not
pleased. Well let me exhort those that be in authority, that if they will not
hung them up unto the Lord, 2. Sam. 21.6
as the Gibeonites said of Saul's sons, (which yet I am persuaded would be as
acceptable a sacrifice to God as that was, and as pleasing a spectacle to all
God people) yet they would tie them shorter, and make their imprisonment a
restraint indeed, that they may not have so much liberty to do mischief.

But it may be some will object. Will you then deny all mercy unto those that
do offend. No by no means. I know that Solomon says, Pro. 20.28.
The Kings throne shall be established with mercy. I would not have the seat
of Justice to be Reorum scopulus. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 5.
the rock of malefactors, as they said of the tribunal of Cassius. I hate the
cruelty of Draco, who punished the lightest and smallest offense with death,
and therefore was said to write his laws not with incke but with blood. M lum
est delectari sono catenarum Sen de clement. li. 1. cap. vlt.
I hold it a filthy thing for a Magistrate to delight (as one says) in the
rattling of chains and fetters, as a carter that is never well but when he
hears the lashing of his whippe. But as David says in the beginning of this
Psalm. I will sing mercy and judgment: so I would have all those that are to
punish offenders, to temper mercy and justice together, Vt non facilitas
authoritatem, aut seue ritas amorem minuat. Cor. Tac. in vita Iul Agric.
Milis s^ueritas non dissoluta clemen ia Plin Sec. in panegyr.
that too much leuitie do not derogate from their authority, nor too much
severity do not diminish their love. They Tam omnibus ignoscere crudelitas
est quam nulli. Sen. de clement. l. 1 c. 2. a Potest poena diluta exigi, non
potest exacta renocari. Sen. de ira. l. 2. Sen de clement l. 1.
must use a mild severity, and not a dissolute clemency, as Pliny said of
Tragane the Emperor. As they must not show mercy hand over head, so they must
not deny mercy to all. e For it is as great cruelty to show mercy to all, as
to none. And therefore, to the end that the Magistrate may carry himself
uprightly in this case, there are diverse causions to be observed. First of
all, they must not be too headlong, nor too hasty in inflicting punishment.
All other means, as we have said before, must be used, and if they be despised
and contemned, then at the last they must come to punishment. It was a good
saying of Seneca. Ne superet medicina modum.
A punishment that is deferred, may be exacted: but if it be once inflicted, it
cannot be recalled. Secondly, they must labor by smaller and lighter
punishments to peruent greater. They must not come to capital punishments at
the first, unless the fear of future evil be greater then the present. Death
is the last punishment, and therefore there is none will inflict it, but he
that has spent all his other remedies. Thirdly, they must punish in equity and
due proportion, according to the quality of the offense. Nesuperet medicina
modum.
The medicine must exceed me^sure. And this was the commandment of the Lord
himself, that if a wicked man were found worthy to be beaten, the Judge should
cause him to lie down, Deuteronomy. 25.2.
and to be beaten according to his trespass etc. And our Savior Christ has
taught us, that he that sins of ignorance must be beaten with fewer stripes,
then he that sins against his knowledge. Luk 12.47.48.
That servant says he that knew his ma^sters will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many wripes. But he
that knew it not, Ezra. 7.26
and yet did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
And this the heathen king even by the light of nature prescribed unto Ezra, --
adsit Regula peccatis quae poenas ittoget acquas. Ne scutica dignum horib^li
sectere flagello. Hora. sermon. l. 1. sat. 3.
that whosoever will not do the law of God, and the kings law, he should have
judgment, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or unto conffication
of goods, or to imprisonment. Where we see, he makes diversities of
punishments, according to he desert of the offender. (b) And unless this rule
be observed to proportion punishments according to the offenses, they shall
punish that with a scourge, that scarce deserve a wippe. Fourthly, they must
consider the nature and disposition of the party. Some are more flexible and
tender hearted: others are more audacious and desperate in their wickedness. A
lesser correction will preuaille more with the one, then a greater punishment
with the other. As Solomon says, Pro. 17.10. and 27.22.
A reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an hundred
stripes into a fool. For though a man should bray a fool in a mortar, among
wheat, braied with a pestell, yet will not foolishness depart from him.

A Magistrate must put a difference in punishing of these. There must not be
the like severity used toward them. Where a pin will serve to open an ulcer,
there needs not a launcer. Last of all, whatsoever the punishment be, mercy
and compassion must be used in inflicting of it. And therefore the Magistrate
must not use reuiling and reproachful speeches, to the disgrace of the
offender. When Joshua was to proceed against Achan who by his sin had
troubled all Israel, Josh. 7.19.
he speaks to him in mild and gentle terms; My son says he, I beseech
thee g ue glory to God, etc. Neither must he by any cruel course, make his
torture greater or longer, then necessity requires. For when the delinquent
shall see himself despised (as Moses says) in the sight of him that punishes
him, Deuteronomy. 25
it will be a means to drive him to desperation. And therefore a godly Father
says well, Even one that judges aright, must hold a balance in his hands, in
the one end he must bear justice, in the other mercy. By justice he gives
sentence against sin, Per illam reddit peccati sententiam, per hanc peccati
temperat paenam. Ibid.
by mercy he tempereth and mittigateth the punishment of the sin. Whereunto
agrees that speech of Saint Augustine. Duo sunt nomina, homo et peccator. quod
peccator est corripe, quod homo miserere.
There are two names, a man and a sinner: as he is a sinner punish him, as he
is a man pity him. And indeed, mercy is the very eye and light of justice,
without which it is nothing but blind rage and fury.

But above all, mercy must be showed to the souls of Malefactors. And
therefore great care should be had, that by their punishments they Poenitentiam
quam perniciem malun^ Cor. Tac. Annal. lib. 1.
may be brought to repentance, and not to destruction. And this was the end
which the Apost e propounded it punishing the incestuous person among the
Corinthians, by the censures of the Church. He commanded, that he should be
delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the fl sh that the spirit might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus The sword of justice does continually cut
off many wicked persons for their due deserts. 1, Cor. 5.5.
And as they die a dogs death; so it is to be feared, that many of them the
like dogs, for want of knowledge and for want of grace. It is a lamentable
thing, that in so great a place as this, there is not some godly and sincere
Minister appointed to instruct them better, and to prepare them for their ends.
I confess this City is famous for many excellent works of charity to the
bodies of men. The e are many hospitals, wherein a great number of poor
orphans and desolate widows are liberally fed and clothed. No doubt, the
loins of many such that are warmed with your garments, Job 31.20.
do bless you, as Job says. And many sick and wounded persons by your good
provision, do recover the health and soundness of their bodies. I beseech you
let me begi t at your hands (and who knows whether God sent me hither for
this purpose or no) that you would add this work of mercy to the rest, which
is more excellent then they all, that a competent maintenance may be allowed to
some faithful and skillful Minister, who may take care of these poor
wretches. It were to be wished that there were in every prison such a man
maintained. For we see by experience, that they are nurseries of all
ungodliness, and men that once come in prison, learn more villenie, then ever
they knew before. Whereas if there were a godly minister to teach and instruct
them faithfully, 2. Chro 33.12.
it were to be hoped, that in their tribulation they would humble themselves
greatly before the Lord their God, as we read Manasses did, and so whatsoever
became of their bodies, yet their souls by Gods mercy might be saved. But if
this be a work of too great cost: yet let me so far prevail with you in
this case, that there may be a man of understanding and knowledge, set over the
souls of them that are appointed to die. Job 29 13.
So shall the blessing of those that are ready to perish, even in this life
come upon you: and doubtless in the life to come, Mat. 5.12.
great shall be your reward in heaven.

All the wicked.) This is the second thing that was noted in the words, namely
the equity of King David, that he would not be partial. It was not likely that
when he had done all, he could utterly purge the land of wicked men. Yet he
promises so to carry himself in punishing of them, as it should appear he
would do it without respect of persons: he would not incline to one more then
another. This example does teach all that is in authority, that in punishing
malefactors no partiality must de used. All must be punished according to their
deserts, one as well as another. Respect of persons is every where condemned in
the scripture. And first in judging. (...) was the Lords commandment unto
Magistrates, ye shall not do unjustly in judgment. Leuit. 19.15
Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the
rich, but shall Judge thy neighbor justly. Giving us to understand, that he
that uses partiality, cannot judge righteous judgment. and 16.19.
And again, Ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear
the small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man; for the
judgment is Gods. And in another place, Wrest not the law, nor respect any
person, etc. A mighty man must not be feared for his greatness, nor a mean
man must not be despised for his poverty. And David in the person of the Lord
reproving the corrupt and wicked magistrates of his time says, How long will
ye judge unjustly, Psalm. 82.2.
and accept the person of the wicked? And Solomon in diverse places does the
like. It is not good, says he, to accept the person of the wicked, Prou. 28.5.
to cause the righteous to fall in judgment. And It is not good to have respect
of any person in judgment. And again. and 24.23.
To have respect of persons is not good: for that man will transgress for a
piece of bread. Hereupon the Apostle charge Timotheus even before God, and
18.21.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that in executing the
ecclesiastical censures upon wicked persons, 1. Tim. 5.21
he should not prefer one before another, and that he should do nothing
partially. Where he uses two words of great signification. (...).
The first does signify to esteem highly of some one man in respect of
others, which is most intolerable in a Judge, who must sit in the place of
justice, not to judge of men's persons, but according to their causes. (...)
Beza.
The second is borrowed from him that holds the balance, implying that the
Judge must weigh the causes of men that are at variance, as it were in a
balance, so as he must incline to neither part, otherwise there can be no right
judgment.

Secondly, this respect of persons, and this parcialitie is condemned also in
punishing. When the Lord had appointed punishments by way of retaliation, unto
him that had any way hurt his brother, he adds in the end. Ye shall have one
law, it shall be as well for the stranger, as for one borne in the country. The
stranger if he deserve favor, must have as much savor, as if he were borne in
the country; and he that is borne in the country, must be punished with as much
severity, as if he were a stranger. Again, the Lord commands, Deu. 17.25
If there be found among you in any of thy cities, which the Lord thy God giu
th thee, man or woman that has wrought wick^dnesse in the sight of the Lord
thy God etc. then thou shall bring forth that man or that woman unto thy
gates, and shall stone them with stones till thy (...). We see here is none
excepted. Whosoever they be that transgress, high or low, rich or poor, they
must be punished. And therefore in some cases, it were not lawful for the
father or mother to spare their own son, that was borne of their bone, and
flesh of their flesh. If any man have a son (says the Lord) that is
stubburne and disobedient, Deuteronomy. 11.18 19.21.
which will not hearken to the voice of his father, nor the vo^ce of his mother
etc. then shall his father and his mother take him and bring him out unto t e
Elders of his city, and then all the men of his city shall stone him with
stones unto death. Yea there is not any bond of nature or of friendship, that
should hinder a man from the performance of this duty, according to that
strict charge and precept of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 13.6.7.8.9.10.
If thy brother the son of thy mother, or thine own son, or thy daughter,
or thy wife that lies in thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve us other Gods, etc.
Thou shall not consent unto him nor h^are him neither shall thine eye pity
him, nor show mercy nor keep him secret. But thou shall eu n kill him: thine
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death and then the hands of all the
people, 2. Cron. 15.16.
etc. And therefore, Asa, king of Judah is commended in the word of God, for
his uprightness in this respect, that when Maacha his own mother committed
idolatry, he would not spare her but punished her, even by deposing her from
her regency And indeed, it is truly said, Iustitium non nouit patrem, non
nouit matte n, ventatem vo^s.
that Justice knows neither father nor mother, but only the truth. As Moses
testifies of Leui, that he said unto his father and to his mothe, I have not
seen him, neither knew he his brethren, nor knew his own children: so must it
be with every good Magistrate. The nearest kinsmen and dearest friends that he
has in the world must have no more favor then other men. Besides, the Lord
has entitled and styled Magistrates by the name of Gods, as David says, God
stands in the assembly of gods, Psalm. 82.1.6
he judges among Gods. And again, I have said ye are gods, etc. And
therefore, as they communicate with God in his name, so also they should follow
his example. Now the Scripture does every where teach us, that God is no
respecter of persons. The Lord your God, says Moses, is God of gods, Deuteronomy.
10.17 18.
and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, which excepteth no
persons, nor takes reward, etc. And Iehosaphat exhorting his Judges that he
had made, to the due execution of justice, uses Gods example as an argument to
persuade the^ thereunto. Let the fear of the Lord, says he, be upon you: 2.
Chr. 19.7
take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lrrd our God, neither
respect of persons nor receiving of reward. And Elihu affirms the same in the
book of Job. Job 34.19.
The Lord accepts not the persons of Princes, and regards not the rich more
then the poor: for they be all the work of his hands. The greatest and the
richest are like to find no more favor at his hands then the meanest and the
poorest, Isa. 11.3.
for he made the one as well as the other. And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of
the kingdom and dominion of Christ, says, He shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes, he shall not be carried with outward respects to condemn or
absolve any man without cause. In a word, the Apostle Peter says, 1. Pet. 1.17.
that God without respect of persons judges according to every man's work. And
we see by experience, that the greatest potentates, and mightiest monarchs in
the world, can no more escape the vengeance of God, then the poorest wretches
that live upon the earth. Witness Pharaoh, Nabuchad-nezzar and diverse others,
whom God brought to confusion notwithstanding all their pride. Neither can the
greatest multitude of sinners that are, rescue themselves from the stroke of
his punishing hand, no more then if they were but a few, or but one person, as
we see in the old world, in Sodom and Gomorha, and the cities about them, and
in the great army of Sennacherib. Yea the Lord corrects his dearest children,
even as well as those that are his enemies. As the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4 17.
says, The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God. And
the Lord himself says to the wicked nations Lo, Ier. 25.29.
I begin to plague the city where my name is called upon, and should you go
free? And speaking of the children and posterity of David whom he loved so
dearly, Psalm. 89.30.31.32.33.
as he promised that he would Never take his loving kindness from them: says
notwithstanding, that If they forsake his law, and walk not in his judgments:
if they break his statutes, and keep not his commandments; he would visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes. Thus should
it be with all Magistrates. 1. Pet 2.9.
They should labor to express this excellent virtue of him that has called
them out of darkness into his marvelous light. They must suffer neither great
nor small, one nor other to escape deserved punishment. Cauendum est ne usdem
de causis alij plectantur, In ^e appell^ntur qu^dem. ^ic. of c. li. 1.
They must take heed that for one and the same fault, some be not punished,
and others not once called in question. Be^. de Con. sid. ib. 2.
The magistrate (as Bernard told Eugenius) makes himself guilty of no small
offense, if he do respect the countenances of sinners, and do not rather
judge according to the merit of their causes. As it is said of the law, that it
can neither be moved witst favor, nor weakened with power, nor corrupted with
money: so it should be with the Magistrate. Nihil offens^e, nihil grati^e
dabitur. Sen.
Neither fear nor favor should divert him from that which is right. As the
Sin is no other to a a rich man, then to a poor man, but indifferent to all,
parching, or refreshing all alike: So must the Magistrate carry himself equally
and indifferently to all men in the execution of justice. The rich must not be
more favored then the poor, nor the poor more severely dealt withal then
the rich. It is reported by travelers, that in Zante over the place of
judgment, where all causes both criminal and judicial are decided, there are
two Latin verses written in letters of gold, on the wall, to this effect. Hic
locus odit, amat, puuit, conseruat honorat. Nequitiam, pacean, crumina, iura,
bono^
This place hates wickedness, loves peace, punishes offenses, preserves the
laws, honors the good. Implying that there shall be no partiality used, but
every man shall be proceeded withal according to his de^a^^s be they good or
evil. At Athens the judges called Areopagit^ did sit in judgment upon causes
in the night time, that no outward and occasion or respect might work upon
their affections to move them either to severity or to pity, more the^ the
equity of the thing required. Cael. Rhodi. lib. 10. cap. 3.
And in Creta the image of Jupiter was made without cares: insinuating that a
Magistrate should hear no man's complaint nor petition, but only follow that,
which the balance of reason, and the sincerity of uncorrupted justice did
suggest.

Here then are all such justly reproved, as are careless and negligent in this
respect As we see by common experience, that many ^^hes in place of justice,
there is now much partiality If they be great persons and rich men that offend,
they are seldom punished. I pray God it may not be true at this day, which the
heathen Orator observed of his times. Omnium sermon percrebitu, his iudiciis
quae nunc sunt, pecuniosum hominem quamuis sit no cena, neminem posse damnari.
Cic. in Ver. protem. 1. act.
It is common in every man's mouth, that in these judgments which are now, ^o
money man though he be an offender, can be condemned. Nihil tam sanctum, quod
non viola^i nihil tam munitum, quod non expugnari pecunia potest. ibid.
And indeed there is nothing so pure and holy that cannot be violated, nothing
so well fensed that cannot be won and overcome with money. But the laws must
nor be like unto cobwebs, which catch and hold the h^^^ flies, but the great
ones break through them. Others there be that suffer themselves to be turned
out of the way by hundred and acquaintance and friendship and such like
respects. Whereby it comes to pass, that according to the old proverb, some
man may better steal an horse, then another may look on. If he be Cousin to
we, as the saying is, if he be well allied, let his fact be what it will be he
need not sen^e, he shall never be called into question, or if he be, he shall
quickly be discharged. But Magistrates ought to know that there is no nerenes
of kindred or allia^ce that should be any patronage for sin. When the Lord was
wroth with the people of Israel for making the golden calfe. Moses comanded
the sons of Leui, Exo. 32.27.
to put every man his sword by his side and to go to and fro from gate to gate
through the host, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion,
and every man his neighbor. They must spare none, how near or dear soever.

Hae rog^tiones mistam necessitatem habent Cacl. Calcag. de rat. iudicandi.
There are many also, that for fear of greater persons, are kept from executing
justice. For as has been said before, Mighty men will become suitors to
inferior Magistrates in the behalf of offenders whom they affect. And as one
says well, (a) their request brings a necessity with them. For unless their
desire be satisfied, and the party whom they commend be absolved, by right or
wrong, be his cause never so bad, they will be sure to sit on their skirts, and
one time or other they will come even with them. As we read of Agisclaus, who
when he commended a friend of his to the Judge, he requested him, that if his
cause were good, he would absoule him for justice sake, if not that he would
fulfill his desire: but howsoever the world went that he would absolve him. By
this means it comes to pass, that many notorious lewd persons, are subduced
from deserved punishment, and reserved to commit greater villenies, to the
dishonor of God, and the hurt of the commonwealth.

And therefore all magistrates are to be exhorted, to labor for equal and
upright dealing in punishing offenses. They should show themselves so
invincible and so impregnable against all affections, as neither by force of
money, nor by the fear or favor of any man whosoever, they suffer themselves
to be drawn away from the right. Courage is the principal virtue, and the
chief badge of a Christian Magistrate. Exodus 18.21
When I^thro persuaded Moses to make and appoint rulers under himself, ever
thousands, ever hundreds, ever fifties, and over tens. The first thing that he
required in them was this, that the should be Men of courage. And when Joshua
was appointed to succeed Moses in the government of the people of Israel.
First, Moses called him and said unto him in the sight of all the people. Deuteronomy.
3^.7.
Be of a good courage and strong. And after that the Lord ^aue him the same
charge twice for failing. Be strong and of a good courage (...) would expel
and ^riue away a I cowardly an^ fainthe ^^^^^s, Deuteronomy. ^.23 Josh. 1.1.
and cause them manually and strongly to execute justice, though there be never
so many impediments to encounter with all. And herein the very h^athen men may
be our S^^lemaisters For if Solomon send the Slugg^rd to the pismire to learn
instruction, why should we scorn to earne of paga^s who were endued with
excellent gifts of nature. Prou. 6.6.
Phacion a great Magistrate in Athens when his son in law Charillus was to be
endited for extortion, would not so much as be present there least his
cou^tena^ce might have procured him some favor, assuming that when he took him
to be his son in law, he hoped he would ^e a good and an honest man. Plutarch
in praecept polit
And Cleon when he was called to be a Magistrate, sent presently for all his
friends, and renounced then f^^^^dship. And when Simonides requested something
of Tho^^stocles, a Magistrate that was not very just, he^re H^^ ^^m with this
answer. He is not a good Poe^ that singe^^ w^t^out harmony, nor he a good mag
strate that shows any favor a^a^^st the laws. ^ut there is a most famous
example of all other for this purpose recorded by Aelianus. The sum of it is
this. There was a man of the people called Mardi, A han. lib. 1. cap 34.
that had seven sons, whereof the youngest being stubborn and dissolute and
one that would not be reclaimed the rather takes him, and binds his hands
behind him, and b^ought him to the Judges: and there does ^arnestly accuse him,
and required that he might be put to death. The Judges being astonished at the
strangenes of the thing would not meddle with ^t, but brought the father and
the son to Artaxerxes the King. Where the father sti^ plea^ed against the son
and craved justice. The King seeing his ea^n^stnesse, said unto him. Can thou
then with thine own e^e endure to behold the death of thy son? he answ ^ed,
yea very ^el For when I shall see him, that wrongeth and dishonors my
family, put to death, Land the rest of my children shall live with ^eater
comfort When the King heard this he highly commended the father, and made him
one of his Judges, affirming, that he that durst so severely and so justly
pronounce sentence against his own child, would doubtless show himself a
sincere and incorrupt judge unto others. But he pardoned the young man for that
time, threatening to put him to a most horible death if ever ^e should offend
again in the l ke manner. ^^h that our Magistrates and Judges would follow
th^se examples. For if it did once appear to the world that rich and mighty
men should be punished as well as the poor and mean persons and that
kinsfolk and friends should find ^o more fau^ur then those that are
strangers, it would soon cut off all hope of impu^^^e from all kind of
malefactors. And blessed be God, that at this time our eyes do see the great
care of his Majesty to have the ^a^d purged from blood, wherewith it has been
poluted, and that there is so strict and so just proceeding against all that
were co^e^era^e in so wicked a fact. nd the Lord stre^^then the heart and ^a^^^
that most wort^y Lord chief Justice that he ^ay still go forward impartially to
cut off al those that had any a^ in so foul a murder.

Wicked.) As all the wicked must be punished without partiality so none but
the wicked must be enda gered. Th y that are innocent and harm esse, must not
b^e m^l^sted. The Lord, commanded Moses that in the execution o^ j^st ce, Deuteronomy
2^.1 Prou. 17.15
The righteous should be justified and the wicked condemned And Solomon says,
It is as great abomination in the sight of od to condemn the just, as it is
to justify the wicke^. And the Prophet pronounces as great a wo^ against ^im
that Takes away the righteous es of the r ghteous from him, Isa. 5.23.
as against him That iust^fi^th and absolueth the wick d for a reward The Lord
has pu^ a sword into the Magistrates hand, Romans 13 4
but it is to this e^d, that he may Take vengean^^ (...) him that does evil.
And therefore be abuses his author^t^^, and abuses his sword, if he turns
edge of it against the godly, Psalm 11 2.
and smite them that are upright in heart, as David says. This is a most
fearful and a most horrible sin and a si^ne which God will ^ost seu^rely
punish. Among those se ^en things which the Lord hates and abhor^ h, Pro 6.16
17 Psalm. 9.^^.
this is one, The hands that shed innocent blood And ^auid says, that the Lord
himself wi^^ make inquisition for blood. Sometimes innocent bloo^ is shed
under color o^ ^aw But there will be at t^me, when the Lord will c^^e with a
quest of ^^qui^e to find it out, nd to punish it. And therefore, when the
wicked brought the Prophet Jeremiah before the princes, and would have had him
put to death, he speaks to them with great boldness. Ier. 26.14.15
As for me, I am in your hands, do with me as you think good, But know ye for
a certain, that if you put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood
upon your selves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof.
Implying, that God would revenge his blood, not only upon the murderers
themselves, but upon the people, the whole land should be guilty of it. When
poor Naboth was unjustly condemned and put to death by wicked Ahab, the Lord
sent Elijah the Prophet to him with this messag. Have thou killed and also
gotten possession? Thus says the Lord in the place where dogs licked the blood
of Naboth shall dogs lick even thy blood also. 1. King. 21.13.19. and 22.38. 2.
King. 21.16. and 24.2.3.4
Which came to pass accordingly Manasseh was a cruel murderer, He shed
innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenished Jerusalem from corner to
corner. But mark how fearfully the Lord revenged this sin in his posterity.
In the days of Iehoi^kim. The Lord sent against him bands of the Caldees, and
bands of the Aramits, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the Amonites and
he sent them against Judah, to destroy it. Surly by the commandment of the Lord
came this upon Judah, that he might put them out of sight, for the sins of
Manasseh, And for the innocent blood that he shed, therefore the Lord would not
pardon it. Manasseh was dead and rotten long before this time but we see the
Lord had not forgotten his sin, but the whole land smarted for it in the third
generation after him. So likewise Ioash most unkindly caused Zechariah the son
of good Ie^oiada to b^ stoned to death, because he reproved him for his
idolatry. But see what followed. 2. Chro. 24.21.22.23.24.25.
When the year was out the host of Aram came up against him, and they came
against Judah and Jerusalem and destroyed all the Princes of the people from
among the people and sent all the spoil of them unto the King of Damascus.
Though the army of Aram came with a small company of men, yet the Lord
delivered a very great army into their hands.

After this, the Lord somte him with great disseases. And at the last, his own
servants conspired against him, and slew him on his bed. And the reason of all
these judgments is given there by the holy Ghost, that they were For the blood
of the children of Iehoiada the Priest. And to this purpose the Lord did
threaten the Jews, Mat. 23.35
that Upon them should come all the righteous blood that was shed upon the
earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of Zacharias the
son of Barachias, whom they slew between the temple and the altar. When the
wicked Jews were so earnest with Pilate to have our Savior Christ put to
death, and he would have testified his innocence in the matter, they all with
one voice took it upon themselves, Mat. 27.25
and cried out, His blood be on us, and on our children. Which fearful
imprecation of theirs the Lord did hear, and avenged his blood upon them with
a witness. Neither was there any sin so severely punished as that sin. For
the Lord brought an utter destruction upon the whole nation, that even to this
day they are despersed and scattered throughout the whole earth, and may even
be termed the common Rogues and vagabonds of the world. And Pilate that wicked
judge, that pronounced that wicked sentence against him, to gratify and please
the Jews, even against his conscience, Eusebius li. 2 c. 7.
did not escape the revenging hand of God. For the Lord brought upon him such
woeful calamities, that to be rid out of his pain, he thrust himself through
with his own hands, and so ended his wretched life. In a word, we read in the
Revelation that the souls of them that were killed for the word of God, Revel.
6.10.
and for the testimony which they maintained, do cry with a loud voice under
the altar: How long Lord, holy and true! do thou not judge and avenge our
bloode^ them that dwell upon the earth.

By all this that has been spoken, we see what a fearful sin it is to be
guilty of shedding innocent blood. And yet we see it by too much experience,
that where wicked men are in authority, they that are most godly, and most
religious, are sure to be most molested. Is it not an ordinary thing with the
Papists, where they have the law in their hands, to punish a man more severely,
for reading the holy word of God, for the comfort and education of his soul,
at for eating flesh on a friday, or for breaking any of their superstitious
ceremonies, the neither for blas^^my, or drunkenness, or whordome, of for
mur^er it self? For though^ man be guilty of these sins, he may have a
dispensation and a pardon: but if he be taken ^ardie in a^^e of the other, he
is sure to be burnt at a stake, and to fry a faggot. And others also that are
no Papists, at least would be counted none, as far as their power will
stretch, do most of all manifest their malice against the children of God. I
know they are ashamed openly to profess this. But they have other shifts and
other pre^enses for their proceedings. If Haman desire to have the whole nation
of the Jews destroyed, there shall not be the least insinuation, that it is
because they are the people of God: that were too gross. But They do not
observe the Kings James, Ester. 3.8.
and therefore, It is not th Kings profit to suffer them. If the Jews conspire
the Prophet Ieremiahs death, the quarrel must not be, because he is a faithful
Prophet of the Lord and will boldly speak all that the Lord commands him to
speak: that were too shameful. But forsooth, Ier. 26.11.
He prophesies against the city, and therefore he is worthy to die. If
flattering Am^siah the Priest of Bethel would bring poor Amos into disgrace
with Jeroboam, the pretense and color of his ac^usation must be this. Amos
7.10.
Amos has conspired against thee in th^^^ands of the house of Israel: the land
is not able to bear all his words. When the Jews were purposed to crusifie
our blessed Savior the Lord of life, Ioh. 8.46.
though they could find nothing in him that was a^iss^ (for there was none of
them that could truly rebuke him of sin) yet this they falsely pretended
against him. That they found him perverting the people* Luke 23.2.
and forbidding to pay tribute to Ca^sar, and that he spoke against Caesar in
making himself a King. Ioh. 19.12 Act. 6.10.
When the adversaries of Saint Steven sought ^^^^de the maine quarrel was
because they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he
s^ake. But yet they had another manner of accusation against him, namely, that
he ceased not to speak blasphemous words against the holy place, and against
the law. In like manner when Ananias the high Priest and the elders went about
to put the Apostle Paul to death, they had as far a cloak ^or their
vi^leinous intent as could be. Act. 24 1.2 5.
They hired a skillful lawyer to accuse him, to be a p stilent fellow and a
mouer of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world. And doubtless,
wicked and ungodly men at this day, are not less ingenious, nor less
malicious, to devise false accusations agai st those that are most sincere, and
so far as is in their power, to bring them within compass of law, when as in
truth if they would s^riue themselves, their own heart tells them, that
their quarrel against them, is no other, then Cains was against his brother
Abel, 1. Ioh. 3.12.
even because their own works are evil and the others good. And therefore,
let all those whom this may concern be admonished, Mat. 27.24
to wash their hands but with a purer conscience and a cleaner heart then
Pilate did) from the innocent blood of all just persons. Let them take heed,
that they have no hand, upon any pretense whatsoever, not only in the dead,
but not in the unjust molestation, or wrongful punishment of any that are
known to be godly.

Betimes.) or early. This notes his speed and diligence in punishing
offenders he promises to do it speedily without delay, diligently without
remissness, and constantly without intermission. From whence we may observe,
that they that are to punish others, must do it speedily. This was the
commission that was given to Ezra, Ezra. 7.26.
that Whosoever would do the the law of his God and the Kings law, he must
have judgment without delay. That which God commands to householders and
fathers of families: namely, that if they love their children they must Correct
them betimes, Prou. 13.14 and 19.18.
and chasten them while there is hope: is also required of Magistrates and
fathers of the cou^^ry: that in punishing of sin they must begin early and
betimes, least it they be ^^^e, and slack, and remiss, they do not in time
convenient, and in due season, meet with those evils that are to be reformed.
So that if Magistrates take heed, that they give not way to rash and unadvised
anger, and that they be transported and carried headlong with inconsiderate
passion, they cannot begin soon enough to punish those that do offend. For
as in all other cases, so in this especially delay has dangers. For by this
means sin gathers st^e^th As fire that is not presently quenched, causes
great ruin. So iniquity that is not quickly rep^^ssed, breeds great
mischief in the commonwealth. Vide ego quod ^erat primo sanabile vulnus,
Dilatum o^gae d^mna tu isse morae.

Principiis obsta, (...) to medicina per ^ur, Cum mala per longas ^^aluere
moras. Ovid. de rem d. amo^is l b. 1. Et neglecta solent in cendia sumere vires
H^rat. l. 1. Epist. 18. 2. Sam. ^.27 and 20.9.10.


As a wound or a disease that is not taken in time, proves many times
inueterate and incurable: so evil that is not prevented in the beginning,
spreads often to the destruction of a state. If Ioab had received punishment
according to his desa^ts, at the first for killing Abner, he would not have
grown so audaciously insolent, as he did afterward, to murder Amasa so
treacherously. Again, it is to be observed, that the Prop^et David does here
use the plural number. For in the or ginall it is in the mornings. Whereby he
notes his constant stoutnesse in performing of this duty. Because it were not
sufficient for a Magistrate, once or twice severely to punush wicked men,
unless he do constantly persevere in the same And therefore in a word, not to
insist any longer on this point, here is condemned the carelessness and
remisnes of many Magistrates, who though they see lewd and ungodly persons, to
rush i^to sin^e with impudent and shameless boldness: yet either for fear,
or for favor, do protract the tim^ from day to day and dare not or will not
punish them. Let them remember that God himself has armed them with a sword,
In matutinis Calum^n loc. singulis matuti^^s. Tremel.
that they should not only stoutly and manfully, but also quickly and speed ly
execute his judgments. And let them know, that if they fail herein in any
respect whatsoever, they are lyabl to that curse denounced by the Prophet. Ier.
48.10
Curs d he he that does th work of the Lord negligently and cursed b h^ that
when ^od gives him a commandment to kill, keeps back his sword from blood.

Workers of iniquity) ^^er^ the Prophet expounds and declares what he meant
by those whom he called wicked in the former part of the verse. Which teaches
us that all workers of iniquity are wicked men. I know men think scorn of
this and they will by no means endure to hear of it. And indeed it is an
odious name, and all that are such are in a fearful estate. But sti l in the
judgment of the holy Ghost, they are all accounted wicked and ungodly persons
that do work iniquity. Our Savior Christ affirms it with as great
earnestness as may be. Ioh 8.^4.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that whosoever commits sin is the servant
of sin. 1. Ioh 3.8.
And his Apostle makes the matter yet worse. He that commits sin is of
the devil. But here peradventure it will be objected, Prou. 2 B. 9.
that all are sinners, as Solomon says who can say, I have made my heart
clean, I am clean from my sin. 1. Kin 8.46 1. Ioh. 1.8
And in another place, there is no man that sins not. And the Apostle
confesses, that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there
is no truth in us. And so by this reckoning all should be wicked men. I answer,
that it is true indeed, all men are sinners: but yet there is great difference
of sinners. Some are penitent, and some are impenitent sinners. But to the end,
that we may conceive this point aright, we will distinguish of sinners four
several ways. First, in respect of the measure. Secondly, in respect of the
manner of their sinning. Thirdly, in respect of their continuance in sin.
Fourthly, in respect of the use that they make of their sins. For the first.
There is great difference between the Godly and the wicked in the measure of
their sins. Iud. ve. 24.
The godly, though they have in them the seeds of all sin, yet they do not
commit all sin: 1. Ioh. 3.9.
but by the mercy of God they are kept from falling into many sins. The seed
of grace and regeneration is in them, and that preserves them, that they
cannot sin as the wicked do. And therefore, the child of God may speak
that sincerely, which the arrogant Pharise spoke proudly and vainly: Luke
18.11.
O God I thank thee, that I am not as other men. I am not given to extortion,
to injustice, to adultery and such like sins, as other men are. But the
wicked commit all kind of sin whatsoever, if either shame of the world, or
fear of punishment do not restrain them. Their life, is a life of sin. As
the Prophet Jeremiah insinuates, when he bids the people, Amend their ways
and their works. Ier. 7 3.
All their ways are sinful ways, and all their works are wicked works, and
the Apostle speaking of the wickedness of the Gentiles, he says, They were
full of all unrighteousness, and then reckons up a long beadrow of vices
wherein they lived. And in another place, Romans 1.29.30 Ephesians. 4.19
They gave themselves unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness. They make
no bones of any sin whatsoever it be: there is nothing too hot or too heavy
for them.

Secondly, there is difference between them in the manner of their sinning.
For first, the godly sin, but it is sore against their wills. Romans 7.23
As the Apostle says of himself: that The law of his members (that is, his
corruption) rebelled against the law of his mind, and lead him captive unto
the law of sin. The Apostle sinned then, but it was neither with heart nor
good will, as we say: but he was hailed and drawn to it forcibly, by the
strength of his corruption, and the violence of his tentation, even as a
prisoner is hailed to the gaile. But the wicked, they sin willingly,
voluntarily, and of their own accord, They fulfill the will of the flesh and
of the mind, as Saint Paul says. Again, Ephesians. 2.3.
the godly do but seldom fall into sin in comparison of the wicked. They
are sometimes overtaken with it, but still the whole course of their life is
bent to do that which God commands. As a servant may sometimes do a chare
for another man, and yet chiefly and principally mind his masters business.
And therefore, it is said of David, that he Did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, 1. Kin. 15.5.
and turned from nothing that he commanded him, all the days of his life,
save only in the matter of Vrijah the Hittite. But the wicked sin
continually, they do nothing but sin it is their daily practice they make it
their ordinary trade and occupation. 1. King 21.25.
As it is said of Ahab, that he did sell himself to work wickedness in the
fight of the Lord. Moreover, the godly sin, but it is with grief and sorrow
of heart, they take no more pleasure nor delight in their sin, then the horse
does in his heavy load, or the prisoners in his irons and fetters. And
therefore the Apostle cries out as if he were over tired with the mass of
sin that was in his flesh. Romans 7.24.
O wr^tched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death.
Prou. 2.14. and 4.16.
But the wicked sin with delight and joy, as Solomon says, They rejoice in
doing evil. Nay they ca^ not be merry, they cannot sleep quietly in their
beds except they have done evil. Last of all, the godly sin with resistance.
They wrestle and strive against their sins by prayer, by fasting and all
other good means. Gal. 5.17.
The spirit, that is the generate part, continually ^usteth and fights
against the flesh. And this the Apostle shows by his own experience. Romans
7.15.19.
I allow not says he, that which I do. And, I do not the good that I would:
but the evil which I would not, 25.
that I do. And again, I my self in my mind ^erue the law of God but in my
flesh the law of sin. The godly then are in a continual combat and conflict
against their sins. Heb. 12.4.
But the wicked are carried headlong to sin with full sway, with their whole
endeavor and with all enforcements that may be. Ier. 8.6.
They turn to their sinful courses, with as great violence as the horse
rusheth into the battle. They work all uncleanness even with greediness:
Ephesians. 4.19
Neither did the hungry fish more eagerly and greedily follow after the bait,
then they do pursue and hunt after the occasions of sin. Yea, they strive
every one to excel other. Their feet run to evil, Isa 59.7. 1. Pet. 4 4
and they make have to shed innocent blood. And they run into all excess of
riot.

Thirdly there is difference in their continuance in sin. The godly, Prou.
24.16
though They fall seven times a day, as Solomon says: yet they rise again,
they renew their acqu^^^tance, as often as they renew their sins. That which
the Apostle speaks of anger in particular, that a godly man will not suffer
the sun to go down upon his wrath, Ephesians. 4.26.
that they practice in all sin. They will not sleep in any sin; but
continually break of their sins by righteousness, Dan. 4.24.
as Daniel exhorted that proud King of Babylon. But the wicked dwell and
continue in their sins: they he along, yea they wallow, and ^umble and welt^r
themselves in them, as the sow does in the mire, without any thought of rising
again. Psalm. 1.1. Rom 2.5. Isa. 5.18 and. 30.1.
They sit down in the seat of the scornful. They have brought such an
hardness upon their hearts, by the custom and continual use of sinning, as
that they cannot repent. They are so far from breaking of the course of their
sins, as they draw iniquity with cords of vanity and sin, as it were,
with cartropes Yea they lay or heap sin upon sin, as the Prophet says,
Deuteronomy. 29.19
adding drunkenness to thirst. And being by the just judgment of God given
over and left to themselves, Psalm. 65.27
they fall from one wickedness to another.

Last of all, they differ in the use they make of their sins. The godly are
made more wary and more heedfull for the time to come, and more careful to
avoid all occasions of sin. And this the Apostle affirms, when speaking of
the fruits of true repentance and godly sorrow, he says, that it wrought in
them great care, great indignation great fear, great desire, etc. We say in
our common proverb. 2. Cor. 7.10 11.
The burnt child dreadeth the fire. So a man that has been burnt in the hand
by his sin, that has felt the displeasure of God, and the horror of
conscience by reason thereof, will take heed how he falls any more into
sin while he lives. But the wicked, the more they sin, the more bold and
audacious they are to sin again. Ier. 3.3. Ier. 8.12.
They have gotten an where is forehead, they cannot blush. Were they ashamed when
^hey had committed su h abominations; says the Prophet Jeremiah, nay, they
were not ashamed, neither could they have any shame, they were past shame. Isa.
3.9.
The trial of their countenance does testify against them, yea they declare
their sins as Sodom, they hide them not. They care not who sees them. To
this purpose Bernard has a very excellent saying. Bern. in. Ps l. 91. sermon. 2.
Ho. interest ^i^er pio^um et implorum c^^^, ^ c.
There is this difference, says he, between the falls of the godly and the
wicked: that a righteous man is vpholden by the Lord and therefore, he rises
again stronger then ever he was: but when an unrighteous man falls, he never
rises again. Nay he is so far from rising, that either he falls into
hurtful shame, or else into flat impudency For either he excuses that which
he does, and that is a shame that makes a man sin more; or else he has an
whores forehead, so as he neither fears God, nor cares for man. A righteous
man he falls upon Gods hand, and after a marvelous manner, even his sin
is turned to his good; according to that saying of the Apostle, All things
work together to the best, to those that love God. And says he, does not that
fall make for our good, whereby we become both more humble and more wary?

This then does serve to confute the fond opinion and conceit of them, that
think it is not lawful, either for the Minister, or for any other Christian,
to judge any man. As our Savior Christ says. Judge not, condemn not. It is
true, a man must not judge rashly and unadvisedly without good ground and
sufficient reason. Neither must any man judge finally of another man's estate.
For that belongs solely and only to God. Mat. 7.16.
But as a man may judge of the goodness or badnesse of the tree by the fruit
that it bears: so by the conversation of men we may judge of their present
estate. If any man shall presume of another man's final estate, whether he
shall be saved or damned, he goes further then he has warrant for, and takes
Gods office cut of his hand. A jury, by the evidence that is produced and by
due examination of the cause, may find a man guilty: but neither they nor any
man else, can say he shall be hanged, because it is in the power of the king to
pardon him. In like manner, when we see the wicked life and leaude conversation
of a man, we may conclude, that for the present he is in a damnable case: but
no man may take upon him to affirm, that he^ shall be finally damned, because
the Lord may have mercy upon him, and pardon his sin And therefore, to
conclude this point, so many as would not be accounted wicked men, let them be
admonished to take heed, that they be not workers of iniquity. If thou will
make a trade of swearing, drinking whoring, profaning the Sabbath, etc. it is
no breach of charity at all, to say that thou art a wicked man.

From th city of the Lord.) This the end of all that went before, namely, why
the Prophet would be so careful to destroy the wicked, and to cut off the
workers of iniquity, and that betimes, even because he would preserve the
city of the Lord from the pollution of sin By the city of the Lord, Mat. 5
35.
in this place is meant Jerusalem which is also called The city of the great
King, because there the Lord appointed a place for the habitation of his name:
as David says, speaking in the person of God, The Lord has chosen Zion, Psalm.
132.13.14.
and loved to dwell in it, saying, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell,
for I have dilight therein. It is called likewise the holy city, because it was
appointed and consecrated to holy uses, to the exercises of true religion, and
the service of God. Mat. 4.5.
For there was the temple, there was the priesthood, there was the law and word
of God. Now the Prophet promises to have a special care of this place,
because it was a type of Gods Church, and the chief city in the Kingdom.
From whence we are taught this instruction, that as Magistrates must have a
care to reform evil every where: so especially, in places that are of
greatest note. Great cities and such like places, are chiefly to be looked
unto. The reason is. First, because such places stand most need, because there
commonly is most ungodliness and impiety, by reason of the great consluence
that is of people of all sorts* and of all nations. Secondly, for example sake.
For more good or hurt redoundeth to the whole land by the example of such
places. The Prophet Jeremiah, speaking of the wicked Priests of his time, Ier.
23.15.
said that From them wickedness was gone forth into, all the land. As this is
true of great persons, so it is true also of great places. And this we see by
too much experience. For does not London furnish all the land with pride and
vanity? where are all the strange disguises, and monstrous fashions of
apparel inuerted but here? and from hence they are conveyed into all the parts
of the land. Last of all, sin is a greater disgrace to great places then to
others, because they have more means to make them good. Mat. 11.20
And therefore our Savior Christ does more vpbraide those cities wherein he
had most preached, and where he had wrought most of his miracles then any other
place besides. 21
We be to thee Corazin, says he we be to thee Bethsaida: for if the great
works which have been done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they
would have repented long agone in sackechoath and ashes. And thou Capernaum,
which art lifted up unto heaven, shall be cast down into hell, etc. 23.


This being so, let the Magistrates of this place chiefly be exhorted, to have
a special care of reforming sin in this great cit^e, least other places by
the example thereof be hartened and encouraged in evil. It is the corruption
of man's nature, rather to be led by the example of others, then by the precepts
and rules of the word of God. And this place is even as a city set upon an
hill: Mat. 5.14
all men's eyes are upon it. And therefore, if this city that should be
faithful become an harlot, Isa. 1.21. Naum. 3.1
if this city be a bloody city, full of lies and robbery, if London be
disordered and wicked, it will be a privilege as it were to all other places
to do the like. And therefore, you that are in authority here, labor to purge
this fountain that all the streams in the land may be clear and pure.

Thus, as God has enabled me, I have handled the principal things contained
in this text. There is yet another thing worthy our consideration, which Calvin
by way of Allegory observes in this place. Which I will briefly add for a
conclusion of all.

The Prophet David, as we know, was a type of our Savior Christ. And as he
promises betimes or in the morning to destroy all the wicked of the land: So
though Christ Jesus do with patience long suffer and endure ungodly persons:
yet there will come a morning wherein he will arise to execute judgment, and
Show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, 2. The. 17.^
to render vengeance on them that know not God* and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Then Shall all the wicked be turned to hell, Psalm. 9.17. 2.
These. 1.9.
and all the people that forget God. Where they Shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his
power. And howsoever in the conceit of carnal men, the Lord may seem to
defer his coming: yet in the end, he will come in a day when they look not
for him, Mat. 24.48 50.51.
and in an hour that they are not aware of, and will cut them in pieces, and
gi^^ them their portion with hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord as the Apostle
says. 2. Cor. 5.11. Psalm. 50.22
I will shut up all with that exhortation of David, O consider this, ye that
forget God, least he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver you.

FINIS.

