An exposition in the epistell of Jude the apostel of Christ wherein he sets
plainly before every man's eyes false apostels, and their crafts, by ye which
they have long deceived simple christian people.



The argument.
IN this pystell Jude monysheth men to take heed and beware of pseudapostels,
and of their false doctrine showing and perswadynge to all men, that god will
not suffer these pseudapostels, and al them that assenteth and agrees to their
deceyuable doctrine, and follow them in manners of living to escape unpunished.
And that men shall know these pseudapostels, that they may beware of them the
better, and of their lyenge doctrine, which brings to confusion and
dampnation, Jude describes these pseudapostils, and shows certain of their
propertyes, by the which they may be known, although they go craftyly to
warke, and sleyghtly has crepte in among men, with much feigned and
pretensed holiness, pretending in words to seek ye glory of god, the auancement
of his word, the profit of other, when they seek their own glory, their own
auancement, their own profit, lucre and aua^tage. Jude threteth to these
pseudapostels, and to all their adherentes and folowers of their false and
deceyuable doctrine, everlasting woo, pain and dampnation, that he might
dysswade them from sin and deuyllyshe doctrine, if not for love, yet for
fear of punishment: for god will not suffer sin to be unpunished. Of these
pseudapostels, and of their deceyuable doctrine used, in the pystell you may se
and read, this is the sum of the pystell. But I pray you read this pystell
to your edyfyenge and admonition to beware of false doctrine, as the author of
this exposition in this pystell of Jude wylleth and desires and sets forth
this rude and homely exposition for that intent only, that these that be
unlearned might se and perceive the better, with what deceyuable doctrine men
have been deluded and deceived many a day, that men might receive Christis
doctrine and of his apostelles, which brings to life, joy, and bliss, and
leave the doctryn of pseudapostelles, which brings to death, to hell, and to
the devil. Follow Christ and his doctrine and you shall have life with him in
glory. To him be glory always.

Amen.
The pistle of saynet Jude.
IVdas the servant of Jesus Christ, the brother of James, to them which are
called and sanctified in god the father, and preserved in Christ Jesus, mercy
unto you and peace and love be multiplied.

They that wylleth and desires to understand the holy scripture of god
trewly, purely and sincerely, these things they must consider, and ever have
before their eyes. First yt they know who spekes, for in holy scripture there
be many that spekes, so^tymes spekes god, somtymes the devil, somtymes Christ
and his apostilles, somtymes the scribes and the phariseis, somtymes Peter,
somtymes Paul, somtymes Judas, so^tymes Anna, Cayphas, and Pylate, therefore it
is convenient to consider who spekes, lest one be taken to speak, when another
spekes, as Christ to speak, when the devil spekes: or contrary, the devil to
speak, when Christ spekes, and so of the other. For although all holy scripture
was written by the spirit of god, which is the spirit of trewthe, yet there
is in holy scripture that spekes many, ^as is showed before, therefore it is
mete to consider who spekes. Secondly they must consider, to whom specially
scripture does speak, of what affection, disposition and nature they be, to
whom it is spoken. Thyrdly for what cause, purpose and intent the words of
scripture chefely was spoken, and what the holy ghost would persuade or
dissuade in that place of scripture, by those that spekes. Finally what is the
clear sentence and proper understanding of that scripture spoken, that it may
be open, plain and evident to all men, what is the true sense and meaning of
the words of holy scripture in that place spoken. These circumstances noted,
the holy scripture shall be more casyer to understand and know.

The author that wrote this pistle by the inspiration of the holy gooste was
Judas Thadeus, one of the.xii. apostels of Christ Jesus, whom saint Mathewe
reckeneth among the.xii apostels of Christ. Math.x. But there was two men,
that was called Judas both apostilles of Christ, the one did appear to the
outward opinion and estimation of men, to be entierly beloved and hye in the
favor with his lord and master Christ Jesus, ye and hyer in favor than any
of the other of the xii. apostels, Ye he did appear to be so hyghly beloved
with Christ Jesus, that he preferred him before all other of the apostels, and
made him as steward and ouerseer of his house, and made him his purse bearer:
yea also Christ would have him to be so nigh and familier with him, that he would
have him to eat with him, and to put his hand in Christis dyshe. But this
Judas so hyghly beloved of his master, lord and king Christ Jesus, as an
unkind, yea most unkind of all, did betray his master so loving, kind and
gentyl: and sold him to the wicked and cruel jews to be crucified. This Judas
that betrayed Christ was not the author of this pystell, for that Judas was
called Judas Ischarioth. There was an other called Judas Lebbeus or Thadeus,
one of the apostils of Christ called the brother of our lord Jesus, because he
was the son of the sister to the mother of Christ, as is written Marc. vi.
This Judas called the brother of Christ was the author yt wrote this pistell,
as the beginning of the pistell does show. To whom it was written, the
salutatio^ shows, to those that were called, sanctified and preserved in our
lord Jesus Christ, for what cause and intent this pistel was written, what is
contained in the pistell, in the process of the pistell, god willing it shall
be made open and evident to al good christen reders, that with a pure heart and
stomach in faith desires to know the will and pleasure of god, and will take
the pains to read this homely declaration of this holy and spiritual pystell
of saynet Jude, and mark diligently the wholesome counsels and spiritual lessons
yt saint Judas teachethus in this pistel. Saint Judas divides this pistel in a
salutatio^ and a narratio^, as lyra shows after ye example of saint Paul in
his pistels. In the salutation he shows who was the author of ye pistell,
what was his office to do, to whom it was written, what things he desires to
them to whom he wrote this pystel. The auctor uses a salutacyon in the
beginning of his pystell after the fassyon and manner of them that uses to wryt
pystelles. And also less any should count him without good humanyte as to
speak to any of sad and weyghty matters, whom he did not salute at the left
before. And also he uses this salutacyon, to teach us Christen men and women
one to salute an other, and to desire, and wyshe one to an other such things
as he desires (that is to say) the grace, fanoure, peace, and mercy of God
to be multyplyed to all Christen men and women. Judas the servant of Jesus
Christ. In these words is showed who was the Author of this pystell (that is
to say) one Judas not Isearyoth the betrayer of Christ: but an other Judas (by
name Thadeus) called the brother of Christ. Here observe these two men, both
called Judas both Apostles of Christ, the one of them to be good, the other
evil. Here you may learn good reader, no dyfference to be between a good man
and an evil man as touching their names and offices, as you do se the author
of this pystel to be a good man, ye servant and the Apostle of Christ,
although he was called Judas, and agrees in name with him that betrayed
Christ, yet his name Judas made him not evil. So like wise Judas Iscarioth
all though be agrees in name with this Judas, his name made him not good. It
is not the outward name ne office that makes a man or woman good, but it is
the grace of God, and perseueraunce there in that makes a man good. Therefore
let us learn, here not always to judge according to the outward apperaunce.
For if we judge after that facion we shall be deceived if any would judge after
ye outward apperaunce and after the opinion of men, who would not judge and
prefer Judas the betrayer of Christ before Judas the author of this pystell,
and say that he was much better man then was Judas Thadeus, in that Christ
made him his purse bearer and ouerseer of his house, and shows to him more
favor, as did outward appear, then he did to this Judas Thadeus. And yet
Judas Ischaryoth was evil, and the child of perdicyon. The other Judas
Thadeus was good, and the child of salvation, although the judgment of the
world was other ways. Here learn the judgment of the world, and of ye
outward apperaunce to the eye often times to be deceyuable, and deceive men
oftimes. Therefore faith is not always to be given unto ye outward apperaunce,
or to the opinyon of men. For men judges these things that does appear. God
beholds the heart and the inward affection of ye mind. oftymes it chances
these to be lest with God, and fardest from his favor, whom men does judge
to be first and highest in the favor of God. Paraduenture men judges Popes,
Cardynalles, Legates, Bysshoppes, Archebyshoppes, Abbottes, Decayns Prelates,
Pryors, Monks, Channons, Priests, Friars obseruantes, cartusyans, and such
like to be more in favor with God then lay men, or lay women, when God
peradventure does prefer lay men before all them. And more has in his
favor the poor simple lay man, or lay woman, then the highest bishop, pope,
or cardinal, for God is not the acceptor of persons, nor he does not judge,
and esteem men after outward face, and outward apperaunce, but after the
inward affection of the mind, and pureness of heart. Judas by interpretacyon
sygnyfyeth confession or knowledge. It becomes us to be Judas, yt is to say
as to know and confess Jesus Christ, and him crucified only our redemer,
Iustifyer and Sauyor. If we believe Christ to be our only Iustifyer, then will we
not believe our works to iustifye us or able to pourge us from our sin, nor
yet the Popes bullys, Pardons or any indulgencis granted by Popes,
Cardinals, or Bysshoppes, hallowed bedes, or messys ad Scala cely may purge us
from sin, or take away our sin, by strength of the work it self. For if
remissyon of syn might be had by the strenght of any work in it self, then
Christ dyed in vain, then his death is not to us so precyouse, but some warke
might have been to us as precyouse as his death, which thing God forbid that
any man should say or yet think.

The servant of Jesus Christ. In these he shows his office or dewtie
saying that he is a servant. He calls him self not a Lord, a master, a
King, an Emperor, to be above Kings and Princes, and that Kings should
knele and kiss his fete but he calls him a servant: not of every one, as of
men, to plese men, to be a man pleaser and to preach these things that should
please men, and to play the legate of men of ye world But he calls himself
the servant of God, and his office or duty to be to please God, to confess
Christ Jesus openly and plainly every where and in all places, to play the
Legate of Christ Jesus, to preach Gods words boldly without all fear,
without all dread among all men. The Apostell here in these words he
checketh, and rebukes these that be asshamed to confess them selves to be the
servants of God, that be asshamed to preathe Gods word purely and
syncerly, that for fear of men, for hynderaunce of lucre or advantage will
not openly confess the truth of Gods gospel, nor yet suffer other to do it,
nor be willing that other shall show it for fear of decay of their honor,
promocyon, dignytie, frendeshyppe of men, lucre or advantage. Also the
Apostell checketh all these yt will not preach Gods word, but man's
tradicyons, man's phantasyes, and dremes, man's learning, and man's
inuencyons, and that for the word of God, and in the stead of the word of
God. These be they that be men pleasers, and studyes rather to please man then
GOD. But such be not the servants of God, but the servants of men, whom
they study to please. These be not the servants of Jesus Christ, nor his
true Apostles, although in words sumtymes they may call them selves the
servants of Christ and his Apostles, yet they be not the servants of
Christ, nor his Apostells, but they be false Apostelles, as Judas Iscaryoth
was, and with him are to be numered and reckenned, and with him shall have their
reward in hell.

The brother of James. These words be added les any man should think Judas
Iscaryoth the betrayer of Christ Jesus to be the author of this pystell, and
for to know Judas Thadeus which was the author of this epystel from Judas ye
betraier of Christ Then it is not like, Ye let no man think that Judas put in
these words for any vain glory, or any aduaunsynge of him self that he was
the brother of Christ or his kynsman, all such carnal affeceyon was far
from his mind.

To those that be called / and in god the father hallowed and by Jesus Christ
preserved.
Now shows the Apostell unto whom this Epistell was written, it was written
not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentyls, to all men beleuinge in
Christ it was written indifferently, to all that be called either by secret
and preuy inspiracyon, or by open preaching of the word of God to believe in
Christ Jesus, which in God the father be sanctified. But theare is many that
is sanctified, or blessed but not of God, but of man, as of Popes, cardynalles,
bishops, Abbottes, which weryth their myters, and other times does bliss and
l^n^tify men, but peradventure the^e that be thus blessed of me^ be cursid of
god. Of such that be only sancrifyed of men, and not of God Judas does not
here speak but ofsoche as be sanctified of GOD wheder they be cursed or blessed
of me^ and surely these be sanctyfyed. Some peradventure will ask who be they
that be blessed and sanctified of God, trewely all they whom Christ has
sanctyfyed in his blood, and wassheth their sins in his blood that has
faith and does believe their sins only to be taken away by Christ, and his
blood shed for their remissyon of syns and whithe will believe surely till they
dye these be they which be truly hallowed and sanctified in god the father and
these be holy and blessed, whether men do bless them or turse the^, other
there be yt be sanctified as of men, as of the pope, of ye cardynals, of
bishops or of Abbottes, but these be not holy nor blessed, except that
Christ has sanctified them in his blood, and have remyssyon of their sins
by Jesus Christ, which thing they believe surely, or else they be not
sanctified of God nor blessed, be they never so often times blessed of the
Popes holy hand and all his three Crosses, with all the myters of his
Cardydnalles and, bysshoppes. Oftimes it fortuneth god to curse them whom men
do bliss, and the contrary those to be blessed of GOD who^ men do curse, as
god does speak by his Prophet, saying I will bliss your cursings, and
contrary I will curse your blessings.

For as much as this Apostell Judas wrote to them that were alive whom he
said was sanctified it is euidente this word sanctum or sanctifycatum in
scripture for the most part to be taking for holy men that lives, that is
to say for good and faithful men and not only for those that be departed
hence, and called unto the number of holy saints in heaven, whom the
church of Rome has canonyzat and only calls saints. They that after that
ways only will take this word sanctumin holy scripture they err from the
truth, and gives great occasyon of impiete to other and makes many to err
in taking of scripture in the true sense. These men bring great darkness to
scripture, they make scripture dark, and will not suffer holy scripture to be
right understand, but do alyenat and pluck away from ye true and proper
sense of ye holy ghost the faithful Christen reader which desires to have
the true intellygence of scripture. How can they truly understand saint
Paul's pistell which he wrote to the samctes that were at Rome, if they will
take this word sanctum or sancti for saints that be departed. Sainet Paull
in a manner wrote all his epysteles to saints as it does appear in a manner
through al his epystels in the beginnynge. How can it be but these men which
takes saints only for them that be departed but they must needs count
Saint Paul for an idiot fool which wrote his epystelles to the Saints
departed which could not read them, nor yet when they were read culde hear
them, or understand them, or any fruit or profit take of them, or any thing
gather of them to obtain true faith, or to fassyon good manners, to fle sin
and iniquytie, for Saints that be departed be passed the state of this
present life. It is euydent therefore that Saint Paul calls good and
faithful christen men living after the law of GOD in faith and in charity.
Saints although they live in this present life, or how could any man
truly understand this pystell of Jude which Judas dedycated to saints, if
saints were only taken for saints departed this life. Judas thadeus wrote
to them that were a live, wherefore it is manifest this word saints must be
taken in holy scripture as well for Saints being a live in this present life
as for saints that be departed. For saints being a live takes saint
Paul this word saints oftymes as it appears Romans xv. Ephe. pri. Colocen.
pri. and ofter it is so taken, then other ways.

Because many has not taken this word saynctes in scripture for good men
living, but only for holy men departed. And also because saint Paul desires
oftymes the prayers of saints for him as is written. Roma. xv. and saints
they took only for saints departed, saying there is no scripture to persuade
us to pray to saints departed, no co^maundme^t of god less in holy scripture
that I do remember no promise that we shall obtain our peticyon if we pray to
the saints, but all scripture does persuade, Ye command to pray to God
which is the gyuer of all that is good, he byddeth ask of him and we shall
have. Iacobi primo. Math. septi. To pray to God persuades all holy scripture,
Math. vi. and also promyseth that we shall not ask in vain, but that we shall
obtain our peticyon if we ask as we should do and in faith nothing douttynge
but we shall obtain that we desire, if it be to the glory of God and for our
profit to receive it. How prayenge to Sainttes did come up, I have showed mine
opinion. To pray unto Saints that they may pray with us unto GOD I think
it not evil. I think it a very good and laudable custom, and may be well
used, so that men make not saints their patrones and gyuers of that thing
that they desire, as many has done in times past, and put more trust more
confidence in a saint, then in god: therefore they being in any peril or
icopardye, would run to this image or yt image o^ such a saint before god.
Thus the ignorant people has preferred the saints before god: and put more
trust, more confidence, more help, more succor in a saint then in god: yea I
fere me that many has put their trust help and succor in an image made of
stone or of wode by man's hand, and done great reverence and honor to the
image, beleuynge great virtue, great holiness to be in that image above other
images: and therefore that image must have a veluer cote hanged all with brouches
of silver, and much silver hanged about it and on it, with much light before
it, and always candels burning before that image, which candle may never go
forth, nor be put out: that light before ye image to be put forth it is a great
faut^and some thinks that the image would take a vengeance on such yt should
do it, which thing I would no man should do in contemnynge the saint whose
image there is, but I would have this evil opinion out of the simple heart,
that they should esteem images after the valowe as they be, and put no more
holiness in one image then in an other, no more virtue in one than in an other.
It holds the simple people in great blyndnes, and makes them to put great
trust, great holiness in images, because one image is called our lady of grace,
an other our lady of pytye, an other our lady of comfort or succor: the holy
rode of such a place and such a place. These means makes the people to
esteem these images of great holiness and virtue, and that they may do much for
them, and that some images of our lady prayth to our lady of heaven for her
petitioners: such is ye simplenes of many simple people.

As touching images to be in the church I was never of other opinion but I
thought it were commendable and expedient to have them to bring us in
remembrance of the vertuousnes and holiness of the holy saints, that we may
take example of them to follow their godlynes and holy virtues, as to follow
them in faith, in hope, in charity, in makenes, in lowlynes, in patience, in
sufferynge iniuryes and wrongs, in co^temnyng the world and the vain
pleasures thereof, in lokyng for the life joy and bliss to come. After this
facion scripture teaches vsto remember holy saints in many places as s. Paul
shows Heb. xiii. Remember you the^ which has had rule over you which has
spoken the word of god unto you, whose faith you do follow, remembrynge what
was the end of their good conversation. So saint Peter. i. Pet. iii. bringes
in Saray for an example, that women should be obedient to their husbands, and
please their husbands, and have their husbands in reverence, as Saray had
Abraham in honor and reverence. Saint Peter brynges the example of Saray to
teach other women to follow the example of Saray: so be images set up in the
churches to put us in remembrance of the vertuousnes of the saynctes, that we
should take example to follow them in goodness and vertuousnes, to stere up our
dull hearts and slowfull minds to god and to goodness was images set up in the
church, and not for honor nor worship that should be done to the image,
which is but a thing made of wode or of stoue, or other such like matter,
and no more holyer then is the matter it was made on. Of these you may gather
the good use of images.

To those that was called and in god the father sanctified, and by Jesus Christ
preserved. Here it is showed to whom this pistell was dedicate and sent, that
is to say, to all men and women renewed by the blood of Christ, whom Jesus
Christ has called of his only mercy and grace: and not of the merytes, works
and deservings of men. First he called them, and then he did sanctifye them.
Here be two things to be noted, first that Jesus Christ calls whom be
wylleth, second those that he calls he sanctifyeth them: he calls men to
him of his only mercy, and not of their merits, nor yet of their worthynes of
their works. God calls sometime in wardly by inward inspiration, as he did
call saint Paul Actorum ix. and many other prophets. Somtymes he calls in
wardly in yt heart, and outwardly by preaching of yt gospel, to ye which they
give credence yt be called. Christ calls not after the pleasure of man, but
after the will and pleasure of god, and when god will, and not when man
wills, whom god pleases to call, and not whom man judges worthy to be
called, nor yet when man thynkes mete to be called, but when god thynkes and
knows men apt and ready to come when they be called. By the which saying
many reasons be taken away of the calling after the will of man, by the
merits of men, and when men judges men to be apt and ready to the herynge of
the gospel, and will give credence to it.

And although god only does call, and when he will without any indeuering or
work of man, yet oftimes and for the most part he uses certain means, as
by prechynge of the gospel, and by herynge of it preached, as he gives other
gifts by means, as learning by study, riches by labor, wisdom by
experience, faith by the gospel preached: so he calls men to him by
preaching of gods word, which they believe that be called, and after it
does live a life pure and clean in all innocence of living. God knows who be
his, and those he calls to him in time prefixed, and when he knows them
most apt to follow their calling. Here you may se the cause why god would
not have his gospel at the first preached to the jews and to ye gentyles, and
yt in all times: it was because he did se the^ then not apt to receive it, nor
yet apt to believe it, therefore yt they should avoid more pain god did hyde
from them his gospel, and when he did se them apt to receive and believe ye
gospel he made the gospel to be preached to the ge^tyles, and they believed
it, and was saved as many as was ordained to life.

The order that god uses most commonly to them that shall be saved, it may
here be gathered of the apostell Jude. First he says they be called, secondly
they be sanctified in god the father, thyrdly they be saved by Jesus Christ
through his word and obedience to do these things gladly and freely, that the
word of god teaches them. This thing saint John^ testifies Ioh. xvii.
saying. Father I have showed thy name to men, whom thou have given to me of the
world: they were thine, and to me thou have given them, and they have kept thy
word. Now truly they have known, that al things which thou have given to me
was of the: for the words which thou did give me, I did give to them, and
they have received them, and they have known truly, that from the I have
gone, and tha^ thou sent me. Here we may learn the mean which God uses
toward them that shall be saved, although god only save us by him self, by
Jesus Christ, and of his mere mercy and grace, yet he uses a mean whereby he
brings men to salvation, that is to say by the word of God preached and
giuyng credence toyc, workyng after it, wherefore if the word of God be not
preached nor had among us, it is a great token that we be not in the favor
of God nor of his elected people to salvation. Also if we in our selves do
perceive no desire, no love to the word of God, but not regard it, esteem it
at little valu, think other things more precyouse then it or think it
folyshnes, or as a vain thing. Then it is a token that these that think so
they be none of the people of God, nor yet in the favor of god as long as
they shall think so of these tokennes and signs every one in him self may
sone perceive whether he is in the favor of god or no. In that he has a
desire or a love to gods word to hear it, to read it, believe it, to work
after it, to esteem it above all worldely things. etc.

Mercy be to you and peace / and charity may be multiplied.
In this salutacyon what thing Saint Jude desires and wyssheth to them to
whom he writes, here it is showed. He desires that god would increase and
multiplye his gifts in them, and specially give them mercy peace and charity
with him, which three gifts be very necessary for every Chrystyan man and
woman, as long as they shall live in this world The Apostell here teaches us
what ^hynge we should desire one unto an other, that is to say the gifts of
god to be entreased and multyplyed amongeste us, and in all men. From this
wholesome council of the Apostell Jude far be these men and women which do not
desire nor wysshe good things unto their neighbors or other men, but
desires vengeance, evil chance, death of their neighbor, or evil fortune
to chance unto their neighbor or neighbors cattle, or goods, which does
curse or banne their neighbors, desyringe GOD to take a vengeance upon
them, or to send sum sodeyne syknesse, or disease upon them, as the
pestylence, the fraunche pockes, the falling sycknes or soche like. Those men
follow not the council of the Apostell in this place. Let therefore al such
euel persons that follow not the council of the apostell leave their evil and
deuellyshe affection and desire which brings euetla sting death, if it be
not left and for sakyn with repentance before death, and follow the wholesome
counsel of saint Jude, which desires mercy, peace, and charity to be
multiplied to every one.

First he desires to them the mercy of God, that it would please God to give
them his mercy and grace, that they might repent them of their old vices and
sins, and utterly forsake them, and have a new life in Christ Iusus,
which thing no man can do without the mercy and grace of god, therefore
mercy and grace is first of all to be desired. Secundly he desires Peace
between men and God in men's conseyences, which Peace and quietness in
conscience evil men has not, for to evil men is no peace with God in their
conseyences, as the Prophet says, but evil men hates god always and fear him
fore lest he should punysshe them. For they count god as a strayte judge or a
cruel tormentoure that will suffer no fault vnponysshed, but will extremely
punyshe every fault, or trespace done against him. The euel some times does
abstain from wyees and sins, but not for love of GOD, or of justice, but for
fear of pain, or for hope of reward of men or favor of me^ The evil somtymes
has peace outwardely, as with men and with the world, but in wardly in their
conscience they lack peace and quietness. In their heart they have GOD as on
wrath with the^, their conseyence byte them and troubles them sore, day nor
night they be not quiet in conscience but ever when they remember God, they
fear pain, and punishment. This considering Jude he desires to the^ peace
in me^nes consciences with god which peace only has given men ye be ins^yfyed
by faith, wytnessynge s. Paul. To. v. we justified by faith have peace with
God, whether they have peace with the world, and men of the world or no, good
men that be justified by faith have peace with god in wardly in their
conscience. Thirdly he desires charyce, that they should be charytable and
loving one to an other, knyt to gether in mutual love, one loayng an other
hertely, and showing their love by mutual works, and deeds, and that their
love should be only for gods cause, but not for no carnal lucre, or
advantage, honor, or any carnal cause. Thus in this salutacion we be taught
what christen men should desire and wyshe one to an other, that is to say,
mercy peace, and charity of God, as the apostell teaches us.

Beloved when I gave all dilygence to write unto you of the commen health / it
was needful for me to write unto you, to exhort you that ye should continually
labor in the faith which was ones given unto saints.
Now begins the narracyon, and shows the cause of the pystel shewinge
also what a great desire will and mind he had to profit them, ye what care
and thought he had for their health specially for these things yt pertayneth to
their everlasting health he had so great a desire yt he could not refrayn but he
must needs write to them having no les care for them the^ for himself
perceiving them to be in great ieo perdy and parell, by the craste and falsed of
ye false prophets. Therefore Judas perceyuinge these perils to aproche to
christians, and moved by brotherly charity he cold not te^per him from writing
to show christen men of their perelles, and also to exhort them that they
would not cease to walk in a pure and sincere faith and love which they had
heard preached and had learned of the true Apostels of god. And also he
desires them to take heed of false Prophets, which always did study to
bring the true Christyanes from the true faith which they had received. Here
we may learn what study and desire it becomes every one of us to have
toward an other, that we may profit other. Secondly with all dylygence and
study taking, late us exhort other to walk in the treweth truly received,
less they should ware sloggesshe by negligence, or slothfulness. Thirdely
that they may avoid the parelles that be like for to ensue by slouthfulnes,
or negligence, or by ignorance if they be not monysshed specially, it
becomes for to monysshe to avoid parelles, when that parell of Soul does
appear. Thus it becomes every man to care for an other, and to money she an
other o^iepardy yt may ensu, both in word and also in writing, and this care
it may not be litel, but it must be great with al labor and dilyge^ce to profit
other as ^ra^ple to be taken in this place of Jude.

Of the common health. For what thing Jude labors so diligently to write to
them here he expresses, saying it was for the common health. He calls it the
common health because he counted their health his health such was his love
toward them, that he was no other ways affected toward them then toward
himself countyng yt same evil to chance to him self, ye should chance to
them by the craft and suttiltie of false prophets, gyuyng us example likewise
one to be affected toward an other, as he was to the^, to whom he wroce, and
also as me^bres of one body be one to an other. This saying of Jude does check
all them which be not careful for their neighbors, nor for other be-sydes
them selfs, which care not what become of other, so they be well themselves.
Also it sharply reproves all them which care nothing at all, nor nothing
does study how they may profit other, which pass nothing at all what
become of other, whether they live or dye, be sick or in health, be glad or
be sorry. Yea this sermon of Jude much more condempneth all those that study to
do hurt and damage to other, or any manner of iniurye or wrong in word or in
deed.

It was nedeful for me to write unto you. As who should say, I se it is so
necessary for you yt I could not refrain but I must needs write unto you, my
charity so compels me, perceiving it to be much for your profit, to
exhort you to go forward in that true faith received, and to profit in the
same, and to increase it daily more and more. And that you should not shrynke
one hear bread from that true faith which you have received, and which was
given unto the saynctes of god by preaching of the gospel, as saint Paul
says Rom^. x. Faith comes of herynge, herynge verily by the word of god.

He exhorts them that they should continually labor in the faith, or be
helpers to the faith (as Erasmus translation has) which was ones given to
saynctes. Here be two things to be noted for our learning. One is that he
desires them to be helpers of the faith, to the which men be helpers after
this phrase of scripture, when they suffer not the faith received to be weyke,
feeble or inconstant, to be oppressed with desires or affections of the flesh
or of the world, by the craft or suttyltye of false prophets to be brought a
way from it, and led in to a false belefe by false doctors whom the devil
does use as his ministers to deceive ye simple people un learned. Also scripture
uses to call men helpers of the faith, when men do diligently watch that they
be not deceived by the devil, nor by none of his ministers, when they do
labor with all force to make their faith sure and strong, douttynge or
halting in no part, but by all means studyeth every day to make their faith
more stronger and stronger by all manner of good warkes. The other thing that
was here to be noted, is that we should know faith to be given from above, for
he desires them to be helpers to the says, which was given ones to saints.
Faith is the work of god, and it comes of god, as saint John^ says: this is
ye warke of god, that you should believe in him. Saint Paul witnesses ye same
saying Philip. i. Not only it is given to you that you should believe in god,
but also that you should suffer for his sake. Of these two places of scripture
it is evident saints living or deed not to have had faith of them selfs, or
of their own might and power, but to have received it of god, which gives
faith to whom he will, and when he will, although saint Paul says faith to com
of the heryng of ye word of god, which word although many may here it, yet no
man shall believe but he to whom god gives faith, and in whom god warketh faith
and believe.

For there are certain craftily crepte in / of which it was written a fore
time unto such judgment they are ungodly, and turn the grace of our lord god
unto wantonness and deny god the only lord and our lord Jesus Christ.
The apostel more at large shows the cause of his admonition, which is to
monyshe them that they should arm them selfs with sure armure and defense to
defend them against false, prophets and that they should in any wise take heed of them, lest by the craft and falshere of pseudapostels they should be
deceived and alienated from the way of truth and from sincere doctrine of ye
gospel. What manner of men were these pseudapostels and false doctors in the
second pistel of Peter ca. ii. it is showed more abunda^tly. And also here
after shall be god willing more plainly declared, how they have come in, Jude
here does partly show, saying they have craftily crepte in, not plainly
preaching the gospel of god, but darkly and coloring it with great pretense
of holiness, mixting man's doctrine with gods word, teaching man's doctrine, man's
traditions, dremes and fantasyes of men in ye stead of gods word, willing and
perswadyng as great faith, as great authorite to be given to the traditions,
and writings of men, as to gods words, gods holy precepts, but these be
evil and false doctors of god deputed to judgment, that they should suffer
pains un to the day of judgment, and after that day yt they should suffer
more grievous pains in body and soul together, saying that now they suffer
pains and punysh me^tes only in the soul, after ye mind of the doctors, and
shall suffer in the soul only pains to the day of judgment, and after the
day of judgment shall then suffer pains and turmentes both in body and
soul, as the doctors does say.

They are ungodly and turn the grace of our lord god unto wantonness. They be
so ungodly so ungracious that they turn all that we have of god and of his
grace to fulfill and satisfye their pleasures, pluckyng to them selves hasty
destruction and eternal death, they are so evil and myscheuous full of all
unhappiness, that they turn ye free benefyte of god and grace, by the which
Christ has delivered us from sin, death, hell, devil, and eternal
dampnation, and made us innoce^tes and free from all captivity of sin, and
set us in innocence and holiness (which thing should move us to keep innocence
and holiness) they turn this liberty of ye spirit whereby men be set to do all
good things and no evil, to do only those things to ye which the spirit of
god moves and exhorts. These ungodly turn this liberty in to a carnal
liberty in occation and liberty to sin, and gives them self holly to
wantonness, so lasciuiousnes, to vnclenlines, to bawdry, to fornication, to
adultery, and other many vices and sins, nor yet they are not so content, but
they deny their master which has redeemed them by his precious blood, they
deny their master not openly and before al men and plainly, but secretly in
corners and craf^ely they deny their master. But when deny they thus their
master privily and secretly? Truly when they ascribe their justification,
forgyuenes of sins to any creature, or to any warke by the might and power of
the warke, to any indulgence or pardon, to masses ad scala celi, to holy
beads, to kissing of images and such like, and not to Christ Jesus and to
his blood shed for us to obtain us remission of sin, by whose blood
only we were washed us in from our sins, as saint John^ says Apoc. 1. He
has washed us i^ his blood from our sins. They deny the lord which
ascrybeth remission of sins to any other thing then to Christ and his
blood, which thing false, prophets does, denyenge their master.

They turn the grace of god to wantonness. As who should say, they were called
and redeemed with the precious blood of Christ Jesus, that they should live in
all innocence and purity of life, in all holiness and godlynes. But they be
translated and turned from all innocence and purity of life, and turned to all
maliciousnes, wantonness and fylthines. They be translated. q. d. they be all
changed from ye holiness to the which Christ did call them, and by benefit did
inuyte them but they be translated from yt holiness, and be translated after ye
manner of ye Gala^hians, of whom saint Paul co^playneth saying, I merueile that
from Christ which has called you by grace, you are so soon translated in to
an other gospel when there is none other: but yt some men there be yt
troubles you, and would inuerte the gospel of Christ Gala. 1. as these of whom
saint Jude here co^playneth, that they translated the grace of god in to
wantonness, and they were utterly translated from all holiness, to the which
Christ had called them: so I fear that we christians be translated from the
doctrine of Christ, and from the true faith taught in it, by ye bishop of Rome
and his laws, by decrees, statutes and traditions of the church of Rome, in
to the forgetfulness of gods law, of gods commandment, in to other manners
and facions then gods law does command or suffers: yea we be far
translated by the bishop of Romes laws among us used and usurped so long,
that many one does think and has thought ye bishop of Romes law to be gods
law, and to have like authorite with gods law, and that it byndeth no less
than gods law: yea this law of the bishop of Rome has brought us so far out
of frame, yt scarce we think those things perteyne unto us which gods word
byddeth and commands us. Therefore let us be sorry for this translation from
Christ and his commandment, and be translated again to Christ, that we may
do those things which Christ commands us, that we and our warkis may be
acceptable before god.

My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance / for as much as ye ons know
this / how that the lord after that he had delivered the people out of Egipte,
destroyed them which believed not.
Jude brings in here, iii. era^ples of these yt transgressed the
commandment of god, and was punished for their sin to pluck back other from
sin for fear of punishment, which our lord will give to the^ yt will not
cesse from sin, punishment from the beginning was ever prepared and deputed
for sinners, as to good men a reward in joy and bliss. But although good me^
has ever b^n rewarded, and evil men punysshed, yet there is a difference,
good men has been and shall be rewarded by life everlasting not of their
merits, or for the worthynes of their works, but only of ye mercy and goodness
of god. Evil men has suffered pains and punyshme^t for their iniquite and
sins, and because they have done evil, therefore god of his justice has
punysshed them, and to refrain other from sin for fear of punishment here.

Jude brings in three examples, by the which he persuades that god will
punysshe sinners that will not repent and leave their sin. The first example
is taken of the people of Israel brought out of Egypt from the great bondage
of Pharao, which oppressed ye people of god with ^tollerable pains and
labors. Of the which people god at the last had mercy, and delivered them
from their bondage, and brought them sauffe out of Egypt. But these people not
beleuynge god has killed in the deserte. Of the which, we may note the
goodness of god in his people whom he would save and deliver from all bondage and
perils. Second the unkindness of these people not beleuynge the promyses of
god, seeing that god had done so much for them before, as to deliver them from
the bondage and cruelty of Pharao, above all man's expectation, and had punyshed
Pharao with all his adherentes with great plages and punyshmentes, and at the
last drowned him with all his host in the reed see, and also had done for
them, that they thought more then all this, had brought them through the reed
see as by the dry way in to the deserte, where he fed them with meat sent
from heaven, that is to say, with ma^na, and had given them drink out of the
peter stone. At the last these people for all these things not beleuyng gods
promyses, but complaining, grudgynge and murmuring against god and against
Moses, god has punyshed with death in the desert for their offenses. Of the
which we may surely persuade unto us, if god have punysshed these people whom
he loved so well, for whom he did so mothe, and to whom he showed such
benefytes, if god have punyshed them with death as he did for their i^credulite
and unbelief and their sins: how much more is it evident that he will not
suffer false apostels or other offendynge and brekynge his laws to be
unpunished. Therefore let all sinners beware and repen^ betyme and leave sin,
for if they do not, they may be sure they shall n^^ escape without punysshement.

The angels also which kept not their first estate / but left their own
habitation he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto judgment
of the great day.
Now Jude brings in the second example by the which he afrayeth sinners
from sin by fear of pain and punishment. And this example is taken of
angels created of god in a hye and glorious nature, to whom profited nothing
their excellenci of treatio^, for as much as they did not keep their innocence
in which they were created in, but left their innocencye, and did fall to
inyquytie and sin, pride prycked them so greatly, if God this noble and
excellent creature offendyng, I mean Angels offendynge has ponysshed and
depryuat the heavenly light, and to everlasting darkness has committed them,
where they be kept in perpetual chains in darkness, unto the day of
judgment, and after ever to be ponyshed if god has ponished Angels
offendynge, how much more other offendynge, he will ponysshe, which from
their sins will not cesse.

This saienge of Jude does appear to show that the Angels was created of God
that they should live in all innocence and keep their place in heaven deputed
unto them for their inhabytacyon and dwellinge place, from the which they did
fall by sin, and was cast hedlynges in to this dark air, bound in chains
of darkness, and they be kept in a dark place, which is contained from the
heavens above, unto the low ground, as Faber doch say, and that unto the
day of judgment, and then they shall be given and committed unto the eternal
punysshemente of hell, ever there to be punysshed in pains everlasting.

Even as zodom and gomor, and the Cities about them, which in like manner
defiled them selves with fornicacyon, and followed strange flesh, are se^
forth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.
The third ensample is here put which is of zodomme, and gomor, and other
Cities polluted in their fylthynes, therefore punysshed of God for their
abhomynacy on and sins, as for fornycacyon, adulterye, uncleanliness, sin
against nature, fylthy pollucyonnes, and other such like, with these sins
specially the Apostell says, they were polluted and defiled. And also that
they followed strange flesh, and not their own flesh they used, that is
to say, their own wives in lawful matrymonye, but they followed strange
flesh, that is to say they did use other men's wives, maidens, or virgynes
immaculate, or other women, and also men unlawfully, contrary unto nature.
wives unto their lawful housebandes be not called strange Flesh in the
scripture, but the proper Flesh of their husbands, as appears by saint
Paul Ephesians. quinto. where saynct Paul exhorts men to love their wives as
their own bodies, for he that loves his wife he loves him self no man does
hate his own body but he will norysshe and cherysshe it, as the LORD does
his church, and for this a man shall forsake his father and mother and shall be
coupled to his wife and they shall be two in one flesh wherefore it is euydent
that the flesh of the wife to the husband is not called strange fl^sshe,
this flesh God did give to the man as a lawful remedy for the infirmyte of
the flesh, that by this lawful remedy had in matrimony matrimony all
adultery, and fornycacyon should be eschued and utterly eriled.

Fordermore in that the Apostell says these sodomytes to have followed strange
flesh. He does appear to note them of uncleanliness and sum fylthynes against
nature by ye which they were polluted as apperith gene. xix. and saint Paul.
To. i. But unto what purpose be these three exsamples brought in here of jude?
Truly to fere men from sin, less they suffer like payns with them: whom god
punisshed for their sins, which pains are more greuouse, they shall not
eskape which will not leave their sins and repent, but continue still in
sin and provoke other unto sin whether it be by their evil doctrine or
evil example,

Suffer the pain of everlasting fire. These words of the apostle shows
plainly those sinners spoken of before to suffer pains of everlasting fire,
wheresoever they be other in hell or in the aer, it makes no matter of ye place
where they be it is certain that they suffer great pains and punishments in
everlasting fire. Therefore let every man beware to sin, lecste they suffer
like pains in fire, world without end as these does to the which pains
they shall be committed by the justice of god that will not cease from sin,
and from breaking gods commandment.

Likewise these dremers defile the flesh / despise rulers / and speak evil
of them that are in authority.
Judas here teaches certain propertes of them whom he wylleth christen men to
flee and eschew, he calls them dremers or mocked in dremes, and deluded, as
one that dremeth, is deluded by certain vain fantasyes, or imagynacyons
which he does appear to see or hear, as he that dremeth thynkes sumtyme he
hears or ^eith that thing, which he another did hear nor see, or to be in a
place where he is not, or to have these things that he has not, somtymes to
be glad, sometimes ladde, but when he wakes, he perceyuith his dreme to be a
vain thing, of no certaynce of no troth, of a delusyon, he is ashamed of his
dreme: he would yt no man should know it, he is ashamed to show it to any man
he is co^temneth it, and sets it at naught, to these dremers Jude assembleth
pseudapostelles false preachers, preferrynge men's laws, and men's
tradycyons above Gods law, or making them equal with Gods word, or such
as preach or set up man's doctrine, in the steed of Gods word, these he
assembleth unto dremers, and he calls them dremers, or deludyd by dremes, but
it shall chance unto them at the last if it shall please god to open their
eyes from their dremes and make them awake, that they shall see that they have
dremed and that they have been deluded by dremes, and surely they shall
perceive their dremes to have been folysshe and vain things of the which
they may be ashamed of.

Amongst these dremers, whom saint Jude does speak of, there has been some
dremers deluded in dremes which has dremed yt they had power and authority
of God to make for their will and pleasure what they lift, and that thing
that they would should be takyn, as an article of the faith, ye they did dreme
that they had authorite to make articles of the faith Canons, and rules which
should iustyfye and sanctifye men: that they had authoryte to give pardon and
indulgence which could absolve a pena et a culpa. i. which culde deliver
from pain and from sin, furdermore among these dremers sum has dremed that
they had power to remit sin, and to give. xl. days or ^. C. days of pardon,
or so many years or mo of pardon for pains due for sin, and that as often as
it pleased them. And this pardon they called the treasure of the church,
which these dremers had in their hands to bestow where they pleased. And not
only they had this treasure for them selves, yt they should bestow it at
their pleasure, that they only should give days and years of pardon, and
remyt sin as often as it should please them: but also they had it for other
creatures without life, as for a stock, a stone, a pot, a maser, a boll, as
saint Bedes boll, saint Edmundes boll, that he that should drink of these
should have. xl. days of pardon. Of these if he should drink till he were
dronken, I suppose he should have many days of pardon: so by lykely hode they
would have made dronkennes a virtue, a good thing specially if any man should
drink so he were dronken of that cup, maser, boll, glass, or horn hallowed or
pardonned by these dremers, how many years and days of pardon have they
granted to these that come and visyteth this image or that image, in such a
place or such a place, to this crucifix or that crucifix, that is to say, to
this image of Christ or that image, in this place more then in that place,
feynynge god to do miracles because of the holiness of the images, and because
he would have those images honored and worshipped of men. What pardon has been granted to bedes hallowed in such a place, to laces, to knottes, to
staryons to Rome, to saint James of Co^postel, to saynct Thomas of
Caunterburye, and in the year of grace clear remyssyon a pena et a culpa. After
this and such like facions has been promised infynyte days and years of
pardon by these dremers. And if they have not dremed, I report me unto you
that be awake, your dreme is gone, your eyes be open, you be no more in such
dremes, you be fully awaked thanked be god: and our most soueraygne lord
lord king Henry the eight, which so entyerly loves the veritye and the
treweth of gods gospel, and wylleth it shall go forwards, and hates all
such dremers, dremyng of vanyties and lies, promysyng such things by
creatures, which only Christ did give un to us by his precious blood shed for
us on ye cross. If remission of syn might be given by such things, then dyed
Christ i^ vayn, then was Christ a fool to shede his blood to oprayne us
remission of sin, seeing remission of sin might have com a more easier way
tha^ by sheding of Christ's blood. We be much beholding to these dremers yt
they have found a more easier way to opteyn forgyuenes of sin then Christ
did find, they be much more wyser then Christ, if their invention be true,
this is their dreme: these that be awake do well enough perceive their dremes to
be vain and vanite. Such men not without a sufficient cause be talled dremers
or deluded in dremes, because we can not obtain remission of sin but only
by Christ and his blood, says saint Paul Ephe. i. By Christ we be redeemed,
and by his blood we have remission of sin. Iohe^s Apoca. i. He has washed
us from sins in his blood. If remyssyon of sin be by Christ's blood (as
it is in deed) then it is not by the popes pardon, by indulgence granted by
bysshoppes to this thing or that thing, this cup, pot or boll, and such
like. Awake therefore you dremers, if any such yet be in a dreme and know your
dremes to be vain and lies, deceive your self and other no longer, the night
is gone, the day is spronge up, the son shyneth all about, thanked be god.

They defyle their flesh. Who be they that defile their flesh? Verily they
which live al together in deyntynes and pleasure, gyuynge them selves to all
voluptuous pleasures of the flesh, following their flesshly desires and
appetytes in all pleasures that may be, without fear of god, or any shame of
ye world, caryng for nothing so they may satisfye their carnal and beestly
appetyte with voluptuousnes and pleasure, which thing is their chief desire
and will to fulfill with pleasure their fleshly appetyte and lust.

They despise rulers, and speak evil of them that be in authorytye. Jude
shows more of their propertyes, he says they despise rulers, and speak evil
of them that be in authorite. Here Jude reproucth and checketh pseudapostelles
specially for two vices, the one is that they pollute their flesh, and defyle
it, living in voluptuousnes and pleasure o^ their flesh, the other is, yt
they despise rulers, that is to say, outward powers ordained of god and under
god, they contemn, and speak evil of common rulers and common officers. But
how despise they rulers? Truly when they despise, nothing regardes emperors,
kings, princis, lords, common mynisters of the common wealth, do not honor
cheym and reverence to them as honor should be given to hye powers under god,
not obeyinge their lawful and just commandments for ye common wealth, but
eremptyng them selves from the obedience of hie powers, and other also,
chalengynge authority and power above kings and princis, which authority and
power above kings and princis to be in this world saint Paul did not know,
co^maundynge every man to be obedient to the hye powers, saying Rom^. xiii.
Let every man be obedient to the hye powers, he that resysteth power, he
resysteth the ordinance of god, and he that resists the ordinance of god,
he takes to him judgment. Of ciuyle power saynct Paul does appear to
speak. Saint Peter confirms the same thing, saying. i. Petri. ii. Be you
subject to all manner of creatures for god, whether it be the king as most
highest, or it be dukes as of him sent to the punyshement of evil men, or to the
praise of good men. Consider gentyl reader, if the eremptions granted by the
bishop of Rome, by the which he has erempted him self and many other
relygyous howses and relygyouse men, as they call them, and other spiritual
men called from the obedyence of Cyuyle rulers and powers, and will not be
obedient to princis and kings, but be above them, and have princis and kings
at their commandment, and they not obedient to the just and lawful
commandment of princis, of kings, and of other common mynisters appointed by
kings and princis for ye common wealth. Look gentyl reader if this exemption
come not of him which contempneth rulers? Does not this exemptio^ or privilege
exempte men from dew obedience to their superyour powers: to whom saint Paul
Rom^. xiii. saint Peter. i. Petri. ii. commands every man to be obediente to
superyour powers let eueryman be obedient, be he religiouse man, be he other,
let no man think him self to be exempted from the superior powers, as from
ye kings grace and his officers appointed by him to be rulers in this realm,
for any exemptio^ or privilege granted by the bishop of Rome, which has
none such authoryte by God granted, that he may exempte men from the
authority and obedyence to their superior powers, to whom Saint Paul
commands every man to be obedyent. Roma. xiii. Hebreorum. xiii. Two vices
Jude notyth in these pseudapostles, the one that they contempne powers, the
other that they speak evil on them.

yet Mychaell the Archangell / when he strove against the deuell / and dysputed
about the body of Moses durst not give raylyng sentence / but said the
Lord rebuke the.
Judas shows these pseudeapostells speaking evil of the hye powers ordynated
of God to be more bolder then Mychaell the Archangell sent to fight against the
deuel, whom he durst not curse nor speak evil of, if the Archaungell of God
Mychaell durst not nor would not curse the deuel nor speak euel of him how much
more should not pseudeapostells curse good men and just men put of god in
authorite and in hye power, to whom every man should give due obedyence, and be
ready to do all lawful commandments, and not to resyst, to curse, or to
speak evil of the hye powers to who^ honor, reverence, and obedience must be
given according to the mind of saint Paul. Roma. xiii. give unto all men
that is due. Give honor to whom honor is due, give fear to whom fear is
due, give trybute and custom to whom they be due. etc.

This place of Jude is a strange and rare place scarce was found in any other
place in Scripture, therefore this Epistle of Jude was rejected of the fathers,
because this place scarce was found in any other place of scripture, that made
mencyon that Michael did fight with the deuell as touching the body of Moises,
and of what occasyon this contempcyon did spring up, be cause scripture
commends Moses so greatly, saying no prophet to have been in Israel like to
Moses, as it is written Number. xii. says scripture. Moses was meke above al
them yt dwelled in the earth and a little after yt says, if any shall be among
you a prophet of ye lord in visyon I will appear to him, or by sleep I will
speak to him, but not such is my servant Moses, which is most saythfullest in all my house. I do speak to him mouth by mouth openly, and not by dark saienges
and figures, he did se ye forde. etc. Thus Moses is hiely co^men^ed in
scripture, as apereth i^ Ero. xviii Judas here peradventure did take occasion
to speak of Moses of these words which is written Deuterono. the last Chap.
where it is plain that after our Lord had showed to Moses the land of
promyssyon promised unto the fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and had said
that Moses should not enter into that land (and that was for a mystery that
was hid which saint Paul opens hebreorum. vii. saying that the law did
bring no man to perfeccyon that is to say that the law could not iustifye
ne bring men to life, of Moses it is written the last of the Deuteronomy. that
Moses did dye in the land of moab, and was buried and that no man did know
his sepulcher unto this day. The sepulcher of Moses god would have it
unknown, lest the Jews which counted Moises for such a great and a holy
prophet should commyt ydolatrye, and set up idolatre upon the sepulcher of
Moses, and worship Moses as God, for the Jews was ready to ydolatre, of
this does the contencyon appear to be sprung up between Michaell and the
deuell, of the which contencyon Judas here speaks of, the deuell would the
body of Moses to have been showed to the Jews, that it might have been to
them an occasyon of ydolatre, Michael would it should not have been showed unto
them, that they should have had by it none occasyon of ydolatre, but that all
ydolatre should be utterly extincted and put away, here you may learn the
desire of the deuell which is to move to ydolatre, to iniquite, and sin,
good men they always dysswade from ydolatry and sin, and takes away all
occasyon by the which passage may be made to ydolatre and sin.

Saint John apoca. xxii. does speak of a certain bataile between Michael and
the devil. He says there was made a great battle in heaven. Michael
archaungell and his angels did fight with a dragone, and the dragone and his
angels did fight against Michael, but they have not prevailed, nor yet no
place of them was found any more in heaven, but the battle of which it is here
spoken was of the body of Moses which the deuell would have had worshypped
yt the Jews might have committed idolatry on it, Michael did resyst him, this
is the meaning of this place after mine opinion, if it be the true meaning of
Jude take it, if not take their mind that brings a better sense, and I my
self will be glad to learn of better learned then I am (for I am of the lest)
ye true understanding of this place, exceppe mine opinion in good worth, till
you hear a better.

But to what purpose brings Jude in these, but that he would teache
pseudapostels should not speak evil, curse wysshe unto the deuell, high
powers and such as be put in authorytye under GOD, unto whom it becomes
every man for to be obedient by the ordinance of GOD, and to have them in
honor and reverence, and not to speak evil of them. If Mychaell the
Archangell sent of GOD as a common minyster, durst not curse or speak evil of
the deuell, what boldness is it pryuate men to curse, to speak evil of powers
ordynated of GOD. This place of Jude does appear to take away all evil
speaking from pryuate men, of them that be set for common minysters of the
commonwealth. This place does not inhybyte, ne let, but common officers may
rebuke evil doars and punysshe them, as it shall be thought most expedyent for
the amendment of them that be evil, and to avoid more inconuenyence. Also
this saying of Iud does take away al vengeance in word or in de^e from private
men and monishe them to remit al vengeance to god, which will not suffer
sinners to escape unpunished. Judas uses here an argument of the less to ye
more after this manner. If angels durst not curse evil men, much more men
should not curse or speak evil of good men, much less they should speak
evil of good men being in authority.

If our fore fathers did long reject this pystel of Jude for this place,
which in scripture scarce i^ any other place could be found, how much more
now should men reicet the sayings or writings that with holy scripture (I do
not say do not agree) but plainly does repugne with scripture, and far
dissent from the scripture: nor yet this doctrine does not so far discord from
the scripture, and so far contrary to the truth: but they get some patrones
which with all might and power will defend this doctrine as holy and good, as
they do which set up ye usurped power of the bishop of Rome above kings,
princis and emperors, and that by ye ordinance of god, as god and his holy
scripture did give to the bishop of Rome a secular power above kings, princis
and emperors here in this world, when it is euydent by scripture the bishop
of Rome to have none other power but at the pleasure of princis, then in the
mynystration of the word of god, to preach gods word purely and sincerely,
to reprove by it evil men, as to do such things as becomes a preacher, a
bishop, a minister of god^ word to do: other power does not Scripture
attribute to the bishop of Rome, nor suffer him to use. Scripture wylleth him
to be a bishop, and to do the office of a bishop, and not to play the
prince, the king, the emperor, the lord, and so forth, as Peter byddeth. i.
Pet. v. Feade as much as is in you the flock of Christ, not playinge the
lord in the clear, that is to say, in the elected of god, and so forth.

The lord rebuke the. Mychaell would not rebuke the devil, but remytted all
vengeance to god, teaching other in their proper cause to commyt vengeance
to god, which shall judge right, and punyshe evil doers. Therefore it is not
conuenyent that men should desire vengeance of evil doers, seeing that god
will punysshe malefactors and avenge all iniuryes done to god, or to men, if
these malefactors will not repent and be sorry for their offenses paste. These
words of Jude do not appear to be of one that desires auengeme^t, but rather
of him that shows what is to come of god, that the lord will rebuke him that
stereth and provoke men to evil.

But these speak evil of these things which they know not. In to these
things which they know naturally as beasts without reason they corruppe
them selves.
Jude pueth these false doctors more bolder then angels, for they dare take
upon them to curse powers ordained of god, which thing ye angels would not do
in men. And leest these false doctors should say they had a just cause to speak
evil, or to curse powers and rulers and other not obeyenge their laws and
precepts. Jude says they curse not having a just cause, but yt they do not
understand these things for which they curse and speak evil, that is to say,
yt they do not understand a just cause of their cursyng. And not only men Jude
says they curse, but also other things which they do not know that they
curse and speak evil of, as of doctrine and wrytynges which they never red
nor herd, ye and of such doctrine as agrees with Christis doctrine and
lernyng of ye apostils: but these pseudapostils speak evil of it, which they
know not, nor yet can give judgment of it, for as much as they never red it,
nor herd it red. Among these men there be some so ignorant of gods doctrine,
that they have wyshed and desired heartily of god, saint Paul's pistels, yea the
new testament to be brent, saying all errors and heresies to come out of
saint Paul's pistels and the new testament, such shameful words and
detestable has some doctors spoken, which would have been counted for learned
men, doctors in their sciences, but as blind as betils in gods law, and
ignorant in gods word, and yet they were benefyced men, rulers, ordynaryes,
and heads of other, ye of a hole country. O mercyful lord what were the
members, when such blind beyardes were heads and ordynaryes, how was the
people of god fed with gods word, when the head would have had gods
word burnt. Nothing is more to the hurt and destruction of many souls in
this realm, then is to have one to be official, comysarye and ordynarye under
the bishop, that is ignorant in gods law and gods word, how will he
preach and teach him self, what example will he give to other, what persons,
what viccars will he make of? Trewly such as he is him self, ignorant in
gods law, and such as be learned he will hate and despise, and they that
would teach their flock and feade with the wholesome word of god, these he
will call heretykes, and accuse them of heresye, and impryson them. Examples to
many we have in this realm, I pray god amend it when his pleasure is. Such
shameful words has doctors in their facultye (as they call it) spoken,
desiring to have had Sayncte Paul's pystels, ye the new testament burnt. Of
their sayings they have been nothing ashamed, nor yet of their ignorance nor
blyndenes, but taken for right worshypfull men, posts and pyllers of Christis
church, these ignorant and blind heads and rulers of other how could they
preach gods word being thus affected? how could they favor those that
preached gods word trewly and syncerely? Trewly they could not, this is the
cause that true preachcers of gods word in this realm be so evil spoken on
as they be, because they exhort al beneficed men to do their duty to preach
gods word, to feade their flock with the doctrine of god, that they might
save their souls in the day of the lord. But a great part of beneficed men
no thing regard their dewty commanded them of god, nor the exhortation of the
preachers, that is to feade their flock with gods word, but neglygently
despyseth that office, and will neither feade his flock him self, nor yet se
or provide that they be fed by other that can do it, yea they will speak
evil of such as preach gods word purely and sincerely, and make them to
be endited of heresye, which preach gods word purely, which do feade ye
people of god trewly with gods word, such is the affections of many persons,
vi^ars and curates, such is their ignorance, such is their blyndnes, god send
them the light of his word, that they may se it and use it to the health of
them and their flock.

Many there be that peradventure thinks it is enough they do the
commandment of their ordynary, so that they never preche nor feed their
flock with gods word, which men deceyueth them selves if they so think, for
this will not excuse them before the hye judge at the day of judgment, as is
evident Ezech. iii. xxxiiii. xxxiii. pri. Corinth. ix. Woe be to me says saynct
Paul if I preach not. Jude here speaks in the neutre gendre, saying that
they did speak evil of these things which they did not know, by the which
he vnderstandethe many things. Here we may se what evil it is to curse those
things that men do not know, or that they have neither herd nor read. To
such men saint Jerome gives a good counsel in a pystell before Esaie the
prophet. He wills that men should first read, and then despise, least they
may he thought not of a true judgment or knowledge, but of a presumption, of
hatred to condemn those things they know not if men would follow here
saint Hieromes counsel they would not be so ready to condemn as they be.

which as beestes without reason they corrupt them selves. Jude here says
they corrupt them selves naturally as brute beestes with out reason, as who
should say they live in wealth and pleasure, and in satisfyenge the desire of
their flesh, they pass brute beestes which be without reason which live
after their nature, but these in the fylthynes of their flesh they keep not her
measure nor mean, all together given unto pleasure of eatinge and drinking,
and to satisfy the other pleasures of the body, wherefore they be worse then
brute bestes which live after their nature.

woe be unto them / for they have followed the way of Cayne.
Here Jude no^eth these pseudeapostels to be full of envy, as Cayne was
toward his brother Abell whom he killed. Cayn enuyed his brother abell
because his brothers sacrifyce was better or more just then his. Genesis. iiii.
and therefore he did kill him. So there be many yt follows the way of Cain
which can not bear that other men, and other men's works should be
preferred before them, or their works. Here is to be noted, first Cayn an
evil man to have enuyed his brother Abel a good man. Secondly Cayne of envy to
have persecuted his brother be cause his brother was better then he, and his
brothers works preferred before his. Thyrdely that it greueth evil men, other
man, or other men's works, or oblacyons to be preferred before them.
Fourthely that two brethren of one man, and of one woman, the one to have been
good, and the other evil. Fyftely one brother to have killed an other of
malice, envy, and hatred. Syxtely learn envy, and hatred to bring murdoure,
and man slaughter at the end. Seuently learn that evil men always enuyeth
good men, persecuteth them with mortal hatred, without a cause, and at the
last kylleth them. And that this thing is no new thing, here you may see
of Cayn, and Abell. Many there is that enter the way of Cayn and follows his
foot steps, in his envy and malice drowned, and these be called Caynys. Many
there be now a days Caynys that enuyeth the true preachers of the Gospel,
but these shall have a reward with Cayn to whom the apostell does threate woe,
that is to say, everlasting woo and dampnacyon, that for fear of pain men
should abstayn from envy and hatred The punysshemente taken justly of Caine
may fear other from the envy malice, and hatred of Cayne. Jude saying woe be
to these men that goes the way of Cayn. He does not desire woe to Caynis, but
he shows woe and pain to come to them, which does the works of Cain, and
fulfill their envy and malice, by the death of an Innocent.

And are spylte in the error of Balaam for lucre sake.
The apostell shows woo to come to them which are spylte in the error of
Balaam, or polluted by such couetousenes as Balaam was, he thretyth woe
everlasting to them, which for money, or for fylthy lucre sake doethe these
things that is not mete ne convenient, which does ever for their belly sake,
for hope of lucre or advantage After the example of Balaam, which for money
would have cursed the people blessed of god, more regardinge money then the
commandment of god. Of this Balaam it is written. Nu. xxii. xxiii. how he
was hired of Ba^ach to come and curse the people of god, and how he was
content to do it for money, but god did not suffer him but when he should have
cursed them, he did bliss them, which story shows the noughtynes of man,
and how money will corrupt him sone, and that man can do no more then God will
suffer him. But there be now many worse then Balaam, which corrupt by money
would only have cursed the people whom God did bliss. There be many worse I
fear me then Balaam, which not only for money would curse the people blessed
of God, but also would begyle and deceive, and bring them to error, to
heresies, to ydolatrye for money. I pray you what Gods or Goddesses have
they set up in many places to be worshypped to get money with all of men?
what worship or veneracyon of images have they sucked out of their fyngers for
money. Images for to be a remembrance of the holiness of saints I do approve,
but to get money with images I do not approve, yea what miracles say they
has been done for the holiness of the images, so be that they might make them
more rycher by oblacions, ye who can tell half the ways and means that they
have found to get, ye to extort money from men, what by images, by pardons, by
pylgrimages, by indulgenses, by ceremonies, by hallowynge of churches,
churchyardes, belles, books, chalyces, vestymentes, abbases, monasteries, by
relygyon of munkes, channons, friars, priests, bysshoppes, cardynalles, and
such like, by prayers, bedys, psalms, masses, and many such like, and all
inuenced for money, for without money none of these consecracyons, or
hallowynge is granted what consecracion makes not the holy smell of money? no
pardon, no indulgence, is granted without money. Thereupon came up this common
verse. Cu^ia romana non cupit ouem sine lana, that is to say the court of
Rome care^h not for the sheep without her flese or woll. Of such marchaundyse
great advantage, great lucre has commen unto the inuentours, to the
Masters of this sutteltye and craft, to them has been plesaunde the smell of
lucre, what matter so ever it were. These be they that in a manner have
corrupted the hole world, in so much that these things that be good and just
can not come to pass without money. Therefore the Apostell threteth woo to them
for they not only are in ye same decepcion with Balaam, but also they are full
of that deceiuablenes, therefore he says they be spylte by this manner of
deceyuing, that term he uses to show the abundaunce of their deceyt, for there
is no thing they would not do for a vauntage, good smell to them always is a
vauntage of luere or money, many be now a days like unto them, which all
shall have a reward with them, that is to say woe everlasting. Therefore
forsake Balaams decepcion betyme, and be no more a Balaamyte, lest woe com upon
you sooner then you be ware.

And are cast a way in the treason of Core.
Woe says the Apostell shall come to them, which be in the treason with Core,
which does conspyre against Moses, and Aaron, as Core and his companyons
did. Of the coniuracion and conspiracy styred up by Core and his companyons
against Moses, and Aaron, it is ^^d Nu. xvi. how that Core not being content
with his calling and lotte would have been ruler to the people of god, whom
Moses by the mighty power of god did bring out of Egypt. This Core perceyuyng
he could not have that rule that he desired, he gathered a great nombre of
people, and made a conspiracy against Moses and Aaron, and so thought to have
killed them, and made him self and other whom he would rulers of that people,
but god did not suffer him to bring to pass that he intended, but did cast
him in his own ^ourne, god delivered his servants Moses and Aaron, and
showed his might and power against Core, Dathan, Abyron, and their companyons,
and made the earth to open and swalowe Core, Dathan, Abyron, and all them that
were of conspiracy with them. Here be some things to be noted. First the
maliciousnes of Core and of them which assented to him. Second, that he was
not con^ent with his lot and calling of god. Third, that he did envy Moses
and Aaron, yt were elected of god to be rulers of his people. Fourth, that he
did gather other unto him, yt thought his cause good, and would take his part,
to put down the rulers elected by god. Fifth, that no man is so evil nor have
so evil a cause but there is some that will agree unto him, and be willing to
help him to justify his noughty cause. Sixte, Evil agrees soon to evil,
and like will to like. Seventh, the punishment of Core, Dathan, Abyron and
their companyons may monyshe al other to to beware to co^spyre against Moses
and Aaron ministers of god, the earth that swalowed them up, may monyshe all men
yt they shall not murmr, grudge ne conspyre against such whom god has put
and set in authority and rule over the common people. Therefore let al pse(...)
apostels and all other beware ^est they murmr grudge or cause sedition
against the mynysters of god against powers ordained of god, left it chance to
them like vengeance as did to Core and his companyons, by the which they have
perysshed. Le^ne here how nyely they displease god, that be not content with
their lot, with their calling, but will desire and take an hyer honor then they
be called to, Ye that will conspire against powers ordyned of god, and not be
obedient to them, after ye ordinance of god To. xiii. The punyshme^t of Core
and his co^panyo^s how highly they dispiesed god does show, yt does as Core
did. O^ Core you may read ye story Fru. xvi. and there note mo things of him.

These ar spots which of your kyndnes feast together without fea. e feadynge
them selves.
Jude reproves the judgment of the people toward these pseudapostels, of
the simple people they be c^unted to be the worship, honor, and ornament of
all charity, of all virtue: but if they be nerely looked on they are not that
thing that they be counted to be, they are not the honor nor the beauty but
they (...) the very fyithynes it self, and the very spo^^es of whom comes
and spryngeth that thing that befo^meth the hole face, the hole body.
Furthermore in that he says that they be the spots among your charytyes,
as Erasmus translation has, an other thing he does appear to say, as who
should say, they by craf^e, suttelty, falshede, hypocrysye and symulation has
gotten of you great richesse, great possessions, lands and tenementes, which
you have given to them of your charity, supposyng that they were the honor,
the worship, the beautye of the world, and that in them were all holiness,
and nothing bu^ holiness that they were the lyghtes and lanternes of Christ's
religyon, the very true patrones to follow in all holiness of life, after whom
men should fourine and fassyon their lives. And for that cause what some ever
you did give to them of your charytye, you thought it well bestowed,
supposing that they take only necessaryes for them selves, the resydue to
bestow after the best fassyon. But it is not so (says Jude) as you think,
they be not the honor and beautye of men, but they be ye spots that
disfygureth men, they be the pestilence and destruction to men, if they be in
wardly considered. I grant they be e^ampl^rs and patrones, but of all evil
and mischefe. Of you they have gotten riches and substance by craft, by
falsehede, hypocrysye and symulacyon: but as they (...)gotten their goods
evil, so they s(...) them evil, as the common saying is evil gotten evil
gone: ye often times it chances, that thing which is evil gotten, to be
worse s^ence, richesse gotten of your charytye by hypocrisye and simulacion,
they do not spend them in the feadynge of poor people in warkes of charytye,
but in mutual feasts to great men, to rich men, byenge promotion and
dignitye, gyuynge great rewards to such as need not, to obtain fa^oure of
men they spend their richesse in mutual bankettynge and feastynge, in goodly
and delycate fare, in feadynge of horses and dogs, I will not say all. These
men all though they be counted of the world to be the honor and beautye of
the world, and so they would be counted them self, yet saynct Jude here
calls them the spots and the destruction of Christis religion, and how
some ever they be counted with the world, they be before god as spots and
fylthynes that disfygureth. If any will consider their lives (says saynet
Jude) they live without fear of god or of man, they live after their own
pleasure and voluptuousness, other lives in great penurye and pouertye, in
great labor, great pain, and in the swette of their brows get their
living full hardly. They live in great wealth and abundaunce in ydelnes and
pleasure, having all things abundauntly without any care or thought, taking
no labors nor pains to feade the flock of Christ, and yet they will be their
pastors, and suffer their sheep to stray away from the fold, and to be a pray
for the wolf, fox, and the devil, they will lay great burdens and yockes on
other men's necks, but they them selves will not ones payse them with their
finger. Therefore not without a cause Jude calls them sp^^^^s which live
without all fear eating and drinking, passing the time in sport and game,
taking al their ple^u^es here, as who should say, there were none other world
after this, therefore they eat and drink and make good ^^e^e, and take their
pleasure while they are here, for after this world they think there is none
other world, and if there be any, what they shall have there they can not tell,
such be the words of infideles, as appears Sapientie. ii. To such truly in
an other world shall be sorrow to their soppes pain and woo everlasting.

Clouds they are without water, carried about of wyndes.
Jude accuses these pseudapostels of a^^ogancy, they think them selves to be
clouds, clouds be a boue men, they move in the air or element, oftymes they
obscure and dark the light of the sone from men, out of them comes water
that temporeth the earth, that makes grass, and corn grow, so like wise
these pseudapostelles thinks them clouds, that is to say, that they are
half Gods, and above men and give the water (that is to say) doctrine that
tempereth the earth, that is to say all men be tempered, and ruled by their
doctrine, I grant says Jude that they be clouds as they count the^
selves, but they be clouds carried of the wyndes hither and thither, they be
inconstant having no sure doctrine for they be cost this way and that way with
every pufte and blaste of wind they be carried with the wind, they be
clouds, but unprofitable without water to temper the earth yt is dry, ye is
to say they want hole and wholesome doctrine of god by the which they might and
should temper the thurstie and dry Souls and conforte afflycted conscyences
they be clouds, but such as darkens and keep away from men the light of the
son, that is to say they kep^ bake the truth of gods word, and will not
let it appear to men as much as lies in them they dark the truth of
Gods Gospel by their tradicyons, by dremes, by inuencyons of men, which they
command and teach^ ^o keep in the steed of Gods word, they lead us from
the light in to darkness, and would make us to believe darcknes to be light. They
bring us from Gods word in our yough to gentylle authors which we must
learn first, knowing well the bottell ever to smell of that lyquor which he
first receives, if we were brought up soberly by a sober and dyscrete may ster
in gods learning, I suppose we should ever smell of that liquor as Titus and
Timotheus did. Saint Paul prayseth their bringinge up. i. Timo. iiii. ii. T^mo.
iii. besides this that they lead us out of the way from Gods learning to
gentle authors, as to Aristotle, Plato, zenophon, and such other, when we be
passed them, then the way is stopped to Christ, but we must then go to dunce,
dorobell, au^royse, bryco^, anthony, gabryell, thomas and s^che like, and at
the last when we shall ^^m to the study of holy scripture must be wrasted and
wrythed after their minds, and their terms, and their subtle dystynccyons,
although they be never so far contrary to the true meaning of the scripture.
Christ commands us Johan. v. to search scryptures these clouds commands
the contrary to search doctors as gentle authors, and skole doctors as dunce
dorobel petrus hisyanus and such like, holy scripture is to be vnderstandyd
first by the scripture it self, one place expounds an other, The holy ghost
can best expound him self. Second by the knowledge and phrase of the tongues,
as oflaten, greece and hebrew. Thyrdely by the exposycions of the holy doctors
that was exercysed in scripture, as by the exposycion of saint Augustyne,
Hierome, Ambrose, Chrisostone, Liprian, Lirill, and such like, and their
exposycyons taken where it agrees with scripture, and forsakynge where they
agree not with Scripture, as these Authors would their writings to be taken
as apereth in their works, these authors would have no man so addycted unto
their sayings, that what so ever they should speak or had written yt it should
be believed as truth, and as an arcycle of the faith, but they made ye scripture
of God to be judge of their writings.

They be trees rotten in authum unfruitful / twyse dead / and plucked up by
the rotes.
Jude compares these pseudapostels or false doc^ors to rotten trees in ^^^e of
harvest, unprofitable he calls the^, because they bring forth no good fruit
but only occupies the ground where good trees should grow, these wychered
trees be like to other trees which brings fourth good fruit in time
conuenyent, these trees as other does bud they bring forth leaves blossoms, and
flowers, but they be without fruit in time of harvest, then they be wethered
not only unprofitable without fruit, but also they be twyse dead to them
selves and to other, that is to say they bring death to them selves, and also
to other that believes them, they be as trees dead and plucked up by the rotes
as dead and rotten, so they besuch as in who^e there is no hope of amendment
as in the tree pluckyd up there is no hope that it should receive rote and life
again. Trees that be wethered in harvest do not live again ne grow but they
rote ever more and more, and at the last falls down dead, they be
unprofitable burdeins and lodes of ye earth another profitable to them selves
nor other, such be these pseudapostels. Also they be as trees twyse dead,
another they live in themselves, nor in other, they live another in body nor in
soul, they be dead in the rote, in the stock, without lefe, without fruit,
for they be dead, that is to say they have another true faith hope nor charity
nor yet good works, nor holsom doctrine to teach them selves and other, they
be also trees plucked up by the rotes that is to say they be rased out from
the book of life, and clean separated from Christ, how much someuer they
bost and crake them to be planted and grafted in Christ, and to live in
Christ, and bring forth fruit that pleased Christ best, yet Jude says they
be separated from Christ, and dead in Christ Jude is always contrary to their
proud opynion of them selves, which he laboreth to pluck from them.

They are the ragyng waves of the sea, foming out their own shame.
Jude contynueth still descrybyng these pseudapostels, he calls them the
ragynge waves of the sea, for as these outrageouse waves fearse and cruel does
toss the quiet and peaciable ship now up now down, now this way now that
way, and makes the ship and them that be in it ever in parel of drouning and
will not suffer the^ to be quiet. But what does these troublesome waves of yt se,
nothing else put fometh out their foome and fylthynes, and their own shame, so
these pseudapostels do troble and vexes quiet and peaceable men, moore
outragyouse then the sea, which sometime cease of this outragiousnes and is
caume. These pseudapostels be more outragyouse then the sea, for they never
cease to troble, vex and dysquyet those that would live in quietness and
peace. These pseudapostels stereth up contencion, debate, and strif they troble
the common quyetnes, the common peace, they trouble the hoole world perswadyng
them selves to be the light, the lantern of the world, them to be the
poostes and pyllers of Christ's church with the which Christ has promised ever
his presence to the end of the world, and that they can not err, and yet
their life is contrary to that life that GOD requires of his church to whom
he promised his presence, and for this comes such cumult, such trouble in
the world that men will not believe them, saying they have the presence of god
always with them, and that they can not err, nor god would not suffer them to
err so long, for this they rage, they rampe, they be wode, they troble all
good men, and these that would live quietly they vex, they trouble, they do
them injuries, and speak evil and rail on them shamefully: but in so doing
what get these pseudapostels to them selves? trewly nothing else but that Jude
here shows, they foam and spewe out their own shame and rebuke to their
utter co^fusio^. Behold to what purpose and end comes these proud words
of pseudapostels? truly to their own great shame and confusion, their craft,
their suttelry, their hypocrisye is known well enough, let them therefore halte
no more before crepyls, their madness shall be known to all men, as sait Paul
says. ii. Tim^. iii.

They are wandering sterres, to whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever.
Also Jude calls them wanderyng sterres, because they be wauerynge as these
sterres be, mouable and inconstant tossed and moved with every wind, so be these
pseudapostels inco^stant moved with every wind of ye flesh, or of desire of
the world, and be carried whether ye desire of the flesh moves them, also
wavering sterres gyues no light, but darkes the light of other stars, and
lets ye light of clear sterres, and they be carried of the wind whether yt
wind blows: the nature of these stars these pseudapostels follows, men
light in condition, manners and learning, which will go and change as ye wind
blows, and say as the world and most part says for lucres sake, and play
Gnatoes part very well as Terence does say: what other men say, they will say
the same, and fassion them self to the most part, caryng no thing what the
truth will or requires, but rather what the heed rulers and the multitude
will and commands, although we know the most part to be ignorant of yt
truth: for many shall be dampened, and few saved: wherefore it is not always sure
to agree to ye most part.

To whom is reserved the mist of darkness for ever.
Now Jude shows ye pain reserved for these pseudapostels and masters of
lies, the mist of darkness, that is to say everlasting pain i^ darkness, and
where shall ever be darkness, weeping and gnasshing of ceth. He does appear to
allude to them bringing in darkness to the light of trewthe, what darkness they
bring to the light, no man can express ne show, and those at the last shall
receive everlasting darkness in pains. Jude here does fear men from sin for
fear of pain, showing sinners that will not repent, not to escape everlasting
pain, which shall be in darkness to their great co^dempnacion and punyshme^t.
Therefore let no man think that he may sin and escape all punishment: for god
of his justice will not suffer sin to be unpunished in these that will not
repent. In repenting he forgyueth and pardonneth much sin.

Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied before of such, saying behold the lord
shall come with thousands of saynctes to give judgment against all men / and
to rebuke all that are ungodly among them: of all their ungodly deeds which
they have ungodly committed / and of all their cruel spekinges which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him.
Lest any man should think him to have spoken any new thing of these
pseudapostels to be punysshed, if they do not repent, he brings in the
prophecy of Enoch to co^fyrme his sentence saying yt Enoch was a good man the
seventh from Adam, and that he prophesied pains and grievous punyshme^tcs to
come upon evil men, if they did not repent. Also Enoch inspired with the spirit
of god did prophecy the lord for to come with many thousands of saynctes (of the
day of judgment he appears to speak) to give judgment against all evil men,
and to reprove them of their noughty words and deeds, of their noughty and
evil words against god and the professers of his trewthe. Of the which
saying it is euydent that god will reprove in that day as well evil words as
evil deeds.

Also Jude here certifieth us, that the day of judgment will come, in ye which
day god will reward good men with hye rewards: and evil men with
everlasting punyshement. He will come to judgment having with him many
thousands of his saints: in the which day there shall be showed as well the
evil words, as the evil deeds of every man, and shall be made open to all
the world. Of the which words and deeds every man shall make a count for
him self: and if they have done well, they shall receive a reward: if they
have done evil they shall be committed to pain and punysshement everlasting.
Jude here threttenynge pain everlasting to evil men did no new thing, for
Enoch the seventh after Adam did the same. Also here is to learn the goodness of
god, which prouydeth in all times some good men, which disswadeth men from
sin for fear of punyshement, and also which has showed mercy, grace and
remissyon of sin to be only of god that all trust and al confidence should
be put in god.

This place of Jude scarce in any other place of scripture is found, therefore
some of the fathers long did reiecte this pystell of Jude, but this is not
enough to reiecte a book or a pystell for one or other sentence, which do
not differ from other places of scripture: if ye sentence did differ from
scripture, then it were a cause outher to doutte of it, or to reiecte it, or
else no. Saint Paul brynngeth in Iannem and Mambrem. ii. Timoth. iii. which
were the wytches of Pharao, which resysted Moses Erodi. vii. such men there
were, whose names be not expressed Exo. vii. saint Paul names them, shall we
say that their names be not as saynct Paul calls them, because their names
is not expressed in any other place of scripture, that is no sufficient cause
to say so, or to reject saint Paul's pistell to Timothe, it is sufficient that
saint Paul does say it, whom we know did speak by the holy ghost, and the
spirit of god.

These are murmurers, co^playners walking after their own lusts, whose
mouths speaks proud things, they have me^ in great reuere^s because of
aua^tage.
Jude some things omytted before now he adds of these pseudapostels,
affirmyng them to be murmurers and co^playners. If any man would speak against
their usurped power, say they, yt me^ would destroy al holiness, al virtue and al
goodness, which only minysheth their power falsely usurped, if any man shall omyt
any thing of their old title, by and by they cry out, and say that god and
all his Saints is despised, contemned, and set at naught, they cry the
contempt of god, and disobedyence to his church, when no man contemns god,
nor is disobedyente unto the church of god, nor disobedyent to nothing that
god would have men obedyente to. Furthermore they be murmurours against god and
his divine power if any afflyccyons, incommodites, mynysshyng of their
authorite and ruell, of their hye tytles and such like ye they be not affrayed
to murmr against god, that he suffers such things to chance unto them,
contrary to their minds.

These perceyuinge their lives to be very short, they murmoure in their hearts
that god created of so short life subject to so many infirmytes and sycnesses,
wysshynge and desyringe them to live evermore in this corporal body in pleasure
as they now live without any pain, and of the life to come utterly
despayringe, measurynge all felycytye and pleasure of this body. These
pseudapostelles be murmurors and complaynors if every thing do not come to
pass after their mind, as God were to be blamed that he punyssheth not
straytely them that resystich and gaynsayeth their noughty will, and couetouse
mind. They murmr against the truth known, which opens and shows their
hypocrisy and symulacyon long hid by the which they have deceived the world
long. They murmoure that they can no longer keep the simple christen people in
supersticyon, false and feigned holiness the cause of their murmuring is by all
conjectures, that they can not increase their riches and substance no more by
hipocrisy simulacyo^ false and feigned holiness. Their murmuringe shows that
they be not content with their state and calling. They murmur against other,
when against the^ have men just causes to murmr and to complain, saying
they live after their proper concupyscence and pleasure of ye flesh and not
after the will of god.

whose mouths speaks proud things. What bostynge words and full of vanite
they do speak so far wide from the truth. They say they have power in body
and soul, and yt they may make laws to bind men's consciences under the pain
of deadly syn, but Christ says that men has power in yt body, to kill ye
soul they can not says christ Mat. x. fear not he says these yt kylleth the
body, ye soul they can not kill they have not yt they may do more the^ kill
the body. Furdermore they say they have two swerdes, a spirytuall sword and
a temporal with the which they may smite whom they list, and when they lust,
contrary is this their proud saying to saint Paul. To. xiii. which
commands every man to be obedienc to the cyuill powers, which not without a
cause bears ye sword to ponyshe euel doars to make good me^ to live in peace
and quyetnes. Again they say they be exempted from al kings, princys and
rulers, from all trybute or custum to be paid to Kings, Princys, Emperors,
and that by their own exempcyon from all obedyence of hye powers and rulers.
And not only thus they have exempted themselves, but also they have exempted
many other, as many relygyouse howses, many clerks gyuyng to themselves under
lead annuyte and exempcyon, in so much that it is not lawful for Lyuyll
officers to meddell with a relygyouse man or to correct any fault of a
religyouse man, such be their proud words of vanyte, which they speak.

They have men in great reverence because of advantage. These pseudapostels
prayseth and laudeth men above ye moan, of whom they look to have lucre and
vauntage, be they neuerso euel, never so wicked them they will praise and
laud, them they will flatter saying good to be evil and evil good, swet to
be bitter and bitter swet, darkness to be light, and light to be darkness,
iustyfyenge the evil for money, to whom the prophet Esaias does thret woe
everlasting. Esaie. v. saying woe be to them that says good is evil and
evil good, swet to be sower and sowerswet, darkness to be light and light
darkness, iustifyenge the evil for money, these be flatterers which speak not
those things which the Gospel teaches, but they speak flattery and those
things that pleseth them of whom they hope to have lucre, vauntage, or hye
promotion or dignite. Erasmus in his translacyon has a meruaylouse word, he
says they maruayle at, or they have persons in admiracion for a vauntage (as
who should say) they laud, they praise, they extol persons, ye they make them
half a god and all for lucre sake ye or equal with God, and far above all
men, has not the Popes decrees made the Pope above men, and as he were a god,
look in the decrees and ye shall find it. Do not they make the pope as a god,
which give authoryte to the bishop of Rome to interpret holy scripture after
his pleasure, and as he interprets scripture that it must needs be taken,
and so understand, and that it is not laufull to descent from his
interpretacyon? do not they make the pope as a god, which says that he has
authorytie to bind and loose, what he will in Heaven, and in earth, and at his
pleasure, when the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop can not bind or
lowse, but after the will and pleasure of god? do not they make the pope as a
GOD, which give like authoryte to the decrees of the pope, as to gods word,
gods commaundment, these men I suppose deserves a bysshoppryche or a
cardynallshyp, for their flattering, for their lies, such be they of whom
Jude here speaks, which have men in admyracyon for advantage.

But ye dearly beloved / remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostelles of our Lord Jesus Christ / ho we that they told yo we / that
there should be begylers in the last time which should walk after their
ungodly lusts.
Jude intending to make an end of his pistell exhorts them to whom he
wrote, to remember the words of the apostelles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which said that there should come begylers and deceauers, ye mockers
skorners, and despysers of Gods word, which do despise and set at naught
the word of god preferring man's doctrine above the precepts of God, or at
the leest making man's word equal with gods word to avoid and fle these
men, and their false doctrine, Jude here exhorts the^ and also when there
should come such men yt would despise and scorn gods word, that they should
know that to be the last time, and that these things were fulfilled, which
the Apostelles of our Lord did speak before these false prophets did come,
yt men monysshed of them before, should better know them, and avoid them, and
be ware of them, and their doctrine. Here the apostell byddeth us remember
the words of the apostels of our lord, he byddeth us not remember this decre
or that decre of ye bishop of Rome, to remember this religyon or that religyon,
this custom or that custom, this saying or that saying of the fathers: but
he byddeth us to remember the words of the apostels of our lord, and after
these words to warke and live all our life time. He byddeth not us here look
what this counsel or that counsel have decreed, what the church of Rome have
ordained, what the religion of man has invented: but what the apostels of our
lord Jesus Christ has commanded us in their writings to be kept, and to be
fled and eschewed, these things as necessary to be done, other things as
charity of thy christen brother requires. Some there be that think this
pystel was not written of the apostell of Jesus Christ, for these words that
he exhorts them here to call to remembrance the words of the apostels of
Jesus Christ? To this may this answer be made, that it may well stand
together, the author of this pystell to be an apostell of Jesus Christ, and
also that he exhorts them to call to remembrance the words of the
apostelles of our lord Jesus Christ, and that for diverse causes. First that he
did the same thing here that the apostels of Jesus Christ did, as should
appear by their wrytynges and words. Secondly to teach all other to confyrme
their doctrine by the doctrine of Christ and his apostelles. Thyrdely to
confute the false doctrine of the pseudapostels, which could not be proved by
the words of Christ and his apostelles, his own name or him self he did not
express because of humylitie.

In the last time there should come begilers which should walk after their
ungodly lusts.
He says begylers should come in the last days spoken of before of the
apostelles of Jesus Christ, that men monysshed of them should the better be
ware of them and of their doctrine. But who be they whom the apostell
monyssheth here them to take heed of and to be ware of. First they be these
that contempneth, despyseth, and makes a scoff of the teachynges of holy
scripture, and cou^teth them as folyshnes and vanite, mocketh and scorneth the
sayings of holy scripture, and makes holy scripture and the professors of it
their mockyng stock at tavern or alehouse, at their riot and feastyng, and
byddeth men stick to their old traditions of fathers, saying all ye old
shall come again. I suppose they would say ye bishop of Rome with all his
traditions shall come again, if they durst say so: but this thing is to be
coniectured they mean so saying. Secondly these which live not after the will
of god showed in scripture, but after their carnal desire and lust does live
in ydelnes, wealth and pleasure, nothing regardyng the life of the soul.
Thyrdly these which separate them selves from god, and bring in a new sect
denyeng the lord which has bought them, of whom it is spoken. ii. Petri.
ii. Fourthely these that be beastly men not understanding those things which
are of god, but which are of flesh, not beleuynge the great resurrection of
all that be deed, not beleuyng the judgment of that great day, not beleuyng
any life to be after this life, having no faith to holy scripture, but being
as horses and mules which has no understanding. Fifthly these that have no
spirit of god, no mind to good things, but set their minds to all myschefe,
to all unhappiness contemnyng all heavenly things, and immoderately desiring
all worldely things, yea living so in pleasure as there were neither god ne
devil, neither heaven nor hell, neither life nor death, neither pleasure nor
pain after this life. Therefore the apostell Jude says they be makers of
sects, natural, having no spyryte that is of god, yea no spark of godlynes,
as is before showed, therefore I do pass over that sentence.

But ye derely beloved edyfye your selves in your most holy faith praying i^
the holy ghost / and keep your selves in the love of god, lokyngc for the mercy
of our lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
Jude contynueth still in his exhortation, desiryng them to go for wards in
faith, byldynge them selves upon faith by the holy ghost, prayeng in spirit,
keeping them selves in charity and love of god, warkynge the warkes of charity,
keeping unite, concord, peace, patience, as well in aduersite as i^ prosperity,
lokynge for the mercy of god, which brings to everlasting life, which life
does not come of our warkes, merytes, nor deservings: but by the only mercy
of god, as testifyeth saynct Paul ad Titum. iii. saying, Not of the warkes of
justice which we have done, but by his mercy he has saved us.

And have compassion on some, separatynge them / and other save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire / and hate the fylthy vesture of the flesh.
Jude here shows certain offices of charity toward sinners, and first he
teaches how it becomes men to use them self toward sinners that be not
obstynate, nor obdurate in malice. Secondly as touching obdurate sinners.
First as touching all sinners, it becomes no man to be glad, to rejoice of
any sin, of any vice in any man, but to be sorry for all vice and for all
sin done, or injury done to any, or by any man. Secondly, gentylnesse, mercy,
pytye, compassyon, and pardon is to be used in such as by negligence, by
ignorance, and by infyrmytye of nature be fallen to sin, to rebuke them
softly and gentylly for their sin, to show them the danger of it, to
exhort them to forsake their sin, and to abhor it, to take and enbrace
virtue, and to show the fruytfull commodytyes of virtue and of goodness. And
this is to be done as long as there is hope of amendment. But if so be that
they be so obstynate, and so obdurate in malice, that they will by no gentle
exhortation, nor gentle admonition be plucked from their noughtynesse, but
will continue still in error, in heresye, and in noughty doings, then be you
sorry for them, pray god for them to convert and mollyfye their obstynate
hearts, and turn them to some grace, separate your selves from them, have no
medlyng with them, let them be clear separated from the company of good men,
that they may be at the last confounded and ashamed with them selves, seeing
that every good man forsakes their company, and that for their noughtynesse.
Let this thing be done with all diligence, and with all humanitye. Let nothing
be omytted in you of your duty to win them, and at the lest that their
souls may be sauffe in the day of the lord, if it be possible.

Many there be which sore complayneth of some men called spirytuall men for
their tyranny, crueltye, and vnmercyfulnesse, as touching such as has
erred from the faith, from the gospel, and from holy customs received, whom
they say the bysshoppes has burned, not offering mercy, pardon or gentylnesse
to them, which thing they think to have been a great cause that they were so
styffe in their evil opinion, for the which they have suffered death for, or
else because the punysshement was so opprobryouse that they should have
suffered. If they would have forsaken their evil opinion, that they had
lever have dyed, then to have suffered such an opprobryous punysshement,
which should have been an immortal ignomynye to his name for ever, and to have been a cause that no man should have given credence unto his words afterward,
if he had spoken never so true, and nothing but the gospel of god. Peter
denied his master Christ and did forsake him, and said he never knew him,
and that with an oath. Afterward he was penytente, and God did forgive him
his sins, he was not compelled to bear a faggotte for his offense, for to be
a sign of an immortal ignomynye of his name. Furthermore, if God should
punysshe us for every little fault or offense done against his goodness, and
make us repenting to bear a faggot, I suppose there would be many faggottes
borne in a year, or else few repenters. I do not here speak of such as
has been imprysonned, and vngentylly and vnmercyfully handeled by some
spirytuall men, not for errors or heresye, or for these things that have been
contrary to the holy scripture, contrary to the word of god, contrary to holy
customs received, contrary to such things as agrees with gods word. But
for words spoken against abuses of things used, and because they have been
used, the simple unlearned people and untaught thinks men to speak against
the things used, when men speaks against the abuses. And of that it comes
that diverse true preachers is and has been endited of simple people of
heresye, as they call it, when these simple people does not know which is
heresye, which is the gospel, which is truth, which is falsehede. Therefore
if it would please the hye powers and rulers (to whom it pertayneth to do) to
mytygate the rygorousnesse of that law which to penytent persons deputeth
that they should bear faggottes, or else change that punysshemente in to some
other punysshemente: and also would punysshe all accusers and sclaunderers of
other for heresye with like punishment, if they could not prove it. For now
many men be accused and be sclaundered of heresye, and that for malice, for
envy, for desiring men to do their dewtyes, to preach and teach the people
of god gods word, to fe^de with it, as the people does feade them with tithes
of their benefyces. For this cause men be evil spoken on, have iniuryes done
to them, be sclaundered and be accused of error and heresye: and such men
be accused which be best learned, which has taken most pains to set
forth Gods word trewly, purely, and syncerely, which never in all their
lives did preach error ne heresye, which I dare be bold to say does love
error or heresye worse then any of them that does accuse him, such as be idle
them selves, and will take no pain, no labors to teach their flock
committed to their cure, but will sit all the day and night at ye tavern at
ale houses eating, drinking, feastynge, and making good chere, and at
cards, and dyse passing the time in pleasure, and then is a time conuenyent
to speak evil, to rail, to slander, to accuse true preachers, good
students that would somthyng withdraw them from their good chere and make
them save their souls in the day of the Lord if it would be. Therefore I
suppose verily yt should avoid great tumult, great slander, shameful
accusacyons of error, or heresy, ye I suppose it should be greatly for the
commonwealth, if hye powers and rulers would make legem talionis, that is to
say, that they that slander or accuse other should be punysshed with like
punysshement, as heresies be, if they could not prove their accusation.

This law ordynated should stop much false sclaunder, much false
accusation, much trouble of innocents and poor men: it should make gods
word to be preached all abroad purely and syncerely, it should stop many
sclau^derous and poysonfull mouths, which now care not what they speak of
other, how they sclaunder other, what poison comes out of their mouths of
other, it is unpunished.

An other office of charity there is to deliver from the mouth of the devil
those that be begyled, deceived, or by other ways drawn in to error or
heresye by the doctrine or means of false doctors, to deliver these from
error, from heresye, and so from hell fire, it parteyneth unto charity, of
the which saynct James does speak. Iacobi. v. saying. Brethren if any man
among you has erred from the truth, and any man shall convert him, let him
know that he which has converted him from his error shall save his soul
from death, and shall cover many sins. James also here does not appear that
he would that that man which by ignorance, by negligence, by infirmytye of
tongue or of man has erred from the trewthe in to some error which he has
uttered by his mouth, and showed by sum other good man that he was in an
error, which after he knows to be error, he is sorry for it, that he held
or defended such an opinion that was erronyouse, or any ways contrary unto
the trewthe, which opinion contrary unto the truth he forsakes, and takes
gladly with a good mind the truth, saynct. James does not appear to say that
he would that that man should bear a faggot for speaking of his erroneus
opinion, but he is more merciful then so, as our savior Jesus is merciful
to us all, and makes us not to bear fagottes for every fault but forgeueth us
wyllyge us no more to offend. Thirdely Jude here shows what thing we should
hate in every sinner (that is to say) his spotted cote of the flesh, that is
to say his vices and sins, not the man ordinated and created of God, but his
euelnes, as Paul teaches us Roma. xii. hate you says he, that which is
evil and love that is good, evil therefore is only to be hated, and good to be
loved, and this is it that Jude calls the spotted cote of the flesh,
because all these spots comes of the infirmyte of the flesh.

This last sentence of Jude the old translacyon has moore plainly then
Erasmus translacyon has, he says, reprove you them judged that is to say,
reprove them as worthy to be judged, show them obstynate and as condemned and
noughty persons worthy to suffer punisshment for their sins and obstynacy
in sin: the other that be not obstynate, but by infirmite of nature fallen
unto sin, save and pull them from the fire of hell, which commyth to such as
will not repent, and forsake their sin.

Unto him that is able to keep you / that you fall not and to present you
fautles before the presence of his glory with Joy / that is to say, to God
our savior which only is wise be glory / majesty / domynyon / and power
now and for ever Amen.
Here Jude makes an end of his Epistle gyuinge thanks unto God which only
is wise our Sauyoure which may keep us clear from all sin, and make us
without spots or wryncles in the sight of his glory and may make us only
to rejoice in him and not in our selves, nor in no other creature but only in
God, which has called us before the beginning of the world, that we should be
holy, and without all spots of sin, yea faureles in his sight, as Paul
testifyeth. Ephe. i. to God which is only wise be all honor, glory, Imperye,
domynyon, now and ever world without end

AMEN.
The end of Iudes pystell.
printer's device (?) of Thomas Gibson

Imprynted in the house of Thomas Gybson.


