A SERMON AGAINST OPpression and fraudulent Dealing: PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS,
the eleventh of December, BY CHARLES RICHARDSON, Preacher at Saint KATHERINES
near the Tower of LONDON.

ECCLESIASTES, CHAP. 5. VER. 8. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the
matter: for he that is higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher
then they.

LONDON, Imprinted by George Furslowe for Joseph Brown, and Thomas Harper.
1615.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir JULIUS CAESAR Master of the Rolls, and one of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel: Increase of grace in this life,
and eternal happiness in the life to come:
Right Honorable,
AS it pleased God to give better approbation to this poor Sermon in the
delivering of it, then I expected: I have been earnestly entreated since, by
some of my good friends, to give way that it might be printed. And though I am
not ignorant of mine own inability: yet because I know that God can, and does
work, as well by weak, as by greater means; I have yielded to their request.
I confess it is written in a rude and homely style, and I doubt not, but the
curious censurers of this age, who like nothing but that which is for their
own humors, will carpe and cavil at the plainness of it: but my desire was
to make it appear, that as Barnard says, in the like case, I rather sought
Edification then Ostentation. Now because the means of that maintenance which
I have, is chiefly by your honorable favor, I have therefore presumed to
publish it under your Honors name. And howsoever there be nothing in it worthy
your Honors contemplation: yet I beseech you to accept of it as a poor
testimony of that dutiful affection which most deservedly I owe unto you. The
Lord bless your Honor with increase of all saving graces, that you may long
be a profitable instrument of his glory, both in the Church, and in the common
wealth.

Your Honors in all humble duty and service, C. R.

1. THESSAL. 4.6. That no man oppress and defraude his brother in any matter:
for the Lord is the auenger of all such, as we have told you before and
testified.


THe Apostle Paul having planted a Church at Thessalonica, Act.
17.1.2.3.4.5.15. etc.
and being driven from thence by some malicious enemies of the truth, he made
his abode for a while at Athens: where understanding what troubles and
persecutions were raised up against these new Conuerts, out of his love and
care for their good, 1 Thessalonians. 3.1.2.5
he sends Timotheus unto them, to visit and comfort them. And being
certified by him, with what great patience and invincible constancy they
endured tribulation for the Gospels sake, Ver. 6.7. etc.
because he could not come unto them as he desired, he writes this Epistle,
to confirm and establish them in the present truth. Wherein, in the three
former Chapters, he congratulateth with them for their faith, love, patience,
reverence to the word, and other excellent graces, which God by his spirit had
wrought in them, which gratulation he concludes in the end of the third
Chapter with a gracious prayer in their behalf, Ver. 12.13.
that God, which had begun so good a work in them, would stablish them in
the same unto the end. In the two next Chapters, he exhorts them to
holiness, and to a Christian conversation: And that first generally, that they
should not content themselves with their good beginning, Ver. 1.2.
but increase more and more, and labor to surpass, and to go beyond
themselves. Then more particularly, he descends to the parts of
sanctification, and lays down certain special rules, the better to direct
them how to run in this Christian course. The first respects every man's
own person in the private carryage of himself. Namely, This is the will of
God, Ver. 3.4.5.
even your sanctification, etc. The second respects a man's dealing with his
neighbor, in this verse that I have read, That no man oppress, etc. For it is
not enough for a man, Tit. 2.11.22.
to live soberly in regard of himself, unless he also live righteously in
respect of others. The words are imperfect in themselves, and must be supplied
out of the third verse, in this manner. It is the will of God that no man
oppress and defraud his brother, etc. And this is the coherence that these
words have with the former.

Now for our more orderly proceeding in the handling of them, we have to
consider two things in general. First, the exhortation it self; and secondly,
the reasons whereby it is enforced. In the exhortation we may observe first the
branches of it; secondly, the extent of it. The branches are two. First, that
no man oppress: secondly, that no man defraud his his brother. The first
signifies violence and manifest force: the second, deceitful and fraudulent
dealing; and that by a general consent of the most interpreters. The extent is
either in respect of the persons oppressing and oppressed; no man his brother,
of whatsoever place or condition he be; or in respect of the object, in any
matter whatsoever, great or small. And howsoever these universal terms be not
expressed: yet the proposition being indefinitely set down, it is as much as
if they were expressed. The reasons are likewise two. The first is included in
the word his brother, which (as we shall see afterward) contains in it a very
forcible argument. The second is expressed, and it is taken from the vengeance
of God. For the Lord is the auenger of all such. And this is further amplified
and confirmed by the Apostles former testimony, in the last words, as we have
told you before, and testified. And this is briefly the sum and resolution
of this portion of Scripture: Let us now see the instructions that arise from
thence for our further learning.

(That no man oppress.) This is the first branch of the exhortation. The word
here used in the Original, (...).
does properly signify, to go upon, or to climb upon a man, and to tread him
under foot; representing unto us those persons, who having oppressed a man by
violence, do trample upon him. As we read of Ioshuah, who having vanquished
those five Kings of the Amorites, called the Captains that were with him, and
bad them, put their feet upon their necks. Josh. 10.24.
And to this purpose is that threatening denounced by Moses against the
disobedient Israelites, Deuteronomy. 28.43.
The stranger that is with thee shall climb up above thee on high: and thou
shall come down beneath very low. A plain description of that which is
signified here. And the Church of God complaining of the injuries of her
enemies, says; Psalm. 66.12.
Thou have caused men to ride over our heads. This is referred, as has been
said, to violent oppressions, when they that are mighty and powerful, take
boldness to hurt and wrong those that are under them. As the Apostle James
says, Iam. 2.6.
Do not the rich oppress you by tyranny? etc.

From hence then we observe in the first place, Doctrine.
that oppression is a grievous sin against the will of God. The truth of
this will appear unto us, if we consider how often, and how earnestly the Lord
forbids it in the whole course of the scripturs. He charge the people of
Israel by Moses, Leu 19.13. and 25.17. Prou. 3.29.
Thou shall not oppress thy neighbor by violence, neither rob him. And again,
Ye shall not oppress one another, etc. And Solomon goes yet further; Intend
no hurt (says he) against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee;
thereby teaching us, that we should be so far from doing and practicing hurt
to our neighbor, that we must not so much as intend and devise it in our
thoughts. and 22.22.
And in another place; Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither
oppress the afflicted in judgment. And David makes it a mark and property
of a true member of the Church in this life, and of the kingdom of heaven in
the life to come, Psalm. 15, 3.
that he does no evil to his neighbor. And our Savior Christ delivering the
sum of the Law, Mat. 10.19.
sets down this for one branch of it; Do no hurt. Luc. 3.14.
In a word, John Baptist charge Soldiers, who of all other men commonly take
most liberty this way, that they should do violence to no man. Besides, there
are many reasons to show the heinousness of this sin. First of all, it is
against nature, for every man's neighbor is his own flesh, as it were, Isa.
58.7. Now as the Apostle says, No man (unless he be a mad man) will offer
violence to his own flesh; Ephesians. 5.29. yea, the poorest and meanest wretch in
the world, bears the same stamp and impression of Gods Image that the
greatest does, Genesis 6.6. And therefore one man should be so far from
hurting of another, as that rather he should be a God unto him, as it were,
to protect him, and defend him from wrong to the uttermost of his power. Hence
is it, that there are such titles given to Gods children, as should put them in
mind of that harmelesnes that ought to be in them. They are called Lambs, and
Sheep, and Doves. The Dove, says Barnard, Columba simplex est animal, fell
caret, rostro non laedit. Bern. in die purificat.
is a simple creature, it has no gall, it strikes not with the bill, as other
ravenous fowls do: such should one man be to another: But alas, we see the
common practice of most men is clean contrary: The greatest danger that
befalls man, comes from whence it ought least of all to come, even from man
himself. And now the old Proverb is verified, Homo homini lupus.
One man is a Wolf to another. Nay, there is no brute beast so hurtful to
man, as one man is to another: for they lightly never set upon a man, unless
necessity force them to it: either by hunger, or by fear they are constrained
to fight. But one man takes pleasure to wrong and to hurt another, which
caused Seneca to propound the question, and give the answer; Quid homini
inimicissimum? Homo.
What is the greatest enemy that man has? Man himself. Caetera animantia in
suo genere probe degunt, etc. At homini plutima ex homine mala, Plin. in
Prolog. lib. 7.
All other creatures, as Pliny notes, do live peaceably with those of their
own kind; they all hold together, and stand in opposition against all others.
The Lions though never so fierce; do not fight among themselves: one serpent
does not sting another; yea, the great fishes and monsters of the sea devour
none but those that are of other kinds: But the greatest evils that man
sustayneth, come from man. O humanae malitiae detestanda crudelitas! Ferae
parcunt, aues pascunt* homines insidiantur and saeuiunt. Sermon. 6.
This made Cyprian cry out with wonderment and admiration; O the detestable
cruelty of man's malice! the fierce Lions do spare Daniel in the den: the
ravenous birds do feed Elias in the wilderness: but one man exercises
cruelty upon another.

Secondly, it is against that justice, that ought to be in civil societies,
for the preservation whereof, it is necessary, that men do converse safely
together, and without fear one of another. And therefore it was well said by a
wiseman, that the first foundation of justice is to hurt no body; and the
second, to procure the common benefit as much as lies in a man's power.

Thirdly, it is against Christianity, Vita Christiana est been faciendi and
male patiendi disciplina. 1. Cor. 6.7.
which is a life that teaches a man, to be ready to do well, and to suffer il,
according to that speech of the Apostle* Why rather suffer ye not wrong? Why
rather sustain ye not harm? Implying that a Christian man should rather part
with his own right, then use the lawful remedy of the law, to the scandal
of the Church. Not that it is not lawful for a man to prosecute and maintain
his own right; but to teach us, that if he will not do this, much less will
he spoil and unjustly deprive another man of his right. And this was
prophesied of long before, that in the time of the Gospel, the Wolf shall
dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid, Isa. 11.6.7.8.
and the Calfe, and the Lion, and the fat beast together, and a little child
shall lead them. And the Kow and the Bear shall feed: their young ones shall
lie together: and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock. And the sucking
child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the weined child shall put his
hand upon the Cockatrice hole. Thereby teaching us, that though men by nature
be brutish and savage, like those Indians that Pliny speaks of, Lib. 7.
cap. 2.
who having copulation with wild beasts, do beget a mixed and half wild
brood: yet when it pleases God to convert them, and place them in his
Kingdom, they lay aside their fierce disposition, and live peaceably one with
another. For as it follows in the next verse, None shall hurt nor destroy in
all the mountain of the Lords holiness. And in another place it is said, that
under the Kingdom of Christ, men shall break their swords into mattockes or
plow-shares, Isa. 2.4.
and their spears into sithes, etc. That is to say, those weapons which before
were instruments of cruelty, shall now be turned into instruments of peace.

Romans 13.10.
Fourthly, it is against the rule of Charity; for as the Apostle says, Love
does not evil to his neighbor. And in another place, 1 Cor. 13.6.
Love rejoices not in iniquity, and wrongful dealing. And therefore, they
that care not what injury they offer to their poor brethren, are far from
that charity, that ought to be amongst Christians.

Fifthly, it is odious to all good men, and makes them many times weary of the
world: As Solomon says, Eccles. 4.1.2.3.
I considered all the oppressions that are wrought under the Sun, and behold
the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort them: and on the side of their
oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter. Wherefore, I praised the
dead which are already dead, above the living which are yet alive. And I
account him better then them both, which has not yet been, who has not seen
the evil works which are wrought under the Sun.

Sixthly, it is theft, and worse then theft, 2.2^. q. 66. art. 8.
as Thomas Aquinas does well determine; Oppression and theft are both of them
(says he) to be accounted sins, because they both spoil a man of his goods
against his will: yet so, as in theft, a man is wronged ignorantly, that he
knows not of it: but in oppression, he is wronged by violence; he knows it,
and looks on, and cannot tell how to help it. Now that is more directly
against a man's will, that is done by violence, then that which is done
ignorantly. And therefore, oppression is a more grievous sin then theft.
Again (says he) in oppression, beside the damage done to the party, there is
always some indignity and reproach done to his person, which is far worse
the^ fraud or deceit which is used in theft: Remota iustitia, quid sunt reg na,
nisi magna larrocinia? De Ciuit. Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
whereunto agrees that saying of Saint Augustine; Take away justice, says he,
and what are even kingdoms themselves, but great robberies? And he relates a
story of a famous Pirate, who being apprehended, and brought before Alexander
the great, when the King asked him, what he meant to trouble the sea in that
manner, he replied very stoutly and boldly; What do thou mean to trouble
the whole world? But, says he, because I do it in a little Bark, I am
called a Robber; and because thou do it with a great Army, thou art called
an Emperor. Nay indeed, oppression is far more dangerous then either piracy
by sea, or robbing by land. For Pirates and robbers, being accounted as they
are, common enemies of all men, Vrbani praedatores viuunt, and viuunt, non ad
deponendam, sed ad confirmandam audaciam.
whenever they are apprehended, they are hanged up, or put to some other
death. But these City robbers, as one calls them, they domineir in gold and
purple, and live not to lay aside, but to increase their boldness. And this made
Diogenes laugh heartily, when he saw the Sherifes and other officers lead a
poor thief to execution, that had robbed the treasury; Laert. in eius vita.
Great thieves, says he, lead little thieves to the Gallows. The poor
Snakes, that peradventure for mere necessity break a man's house, or otherwise
pilfer his goods, they lie in prison, Psalm. 107.10.5.
fast bound in misery and iron, both hungry and thirsty, their souls fainting
in them, as David says. But these mighty oppressors, who are the greatest
thieves of all, they stretch themselves upon their beds of yuorie, Amos, 6.4.
Luc. 16.19.
and with the rich glutton, are clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare
delicately every day. Psalm. 109.11.
And hence it is, that David by the spirit of prophecy, cursing his enemies,
amongst other things, he says, Let the extortioner catch all that he has. As
though a man could not be worse plagued, then to fall into the hands of one of
these merciless Oppressors.

Last of all, it is a degree of murder: according to that saying of Sirach; The
bread of the needful is the life of the poor: Eccl. 34.22.
he that defraudeth him thereof, is a murderer. For a man to deprive the poor
of that wherein his life consists, is all one with God, as to take away his
life it self. Nay Antisthenes the Philosopher was wont to say, that oppressors
were more hurtful them common hang-men; for the hangman puts to death none
but malefactors: but oppressors spoil and undo them that are most innocent.

Use.
This doctrine then, to apply it to our times, does serve for the just reproof
of all oppressors whatsoever they be. Oppression is a most filthy bottomless
sink of grievous enormities. Lerna maloru^.
To rip up all the kinds thereof were infinite: and therefore I will deal with
some of the principal. There is oppression in the Church, and in the
commonwealth. I know as Luther said wittily, It is not safe for a poor hare
to preach such doctrine to these Lions, he shall have much ado to escape
their paws: But whatsoever the Lord commands me, that must I speak, Ier.
1.17.
I must not be afraid of any of their forces, lest he destroy me before them.

First then, to begin with the Church. There is oppression there in those
sacrilegious impropriations, whereby the livings of the Church are alienated to
other uses. And this is a very great oppression: for tithes and other revenues
were given to the Church by our devout forefathers, for the maintenance of
Gods worship, and of the Ministry of his Word; and therefore it is the more
grievous sin for any man to incroach upon the^. In iure fori, non in iure
coeli. Aug. de vita and morib. Cler.
I know they that hold them, plead law for their defense. And howsoever their
plea will hold in the court of men, yet it will not hold in the court of
heaven. And yet such is the iniquity of the times, that many covetous Patrones,
even where there is no impropriation, can find means either by unconscionable
Leases, or by sequestration, to withhold the profits from the Church.

But it is in vain to spend any longer time in speaking to the belly that has
no ears. There is little hope ever to prevail with such persons, unless it
please the Lord to put into the hearts of godly Princes, Nehem. 13.11.12.
with good Nehemiah, to compel them to bring their tithes again into the
house of God. What a glorious work would this be for his Majesty, and what a
renowned Parliament would that be, wherein this thing might be effected! And
thus much for the first kind of oppression that is in the Church.

Secondly, there is oppression also in the Commonwealth: and that either in
private affairs, or in public judgment. For the first, It is an ordinary
thing for mighty men, and men of power, in their dealing to oppress those that
are under them. It is true, great men should be to the poor people, Isa. 32 2.
and 14.6. Ezech. 22.29.
as a shelter from the wind, and a covert from the tempest. But for the most
part, they smite the people in anger with a continual plague, and rule them in
wrath, as the Prophet speaks of the King of Babylon; yea they violently
oppress the poor, and vex the needy against right? There is no spectacle
more pleasant to their eyes, then the ruins of the poor. They are greater
plagues and calamities to the places where they dwell, then an inundation or a
fire: for, as the rivers, rising at the first of small beginnings, and
afterward being intolerably increased, do at the last with violence bear
down all before them, and carry it away: so these covetous great men, the more
they increase, the more they oppress, and make the ruins of the oppressed, as
it were steps to the oppression of others. And as the fire, having seized
first upon one house, flies presently to another, and from that to a third,
till, if it be not prevented, it lay all the street even with the ground: so
these persons by cruel oppression ioyn house to house, and land to land, till
there be nothing left for the poor, but lamentable desolation: Nemo potentes
aggreditutus potest. Sen. in Medea.
So that no man can safely converse with, nor live by those that are mighty.
Noui ego istos Polypos, quicquid tetigerint tenent. Plaut. in Ausul. Genesis 10 9.
They are right Polypi, whatsoever they catch by hook or by crook, it is
their own. These are the great Nimrods, the mighty hunters of the earth, that
hunt the poor people as the wild beasts do their prey. These are they, that
count it their glory and felicity, to play the Termagaunts over the poor, and
to terrify them with their power. Peruersa magnitudinis and potestatis
aestimatio est, iniurijs vires metiri. Sen. de Benef lib. 1. Job. 24.10. and
20.19.
But the very heathen man could teach them, that it is a bad estimation of a
man's greatness and power, to measure his strength by the injuries that he is
able to do.

But this sin is chiefly committed by cruel Landlords; partly, by enclosing
the Commons, and decaying tillage, whereby they take the gleaning from the
hungry; yea, they undo many, and spoil houses which they builded not: so that
a man may say of them, that wheresoever they come, desolation and destruction
are in their paths; partly, Isa. 59.7.
by racking their rents, and taking excessive fines; and partly, by making
their Leases void at their pleasure: for with these men Pactum no^ pactu^ est,
non pactum pactu^ est, quod illis lubet, Plaut. in Aulul. Isa. 3.15. Cic. in
Verrem. lib. 4.
that which is covenant to day, shall be none to morrow, and that which is now
no covenant, shall be a covenant when they list. By which kind of dealing,
they beat the poor to pieces, and miserably grind their faces. And to this
purpose they have their prowling Bayliffes, and other Ministers, who like
bloud-hounds hunt about to find out booties for them to seize upon. The whole
land groaneth under this burden. The Lord gave a commandment in the Law, Deuteronomy.
22.6.
that men should not take nor kill the damme with her young: but these
merciless persons, as much as in them lies, by these intolerable vexations,
do even kill the poor mother with her children. Now the causes of all these
hard courses, if any man desire to know, are diverse. The first is ambition,
when men having gotten a deal of wealth together, give many hundredth pounds,
to buy one degree of honor after another, to make themselves great in the
world, and I know not how many thousand pounds, to advance their daughters in
marriage, to make them Ladies or great personages. Then secondly, they must
lash it out, and flaunt it in all bravery of apparel, that they may, at the
least, match them of their own rank. And when by these means they have
emptyed their cofers, they must coin new money on their poor tenants skins.
A third cause is sumptuous building: It is one of the vanities of this age,
that every man, of any degree, must build like Princes: As the Prophet says,
Ier. 22.14.
They will build them great houses, and large chambers, with great windows,
and will siele them with Cedar, and paint them with vermilion. And then not
only their own Tenants, but all the Country about them shall be tired out
with carriages. Poor men are glad to toil themselves and their cattle,
sometimes in the deep of winter, yea sometimes in the midst of harvest, to
bring timber or stones, or other provision, and all for fear of a further
displeasure: for if any man refuse to come at their call, they will be sure to
sit on his skirts, and to pay him home, either by raising him in the Subsidy,
or by doubling his charge for the wars, or one way or other. But let them
remember, what the Prophet denounces against them, Ver. 13.
in the place before alleged: Woe be to him, says he, that builds his
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without equity: he uses his
neighbor without wages, and gives him not for his work. The last cause is
excessive feasting; wherein men are grown to such exceeding riot, that neither
the land, nor the sea, nor the air is sufficient to furnish their tables,
(though the poor get but little relief in many places for all this. Mat.
20.12. Psalm. 127.2.
) The toiling Labourer, who endures the burden and heat of the day, the poor
husbandman and oppressed Tenant, that rises early, and goes late to bed,
does eat the bread of carfulness, and sits with many an hungry meal, his
poor children peradventure crying for food, and all to bring a full diet to
his Landlords Table; As if these men were slaves and servants, and not sons.
Job had a better conceit of those that were his servants indeed, Job. 31.15.
then these persons have of their Tenants. He that has made me in the womb,
has he not made him? These poor wretches, whom thou by thy cruel oppression
causest to toil and moyle like drudges, or else they cannot live; are the
workemanshippe of God as well as thou, and as dear to him as thou art,
notwithstanding all thy greatness, and it may be, dearer.

Last of all, there is oppression in judgment. But dare this ugly monster set
her foul feet on the seat of Justice? Surely, in the times of the Prophets
and Apostles she durst; Else why, Iam. 2.6.
says Saint James, Do not the rich oppress you by tyranny, and draw you
before the judgment seats? making that a means of oppression, which was
ordained to be a protection of the poor. And why does Solomon say, Eccl. 7.17.
that in his observation he has seen a just man perish in his justice? that
though he had a just cause, yet he has been cast in it. Isa. 1.23.
And this the Prophet Isaiah complained of in his time, that the Princes were
rebellious, and companions of thieves; and that every one loves gifts, and 5.7.
and follows after rewards, etc. And that whereas the Lord looked for
judgment, there was nothing but oppression, and for righteousness, and there
was nothing but a crying. And the Prophet Amos says, Amos. 5.7. and 6.12.
that they had turned judgment into worme-wood and gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into hemlocke. And the Prophet Zephaniah is not afraid to affirm,
Zeph. 3.3.
that their Princes were as roaring Lions, and her Judges as ravening Wolves.
But it may be, the times are better now: what then mean those Proverbs, that
are so rise amongst us? As a man is friended, so is his matter ended. And, Cui
vis est, ius non metuit, ius obruitur vi.
might ouergoeth right. As Aesops wolf said to the sheep, when they were in
contention; Thou have a better cause then I, but I have stronger teeth then
thou. And as the Orator said of Verres, Pecuniosus damnari non potest.
A money man can hardly be condemned, be his cause what it will be. There were
certain sacred pictures in the court as Thebes, representing the persons of the
Judges, which were al made without hands, and the chiefest of the^ wa^ted eyes
also: whereby was signified that Judges should be free from bribes, and void of
partiality, that they should be led neither by favor nor affection, that they
should respect neither love nor hatred in determining of causes, whether
criminal or judicial. And let us conceive the best: Let us take it for
granted, that our Judges are most incorrupt, and that, as Justinian said, they
can lift up their hands clean, to God, to the King, and to the law; yet
wrangling Lawyers, if they may have their wills, will cause judgment to be
perverted. They will continue suits, as once says, Lites no^ tantum lustrales,
sed and seculares facient.
not for diverse years only, but for diverse ages; that if a man should live as
long as Nestor did, and begin a fute in his youth, he should hardly make an
end of it in his old age, nay, it is like, he should be constrained to leave
it to his heir to finish; and this they do, that they may enrich themselves
by spoiling their poor Clients. Is it not a grievous oppression, to cause a
poor man to come trotting or trudging up hither, from the furthest part of the
land, Term after Term, and still his cause as far from being ended, as it was
at the first? he in the mean while, does nothing but empty his purse, by paying
fees, first to one, Mar. 5.26.
and then to another. As it is said of the woman in the Gospel, that had been
sick of an issue of blood, twelve years, and had spent all that she had upon
Physicians, and yet it auayled her nothing, but she beeame much worse: So it
fares with most men that go to law in these days: A. Gell. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Idem lib. 11. cap. 9.
for the Lawyer either with Protagoras, with glosing speeches will make the
worse cause seem the better, or with Demosthenes, by mercenary silence, will
betray the good cause, which he has taken upon him to defend; or with
Penelope, as much as he has brought the cause forward one Term, he will
bring as far back again the next Term: or will draw out the web of a
suite so long, till the poor Client want weft to prosecute it; and so after
all his labor and travel, he must be enforced to let it fall; or if he do
at the last recover, and have the matter go on his side, yet he shall be no
great gayner by the match; for as one says, Mayor est expensarum sumptus,
quam sententiae fructus. Aelian. l. 9. c. 18
the charges of the suite are greater, then the costs that shall be awarded
him. This made Themistocles say, that if a man should show him two ways, one
to hell, the other to the bar, he would rather choose that that went to hell.
I do not speak, nor I have not a thought to speak against the use of the Law.
I acknowledge it as necessary for the common wealth, as the sun is for the
world: Est fundamenrum libertatis, fons aequitatis. Cic. pro A. Cluent.
It is the foundation of liberty, the fountain of equity; and as the body is
without the soul, so would the commonwealth be without the Law. Est
propugnaculum mutique tranquilitatis, Cic. in L. Pisonem.
It is the very bulwark and fortress of our safety; the eye whereof is
Prudence, the hand Fortitude, the beauty Justice, and the foundation of it is
laid in Justice: And I doubt not, but there are many conscionable Lawyers, who
deal faithfully in the causes committed to their trust. But I speak against
those base and degenerate professors of the law, which are a blemish and stain
to the rest, and which, like Vultures, do nothing but gape after the prey. By
all these means the poor people are grievously oppressed. To which, I might
add our Non missura autem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. Horat. Psalm. 14.4.
cutthroate usurers, our bloud-sucking brokers, our griping extortioners, which
eat up the people as they would eat bread: but the time would fail me. And
they have been so often cried out upon, both here and in other places, as
there is now no hope of their reformation. They have got them an whores
forehead, Ier 3.3.
as the Prophet says; they cannot be ashamed. And thus much for the first
branch of the exhortation.

And defraud.) This is the second branch. As the former is referred to manifest
and open violence; so this is referred to fraud and deceit. (...). Calvin ad
locu^. 2. Cor. 2.11. (...) 2. Cor. 7.2. (...). 2 Cor. 12.17.18. (...), etc.
The word that is here used, does signify in the Original, by a covetous
desire to circu^uent or defraud a man. And so it is used in other places. The
Apostle applies it to the wiles which the Devil uses to beguile the godly
withal; Lest, says he, we should be circumuented of Satan: for we are not
ignorant of his enterprises. And in another place, he says of himself; We
have defrauded no man, And again, Did I make a gain of you by any of them
whom I sent unto you? I desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother; Did Titus
make a gain of you? The meaning then of it is this; for a man by covetousness
or other evil means, to raise his own benefit out of another man's loss.
Doctrine.


From hence we observe in the next place, that fraudulent and deceitful
dealing is a sin against the will of God, and cannot stand with
sanctification. This is confirmed by the testimony of the Apostle to the
Romans, where reckoning up the sins of them that are given over to a
reprobate sense, among other things he says, Romans 1.29. 1. Pet. 2.1.
they are full of deceit. And therefore the Apostle Peter exhorts all
Christians, to lay aside all guile and dissimulation. Psalm. 101.7.
And the Prophet David protests, that he would not suffer a deceitful
person to dwell within his house. This is also confirmed by diverse reasons.
First, as was said of the former sin: so this also is against nature. And
this the heathen man affirms; Cum duobus modis aut vi aut fraud fiat
iniuria, fraus quasi vulpeculae, vis Leonis videtur, etc. Cic. offic. lib. 3.
Seeing injury, says he, is done two ways, either by force or by fraud, fraud
does as it were, belong to a Fox, and force to a Lion: but both of them are
most repugnant to the nature of man; yet of the two, fraud is worthy of greater
hatred.

Secondly, it is against civil society. Man is a sociable creature. And this
is the Law even of natural society, that whatsoever we would that men should
do to us, we be ready to do the same to them: and on the other side, Mat.
7.12.
whatsoever we would not that men should do to us, we do not so much as offer
it to them. Otherwise, there can be no commerce, nor traffic used amongst
men. For, as Thomas Aquinas says well, Because man is a sociable creature, 2.2
ae. q. art. 3.
one man naturally owes that to another, without which, humane society cannot
be preserved: but men cannot live and converse together, unless they may
believe, and trust one another, as manifesting the truth one to another.

Thirdly, it is a kind of theft, as it is agreede upon by the most Divines,
old and new. Hierome writing upon that place to the Ephesians, In Ephesians. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, etc. has these words, Because it is an
hard matter for them that are conversant in the affairs of this life, though
they be free from other passions, Furtum nominans omne quod alterius damno
quaeritur.
as fornication, etc. not to be guilty of theft: therefore now he warns the
Ephesians, that by occasion of gain, they incur not the danger of theft:
calling that theft, whatsoever is gotten by another man's loss. And Erasmus
said, Show me a liar, and a deceitful person, Ethic. Christ. lib. 2.
and I will show thee a thief. And Danaeus, If any man, says he by craft or
deceit procure loss and damage to another, certainly, he is a thief.

Last of all, it is against Christianity, which requires plain and open
dealing amongst men. The heathen Orator could say, Inter bonos been agier
oportet and sine fraudatione. Cic. Offic. lib. 3. Use. Ier. 5.27.
Amongst good and honest men, there should be good and honest dealing, and
without deceit. Much more should they that profess themselves Christians, be
thus affected.

Here then are justly reproved all kinds of fraudulent and deceitful dealing.
A thing so common at this day, as we may say with the Prophet, As a cage is
full of birds, so are men's houses full of deceit: thereby they are become great
and waxen rich. Now there are many kinds of this sin. I will only insist in
that which is used in contracts, in buying and selling: Merchants and Tradesmen
have been of old condemned generally for covetousness and bad dealing: As a
nail in the wall, says the Wiseman, Eccl. 27, 2.
sticks fast between the joints of the stones: so does sin stick between
the selling and the buying: whereupon among the Hebrews, a Merchant is derived
of a verb that signifies to deceive. I do not deny, but that negotiation and
trading is good in it self, and very necessary for men. For God has so
ordered the matter, that as no Country, so no man, is sufficient of himself,
but must supply his wants by buying of another. Hence innumerable benefits do
redound to mankind, yea, the whole world almost by this means is brought into
a communion and fellowshippe. But now the malice of men has filled it so full
of deceitful tricks, that many Chapmen are little better then thieves and
robbers. That which was spoken of the followers of Antichrist, may be fitly
applied unto them, that few do buy and sell in these days, that have not the
mark of the beast, that is, Apoc. 13.17
that use not lying and dissembling. They have so many false shifts to deceive
those that deal with them, that if a man had Argus his eyes, he should hardly
secure himself from being ouerreached. It is not for nothing, that their
trades are called Mysteries: for there is a mystery of iniquity in the^. And
Crafts: for, as they use the matter, there is little but craft and deceit in
their dealing: Qui cauet ne decipiatur, vix cauet, etiam cum cauet, etia^ cum
cauisse ratus, saepe is cautor captus est. Plaut. in Captiu.
Let a man be never so circumspect, and look never so well to himself, yet it
will go hard, but he shall be fetched over by one trick or other. Stobaeus
ex Theopompo.
It was a custom in Athens, that when men bought or sold any thing, they came
before the Magistrate appointed for that purpose, and there took a solemn
oath, that they had not dealt fraudulently, nor used any cunning or deceit. But
it is far otherwise with us; for both in buying and selling, every man
almost, Mic. 7.2.
as the Prophet says, hunteth his brother with a net. As it is reported of the
fish Polypus, that when she lies in wait for other fishes, Aelian var hist.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
she changes her color into the color of the rock, and so the fishes are
caught before they be aware, in a net which by nature she has behind her head,
and can spread it at her pleasure. So do the Trades men of these days, when a
man comes to them, they insinuate themselves into him, with the fairest and
smoothest words that can be devised: but if he take not the better heed, there
is a net spread to ensnare him, and it will be hard if he be not caught. But it
will be objected, I compel no man to buy my commodities, I only show them and
make the price: let the buyer look to it. Caveat emptor
But the Heathen man will tell thee, In sidiae sunt tendere plagas, etsi
excitaturus non sis nec agitaturus, etc. Cic. lib. 3. Leu 25.14.
that it is bad dealing in thee, to spread a net for thy brother, though thou
do not hunt him and drive him into it; for the wild beasts many times fall
into the net that is laid for them, though no man pursue them. The Lord gave a
strait commandment unto the Jews, that when they sold ought to their
neighbor, or bought any thing of their neighbors hand, they should not oppress
one another. But now there is nothing more common both in buying and selling.
First for buying. It is an ordinary practice especially with great persons,
that if any of their neighbors have any commodity that lies fit for their
use, as Naboths Vineyard did for Ahab, they must have it from him by one means
or other. If he be unwilling to part with it, they will so weary him with
continual vexations, that he shall be constrained to sell it whether he
will or no. Ereptio est, non emptio, cum venditori suo arbitratu vendere non
licet. lib. 4. in Ver.
But as Tullie said well, It is rather a taking by violence, then a buying,
when the seller may not sell at his own choice. Again, let a poor man come
and offer any commodity to sell, the buyer will presently take advantage of his
poverty and necessity, and make him sell it far under the worth. To this
purpose Saint Augustine makes mention of a certain iester, who undertook to
tell the people, what they all most desired. And when a great multitude were
come together, at the time appointed, he stood up, and said with a loud voice,
Vili vultis emere, and chare vendere, de Trinit. lib. 13. cap 3. Prou. 20.14.
You desire to buy cheap, and sell dear: whereunto agrees that saying of
Solomon: It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he is gone, he
boasts of his pennyworth.

Again, in selling, they have innumerable deceitful tricks, and crafty
devises, whereby they set their own souls to sale, and that with such
subtilty, as a simple man shall never discern them, as though they had Gyges
his ring, to make them go invisible. So that as the King of Babel sacrificed
to his net: Heb. 1.16.
so may these sacrifice to their craft.

But to touch some particulars of their bad dealing. First of all, they offend
by lying, -- Before aequo laudat vaenales qui vult extrudere merces. Horat.
lib. 2. Ep.
whiles they set a far greater commendation on their wares, then they deserve:
for so they may gain, though it be by lying, they care not. They sing that
song of Curio, Vincat vtilitas. Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
Let profit prevail. And yet the heathen man that never knew God, has taught
to the shame of us Christians, that all lying must be taken from contracts.

Secondly, if lying will not serve the turn, they add swearing and
forswearing, and so, as much as in them lies, they make God a false witness.
Quis metus aut pudor est vnquam properantis auari? Iuuen. Sat. 14.
For what sin so heinous, which a covetous wretch, that makes haste to be
rich, will be either afraid or ashamed to commit? They will swear it cost them
so much, and yet, rather then all fail, they will sell it better cheap: they
will swear they give you the buying, and they would not sell it so good cheap
to another, though they never saw you before.

Thirdly, they sin in inhaunsing and raising the price of their commodities
above measure. As the Prophet says; Amos 8.5.6.
They make the shekell great, that they may buy the poor for silver, and the
needy for shoes. This is the practice of them that ingrosse a commodity into
their hands when it is cheap, and keep it up till it be dear, that so they
may sell it at their own price. The very light of nature has condemned this
sin: as the Heathen Orator puts this case to such persons; Offic. lib. 3.
namely, If a man, in the time of a great dearth, bring a Ship from beyond Sea
laden with corn, and know that there are a great many more Ships coming
within a few days, if he dissemble this, and take advantage of the present
want, and sell his corn at too high a rate, he is condemned for hard and
unjust dealing. This point is very well determined by Thomas Aquinas: 2. 2 ae.
q. 77. art. 1.
Buying and Selling (says he) was devised for the common good of both
parties, and in that respect, it ought not to be a greater grieuance to one
then to another: and therefore a contract ought to be made according to the
equality of the thing; and that must be measured according to the price that
is given. And therefore, if either the price exceed the worth of the thing, or
the thing exceed the price, the equality of justice is taken away: And
therefore, to sell dearer, or to buy cheaper then the thing is worth, is in it
self unjust and unlawful.

Fourthly, they offend in showing one thing, and selling another. And herein
they are their Craftsmasters: for they have such cunning conueyance, and
sleight of hand, as a simple man cannot suspect, much less discern them.

Fifthly, they sin in using false waights and unjust measures; making, as the
Prophet says, Amos. 8.5.
the Ephah as small, as they make the shekel great. This is most abominable in
the sight of God, as Solomon says; Prou. 11.1.
False balances are an abomination unto the Lord. To this purpose, there was a
very strait charge in the Law: Deuteronomy. 25 13.14.
Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of waights, a great and a small;
neither shall thou have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small: but
thou shall have a right and just weight: 15.
a perfect and a just measure shall thou have; that thy days may be lengthned
in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee: 16.
for all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are abomination
unto the Lord thy God. And the Lord speaks with indignation to the people of
Israel: Mic. 6.10.11.
Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant
measure that is abominable? Shall I justify the wicked balances, and the
bag of deceitful waights? As if he should say, I will not justify, but
condemn them. Besides, waights and measures are instruments as it were of
justice and equity; for thereby things that are unjust, should be reduced unto
equity. And therefore if there be any iniquity in them, it is so much the more
displeasing unto God. And look how much men take from the just measure, so
much of the wrath and displeasure of God do they purchase to themselves. In a
word therefore, let all men remember, what the Lord requires in this case: Ye
shall not do unjustly, Leu. 19.25.36.
says he, in judgment, in metyard, in weight, or in measure, ye shall have
just balances, true waights, a true Ephah, and a true Hin. I am the Lord, etc.
But if the waights and measures be in themselves never so right and just, yet
if they have cunning tricks to falsify them by deceit, Amos. 8.5.
that a man cannot have that he pays for, it is all alike odious in the
sight of God.

Sixthly, they sin in selling bad and unprofitable wares in stead of good. As
the Prophet complains of the Jews, Amos. 8.6.
that they would sell the refuse of the wheat. It is a lamentable thing to
see, what baggage stuff Apothecaries and Chandlers sell to poor people, and
make them pay as dear as if it were the best. And this is the general
complaint concerning sale wares, that men care not how slightly it comes out
of their hands: and that there is nothing almost made so good, and so durable
as in former times.

Last of all, they sin in concealing from the buyer, the faults of that they
sell, and so suffering him to be deluded. 2. ^ae. q. 77. art. 3
Thomas Aquinas speaks very well to this point. It is always unlawful,
says he, to give to any man occasion of loss or danger. But the seller that
offers any thing to sell, does herein give the buyer occasion of danger or
loss, in that he offers him a thing that is faulty, if by the fault thereof
he incur danger or loss. Loss, if for such a fault, the thing that is to
be sold, be less worth, and yet he for that fault will abate nothing of
the price. And danger, if for such a fault the use of the thing be made either
unprofitable or hurtful. As for example, if a man sell one a lame horse, for a
swift running horse, or a ruinous house, for a strong house, or corrupted and
poisoned meat, for that which is good. Whereupon, says he, if these faults be
secret and he do not discover them, it is unlawful and fraudulent selling,
and the seller is bound to recompense the loss. Yea, this sin is exceedingly
condemned by the heathen man. Cic. offic. lib. 3.
Who sees not, says he, what a thing this kind of concealing is, and what a
manner of man he is that uses it? Surely, he is no plain dealing man, no
honest man, no ingenious man, no just, no good man; but rather a subtle, a
base, a fraudulent, a deceitful, a malicious, a cunning, a sly, and a crafty
knave. But the Chapmen of these days are so far from making known the faults
of the commodities they sell, as that rather they do of purpose darken their
shoppes, that the buyer cannot see what he buyeth, Isa. 59 10.
but must grope at noone day, as if it were twilight. By this practice, as one
says well, they show themselves to be the children of darkness, and their
deeds to be the deeds of darkness: yea they bewray, that they have a
desire to do evil, and to deal badly. For, as our Savior says, Ioh. 3.20.
Every man that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. And therefore, because they love
darkness more then light, 19.
let them take heed they hear not that woeful sentence denounced against them,
Bind them hand and foot, Mat. 22.13.
and cast them into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. These are some of the unconscionable practices that are used by
Tradesmen in buying and selling, and these are so common at this day, as it is
accounted a folly for any man to do otherwise. Every body will confess, that
plain dealing is a Jewel, but they say, he that uses it, shall die a
beggar. Yea, they train up their servants and Apprentises to these courses. Eo
laudabilior, quo fraudulentior. Aug. confess. l. 1
And if any of them prove more cunning and crafty to ouerreach men that come
into their shops, then the rest, he is more commendable and better accounted
of. So that by that time they have served out their years, partly by their
own inbred corruption, and partly by their Masters ill example, Mat. 23.15.
as our Savior Christ said of the Jewish Proselites, they become twofolde
more the children of hell, then their Masters are. And thus much for the
exhortation, and the several branches thereof. The reasons follow.

His Brother.) The first reason, as has been said, is included in this word,
Brother, and it carries great force and weight with it. It was the argument
that Abraham used to Lot: Genesis 13.8.
I pray thee let there be no strife between thee and me, for we are brethren.
And it was the argument that Moses used to the Hebrews that strove together:
Act. 7.26.
Sirs, ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? 3. q. 28. art. 3.
Now men are called Brethren, as Thomas Aquinas observes, four ways in the
Scriptures: First, by nature, and that either by birth, as Jacob and Esau,
borne both of the same Parents; or by blood, and so all mankind are brethren:
Act. 17.26.
For, as the Apostle says; God made of one blood all mankind, to dwell on all
the face of the earth. Secondly, by Country; and so the Apostle calls the
Jews that were his Countrymen, Romans 9.3.
his Brethren. Thirdly, by Kindred, as they that come all of one stock or
lineage: and so our Savior Christ is said to have brethren and sisters; Is not
this the brother of James, and Ioses, and of Judas, Mar. 6.3.
and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And yet we know that his
blessed Mother remained a Virgin both before and after his birth. Fourthly, by
Affection. I might speak of all these, and show the force of the argument in
every one of them: but I will insist only in the last, which is chiefly meant
in this place; and indeed it is the strongest of all the rest, and does most
of all bind us to procure the good one of another, Ephesians. 2.16. Romans 12.5. Doct.
it being our conjunction with Christ our head, and then in him one with
another, whereby we are al made one body, and every one one another members.
This then does teach us, that it is a grievous sin for one Christian to
oppress or defraud another. True, it is not lawful to offer violence to any
man. If there were no other reason, yet even in this very respect, that he is
a man, we must not do him any wrong, no though he were our utter enemy. Mat.
5.44.
As our Savior Christ says; Love your enemies, do good to them that hate
you, etc. And the Apostle exhorts; If thine enemy hunger, feed him, Romans
12.20, 21
if he thirst, give him drink, etc. And be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with goodness. Much less must we hurt or harm those that are
Christians, of the same profession with our selves. To this purpose there are
seven bounds set down by the Apostle, which, if any thing will prevail, might
serve to contain us in our duty.

There is one body, and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.
even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation. There is one Lord, one
faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. There is one body. As in the
natural body, there is no member more for it self, then for the whole; so it
should be in this mystical body: Those that are, as it were, eyes and hands,
must not oppress the feet. There is one spirit, which is, as it were, a soul
in this body, which knitteth all the members thereof a great deal nearer, then
the members of the natural body are coupled with joints and sinews. There is
one hope of our calling, Ephesians. 4.16.
whereby we are called to an inheritance in the Kingdom of heaven. There is
one Lord, whose servants we all profess our selves to be. And therefore, as
they that serve one Master, and live in one house, ought not to wrong one
another: no more should we that would be accounted of Gods household, offer
injury to our fellow servants. Mat. 24.49.
There is one faith, whereby we believe the same gracious promises of God for
our comfort. There is one Baptism, wherein we all promised before the God of
heaven, before Angels and men, to renounce all the cursed deeds of darkness.
Last of all, there is one God the Father of us all, not only by creation, as
he is also of the wicked and unreasonable creatures (in which respect Job
calls the crawling worms his sisters;) but chiefly, Job. 17.14.
by grace and regeneration, Quae si non prosunt singula, multa iuua^t.
and we all would be reputed his children. There is never a one of these
bonds, but even single by it self, it might be of force to tie us to the good
behavior toward our brethren: but all of the^ laid together, cannot chufe,
if there be any spark of grace, but mightily prevail with us.

And therefore, to apply this in a word, it serves to reprove those that
break all these bonds. Solomon says, a threefold cord is not easily broken.
Eccl. 4.12.2.
But here is a greater cord; here are first, as we have heard, four arguments
of brotherhood, Hos. 11.4.
then, here are seven bonds of love, to tie and unite us in affection one
toward another. And yet all these are not strong enough. There are a number of
false brethren in all the former respects. Gal. 2.4.
And it is hard to find any in this age, 1. Cor. 6.8.
that will not do wrong, and do harm even to their brethren. So that as the
Prophet says, Every man must take heed of his neighbor, Ier. 9.4.5.
and not trust in any brother: for every brother will use deceit, and every
friend will deal deceitfully: and every one will deceive his friend, and will
not speak the truth: for they have taught their tongues to speak lies, etc.
Yea, many are grown to that pass, that they will deceive their own fathers.
The sacred profession of religion, which ought to be the nearest of all bonds,
that heaven and earth can affoorde, is violated and trodden under foot. Yea, it
is too evident, that there are many, that use their profession for a cloak of
maliciousness. 1. Pet. 2.16. Gal. 5.13.
They think that men will the sooner believe and credit them fot their
profession sake, and so by that means they do the more dangerously deceive.
And hereby it comes to pass, that the mouths of profane persons are opened
against them, and the holy name and Gospel of God is disgraced: for indeed
there can no greater reproach redound to the Gospel, then when they that are
the professors of it, make no conscience of their dealing. According to that
speech of the Apostle; Romans 2.24.
The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. 2. Sam. 12.14.
And so Nathan told David, that by that wicked deed of his, he had caused the
enemies of God to blaspheme. For this is the property of the ungodly, that
whatsoever they can find amiss in a man that professes religion, presently
they impute it to the profession, and to the religion it self. And hence it
is, that Papists on the one side, and Atheists on the other side, do exclame
against us. These are your professors, these are your Bible-bearers, these are
they that will not miss a Sermon, and yet they will dissemble as deeply, and
use as much bad dealing as other men. And doubtless, this is that which
disgraceth this famous City; that having the Gospel so plentifully as they
have, and making such a profession of religion as generally they do, yet there
is so little conscience and equity in their dealing. And therefore, let them be
exhorted in the fear of God, to walk answerably to their profession, that so,
as the Apostle says, They may take away occasion, 2. Cor. 11.12.
from them that desire occasion against them. There is nothing in the world
that ought to be so dear unto a Christian man, no not his own life, as the
credit of the Gospel. And therefore, as we tender it, and would be loath to
expose it to contempt, by the slanderous reproaches of wicked men; let us make
conscience of our ways; that they that speak evil of us, as of evil doers,
1. Pet. 3.16.
may be ashamed, when they shall see our good conversation in Christ. And thus
much shall suffice briefly to have spoken of the first reason, in this word
Brother.

For the Lord is the auenger of all such.) This is the second reason, which is
plainly expressed. And it is taken from the vengeance of God, that they that
will not be drawn by love, may be forced by fear. And it is added by due
order to that which is supplied out of the third verse; namely, It is the will
of God, that no man oppress or defraud his brother: for the vengeance of God
does always follow the violating of his will. Now it is to be observed, that
the Apostle does use here the present time: because the Lord not only will
be, but also has been in all the ages of the world, and still is at this
day, the auenger of all such things.

Doctrine.
From hence we learn, that the Lord will most surely punish all oppression and
fraudulent dealing, and all injury that a man does to his neighbor. Prou.
22.22.23
The Scripture is plentiful in the proof of this point. Solomon says, Rob not
the poor, because he is poor, etc. For the Lord will defend their cause, and
spoil the soul of those that spoil them. And the Lord gave a strict charge
to the people of Israel, and enforced it with a severe threatening: Exodus
22.22.23.24.
Ye shall not trouble any widow nor fatherless child. If thou vex or
trouble any such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry.
Then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. Where we see, that the
Lord will pay them home in their own kind. And to this purpose says the
Prophet David; Psalm. 12.5.
Now for the oppression of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will
up, says the Lord, and will set at liberty him whom the wicked has snared.
and 10.14
And in another place; Thou beholdest mischief and wrong, that thou may
take the matter into thy hands: the poor commits himself unto thee: for
thou art the helper of the fatherless. And the Apostle testifyeth, that it is
a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.
With men many times they are not punished, Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura
columbas, Iuu. sat. 2. Cic. in Ver. l. 3. Col 4.1.
the law takes little hold of them. They break through the laws, as great
flies do through the cobwebbes: yea, such is their power and might, that no
man dare call them into question; yea, men had rather endure any thing, then
complain of their wrong and injuries. But GOD who is most just, will revenge
all injustice: as the Apostle says to earthly Masters; Ye Masters, do unto
your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a
Master in heaven. Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit, Mayor hoc vobis dominus
minatur. Sen in Thyeste
So it may be said to all great persons; See ye offer no violence to those
that are under you, for there is a greater then you in heaven. According to
that speech of Solomon; Pro. 23.10, 11.
Romooue not the ancient bounds, and enter not into the fields of the
fatherless: For he that redeemeth them, is mighty, he will defend their cause
against thee. Non di^simulat iniuriam filii Pater. De aduent. Dom. Sermon. 1.
Ecclus. 35.15.
A Father (says Bernard) will not dissemble the injury that is done to his
child: Much less will our heavenly Father put up the wrongs that are done to
his children. Do not the tears run down the widows cheeks? (says the
wise man) and her cry is against him that caused them: from her cheeks do
they go up unto heaven, and the Lord which hears them, does accept them.
There is never a tear, which cruel Tyrants wring from the eyes of the poor,
Psalm. 56.8. and 58.11.
but the Lord puts it into his bottle, and in the end he will make it
appear, that there is a God that judges the earth. But not to dwell thus in
the general, let us see how and by what means the Lord does revenge them:
surely the Lord has many ways even in this life to take vengeance of
oppressors and wrongful dealers. And first of all, by the curses of the
people that are oppressed by them: For if the people will curse him that
withdraws his own corn in the time of dearth; Pro. 11.26.
much more they that by oppression take corn from the poor, shall bring many a
bitter and heavy curse upon themselves: but it may be they pass not much for
this; The Fox fares best when he is cursed. Therefore the Lord does punish
them with infamy and disgrace, that their very names do rot and stink. Pro.
10.7.
Their cruel and unconscionable dealing opens all men's mouths against them,
and makes every body cry out on them: it may be, not to their faces, for it is
like, they have trencher slaves ynow that flatter them, Turpe est monstrari
digito and dicter hic est.
and extol them to the sky: but they cannot walk in the streets, no nor ride
in their Coaches, but they are poynted at, and rayled upon. But it may be they
care not much for this neither, but rather do boast themselves and glory in
it; Quid enim saluis infamia nummis? In. sat. 1.
For what is disgrace, so long as a man has his bags full of money? He can
sing with that old Churl in the Poet: Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo Ipse
domi, simulac nummos conte^plor in arca, Horat. lib. 1. sat. 1. Genesis 41.20, 21.
Job. 20.15.19.
The people hisseth at me abroad, but when I come home, and see my coffers
full of coin, I can applaude and make much of my self. And therefore the Lord
does punish them sometimes with poverty: that as those seven lean kine, which
Pharaoh dreamed of, did eat up the seven fat kine, and yet were neither fuller
nor fatter: So, though those great oppressors, by undoing many, devour much
substance: yet, by the just hand of God upon them, many times they are never
the richer. And this the Lord threatens by the Prophet, saying; Isa. 33.1.
Woe be to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled, etc. When thou shall cease
to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shall make an end of doing
wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee. Hab. 2.7, 8.
And in another place: As in the Sea one fish deuoureth another, and a greater
comes after and deuoureth them both: So many times it comes to pass, that
they which take delight in spoiling others, become a prey to some that are
mightier then themselves. And this commonly befalls them who have been
instruments of oppression unto other men, who in the end deal with them,
Sueton. in eius vita.
as Vespasian did with his Officers; he used them as spunges to suck up the
substance of the poor, and when they were full, he crushed them out into his
own vessels. So true is that saying; Non habet euentus sordida praeda bonos,
Ovid. Amor.
Basely gotten gain never comes to good.

Sometimes the Lord punishes them with barrenness, that they go childlesse
to their graves, and though they gather a deal of wealth together by
unconscionable courses, yet they have no heir to leave it to when they have
done. Eccles. 4, 8.
Solomon has a saying to this purpose: There is one alone which has neither
son nor brother, yet is there no end of all his travel, neither can his eye
be satisfied with riches, neither does he think, For whom do I travel, Psalm.
39, 6.
etc. And David says; He disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches,
and cannot tell who shall gather them.

Sometimes the Lord takes them away by untimely death. As David says; Psalm.
55.23.
The bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days. And
hereof we have experience (as also of the former;) for we see many of these
unconscionable persons, that care not how they oppress and defraud others to
enrich themselves, Die in their full strength, as Job says, Job. 21.23, 24.
when their breasts are full of milk, and their bones run full of marrow.

Sometimes they are punished with a reprochful and ignominious death, the poor
people insulting over them, as once they did over the King of Babel when he was
dead: They took up this Proverb against him, Isa. 14, 4, 5.
and said; How has the oppressor ceased! and the gold-thirsty Babel rested!
The Lord has broken the rod of the wicked, and the scepter of the rulers,
etc. And again, 7.10, etc.
The world is at rest, and is quiet, they sing for joy. And a little after;
They cried, and said unto him, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou
become like unto us? etc. It is like they shall be buried with great state, and
some clawbacke or other, in a funeral sermon, Isa. 32, 5.
will not stick to commend them above measure, and to call the niggard
liberal, and the churl bountiful: but in the mean while, the people will
deride them. And which is worst of all, though as the Prophet says, Ezech. 32,
27.
They go down to the grave with their weapons of war, etc. yet their
iniquity and their oppression is in their bones.

Sometimes they are punished in their posterity, which for the most part come to
beggary. There is a fearful saying in the Prophecy of Nahum. The Lion,
Nahum. 2, 12, 13.
says the Prophet, did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and worried for
his Lioness, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with spoil. But
mark what follows: Behold, I come unto thee, says the Lord, and I will burn
her charrets in the smoke, and the sword shall devour the young Lions, and I
will cut off thy spoil from the earth, etc. whereby we see, that though great
men, like Lions, spoil and devour on every side, yet their children shall be
little better for it. Job. 27.1^.14.
According to that which Job says; This is the portion of a wicked man with
God, and the heritage of tyrants which they shall receive of the Almighty: If
his children be in great number, the sword shall destroy them, and his
posterity shall not be satisfied with bread. But it is worthy our observation,
to consider what means the Lord in his providence uses to bring this to pass.
Many times he takes away the covetous father, before his son and heir come
to age, at least before he come to discretion to manage his estate; and then
my young Master lasheth it out, and can stand on no ground, Quodcunque profunda
Traxit auaritia luxu peiore refundit. Claudian.
till with a forke he have cast abroad all that his father gathered together
with a rake. We need not go far for instances in this case. There has been
sufficient experience of it in this City. Have not your eyes seen mountains
of wealth, heaped up by unjust courses, suddenly thawed away like ice before the
sun, and melted like wax, when it has felt the heat of the fire? And this
is that which is spoken in our common Proverb; Male parta, male dilabuntur.
Evil gotten goods are evil spent. Nay a small thing that is evil gotten,
will by the just judgment of God prove a canker, to waste and consume a great
deal that is well gotten. Raro gaudebit tertius haeres.
And though peradventure, this prove not true in the first heir, yet such
goods do seldom continue to the third generation.

Another punishment that God inflicteth upon such persons, is this, that their
prayers are not heard. As the Lord himself threatens them: Isa. 1.15.
Though ye make many prayers, I will not hear, because your hands are full of
blood. And Sirach says well to this purpose; Eccl. 34.25.
When one prays, and another curses, whose voice will the Lord hear? How
then can they look to have their prayers heard, when a great number of those
whom they have oppressed, do cry for vengeance against them? If a man should
come before an earthly Judge to crave favor for himself, and a multitude of
poor men, with their wives and children should fall on their knees before the
Judge, and complain what wrong and injuries he has done unto them, the judge
would never respect him; much less can such persons look for any favor at
Gods hand, so long as the cry of the oppressed is in his ears.

Sometimes they are punished with a guilty conscience, as one says well, They
have gain in their cofers; Lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia, etc. Romans
2.5.
but loss in their conscience; yea gain that is unjustly come by, is a woeful
treasury. Such persons do treasure up to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, etc. Every penny that is hoorded up by sinful courses, will bring
with it in the end a pound of horror of conscience. These are the punishments
wherewith God takes vengeance on oppressors and fraudulent persons in this
life. And though it should fall out, that they should escape all these, 1. Cor.
6.9.10.
yet there is a far worse after this life; and that is, they shall for ever
be excluded out of the Kingdom of heaven. And therefore let me use that
exhortation of the Prophet David unto them; O consider this, you that forget
God, Psalm. 50.22.
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you: For as the
Apostle says; Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

But it may be they will object: They hope to do well enough for all this;
They will do some deeds of Charity when they die: they will build an
Hospital or an Alms house, or some way or other relieve the poor, and that
shall make amends for all. But let all such persons know, that the Prophet
makes this a special property of a godly man, to give his own bread to the
hungry. Ezech. 13.7.
Upon which place Hierom well observes, that the Prophet does sufficiently say,
his own bread, lest me^ should turn bread gotten by oppression and usury, into
a work of mercy; As we see many do, says he, who oppress by their power, or
commit theft, that of much they may give a little to the poor; and the
Minister may make mention of their names among the benefactors. They please
themselves in the applause of the people, when their conscience stingeth and
vexes them within. I do not deny, but the poor may be much relieved and
comforted by this means: but whether it will be acceptable to God or no, that
is the question Barnard has a sweet saying to this purpose: Non recepit
Eleemosynas de manu raptoris aut foeneratoris. Credo non redolebant lilia manus
illae; and propterea respuebat munus exillis, qui pasci inter lilia consueuit,
and non inter ^spinas in Cant. Sermon. 71.
God receives not, says he, any alms at the hands of an oppressor, or an
usurer; I think his hands do not smell of lilies, but of thorns, and therefore
he refused to take a gift from them, who feeds among the lilies, and not
among the thorns. Yea Plinius Secundus, though an heathen man, speaks very
gravely concerning this point. Pauperes non vt ferarum catuli sanguine and
caedibus muriendi: quodque gratissimum est accipientibus, scient dari sibi quod
nemini est ereptum. Paneggyr. ad Traianum. Prou. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.28.
The poor, says he, are not to be fed like the whelps of wild beasts, with
blood and murder. But then is a gift most acceptable to them that receive it,
when they know that that which is given to them, is not taken from some body
else. When a man shall think, this meat that I eat, was taken out of the
mouths of many fatherless children: this gown or this apparel that I
wear, was taken from the backs of the poor: and he that provided this
harbor and lodging for me, turned many poor people out of doors, it cannot
be so comfortable unto him as otherwise it would. And therefore Solomon
exhorts men to honor the Lord, but, with their own riches. And the Apostle
would have men to leave stealing, and to work with their hands the thing that
is good, that they may have to give to him that needs. That that is given to
the poor, must not be gotten by unlawful means, but by honest labor: for as
Saint Augustine says well, Quale est illud munus quod alter cum gaudio
accipit, alter cum lachrymis amittit?
What a manner of gift is that, which one receives with joy, and another
loses with grief? When David made provision for building the Temple, and saw
how chearefully the Princes offered thereunto, he makes a solemn thanksgiving
to God, and acknowledges that they had first received all from God. 1. Chr.
29.14.
Of thine own hand, says he, have we given thee. That which men give to God,
they must first receive of Gods hand, and not of the devils hand. For if it be
unjustly gotten, it is so far from pacifying, as it will rather provoke the
wrath of GOD against them, Luc. 19.8.
unless with good Zacheus they first make restitution. And therefore to
conclude this point; let me say unto them, as Daniel said to the King of
Babylon; Dan. 4.24.
Let my counsel be acceptable unto them, let them break off their sins by
righteousness.

As we have told you before and testified.) This latter reason is confirmed
by the Apostles former testimony; he had before seriously reproved them for
these sins, and had denounced the judgments of God against the^. From this
constancy of the Apostle, we that are the Ministers of the Word, are taught,
that we must not coldly and remissly reprove men's sins, but oppose the
threatenings of the Word, and the vengeance of God against them. Isa. 58.1.
This the Lord commanded the Prophet Isaiah; Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sins. Ministers must be (as Christ called James and John)
Boanerges, that is, Mar. 3.17.
the sons of thunder: they must thunder and lighten against vngodlnesse and
sin. And therefore the Apostle gives Timotheus a strait charge, 2. Tim. 4.2.
that in preaching of the Word, he improve, rebuke, etc. Tit. 2.15.
And he commands Titus to rebuke with all authority. And again, he says to
Timotheus, Them that sin, rebuke openly, 1. Tim. 5.20.
that the rest may fear. The reason is evident. For such is the dulnes of men's
nature, that of themselves they are not affected with any sense of Gods
judgments: yea they are so blinded with self love, and so hardened with the
deceitfulnes of sin, that willingly they will not acknowledge themselves to be
sinners. And therefore, the Minister must pull the vizard from their faces, and
hold the glass of Gods law before them whether they will or no, that so they
may see their sins, and the vengeance due unto them. Thus did the Prophet
Nathan with David, when he lay in his sin for a time without repentance; he
tells him plainly, 2. Sam. 12.7, 8, 9.
Thou art the man, thus and thus has God blessed thee, and thus and thus have
thou rewarded him; and therefore thus and thus will the Lord be revenged of
thee. And thus did the Apostle Peter with those secure and careless Jews, who
for the space of fifty days were not so much as once touched for their sin; he
labors to convince their consciences, that they had imbrued their hands in
the blood of the son of God.

Ministers, who only preach pleasing and smooth things unto the people, Isa.
30.10.
and sing them a song of mercy only, without any mention of judgment; who sow
pillowes under men's arme-boles, Ezech. 13.18.
as the Prophet speaks, to make them sleep more securely in their sins. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.
The Apostle Paul took another course with this people; for he takes
themselves to witness, that he never used flattering words. And speaking of
the abuses and corruptions, which the Corinthians had brought into the Lords
Supper: 1. Cor. 11.22.
What shall I say to you says he, shall I praise you in this? Stapleton Domini.
in 3. quadrages.
I praise you not: whereupon, one, though otherwise none of the best, said
very well; They are Ministers of Satan, that dare promise peace to a wicked man
without repentance. And it is the greatest deceiving that can be, to secure a
man that lives in the state of sin.

Minister should denounce threatenings of Gods judgments against their sins.
Ezech. 13.10. Ier. 6.14.15.
So long as the Minister does daube with untempered mortar, so long as he will
heal their hurt with sweet words, and stroke their head in their sins, so
long as he will not open his mouth against their sins, but rather will give
them a placarde to continue in them; yea it may be, will run with them to the
same exercise of riot; 1. Pet. 4, 4.
he is a Preacher for their tooth, then they love him and commend him: but if
in conscience of his duty, he will rebuke them sharply, and not suffer them
to sin, Leu 19.17.
then they cry out of him, as they did of the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 15, 10.
to be a contentions man, and a man that strives with the whole earth. Thus
did Abab with Michaiah; 1. Reg. 22, 8.
There is (says he) another Prophet, but I hate him, for he does not
prophecy good unto me, but evil. I can never hear him, but he vexes me; he
is always telling me of my sins. And the Apostle says, that the Galatians
accounted him their enemy, because he told them the truth. Yea, Gal. 4, 16.
if it be possible, they will find some cavil or other against their
doctrine, that so they may accuse them as enemies to the State. As Amasiah that
false Prophet complained of Amos, that he had conspired against the King,
Amos. 7, 10.
and that the land was not able to bear his words. And if their words will
serve, he shall hardly escape without violence. As Jeroboam, when the Prophet
threatened Gods judgments against him for his idolatry, he cried, 1. Reg. 13,
4.
Lay hold on him. And Amasiah said to another Prophet in the like case, Have
they made thee the Kings Counselor? cease, why should they smite thee? But
this is a more grievous sin, then men are aware of. Solomon says, Prou. 29,
1.
A man that hardneth his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and cannot be cured. And doubtless, the time will come, that they
shall curse the time, that ever they gave credit to flattering Preachers. As
the Church complains in the Lamentations, Thy Prophets have looked out vain
and foolish things for thee, Lament. 2, 14.
they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, etc.
Confessing, that if their Prophets had dealt sincerely with them, and brought
them to the sight of their sins, they had repented of them, and so had not
gone into captivity. Nay, it is the greatest token of Gods anger that can be,
when he sends such clawbacke Ministers unto a people. Hos. 9.7.
As the Prophet plainly shows; The days of Visitation, says he, are come,
the days of recompense are come; Israel shall know it. And because the people
might object; Our Prophets tell us otherwise, they persuade us, that God is a
merciful God, and that having set his love upon us, to make us his peculiar
people, he will not thus reject and cast us off: Therefore the Prophet meets
with them in the next words, Does your Prophet, Zanch. in locu^.
says he, tell you so? then the Prophet is a fool, and the man of the spirit,
(that is, the false Prophet, that boasts he has the spirit of God, and that
he speaks by it) is mad. And whereas they might object further, Why then
does the Lord send us such Prophets? He answers, that for the multitude of
their iniquities, therefore the hatred of God is great against them. And
therefore, Heb. 13.22.
to shut up all in a word, let us be persuaded to suffer the words of
exhortation. And howsoever it may be harsh and unpleasing at the first, yet if
ever it please God to bring us to repentance, then as Solomon says, Pro. 28.23.
He that rebukes a man, shall find more favor at the last, then he that
flattereth with his tongue.

FINIS.

