A SHORT SVR VEY of Ireland.

TRVELY DISCOVERING WHO IT IS THAT HAS so armed the hearts of that people with
disobedience to their Prince.

With a description of the Country, and the con dition of the people.

No less necessary and needful to be respected by the English, then
requisite and behooue full to bereformed in the Irish.

By BARNABE RYCH, Gentleman.



LONDON, Printed by N. O. for B. SVTTON and W. BARENGER, and are to be sold at
their shop at the great North door of S. Paul's Church. 1069.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARL of Sarisbury, Lord High Treasurer of
England.
BEING willing (most Honorable) in the sight of the world, to leave some
public testimony of my humble duty toward God, of my faithful service
toward his Majesty, and of my unfeigned good will to that unfortunate
Country of Ireland, that has been so favorably dealt withal, first by the
mild and merciful allurements of our late Queen of most happy memory, that
was a loving Nurse, nay rather a kind mother, that did still carke and care
for them, with such compassionate love and kindness, that she neglected
nothing that was either fitting for a Prince to bestow of subjects, or
behoouefull for subjects to receive from the Prince: And now again, has not
this love, this care, and thiS clemency been still continued unto them, by the
blessed and peaceable government of our gracious King, and what is the
conclusion, the people were never more froward, never more obstinate, never
more perverse, nor the state of that kingdom, never more desperate then it is
at this hour, confused as well in the true knowledge appertayning unto God, as
in their duty and obedience belonging to their Prince, where the people are
daily seduced, infected and perverted by Jesuits, Seminaries and other
runnagate Priests the ministers of Antichrist, wherewith the Country does
swarm, and have so mightily prevailed, that they have wrought a general
contempt, as well against his Majesty himself, as against his godly
proceedings.

And these be they that have so abused and blinded the zeal of many good
people, which otherwise without all question would be more confirmable in the
knowledge and love or GOD, and in their obedience and duty toward their
Prince: but so many seducing spirits are planted in all the parts of that
Realm, that if there be one that will stand for the King, there is twenty for
that one to maintain the Pope.

But it will be said, why these are no novelties, all this is well enough
known to be true, and what may I either do or say in a matter that so many
learned men have already dealt withal? that so many wise men have had to do
withal, and so many politic men have so often undertaken, and could never
perform either mean to redress or amend it. I confess my learning is none
at all, and therefore I will not meddle with those matters that are above my
reach: my wisdom I acknowledge no more then my learning, and yet I hope it
shall suffice to discover a truth in this matter that I have undertaken: with
policy I will not meddle, neither is it for me to deal wihall: but
especially with that policy that belongs to matters of estate I will not so
much as look after, yet I would be glad to put in a helping hand: it is
little that I can do, yet he does well that does something.

The devil is not idle, and his Apostles do neither slip time, nor omit
occasion: the Pope bestirres him with his Bulls, with his Indulgences, with
his Pardons, with his Priests, with his Jesuits, with his Ministers of all
sorts and of all professions: that are still conspiring that are still
perverting, that are still seducing in every corner, in the Country, in the
Town, in the City, perhaps in the Court* what, shall we not encounter them?
(or at the least) shall we not discover them what they be, to whom they
belong, and what they endeavor? But they will say, I am no divine, and it is
truth. I am no scholar, and that is true too: what am I then? I am a
Soldier, a professed soldier, better practiced in my pike then in my pen:
and may not a Soldier endeavor himself for the glory of his God, for the
service of his King, and for the good of his Country? may not a Soldier uphold
that religion either by word or writing, that he must maintain and defend
with the price of his blood? is there any man to impugn this? if not, I hope
my unlettered diligence shall not be misconstrued, that, knowing the state and
condition of that miserable and wretched Realm of Ireland, where so many good
people of all sorts are so cortinually seduced and abused by the Popes factors,
I have therefore collected and gathered this little treatise, wherein
(according to the truth testified in the holy Scriptures) I have not only
unmasked this brood of the generation of Antichrist, but I have likewise so
plucked the visard from the Pope himself, that he might so appear in his own
likeness, that neither his fatherly looks, nor his counterfeit show of
gravity, nor that holy holy holiness where with he has so long disguised
himself, shall be able to deceive any man (be he never so simple) that will
but vouchsafe to read, and to believe but that which is testified by the word
of the living God.

And here again it will be said, that all this has been already performed
by several learned and worthy men: but shall we therefore leave the field to
the foe, because we have already given him a conflict? shall we not encounter
him to day, to morrow and every day, that is continually bragging and brauing
of us? that is still assailing us with fresh supplies? that is still leuying of
new forces to set upon us? that is still incroching, and never gives over to
send his Agents, not by one, or by two, or by ten, but by hundreds, and by
thousands, and shall we not encounter him, but suffer him thus to draw away the
hearts of the subjects, from the duty and obedience they owe to their
sovereigns, as they have done and are daily practicing in Ireland? nay shall
we suffer him, (without contradiction) to lead so many poor souls to
destruction? For although all manner of sins did never so much abound, as
they do at this present, yet, of my conscience, the Pope himself does send
more souls to hell, and the devil is more beholding to the Pope alone, then
to all the rest of those ugly monsters, that are called by the name of the
seven deadly sins.

Lo here a matter of christian re morse, and shall we not now put to our
helping hands on al sides to discover this monster? shall we say it is a
superfluous matter to reiterate any thing that may lay him open to the view of
the world, that with his counterfeit show of holiness has deceived the whole
world, and has sent so many millions of Christian souls to the pit of
perdition?

What I have endeavored herein (I hope) will neither be thought to be
unnecessary, nor deemed to be altogether unprofitable: yet the rather to
countenance both it and me, I have with all humbleness presumed to offer them
to your honor, to you whom God has endued with the spirit of his truth:
being so much the rather encouraged with hope of a favorable acceptance,
knowing your godly disposition to be so zealously inclined to the true
worshipping of God.

If my lines be not answerable to your exquisite judgment, I do then tender
them to your honorable courtesy, that was yet never known to despise any man's
endeavor that was honestly intended; but if they fall out (as I have meant them)
for the advancement of Gods glory, why then they belong to your Honor as your
own proper right, whom God has advanced for the setting forth of his glory,
and has given you both heavenly wisdom and worldly honor, that you might
continue (as hitherto you have done) a principal instrument for the upholding
of the Gospel.

Pleases it your honor to accept of it, as an office and service of good
intent: and although from a soldiers pen, yet as the earnest penny of a
faithful heart, that has been (and is) always consecrated to do your
Lordship all humble and dutiful service, and so in the like dutiful manner will
rest.

Your honors in all bumblenes to be commanded, BARNABE RICH.

To the courteous and well disposed reader, especially of Ireland, and to all
other that have discreti on, first to reads, and then to judge.
IT may be there are some will think it strange that a man of my profession
should deal in these causes: Unbefitting (they will say) for a soldier to
meddle with all. But if there be any such who does not know it to be lawful
for any man that is a Christian, and truly prosessing Christ (of whatsoever
calling otherwise he be) may not endeavor himself for the glory of God, or the
advancement of the Gospel; I will rather pray for that man, then take upon me
to answer him. The matter that I have vndertake^, is to discover the Pope, to
make him known, and so to lay him open to the view of every discreet reader,
that he might no longer deceive that he that is not wilfully blind may be made
able to discern between light and darkness, to judge of truth and
falsehood, to know the voice of Christ calling to salvation, and to shune the
ways of Antichrist leading to destruction that this rablement of Jesuits and
Seminaryes, and the rest of that viperous brood, should not be so easily able to
seduce, that have already sobewitched and infected that unfortunate country of
Ireland, that ignorance is joined with obstynacy, that blindness is coupled with
malice, that wilful opinion is holden for the testimony of a good conscience,
where he that is most perverse, is accounted for most Catholic, and to
conclude, where Christ is despised, and Antichrist is advanced.

To the end therefore that this man of sin, this Antichrist I mean (that has
been so often spoken of, and so long looked for) might be discerned, I have
gathered together what notes the holy scriptures do testifiy of him, what
marks are there left unto us whereby we may know him, what paths he should
tread out, and what ways he should walk, whose steps I have undertaken, and
followed the tract directly to Rome, I have brought it to saint Peter's chair
(as some would have it called, and there I have left it. Now according to the
Irish custom, when a Health is committed, and the tract being followed into
any part or quarter off the Country, the Lord of that place is either to put it
off again from out of his precinct, or else to stand charged with the fact,
and is compelled to make a full restitution: the^ according to this custom,
the tract of Antichrist being brought to Rome, they must either put it off
again from out the territories, and make good proof into what jurisdiction
they have brought it, or else that holy seat which they say in times past has
been Saint Peter's chair, is now become the seat of Antichrist, and the Pope
is to answer for as much as the word of God does expressly charge him with,
that is to say, of Treason, of murder and of theft.

First of Treason against the most Highest whose laws, covenants seals and
sacraments, he has not only clipped, counterfeited, chopped and changed* but
he has also set up other Gods of his own making, which he causes to be
worshipped honored and adored.

For a murderer, who has ever heard of a more cruel and merciless butcher,
as well against the Saints and servants of God whom he persecuteth with sword,
with fire and with all manner of tortures, wherewith he tormenteth them to a
temporal death, but likewise sends infinite thousands of the miserable
souls (that do assie and trust in him) with his Indulgences, Bulls and
pardons, to eternal death and danation.

Now for felony, what more notable theft then to rob God of that glory that is
proper to himself? and yet not contented with that, but he hathrobbed us of
the holy scriptures left unto us by the holy Ghost to be our comfort and saving
health, and wherein we are to search the very mystery of our salvation. Our
savior sent the Scribs and Pharisees to search the scriptures though they were
but hypocrites, and sought daily to erucify Christ, but the Pope forbids
Christian men once to look on them, though they be baptized and have received
Christ.

Are the scriptures medicynable to the bad, and vehemous to the good? and more
perylous to him that will believe in Christ, then to him that will crucify
Christ?

They vaunted of their father Abraham, and their sitting in Moses chair, as
the papist does now of his holy father the Pope, and his sitting in Peter's
chair: yet Christ pronounced woe against them for shutting up the key of
knowledge, which was by giving a false sense, by wrong interpreting the
scriptures: but it is not found that they prohibited or forbad any man to read
the^, as the Pope and his shauelings are accustomed.

What I have iudeuoured herein, I have done it in compassion: for if there be
any commiseration to be had of those that walk in darkness, and sit in the
shadow of death* the poor people of Ireland are to be pitied; and not only
they alone, but as many other, what, or whersoeuer, that are thus seduced and
blinded by the ministers of the Prince of darkness.

If thou with like favor and courtesy will vouchsafe to peruse it as I have
honestly meant it, censure it then and spare not: and thus reposing my self on
thy charitable disposition, I rest.

A short survey of Ireland.
CHAP. I.
A description of the Country, with the manners, customs and dispositions of
the people.
IT could not be impertinent in this my survey of Ireland to make my first
entry with the description of the country, the fertility of the soil, the
nature, disposition and manners of the people. All which if I should express
according to a truth, I might write a more admirable history, and speak of
greater wonders, then either sir John Mandiuyll in his travel, or any other
that have passed the most uncouth places of the world are able truly to report.

And here is the matter especially to be admired, that a country situate and
seated under so temperate a Climate, that is neither oppressed with extremity,
either of cold in the winter, or with heat in the summer, that is environed
with England, Scotland, France and Spain, that has had continual
intercourse, trade and traffic, and has been daily conversant with the
people of these nations, and the country should yet remain as it does* more
uncivil, more uncleanly, more barbarous, and more brutish in their customs
and demeanures* then in any other part of the world that is known.

If I should speak what affiance they have of Saint Patricks purgatorte, of
the Holy Cross, and of many other places of pilgrimage frequented by Irish, I
might deliver ridiculous matter, not only of the blind zeal, and sometimes
of the uncivil demeanure of the pilgrims them selves, but also how they are
cheated, cousined, and deceived by their ghostly fathers, that for their own
lucre and gain, does delude themwith voices, with visions, and with strange
devises, more fitter to be laughed at, then to be believed.

It were strange to deliver the manners which they use in the burial of their
dead: and he that were at Dublyne it self, and should see a dead corpse brought
to the grave, would say, that there could not be a more heathenish demeanure,
no, not amongst a people that had neither known nor heard of God.

For the blessing which it has pleased GOD to vouchsafe to that country, in
purging it from all sorts of worms that are venomous or poisonable: this
benofite only they ascribe to saint Patricke, and will in no wise acknowledge
it to be the blessing of God.

I might speak here of their Irish customs, strange to be delivered, and of
their Brehon law, and their laws Tamestry, and of their Lord and Captain
called Tamest, chosen for diverse considerations: and how amongst the^ every
great man's will and commandment is a law (especially amongst their own
tenants:) for Ireland has evermore striued to run into all lawless and
irregular courses, whereby they are grown into such a habit of savage
tyranny, that nothing is more pleasing to the greatest number of them, then
civil wars, murders and massacres, whereunto as they are commonly inclined,
so there wants not those amongst the^ to prick them forward, and to stir
them up to Treason and rebellion against their Prince, that are still
co^spiring, still practicing, and still indeuouring to draw them into that
mortal plague of rebellion, which is not to be cured but by the sword, by
common slaughters and spilling of blood.

And although the greatest part of the people of that kingdom has been from
time to time thus drawn and stirred up by these seducing spirits: yet for a
number of others of that Country-birth, to whom it has pleased God to
vouchsafe the grace of his holy spirit, that I know are daily labored and
importuned by this viperous brood, as well to shake off the love to their God,
as their duty to their Prince, for their sakes it is that I have endeavored
these lines, to give them a Caveat to beware of these firebrarnds of Rebellion,
the which because I have deciphered in their proper colors, I will refer
them to this sequel, as it hereafter follows.

CHAP. II.
The Diversity in opinions what Antichrist should be.
THere is no man (I think) if he have but very slenderly endeavored himself
in the reading of the holy scriptures, but he has found it testified both in
the old and new testaments, that toward the latter days and end of the world,
Antichrist should come, who with false doctrine and lying mitacles should
seduce the kingdoms and nations of the earth.

What, or who this Antichrist should be, there are diverse suppositions, and as
many fabulous conjectures have been devised of the person of Antichrist, which
do rather seduce, then give any certain testimony whereby we may know him.

Some do say that he should be a Jew, of the tribe of Dan, and some would
have it that he should be borne in Babylon, some that he should be bred up
in Bethsaida and Corazin, some that he should be raised in Syria, some that he
should be conceived of the mixture of man and woman in sin, because Christ
was borne of a woman and conceived by the holy Ghost, some say that he shall be
of an ill-fauoured personage, because it is written of Christ, comely and
beautiful is he beyond the sons of men: some say that he shall preach some
certain years where Christ preached, and that he shall circumcise him self,
and say that he is Christ, and the Messiah that was promised to be sent for
the salvation of the Jews, some would persuade that Mahomet was Antichrist,
some hold the like of Nero, some say that he should build up the City of
Jerusalem, some that he should overthrow Rome, some do say that he should
be borne of a Frire and a Nun, and that he should work wonders, and make
trees to grow with the roots upward, and then should fly up into heaven and
fall down and break his neck: and there be other some have said, that he
shall fight with the two witnesses of Christ, Enoch and Hely, and shall kill
them, and he himself shall finally be slain with lightning.

These tales and many others have been craftily devised whereby to beguile us,
that whilst we are thinking of these imaginations, and so occupy our eyes in
beholding a shadow or a surmised conjecture what Antichrist should be, he that
is Antichrist (indeed) may unawares deceive us.

CHAP. III.
What it was that deceived the Jews in the expectation of Christ.
THis was it that deceived the Jews in the knowledge of our savior Christ:
for when man had by his own sin drawn Gods wrath, and the decay of the
whole world upon his own head, the almighty yet, of his wonderful mercy and
goodness, promised unto Adam that Christ should come and break the serpents
head. This promise was delivered over from hand to hand, and still conveyed
from the father to the son, solemnly declared to Abraham Isaach and Jacob,
committed as a pawn by Moses to the people of Israel, celebrated by David in
his psalms and songs, renewed and continued from time to time by many excellent
and worthy Prophets, which pointed out the time, the place, and the manner of
his coming, and set down plainly and expressly his stock, his parents and his
birth many hundred years aforehand, the scriptures are full and the Prophets
do make often mention of this promise: old men and young men and all the
people waited for the fulfilling thereof, every eye was bent upon him, and
every heart attended and wished for his coming: but when the fulness of the
time was expired, and that he was come into the world indeed, they to who^
this promise was made, even those that had so longed and wished for him, and
made all their common talk of the hope of his coming, when he came they knew
John. 1. Ionn. 3
him not: He came into the world, and the world knew him not, he came into his
own, and his own received him not: Mat. 11.
Light came into the world and men loved darkness better then light: they
reviled him and said, Behold a glutton and a drinker of wine, a friend unto
publicanes and sinners: they called him a false Prophet and a seducer of the
people, they persecuted him, betrayed him, scourged him and crucified him.

Such was the receiving of Christ: but this they did to him through ignorance,
for if they had known him, they would not have killed the Lords anointed, nor
have laid violent hands on the only son of GOD. But what was now the
mistaking? verily nothing but this, they looked for him after a carnal manner,
and not according as the Scriptures had testified of him, for they could not
imagine any likelyhoode that Christ (by whom they thought all Israel should
have been so renowned) should be so base and abject a person in the sight of
the world, but they looked that their Messiah should have come in triumph, to
have contented their ambition and pride: but he was promised to come in
humility, and to humble him self even unto death: they looked to have had him
prince-like, but he was fore-promised poor: they looked for a great Captain
that should have performed the conquests of Alexander, when it was told them
that he should be both beaten and wounded: they looked for one that should have
come with feasting and banqueting, when it was told them aforehand that his
bread should be steeped in vinegre, and his cup should be mingled with gall and
bitterness.

Here was now the mistaking, this was the stumbling block* and from hence grew
the error, that in stead of believing they fell to crucifying the Lord and
savior of the world.

CHAP. IIII.
What it is that has deceived us in the looking after Antichrist.
NOw as the coming of Christ was, such shall be the coming of Antichrist: the
Prophets of the old law prophesied that Antichrist should come: the Apostles,
Peter, Paul, John, yea Christ himself foretold us of him, the ancient fathers
and Doctors do often make mention of him, there is no man sosimpleeither old or
young, either learned or unlearned, but he has heard of Antichrist, they know
that he shall be a false Prophet, a seducer, an enemy to Christ, and such a one
as shall set himself directly both against Christ and his doctrine, they shall
therefore hate his name, and detest him before they know him, they shall look
after his coming, and he shall not fail to come, and every man shall carry
hatred against him, and reckon him abominable: but as the Jews that longed so
much for the coming of Christ, yet when he was come they knew him not, but
accounted him amongst thieves and robbers, because they did not look for him
accordingly as the Scriptures had prophesied, but according to their own
imaginations as they had grossly conceived: even so shall be the coming of
Antichrist: for he shall cover himself with such a cloak of holiness, That
if it were possible the very elect should be deceived: for men shall not know
him, their eyes shall be blinded, they shall hate his name, but embrace his
doctrine, they shall think they do good service unto Christ, but shall in
truth do service unto Antichrist.

From whence shall this error spring from that very occasion that deceived the
Ie^es in the looking after Christ, they look for him still, but he is come
many hundred years ago and they are not aware of it: we also have looked for
Antichrist, and he has almost reigned as long, and we are not aware of it, and
that because either of us have looked carnal^y for him, and not in those places
where we ought to have sought him: the ^ewes had found Christ v^^ily and
truly, if they had sought for him in the scriptures, according to the law and
the Prophets. We also had spyed out Antichrist long ago, if we had looked in
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles: for this is to be noted, that
Antichrist is not one man only that shall suddenly appear with strange signs
and wonders as our ancestors have talked and dreamed of: but a relation to one
State and kingdom, and a continuance of some one power and tyranie in the
Church for so Christ him self has prophesied, not speaking of one man
singulerly, but says, Many shall come in my name, and shall say, here is
Christ, and Mat^h. 2^.
there is Christ, and shall deceive many.

CHAP. IV.
Where Antichrist is to be sought for, and how to be known.
We are now likewise to think that Antichrist shall not apparently manifest
him self to be a tyrant, a robber, a spoyler: he shall not say I am
Antichrist, I am that man of sin, I am that child of pe^dition, I am that
aduer^asie* and am contra^ie to Christ: nay he shall not lay him self so wide
open, for then who would be deceived by him? and he shall deceive ^any. And in
like manner if he should expresl^ say that him self were Christ, what
christian could he then seduce? so that he must neither show himself to be an
open enemy to Christ, as was Mahomet, and as the Turk is, neither must he
take upon him to be Christ, for then every man would be wary enough of him.

It should follow then that Antichrist must come disguised, he must put on him
the cloak of simplicity, of truth, of holiness, perhaps of prayer, perhaps
of fasting, perhaps of giving alms, he shall come with fatherly looks, with
holy countenance, he shall allege the Doctors and Fathers, he shall allege
Peter and Paul the holy Aposties of Christ, he shall allege Christ and God
himself.

Thus under a pretense of serving Christ, he shall perform all his practices
against Christ, he shall de^oure the sheep and people of Christ, he shall
deface what Christ has built, and shall roo^e up that which Christ has
planted, he shall be contrary to Christ in faith, contrary in life, contrary in
doctrine, contrary in sacraments, and in effect contrary in all things.

Thus shall he walk craftily, and handle the word of God deceiptfully, he
shall mingle his lies with the truth of God, he shall mix his poison with the
wholesome food of our souls, so closely and subtly, that it shall hardly be
espied: he shall convey him self into the hearts of the people, and shall so
settle him self in their consciences, that they shall admire him and have him
in reverence. They shall say, who is like unto the beast, who so wise, so
learned, so virtuous, so holy, or so like unto God himself? Thus shall they
honor Antichrist unawares, when they shall say we de^ie him, and yet they
shall fall down and worship him. And as it was with Christ at his coming, he
was in the world, he did the works of his father, yet the fewest part knew
him: even so must it be with Antichrist, he shall be in the world, he shall do
the works of his iniquity, and yet few shall know him.

But let us now more particularly fall to examination who this Antichrist
should be: we have already said he must not be an infidel or heathen, one that
shall apparently set himself against Christ, but he shall come in the name of
Christ, and perhaps shall preach Christ counterfeitly, for the scriptures have
so prophesied of him, and as S. Hillary says, He shall be contrary to Christ
under the color of preaching the Gospel, so that our Lord Jesus Christ shall
then be denied, when a man would think he were preached, so covertly, so
closely, and so subtly shall Antichrist behave himself in the sight of the
world.

Was there ever man then that came in the name of Christ with the show of
holiness, with the countenance of the church, and has showed himself in all
his life and doctrine contrary to Christ? if there have ever been any such,
without doubt the same is Antichrist.

CHAP. VI.
An antithesis between Christ and the Pope.
LEt us here call the Pope a little into question, let us examine his
proceedings, comparing his doings with our undoubted savior Christ, and we
shall find him so directly contrary in sacraments, in sacrifice, in prayers,
in life, in religion, in doctrine, in the whole form and order of the church,
how he has shutwhat Christ has opened, and has opened what Christ has
shut, he has cursed where Christ has blessed, and has blessed where Christ
has cursed: finding him then to be so repugnant, and to set himself so
directly opposite, it must needs follow, that if Christ be Christ, the Pope
must needs be Antichrist.

But let us come to some particulars to see what light they will give us
concerning the premises.

Christ came into the world to seek the glory of his Father, the Pope is come
into the world, and only exalts himself.

Christ spared not his own life, that we might reign in an other world, the
Pope spares not our lines, that he may reign in this world.

Christ fulfilled the law and the Prophets, the Pope maintains his own
laws and traditions.

Christ forsook the kingdoms of the world that were offered him by the
devil, the Pope has received them, and thinks them all too little.

Christ would neither be Judge nor deuider in the world, the Pope judges and
deuideth all the world.

Christ was obedient to the temporal maiestrates, the Pope holds Emperors
and Kings in subjection.

Christ would wash the feet of his own disciples, the Pope gives his feet
to Emperors and Kings to be kissed.

Christ had a crown o^ thorns thrust upon his head, the Pope has three
crowns wrought with precious stones ^et upon his head.

Christ carried his own cross of affliction, in token of his hu^ilitie, the
Pope carries his cross of (...) and gold in token of his paid.

Christ says, Peter put up thy sword, for he that strikes with the sword,
shall perish with the s^ord, the Pope says, Kings and Princes dra^ your
swords, and ^ut them down before ye that will not obey me.

Christ and his disciples ouerc^me by suffering, the Pope and his d^sciples do
overcome by persecuting.

Christ humbles his dis^iples, and brings them low, the Pope exalts hi^
disciples and lifts them up on high.

Christ says blessed be the peacemakers, the Pop^ says blessed are they
that can s^t the world together by the ^ares.

Christ says blessed be the poor in spirit, for to the^ belongs the
kingdom of heaven, the Pope says, blessed are the proud and high minded, that
will resist and rebel against their Prince.

Christ says it is as easy for a Cammell to pass thorough the eye of a
needle, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, the Pope says,
heaven gates shall stand wide open to him that has money to purchase Masses,
Trentales, Dyrges, and to buy pardons.

Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, the Pope maintains
such as make daily portsale of Masses and Dyrges in the Temple.

Christ sends his about the world to preach glad tidings, the Pope sends
his about the world to ^ell pardons.

Christ when he forgiueth, he remitteth freely of grace, the Pope ^emitteth
nor forgiueth any thing without money.

Christ faith, come unto me thou that art laden, and I will ease thee, the Pope
says, come unto me thou that have murdered thy father, and I will give thee a
pardon, if thou will give me money.

Christ commands marriage, and only forbids whoredom, the Pope admits
whoredom, and only forbids marriage.

Christ faith, that a righteous man makes righteous works, the Pope says,
that righteous works do make a righteous man.

Christ sends the Scribes and pharisees to search the Scriptures, the Pope
forbids that christian men should so much as look on them.

Christ has given his the light of the Gospel whereby to guide their steps,
even at midnight, the Pope has given his a candle to light them with, because
they are still groping in the dark, even at midday.

To be short, Christ being God, became man, for the salvation of the world, the
Pope being man becomes God to the destruction of the world.

Infinite might I be in this comparison, if I should prosecute it according to
a truth: and Christ says, we shall know them by their fruits. Judge of them
now but as they deserve, if Antichrist is to be understood one against Christ,
tell me where shall we find him that is more contrary then the Pope?

Furthermore, and for the better confirmation of this matter, I might here set
down many probable authorities, manifestly expressing the sear of Antichrist
to be at Rome, yea and further testified by several ancient writers, that he
should be advanced in the Apostolic sea: but left it might be thought that
all such authorities might rather be termed partial opinions (as the Papist
cares not what he says) we will therefore pretermit all priua^e objections,
and will only make search in the holy scriptures, and see what testimonies are
there left unto us, for those are the marks that cannot deceive.

CHAP. VII.
The first mark whereby to know Antichrist, taken out of S. John. 1. Epist. 2.
SAint John in his first*Epistle and second chapter, gives us this Item, Who
is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? that same is Antichrist,
that denies the Father and the son.

Let us now examine these words, and see if we cannot fashion out Antichrist by
the substance of the Pope, or frame a Pope by the shadow of Antichrist.
Antichrist and Christ are two contraries, and the study of Antichrist is, to
quench the name of jesus Christ: why the^ Math. 2^.
(some will say) the Pope cannot be Antichrist: for he does both profess and
preach Christ, yea and would be Christ's high Vicare here on earth, but it is
said before that Antichrist must so do, he shall turn himself into an angel^
of light, and must come in the name of Christ, otherwise he could not deceive.
But he shall deceive many, and the Pope abusing the name of Christ, by that
means sets up himself, and gathers offerings, tithes and rents, and
bestows them to his own profit, and not the honor of Christ, but brings
the consciences of the people under him through suspicious fear* ^s though he
had such authority given (...) of Christ: and every syllable that has but a
sound as though it made for his purpose, that he expounds falsely, and
therewith he so ^^gleth and bewitch^^h the ears of the people (but especially
of that simple and ignorant sort, that have yielded themselves to become slaves
to his suggestions) those (I say) he make^h them believe what himself lif^eth,
for it is enough for the^ to believe what the church believes, although they
know not what the Church believes, nor the greatest part of them, what the
tr^e catholic church means.

He that believes not to be saved through Christ, the same denies christ, but
the Pope believes not to be saved through christ, for he teaches to believe
in holy works for the remission of sins, and the^eby to a^^aine salvation,
as in the works of penance enjoined in vows, in chastity, in pilgrimages, in
other men's prayers, in Friars and Friars c^^es, in Saints merits, in the deeds
of ceremonies, and a thousand other such superstitious follies ^etteth he
before us to believe in, and all of them destroying christ, and most injurious
to his precious blood.

He that denies Jesus Christ (^ai^h the Apostle) the same is Ant^christ, can
any man deny him more directly then he that seeks his salvation in his own
merits, and his own de^^ruings? The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin: i^ the blood of ^e^us christ cleanses us, why then out own works
do not cleanse us, for they are not christ.

But let our good works be examined after the judgments of God, and we
ought rather to fear punishment for the faults that be even in our best
deserving, then to look for any reward.

The Prophet does liken our righteousness to a filthy clout, such as would
abhor any man's eyes to behold it; and therefore says the Prophet David,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in
thy sight: what manner of merit may this be then, which cannot abide the censure
of Gods judgment, nor be delivered from condemnation but by mercy only?

CHAP. VIII.
The good works prescribed to the Pope.
But let us see what good works these same should be which the Pope has
prescribed, and the papists do so much talk of.

First they teach unto the ignorant, to hear Masses every day devoutly, to
prostrate themselves before dead Images, to mu^ble up a number of prayers unto
Saints, to go on pilgrimage, to build up Chaunteris, to cause Trentales of
Masses and Dirges to be said for the dead, to give large sums to idle
Priests, Monks and Friars, to give gold and silver to make crosses, chalyces,
cups and restiments, to say over Ladies Psalter, to pray upon B^ades, to
receive Holy bread, holy water, holy palm, holy ashes, holy fire, holy cream,
holy candle, holy oil, with a number of other holy toys, and those are the
good works allowed and commanded by the Pope: and these are expressly injurious
to the precious blood of Christ, and therefore the works of si^ne, and the
very ins^itutions of Antichrist.

By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his Romans 3 ^am* 2*
sight, whosoever shall keep the Law, yet fail in one point, is guilty of
all. And who is, or ever was able to keep the law? (christ only excepted) but
are all imperfect, and the most righteous man sins seven times a day. But to
cleanse those sins, the Pope has devised a purgatory, still excluding
christ, making him of less authority then he does attribute to himself, for
he will in no wise but that christ shall be an imperfect savior, for if the
Pope will give christ leave to forgive the sin, yet he will in no wise give him
leave to forgive the pain, but we must to purgatory to be plunged there, and
if there be not good store of money left to the priests, and to pay well for
their Dyrges Trentals and ^oule Masses: but the Pope himself, he has full
power and authority to grant pardons for all sins, even a pena, and a culpa,
as well for the offense as for the punishment: and not only of sins that are
actually committed, but likewise of sins before they are done, as to the holy
Friar that killed the king of France, to a second again that murdered the
prince of Oranges, and to sundry others to whom he had in like manner given
full pardon and free absolution aforehand to have attempted the like against
our late gracious Queen Elizabeth.

Thus we do see the Pope takes upon him a greater power to forgive sins then
christ: for christ forgiueth no sin but upon unfeigned repentance, and yet
the Pope will not then suffer him to forgive any more then the bare crime, for
if we will give him no money, the pain must not be remitted but in the
scorching flames of purgatory: if this be not directly the doctrine of
Antichrist, I refer me to their judgments that are not too partial, nay,
that are not wilfully blind.

CHAP. IX.
The fraits of the Popes doctrine, and what it draws after it.
But let us see farther what this doctrine draws after it. If I may get to my
self satisfacti^n by suffering in pu^gatorie for my sins, then I have gotten
more by my sins in suffering pain, then I have done by christ's death, and so
consequently pain was more effectual and strong for me to obtain heaven,
then was christ's passion: this is the Popes doctrine.

The reward of sin is death, and the pain that depends of every sin
(excluding Christ) is eternal damnation: then what shall purgatory do,
unless for the ungodly, that should first go to purgatory, and after to hell?
There is no remission of sins without blood, says S. Paul. and christ
speaking to the thief on the cross, said. This day thou shall be with me in
paradise, not in purgatory, and Marie Magdalen had her sins freely forgiven
her by christ without going to purgatory.

But to say the truth, there was at that time no such place at all, nor any
one word spoken of purgat^rie, either in the Old or New Testaments: and it was
many years after christ's death, before the Pope could kindle it, but after it
once began to burn, it grew so hot, that it melted more treasure out of
ignorant men's purses, then the King of Spaines west Indies did then afford: but
the extreme heat is now well allayed, and as men begin to wax wise, so the
scorching fire does daily more and more abate. Thus you may see, the Pope and
his sects are content to give Christ his name, but they rob him of the effect,
and take the signification of his name to themselves, and they make of him but
an Hypocrite, as they themselves be, as though he forgave us our sins, but
not the pain due to our sins, and then who shall be saved? for the pain due
to every sin, is eternal damnation.

These therefore (as the Apostle says) are right Antichrists, and deny both
the father and the son, for they deny the witness that the father bare unto
his son, and deprive the son of the power and glory that his father has
given him.

CHAP. X.
The second mark whereby to know Antichrist.
S. John. 4.
A Second mark given us in the Scriptures, whereby to know Antichrist, is
likewise left us by S. John, as follows.

Hereby know ye the spirit of God, ener^ spirit that confesses that Jesus is
come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the slesh is not of God, and the same is that spirit of
Antichrist of who^ you have heard that he should come.

Whatsoever opinion any member of Antichrist holds, the ground of all his
doctrine is to destroy this article of our faith, That Christ is come in the
flesh: for though the most part of all heretics confess that Christ is come
in the flesh, in their manner, yet they deny that he is come as the scriptures
testify, and the Apostles preach him to become: for the whole study of the
devil and all his members is to destroy the hope, and trust that we should
have in Christ's flesh, and of those things that he suffered for us in his
flesh, and of the Testament and promises of mercy which are made us in his
flesh: for the scriptures testify, that Christ has taken away the sins of
the world in his flesh, and that the same hour that he yielded up his spirit
into the hands of his father, he had fully purged, and made full satisfaction
for all the sins of the world.

But that Christ has done this service in the flesh, all the members of
Antichrist do deny, and hereby (says the Apostle) thou shall know them.

All doctrine that builds thee upon Christ, to put thy trust and confidence
in his blood, is of God, and true doctrine: and all doctrine that withdraws
thy hope, and trust from Christ, is of the devil, and the doctrine of
Antichrist.

Let us now examine the Pope by this rule, and we shall find that all that he
does is the destruction of this article, he wresteth all the scriptures, and
sets them clean against the hai^e, to destroy this article, he ministers
the very sacraments, to the destruction of this article, and all his other
ceremonies, as his absolution, penance, purgatory, dispensations, pardons,
vows, with all his other disguisings is to that purpose.

The Pope preaches that Christ is come to do away sins, yet not in the
flesh, but in water, salt, oil, candles, ashes, Friars coats, and Munkes
cowles, and in the vows of them that forswear matrimony to keep harlots,
and swear beggerie, to possess as much riches, wealth, ease, and pleasure, as
this world may afford them, and have vowed obedience to disobey, by authority,
all laws both of God and man, and these hypocritical and false sacrifices
teaches he us to trust unto for the forgiveness of sins, and not in Christ's
flesh.

CHAP. XI.
The third mark whereby to know Antichrist.
S. Paul again in his second epistle to the Thessalonians, gives this third
mark whereby to know Antichrist: where he says, that Antichrist shall sit in
the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

By this it may evidently appear, that Antichrist shall come in the name of
Christ, and shall be a counterfeit christian: for otherwise he should have
been an open and express enemy unto Christ, A Turk, a ^ewe, an infidel o^
heathen, whose temples are the temples of Idols, and therefore not to be called
the Temple of God, and so S. Augustine does understand the Apostles words, for
says he, The Temple of an Idol or a devil the Apostle would never call the
Temple of God.

But Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, he shall not defy the name of
Christ, but he shall call himself Christ's v^car, the most catholic father,
the servant of Gods servants, by these means he shall be exalted in the eye of
the world, he shall win the hearts of the people, he shall sit in the
consciences of men, he shall make Kings and Princes to become his subjects, he
shall deceive the learned and wise, he shall cast himself into a color of
holiness, he shall fast, he shall pray, he shall give alms, he shall walk
as if he were a disciple of Christ, he shall go before, and the world shall
follow him, they shall run to him out of all parts of the earth, they shall
fall down before him, they shall say unto him, thou art the comfort of the
Church, thou art the light of the world, thou art most holy, all law and all
knowledge is hid in thy breast, we beseech thy holiness show us thy way, expound
thou the scriptures unto us, teach us how we may be saved, thou have the key
of knowledge, thy word is the word of truth, thou can not err.

Thus shall Antichrist deceive the world, thus shall he dwell in the
consciences of the people, thus shall he sit in the temple of God, but the
Apostle says further, that he shall show him self that he is God.

The Apostle does not say that he shall call him self God, for that were too
broad, and every man would then beware of him, and would say this is but a
mortal man, borne as other men be of father and mother, and they likewise both
mortal, and again he shall die and return to the earth from whence he came:
but God had no beginning neither shall have ending, Antichrist him self
knows all this, and therefore will not dea^e so openly to call himself God,
but yet will show himself a GOD, and will be contented that other men should
so repute him, as Pope Nicolas says, It is well known that the Pope (of the
godly Prince Constantine) was called God. Again in the Extrauagantes, in the
same Canon Law, it is written, Dominus Deus noster Papa, Our Lord God the
Pope. And Christofer Marcellus in the counsel of Laterane, said to the Pope,
Thou art another God upon earth.

CHAP. XII.
How the Pope does show himself that he is a God.
But he shall show himself that he is a God (says the Apostle) he shall
receive all reverence as if he were God. The Pope has done this you see, he
has compared his laws with the laws of God, he has said that his word is
the word of God, and whatsoever he says, it must be said it is the voice of
the spirit of God, and of the same authority as is the Gospel of Christ, no
man may break it, no man may touch the credit thereof, if any man withstand it,
he must be accursed, he must think he does sacrilege, commits blasphemy,
sins against the holy Ghost, and must be counted an heretic: his authority
reaches up into heaven, it stretches down into hell, nay he has one
kingdom proper to himself more then ever God knew of, and that is purgatory,
there he raigne^h, there he rules, there he rosteth, there he broyleth, and
there he commands how he list, there is no body else to control him.

Thus does Antichrist sit on the Temple of God: thus does the Pope show
himself that he is God.

Nay what has God proper to himself, but that the Pope is either a sharer
with him, or at the least can command the like?

God has heaven and hell, the Pope can command them both, and send to either
the souls of whom he list.

God has his Angels that be his ministers, the Pope may command their service,
and may employ them about his business as often as it pleases him, or else hi^
vpholders have shamefully mistaken.

God has his Saints, the Pope makes saints, both he-saints and she-saints, at
his own will and pleasure.

God has his scriptures, and the Pope has his Counsels, his decrees and his
canons.

God has his Church, a poor silly one, the Pope has his Church a brave
lusty one.

God has his sacraments, the Pope makes sacraments two for his one.

God has his laws, whereby to rule his Church, the Pope makes laws whereby
to rule his Church.

God commands the sabbath day to be kept holy, the Pope makes holy days and
half holy days, sometimes two or three in a week.

Can a man show himself more like a God then does the Pope? if any man can
name him, let him be Antichrist.

Nay yet to show himself more like a God, the Pope will undertake to make a
God, a poor silly God, that is not able to defend himself from the malice of
a mouse.

CHAP. XIII.
The fourth mark whereby to know Antichrist.
AN other reason to prove that the Pope is Antichrist is this, who^oeuer
believes in Christ, consents that Gods law is good: the Pope consents not
that Gods law is good, for he forbids holy wedlock commanded by God: but
wedlock (says the Pope) defiles holy Priesthood more then whoredom, he
has notwithstanding made a sacrament of Matrimony. And is not this a diueli^h
doctrine to say that sacraments can defile? what can be more contrary to the
doctrine of Christ? the Pope forbids wedlock, which God commands, and
licenseth whoredom which God forbids: but this is an other evident token of
Antichrist, and noted by S. Paul to be a (...) Tim* ^.
doctrine of devils, who writing to Timothy says: Now the spirit speaks
evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall
give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know the truth.

The Pope again, directly opposes himself against Christ, and seeks to
draw us from the mercy of God, and tells us we have other friends to whom
we are beholding, and have done many good things for us: it was that Saint that
took pity of our griefs (says he) at such a time: and our Lady has
wrought many miracles at such a place: but Saint Patricke is the good Saint,
that has done marvelous things in Ireland, and as every Saint has his
peculiar property to work more in one place then they can do in an other: so
every Saint has his several office, some better for one thing, and some worse
for an other: one is very good for the falling sickness, an other is excellent
good for the toothache, one is a present remedy for a burn ing, an other is as
precious for him that has the chine*cough. If a woman be barraine and would
feign have a child, let her go on pilgrimage to S. Thomas of Canterbury, or
in Ireland to the Holy Cross, or to S. Clen^cks well: and she that cannot make
her pulline to prosper, or that her chickins be troubled with the pip, seek
help from S. Reuen.

Thus every Saint has his several charge: every man has his several Saint:
and every Saint is full of miracles, and every miracle full of lies. The
Papists do allege many ungodly reasons, whereby they would maintain a
necessite in praying to Saints: and to avoid Idolatry, they would make
certain distinctions between the worship of God and the worship of Saints:
but let them distinguish how they can, this is certain, Math. (...)
the more hope they have in saints, the less trust they put in Christ, for he
says, Come unto me all you that be laden and I will ease you: if he of
himself has lovingly called us unto him* why then to seek to any other, is
upon some distrust we have of him, and that is as much as to make God alyer,
and not to think him true in the promise he has made us.

Again, if we will give credit to S. Paul, there is no other mediator for us
to secke unto, but only Christ, (...) Tim. 2.
There is one God, and one mediator between God and man, which is, the man
Jesus Christ: and for that foolish distinction that gross headed Papists will
make between worshipping and serving, our savior himself has decided, Thou
shall worship thy Lord thy God, and him only Mat. 4.
shall thou serve.

I will conclude, whosoever seeks any other mediator then our Lord Jesus, is
injurious unto Christ, and therefore of Antichrist: and whosoever kneeleth and
prays to blocks, stones, Images, or the pictures of Saints, the same
expressly breaks the commandment of God, and deserves to have his portion
amongst the wicked.

CHAP. XIIII.
The fifth mark whereby to know Antichrist.
Math. 14 Mark. 13.
ONe other mark whereby to know Antichrist, our Savior himself has given
us: Fals^ Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shat show signs and
wonders, to deceive (if it were possible) the very elect.

This speech thus spoken by our Savior is not directed to the heathen or to
infidels, but to such as shall profess Christ; and therefore concludes
undoubtedly, that Antichrist shall be a christian in profession, and that he
shall not be one man only, but a continuance of many; for he speaks in the
plural number: False Christ's, and false Prophets shall come with signs and
wonders, etc.

S. Paul giving us a light what those signs and wonders should be that
Antichrist should come with all, in his second epistle to the Thessalonians,
calls them lying signs, and lying wonder^.

This is now to be gathered, False Christ's shall come, that is, they shall come
co^nter^eitly in the name of Christ, and they shall show their wonders before
the Lord, and be a ^ore temptation unto them, to bring them out of the way:
but the Elect shall be kept by the mighty hand of God against all natural
possibili^ie, so that the elect and chosen of God shall never be without
persecution and temptation of their faith (not as those that are under the
Pope, for they present but suffer not) and those which the Pope calls
heretics, show no miracles by their own confession, neither ought they, in as
much as they bring no new learning, nor any other thing, then only the
scripture, which is already received, and has been confi^med by Christ and
his Apostles, with wonderful miracles many hundred years sithence.

This is then to be noted, that even as Christ at his coming, altered the
state of the Church, from the corruption of the pharisees, and confirmed his
doctrine with miracles, so Antichrist at his coming, seeks to alter the
Church from that purity which Christ and his Apostles had left it in, and
works miracles to o^erthrow the Gospel: new doctrine must be confirmed with
new mytacles, Antichrist seeke^h to deface what Christ has builded long ago,
Christ has fortified his building with miracles, Antichrist seeks to
undermine the whole foundation which Christ has laid, and to build a new for
himself by my^acles: and this was prophesied of aforehand by Christ, and this
was prophesied on a forehand by Paul. Christ says, Antichrist shall come with
signs and wonders to deceive: S. Paul says, He shall come with lying signs
and lying wonders to deceive, and what miracles be those that the Pope has
brought to confirm his doctrine withal? look through their golden legend,
and tell me how many true miracles be in the whole book: what apparitions of
Saints, and isions of angels have been forged to come from heaven? what
yelling of spirits, and crying of souls have been feigned to come from
purgatory? these be miracles, signs and wonders wrought by Antichrist and his
ministers: but as S. Paul says, lying miracles, both themselves deceiptfull
and pretending to deceive: deceiptfull in themselves, for that they were but
lies and popish practices counterfeitly forged whereby to deceive the simple
and ignorant people, to lead them into errors, and to cousin them of their
money, in purchasing of pardons, dyrges and masses.

And were not these miracles to hear it told that Roodes could speak, Belles
could ring alone, Images could come down and light their own candles, Blocks
could turn their eyes and wag their lips, shake their heads, move their hands,
and some of them could knit sinues, set bones, heal the sick, give sight to
the blind, make the lame to go, but are not these practices discou^red long
ago, and ^ound out to be no other then slights and mere deceipts?

These are called miracles, and are indeed but lies, and there are none but
Papists that would be mocked with them.

CHAP. XV.
What signs and wonders they should be that are brought in by Ant^christ.
SAint Paul says, The coming of Antichrist shall be by the working of Satan,
with all power and ^. These. 2.
signs of lying wonders, and all d^ceiueablenes of unrighteousness amongst
them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved; and therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Can any thing be spoken more plainly? these shall be the works of Antichrist
which he shall bring to pass, that is to say, lying wonders: this shall he
work with all deceiueablenesse, that is, he shall come with all kind of
shifts and deceit: and with whom shall he prevail, and who be they that shall
be deceived? Those that perish because they loved not the truth that they
might be saved: and therefore God shall send them strong delusions to believe
lies.

This text must also pertain to a multitude gathered together in Christ's name,
which for lack of love unto the truth, shall be led into all error, to
believe in crosses, to believe in visions, to believe in wells, and to give
credit to all manner of fables, but the truth they shall not believe, That they
might be damned for not believing, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

If these things had not been thus sensibly foretold us long ago by the holy
ghost, it might have been thought a strange matter, that so many should be
thus still led away from the pure and undefiled word of God, and to give
themselves over to follow dreams and fantasies, but it is an evident token,
that their hearts are not marked with the spirit of God, but are led by strong
delusions to believe lies.

CHAP. XVI.
The sixth mark whereby to know Antichrist.
2 P^^. 2.
YEt one other note is given us by Saint Peter whereby to know Antichrist: and
(says he) There shall be false teachers amongst you, which shall secretly
bring in damnable sects, denying the Lord that bought them, and many shall
follow their damnable ways, by w^om, the way of truth shall be evil spoken
of, and with feigned words they shall make marchandice of you: Rom 3.
now says S. Paul, The law speaks to them that are under the law: and even
so, this is spoken to them that profess the name of Christ.

There shall be false teachers that shall bring in damnable sects. Histories
make mention of one Anthony, who lived in the wilderness of Thebais in Egypt
in manner of a Hermer, Anno 361: he had three disciples, Darmatas, Amat^s and
M^charius, these lived solitarily, and in strictnes of life, but it was in the
time of persecution, whereby to shift them from the hands of tyrants, and
proceeded at the first of a good zeal to godliness: but the devil the
peruerter of all things, did so impoison the hearts of them that followed, that
they had more trust to their own works then faith in Christ's blood, and after
that, men began new rules of works to be their own saviors.

Benet. he succeeded Anno, 524, and in the time of John the first, and he
pre^cribed institutions to a certain order of Monks.

In Anno, 850, and in the time of Sergius the third, sprung up a new sect of
Camaldimenses, a holy company that kept perpetual silence, they fasted, went
barefoote, and used to ly on the ground.

In Anno, 1060, under Gregory the sixth, there sprung up a new sect of Monks,
calling them selves the order of the shadowed valley.

The Monks of Oliuet sprung up as a fruit of disorder, ina time o^ strife
between three Bishops, in Anno, 1047, under Gregory the twelfth.

The sect of Grandmontensis sprung up under Alexander the second, in Anno,
1076. Innocentius the third, admitted the Humilitates in Anno, 1166* and a
little before that, in Anno, 1098, under Vrbane the second, began the order of
the Cistercians.

Celestinus the first, founded the Celestines, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand, one hundred eighty eight.

Here follows now such a ^abblement of others, as Gilbertines, Lustinians,
Hieronimians, Augustins, the order of Saint Savior, Scopeteines, Frisonaries,
brethren ^f S. George de Alga, Charterhouse Monks, Curthugian Friars,
Carmelites, Premonstratences, Croched Friars, White Friars, Black Friars, Gray
Friars, Dominick Friars, Frauncis Friars, Minorites, Minimes, Obseruants, the
order of Trinitte, Bouhomes, and now lately viperous brood of Jesuits.

Then were their women lectaries, as Penitenciers, Brigidians, Magdaline
sisters, with other Nuns of diverse sorts.

Yet I might speak of graue-keepers, called knights of the Sepulcher, knights
of S. John's, knights of S. Mary, Temple knights, Jesus knights, and such a
rabblement of sundry other sects by me over slipped, of which if I should
undertake to set down, their observations, their dissimulations, their
abominations, together with their hypocrisy, and filthy living, I might write
for every letter a line, for every line a leaf, and for every leaf a whole
quire of paper, and it would yet be too little to discipher out their
abominable practices.

These sects have been all of them, instituted, ratified, confirmed and
allowed by Antichrist the Pope, and yet not founded all by one Pope, but by
sundry Popes: according to the words of the Apostle, There shall be false
teachers, which shall bring in damnable sects: the Apostle speaks in the
plural number, and we see it is fulfilled: and these sects as they were
infinite, so they were as diverse in their opinions, yet all of them of one
assent in this, they all denied Christ, and they all preached the Pope, they
deny that Christ is sufficient for their salvation, but they must atteine it by
working, by fasting, by going on pilgrimage, with a number of other ceremonies,
too foolish to be set down.

Here again are the words of the Apostle verified, They shall deny the Lord
that bought them, and follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of.

Now what truth in Christ does not the Pope and his shauelings rebuke? and in
setting up their works, and following their own ways, deny altogether the
truth of Christ's ways?

And with feigned words they shall make marchandice of you, can any thing be
more directly spoken? and to prove that they come with feigned words, where
find we in any place throughout the whole scriptures that makes mention of
purgatory, of shrift, of the sacraments of confirmation, of penance, of
pardons, and such other trash, all of their own faining, and by this means
do they make marchandice of our souls.

These lights and many others whereby to discern Antichrist, are left unto us
in the holy scriptures, where the Beast seeing himself to be sought for, he
roareth, and therefore to hide himself the more closely, he persecuteth the
word of God, and seeks with all wilynes to drive the people from it, and with
false and sophistical reasons, would make us afraid of it: he curses and
excommunicateth those that would read it: persuading them they are damned, if
they do but look on it, but let not this dismay us to seek our souls:
health, for there we shall find the sweet promises of God, to the great
comfort of poo^e distressed sinners.

Whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, says saint Paul, but the
Pope would persuade they are written to deceive us, and he is contented to
sanctify us with holy oil, holy bread, holy salt, holy candles, holy water,
holy blessings, holy ceremonies, and what other holiness a man himself would
wish for, saving the holiness of Gods word for that he will in no wise have us
to deal with all, and this is the doctrine of Antichrist, and these be the
marks whereby to know him.

CHAP. XVII.
Special notes whereby to ^onfirme the Pope to be Antichrist.
THe scriptures have hitherto furnished us with sufficient notes whereby to
know Antichrist, and there are diverse testimonies yet to be gathered, and all
of them confirming the Pope to be that man of sin that has set himself
against Christ, but let us here examine some few examples.

Christ was humble and meek, and the Apostle Phil. 2. Matthew. 11.
says, He humbled himself and became obedient even unto the death, even the
death of the cross: and our savior himself commanding his disciples to
follow his example says, Learn of me that am meek and lowly in heart, and ye
shall find rest unto your souls: but is this humility to be found in the
Pope? behold his estate, his doctrine, his disciples, his life, you shall see
nothing but pomp and glory, he rules over nations and kingdoms, he makes
every knee to bow down unto him, he makes Emperors and Kings to bring him
water, to carry his train, to lead his horse, to hold his stirrup, to kiss
his ^eete, he will needs rule over all the world, and says, I am Lord of
lords, and King of kings, the whole world is my dyocesse.

If Christ, when the devil proffered him the kingdoms of the world and the
glory thereof, refused them as things impossible to stand with his kingdom,
of whom is the Pope that has received them? the devil said to Christ, Fall
down and worship me, and I will give thee all, the Pope says to the Emperor,
fall down and kiss my feet, and I will give thee thine Empire, he says to
kings in like manner, swear to defend me and my prescriptions, and I will
uphold thy crown, and will give thee this or that kingdom.

And as Christ commanded his to be lowly, so he commanded them to all
obedience: but the Pope will none of that, but as he sets himself at
liberty, and will be tied to no law, neither of God nor man, so he that will
obey neither father, mother, neither Lord nor master, neither King nor Prince,
let him but take the mark of the Beast, let him but shave himself a Monk, a
Friar, a Priest, or some any one of those sects formerly rehearsed, and the
matter is dispatched, he is exempted from all service and obedience due unto
man: and the more disobedient he shows himself unto the ordinances of God,
the more apt and meet he is for the service of the Pope: neither is the
professing, vowing, and swearing obedience unto their ordinances, any other
thing* then the denying, defying, and foreswearing obedience to the ordinances
of God.

Does not the Popes doctrine flatly teach disobedience, rebellion and
insurrection, commanding the people to arms, and to send his tradition^ with
sword and fire, and neither to obey father, mother, master, Lord, King nor
Emperor, but to invade whatsoever land or nation that will not obey his
godhead? how bestirreth he himself at this day, that seeing his
excommunications and cursings are so little regarded, that men do eat their
meat with never the less stomachs, he now falls to blowing up the coals of
rebellion, of sedition, of treason, he raises subjects against their Princes,
and sets Princes upon their subjects, and thus under the title of Seruus
seruorum, he shows himself to be Tirannus, tirannorum.

This is the Popes doctrine, this is his humility, this is his obedience, and
this is all his piety that is so cloked under that great show of holiness.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Pope takes upon him to be the head of Christ's Church.
THe Pope further chalengeth to be the head of Christ's church, but what can be
more contrary both to Christ and his Church? for the church being compact of
many members, is made one body, whereof Christ is the head: God has appeinted
Christ ever all things to be head of the Church: now if the Pope will challenge
to be the head of this Church, what does he then but make two heads of one
body, deforming altogether, and making a monster of the Church of Christ?

Again in several places of the Scriptures, the Church is called the spouse
of Christ, as S. John in his Revelation says, The true Church, the sponse and
wife of the Lamb: and an honest wife can have but one husband and one head at
one time* the which when she forsakes, and commits her self to an other,
she plays the Harlot, as that whori^h Church of Rome has already done.

And as Antichrist has thus sought to disfigure the Church of Christ, so has
he likewise defaced the Sacraments left unto the church by our savior: for
where christ and his Apostles haueleft the sacrament o^ Baptism, to be
ministered with water and with the holy Ghost, Antichrist has added oil to
grease them, spittle to poison them, and salt to stifle them: for the sacrament
of christ's body which he has left unto us as a sign of his bloodshedding,
and to be kept as a memorial till his coming again, Antichrist has made it
a most abominable Idol, commanding it to be worshipped, and the people thereby
to commit Idolatry.

Thus has he broken the first institution. And where christ says, Take ye,
and eat ye: he says, kneel ye down and worship. And where christ says,
Drink ye all of this cup, the Pope says, it serves only for the Priests,
and that those words Drink ye all of thy cup, were only spoken to the
disciples, as though the former words, Take ye and eat ye, were not in like
manner spoken to the disciples: but this is still the condition of Antichrist,
to secke to overthrow what christ has instituted.

CHAP. XVIIII.
Of the five Sacraments instituted by the Pope.
TO those two Sacraments left us by christ, the Pope has added five others
spicke and spanne new of his own making, and not one word throughout the whole
scriptures, making any mention of them, nor never heard on; nor received in the
church, till Antichrist began to prevail: the first of the five is the
sacrament of Confirmation, and this consists of two parts (as they say) the
matter and the form.

The matter is holy Chrisme, confect and made of oyle-oliue and balm
consecrated by a Bishop, an excellent receipt to scour a rusty corslet.

The form is, when any one is confirmed, the Bishop saying certain words,
must make a cross on the forehead of the party, with this enchanted ointment,
and then (be it man or woman) they are made as holy, as a pair of old boots w
hen they come new trimmed from the currior: here is now to be noted, what
themselves do attribute to this sacrament, and these be their own words, The
sacrament of confirmation is said to be greater then the sacrament of baptism,
because it is given by worthier persons, and in the more worthier part of the
body.

Is not this a sound doctrine that a drop of grease, coniured and enchanted,
should be preferred and made of better worth then the Sacrament of Baptism,
left unto us by our Savior himself: if this be not the doctrine of
Antichrist, let any man judge that is not partial.

The Sacrament of Penance is the second, instituted likewise by the Pope, and
consists of three parts, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.

Judas, after he had betrayed Christ, had Contrition, and when he knew they had
condemned him, he repented: he had Confession, I have sinned in betraying the
innocent blood* he had Satisfaction, he went to the high Priests, and delivered
back again the money* Now if Judas be not a saint in heaven, the Pope is
Antichrist in the seat of Rome.

They have a third Sacrament of Extreme unction, and this is to be minis^red
to sick persons, the matter is oyle-oliue, hallowed by a Bishop, wherewith the
sick is anoyled, upon the eyes, ears, mouth, nose, hands and feet.

And if it be a man, he is farther anoyled upon the reins of his back, but if
a woman, then they do it upon her belly, they show a filthy reason why,
because (they s^y) concupiscence reigns most in th^se parts, but for
offending of godly ears, we will let this pass amongst other of their
unclean stuff whereof their doctrine is full.

Their fourth Sacrament is the sacrament of Order, and this serves only for
the consec^a ing of Priests: there b^^ diverse ceremonies pertaining to this
sacr^ment, and (I think) both the institution and the observation, at the
first drawn from the four and twenty orders, and therefore this Sacrament is
better applied then any of the rest that were founded by the Pope.

Matrimony is the fifth and last which the Pope would have to be a Sacrament,
and having thus dignified it with so holy a title, he then prohibits it from
his clergy for fear of inf^cting them. Be not these holy Sacraments, that can
defile a man and make him vnclean^? or is not he a shameless creature, that
will teach such doctrine?

CHAP. XX.
What havoc the Pope keeps in the Church of God.
SVch hanock keeps the Pope in the Church of God, he defac^th the Sacraments,
he peruert^th the Scriptures, he corrupts the w^rd of God with his
traditions, he raceth out the second commandment out of the law of the living
God, he burns the Bible, he excommunicateth, he cu^^eth, he persecuteth, yet
all this will not serve, but Antichrist must fall, his kingdom is of this
world, and here he takes the pleasure thereof, which is the devils wages, and
the earnest-peny of his everlasting damnation.

Christ sought our profit and not his own, the Pope se^keth his own profit,
and not ours, Christ became bound to make us free, and le^t with his di^ciples
the law of the love, the Pope keeps all bound, and himself only free, and
has commended to his shauelings, only the love of their own bellies, and let
any body offer to feed them, and such persons shall be father, mother, sister
or brother unto them, they will say he is a good man, he is a father unto us*
and to our whole fraternity, we are bound to pray for him, for he does much
for our religion, and such a woman is a good sister of ours, nay, she is a
mother to our Covent, for we are more bound to pray for our good benefact ors,
then we are for those that do nothing for us.

This is the love of the Popes disciples, the Monks, the Friars, the Ies^utes,
and the rest of those popish Pri^sts, to them that give them much, them they
love much, and to them that give little, them they love a little, but to them
that give them naught, them they love naught, so that al their love is b^lly
love, al their prayer belly prayer, al their brotherhood, belly brotherhood,
and for him that will not pamper them, there is no love, noprayer, no
brotherhod, no kindred nor knowledge: and herein are still expressed the marks
of Antichrist. O let us then open our eyes, God has given us ears to hear,
eyes to see, and hearts to understand, let us judge uprightly, it is Gods
cause, and we do see who it is that has carried himself so long time under
the color of holiness, this is he which has beguiled and blinded the world,
this is he that man of sin, that has set himself against Christ, and under
the pre^ence to be the vicare of Christ, has sought to confound the light of
the Gospel which is left us by Christ.

His holiness is contented, even at Rome it self, to ^ollerate with any
religion, e^cepting this of the Go^pell, he is contented to suffer the Turk
there to have a Temple, and the Jews there to have their Sinagogues, but he
can in no wise admit so much as a little Chapel, where the word of God may be
purely preached, and sincerely taught, no, he knows that if the Ark of God
be brought into the house of Dagon, the Idol can not stand, but down he falls
presently to the ground.

The Popes doctrine can join in good society with Turks, with Jews, with
Infidels, whatsoever, only the doctrine of Christ's gospel excepted: such
enmity there is still between Christ and the Pope.

CHAP. XXI.
As there is but one true God, so there is but one truereligion.
ANd as there is but one God almighty, who will have no other Gods but
himself, so there is but one undoubted truth (which is holy and given by the
same God) and will admit of no other religion but it self: for wheresoever it
becomes, it confounds all other doctrines, that is or may be invented by
the subtlety of Satan, or any of his ministers, and this is the cause that
the Pope is so hateful unto it, and seeks so much as in him lies utterly to
suppress it.

Histories make mention, that in those days when the Romans had brought the
greatest part of the world under their subjection: wheresoever they became
victors, amongst other spoils they never failed to bring away the Gods of the
heathen, which were still conveyed to Rome, as well in token of their conquests:
as themselves in those days being likewise Infidels, carried this opinion,
that the more Gods they had amongst them, the greater trust they had to
prevail in all their enterprises whatsoever they attempted.

In the honor of those Gods, Marcus Agrippa edified a Temple called Panthion,
wherein these Idols were altogether placed.

We do further read, that after the Romans had subverted the City of
Jerusalem, it was thought good amongst them, that a picture should be made in
the representation of Christ, because he had there been reputed for a God
(although a very simple one) and a very few there were at that time that did
so esteem of him, yet being very loath that any God, great and small should
escape them: but they would have them all in Rome in this Temple of Panthion.
The matter being thus in question, in the end they got understanding, that
Christ in his doctrine, would admit of no more Gods but one, whereupon they
thought him not a necessari^ or fit companion to be brought to their Temple,
where they had so many Gods, that could stand altogether, and could agree
quietly amongst themselves, which they had thought he would never have done if
he should be once brought amongst them: they therefore resolved themselves,
thinking it not convenient to meddle with him at all, that would so much
disturb their quiet, and so they left him.

Tell me now, is not our holy father directly of this humor, he can agree
quietly with the Turks and the Jews, and they likewise with him, and he can
have his Mass in one Church, and they can use their Ceremonies in an other
fast by, all at one instant, and all within Rome: but let any man come there
that should but offer to preach the Gospel of Christ purely, and should speak
against Idolatry, and the worshipping of Images made with men's hands, and all
Rome would be in an uproar, the Pope himself would be out of his wits, and he
would never be in quiet, till he had tormented him, and put him to cruel death.

This Temple of Panthion in Rome, is now called by the name of All halous,
first builded by Marcus Agrippa, for all the Idols of the heathen, and after
consecrated by Bonifacius the fourth, to all the whole company of Saints,
whereby it appears as well in that as in other matters, that the Pope has
well furnished his Church with many heathenish presidents.

CHAP. XXII.
The City of Rome is a continnall persecuter of the children of God.
THat City of Rome, has been from the beginning, the greatest persecuter
that ever was amongst the Christians, for as it is truth, that the Church of
Christ has bin there established, and that very faithfully and truly, so this
is as certain, that before it could be so established, it was many years in
performing, and cost the lives of an infinite number of Martyrs and Saints,
neither had it after any long continuance, but that Antichrist began to creep
in by little, and prevailed so much in the end, that he quite excluding Christ,
has in his place set up himself, and has fithence been a greater persecuter
of Christians, then all the Tyrants that were there before the first
establishment.

Now if God were their father, then would they love Christ his son, and seek
to set forth his glory: if they were of the sheepesold of God, then would they
hear ^is voice: but they are of their father the Devil, and the lusts of
their father they will do, they are in name the servants of Christ, but in
their works they show themselves to be the members of Antichrist, they change
peace into war, they tume judgment into gall, and the fruit of
righteousness into wor^ewood, they resist the truth of God, to establish the
devises and doctrine of men, they pretend show of holiness, through the which
they draw to themselves credit, they have only a painted visard, and carry
an empty name of the Church: what is their wilful chastity, but an obedience
condemned in the scripture, to give God that which he has not given us, and so
to make sin where there was none at all, the fruits whereof, is daily
corrupting of other men's wives, and to live in open and common whoredom, with
other abominations, filthy to be spoken of.

Under the pretense of their vowed poverty, they have robbed the whole world
of their wealth and treasure, not suffering Emperors nor Kings to live in
quiet, that will not be sworn to do them service, and to uphold their pride
and ambition.

The fruit of their wilful obedience, is to exempt themselves both from the
laws of God and man, in so much that if any Prince begin to punish their
disobedience, they curse him immediately to the bottomless pit of hell, and
will proclaim him no rightful King, setting both his own subjects, and other
nations against him.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Popes practices whereby to deceive the simple.
THey teach us to fly from Christ, and worship Saints, who as the Papists
themselves suppose, are most cruel and merciless tyrants, wreakefull and
vengible, if their euins be not fasted, their Images visited, saluted and
worshipped with a pater noster, with a candle, with incense or other offerings,
in that place which they themselves have chosen to hear suitors, with their
supplications and petitions.

They fray and terrify us with their painful purgatory: the scorching heat
whereof is such, that it has not only consumed infinite treasure both of gold
and silver out of ignorant men's purses, but it has likewise melted Castles,
buildings, Lands and tenements innumerable, to the profit of Monks Friars,
Canons, Priests reguler and seculer, and many men have robbed their heirss, to
give perpetuities to these hypocrites to buy perpetual prayre (but rather we
may say to buy perpetual pain) for they never appoint any time of
deliverance, fearing that the Lands should return back again to the right
heirs.

There be some that have given them large perpetuities to be prayed for, of
whom they have made saints, receiving offerings in their names, and teaching
other men to pray unto them that have given great revenues to be prayed for
them selves, and yet the Pope for money can empty Purgatory when he will: but
if a man should ask them by what authority the Pope gives such pardon, they
answer that it is out of the merits of Christ's passion, and so at the last
they are driven to confess against themselves, that Christ has not only
deserved for us the forgiveness of the crime, but also of the pain: and then if
Christ has deserved all for us, who gives the Pope authority to reserve a
part of his deserving from me, and to sell me Christ's merits for money?

His holiness sends them to heaven with Scala Celi, that is with a ladder to
scale the walls of heaven, for by the door Christ, they will not suffer you
to enter, but they have stopped up that way, because they would have you to buy
their scaling ladders.

They refuse the precious blood of Christ, making themselves aprons of
Pope*holy works, as Adam did of fig leaves to hide his sin: an unjust
righteousness, that will justify it self before him, where the Angels do
find no other buckler then grace.

And what are our works, but a deformity and filthiness in the sight of God?
our*sinnes are great, for they are against a great God: they are infinite,
because they are committed against him that is infinite, and therefore we may
not think to cover them with merit, nor to repair them with satisfaction for
our own.

CHAP. XXIIII.
What our d^sernings are, and what we are able to merit.
But let us look into our deserving, or did we but keep a reckoning of our
life, how small a part thereof do we bestow upon God, how few of our steps we
do tread in his trace, how few are the thoughts that we direct to his se^uice?

Our reason that should further us unto all goodness, it is in nothing more
unreasonable, then in the knowledge of things belonging unto God: and the b^st
use we make of it, it se^ueth to cover our naughtines* and wherein consists
our virtue, but in concealing our vices? so that those that have most wit, have
commonly least honesty.

Thy senses, to what other use do thou put them then to the marring of the
senses: thy tongue, how much more ready is it to speak evil, then to speak
good: if we do any good, it is but to the end it might be seen, whereby to
attain a little popular praise, for in secret we will do nothing at all: if
we forbear to do evil, it is but fear lest the world should know it, and
were that fear away, we would stick at nothing.

But let us come to our best perfections, and look into our prayers and what
are they but continual offenses, when in the midst of our greatest
vehemency, our minds are by and by carried away with one vanity or other so
that when we have prayed, we had then need to pray again that God would
forgive us the imperfections of our prayers.

Is this our righteousness wherein we have such trust, an unrighteous
righteousness, which will not acknowledge his good to come from God, and his
evil to come from himself.

The Pharisie abased the most highest by lifting up his own merit and
worthiness, spoiling God of his dignity, by advancing himsslfe, and Christ
rebuked nothing so much amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, as their fasting,
their praying, their washing, and their cleansing, wherein consisted the hope
of their holiness, for in open sin, their is hope of repentance, but in holy
hypocrisy, there is none at all: and as there is no way better for us to love
God, then by hateing our selves, so there is no righteousness in us to be
accounted greater, then by confessing our unrighteousness, for we then exalt
God, when we cast down our selves, when we bow our necks under his yoke,
treading our selves under our own feet, by casting our presumption and
arrogancy at his feet, even then may we best trust in God, when we most
distrust our s^lues, and although between man and man, i^ we confess a debt,
we must pay it, or acknowledge a wrong we must make amends, yet God requires
no other satisfaction then a true and so^rowfull conf^ssion* then covering our
sins with mercy, when we discover them most tru^ly.

CHAP. XXV.
A friendly admonition to the Irish, to beware of th^se Ministers of
Antichrist, that have so blinded their understanding, and abused their Zeal.
^, These. 5,
LEt us then be no longer deceived, but follow the counsel of S. Paul, Try all
things, and keep that is good. God has given you the spirit of discretion, be
wise therefore, and make trial to know what is good: learn of those of Berea,
who hearing Paul preach, made daily search of the scriptures whether those
things were so which he had taught them, and finding them to be true, many of
them believed: do you in like case make trial, and receive nothing without
good proof and testimony, and when you shall find that they are not contrary
to the wholesome doctrine of the word of God, Then keep that which is good,
settle your selves then, and be not carried away with every blast of doctrine.

Believe not these Jesuits and Seminaries, that do so bestirre themselves
amongst you in Ireland, to persuade a religion that cannot abide the light of
the Scriptures: would not any man that were wise, suspect him that would set a
Jewel to sale, and would not suffer the buyer to look upon it in the light,
but he must buy it in the dark, keep it in the dark, wear it in the dark,
and never bring it to any place where it might be perfectly seen and examined?

Now who would not suspect him for a cousening companion, that would offer such
a thing? and can there be a greater suspicion of cosenage, then for men to
offer a kind of religion, that cannot abide the light of Gods word, and would
enforce men to receive such a doctrine as they might not examine by the
scriptures, to see how it would stand with the doctrine of Christ? who but
cosening wretches would offer it? but what ignorance in those men that would
receive it?

Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God. At what
time Achab would not believe the answer which the Prophet Micheas made him,
there came forth a spirit and stood before the Lord, and said, I will go out
and be a false spirit in the mouths of all his Prophets. Take heed you be not
deceived by any of these spirits, which shall seek to abuse you, by pretense
of revelation, by visions, by dreams, by show of holiness: such spirits are
walking and daily conversant amongst us in Ireland. Woe be to you Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites (says Christ) for you devour widows houses, under the
color of long prayers: but our hypocrites rob not widows only, but they
spoil married wives, and make havoc of Esquires, Knights and Lords: they
spoil all men, women and children, arming them with grudge, with murmr, with
contempt, and sometimes setting them in open rebellion against their Prince.

And who are the inducers of these and many other mischiefs, but your
Jesuits, your seminaries, and your ungodly massing Priests? these are they
that are the common disturbers of the Countries quiet, that have stirred up and
set on foot many rebellions: these are they that have blinded your
understanding, abused your zeal, and led you into ignorance under A
counterfeit pretense of holiness.

They will you to pray, and they teach you to trust in your prayers, they bid
you to fast, they say you shall merit by your fasting: but be no longer
deceived, look into the fruits of this prayer and this fasting, that they have
so long taught, and wherewith they have almost infected the whole realm of
Ireland, (but especially in the most remote places) and letting slip persons of
greater worth) whose eyes I hope God will open to see their own faults) in
beholding other men's follies, we will take but for our example, the base and
barbarous Kearne, the very dross and scum of the Country, and yet what
Jesuit, what Seminary, what Priest, or what other member of that rascal
rabble, that are more precise in their popish observations, more abstinent in
their prescribed fasting days, and that are more scrupulous in any point of
Popery then they be: and yet that very day, hour or minute, when they will
nor touch any flesh, butter, cheese eggs, milk or such other like, for defiling
of themselves, they will make no conscience, to murder, to kill, to rob, to
ravish, to spoil, or to commit any other villainy whatsoever.

You know this to be true: be not then any longer enemies to your own
discretions, let these Balam^tes no longer deceive you, with their lies, with
their visions, with their wonders and miracles: Christ has prophesied that
there shall many false Prophets a^i^, and shall show signs and wonders, and
shall deceive (if it were possible) the very elect.

Many will say unto me n that day, Lo^d, ha^^ we not in thy name prophesied,
and by thy name cast out Devils, and by thy name done many good works, and
then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me you that work
^^iquitie.

And Paul has long ago foretold us, that which at this day we may behold with
our eyes.

In the later time, same shall give heed unto spirits of errou^: take heed
ther^f^re, and when thou hear tell of visions, or miracles (for by these
delusions the poor people of Ireland ^re most deceived) bring them to the
touchstone, compare them with the word of God, if thou find they intend
nothing but the aduancemet of the Gospel of Christ, and the glory of God,
thou may receive them as sent of God: if otherwise they pretend the
advancement of creatures, or of superstitious works or working, beware of
them, for without doubt they are either lies or delusions of the Devil, or some
of his ministers, practicing to deceive thee: for open the Bible, and in the
very first lease it is written, In the beginning, God created heaven and earth,
and all that is contained therein, immediately excluding all other Gods made or
devised by man, only to keep man to the true God, that first created him:
open the Book still further forth at all adventures, and so peruse from line
to line, even to the latter end of the whole book, and you shall meet with
nothing but the praises of that God, or with fearful denunciations,
thundrings and threatenings against those that follow strange Gods, or give his
glory to creatures, stocks, blocks, or stones.

Let us take heed then and beware of these deceipts, we have tasted the word
of God a long time, we have received the comfort of the gospel, let us not
despite it, or be weary of it, but let us build our selves of that corner
stone, which the builders have cast off: let us lay our counsels to the square
of his truth, let us measure them with the plummet of his righteousness. What
eye would not behold the brightness of that sun? what ear would refuse to hear
GOD speak? Despise not then the wisdom of the spirit, refuse not his help,
but seek the same that we may be strengthened: let us comfort our selves in
the testimonies of our adoption, let us not quench the light he has kindled in
our hearts: let us not slenderly account of his mercy, nor abuse the time of
our salvation.

God give us his holy spirit, that we may discern the truth from falsehood,
and know the blessed and gracious will of God: that we may feel our dark and
clowdie understanding, which shines not, but as it pleases him to inlighten:
that we may walk in his ways, and serve him in reverence and fear, all the
days of our life.

FINIS.

