A WORKMAN, That NEEDS NOT TO BE ASHAMED: OR The faithful Steward of Gods
house. A Sermon describing the duty of a godly MINISTER, both in his DOCTRINE
and in his LIFE.

By CHARLES RICHARDSON, Preacher at S. KATHARINES, near the Tower of LONDON.

LVKE 12.42. Who is a faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make
ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for William Barret, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1616.

TO MY REVEREND GOOD FRIEND MR. D. SPARK, MINISTER OF GODS WORD AT BLETCHLEY
IN BVCKINGHAMSHIRE, Grace and Peace.
SIr, I present unto you here a Sermon, penned by me, concerning the duty of
a Godly Minister. I confess, it may be thought great presumption, that I, who
am the least of many thousands of my brethren, should take upon me to teach
others, Magis mihi discendum quam docendum, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 4.
who stand more need to learn my self. But I may truly say, as Sui magis
admonendi, quam aliorum docendi gratia, lib. 16. c. 5.
A. Gellius said of a certain book of Laelius, That I writ it rather for mine
own admonition, then for the instruction of others. Whatsoever it is, I am
bold to publish it to the view of the world in your name, both in regard of
that desire I have to testify my thankfulness unto you, for the great and
undeserved kindness, I have many ways found at your hands, especially for
that (as I do willingly acknowledge) you were the first that persuaded and
encouraged me to enter into the Ministry, and the first place which I had in
the Church, I had of your free gift: and also in respect of that reverence,
which I bear unto your grave and venerable old Age: Venerabilis non annorum
sed virtutum numero, Bern. de amore Dei, part. 2.
Venerable, I say, not so much in number of years (though they be very many)
as in abundance of virtue. It is not with you, as it is with too many, who
being decrepit with age, and ready to be laid on the Beer, Senec. de breuit.
vitae.
have no other argument to prove that they have lived long, but their gray
hairs and their wrinckles. But you have verified that speech of SOLOMON, Age
is a crown of glory, Prou. 16.31.
when it is found in the way of righteousness. The pains that you have taken
in the Church, 2. Tim. 4.2.
in preaching the word in season and out of season (as the Apostle commands)
will no doubt make you famous to posterity: especially considering, that even
now when your strength is spent, and your body worn, so as you might justly
with -- Veianius armis Herculis ad postem fixis latet abditus agro, Horat.
Veianius, long ago have hanged up your armor, and betaken your self to
rest, yet still you continue your wonted labor, as though you desired to end
your life and your preaching both at once. And when you shall be gathered hence
as a ricke of Corn, you shall survive in those three worthy Sons of yours,
M. Thomas Spark of New College in Oxford. M. Andrew Spark of Peter-house in
Cambridge. M. William Spark of Magdalen College in Oxford.
whom you have been careful to train up in the Schools of the Prophets; two
of them being already profitable Ministers in the Church; and the third, as he
has attained to a great measure of learning: so, I doubt not, but he will
employ it to the edification of the body of Christ. But I am not willing to
detayne you with any further mention of these things. I beseech you to accept
of these weak meditations, with the same mind and affection, wherewith I
offer them. And howsoever, I confess, Cypr. in Symbolum Apostolorum.
they be not worthy the exercise of great Divines: yet if hereby I may excite
some young beginners, to the more conscionable discharge of their duties, I
shall think my labor well bestowed. I pray God still to bless your godly
labors, that when you shall have finished your course, you may receive that
Crown of righteousness, which is laid up for you in the Kingdom of heaven.

Your W. in all Christian affection, CHARLES RICHARDSON.

Errata.
Page, 15. lin. 8. for happiness read hearers. p. 21. l. 27. for and, r. etc.
p. 23. l. 32. after find, r. them. p. 26. l. 14. for Trade, r. flaile. p. 42.
l. 5. for with. r. to. p. 45. l. 23. put out these words. and the work is an
establishment to the life. p. 46. l. 27. after filthiness, r. might. p 47. l.
31. for heal, r. heart. p. 55. l. 34. for they, r. he. p. 67. l. 27. for
fills, r. fitteth.

A SERMON, DESCRIBING THE DVTY OF A GODLY MINISTER.
2. TIM. 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Worke-man that
needs not to be ashamed, dividing the Word of truth aright.


THis Timotheus, to whom both these Epistles are written, having been brought
up in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures from his cradle; 2. Tim. 3.15.
and having always been faithful in the profession of Christian Religion, was
therefore in very great estimation with the Apostle Paul; Act. 16.3.4. and
20.4. and Romans 16.21.
and was either one of his Companions in his peregrinations; or else when the
Apostle himself was kept in prison, he employed him as a Minister, and sent
him to confirm the Churches which he had planted. Thus was he sent to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.17. 1. These. 3.2.
To put them in remembrance of that which the Apostle had taught. Thus was he
also sent to the Thessalonians, To establish them, and to comfort them touching
their faith. For this cause, 1. Cor. 4.17. and 16.10. Phil. 2.22. and 1. These.
3.2. Act. 16.9.10.1. Tim. 1.3.
wheresoever the Apostle makes mention of him, he does always give him very
great commendation. Now, when the Apostle was himself to depart into
Macedonia, where the Lord had called him by a vision to preach the Gospel; he
left Timotheus at Ephesus, to resist the false Teachers, which were crept into
the Church, and began to corrupt sound doctrine, thereby to draw men from the
sincerity of faith. And because there was not yet a sufficient number of
Ministers in the Church of Ephesus to preach the Gospel, therefore the Apostle
gives him authority, to ordain as many as should be needful. And for his
better direction in so weighty a business, 1. Tim. 3.15.
he writes the former Epistle unto him, teaching him, what he is chiefly to
respect in the imposition of hands, and showing, who are to be admitted unto
that great and high calling, and who are to be rejected.

And because Timotheus, 2. Tim. 1.4.
as a loving Scholar, was much grieved, and shed many tears, at the departure
of so kind a Master, 1. Tim. 3.14.
therefore to comfort him, the Apostle promised in the former Epistle, if it
were possible, to come unto him again very shortly. But being in the mean
while carried as a prisoner to Rome, and having now no hope ever to return
again to Ephesus, 2. Tim 4.6.
but rather looking every day for present death: he writes this second
Epistle unto Timotheus, both to confirm and arm him against the fear of
persecution, which in regard of his youth might trouble and dismay him: and
also, to direct him further, how to behave himself in the government of Gods
Church.

But not to spend time in vn-folding the whole Epistle, but to come near the
words that are to be handled; in this second Chapter, the Apostle first of
all exhorts Timotheus unto cheerfulness, and diligence in preaching of the
Gospel, and to appoint meet and sufficient Ministers, for the propagating of
sound doctrine unto posterity; which exhortation, with the reasons of it, is
continued unto the 9. verse. Secondly, he comfort him by many arguments,
both against that offense he might take at his bonds and imprisonment, and also
against the fear of persecution, which might befall himself likewise: and
that unto the 14. verse. Thirdly, because even then the Church began to be
troubled with contentions, disputations, and strife about words, in the 14.
verse he exhorts him to restrain them to the uttermost of his power. And
first, the more to terrify those that delighted in such peevish oppositions,
he bids him use great vehemence of speech in reproving them, even to protest
unto them before the Lord; thereby insinuating, how dangerous a thing this
litigious and wrangling knowledge is. Then he sets down two arguments to
dissuade from them, taken from the unprofitable effects of them. First, that
they are to no profit, Altercando veritas amittitur, Calvin. in locum.
neither to the Teachers themselves, who thereby come to lose the truth: nor
yet to their Hearers, who by such courses are not at all built up in Faith and
Charity, which is the true use of Christian doctrine. 2. Tim. 1.13.
Secondly, that such contentions are so far from profiting, as that rather
they tend to the perverting of the hearers: turning them away from true Faith,
and so consequently, from everlasting salvation.

Now, because as Calvin observes, all this stir and strife in doctrine
arises from this Fountain, that men of good, but unsanctified wits, desire in
a vain ostentation to vaunt and set forth themselves and their gifts before
men: therefore, the Apostle in this verse, prescribes a most excellent remedy
for that disease, exhorting Timotheus, and all other in his place, to cast
their eyes upon God, making it their chief study to approve themselves to
him, in the faithful execution of their ministry, and in the sincere
performance of those duties which God requires of them. As if he should say,
Let others that delight in it, seek to win the applause of men: but do thou
study to approve thy self and thy ministry unto God. And thus do these
words depend on that which went before. In the handling whereof, for our more
orderly proceeding, let us consider these two things: first, the duty
whereunto the Apostle exhorts Timotheus: and secondly, the means prescribed
for the better performance thereof. The duty is this, that he study to
approve him self to God. The means whereby this may be effected, are two:
first, if he be a worke-man, and such a one as needs not to be ashamed.
Secondly, if he divide the Word of truth aright. And thus much for the opening
and resolving of the words. Let us now proceed to the doctrines and
instructions, that arise from them.

Study to show thy self approved to God.) (...) a (...), festinatio.
The word that is rendered study, is of great force in the original, and
signifies to endeavor to the uttermost of ones power, to use al diligence, and
even to enforce a man's self to do a thing, and so it is used and translated,
(...) Solicit stude and ante omnia hoc labora, etc. Hieron in loc.
2. Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. And,
Hebr. 6.11. Show the same diligence. And therefore S. Jerome reads it, study
carefully or diligently: and labor for this above all things, etc. This then
may be our first instruction. Minister of the Word, to approve himself unto
God. This was the endeavor of the Apostle Paul, as himself testifies. 1. Cor.
4 3.4.
As touching me, says he, I pass very little to be judged of you, or of man's
judgment: no, I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not thereby justified; but he that judges me, is the Lord. Upon which
place Musculus gives this good note. The faithfulness of a Minister of
Christ, is not commended in that, that he he appear faithful to men, but
that he be found faithful of Christ the Lord. And therefore, says he, this
he studieth most, that from his heart he may serve Christ, seeking nothing
else but to advance his Kingdom. And in another place the Apostle says, 2.
Cor. 4.2.
In declaration of the truth we approve our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God. And again, In all things we approve our selves as the
Ministers of God. and 6.4.
The same care ought to be in all other godly Ministers. The reason is,
because every good Minister is the servant of God, and that after a special
manner, as the Apostle says: God is my witness, whom I serve in my Spirit,
Romans 1.9.
in the Gospel of his Son: and in another place, 1. Tim. 1.12.
He counted me faithful, says he, and put me in his service. Now, as every
good servant is careful to approve himself to his own Master, above all
other: so should every godly Minister desire most of all to approve himself to
God. Yea, it is required of earthly servants, that in the service they perform
to their bodily masters, they should seek the approbation of God, and
therefore they are commanded, Ephesians 6.7. Cel. 3.23.
With good will to serve the Lord, and not men. And, Whatsoever they do, to
do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men. Much more should Ministers,
who do immediately serve the Lord, in the work of the ministry, seek to
approve themselves unto him. In the beginning of this Chapter, 2. Tim. 2.3.
the Apostle calls Timotheus (and so all the Ministers of the Word) a good
Soldier of Jesus Christ. Now, a Soldier having by oath bound himself to his
Captain, or General, endeavors so to carry himself in the wars, as he
may please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier, as the Apostle says.
Minister having given up his name, and bound himself to fight under the
Banner, not of some earthly Captain, as Alexander, or Caesar, or such like,
but of Christ Jesus, the great General of heaven and earth, ought so to behave
himself in all things that appertain unto his duty, as he may be approved
and accepted of him that called him.

Camaeleon does after the air, which is her only nourishment. Pulchrum est
monstrari digito, and dicier hic est, Pers. Sat. 1. AElian Var hist. lib. 9.
cap. 17.
They count it a goodly matter, that men take notice of them, and point at them
for their gifts; yea, many times, though they be never so mean that do it. As
it is said of Demosthenes, that he was filled with pride, when he heard the
Water-bearers whisper something in his commendation, as he passed by them. Now,
he that is thus affected, can never be sincere in the execution of his
ministry. For he will measure all things by his own estimation and credit,
and will make all that he does, yea, even the doctrine that he delivers, to
serve to that end. And therefore, the Apostle commending the sincerity of his
ministry to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 2.6.
takes both God and them to witness, that he never sought praise of men,
neither of them, nor of others: insinuating, that if he had sought praise and
approbation with men, he could not have been sincere. For as Seneca says
well: Controuers. lib. 5
He that seeks after praise, is desirous to have himself approved, and not
the cause which he handles; whereupon follows this fault, that he omitteth
many necessary things, while he labors only to make a fair show. And
hence is it, that vainglorious Ministers, are not the same men in their
preaching, when they have a great Auditory, as when they preach to a few. So
that when we see such a man, Sen. Epist. 29.
famous in the estimation of the people, applauded and commended wheresoever
he comes, we have cause to pity him, and to lament his estate, because he
cannot attain to such favor by sincere and faithful dealing. I do not
deny, but a man may lawfully receive that reverent estimation, that is due to
virtue and good deserts. For it is the commandment of God, that they that are
inferior in gifts, should honor those whose gifts are more eminent, Exodus
20.12. And it is agreeable to justice, that they that are endued with more
excellent gifts of God, and do use them to the benefit of others, should in
thankfulness receive some recompense. Now, what better recompense can be
given them, then honor and due respect? Besides, it is very profitable. For
they that have gifts in any measure, are hereby excited and stirred up to
strive to a greater excellency. And the reverence that is done unto them, does
procure them authority with others, and cause them to be had in higher
reputation, and so their pains and diligence does the more good. And
therefore, the Apostle does not say, that he refused that reverence and honor
that was given to him and his Apostleship, Gal. 4.14.
though he acknowledge that the Galatians received him as an Angel of God,
yea, as Christ Jesus: but only he says, he affected it not, he sought not
after it ambitiously, as too many do, which is the greatest vanity in the
world. 2. Cor. 10.18.
For, as he, that prayseth himself, is not allowed (as the Apostle says) so
neither is he allowed, that by this means is fondly praised of men, but he
whom the Lord prayseth.

be Pastors according to his heart, Jer. 3.15.
as the Lord himself says: For this end, first, it is required of us, that we
be faithful in the discharge of our duties. The Apostle exhorts earthly
servants, Tit. 2.10.
to show all good faithfulness unto their bodily Masters. Much more must we
be faithful, that are Gods Stewards, 2. Cor. 4.1.2.
to whom he has committed the dispensation of his holy mysteries: whereupon,
faith Luther, Let every man be faithful in his ministry. Let him not seek
his own glory, Let him not rest in the vain applause of the foolish
multitude: but let this be his greatest care, that he may perform his work
well, that is, that he may purely preach the Gospel. But our faithfulness
must especially appear in this, that we labor to gather Disciples unto
Christ. We may not be like those false Teachers, which the Apostle speaks of,
Act. 20.30.
To draw Disciples after our selves, that is, to make Sects, and cause men to
give up their names to us. But all our endeavor must be to bring men to
Christ. And this is insinuated in the commission which Christ gives his
Apostles, Mat. 28.19.
and in them the Ministers that succeed them, (...).
namely, To go and teach all Nations: where the word signifies to make them
Disciples. As all the gain of earthly servants does redound unto their
Masters, and not to themselves: so the souls that we gain by our preaching,
should redound unto God. And therefore, Ioh. 1.19.20.
when the Jews began to make account of John Baptist, both for the austeritie
of his life, and for the excellency of his preaching, and the rareness of his
baptism; he would by no means suffer them to be too highly conceited of him,
Ioh. 26.27.
but labors to make them acknowledge Christ, whom he so far preferred
before himself, as he confesses, he was not worthy to unloose the latchet
of his shoo. And when his own Disciples began to dote of him more then was
fit, and went about to breed some emulation in him against our Savior Christ,
because he also began to baptize, Ioh. 3.26.28 30.
and all men came to him, he tells them in plain terms, that it was meet
they should do so. And as for himself, he had told them that he was only a
forerunner sent before him; Mat. 11.2.
and says he, He must increase, but I must decrease. Yea afterward, he
sends them also to Christ, that they might know him to be the only true
Messiah, and so also become followers of him.

Secondly, we must in all our ministry chiefly aim at the glory of God, and
the salvation of the people, committed to our charge. It is the general duty
of all Christians, in all their actions to propound the glory of God, as their
chief and principal scope. 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle) do all to the glory of God. Much more
should Ministers make the glory of God the principal end of all their
ministerial duties. And indeed, the glory of all our actions is wholly due to
the Lord, who works whatsoever is wrought by us. We are but instruments in
the Lords hand, and therefore, we cannot arrogate any thing to our selves
without prejudice to him. Jsa. 10.15.
Shall the axe (says the Prophet) boast it self against him that heweth
therewith? or shall the Saw exalt it self against him that moves it? If
therefore we see any good effect wrought by our ministry, let us say with
David, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, Psalm. 115.1.
but unto thy Name give the glory.

And for the salvation of the people, the Apostle uses it as an argument to
persuade Timotheus, to be diligent and constant in the discharge of his duty.
1. Tim. 4.16.
Take heed unto thy self, says he, and unto learning; continue therein: for
in doing this, thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee. As if
he should have said, Calu. in locum.
Let them that are desirous of vainglory, please themselves with their own
ambition: let them applaude themselves in the subtilties of their wit; let it
be sufficient for thee, to bend thy study to the furtherance of thine own and
the peoples salvation. Thus if we set our selves to be approved unto God, the
Lord that knows our sincerity, will not be wanting to reward us liberally,
and that even in this life, 1. Pet. 4.14.
making the Spirit of glory to rest vponvs, as the Apostle Peter calls it.
To which purpose Luther has a good saying: If a man's work be right, let him
be sure that he shall never want glory neither with God, nor with men. As we
see by experience, that they that set themselves conscionably to perform the
duties of their calling, the Lord does sooner or later cause them to be
esteemed and had in reverence of men, yea many times of such as are enemies to
the Gospel. Sen. Epist. 80.
The Heathen man could say, that glory is the shadow of virtue, which will
accompany men whether they will or no. But as the shadow sometimes goes
before the body, and sometimes follows after: so glory is sometimes before
us, and presents it self to our view; sometimes it comes behind us, and
is the greater, by how much it is the later, when envy is ceased, namely after
our death. But without all question, howsoever it pleases the Lord to deal
with us in this life: yet at the great day of Judgment, When the chief
Shepherd shall appear, 1. Pet. 5.4.
we shall receive an incorruptible Crown of glory. Then our Master Christ
Jesus, when he shall come to call us to account for the talents and gifts
which he has given us, and shall find that we have employed them to the
glory of his Name, and the good of his Church, Math. 5.21.
shall say unto us, It is well done, thou good and faithful servant: enter
into thy Masters joy.

Last of all, here is also an admonition for all the hearers of the Word, that
they suffer their Ministers to perform this duty. There is a secret
corruption in most men, they would have a Minister to speak to their humors,
and to sooth them up in whatsoever they do. If they say the Crow is white, Isay
30 10.
they would have the Minister to say so too. They cannot endure that he should
prophecy right things unto them, but would have him to speak flattering
things, as the Prophet says of the people in his time. But, as has been said
already, The Minister is the servant of Christ, to whom only he ought to
approve himself, and of whom only he ought to labor to draw men to be
followers, and therefore, he must administer and dispense the Word
indifferently unto all, not caring whom he pleases or displeases, so he may
please God. What message soever the Lord puts into his mouth, how harsh
soever it be, he must deliver it faithfully, though all the world be offended
at it. Ky. 1.17.
As the Lord charged the Prophet Jeremy; Speak unto them all that I command
thee, be not afraid of their faces, lest I destroy thee before them. The
Minister, you see, must deal faithfully in the Lords busmesse, even upon pain
of his high displeasure. Number. 23.12.
Balaam that false prophet could say, Must I not take heed to speak that,
which the Lord bath put into my mouth? Much more ought a godly minister to be
careful that way, that though he might gain never so much by flattering,
Numb. 22.18.
yet he must not go beyond the Word of the Lord, to do less or more: he
must not give titles to men, nor causelessely commend them without desert, lest
his Maker reprove him, as Job says, Job 32.22. Yea the Apostle Paul says,
Gal. 1.10.
If he should go about to please men, he were not the servant of Christ. If
he should apply his doctrine to men's humors mours and affections, the Lord
would never approve him. And therefore all this being so, you must give your
ministers leave to discharge their duties in all sincerity, and not be
offended, though at Gods Commandment, they do somewhat sharply reprove your
sins. For as the Apostles said of obedience, so may we say in this case:
Acts 4.19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to please you rather then God, judge
ye.

A Workman. The same word is used in the parable of the Vineyard, Math. 20.1.
and there is translated laborers. (...).
And so it is used, 2. These. 3.10. where the Apostle commands, that if there
were any that would not work, (...).
he should not eat. From whence arises this next instruction: Minister is a
painful and laborious calling, and he that would approve himself and his
Ministry unto God, he must be a workman. This the Apostle confirms in
many other places. Exhorting the Thessalonians to a reverent and due estimation
of their Ministers, he says, Know them that labor among you, etc. 1. These. 5
12.
And in an other place, The Elders, says he, that rule well, 1. Tim. 5.17.
are worthy of double honor; especially they which labor in the Word and
Doctrine. In both which places, the word there used, (...).
does signify to labor unto weariness. In like manner, exhorting Timotheus
to the performance of his duty, he bids him, Watch in all things, do the
work of an Evangelist, 2. Tim. 4.5.
etc. And, describing the office of a faithful Minister, he says, If any man
desire the office of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 3.1.
he desires a worthy work. Whereupon S. Augustine says, Episcopatus nomenest
operis, non honoris.
The office of a Bishop is a name of labor, not of honor: that a man may know
that he is no Bishop, that would bear rule, but would do no good. According to
that speech of our Savior, Math. 9.37. Surely the harvest is great, but the
laborers are few: wherefore pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would send
forth laborers into his harvest. De ciu. Dei li. 19 c. 19. De vit. and morib.
Cleric. Sermon. 1.
Where the same word is used that is in this place. Whereunto agrees that
saying of S. Augustine, that the office of a Minister is rather a burden then
an honor. Declam.
And Bernard says, Great is the place of Ministers in the Kingdom of God: but
yet there is no small labor belonging unto them. So then, though the calling
of a Minister be an high and honorable calling, yet it is not a calling of
ease, but of labor. And though the work of the ministry be a worthy and an
excellent work: yet it is a work, yea and that a painful work.

Now the work and labor of a Minister consists in these three things:
Quandoque parum nouit, nemo docere potest.
First, in private study: Secondly, in frequent prayer: Thirdly, in diligent
preaching of Gods Word.

For the first: a faithful Minister must labor in his private study, that he
may be furnished with knowledge, for the better discharge of his duty. He
must first learn by study, before he can be fit to teach others. For no man
can teach that, whereof he is ignorant himself. The Moon and the Stars
first receive light themselves from the Sun, before they give light to the
inferior creatures. So must the Minister first be enlightened himself with
the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, before he can instruct others in the
same. No man (says Gregory) presumes to teach any Art, unless by diligent
meditation he have first learned it himself. But the regiment of souls is the
Art of all Arts, For this cause, Isa. 6. 6, 7.
the Prophet Isaiah had his lips touched with a coal from the Altar, before
his commission was renewed to preach to the Jews. Luke 24.45.
And our Savior Christ first opened the understandings of his Disciples, that
they might understand the Scriptures: before he would send them forth to
preach the Gospel: and commanded them besides to tarry at Jerusalem, Luke 49.
till they should be endued with power from an high. To teach us, that
howsoever this extraordinary and immediate inspiring of men from heaven, be
now ceased: yet by ordinary study, a man must be furnished with knowledge,
before he can be a sufficient teacher and instructor of others. And this does
the Prophet require of every Priest in the time of the Law. Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Whereupon says
Gualter, Ministers must keep the law of truth, and preserve the knowledge
thereof, as it were in a storehouse, that from thence they may bring forth all
things, that tend to the edification of the Church. 1. Tim 3.2. 2. Tim. 2.2.
And the Apostle likewise requires of the Ministers of the Gospel, that they
be apt and able to teach others? Cyprian, ad Pomp.
To which purpose Cyprian has a good saying: A Minister must not only teach,
but also learn himself, because he teaches better that learneth every day,
and profits, in learning better things. And this was signified in the
mystical apparel of the Priests where the Lord commanded Moses to put in the
Breast Plate of judgment, the Vrim and the Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
which shall be upon Aarons heart. Whereby was shaddowed out the clear
knowledge of heavenly things, wherewith the Minister should be ended. A
Minister therefore must give himself night and day to the study of Gods Word.
Epist. 8.
Sencca says of himself, that he so bent and settled himself to the study of
moral Philosophy, that he suffered no day to pass from him in idleness, but
applied part of the night to his study, that he did not give himself to
sleep, till he was overcome with it, and when his eyes were wearied, and
ready to fall down with watching, yet still he kept them in work. And it is
reported of Aristotle, that while he was searching out the nature of things, he
never used to sleep, but with an iron ball in his hand, hanging over a brazen
pan, that when it should fall out of his hand, the sound of it might awake
him. If these men were thus painful, in laboring to attain to the knowledge
of Philosophy, for their own private contemplation: how much more painful
should a Minister be in the study of the Word of God, whereby he may be
enabled to teach others? 'Dauid makes it the property of every godly man, to
meditate in the Law of the Lord night and day: Psalm. 1.2. And our Savior
Christ commands all Christians in general, John 5.39.
to search the Scriptures. Much more is a Minister bound to do it, because the
chief end of his calling, is not only the private informing of himself in
knowledge of God and his will, but also and chiefly, the gathering together of
the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
and the edification of the body of Christ, as the Apostle says: For this
cause, our Savior compares a Minister, Matthew. 13.52.
whom he calls a Scribe, which is taught unto the Kingdom of heaven, unto
an house-holder, which brings forth out of his treasury, things both new and
old. His heart should be even a storehouse of knowledge, and gracious
instructions, he should never be unprepared, upon every occasion, Act. 13.15.
to use some word of exhortation to the people.

This may serve, first, to reprove two sorts of Ministers. First, such as take
upon them to be teachers of others, and yet stand in need themselves to be
taught the first principles of the word of God. Heb. 5.12.
As there be many that enter into the Ministry for maintenance sake, making
that high calling their last refuge, who for want of knowledge, have no measure
of ability to discharge their duty. These expose themselves and their calling
unto contempt and reproach. For as one says well: What can the multitude admire
in them, if they see no more in them, nay peradventure, not so much as they
find in themselves? Pet. Mart. de dignit. minist. Ex Mal. 2.7.
A Minister should be both able and willing to answer to all things which
belong to salvation. Let them therefore discharge this duty, let them be
interpreters of the will of God, or else let them cease to be Ministers of the
Church, and the Lords messengers. Bern. Declam.
And therefore Bernard has a good saying: How can ignorance excuse him, that
professes himself to be an instructor of the unlearned, and a teacher of them
that lack discretion? For what danger is there, when as the shepherd finds
no pasture, the guide is ignorant of the way, and the messenger knows not the
will of his master?

Secondly, they also are here reproved, that have knowledge and other good
gists, but do not stir them up, 2. Tim. 1.6.
as the Apostle exhorts Timotheus, that is, do not by painful study and
continual use, labor to increase them, but rather suffer them to gather rust,
and become unprofitable. Hence it comes to pasle, that either they preach
very seldom; or when they do preach, they make such cold collations, and
bring forth such flashy and unsavory stuff, as can never profit nor benefit
their happiness. It was said of the Heathen Orator, Cael. Rhodig. lib. 5. cap.
13.
that his orations did smell of the candle. Much more should a Christian
minister desire to have his Sermons which he delivers to Gods people, to
smell of study, and of painful diligence. For if there be a curse denounced
against him, Ier. 48.10.
that does the work of the Lord negligently: much more shall he be accursed,
that shall be negligent and careless in the performance of this great and
weighty work of the Ministry.

Secondly, this may serve to excite and stir us up to diligence and
painfulness in our studies. We should remember that charge which the Apostle
gives to Timotheus, as if it had been given to every one of our selves: Gine
attendance toreading, to exhortation, and to doctrine: that is, 1. Tim. 4.13.
we must so apply our selves to the reading and studying of the Scriptures, as
out of them we may be able to gather exhortation and doctrine, for the
instruction and edification of Gods people. For as Calvin says upon that
place, What shall Pastors teach others, if they be not diligent in learning
themselves? Again, the Apostle says, Despise not the gift that is inthee,
etc. verse. 14. God would not have the Talents which he has given us, to
perish, or to be hid unprofitably under the ground. A gain, Verse. 15. These
things exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen how thou
profitest, etc. This should be the continual practice, this should be the
daily occupation, this should be the chief business of every godly Minister,
to labor by diligent study, to increase the gift which God has given him.
For this cause, he must carefully avoid every thing that might hinder him from
the performance of this duty. And first of all, he must take heed, that he be
not too much given to the world: 2. Tim. 2.4.
No man that warreth, says the Apostle, entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life. If the Apostles would not be troubled with serving of tables,
Act. 6.2, 3, 4.
that is, with care for the poor, which yet was a godly and religious work:
but appointed others to that business, that they might more freely give
themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministration of the word: much
less should a Minister be encumbred with worldly business. For if the buying
of farms, Luke 14.18, 19.
and proving of oxen, and the use of Merchandise do hinder men from hearing
the Word: much more will they hinder a minister from studying of the Word. Our
Sautour Christ would have a minister to be taught to the Kangdome of God,
Matthew. 13.52.
as has been said. That must be his scope which he must chiefly aim at. Let
other men be skillful in buying of cattle, or in ordering of farms, the
chief skill of a Minister should be this, that he be taught to the Kingdom
of God. And as we have heard, the Apostle commands Timotheus: 1. Tim. 4.15.
These things exercise, and give thy self to them. The exercise of a Minister
must not be in worldly business, but in the study of the Word of God. And
indeed the office of a Minister requires the whole man, and he performs no
small matter, that is any way able to discharge the same. For as the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 2.16. De confid. lib. 4.
Who is sufficient for these things? If an ordinary servant, says Bernard to
Eugensus the Pope, be not able both to keep the cattle, and also to wait at
the table; how can thou by thy self attend all these things? And indeed, the
care of worldly things quenches the zeal of a Minister, that he cannot so
fervently attend his study as he ought. For as a river, that is divided into
many streams, has a great deal less force, then when it runs in one
current: so the mind of a Minister distracted with worldly business, cannot
be carried to the discharge of his duty, with that liuelyhood and
cheerfulness that is requisite. If a Brook, says Bernard, can run out into
the field, Bern. vbi supra.
and not hurt the Corn, then may thou meddle with these things without
wounding thy mind. And hereof we have too much experience: For even as many
servants, having got some competent stock under a good master, do attend so
much upon the increase of it, as they neglect the old care of their master: so
many Ministers, having by Gods blessing enriched themselves, become altogether
careless of their duty. And this is it, that gives occasion to many profane
persons to think, that it is best for Ministers to be kept under by living in
want, because many times it is seen, that when they grow rich, they wax idle.

Secondly, a Minister must take heed, that he give not himself to keep
company in Alehouses and Tauernes, and such like lewd and ungodly places. I
would to God there were not many, Iuuat. impallescere charlis, sed pictis.
that are a great deal oftener in the Alehouse, then in their Studies; and
that handle a pair of Chards more, then they do the Book of God. And I would
this were only the fault of some base persons in the Ministry, and that there
were not some, who otherwise are of excellent gifts, and have a good dexterity
in preaching, are as frequent in Alehouses, as the greatest swaggerers in the
Country. This is the greatest disgrace of the Ministry that can be. And it
were to be wished, that they that have authority, would take notice of it, and
set themselves to redress it. It drowneth and utterly quenches the gifts of
God in men, and makes them become altogether unprofitable. And this the
Heathen men did know, and therefore were careful to prevent it. Cael. Rhodig.
lib. 9. cap. 12.
The Priests of Egypt were forbidden to drink of the water of Nilus, because
it would make them fat and gross. And do we not see the same effect in those
Ministers that frequent the Alehouse, that they heave and puff up their
bodies in a deformed manner? which doubtless cannot but dull the spirits:
According to the old proverb: A fat belly seldom begets a fine wit. Let all
Ministers therefore be careful to avoid these profane and scandalous
courses. Let them be as loath to come into an Alehouse, as into a Pesthouse:
and let them sequester and retire themselves into their Studies, that so they
may be furnished with knowledge, and may discharge their duties more
profitably to others, and more comfortably to themselves.

The second thing, wherein the labor and work of a Minister consists, is in
fervent and ear^nest prayer to God for his people. Deuteronomy. 9.25.26.
Thus did Moses pray earnestly to God for the people of Israel, to pacify his
wrath, which by their sins they had provoked. 1. Sam. 12.23.
Thus did Samuel promise, never to give over this duty for his people: God
forbid, says he, that I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for
you. Where we see, that it is a grievous sin for a Minister to neglect this
duty. And the Apostle PAVI in all his Epistles, Ephesians. 1.6. and 3.14. Col.
1.9. etc.
makes mention of his prayers, which without ceasing, he conceived in the
behalf of the people to whom he writes. And great reason there is, why a
Minister should perform this work. For as the Husbandman desires two things
of the Lord, one that he may have a seasonable time to sow his seed;
another, that when it is sown, it may be watered with the Deaw, and Shewres of
Heaven, that it may grow and increase: so should a Minister before his
preaching, pray to God, that first, the Word of God may be aptly conceived,
and then rightly delivered by him, and well sown in the hearts of his hearers.
And after his preaching, he must pray for a blessing upon it, that it may take
root downward, and bear fruit upward. He must, as Luther says well,
commend to God, both his own tongue and the hearts of his hearers. The neglect
of this duty is the cause, why many men's Ministry is so unprofitable. For
while they seek to vent their own gift only, and not to glorify God, they
are both themselves more shallow in the understanding of Gods will, and also
their Ministry has not that blessing, which otherwise it might. But I will
not prosecute this point any further.

The last and greatest work of a Minister, consists in painful and
diligent preaching. The Apostle PAVL imposes this upon Timotheus with a great
and weighty charge. I charge thee before God, says he, 2. Tim. 4.1.2. Gorran
in locum illum.
and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and dead at his
appearing, and in has Kingdom, Preach the Word; be instant in season, and out
of season, etc. That is, Preach instantly, and diligently: in season, in
respect of them that are pleased with the Word: and out of season, in regard of
them that are displeased with it, and to whom it is a burden. And though in
respect of them, thou may seem unseasonable; yet thou shall deal
seasonably. Or as Calvin expounds it: This importunity may be referred both
to the Pastor, and to the people. To the Pastor, that he do not only at his
own hours, as may be convenient for himself, apply the office of teaching,
but sparing no labor nor trouble, he must even enforce himself unto it. In
respect of the people, this diligence is unseasonable, whilst they that are
dull and heavy, are stirred up and excited; and they that are ready to go
out of the way, are stayed by strong hand. Or as Aretius observes: Preach the
Word at all times. In season: That is, when occasion does offer it self. Out
of season, when, in the judgment of the flesh, it may seem inconvenient, in
respect of present danger. This is the charge imposed upon every Minister. And
as all professions and trades are known by their proper works: so the proper
work of a Minister, is to preach the Word. And therefore they are called
Pastors and Teachers; because by preaching, Ephesians. 4.11.
they should feed and teach the people. And this they are bound to do, even
by the necessity of their calling. As the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.
Yea, they must give account to God, for all the people committed to their
charge. So says the Apostle: They watch for your souls, as they that must
give account. Heb. 13.17.
And this the Lord told the Prophet EZECHIEL: O son of man, I have made thee
a watchman to the house of Israel, Ezech 33.7, 8.
etc. When I shall say to the wicked, O wicked man, thou shall die the death:
if thou do not speak and admonish the wicked of his way; that wicked man
shall die for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. If the
case be thus, that a Minister stand charged with every soul that belongs
unto him, so as if any miscarry through his negligence, his life must go for
theirs, then it stands him in hand, to look carefully to the discharge of his
duty. Again, the love that we owe to Christ Jesus, ought to move us hereunto.
And therefore, when our Sauier restored Peter again to his pastoral charge,
after his former denial: he uses this as an argument to persuade him to
diligence therein. Which he repeateth three several times. John 21.15, 16, 17.
SIMON, the son of Iona, lonest thou me more then these? then feed my lambs,
feed my sheep. 2. Cor. 5.14.
And the Apostle Paul professes, that the love of Christ constrained him to
take such pains as he did. Last of al, the love of our people should prevail
with us, to use al means possible to further their salvation. As the Apostle
has given us a notable example in his own practice: Romans 10.1. Phil. 1.8.
Brethren, says he, mine hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved. And in another place, God is my record, how I long after
you all from the very heart root in Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 12.15. and
And again, I will most gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls.
And if this affection be in a man, it will cause him to omit no duty, 11.2.
that he may present his people a pure virgin to Christ. And the rather,
because he knows, that Christ Jesus has redeemed them with no less price
then with his own blood. Act. 20.28.
And therefore, as they are most dear and precious unto Christ: so should they
also be unto the Minister of Christ. This then is the maine duty of a
Minister, wherein he is to be most frequent. As that Reverend Father, Bishop
Jewel, does earnestly urge it in one of his Sermons. This is our office, In 1.
Pet. 4.11.
says he, this we take upon us, this we profess, and except we do this, we
do nothing. It is not enough for us, to know I cannot tell whatlearning. The
Devils peradventure know more then any of us all. It belongs to a Pastor, not
so much to have learned many things, as to have taught much. Let us be
ashamed, that even the meanest and basest men, as Cobblers and Porters do that
that belongs to them, and we that ought to give light to al others, are idle
and do nothing.

But it will be objected: Is not distinct and plain reading of the Scriptures
sufficient? I answer, that reading is very necessary, and of great use, both
to acquaint the people with the phrase of the Scripture, and course of the
story; and also to prepare them, and fit them the better to the hearing of
Sermons: and therefore, God forbid, that any man should derogate from it. But
yet I must say withal, that in an ordinary time, reading is not sufficient to
bring the people to salvation without preaching. And this the Apostle proves
plaincly, 2. Tim. 3.16, 17. and 4.1, 2.
where he says, that the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousues, that the man of Godmay be absolute, being made perfect unto all
good works. And then immediately he adds that charge which we heard before:
I charge thee therefore, (...) preach the Word. Whereupon Calvin gives this
note: The inference that the Apostle makes, is diligently to be observed,
because he does plainly join the Scriptures with preaching. For having
entreated of the profit of the Scriptures, he does not only infer, that all
men must therefore read them, but that teachers must administer the same. 1.
Tim. 4.13.
And the Apostle commands Timotheus to give attendance not to reading only,
but also to exhortation and doctrine. And the Apostle Peter having taught us,
1. Pet. 1.23, 25.
that the Word of God is that immortal seed of our new birth: he adds, and
this is the Word which is preached among you. Plainly giving us to understand,
that for the effecting of this blessed work of regeneration, it is necessary
that the Word of God be preached. And therefore, this was observed in the
Church of the Jews from time to time. In the time of Nehemiab, before the
coming of our Savior Christ, it is said of Ezra, Nebem. 3.4, 5, 8.
that he stood upon a Pulpit of wood, which he had made for the preaching,
and being above all the people, he opened the book of the Law before them,
and he and his assistants read in it distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading. What can be spoken more plainly then
this? It is evident then, that as reading was by no means excluded, so it was
never used alone in the Church, but was joined with preaching. And this our
Savior Christ practiced, Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
who coming to Nazaret, and entering into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, he
stood up to read; and having read a portion of Scripture, he closed the book,
and sat down, and preached unto them, out of that which he had read. Act.
15.21. Onus ipsis Angelis formidandum.
And the Apostle JAMES affirms, that Moses was not only read in their
synagogues in every city, but also preached every Sabbath day. Furthermore,
the work of a Minister is a work of great difficulty. Bernard calls it a
burden dreadful to the very Angels. And Calvin says, it is a business of
rare and excellent virtue, far above the ability of man. Yea, the Apostle
PAVL himself, though he were extraordinarily furnished with gifts from heaven;
yet considering the waightinesse of the duty, he cries out, Who is
sufficient for these things? 2. Cor. 2.16. And where the Apostle calls the
work of a Bishop, a worthy work: 1. Tim. 3.1. Calvin upon that place
observes well, that he puts us in mind, that it is no common or ordinary
work: For, says he, when he calls it a worthy work, he alludeth to that
old proverb, so often repeated of PLATO, that excellent things are hard. And
so concludes, that it is a laborious and a difficult. charge. Now I hope it
will easily be granted, that there can be no such difficulty in the bare
reading of the Word. But for further evidence of this point, let us see a
little wherein this difficulty consists. First then, the very framing and
compiling of a Sermon, is a matter of no small labor. It requires great
skill, for a man to draw out of the bottomless Ocean of the holy Scriptures,
such instructions as may serve to the edification of the hearers; then to
dispose them in an apt and fit method; and last of all, to utter and deliver
the same in such manner, as the people may understand them, we may more truly
say of this, then the Heathen Orator said of his faculty in pleading; It is a
greater matter then men imaginc.

Again, that which the Minister must labor to effect and perform by his
Ministry, does plainly prove how hard and difficult a thing it is. The
Apostle deseribing the properties of a good Minister, Tit. 1.9. he says, De
doct. Chr. lib. 4.
he must be able both to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to improoue them
that say against it. Whereunto agrees that speech of S. Augustine, where he
calls a Minister, a maintainer of the truth, and a subduer of falsehood, a
defender of the right faith, and a vanquisher of error. And Bernard, De
consider. lib. 3.
writing to Eugenius, tells him, that it is his duty to do his uttermost
endeavor, that the unbelievers may be converted to the faith, that they that
are converted, may not be turned away, that they that are turned away, may
return again, that they that are perverted, may be disposed to virtue and
honesty, and that they that are subverted, may be called again to the truth.
Now he that shall go about to do any of these things, shall find to be
works of greater difficulty, then can be effected by bare reading.

Last of al, if reading were sufficient, and if there were no more required in
a Minister, to what purpose did our religious and devout forefathers found and
erect so many famous Universities, to be nurseries of learning? what use is
there of the knowledge of arts and tongues, which cannot be attained without
great pains and industry? and to what end serve the learned writings of so
many worthy ancient fathers? A man without any of these helps, may be
sufficiently furnished, Jsa. 50.4.
and enabled to read the Word. He needs not the tongue of the learned (which
yet is requisite in him, that would know to minister a word in time to him that
is weary: that is, would comfort an afflicted conscience, which Luther says,
is harder to do, then to raise the dead) if bare reading will serve the turn.
To conclude therefore, let us acknowledge, that the Word preached and applied
to the conscience, is that ordinance of God, which he has sanctified for the
conversion and salvation of men. As the Apostle says: It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching (as profane men esteem of it) to save them that
believe, 1. Cor. 1.21. And yet more plainly, Romans 10. 14, 15. How shall they
call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? And
how shall they preach, except they be sent?

The use of this, is first for us that be Ministers. Secondly, for the people.
For us that be Ministers: it serves first for the reproof of two sorts of
Ministers. First, of such as are altogether unlearned, and cannot at all
perform this duty; which occupy a room in the Church, but have no ability
at all to teach the people committed to their charge.

These are such as Chrysostom speaks of, saying, There are many Priests, and
there are few Priests: many in name, few in deed. They are like that foolish
Rhetorician, which Tully makes mo^tion of, that made his scholars a great deal
more sottish, then when he first took them: Where they could learn nothing
but ignorance of learning. And so God knows, a number of Gods people, living
under such unlearned Ministers, 2. Tim. 3.17.
are ever learning, and can never come to any knowledge of the truth: as the
Apostle says in another case. I would all such Ministers would regard that
which B. lewel speaks to this purpose: Whosoever, In his exposition upon 2.
These. 3.7.
says he, asks the pay of a soldier, must buckle his armor and go to
warfare: he that would drink the wine, must plant the Grape: he that desires
the milk, must feed the flock: he that will not be muzled, must thresh out
the Corn: he that reapeth carnal things, must sow spiritual things: he that
requires the bread of the earth, must give the bread of heaven: he that would
live of the sacrifice, must offer the sacrifice: he that would live of the
Altar, must wait at the Altar: he that would live of the Gospel, must preach
the Gospel. He that does none of all these, I can make no account of him, he
is not within Paul's reckoning. The workman is worthy of his wages: but what
right has he to the hire, that is not a workman? Thus far Jewel. And no
doubt, that which the Apostle says of bodily labor, is true also in this
case: 2. These. 3.10.18.
He that will not work, should not eat. Who would have a man to be a
Captain in war, that is not expert in warfare? or to practice Physic or
Surgerie, that is not skillful in that profession? The Minister is a Captain,
and a guide of Gods people, a Physician of their souls, and therefore, there
is great reason that he should be sufficient.

But they will plead for themselves, that they are called of the Church, and
therefore are not to be disallowed. As in deed, even the most unworthy of them
all, are always boasting of their calling. There is nothing so much in their
mouths as that. But I answer, that it is most true, and may not, nor cannot
be denied, that the calling of the Church is most necessary for the making of
a Minister. And though a man were furnished with as rare and excellent gifts,
and had as great ability to preach the Gospel, as ever had the Apostle Paul,
yet he may not take upon him the office of a Minister, in an ordinary time,
and in a settled government of the Church, unless he be lawfully called by
them that have authority in the Church to ordain Ministers. Extraordinary
calling of men, such as no doubt Luther had, Act. 13.2, 3.
never has place, but where ordinary calling wants. But yet for all this,
the outward calling of the Church alone, is not sufficient to make a Minister,
unless he be also inwardly called of God. Now the Lord calls no man to any
place, but he furnishes and fitteth him with gifts, to discharge the duties of
his place. When he called Bezaleel and Aholiab, Lxod. 31.2, 3, 4.
to make garments and instruments for the Tabernacle, he first filled them
with the Spirit of God in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and
in all workmanship: To find out curious works to work in gold, and in
silver, and in brass, etc. And when Gedeon was called from his Trdde, Judge.
6.3, 4.
to be the Captain and deliverer of the people of Israel, it is said, that the
Spirit of the Lord (even the Spirit of courage and fortitude) came upon him,
and clad him like a garment. So likewise when Saul was chosen to be King over
Israel, 1. Sam. 10.9.
God gane him another heart: That is, a stout and a valiant heart, fit for a
King. If God do thus furnish men with gifts necessary, when he calls them
to offices in the Commonwealth: can we doubt of the like care in him, to
furnish them sufficiently, whom he calls to serve in his Church, in the
Ministry of his Word? 1. Tim. 1.12.
And this the Apostle PAVL confesses and acknowledges of himself, that as
the Lord in his mercy counted him faithful (though most unworthy, having been
before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, etc.) and put him in his service; so
also he made him strong to the performance of his duty. As he called him to
preach the Gospel, so he gave him strength and ability to do it with fruit
and profit. Hence (as we have heard before) when the calling and Commission of
the Prophet Is AIAH was to be renewed, Isei. 6.6, 7.
his lips were touched with a coal from the Altar. Ier. 1.5, 9.
And when the Prophet JEREMIAH was to be sent to preach unto the Nations, the
Lord first touched bis mouth, and said, Behold, I have put my words in thy
mouth, etc. And the Apostles, Luke 24.49.
before they went forth to the execution of their office, they were first
endued with power from on high. And howsoever all these examples be
extraordinary, yet still, whomsoever the Lord calls by ordinary means, he
makes him in some measure sufficient to discharge the duty that appertains
unto him. And therefore, unless a man have as well an inward calling from God,
as an outward calling from the Church, he is no true Minister, he is but half
a Minister. As the Lord denounces against the Priests in the time of the Law,
Hos. 4.6.
Because thou hastrefused knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me. They may be Ministers to satisfy Law, but they are no
Ministers of God. As Cyprian says plainly, Lib. 4. ep. 9.
They that are unworthy, are not ordained of God, nor by God. And therefore,
by the way, it were to be wished, that the Governors of the Church, to whom
this authority to appoint Ministers is committed, De consid. lib. 4.
would always in all their ordinations, remember that which Bernard writes to
Eugenius: namely, that they would make it their chiefest care to bring in such,
as after they have brought them in, they may not repent of it. But to return
to these Ministers again, and to their calling. Exposition in 1. These. 2.4.
Bishop JEWEL says expressly and plainly, that they that enter into the
Ministry, must be allowed not of men only, but of God. And therefore,
whosoever takes that charge over the people, must look narrowly into
himself, and see whether his calling be of God. Unless he have a testimony
that God has called him inwardly, all outward calling is to small purpose. God
is a just Judge, and will say unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, etc.
And indeed what comfort can a man have in his place, when his own conscience
shall tell him, Ier. 17.16. and 23.21.
that he has thrust in himself to be a Pastor, as the Propbet says, and
that he has run, when the Lord has not sent him? TINDAL, that blessed
Martyr, does sharply reprove such kind of Ministers. Exposit. in Matthew. 5.
In what case are they, says he, that have benefices, and preach not? verily,
though they stand at the Altar; yet they are excommunicate, and cast out of the
living Church of Almighty God. And again, Priests that preach not, are none
of Christ's, nor none of his anointing: but servants of the beast, whose mark
they bear. And good Father Latimer says after his blunt and plain manner: In
a Sermon preached before King Edward the sixth.
If there were but one unpreaching Minister, there were too many by one. And
again, as good Preachers are worthy of double honor, so these are worthy of
double dishonor. And what is this double dishonor, says he, If the salt be
unsavory, it is good for nothing, but to cast out, and to be trodden under foot
of men. By this salt, is understood such as have cure of souls. If they be
negligent, what be they worthy of? wherefore serve they? for nothing but to be
cast out: that is one dishonor. Another dishonor, is to be trodden under foot
of men: that is, not to be regarded, not to be esteemed. And again, I say, if
one were admitted to view hell, and to behold it thoroughly: the Devil would
say: On yonder side are punished unpreaching Ministers: I think a man should
see as far as he could kenne, and see nothing but unpreaching Ministers.
This was the judgment of these worthy men, and reverend Fathers of our
Church: thus they thought of all such Ministers, as occupy a room in the
Ministry, and have no ability to do the duty of Ministers. And indeed they
are the very calamity and plague of the Church. They keep the people in
ignorance and blindness, to the destruction of many a poor soul, if God be
not mereiful. As the Lord says, Hof. 4.6. Prou. 29.18.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. And, Where there is no vision,
(that is, where there is no preaching of the doctrine of God out of the Law and
the Prophets) the people decay: Tremel. in annot in locum. Sermon. on 1. Pet.
4.11.
or as Tremellius reads it, are made naked. Bishop Jewel urging the
necessity of preaching, has a good saying, that even as when the Sun is
taken out of the World, all things are left dorke: so is it when the voice of
the Pastor is not heard in the Church. And in another place he says, Sermon. on
Luke 10 23.24.
Where the Word is not preached, there the Church must needs run upon the
rock. Little marvel is it if faith fail, where good instruction wants. Vbi
supra.
And Latimer goes yet further: Take away preaching, says he, and take away
salvation. GOD help those poor Congregations, that groan under the burden of
such Ministers.

I have no purpose to disgrace any man's person. Only my earnest desire is, to
persuade all that have any gifts, though never so small, not to suffer them to
rust as they do for want of use. I confess, that it may not be looked for,
that there should be a like measure and proportion of gifts in all Ministers.
For as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.11.
The Spirit of God distributeth them severally to every man as he will. But as
it was said of David's Worthies, that though diverse of them did not attain to
the first three, 2. Sam. 23.19, 23.
yet they were most excellent and honorable among others: So though we be
much inferior to them, Horat. lib. 1. Epist 1.
whose gifts are most eminent in the Church, yet let us strive to be as
excellent as we can. And therefore, they that have any measure of gifts, let
them be admonished to stir them up, 2. Tim. 1.6. (...)
TIMOTHEVS: Where he uses a word taken from a spark of fre, raked up under
the ashes, which by gentle blowing, is quickened and kindled to a flame. And
indeed, there were never more helps to further a man this way, then there are
in this age wherein we live, if he have any wit to make use of them, or any
desire to do good with them. It was a very good speech, which our worthy and
reverend Diocesan in his last visitation at Lincoln, B. Barlow.
used to some unprofitable Ministers there present, that if they would but
diligently study the English books of Dininitie that are now in print, they
might do much good in Gods Church. For have we not the writings of many
excellent Ministers of our own Church, as D. Willet, Mr. Greencham, Mr.
Perkins, Mr. Dod, and others published for the benefit of all men? And are not
the learned works of Mr. Calvin, and other Ministers of foreign Churches, as
also S. Augustines excellent book of the City of God, translated into our
own language? All which if they be read with diligence, may furnish a man
with competent knowledge of Divinity. And have we not many of our own Writers
that have traveled also very profitably in handling the controversies between
us and the Papists? as B. Jewel, D. Rainold, D. Abbot, D. Willet, D. Morton,
and others? And if any man desire to be instructed also in matter of history,
and other humane learning, are not the works of Liuie, Pliny, Plutarch,
Josephus, Eusebius and others, turned also into English? Nay, indeed what
learning is there almost, that a man desires to know, but (God make us
thankful for so great a blessing) he may have it in his own mother tongue?
So that now, unless a man will be wanting to himself, though he be never so
much a Lacke-Latine, as we use to say, though he understand no more tongues,
then that he was borne with, yet he may be able to teach the people committed
to his charge, and to instruct them profitably, at least, in the grounds and
principles of religion. Let them therefore be excited to shake off that
slothful negligence, that has so long possessed them: and let them at the
last seriously set themselves to the Lords work, and pray earnestly for Gods
blessing; so shall they become more profitable to the Church, and have a great
deal more comfort in their own consciences. But if there be any that have no
gifts, nor ability at all to discharge their duty, (as God knows, there are
many shepherds that differ but little from their flock) I know not what to
say to them: but as the poor woman said to the Heathen King, that could not
attend to do her justice, Why then do thou reign? so I say, what do they
in the place of Ministers, if they be no way able to do the duty of
Ministers? There is a good President for them in the Prophecy of Zechariah:
where the Prophet speaks of some such Friests, Zech. 13.4, 5, 6.
that pestered the Church in his time, that they should no longer wear a rough
garment to deceive: But he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman: for
man tanght me to be an Heard-man from my youth up: That is, he shall lay
aside his Priestly habit, Gualter and Tremellius in locum illum.
and shall freely confess his ignorance, and acknowledge, that he ought rather
to be sent away to the plough, or to play the Shepherd, then to be suffered
any longer in the Ministry of the Church, and so shall willingly betake
himself to the labor of his hand, that he may no longer be a burden to the
Church. And where it is said in the next verse, And one shall say unto him,
What are these wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, Thus was I wounded
in the house of my friends. The meaning of it is, that he will be so far from
murmuring and complaining for the loss of his gain and honor, as that rather
he will account them his greatest friends, that first persuaded him to leave
his sin. Oh that our ignorant and insufficient Ministers would follow this
example. There are many of them of strong and able bodies, and though they
cannot work this work of a Minister, yet no doubt they would prove tall
workmen in other things. It were a happy thing for Gods Church, if they would
return to those professions, wherein they were brought up and exercised,
before they entered into the Ministry, and wherein they have more skill. So
doing, though their life would be somewhat more painful then now it is, yet
doubtless, their sleep would be a great deal more sweet and comfortable. As
Solomon says, Eccles. 5.11.
The sleep of the laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much.
Whereas now I cannot see, how they can take any quiet rest, when their guilty
consciences do continually bark against them, or if they have gagged their
consciences for a time, yet the blood of so many souls, which have perished
through their negligence, cries louder in the ears of God for vengeance, then
cuer did the blood of Habel. Genes. 4.10.


Another sort of Ministers that come within the compass of this reproof, are
such as are idle, that though they have gifts, whereby they might do much
good, yet seldom or never use them. They never entered into the Ministry with
any purpose to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but rather their own bellies, Romans
16.18.
as the Apostle says. If they may eat the fat, Ezech. 34 3.
and clothe themselves with the wool, they care not greatly what becomes of
the flock. But they might know, that the calling unto the Ministry is not
directed to that end, that such slow bellies should only enjoy the dignities,
and idly possess the revenues of the Church, but according to the common
saying, Beneficium datur propter officium.
A benefice is given for the duties sake. And this is that which the Apostle
says: The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, 1. Tim 5.17.
specially, De consid. lib. 4.
they that labor in the word and doctrine.

To this purpose Bernard has a worthy saying: There have been Bishops, says
he, that would wholly set themselves to the feeding of their sheep, glorying
in the work and name of a shepherd; counting nothing unbeseeming them, but
that which might be thought to hinder the salvation of their sheep; not
seeking, but bestowing their own things, bestowing their care, bestowing their
substance, bestowing even themselves, as the Apostle says, I will be bestowed
for your souls. All their gain was for their people; their only pomp, and
their only pleasure was to prepare them a perfect people to the Lord. But
where Is now this custom? a far unlike is come in the place of it. These
studies are changed into other, and I fear, into the worse, In Declamat.
etc. And in another place, he is convinced to be unworthy of the milk and the
wool, that does not feed the sheep, that does not watch for the safeguard of
the flock. Such a man eats and feeds upon his own judgment: Woe, woe be
unto thee: Behold, death is in the pot; death is in the fleshpots, death is in
the delights of this world, and especially for this, because it is manifest,
that they are the sins of the people which thou eatest. It were better for
thee to dig, yea, to beg. For thou eatest the sins of the people, as if
thine own were not sufficient for thee. Our Savior Christ, when he called his
disciples, he bids them follow him, and he would make them Fishers of men:
Matthew 4.19. Whereupon one well observes, CHRIST has not enjoined them, to
fish for great living, and other dignity, nor for earthly gain, or for the
praise of men. They that do so, show that they are rather from the Devil
fishers of money, then from God fishers of men. Let these men harken to that
which Bishop JEWEL says of such as they are. O what a case, says he, are they
in, Exposit. in 1. These. 2.17, 18.
that are careless of Gods people, that hunt after many livings, and bend
themselves to do no good: which serve their own belly, and seek to be rich,
and eat up Gods people as it were bread! What account shall they give to God
for the souls of their brethren? where shall they stand, or what shall they
say, when they shall be called to give account of their Stewardship? It were to
be wished, that they that are governors of the Church, would use their
authority, to reform this gross idleness of the Ministers. They might
justly say to them, Exodus 5.17, 18.
as Pharaoh said cruelly to the poor Israelites, Ye are too much idle, get
you to your work, and to your burdens. Is it not a lamentable thing, that we
should have some that go for licensed Preachers, that preach not once in seven
years? If these be Preachers, they are Preachers by the contrary. They may be
fitly compared to Wells without water, 2. Pet. 2.17.
which a weary traveler comes to, in hope to quench his thirst: but alas,
he goes away discomforted: Jude verse. 12.
or to clouds without rain, which give men some hope of a shewre, to water
and refresh the earth: but in the end their hope is frustrate. They are like
that Fig Tree which our Savior cursed, Mark. 11.13.
that flourished with leaves, but had no fruit. So many of them make a very
fair show with outward gravity, but they want inward substance. In a word,
they are like those Idols in the Psalm, Psalm. 115.5. 1. Cor. 4.2.
that have mouths, but they speak not. The Apostle says, that it is required
of the Lords Stewards, that they be found faithful. But alas, to do nothing at
all, to take no pains, but to bury themselves in idleness, is not to be
faithful; and therefore such Ministers can have no comfortable assurance that
they are Gods Stewards.

Secondly, this serves to exhort us all that are entered into this high
calling, with care and conscience to set our selves to preach the Word unto the
people committed to our charge. Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.
And that not now and then only, but with the greatest diligence we can use.
For as the Apostle says of alms, that God loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor.
9.7. so we should address our selves to the performance of this duty with all
alacrity and cheerfulness, counting the businesses of our calling our
recreations, Devita solitar.
as was said of Tiberius the Emperor: and with good B. Jewel, thinking it our
greatest honor to die in the Pulpit. And howsoever it may seem hard and
difficult at the first, yet diligence and frequent use will make it easy. The
Husbandman, we see, has hard sinews and strong arms. Exercise, says
Bernard, has made it so, as by slothfulness he becomes effeminate. The will
causes use, use causes exercise, and exercise ministers strength in all
labor. And it was a good saying of Boethius, Discipl-Schola.
that as in every work constancy and diligence is found to be a mother: so on
the contrary side, of all learning and discipline negligence is the stepmother.
And as the Heathen Orator said, Cic. pro. C. Rabir.
use and practice is the best master. Neither must we be discouraged, though as
many times it falls out, we see little fruit follow our labors. Plin.
secund. lib. 6. ep. 29.
He that takes in hand to fell, and cut down a great Oak, though after many
strokes with his axe, it seem to stand as strong as ever it did; yet he
gives not over, but redoubleth his stroke with greater force, til at the last
it fall, and then he sees that his former strokes were not in vain. A loving
Mother, though the froward child do often refuse the meat, and spit it out: yet
leaves not for that, but still feeds it, and puts the meat into the
mouth again, and at the last it eats. So though our people be hard to work
upon, and froward to receive any thing that is good, yet we must not leave
them to themselves, but apply and follow them with instruction, and in time
they may become more pliable. Never any of the Prophets, says Luther, could
convert all that they taught. In a Sermon upon 1. Pe. 4.11
and B. Jewel, God himself, says he, husbanded the Vine, and yet it brought
forth wild grapes, Isaiah 5.2.4. God himself stretched out his hands all the
day to a rebellious people: Isa. 65.2. And Christ himself, would often have
gathered Ierusalems children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, and they would not, Mat. 23.37. Let us, says he, do our endeavor,
and leave the success to the Lord. For this cause we are called Fishers, Mat.
4.19. Ovid.dearte.
Now we know that Fishermen, whether they fish with net or with angle, do make
many a draught, and cast many a bait into the water, and catch but a little
fish. Simon Peter and his fellows had traveled a whole night, and caught
nothing: Luke 5.5. yet they were not discouraged, but at Christ's commandment
let down the net again, and then they enclosed a great multitude of fishes.
So in like manner, though we lose our labor many times; yet we must not give
over: Christ may bring fishes into our nets, when we look not for it. We are
compared to seeds-men: Luke 8.11. Now all the seed which the Sower casts into
the ground does not fructify. Nay, as our Savior does teach us in that
parable, that of four kinds of grounds, there is but one good ground, which
receives the seed with profit. To which purpose, De Doctr. Christ.
S. Augustine has a good saying, They that hear and learn not, what is it to
the seedes-man? Nether the highway, nor the stones, nor the thorns do
terrify the hands of the Seeds-man: he casts that which is his: he that
shall be afraid, lest his seed fall upon bad ground, does not come unto good
ground. We are called Phisicians of men's souls. But there is no Phisician that
cures all his patients. De Consid. lib. 4.
As Bernard says wittily: Be not discouraged, there is care and diligence
required of thee, not curing and healing. Thou have heard it said in the
Gospel, Take care of him, not cure or heal him. One said ture, It is not in
the Physician always to relieve the sick party. Paul says, I labored more
then they all: he does not say, I profited more then they all. Yea, it may be,
that the labors may do good, though thou see it not. A vessel that often
receives water into it, though it be presently powered out again: yet it is
cleansed at the last, though not at the first, nor the second time. In like
manner, do not thou cease to power water upon the the unclean, though they be
not cleansed at the first pouring, yet with often pouring they may. As Luther
says well to the same purpose: It is impossible that the Word of God should be
preached without fruit. But though all be not converted: yet there are some,
that of sinners, will become believers, and be saved. For the success of the
Ministry is not in the will of men, but of God. As Solomon says, Prou.
20.12. The Lord has made both these, even the ear to hear, and the eye to
see: that is to say: It is both of the gift of God, that there should be some
to teach sound doctrine, and some to obey the sound Teachers. And a little
further he adds: The good ground will bring forth fruit, let the other
three parts go to the devil. But though it should fall out, that no fruit at
all should be seen in respect of the people: De Consid. lib. 4.
yet we shall be sure not to lose our labor. For as Bernard says, Every man
shall receive according to his labor, not according to his success. So, do
thou that, that belongs to thee: For God will sufficiently look to that, that
appertains to him, without thy care and thought-taking. Plant, water, take
pains, and thou have done thy part: doubtless God will give the increase,
when he thinks good, and not thou. But if he will not, thou losest nothing,
as the Scripture says, God will render a reward to the labor of his Saints.
It is secure labor which no defect can make frustrate. And this was the
Apostle Paul's comfort, that having been diligent in the discharge of his duty,
and having omitted no pains neither public nor private, whatsoever fruit
followed of his Ministry, he was pure from the blood of all men. Acts 20.26.
And the Lord tells the Prophet EZECHIEL, that if he fail not to warn the
wicked of the danger of his sin, though he will not turn from his wicked
way, Ezech. 3.19.
and so die in his iniquity, yet he should deliver his own soul. True it
is, that it ought to be the desire of every good Minister, that if it please
God, all his people may be converted, and so come to salvation. But if this
cannot be effected, but that the Lord do rather by his Ministry, make them
fagots for hell fire, and though his preaching be the savor of death unto
death unto them all, and not the savor of life unto any: 2. Cor. 2.15, 16.
yet if he have faithfully and conscionably done that that was required of
him, he shall still be a sweet savor unto God. And herein our condition that
are Gods husbandmen, is far better then the condition of an earthly
husbandman. When he has cast his seed into the ground, if the harvest do not
answer his expectation, he loses not only his labor, but his seed also.
But if we have done our duty to the uttermost of our power, though for any
thing that we can see, as the Prophet says, We have labored in vain, Isa.
49.4, 5.
and spent our strength in vain and for nothing: yet our indgement is with the
Lord, and our work with our God. And though our people will not be gathered by
our Ministry: yet shall we be glorious in the sight of the Lord.

Yea, though our people out of a froward disposition, do wrong us, and offer us
injury, yet we must not give over our pains. A mother casts not away her
child, though it have made her breasts sore with sucking, but with patience
endures the smart, to do the child good. So must we, 2. Tim. 2.24, 25. and
4.2.
(as the Apostle commands us) suffer evil men patiently, and instruct them
with meekness that are contrary minded, prooning if God at any time will gine
them repentance, etc. Nay, we must not be discouraged, though our people become
our enemies, and persecute us. As many times it comes to pass, especially,
if we be sincere in our Ministry, and do plainly rebuke them, Leui. 19.17.
and not suffer them to sin. Then they rage, and then they use al their power
to work us trouble. As indeed that speech of Luther is most true. To preach
the Word of God sincerely, is nothing else, but to draw upon a man's self all
the fury of hell and the devil, and all the power of the world. And it is a
most dangerous kind of life, to offer a man's self to so many teeth of Satan.
This was the condition of all the Prophets and Apostles, as may be seen in the
whole course of the Scriptures. And there are but a few faithful Ministers at
this day, but they have experience of it. But we must not faint for fall this,
De Consid. lib. 4.
but rather, as Bernard says, if they be of an hard forehead, we must also
harden ours against them. There is nothing so hard, that will not yield to a
harder. And this is that which the Lord said to the Prophet Ezechiel, that
though the people, Ezech. 2.6. and 3.8, 9.
with whom he had to deal, were rebels and thorns, and scorpions, yet, says
he, I have made thy face hard against their faces, and thy forehead hard
against their foreheads. I have made thy forehead as the Adamant, and harder
then the flint: fear them not therefore, neither be afraid at their looks.
And the like commandment did the Lord give to the Prophet JEREMIAH, Jerem.
1.17.
Thou therefore, says he, trusse up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto
them all that I command thee: be not afraid of their faces, lest I destroy
thee before them. We may not be dumb and cowardly dogs, that dare not bark
at men's beards, if they be great and of any power: but we must be of generous
spirits, not fearing the face or big looks of any man. And indeed, seeing we
are the servants of God, we need not fear, but that he will protectvs in the
discharge of our duties. We see, that great men in the world do bear out
their servants: much more will the Lord bear out his servants, that do him
faithful service in the Ministry of his Word. As he promised the Prophet
JEREMIAH: Behold, Ier. 1.18, 19.
I have made thee this day a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and walls of
brass against the whole land, etc. For they shall fight against thee, but they
shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee, to deliver thee, says the
Lord.

The use of this doctrine for the people, is first to reprove them that account
the Ministers life to be an easy life. As the most of them think, that we get
our living easily, we take no pains, but patter on a book a little, etc. But
we see by that that has been spoken, that they are greatly deceived. Our
Savior Christ compares the work of a Minister, to things of great labor, as
to plowing, fallowing, planting, rearing an house, feeding of cattle, and such
like, in all which, great pains and diligence is required. Cato says, In lib.
de agricult.
He that tilleth the ground, must not sit still, for he has always something
to do. And indeed, the work of the Husbandman is never at end. Sometimes
he fallowes, sometimes he stirs, sometimes he carries out his compass.
Sometimes he sowes, sometimes he harrowes, sometimes he weeds: yea every
month brings with it new work. So the Minister, that is Gods husbandman, if
he have a care to do his duty well, shall find husinesse enough to keep him
from being idle. And howsoever it be true, that he do not toil with his body
so much as the other does: yet his labor is much more profitable. The Master
of the ship seems to be idle; he stirs not the pumpe, he drives not the
oars, he rides not the ropes, he does no other work that is painful to the
body: and yet his study and care is more available to the safety of the ship,
then all their labor. In like manner we may say of faithful Ministers, as
Seneca said of Philosophers, and a great deal more truly: They do not lead
an idle life: their ease and rest is more profitable to men, then other men's
sweating and running up and down. Nay, if the matter be well considered, it
will be found, that the continual exercise of his mind in diligent study, and
the enforcing of his voice in delivering the word, does more enfeeble and
weaken the body, then any other bodily labor. As Seneca says well, In
prolog. Declam.
The weariness of the wit, is no less then the weariness of the body, but
more secret. And Luther makes no bones to say, that the labor of the
Husbandmen has no proportion to our toil and sweat. And whosoever shall
compare them both together, shall easily see this to be true. The Husbandman
that toyleth all the year in the field, has a sounder complexion, and a
better stomach, then the poor Minister that sits all the day in his study,
and does nothing, as they think, but pore upon a book. Let them therefore
learn to relinquish this error of theirs, and at the last acknowledge, that
the life of a conscionable Minister is painful and a laborious life. In deed
there are a number of idle Drones that occupy the rooms of Ministers, and they
(I confess) live easily enough: for many of them do little else, Exodus 32.6.
but, sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play, as it was said of the
Israelites. But a godly Minister that makes a conscience of his calling, has
labor and travel sufficient, in performing the several duties of it.

Secondly, it serves for instruction. And first it teaches all them that want
good Ministers, what manner of Ministers they should desire: namely, such as
be workmen, such as be painful laborers, not loyterers. As our Savior
Christ says, Mat. 9.38. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Pray the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
Harvest, such as will labor diligently in the word and Doctrine. But alas, the
most men do little regard this of all other things. If their Minister be a
quiet man, and will use them kindly for their Tithes; if he be a good fellow,
and will sit neighbourly with them, and spend his penny, as they do theirs in
the Alehouse: if he read them faite service, as they call it, and trouble them
not with preaching too often: or if he do step now and then into the Pulpit,
if he meddle not too much with their sins, but will prophecy unto them of wine
and strong drink, Mich. 2.11.
as the Prophet says, and so please their humors, they care for no more, he
is the best Minister for them that can be.

Again, for those to whom God in mercy has given faithful Pastors, Jer.
3.15.
which are careful to feed them with knowledge and understanding: they must
learn from hence to be thankful unto them. And first, they must have them in
high estimation, and embrace them with all love and kind affection: 1. Tim.
5.17.
For they that labor in the Word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor.
To this purpose is that exhortation of the Apostle: 1 Thessalonians, 5, 12, 13
Now we beseech you, brethren, that ye know them which labor among you, etc.
That ye have them in singular love for their works sake. And when he sent
Epaphroditus a faithful Minister, and his companion in labor to the
Philippians, Phil. 2.25.29.
he bids them receive them in the Lord with allgladnesse, and make much of
such. And the Apostle testifies of the Galatians, that they esteemed so
reverently of him, as that they received him as an Angel of God, Gal. 4.14.
Ecclus. 38, 1.
yea, as Christ Jesus. If we must honor the bodily Phisician, because of
necessity: much more must we honor the Minister, whom God has made the
Phifician of our souls. And indeed, the labor of a faithful Minister can
never be sufficiently recompensed with any duty or service which they can
perform. For if Alexander the great, thought himself to owe more duty to
Aristotle his Master, that trained him up in the knowledge of Philosohie, then
to Philip his Father that begat him: how much more are men bound to their
godly Ministers, who are not only their instructers to teach them the
knowledge of Gods will: but also their spiritual Fathers, 1. Cor. 4 15.
to beget them in Christ Jesus through the Gospel? But God knows, it fares
with many of us, 2. Cor. 12.15.
as it did with the Apostle Paul, that the more we love our people, and the
more we endeavor to do them good, the less we are loved again. Let them
therefore be admonished to reform themselves herein, and to be affected with
their Pastors with that love and kindness that is due unto them. And the
rather, because it will be most profitable to themselves: For if they love the
person of the Minister, they will a great deal more willingly embrace his
doctrine, and so it will do them more good. There is nothing more pleasing to
them that are sick, Sanec. lib. 4. declam. 5.
then to be healed of whom they would.

Secondly, they must be obedient to their doctrine, as the Apostle exhorts,
Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves, etc. And
that for their own good. For I pray you, what do the Ministers gain by your
obedience? A comfort, I confess, it is to them, to see so good fruit of their
labors: but all the profit and benefit will be yours in the end. And again,
otherwise they are more hardly taught and healed. For as the shepherd cannot
easily cure the sheep, that spurneth and kicketh with the heels: and as the
patient that struggleth, does more hardly receive a medicine: so the soul of
man cannot be cured, unless it do willingly, and of the own accord submit
it self unto discipline.

Thirdly, they must communicate with them of their goods, and allow them
competent maintenance, that so without worldly distractions, they may more
chearefully attend their studies. And there is great reason for this of all
other duties. Luke 10.7.
For as our Savior Christ says, The labourer is worthy of his wages. And
this is part of that double honor, which the Apostle says, is due to the
Minister; and therefore he applies that precept of the law to that purpose, 1.
Tim. 5.17, 18. 1. Cor. 9.14.
Thou shall not mouzell the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. And,
the Lord has ordained, that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. Gal. 6.6.
And therefore the Apostle gives commandment to all that are taught in the
Word, that they make him that has taught them, partaker of all their goods.
And in another place he says, There is no proportion between the maintenance
which the Ministers receive of the people, and that which they afford them
back again. If we, says he, 1. Cor. 9.11.
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your
carnal things? But our people are so far from giving us maintenance of
themselves, as that they use all means they can, to withold that maintenance
from us which the Law has appointed. Luke 18.12.
That proud Pharisee made his boast, and it may be truly, that he gave
tithes of all that ever he possessed. But our people in many places defraude
us by one device or other. Either they have some Popish custom to cut off our
Tithes in kind, or they have out-grounds in other Parishes, and a thousand
other tricks, whereby they can defeat us at their pleasure. As it is strange
to see, how ingenious and witty the devil has made even the simplest of them
to beguile their Minister. But let them take heed that their crafty wit beguile
not themselves in the end. Let them beware, that the cry of the Lords
laborers, James 5.4.
whose hire they have kept back by fraud, do not enter into the ears of the
Lord of hosts. We should know, that Gods ministers ought to be maintained,
though the Law had appointed them no tithes at al for their maintenance. And we
see that the most unworthy Ministers that are, will have their tithes to the
uttermost: yea with greater rigor then they that toil and take most pains
for them. And therefore, let all the people of God be exhorted conscionably, to
give the portion that is due to their Ministers, lest they be driven for want
thereof to forsake the house of God, as they did in the time of Nehemiah, chap.
13. verse. 10, 11. and as they do at this day in many places of the land. In a
word, let them be careful to perform this and all other their duties, with
such alacrity and cheerfulness, as that their Ministers may be encouraged to
do their duties back again with joy, Heb. 13.17.
and not with grief, as the Apostle says: For doubtless the grief which a
Minister shall conceive from the way-ward and perverse disposition of his
people, cannot choose but greatly daunt his spirits, and make him altogether
listlesse to preach unto them. And indeed what heart can a man have to take
pains with such a people, as neither regard him nor his Ministry, if that
necessity which God has laid upon him, 1. Cor. 9.16.
as S. Paul says, did not compel him?

Last of all, it may serve to admonish all true Christians to mourn in their
souls, and with bitterness of heart to bewail the misery of so many
thousands of their poor brethren, who are like to perish in many places,
because there is none to teach them knowledge. Hos. 4.6.
Is it not a lamentable thing, to see so many towns for want of preaching
Ministers, Isaiah 9.2.
(who are the Candlesticks to hold forth the light of the Word unto them)
sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death? Our Savior Christ, when he
saw the people of his time, Matthew. 9.36.
that they were dispersed and scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd,
his very bowels were moved with compassion toward them. And if we be led by
the Spirit of Christ, we cannot but be affected with commiseration, in regard
of the like misery of the people of our times, that have no guides, but blind
guides, to lead them into the ditch. Mat. 15.14.
Would it not grieve any man's heart in the world to see a goodly harvest of
croppe, like to rot upon the earth for want of Reapers to gather it into the
barnes? Mat. 9.37. John 4.35.
Even so, the Lord has a great harvest, and the regions are white already, as
Christ says: What a grief then ought it to be to every good heart, to
consider, that there are so few laborers to thrust in the Sickle? The people
of God in many places, begin to feel the want of the Word, and as newborn
babes, 1. Pet. 2.2.
they desire the sincere milk of it, that they may grow by it. But alas, what a
pitiful thing is it, that their Ministers are either dry nurses, and have no
milk at all in their breasts, to give them suck: Lam. 4.3, 4.
or if they have, they are become through idleness more hard-hearted then the
Dragons, and more cruel then the Ostriches in the Wilderness: they will not
draw out their breasts to feed them, but even suffer the tongue of Gods poor
sucklings to cleave to the roof of their mouth for thirst. And therefore, to
conclude this point, let every one of us be stirred up in a fellow-feeling of
this great misery, to pray to God in the behalf of our brethren, and even to
importune him, and give him no rest, until he be pleased to set over every
Congregation such a Minister, as may be apt and able to teach and instruct
them in the way of godliness.

That needs not to be ashamed.] The word properly signifies, that needs
not to blush. (...) ab (...) Romans 6.21. (...)
And so the Apostle uses it an another place, where he says, What fruit had
ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Here then he exhorts
TIMOTHEVS to keep a good conscience in the whole course of his life, that when
he shall come to give account unto God, his face may not becouered with shame:
for where shame is, there is guiltiness. And thus does Saint Hierome expound
it: Live so, says he, lest thy words wanting deeds, be confounded: for the
doctrine, is an ornament to the life, and the work is an ostablishment to the
life, and the work is an establishment of the doctrine. And Aquinas, The
doctrine, says he, which he preaches with his mouth, let him confirm with
his work, which if he do not, he is worthy of shame and confusion. And Gorra^
interprets it, one that needs not blush to consesse the Gospel for his evil
life. Anselmus reads it unreprovable. For, says he, from a reproof rises
confusion to him that is reproved, and he that cannot be reproved, is not
confounded. As if he should say, Show thy self such a one in all thy works, as
in none of them thou may sustain the confusion of shame. From hence the^ our
instruction may be this, That it is not enough for a minister to preach sound
doctrine, unless he be blameless in his life. And therefore our Savior Christ
in that excellent prayer of his for his Disciples, because they were to be
Ministers of the Word, prays for them to his Father; John 17.17.
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is the truth. And indeed how can they
cleanse others, that are unclean themselves? how can they free others from
pollution, that are polluted themselves? according to that saying of Cyprian:
Lib. 1. Epist. 1 2.
who can give that which himself has not? And the Apostle exhorts
Timotheus, 1. Tim. 4.16.
to take heed to himself, and to doctrine. Attend first to thy self, and
then to the teaching of other: whereupon the ordinary Gloss says, He does not
say, Attend to doctrine and to thy self: but, Attend to thy self, and unto
doctrine: first, take heed how thou live, and then how thou teach: for as
Calvin well notes, doctrine will do little good, if holiness of life be not
answerable. And great reason is there that Ministers of all other men should
be holy. For first, they administer the holy things of God: Alex. ab Alex.
genial. dier. ^. 4 cap. 17.
as the Apostle says, they are disposers of the secrets of God. They bear the
vessels of the Lord, as the Prophet says, and that after a more peculiar
manner: and therefore it behooves them especially to be clean, Isay 52.11.
And this the poor Heathen people, in their blind and superstitious service of
their Idols, had a very great care of. Sabellicus Ennead. 1. l. 3.
It was one of their Pontifical laws: Det them come chastely to the gods, let
them use piety. They that do otherwise, God himself will revenge it. The
Priests of Egypt, every third day did shave their bodies, lest any filthiness
appear, Plutarch. in Quaest. Centuriat. Roman.
when they were offering their sacrifices. And those Priests that were troubled
with Byles and Botches, were forbidden to study Divination: either because it
becomes not them to have any ulcer in their minds, that apply themselves to
heavenly things: or else if they use not a diseased beast for sacrifice, nor
diseased birds for Divination: much more must they avoid such things in
themselves. If these Heathen men had this care for the service of their false
gods, which were but stocks and stones, the works of their own hands: how
much more ought we to be careful of all purity and cleanness in the worship
of the true God, Heb. 12.29. Leu. 10.3.
who is a consuming fire against sin and sinners, and who will be sanctified
in them that come near him, or else he will glorify himself in their
confusion. It was forbidden in the Law, Leu. 21.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
that whosoener had any blemishes, should not prease to offer the bread of his
God: as if he were blind, or lame, or had a flat nose, or any misshapen
member, etc. And howsoever this ceremony be ceased, and be no more in use: yet
the equity of it remains still, namely, that they that have blemishes in
their lives, or are misshapen in their souls, should not be admitted to serve
the Lord, in the ministry of his Word.

Secondly, a Minister must go before his people in the example of a godly
life. It was the exhortation of our Savior Christ to his Disciples: Matthew. 5.6.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. As in the Orbs and Circles of the
Heavens, the highest Sphere moves all the rest; and therefore is called the
first Moouer: So the Minister being highest in the Church, should by his
example move and draw them that are under him unto holiness. For the people in
our times will say to us, as they said to our Savior Christ, What do thou
work, that we may see it, and believe thee? Not what do thou teach? John
6.30. And therefore as it is said of him, that first he began to do, and then
to teach, Act. 1.1. that he was first mighty in deed, and then in word,
according as Cyprian says, Sermon. 5. de lapsis. Luke 24.19.
Christ was a Teacher in words, and a performer in deeds; teaching what ought
to be done, and doing whatsoever he taught. And it is said of Ezra, Ezra. 7.10.
that first he prepared his head to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it,
and then to teach the precepts and judgments in Israel. So must it be with
us, that we may say with the Apostle PAVL: Phil. 3.17.
Brethren, be followers of me, and look on them that walk, so as ye have us
for an example. And, Think of those things which ye have both learned, and 4,
8, 9.
and received, 1. Tim. 4.12.
and heard, and seent in me. And to this purpose the Apostle exhorts
TIMOTHEVS, to be unto them that believe an ensample, in word, in conversation,
in love, in spirit, Tit. 2.7.
in faith, and in pureness. And he bids TITUS, above all things to show
himself an example of good works, etc. And the Apostle Peter exhorts all
ministers, 1. Pet. 5.3.
so to carry themselves, as they may be ensamples to the flocks. In all which
places, (...)
the word that is used, does signify, that the life of a Minister should be
such a pattern of godliness, as that it may set a stamp, and an impression
thereof, as it were upon his people. Men will sooner learn of their Ministers
by their eyes, then they will do by their ears. For they commonly believe
their eyes, Seneca epist 6.
better then they do their ears. And it is a long course to teach by
precepts, but short and effectual by examples. When the people of Israel were
to pass over Jorden into the land of promise, the Priests that bare the Arc
of the Coxenant, went before them: Josh. 3.15, 16, 17. So must the Ministers
go before their people in the journey to the Kingdom of heaven. And indeed,
Doctr. Chr. lib. 4.
as Saint Augustine says, though they profit many by saying that which they
do not: yet they would profit a great many more by doing that which they say.
It is said of John Baptist, that he was the voice of him that cries in the
wilderness. Iobn 1 23. Dominica 3. aduentus.
Whereupon Stapleton well observes, that he had not only a well-sounding
voice, but also he was a voice. Whatsoever was in him, namely, his food, his
apparel, his habitation, and his whole life, was a voice that cried and
proclaimed repentance, mortification and holiness. His life first cried,
before his preaching. The same order should a Preacher observe, that first he
be a voice, and then lift up his voice. They whose lives are not answerable to
their doctrine, have a voice indeed, but an empty one, like sounding brass,
or a tinckling Cymball, 1. Plutarch. in Apotheg. vulgar. Lcc. number.
Cor. 13.1. but they are not a voice, or at least, a man may say of them, as
the Country fellow said of the Nightingale, when he had stripped her out of
her feathers, Thou art only a voice, and nothing else. This was it that made
Herod reverence John Baptist so much, Mark 6, 20.
and hear him so gladly, not that he was a good Preacher: but chiefly that he
was a just man, and an holy. The Heathen Philosophers have made three marks of
a good Teacher: first, that he teach not slightly and negligently, but
diligently, and with due premeditation. Secondly, that he observe a good order
and method in teaching, that his hearers may understand him. And lastly, that
his life be answerable to his words and profession. Whereunto agrees that
saying of Saint Augustine, Confess lib. 10.
It is to little purpose for a Minister to command his hearers in words, if he
do not also go before them in deeds. De Consid. lib. 4.
And therefore Bernard wills Eugenius to consider, that it behooves him to
be a form of righteousness, a mirror of holiness, and a pattern of
piety. So should it be with all the Ministers of the Word, Cyp. lib. 3. epist.
1.
that they may exhort their people not by words only, but by deeds, not only
by the incitement of their speech and voice, but chiefly be the example of
their faith and virtue. And indeed if it be expedient for all men to live
orderly, Cyr. lib 1. epi. 11
much more does it stand with reason, that Ministers be careful that way,
whose manners and conversation should be a lesson and an example unto others.
For how can they see integrity and continency kept, if corruption, and
instruction of vice begin to proceed from themselves? And therefore, to shut
up all in a word, Lib. 1. epist. 11.
as Cyprian well counsels, let every Minister labor to fulfill in deed,
that which before he has taught in word, that so he may be the greatest in the
Kingdom of heaven, as Christ has promised, saying, Matthew. 5 19.
Whosoever shall observe and teach these words, the same shall be called great
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

This doctrine has a double use: first, for the Ministers: secondly, for the
people. For the Ministers, it serves first to reprove allthose that are
careless this way, who as our Savior Christ said of the Pharisees, Say, and
do not: Matthew. 23.3. As God knows, there are so many such in these days,
that we may well use that speech of Bernard; Christ said of his Disciples:
Declamat.
Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil? But I would there
were at this day among twelve one Peter. And it is true of a number that
Gregory says, Cur. Pastoral.
that which they pierce into by their understanding, they tread under their
feet by their living: they teach on the sudden, that which they have learned,
not by practice, but by meditation; and that which they preach in words, they
impugn with their manners. These are they that lay heavy burdens on other men's
backs, but themselves will not moon them with one of their fingers. Mat. 23.4.
With what force can they reprove that in others, which they practice
themselves? Cic prolege Manil.
The Heathen man could say, that he cannot be severe in judging others, that
would not have others severe Judges against himself. And, he that takes upon
him to correct other men's manners, and to reprove their sins, who will bear
with him, if he decline never so little from the care and conscience of his
duty? Idem in Verem. lib. 3.
And in the same place, he is not to be suffered, that is taken himself in the
same fault, which he reprooueth in another. The snuffers in the Tabernacle,
Exodus 37.23.
which were to top the Lamps, and to make them burn brighter, by Gods
commandment were of pure gold, to teach us, that they that by reprehension,
must cause others to give more light, must be pure and clean themselves.
Otherwise, they are like water in the Font, which washes others, and it self
descends into the sincke: or like a file, that smootheth other things, and it
self remains rough: or like Noah's Carpenters, who made an Arc to save
others from drowning, and themselves perished in the waters. Or like impotent
beggars by the Highway side, who can well inform travelers in the way, and
yet never walk it themselves: or like him that carries a candle behind him,
to give light to them that come after, but himself falls into the mire: or
like a lame man, who so long as he sits still, seems to be comely and
well-fauoured: but as soon as he begins to walk, he appears deformed. So
these Ministers (as is commonly said in disgrace of them) so long as they are
in the Pulpit, are good men: but when they come down, they are most wicked:
Psalm. 115.5.6.7.
or they are like David's idols, in this respect also. They have all the
instruments of virtue, but they use them not. They have eyes to see that which
is good, but they follow the worse: they have the feet of their affections,
but they are not moved to good: they have mouths, but such as have no taste
of godliness. In a word, they have JACOBS voice, and ESAVS hands: Genes. 27.22.
how can the poor people have any hope their prayers shall be heard, when such
profane persons as these, are their mouth to God? especially seeing our
Savior has said, John 9.31.
that God hears not sinners.

Besides, their example does wonderful much hurt to their people: If the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, 1. Cor. 14.8. Isai. 58.1.
who shall prepare himself to the battle, as the Apostle says? The voice of a
Minister is a trumpet, and it gives an uncertain sound, when it is not
confirmed by the testimony of his virtues. In such a case no man will prepare
himself, but rather every one will laugh him to scoine, saying, Romans 2.21.
Thou that teach another, teach not thyselfe? etc. If he that is
appointed to be a guide in the way, shall tell the traveler, that he must go
one way, and himself go another way. The poor traveler, knowing him to be
skillful in the right way, will rather follow his steps, then his words. In
like manner, the Minister that is set to be a guide in the way to heaven, if
he shall tell men the right way, but himself walk the way to hell: If he
shall bid them go by the way of mercy, but himself go by the way of
cruelty; if he bid them go by the way of temperance, but himself go the
way of drunkenness; if he bid them go the way of chastity, but himself go
the way of uncleanness and whoredom, it must needs be a great stumbling block
unto the poor people. That which Seneca, though an Heathen man, spoke of the
Philosophers of his time, may fitly be applied to many Ministers of these
days. Epist. 108.
I judge none, says he, to deserve worse of all mankind, then they that have
learned Philosophy, as a certain art set to sale, that live otherwise, then
they teach others to live. They set forth themselves as examples of
unprofitable learning, being subject to every vice, which they inueigh against
in others. Such a Teacher can no more benefit me, then the Pilot that is ready
to vomit in a tempest. Epist. 123.
And in another place; The sick party has no hope of health, whom the
Phisician moves to intemperance. These men, look how much they build with
their doctrine, so much they pull down with their ill life; if so be he can
build any thing that lives ill: for as Saint Augustine says; De Doct. Chr.
lib. 4.
There are a number, that seek for a defense of their cuill life, even from
their Teachers themselves, answering in their heart, or it may be, breaking
out into speech, and saying, That which thou biddest me do, why do thou it
not thy self? And so it comes to pass, that they do not hear him
obediently, that hears not himself: and the Word of God that is preached
unto them, they contemn together with the Preacher. Thus by their faults,
Cypr. l. 1. cp. 11.
they make an example of ruin and downfall to other. As the Prophet Jeremiah
complains of the false prophets, that by their sinful and filthy courses,
Jer. 23.14, 15.
they did strengthen the hands of the wicked, that none could return from his
wickedness. Nay, from them wickedness went forth into all the world. Master
Green ham.
Hence is it, that one calls ill Ministers the devils hawks, and his best
factors; because there is none that does more build up his Kingdom then they.
As God knows, we see for the most part, that such Parishes as are pestered
with them, are little better then the suburbs of hell. For alas, is there any
thing to be found (except it be in some two or three, in whose hearts the Lord
has wrought a hungring and thirsting after the Word) but horrible swearing and
blasphemy, beastly swilling and drinking (the Minister being not ashamed nor
afraid, to make both himself and others drunk, Ser n. de chrietate.
as Augustine says) filthy uncleanness and whoredom, notorious profanation
of the Sabbath, etc? So that though the proverb seldom hold in the better
part, yet it is always true in the worse part (the force of our corruptions
swaying us that way) Like Priest, like people. So true is that saying of Saint
Cyprian: lib. ^. p. 21.
The ruin of the ouerseer, is most pernicious to the downfall of them that
follow him.

Again, such Ministers do exceedingly hurt themselves, and weaken the credlt
of their ministry, and make even the doctrine which they teach to be
suspected. Saint Augustine makes it the first degree of abuses, De december abus.
gradib.
when a Preacher is without good works, neglecting that in his actions, which
he teaches in his speech. For the hearers do easily contemn the sayings,
when they see the works of the Preacher differ from the words of his
preaching. For the authority of a Preacher is never made effectual, unless
by the practice of his work, he fasten it in the heart of his hearers. And in
another place he says, De doctr. Christ. lib. 4.
The life of the Teacher is of greater force to make the people hear him
obediently, then the greatest weight of words: whereunto agrees that speech of
Gregory: His doctrine is contemned, whose life is despised. And no marvel if
the people give no credit to such a man's preaching, because it is like a
writing without a seal. And as in civil judgment, the testimony of one man
is not believed, but in the mouth of two or three witnesses, Matthew. 18.16.
every word must be confirmed: so in preaching, men do not believe the voice
of the Preacher only, unless it be further confirmed by the testimony of his
life. As Gregory says; The authority of teaching is lost, when the voice is
not helped by the work. A Minister by teaching well, and living well,
instructs the people how to live: but by teaching well, and living ill, he
instructs God how to condemn him. Nay, he condemns himself by his own
voice; as it is said in the Gospel, Luke 19.22.
Of thine own mouth will I indge thee, thou evil saruant. Such a man carries
a candle before himself to show others his filthiness. He makes his light to
shine before men, that they may see his evil works, and so despise both him
and his doctrine. De consider. lib. 2
It is a monstrous thing, says Bernard, for a man to have the highest seat,
and the lowest life, lofty words, and idle hands, much speech, and no fruit.
Let every one of us therefore take heed, that our ill life confute not our
good preaching. Happy is he, who if his doctrine be refused, can yet say in
some measure with our Savior Christ, Iobn 5.36. and 10.38.
The works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father bath sent me. And
again: Though ye beleene not me, yet believe my works, etc.

Finally, the sins of a Minister are more grievous, then the sins of other
men. The waights of the Sanctuary were double as heavy as the ordinary
waights of Merchants: signifying, that the sins of Ministers should be
waighed with heavier waights, and so receive heavier judgments, then the
sins of ordinary persons. Leuit. 4.3. 12.13 etc.
And therefore in the Law, there was as great a Sacrifice appointed to be
offered, for the expiation of the sin of the Priest, as of all the people.
And not without just cause: For a Minister has, or should have more knowledge
then the people have. Now where there is more knowledge, there the
transgressour is liable to greater blame. As our Savior Christ says, Unto
whomsoener much is given, Luke 12.48.
of him shall be much required. And besides, the excellency of his place is
greater. And therefore, Bern. de consid. lib. 2.
if his conversation be lewd and wicked, the more excellent he is, the more
deformed he shall appear in the sight of all men. As a little stain of incke
is more seen in fair white paper, then a great one in brown paper: so a
small fault in a Minister is more notorious, then a great one in another man.
The sin of a Minister is like the leprosy of Vzziah, that rose up in his
forehead, and was in every bodies sight, 2. Chron. 26.19. but the sin of
another man is like the leprosy of Moses in his hand, which he put in his
bosom, and so kept it from being seen, Exodus 4.6. Not that other men's sins
also are not seen, but because they are not so much observed, as the sins of
the Minister.

A second use of this doctrine to us that be Ministers, is to excite and stir
us up to endeavor, that there may be an agreement between our hearts, our
mouths, and our hands, Tract. 2. de babit. Virg.
that as Cyprian said of Virgins, when men snal see our conversation, they
need not doubt whether we be Ministers or no. And herein we should labor to
imitate God himself, whose servants we are, of whom Solomon saich, 1. King.
8.24. that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, he performed it with his hand.
It is an excellent thing, when men shall truly say of a Minister, Seneca,
epist. 75.
that he lives as he preaches. And this did the Heathen man require of the
Philosophers of his time, that their speech might agree with their life: for
he, says he, has fulfilled his promise, who is the same man, both when men
see him, and when they hear him. As they that are teachers of Music, do not
only give certain precepts to their scholars, but also show them the practice
of it by playing before them themselves: so the Minister should not only
deliver wholesome doctrine to his people, but also show them the practice of it
in his own example. And indeed, as Hierome writes, The house and
conversation of a Minister, Ad Heliodor. cpist. 3.
being set as it were on a Watchtower, ought to be the Schoolemistresse of
public discipline. Whatsoever he shall do, all his people will think they
may do the like. And therefore, they must take heed he give no cause, that
either they that will reprove him may seem to rail upon him worthily, or they
that would imitate him, may be compelled to offend. And in another place. The
conversation of a Bishop ought to be such, as he may conceive the truth in his
heart, and sound it forth in his whole conversation, that whatsoever he
speaks, whatsoever he does, Epist. 10.
may be the instruction of his people. And Seneca says very wittily of
Philosophy, which is much more true of Divinity, that it teaches men to do
and not to say, and requires this of every man, that he live after his own
Law, that the life dissent not from the speech: but that the life in it self
be all of one color, without any disagreement of all the actions. Such were
the ancient Fathers which in former times flourished in the Church. As it is
reported of Origin, that he had not only perfect Doctrine in his words, but
also in his works he showed examples of perfect discipline, Eusebius. Eccl. hist.
l. 6.c. 3.
and it was said of him, This is he, that has his life answerable to his word,
because he does those things which he teaches. Eusebius. l 11. ca. 5.
And it is testified of Gregory Nazianzen, that he profited much to the
reformation of his people, because being a teacher of Religion, he taught them
many things by his words, but far more by example: neither did they see, that
he commanded his Disciples any thing, which he did not first himself. And
Erasmus writes of S. Cyprian, that his heart burned with Evangelical piety,
and his speech was answerable to his heart: he spoke eloquent things, and yet
rather stout and constant, then eloquent. Neither did he only speak, but
live so. So should it be with all the Ministers of the Word of God. Histor.
tripartit. l. 7. cap. 8.
And therefore the Emperor Valentinian writing to the Bishops about the
election of a new Bishop of Millaine, says in this manner: You know plainly,
being taught out of Gods Word, what a manner of man a Bishop should be, namely,
that he ought not by word only to govern his people, but by his life also;
and to show himself a follower of all virtue, and to have his good
conversation a witness of his doctrine. C^. in Ver. li. 3.
Whereunto agrees that saying of the heathen Orator, that they lay upon
themselves a Law of innocence, continency, and all virtues, that call others
to account for their life. And questionless the neglect of this duty is one
maine and principal cause why the ministry of a number succeeds no better.
For while they speak out of their reading, and out of their judgment, and
have no more care to practice that which they teach, the people are rather
offended, and turned out of the way of godliness, then any whit provoked to
walk in it. And hence it comes to pass many times, that a man of no mouth,
Exodus 4.10.
as Moses calls himself, that is, of very mean gifts, that leads a godly
life, death more good in Gods Church, then many a profane man with greater
learning. Which is not spoken to derogate any thing at all from the most
necessary helps of learning, where with a Minister should be furnished: but
rather to stir us all up, as we have been taught, to express in our lives,
that we profess and teach with our mouths. So would it come to pass, that as
we should do more good to others, so we should make our Ministry more
comfortable to our selves. Yea, as the Apostle says, 1. Tim. 4.16.
in the place before alleged; We shall save our selves, and them that hear us.

The use of this doctrine to the people, is to admonish them, not to be
offended, though sometimes they see a Minister not live as he teaches. It is
strange to see how curiously many men with gazing eyes do pry into the lives
and conuersations of Ministers, and if they find any thing never so little
amiss, they stretch it on the tenterhookes, and make a mountain of every
molehill: crying out with open mouths against the ill lives of all Ministers,
though their own be a great deal worse. But hypocrites as they are, a man may
well say unto them, as our Savior Christ said of such like in his time, Mat.
7.3.
Why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? But if the accusation were never so just and
true, that there were some Ministers (as God knows there be too many) that
confuted their good Sermons with their lewd lives: yet that ought not to make
altogether against all preaching, no more then the bad dealing of many Lawyers
and Physicians does utterly condemn the whole practice of Law and physic.
Besides, there is in the Ministry, as in all other professions, a number that
are in truth no Ministers, but even the scum and refuse of the Ministry; and
therefore it is against reason and equity, to turn their vile and dissolute
behavior, to the general disgrace of al godly Ministers. Again, it is most
true, that the best Ministers that are, are not freed from the common
infirmities and corruptions of mankind, Iam. 5.17. (...).
as the Apostle says of Elias, that though he were a man of excellent graces,
yet he was subject to the same passions that we are. And as Paul and Barnabas
confessed of themselves, Acts 14.15. (...).
in the same word, when the men of Lystra would have sacrificed unto them, O ye
men, say they, why do ye these things? we are even men subject to the like
passions that ye be: neither are they endued with greater privileges against
sin, Romans 7. tot.
then other men (as the Apostle Paul, though rarely sanctified, does
acknowledge of himself.) And therefore, Sen. de beata vita, lib. 1.
they are not able in all respects to perform and practice that which they
teach to others: For if they could do according to their doctrine, they were
most happy. Sen. epist. 94.
But alas, they that are most diligent and conscionable in admonishing others,
cannot do it themselves. And therefore, men should rather labor to reap benefit
by their preaching, then to wrangle and cavil at their living. For they are
not to live by the example of any man, Matthew. 22.16.
but by the rules and precepts of the Word of God. And if the Minister teach
the way of God truly, as the Pharisees said of our Savior Christ, though
himself walk not always with a right foot in the same; Gal. 2.14.
the people are to follow his doctrine rather then his life. As our Savior
Christ commanded the Jews, that though the Scribes did say and not do: yet
because they sat in Moses his seat, they should observe and do whatsoever
they bid them observe: Mat. 23.2, 3. For doubtless, as Saint Augustine says
well to this purpose, He that teaches wisely and eloquently, De doct. cir. li.
4.
and yet lives wickedly, he instructs many men by his preaching, though he
be unprofitable to his own soul. And a little after he adds: They may be
heard with profit to others, which do unprofitably themselves.

Dividing the Word of truth aright. (...) Caictanus in locum. Beza, Piscator,
etc. Leu. 1.6, 7, 8, 12, etc.
] The word here used is a borrowed speech, taken, as some expound it, from
Carpenters, that cut their timber by a right line: or as others interpret it,
from that cutting and dividing of the sacrifices, which the Priests used in the
Law: wherein the Aposile expresses the chief and principal office of a
Minister. For seeing a Minister is implied in the most excellent profession of
al others, namely, in propounding and delivering the Word of truth unto Gods
people, then which there is nothing greater nor more precious in all the world,
the Apostle here instructs him, how he is rightly to handle the same. Now
this right dividing of the Word consists: first, in the right interpreting of
the Scripture. Secondly, in the right disposing of it in an apt and fit
method. Thirdly, in propounding and delivering it in such plain words and
easy style, as the hearers may understand it. Fourthly, in applying the same
unto the hearers, as their capacity is able to bear, and as their necessity
does require.

For the first of these, the Minister must be careful to interpret the place
of Scripture, which he handles, and to lay open the meaning of it, especially
if there be any thing in it, that is hard to be understood. Thus did Ezra that
learned Seribe, who was prompt in the Law of God, Ezra 7.6.
, when he stood up in the Pulpit which was made for the preaching, Nebem. 8.4,
8.
he read in the book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense. Now the
Scripture is best interpreted, when it is interpreted according to the meaning
of the author of it, that is the Lord. 1. Cor. 2.16.
And if any shall object, who has known the mind of the Lord? I answer,
that if in interpreting the Scripture, we follow the analogy of faith, we
cannot fail of the mind of the Lord. Romans 12.6.
As the Apostle says: If we prophecy, that is, if we expound the Scripture,
let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith. Where he sets down the
true Canon of discerning a true interpretation from a false, Beza in Romans 12
namely, if it be examined according to the infallible maxims and principles
of Christian faith, contained in the Apostles Creed, as it is commonly called,
which from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel, was written as an
epitome and abridgement thereof, and was therefore worthily called the rule and
square of faith. Whereunto agrees that saying of S. Augustine, De Doct. Chr.
lib. 3.
When diligence applied, shall perceive it uncertain, how a thing must be
distinguished, or how it must be pronounced; let a man consult with the rule of
faith, which he has received from plainer places of Scripture, and from the
authority of the Church. And indeed for the most part we shall find, that the
harder places of the Scripture are interpreted by some other that are plainer.
Nehem. 8.8. Exponendo sensum, dabant intelligentiam per scripturam ipsam.
And therefore it is said of Ezra in the place before alleged, as Tremelius
reads it, that when he read the Law to the people, he opened the sense, and
gave the understanding by the Scripture it self. But I will dwell no longer in
the amplifying of this point: he that desires to read more hereof, let him
peruse the learned Treatise of that worthy and reverend man, Master Doctor
Whittakers, wherein he disputes the same at large against Bellarmine.

The use of it, in a word, is to reprove first all those, who being sworn
vassals to the Pope, make him the only interpreter of the Scriptures. For
howsoever they talk of the Fathers, and of general Councels to be consulted
withal in this case, yet in the end they bring all to the Pope, and make him
the vmpire in the whole business. But the Apostle Paul has taught us, 1. Cor.
2.11.
that as no man knows the things of man, but the spirit of man that is within
him: even so no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God. 2. Tim.
3.16.
That same Spirit, by whose inspiration the whole Scripture was given, 2. Pet.
1.21.
and by whom the holy men that penned the Scripture were moved, he must needs
be the best Interpreter of the Scripture.

Secondly, it reprooueth those, who when they come to handle the Scripture in
the hearing of Gods people, do dwell only in the rind or outward bark, and
leave the marrow and inward life and soul of the Scripture untouched. For even
as the fruit of light metals, Seneca. epist. 23.
is above in the top of the earth: but those are richest, whose vein is hidden
deep, and will every day more fully satissie him that diggeth: so there are
many excellent things hid, as it were in the bowels of the holy Scriptures,
which with a superficial and ouerly kind of study, cannot be attained unto.
And therefore, if it be the duty of all that study the Scriptures, John
5.39. Prou. 2.4.
to search them diligently, as our Savior says, yea, to seek for the
knowledge thereof as for silver, and dig for it as for hid treasure. Much
more is it the Ministers duty, who must open and explain the same unto the
people. In cap. 3 ad Ephesians.
And the rather, because, as Saint Hierom says, There is no word, no syllable,
no tittle or accent, no little prick in the holy Scriptures, but it is full of
knowledge.

Thirdly, it reprooueth yet another sort, who search too far into the
Scriptures, and not contenting themselves with the natural fense and meaning
of the place, draw all to Allegories, and mystical expositions. Concerning
whom I will only set down what Saint Augustine says in this case. De Ciu.
Dei. lib. 17. cap. 3.
As, says he, they seem to be much deceived, which think there is nothing at
all in the Scriptures, that signifies any thing else, but that it was done
after that manner: so they seem to be very bold, which avouch, that all
things there, are wrapped up and infolded in Allegories.

The second thing wherein the right dividing of the Word consists, is the
right disposing of the things to be delivered in an apt and fit method. This is
most necessary. For hereby every thing comes to have his due place, that it
may be orderly and methodically uttered. It is a true saying that Seneca has
to this purpose, Epist. 89.
It is a profitable thing, and very necessary for him that would attain to
wisdom, to have Philosophy divided, and that great body to be disposed into
his members. For we are more easily brought by the parts unto the knowledge of
the whole. And a little after: Whatsoever is grown somewhat great, it is more
easily discerned, if it be separated into parts. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. praefat.
It were to small purpose, if a workman had stones and timber, and all other
stuff necessary for the building of an house, unless he did dispose and set
every thing in order. So likewise, it is to as little purpose, for a Minister
to be furnished with plentiful matter of instruction for his hearers, unless
he observe an orderly method in his teaching. Confusion has ever been
accounted the mother of error. And therefore in all things, men are careful
to proceed in an orderly course. In an army, al things are placed in due
order. And in a feast, the Sewer does not only set good meat on the table, but
also disposes every thing fitly in due place and time: much more should this
be observed of a Minister of the Word, in the right disposing of the food of
men's souls.

This serves for the reproof of those that offend against this course in the
two extremes. As first, such as observe no order nor method at all in handling
of the word, but utter whatsoever comes on the tongues end. Whereby it
comes to pass, that many times they wander from their Text they know not
whither, and are as far from the scope and sense of it, as the East is from
the West. And hence also arises another inconvenience, that they weary and
tire out their hearers by falling into odious and irksome tautologies and
repetitions, wherein they often lose themselves in such sort, as they cannot
get out. Lib. 9. declam. 5.
Whereas Seneca says wittily in disgrace of such a one, That it is no less
virtue to know when to make an end, then how to speak.

Secondly, such as are ouer-curious in their divisions. A thing which Seneca
condemns in the handling of Philosophy: In parts, non in frusta diuidam.
Ep. 89. Jbid. Idem. n. vitij habet, nimia quod nulla diuisio. Ibid.
I will divide it, says he, into parts, not into gobbets: and, It is
profitable to have it divided, not minsed. And again, The parts should not be
innumerable and ouer-little. For it is as great a fault to have too many
divisions, as none at all. And in a word, it is like to confusion, whatsoever
is cut as small as dust. Much more is this a thing to be condemned, in dividing
of the holy Word of God. For they that are so nice in their divisions and
subdiuisions without end, are even like the horse, that when he goes to
drink, blundreth and troubles the water with his foot, which was clear
before: so do these leave the Word of God by this means more obscure to the
poor people, then they found it. Let it be our care therefore, to observe a
plain and easy method, contenting our selves with the natural division of
the Text, that our hearers in their understanding, may be able to follow us
from point to point, as they are delivered.

The third thing wherein the right dividing of the Word consists, is to
propound and deliver the instructions of it, in such apt and fit words, as the
hearers may understand it. Thus did Ezra open the law to the people in such
plain manner, as he caused them to understand it. Nehem. 8.3.
And the Apostle Paul professes, 1. Cor. 2.4.
that his preaching stood not in the intising speech of man's wisdom, but in
plain evidence of the Spirit, and of power. He did not set a gloss upon the
Word by humane art, as Merchants do upon their wares to make them more
beautiful: but as he says in the same Chapter, Verse 13.
He did speak in words, which the holy Ghost taught him, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual things. And indeed as the Gospel proceeds not from
men, but from God: so it teaches things that are above man's sense and reason.
And therefore in delivering of the same, the Minister should use not humane,
but divine eloquence. Gods Word is spiritual; and therefore the speech wherein
it must be delivered, must also be spiritual, even taught by the Spirit. And
that is a plain and an easy style, which is both most fit to carry the Word
to the conscience of every man, and also to express the Majesty of the Word.
And therefore the Apostle says in another place, that he had rather speak
fine words in the Church with his understanding, that he might also instruct
others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue: De Doct. Chrlib. 4.
1. Cor. 14.19. To which purpose Saint Augustine has a good saying: He that
teaches, must not care with how great eloquence he teaches: but with how
great evidence and plainness. Cicera in M. Anton. Philip. 3.
For what does pureness of speech profit, which the understanding of the
hearer does not follow? Seeing there is no cause at all of speaking, if they
do not understand what we speak, for whose sake we speak, that they may
understand. And therefore he that teaches, must shun all words that teach not.

This serves to reprove all those, Horat. de art. poet.
that think scorn to condescend and stoop to the capacities of the poor
people, but use vain eloquence, such as the hearers cannot understand. As
there are many that come into the Pulpit with an affected kind of gravity, as
though they were great men, and with bombasted and strange new coined words
labor to astonish and amaze their hearers, when (God knows) the matter is so
idle and vain, as that men of judgment are almost sick to hear it. To such
the common proverb may be applied, There is great boast, and little roast. Ibid.
These men have little desire to edify their hearers, or to convert souls to
God, when they will not speak to their understanding. It has ever been
accounted the best eloquence, and the best Orators have always made it their
chiefest care, to express their meaning in the fittest and aptest words that
could be. And therefore, Octauius the Emperor, Sueton. in Octa.
a man of excellent speech himself, rebukes M. Antonius as a mad man, as
writing such things which men might rather wonder at, then understand. Much
more is this a fault in a Minister of the Word, Seneca. epist. 100
whose greatest defire and endeavor should be to compose and order man's
manners, and not their words, and to speak to the hearts, and not to the ears
of his hearers. Affected eloquence may for a time tickle and delight the ear,
but it vanishethaway like the empty sound of music without fruit.

The fourth and last thing, wherein the right dividing of the Word consists,
is to apply the same to the capacity and several necessities of the hearers:
Calvin. in locum.
as if a Father should cut a loaf of bread in pieces to feed his children.
The doctrine must be tempered to the estate and condition of the auditorie.
This is the chief of all the rest, and therefore all the Interpreters beat most
upon it, as it were with one consent. Beza says: Let him consider diligently,
what the capacity of his hearers is able to bear, and what makes to
edification. And Piscator: Let him wisely distribute it, and apply it to the
necessities of his hearers. And Aretius: Let it it be referred to the
capacity of the hearers: for it is right when we propound to our hearers, that
which they are able to conceive, that which their faith can understand and
bear. As a good Steward appoints not so much food for an infant, as for
those that are at full age: nor for a sick, as for a strong stomach. And
Anselmus: That thou may neither give holy things to dogs, nor cast pearls
before swine: but may declare the Word, as it ought to be, according to the
quality of every man's person, etc. And Gorran; namely, By teaching and
preaching according to the necessity of the hearers, that thou may give
strong meat to them that are perfect, and to babes in Christ milk to drink.
And Lira: To propound words agreeable to every one, namely, more high points
for them that are wise, and more plain and easy lessons for the simple. And
the ordinary Gloss: According as is convenient for every one, that he may
distribute spiritual things to them that are profound, and milk to little
children. And indeed, this is the chief part of a Ministers duty, Luke 12.42.
even like a faithful and a wise Steward to give to every one in the house
their portion of meat in due season: namely, that that is fit for them, and
appertains unto them. Heb. 5.13, 14.
And the Apostle Paul compares the grounds and principles of Religion, and
points of Catechisone to milk, where with they that are babes in Christ must
be fed: and the higher and profounder points of doctrine unto strong meat,
which belongs to them that are of age, etc. Whereunto his practice also was
answerable: For he says he gave the Corinthians milk to drink and not meat,
1. Cor. 3.2.
because they were not able to bear it. One and the same exhortation agrees
not to all men. Oftentimes those things hurt some, that profit other some.
Bread which strengthens the life of strong men, Greg. in prolog. part. 3.
past.
kills little children. Herbs which nourish some kind of creatures, kill
other some, and a light whistling which appeaseth Horses, provoke Dogs. And
therefore the speech of the Teachers, must be framed according to the quality
of the hearers. Spiritual doctrine should be delivered after the manner of
food, wherein according to the rules of Physic, four things are to be
considered. First, the substance of it, that it be wholesome and fit to
nourish, not poysonsull and infectious: so the doctrine that is taught, for
substance must be sound and true, not false and heretical. Secondly, the
quality of it, that it be temperate and not too curious: so the manner of
delivering the Word must be plain and easy, as has bin said already.
Thirdly, the quantity of it, that it be not too little, for that weakeneth
nature, nor too much, for that oppresses and ouerwhelmeth. So the Minister,
though he need not fear the excess, because he is commanded to preach in
season, 2. Tim. 4.2.
and out of season: yet he must be careful that he scant not the people of the
Word, and so bring that famine among them, Amos 8.11.
which the Lord threatens. And last of all, the necessity of him that eats:
For one kind of food is fit for a sound body, and another for a sick: one
for a young man, another for an old man: one for a weak man, another for a
strong man. There be many things which are wholesome to him that is in health,
which are deadly to him that is sick. Honey is nourishing to old persons,
which yet, they say, hurts children, and breeds gripings in the belly which
gnaw the bowels. Again, there must be variety of food, according to the
quality of the disease. As one kind of medicine is not used for all diseases:
so neither one doctrine agrees to al men. To diverse diseases, Jn Apolog. ad
Gul. Abbat.
says Bernard, there agree diverse medicines, and stronger to them that are
stronger. And a medicine that abateth one disease, increases the strength of
another. Every thing therefore must be fitted to the condition of the hearers.
The Husbandman considers well the quality of the ground, Virgil. Georg. lib.
1.
before he sow his seed. For there is no ground that is fit for all seed. But
some seed will grow better on one soil then on another. And some plants will
thrive and prosper well in one kind of ground, Ovid. de art. amandi.
which will not like at all in another. So the Minister, that is, Gods
Seeds-man, must consider the quality of his hearers, that he may fit his
doctrine accordingly. The Fisherman does not always use one kind of net. He
does not fish with a casting-net in the midst of the Sea, where the great
fishes might break his net; neither does he spread great nets in the shore,
to take little fishes, which might presently get out again through the wide
holes; for so he should lose all his labor, but he fit^eth his nets according
to the fish which he desires to catch: so the Minister, who is appointed to
fish men to life, must apply his doctrine in such sort, as he sees his
hearers may be soonest caught. Cur. past. part. 3. cap. 2.
And therefore very well says Gregory to this purpose, that it is a matter of
great study and labor, that in exhorting every man, the Minister observe and
regard every thing, and that al things be dispensed to every man, that do
properly appertain unto him. But much more laboursome is it, at one and the
same time, with the voice of one common exhortation to admonish innumerable
hearers, laboring of diverse passions, that as it were with a two-edged sword,
he may cut off on both sides the swellings of carnal thoughts, and like
wrastlers, may turn himself cuery way in striking.

There are four sorts of Ministers that come to be taxed and reproved by this
doctrine: First, such as spend the time in delivering unprofitable and
impertinent things, such as tend not at all to edification. As many take a
great pride and busy themselves in answering frivolous and idle questions,
which themselves had made before, for the ostentation of their wit. A. Gellius.
lib. 4. c. 1.
A man may say to them when they come down, as Phauorinus the Philosopher said
once to a boasting Grammarian, that had wearied him and others with an idle
discourse: They have taught many things which they knew not before, and which
they had no desire to know. Sen. epist. 45.
Or as Musonius said to such another; Both the speaker and the hearers lose
their labor.

Secondly, such as delight only to handle obscure and difficult points of
doctrine, such as few or none of their hearers are able to understand. A thing
which even the Heathen men have condemned. Among the wise and ancient Grecians,
the difficult and hard points of their religion, were never laid open to the
discussing of ignorant people, but were closed up with silence. And Varro
removed those books which he wrote of the profoundest questions, and darkest
mysteries of Theology, from the sight and knowledge of the multitude, and shut
them up within the wall of the Schools. Much more should the Ministers of the
Word be careful not to handle deep and intricate points of Divinity in the
hearing of poor ignorant people, 2. Pet. 3.16.
lest being unlearned, and not able to understand the same, they pervert them
to their own destruction, as the Apostle Peter says.

Thirdly, such as deliver good and profitable doctrine, but never apply it to
men's consciences. Doctrine and application should not be separated: yea, 1.
Cor. 14.3.
the Apostle makes this the chief end of prophesying, that is, of preaching
the Word, namely, to speak to edifying, to exhortation, and to comfort. And he
exhorts TIMOTHEVS, to give attendance, 1. Tim. 4.13.
as well to exhortation, as to doctrine. And in his preaching to rebuke and
exhort, as well as to teach. 2. Tim. 4.2.
And the same he also commands Titus. It Is. 2.15.
And this himself practiced in all his Epistles, where first he sets down
matter of doctrine, for the information of the judgment, and then proceeds
to matter of exhortation, for the reformation of manners. Doctrine indeed is
profitable to persuade the judgment: but it is the application of the
doctrine, that must work upon the heart and affections to win them. So that
application is the very life and edge of doctrine; without which it is dull,
cold, barren, and as good as dead, and does little good unto the hearers. Not
because there is any defect in the Word, for it is perfect to all uses and
purposes: but because few or none will apply the doctrine to themselves, if the
Minister neglect to do it. For according to the common saying. That which is
spoken to all, is spoken to none; because every man posteth it off to his
fellow, and will not take it to himself, unless the Minister lay it home to
his conscience, and so apply it, Mat. 21.45.
(as Christ did to the chief Priests and Pharisees) as they may perceive that
he speaks of them. If a Phisician should prescribe never so excellent and
approved a medicine unto his Patient, yet if it be not applied, it can do him
no good. No more can the doctrines of the Word, though never so excellent,
unless they be applied to the conscience. Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12.
The Word of God is a sword, yea, a two-edged sword to cut both ways. But it
is like a sword in a scabberd, and cannot cut at al, unless it be drawn out
by application. Now the bare reading of the Word cannot do this; it is the
powerful preaching of it that works this effect. And therefore Stapleton,
though a Papist, and therefore no great friend to preaching, yet he prefers
it infinitely before reading. Preaching, says he, planteth young beginners, and
waters them that go forward. And in another place: The voice of God sounds
most effectually in Sermons, not in books. And many times it comes to pass,
Plin. Secund. lib. 2. epist. 3.
that one and the same sentence, which being read, made no impression in the
mind, being spoken and delivered in a Sermon, does mightily stir us up: and
that which, though we know it before in reading, was not observed; in preaching
is observed with admiration, 2. Cor. 4.2.
and does wonderfully please us, which before we passed over without any taste.

Last of all, such as give themselves to flatter their hearers, handling the
Word of God deceitfully; or as it is in the Vulgar Translation, Dominica. 22.
post Pcnte. ost.
adulterating the Word: which Stapleton wittily expounds in this manner: They
do adulterate the Word of God, says he, that do not thereby seek to beget
children unto God, but only to benefit themselves in pleasing men's humors: as
adulterers seek for no issue, but only intend their own pleasure. These are
they that fit their words, not to men's diseafes, but to their defires, and do
not play the Phisicians, but the clawbacks and the Parasites. But every
faithful Minister must first terrify men's minds with the threatenings of the
law, and then, if need stand, raise them up with the promises of the Gospel.
And they that after this manner divide the Word aright, are sure by Gods
blessing to see some fruits of their labor in the Church. The Minister must
remember, that he has to deal as well with the wicked, as with the godly; and
therefore he must so temper his doctrine, as neither the one may have occasion
given him to despair, nor the other may take to himself the promises of God,
when they are not due unto him. This peradventure will be troublesome, and it
may be will procure him hatred, as the Galatians counted the Apostle PAVL their
enemy, Gal. 4.16.
because he told them the truth. But a Minister must not satisfy men's desires,
but faithfully execute that which God has given him in commandment. And as
Physicians do many times power bitter potions into men's mouths, whether they
will or no; and as Surgeons cut and sear men's wounds, though they struggle
never so, if there be necessity: so the Minister must not respect the dainty
and tender ears of the people, but must constantly aim at the end of his
Ministry. It was spoken in the commendation of our Savior Christ, even by the
mouth of his greatest enemies, that he taught the way of God truly, Matthew.
22.16.
and considered no man's person. He taught in truth; in his doctrine he spoke
nothing to win the favor of any man, he delivered nothing but what the truth
it self suggested unto him. So must it be with all the Ministers of Christ;
they must neither respect the displeasure, nor the favor of any man. Stapleton
speaks very peremptorily: They are the ministers of Satan, that either
persuade, or promise, or dare give peace to a wicked man without repentance.

Finally, this doctrine serves to stir up every one of us to the faithful
and sincere performance of this duty. We must not only rehearse the Word of
God by the way, but by dividing it aright, we must fitly apply it to several
places, times and persons. And whether we purpose to teach, or to exhort, or to
rebuke, or to comfort, we must not please men's ears with an empty sound of
words, and with curious speeches made for ostentation: but we must labor to
pierce even into the hearts of men, and to speak to their souls and
consciences. And therefore, to shut up all with that speech of Saint
Chrysostom, Lib. de sacerdou.
A Pastor stands need of great wisdom, and six hundred eyes, that he may
every way rightly discern the disposition of men's minds, that he may know when
he is to deal mildly and gently, and when roughly and sharply.

FINIS.

