A TRVE AND A KIND EXCVSE Written in Defense of that Book, entitled A New
Description of Irelande.

Wherein is freely confessed 1 The cause of the writing of that Book. 2 How
that Book was brought into obloquy and slander 3 A Reuocation of all
ouersightes that through ignorance were published in that Book. 4 A Bulwark
or Defense of all truths contained in that Book.


Pleasant and pleasing both to English, and Irish.

By Barnabe Rych, Gent. Servant to the Kings most excellent Majesty.

The rebukes of a Friend, are better then the kisses of an Enemy.

Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari.

LONDON Printed for Thomas Adams. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ARTHVR CHYCHESTER, Knight, Lord Deputy of Ireland:
And to the right Honorable Sir GEORGE CARRY Knight, Barron of Clopton, together
with the Honorable Sir THOMAS RIDGEVVAY, Knight Barrone^ Viz-treasurer, and
Treasurer at Wars in his Maisties Realm of Irelande, and one of his Majesty's
pr^uie Council in that Realm.
MOst Honorable Lords, and most Worthy to be honored Knight. Let it not seem
strange (with all humblenes I beseech it) that I have thus presumed to couple
you together in the patronizing of these lines that are neither unbeseeming
your greatness, nor unbefitting your worthiness. For to whom does more properly
belong the patronage of those things, that (after a certain manner) do
appertain to the service of his Majesty then to those that are well known to
be godly, wise, religious, and that are best affected to the service of his
Majesty?

The matter that I have taken in hand, (as time and occasion serves) requires
to be graced and countenanced, not only by those that are great, but likewise
by those that are good, as well by those that be godly as by those that be in
greatest Authority, and how soever it may be said, it has past the hands of
a silly workman, yet I am sure the stuff is good: the which although I have
not graced and garnished with that gorgious imbrodery, that is looked after by
curious eyes, yet I have clothed it with truth and plainenes. I would be glad
to arm these mine endeavors, with better deserts then to present them under
the presidents of the widows mite, or the small pittance of water that was
offered to Alexander: the examples are stale, and too threedbare to be
presented to your view, over worn indeed by every bastard Poet: Let me then
humbly offer them with a Soldiers faithful heart, that is still armed to the
proof to endeavor any thing that may tend to the glory of God, to the service
of my Sovereign or to the good of this distressed Country of Irelande, wherein
I live and draw my breath.

Might it please you now but to vouchsafe me a favorable acceptance, I shall
number it amongst your many favors toward me: And I will still rest my
self at your commandementes.

In all humble and dutiful affection BARNABE RICH

TO THE WHOLE NATION OF THE IRISH, BARNABE RICH Soldier, sends all kind
and friendly salutations.
Dear friends and Countrymen (for so I may speak in general without offense
to any man's greatness or exceptions taken at mine own unworthiness) I have yet
once again betaken me to my pen to give satisfaction if it will be to those
discontentme^ts that have bin wrested, and misconceiued against my book. Do
not think that I go about to salve up matters with dissimulation for I
confess my self to be the veryest bungler at this same flattery that ere
putt pen to paper, I could never dissemble cleanly, and they say Qui nesciet
dissimulare, nesciet viuere, he shall be sure to get no friends, and although
friends in this age are but like to an after game at Irishe that is both wone
and lost with a cast yet these few that I have I thank God are assured.

Men are believed as they are beloved, and good counsayles are accepted as the
party is esteemed that advises, whose meanness many times does wipe away
belief. Yet other whiles it has pleased God, to use mean persons for the
setting forth of his glory. Hystoryes do make mention of A Christian child
named Frumelius that being taken prisoner, and brought into the furthermost
part of East India, as he grew in years, won some of the Indians to the
Christian faith, and calling to his assistance some few Christian Marchantes,
that were in those parts, he erected a Church, and brought many Indians to
believe in Christ and to receive Christendom. We read the like of the king of
Iberia, who by the instructions of a Christian woman, believed in Christ himself
and caused all his people to do the like. And what was your great saint
Patricke, that you hold in such veneration, if there be any credit to be
given to your own writers, he kept hogs, and yet by Gods grace, and
ordinance he was the first instrument that drew the Irish to the christian
faith. But if it might have passed for payment in those days, what you think
to be current now, that you will believe nothing but what your fathers have
believed before you, Saint Patricke, had been better to have kept hogs still
then to have spent his breath, to such a froward generation. But your priests
will bear you believe that you retain the same faith now that Saint Patrick
first planted. Do not believe the^ they have mocked you long, and it would be
over tedious in an Epistle to set down how Rome it self is declined nay how
it is defiled and poluted, and how the Pope with his whole Clergy are fallen
from the sincerity of true religion to maintain their own traditions and to
set up superstition and idolatry, and that within these very few years and
whereof there are whole volumes extat for breuityes sake I will here let slip
to speak of Friar Mantu an, of Albertus Magnus, of Platina, of Holcot and many
other of the Popes own brood, that have not only exclaymed against the pope
himself but in like manner against his whole clergy. And Palingenius, an
excelent author and yet a Papist, gives this Item Let no Friar, Monk, nor any
Priest come within thy doors* I could wish that every married man in Ireland
would be a little advised by Palingenius to shut this baudy brood out of there
doors, for they have ever more bine a leacherous generation. These be they
that be your sounders, that have had the guiding and governing of your faith.
These be they that you believe and give credit to, these be they that you are
persuaded their prayers will help you. And these be they that do make devotion
a cloak for sedition that under the pretense of sowing religion do hope indeed,
to reap rebellion. O that you could now but open your eyes to look into this
Romish Impiety: but I will no longer hold you with an Epistle but will refer
you to that which follows.

A TRVE AND A KIND EXCVSE Written in defense of that Book entitled, A New
description of Ireland.
1 The cause of the writing of that Book.
IT is a mere vanity to gather treasure, when a man knows not who shall
spend it, and no less folly for him that will spend his wits in the writing
of Books, when there are so many malicious readers, that are still ready to
wou^d the best endeavors, with the poisoned spears of slanderous tongues.

I have bin diverse times it cited by my friends, amongst the rest by some
Aldermen of Dublin, to write an Apology (as they termed it) whereby to satisfy
some citizens and others, that were much offended with my book entitled. A
New description of Ireland.

I think their meaning was, they would have had me to have written a
Reuocation, of some such things, which (as they said) were not so probable as
reprehending.

I have at their requests endeavored both, I have acknowledged a Reuocation of
such ouersightes as through ignorance have passed my pen, which in their
places shall be expressed, and I have again set down an Apology in the defense
of those truths that do concern the glory of God, and the service of the king.

Upon the perusing whereof, I hope those that never saw the book, and yet
were drawn to a disliking against it, by lying reports, will hold themselves
satisfied.

For some other that will needs number themselves amongst those that have
guilty consciences, if I have unawares rubbed upon any hidden sore, it is
against my will, I have done it but as the blindman shoots the Crow, and being
but a matter of chance medly, I hope I shall obtain a pardon of course, and so
much the rather when I protest I meant them no harm.

To come now to my purpose, and to speak truly, upon what occasion I writ
that book, if I should say, that I was drawn unto it by commiseration, and
through a compassionate love: I know not how I should be believed, especially
amongst them that will scarcely believe that God is a good man but as their
ghostly fathers will please to give them leave.

But thou that art upright of judgment, and have wisdom to discern of good
and evil, to thee I appeal (but give the sequel leave, to plead it own
defense) then censure thou: For the law of wisdom is in thy mouth. Pro. 22.

It is now some 40. years ago (or there abouts) since I first came into
Ireland, since which time, it is not unknown how many commotions, how many
rebellions, how many murders, how many massacres, how many treaso^s, and how
many reuolts, have there bin set on foot, and from time to time co^spired
plotted and put in excecutio^*

It is no novelties to hear of wars, both foreign and civil sometimes of
rebellions, sometimes of treasons. But to have continual vprores areared by
subjects against their Prince, to have treason upon treason, rebellion upon
rebellion to be every day in action still in insurrections, on in others neck,
it is more the^ ordinary*

Subjects have sometimes betaken themselves to arms, when they have been
oppressed by tyrannous princes, and although they have no warrant in the word
of God so to do, but are expressly commanded to the contrary, yet to free
themselves from oppression, wrong and injury, they have some color to
countenance their rebellion: but for the Irish, what can they allege for their
traitorous demeanours against that late gracious Queen of famous memory, that
governed with such mercy and mildenes, that if love and lenity might have
mittigated the rigor of cruelty what did she neglect, that might not have
won them to a dutiful obedience: if clemency might have prevailed, with what
affability did she govern forty and odd years: if mercy, pity and
compassion might have moved them, what pardoning, what protecting and what
tollerating with offenses: if bounty and liberality might have lenified their
rebellious dispositions, what co^tributions, what stipends, what pencions, and
what daily pays out of her coffers, besides other gifts and prefermentes,
bountifully bestowed upon those that came begging and craving to her Court in
England, and what was he that was returned back again without some gracious
reward?

From whence was it then that so many seditions, so many co^motions, and so
many rebellions were daily set on foot, and every day conspired, practiced and
put in execution, still one in another neck.

Why the world does know it, they were the practices of Papists, it is the
poison of the Popes doctrine, that inciteth to seditions, to rebellions, and
that sets subjects against their Sovereigns.

It is an Axiom of Theology, holden and defended by Jesuits to murder
Princes, and this is holden by their greatest doctors, as Sanders, Parsons,
Alline, Stapleton, and diverse others: so that popish religion teaches,
allows and defends treasons, rebellions, and periuries.

And look into their great Bellarmines writings, that has taken such pains
in the behalf of the Pope: and you shall find that his wholl doctrine
consists in nothing, but that the Pope may degrade Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Potentates, that he may abrogate their laws, may dispense with
their subjects for their alleadgeance, that they may take arms against their
Sovereigns, and that they may rebel: see here the just judgment of God,
upon that proud and wicked generation, whom he has given up to the
monstrous sins of murder and treason, the most hateful offenses, that the
wickedest man can commit, and such sins, as above all other are most hated
and detested, and yet they are maintained, admitted, and vpholden by the Pope,
and that viperous brood, that be of his generation.

The papists do seek to compel but they will not be compelled, they grudge
at easy penalties, and at slight restraintes, when they themselves, do exact
most cruel, and vnchristian-like tragedies: what inquisiting, what burning,
what murdering by hundreds, and by thousands, without any respect, either of
innocence or of ignorance: but of what persecution can our Papists of Ireland,
charge that gracious Queen, unless because she would not suffer the
firebrand of Rome to take her crown from her head, and to give her subjects
leave by treason and rebellion, to deprive her of her estate in that kingdom:
they can not say that she ever inflicted any corporal punishment upon them
for their religion, nor yet exacted any paymentes ^ut of their purses, as she
did from the recusants in England.

But Papists will say, there is neither law nor reason whereby to compel men
against their consciences: but those that are professors of the gospel, if
they be caught within the jurisdiction of these Ba^amites, they shall be
compelled both against their consciences, and against the ve^^ty of Gods word,
or they shall endure both torments, torture, and bitter death it self, if they
will not de^e their faith, but although Papists are accustomed to borrow their
precepts, from Turks and infidels, yet Christian Princes do fetch no
presidentes from Tyrants.

How be it Saint Augustine, a father most reverently received in the primative
Church gives this memorandum: The Donat^st^^ rather then they would be forced
from their vain fantasies, slew themselves, yet this did nothing fray the
Church of God from compelling them by the rigor of Princes laws, without any
respect of their wilful desperation.

Now whither a Christian Prince, is not as well tied in conscience to reduce his
subjects to the true knowledge of God, as to teach them their obedience
toward himself, I will not dispute, though the holy scriptures do furnish us
with sundry presidents making for that purpose, but (...) refused to govern
those that were not found in the Christian faith: for (says he) I that am a
Christian, cannot become your Emperor, that are the disciples of Julian a
(...) from Christ.

Here might be a more ample addition concerning this matter the which I will not
take upon me to meddle with.

But that princes have power to command for truth, and to make laws for
Christ, stands not only with probability, possibility, reason and nature,
but also with evident utility, necessity, religion and equity, confirmed
expressly by scriptures, and plainly warranted by the laws, actions and
examples of the most famously learned, and renowned.

Who makes any doubt but that the Almighty God in delivering the sword into
the hands of Princes, gives them a direct charge as well to provide that true
religion be maintained in then realms and dominions, as civil justice
ministered: and gives them no less power to punish Schysmes, heresies, and
Idolatries, and such other offenses of the first table committed against God as
to punish murders, thei^es, and such like breaches of the second table, with
such other sins of treason and rebellion as concerns but themselves.

But for this matter of conscience, so much pretended by our Irish Catholics,
I think there is never a papist in Ireland, that is well able to distinguish
truly of conscience what it is.

They make a matter of conscience, of every popish fantasy, of every wilful
opinion blindly conceived, and obstinately maintained, without knowledge,
wisdom, or understanding* every heretic, every sectary does stand upon his
conscience.

The Turk that denies Christ, and vpholdeth Mahomet, will say as our papists
do, his conscience does lead him so to do, and they can allege, why thus
did our fathers, they believed thus, and in this belief they both lived and
dyed.

The popish priests do teach the Irish, to do as their Fathers have done
before them, and this doctrine is the right ready way to lead to Hell: Walk
you not in the precepts of your fathers, neither observe their ways, nor
defile your selves with their Idols. Ezec. 20.

Let them not be as their fathers were, a disobedient, and a rebellious
generation. Psalm. 78.

Poor Ireland may rue the errors of their fathers, they have felt the fruits
of their fathers Idolatries, of their rebellio^s, of their contemptes, and of
their disobedience, both to God, and their Prince, and they may say with
Hezekia: Our fathers have trespassed, and done evil in the sight of the Lord
our God, and have forsaken him, and turned their backs, and lo^ our fathers
are slane by the sword. 2. Cron. ^9.

And therefore it is a strange doctrine that is taught by those shauelings, to
teach the poor people to disobey God, and to follow their Fathers: our
papists are taught by their ghostly fathers, as we use to teach Parrats, that
can say, Bewar^ the Cat Parrat, but knows not what a Cat is: so they be taught
to speak of the Catholic Church, and the Catholic faith, and to pretend
then consciences, when they lack all understanding of God and godliness: and
yet the poor ignorant papists will keep such a st^^re with the Catholic
Church, the Catholic faith, the Catholic religion, the Catholic service,
and all must be Catholic: but when their Ghostly fathers should come to an
issue to make proof in the matter, they are feign to return a Non est
inuentus.

Thus the people of that Country have been blinded and led astray since I
have known Irelande, and those seducing spirits, their Friars, their
Jesuits, and their ignorant popish Priests, under a pretense of Religion,
seek nothing else but to hatch up and to draw in Rebellion, coloring out
all their impieties, under the show of the Catholic faith.

By these holy pretenses, they have perverted and misledd a number of good
people throughout all the parts of that kingdom, and that of all sorts and
degrees, that without doubt would be both tractable and conformable to the
laws of God and the obedience of the Prince: their zeal in this religion
wherein they are so blindly ledd, is an evidence what feruency they would
show, if their eyes were once opened to behold the light of the Gospel, now
if the creatures of God are to be pitied, if there be any compassion to be
had, one Christian to an other, who would not commiserate this people that are
thus carried away to their destruction, that are thus blindly ledd in darkness,
by these instruments of Satan.

These things considered (though not affying in mine own wit or learning)
yet nothing doubting but that there be many good people in Ireland, to whom God
has given the spirit of judgment and understanding, for their sakes
therefore, and further to express my good will and the love that I bare to that
Country, I endeavored a Book, which I entitled, A short survey of Ireland.
wherein I plainly discovered who it was that had not only blinded the simple
and ignorant sort, but also had seduced those that took upon them to be wise
and learned: In which book I labored nothing else, but so to display the
Pope, in his perfect colors (and but according to the Scriptures and as the
word of God had testified of him) that I dare confidently auowe, there is no
Papist so simple, (or at the least, if he will not join obstinacy with
ignorance) but that he shall plainly see that Idolatrous priest, that has so
bewitched the world with a show of holiness, to be that man of Sin, to be
that instrument of the Devil, to be indeed that Antichrist, that has been
so much prophesied of, and of whom we have been so often forewarned by the
holy scriptures.

It is he that has drawn the kingdoms of the world to drink of the Cup of
his abominations: it is he that has hardened the hearts of this poor people
of Ireland, as well against their God, as against their prince: and it is he
that I have sought so to discover to the Irishe, that he might no longer
deceive: and this I did as well for the glory of God, for the service of my
prince, as for the love that I do bear to a number of that country people, to
whom I do with, as I do to my self.

I was not ignorant, but that it would be objected, that I being no Churchman,
nor had no cure of souls, it would therefore be thought a matter impertinent
for me to meddle with.

But I say, that the Law of God and the Law of nature both, do bind every
Christian, to have care (not only of his friend) but if he should see his
enemy, in a dangerous path, that leads into that peril that he foreseeth
not, I say he that suffers his brother so to perish, and will not call unto
him, and give him warning of the danger, he is guilty of his death, and his
blood will be required at his hands that so suffers him to perish.

Thus we are taught by the word of God, and thus I am sure we are bound ever,
christian one to another.

If my lines have not taken that effect that I desired, I have done my good
will, and have contented my self with the writing of them, knowing mine own
intent, that was only desirous to entice but not to intrapp, and rather
purposed to profitte many, then to offend any.

The publishing of this book, which (as I have said before) concerned nothing
but a discovery of the Pope, became offensive, but not so much to the lettered
sort of papists (I mean, to those that do protes^e knowledge and learning) as
to those that were ignorant and unlearned, that I am sure do not understand
the grounds of their own religion, nor do scarsly understand what themselves
do read: but are better practiced, in Gesta Romanoru^, in the seven wise
masters, in beuis of hampto, and in the lying Legend, then they be in the Bible
or Testament, or in any other book that does concern true godliness: yet
these were they that began to grudge and murmr against me* avowing me to be a
most malicious enemy to Ireland, that never had any (...) meaning to Ireland
but have pitied a number of poor people in that country, that are capable of
obedience and discipline, if they were not misseled.

From this I took occasion to write a second Book, the which I entitled, A
New description of Ireland: wherein I have in a more ample manner inveyed
against Popery in general, but not against any one papist in particular,
saving, that I have a little glanced at a disgrace that was offered unto me, by
some one or two that to show themselves to be others, stretched their
authority a little beyond their bounds, and whereof I could have been well
revenged, if I had been but half so malycious toward them, as they showed
themselves toward me.

I must confess, this discourteous dealing with me, whetted me so much the
rather, to the writing of that book, wherein I took occasion to make manifest
the fruits of the Popes religion, how it not only sequestereth from GOD, and
all goodness, but it is so far contrary to that Christian charity, which
our Poplinges will so much brag of, that beesides it ^^^teth to sedytion, and
rebellion, it breeds a contempt of those things appertayninge to that
morality, that puts a difference between civil people and (...) beasts.

We see it here in Ireland, where the very hat^ed they bear to the gospel
professed by the English, (...), that are not yet reduced to (...), rather to
(...) their accustomed vncleanelines, and to retain themselves in their
barbarous customs and inhumane l^athsomenes, rather then they would take any
example from the English, either of (...), or any manner of decency.

Such malice is there in Popery, that it (...) and impugneth the rules and
principles, as well of Christian p^et^, as of humane society.

To conclude, that poor book intended for his majesty's service especially
that is now so much exclaymed at, that they say is such a (...) and slander to
the whole realm of Ireland: that has been so ^ifted, so ouer-lookt, and so
narrowly searched into, to find either word or syllable, that might be
disproued or taken houlde on, is not yet taynted (...) detected with any
untruth: A (...) of, what they are not ashamed to do (...) man's censure that
(...) a faithful subject to the King, that is not a papist, that is not a
traitor in heart* that has not (...) conscience and finds (...) to be (...)
any man that is not (...), that is not blind on the one side, and will see too
much on the other, censure me in Gods (...).

And now to wind up all, I would be ashamed, and confess my self to be
worthy of punishment, if I should write in the deprauation of a country, that
is reple^^shed with so many honorable, with so many worshipful, and with so
many worthy personages, of all degrees of all estates, and of all professions:
and as in that book it self, I have already acknowledged, and do yet again
reacknowledge by that which follows.

2 (...)
I Have hitherto truly set down (...) very occasion (...) those two books*
the (...) as I have said a true discovery of the Pope himself in particular*
the second a detection of popery in general: wherein although I have ^ypped
up the barbarous customs, the uncivil demeanures, and the uncleanly
behauiours that are used amongst the Iry^he in the remote parts of the country:
yet I have not done it so much to vpbraid them with this their barbarism, as
to make them to (...) the Popes doctrine, that is the author (...), and has so
bewitched them with malice toward the (...), for ^elig^ons sake, that they
will neither draw example, nor president from them, that might either concern
the glory of God, or then own good.

But because I see I shall have occasion hereafter, to speak of these matters
in a more particular manner, I will (...) time deliver, what has been the
occasion that my (...) was brought into that mislike as it was, amongst some of
the Irishe.

There is nothing more distasteful in there double dealing days then the
writing of books, especially if they be of a reprehending humor: for these
galde (...), that live with corrupted consciences, are so afraid of rubbing,
that they will both wynch and kick at any man that they think would but
touch their festered sores.

I have read an old author, that speaking of the nature of the swine, will
needs persuade that a hog (by a certain instinct) does know himself to
be the most (...), the most unprofitable, the most harmefull, and the most
loathed beast amongst all others, and having this w^e^ing of himself, that he
is good for nothing, but as the proverb says, Till (...) to the pot, he
knows likewise that men do never seek to lay (...) of him but either to
hang a yoke about his neck, or other whiles to thrust ringes through his
nostrelles, or more likely to kill him out right, and this is the cause (says
mine author) that the swine do so cry and yell (as they are seen to do) more
then any other Cattle, when they are taken, or when a man does but offer to
lay hands upon them.

An excellent resemblance to a vicious man, that knowing his own guilty
conscience, to be corrupt and wicked, and branded, perhaps with some loathed
deformities, do think that a man cannot write nor speak any thing against
vice or villainy, but he must rub him.

Some of these Hoglinges (as it should seem) have had the perusal of my
lines, and as I do gather by some circumstances, have not only wrested out
matter to their own discontent, but have sought to whet on others to be as
angry as themselves: but amongst the rest of these find-faults, that are so
displeased with my book, what should I say to him, that in the presence and
hearing of no less honorable then the Lord Deputy himself, would avowe, that
book to be no better then a libell, that was first intended for the glory of
God, for the service of his majesty: And that was licenced to the press by
authority, that the Kings majesty himself has pleased to pervse, that our
gracious young Prince, vouchsafed the like, that was dedicated to the most
honorable and worthy Earl the Lord high Treasurer of England, and to be
short, that was both seen and permitted by the most of the Lords of his
majesty's most honorable counsel.

Now for him that in so saucy and malipert a manner, would term that to be a
libell, that had been thus surueied and ouerlookt, did rather argue a mind
over laden with malice, and a tongue fraughted with lying and slandering, then
any token either of wit or modesty.

But as we are taught, we must do good against evil, and the rather to
show a charitable disposition: I will do as I am taught, to pray for him, and
in no worse language then we be taught in the Letany, to pray for his
Majesty's most honorable Counsel, That it would please God to indue him with
grace, wit and understanding.

But that I am pressed in mine own defense to make it known how my Book
became to be so exclaimed at, I would omit to speak of one occasion that
was offered at an honest Aldermans house at Dublyne, who kindly feasting his
neighbors and good friends, where a woman (if I may term her to be a woman
that has forgotten to blush) but such a creature there was that amongst the
wholl assembly, beeganne to pick quarrelles both at me and my book, belying
and slaundering both it and me, with such false and untrue reports, that a
number of those that had never seen the book it self, believed all to be
true that she reported: And being thus carried from hand to hand I was brought
into a general obloquie throughout the whole city of Dublyne, but especially
amongst the citizens wives, amongst the which there be a number of grave,
wise, and sober women, that I have ever esteemed and held in reverent regard
but we see the malice of a wicked woman will seek revenge, if it be but on a
dog, but what should* I say to this womanne reporter, that in some respects
I could resemble to nothing more like then to a Pipe of Tobacco: and let her
go for smoke, fortitude does show it self more worthy in suffering then in
doing wrong.

Jason the Thessalian, being assailed and wo^^ded by an enemy who had an
intent to have stabbed him, had an impostumation opened, which saved his
life: so the stab of disgrace that is offered by an enemy, may serve to cure
and heal our neglected and hidden infirmities.

A wise manne may make great profit, by the reports of his most malicious
enemies, who discovering his imperfections, may learn thereby to mende his
faults: but this argues our vile corruption, when our best offices are
performed by our worst acquaintance.

But now to speak to the main point, how my Book beecame to be so
contemptible to the Irishe: it was the papist indeed that pyckt so many
quarrelles against it: and although they would not openly manifest the matter,
but took other occasions whereat to be angry, yet that was the hidden grief,
that stirred up their Choler, they cannot endure to hear their holy father
so truly translated, from the Vicar of Christ, to be indeed, the Vicar of the
Devil.

It is truth, that in those two Books, I have made manifest as well of the Pope
himself, what he is, as of his religion whereunto it draws, but without any
malice or ill intent to any particular man in Ireland, but in pity and
commiseratio^ of a great number.

And although that the Popes wholl brood of vermin, as Friars, Jesuits,
Seminaries, and other Popish priests, have vowed themselves against the truth
of God, yet there be a number of others, that are misse-ledd, and daily seduced
by these blind guides, that it may please GOD to open their eyes in time, and
to receive the truth of the Gospel with a sober mildness.

He that believes not to day, shall have grace given him, and he may believe
to morrow, in the mean time, I do not despise him, but I do both pity him,
and pray for him.

These be the men to whom I have adressed my lines, and do charitablie beseech
them, not to respect who it is that has written, but to consider what it is
that is written, let them then judge as it shall please God to put in their
minds.

And although that at this time, my desire be rather to take away offense,
then to give offense, yet I cannot dissemble with religion; but that I must
needs make manifest this holy Catholic brood of Rome, that deceives the
poor people of Ireland and (as our Savior said by the Pharisees) that
oppresses the poor widow and fatherless, that lives in idleness, in
whooredome, in practicing of murder, treason, rebellion, and Summa summarum,
in all manner of mischief.

They be the Agents and Factors, for the most insatiable merchant in the (...),
I mean the Pope that sells Gods laws, his own traditions, he sells
sin, he sells righteousness, he sells CHRIST, he sells the blessed
Sacrament of his flesh and blood: he sells the works of Saints, he
sells Christ's merits, he sells the people of God, he sells holy
orders, he sells pardon and remission of sins, he sells GOD and all his
ordinances, and all for money.

But is not this a monstrous hypocrisy, that the Pope will be called the
servant of servants, and yet will take upon him to be the Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings?

The Pope is a more detestable enemy to the true Catholic Church then either
Turk or infidel, for those that seek to vphoulde his abominations, those
he makes Saints, and those that do impugn his doctrine by the scriptures,
them he persecuteth, and against those Princes where he cannot prevail with
those excommunications, his curses, and his Bellowing Bulls, them he seeks
to confound by poysonyng, by stabbing, or by murtheryng in one sort or
another.

Spoils, massacres, and treasons, even to the destruction, and murdering of
Princes, by their servants and subjects (if a pryest do but say the word)
are accounted just, honorable, meritorious, holy, but for a Prince to defend
his own right, or in executing justice upon such of the Popes Vagaboundes as
are sent to seduce, to conspire, and to practice villainy, he is an heretic,
a schismaticke, a disobedient child to the Church, and he must be poisoned,
stabbed, or blown up with gunpowder, there must be some thing exployted
against him, he must not live, if God do not defend him.

This is the fruit of the Popes religion, and these be the practices that are
used by papists, let every man therefore look well to his leader, that he
be not blind, for both the guids that are blind, and those that are blindly
led, shall altogether, fall in the ditch, it shall be no excuse to say, I was
thus taught by my ghostly father, or this is the faith that our forefathers
have dyed in.

When the word of God is preached unto men that be wicked unto whom God has
given no grace to receive it, then are they nothing thereby amended, but their
hearts are the rather, the more obdured, and the more the word of God is
preached unto them, so much the more obstinate they become, and the more
mischief they intend: after this manner the heart of Pharao was hardened, when
the word of GOD was delivered him by Moses, he having no grace to receive
it, the more Moses endeavored to express it, the more sturdie was he to
withstand it.

But what need we travel into Egypt to fetch presidents, when we have so
many home examples here in Ireland, where the truth of Gods gospel has been
so long preached, and the people every day grown more obstinate then other,
that are rather given up to beeleeue lies, legendes, fables, dreams,
visions, old wives tales, and a number of such other mockeries.

The Papists have ever more been full of Miracles, but in their Legende of
Saints, and in many other foolish Books, they have feigned them so grossly,
that they are ashamed to hear of them, but GOD sometimes, suffers those that
have no love to his truth, to be deceived by lying Miracles, for as the
children of the truth, shall naturally incline unto the truth, so the children
of the Devil whose hearts are full of lies, shall naturally consent to be
led away with lies.

I might yet enlarge a great deal of other matter, but my conclusion is that
the whole glory of the Popes Church is nothing else but trash.

3 A Reuocation of all over sightes that through ignorance were published in
that Book.
I Am come to the matter that is most of all looked after, and that I am sure
is especially wished for, and that is A Reuocation of my ouersightes: I know not
how to behave my self honestly in this business, for to square in out to
there contentments that do desire it, would wound mine own credit, and to
reitterate those things that might plead my excuse, would sooner breed a new
warfare of words, then settle that quiet that I could wish: but they say, there
is better safety in an unjust war, then in a patcht peace.

I confess, that if I had but half so far ouershot my self, as reports
were given out, a Reuocation in words only would be too little to make
amends, for I would acknowledge my self to be worthy of shame and punishment
both.

But because the book is extant to be seen, and to answer for it self, I
think my best course will be to set down those oppositions that have been
objected against me, as well by those that were but misinformed by other men's
reports, as of those that made malicious collections, exhibiting those things
against me for slanders, that were shameful for them to bring into question,
if they had been well advised.

Me thinks an easy persuasion might induce wisemen to believe, that he that
will undertake to inuey against Popery, either by word or writing shall want
no enemies in Ireland, that will both rail and rage against him, and will so
over load him with lies and slanders, that if they can not break his back,
they will yet be sure to crack his credit: amongst the rest of those untruths
that were objected against me, one is how I should affirm in my book that
there is neither civility nor humanity to be found amongst the Irish, but that
they are inclined to all manner of brutishnes.

And although I need no other answer to this but to turn them to my book,
that they have so slaundered and belied, yet for better satisfaction I say, it
is truth that I have spoken of the manners and customs that are used amongst
the Irish in some parts of the Country, that are not yet so conformed from
there uncivil demeaners, nor so perfected in the complements of humanity, but
that they retained still their accustomed vncleanelines: now if I should say
that in some parts of England it self, there be many people that are both
rude, ignorant, and very clownish, as it is well enough known there are so
(indeed) could this be a disparagement to the whole realm?

But they will say I have made no exceptions amongst the Irish, but have
numbered them all to be in one predicament, let me entreat them but to
ouerlooke my Epistle to the Reader in that book where they shall find these
words.

Do not think me to be so general, but that I do make a great differnce
between those that are rude, uncivil, vnreuerent, uncleanly, and untaught,
and those other again, that are mild, modest, kind, courteous, and that are
every way endued with wit, reason and understanding. And I do make the like
exceptions between those that are irreligious, superstitious, Idolatrous,
seditious, rebellious, that do retain Jesuits, Seminaries, and other
Traitorous Priests, then of those that contrariwise are professors of the
Gospel, that do embrace the holy Scriptures, and do endeavor themselves in
the service of God, and in obedience to their Prince.

I hope I may revoke this without any disgrace, I have been charged with a
lie, and I renounce it.

A second objection was, that I had taxed the Irish in general to be more
savage and cruel then the Canibals.

This is as true as the first, and needs no other purgation, then what is
contained in the book it self, and first in the 36. page, I say that those of
the Irish that have reduced themselves to civility (were it not for their
Religion) are otherwise of very good conversation: and as well in their manners
as in the decency of their apparel, they are very modest and comely. And in
the 17. page, Although the vulgar sort through their dull wits and their
brutish education can not conceive what is profitable for themselves and good
for their Country, yet there be some others, whose thoughts and minds are
enriched with knowledge and understanding, that have done good in the country,
and whose example hereafter may give light to many others. For I think that if
these people did once understand the preciousnes of virtue, they would far
exceed us, notwithstanding our long experience in the sovereignty of virtue.

You may see now, I have no such conceit against the Irish, in general as
they have fabled, but that I think there be good amongst the bad, and bad
amongst the good, I might therefore have revoked this accusation, as he that
revoked a long relying letter but with one word Ment^ris: yet I will not do
so, but I will borrow a Lawyers plea, Non est factum.

It is yet again objected against me, that I have vpbraided the whole Irish
nation with their rebellious dispositions: with their cruelties, with their
murders, with their treasons, and that I do make semblance as though there
were never a sound subject in Ireland, neither in life nor religion: if these
reports were but half of them true, I might be ashamed to draw any breath in
Ireland.

I would to God that neither my self nor any other man besides could justly
reprove them for their rebellions, for then insurrections, and for their
treasons and murders both, but to think that there is never a sound subject
in Ireland, it were pity I should live to have such a thought in Ireland, but
let me proceed as I have begun, let mine own lines plead mine own excuse,
in the 52. page, I have set down these words. I know there be in Ireland a
number of worthy subjects, that cannot be detected, nor their fidelity and
trust to their Prince by any means impeached, And in the 111. page, I know
amongst the Nobility of Ireland, there has been, and there are still, many
honorable personages, and so there are of many other gentlemen, that without
all doubt are as foreward, as ready and as willing to serve their Prince, as
any other whosoever. And yet again in the 54. page of my book, I have often
said, that there be many good people in Dubline, and so through all the parts
of Ireland besides, men of all sorts, of all professions, and of all degrees
that are not to be detected.

What have I omitted to commend in the Irish, (I mean of those that are worthy
of any comendations indeed) but I have done them right, I have given them
their due, I have not forgotten those that be fewest in number that are godly
affected to religion as in the page, 91. God be thanked Ireland was never so
destitute, but there has been a number of good people natives of that
Country, that has zealously and religiously professed the Gospel. And
therefore those that could spy out the discomme^dations I have given of those
that be bad, and could not see the praises I have given to those that be good,
it should seem they are not perfect sighted, but I would I could entreat them
yet to put on their spectacles, and to look into diverse parts of my book that
do plead my excuse, they should find in the 14. page, this honest
protestation: I do know never a man in Ireland that I do hate, or that I do
wish any harm unto, and therefore if I happen to glance at the abuses of those
that be all, let not those that be good think themselves thereby to be
detected, or so much as touched.

They should find again in my Epistle to the Reader: I would not have it
thought, that I make any difference between the English and the Irish, in
respect of their birth, for I know there be as worthy men in Ireland, as in
England.

And in the last leaf of the book again, for a farewell: I hope there is no
man that will accuse me of partiallity, to say I have more forborne to speak
against the follies of the English, then against the manners and customs of
the Irish, or that I do otherwise distinguish between them, but value them
both a like, the good to the good, and the bad to the bad.

I know not yet therefore what Reuocation I should make, but to say that
either I have been wonderfully mistaken or shamefully belied. I might yet
speak of other accusations, that have been greiuously enforced against me,
how I have mocked at their Irish customs, scoffed at their holy wells,
derided their Irish Saints, and one in sober sadness took it very greiuously
that I had termed, their Friars their Jesuits and their Priests to be the
Popes vermin.

I warrant ye, they that could spy me out these faults, they were not blind
they were none of these heritickes, that will say the pater noster in English:
but they say open confession must have open shame Peccaui. I have sinned, and
here I do make open Reuocation for I revoke wells Saints Friars, Jesuits,
Priests, Pope, Devil and all: And I would all that knows me in Ireland would
take example by me and do the like.

Thus much for Ireland in general that they say I have so detected in my
book, and now for Dubline in particular that I hope I shall as well satisfy
and give content.

I have written 3 several Chapters the 15. the 16. and the 17. that do
particularly concern the Cytty of Dubline, the head of the 15. chap, A true
description both of the Cytty and Cittyzens of Dubline.

The head of the 16. Of some defectes in the government of Dublin, the head of
the 17. Of the trade and traffic that is used in Dublin,

In the first of the three, which is the 15. Chap. I have a little crossed
Master Stanihurst that in his description of the City of Dublin, does so
flourish it out with such gorgious buildings (as he terms them) that the world
does know, when he writ his Cronicle, made but a sorry show, to what it is
now. But Stanihurst sought to please by flattery, and I by plain dealing, he
paintes it out more gorgiously then truly, but my description in these words
following. To speak the truth of Dublin as it deserves first the Town it
self, is convenient enough, pleasantly seated as well for the serenity of the
air, as for the pleasing walks, that are round about the City on every side:
And this commendation, I think be more properly true, then that sumptuous
description that Master Stanihurst has made of it. Now how I am conceited
toward the Citizens themselves let mine own lines witness: which does like
wise follow in these words. The Citizens themselves are wonderfully reformed,
in manners, in civility, in courtesy, both themselves and their wives, modest
and decent in their apparel, and they are tractable enough in any thing,
Religion only excepted.

And the very latter words in the self same Chapter are these: Dubline is not
yet so destitute, but that there are some, as well learned Divines, as other
grave and godly Citizens and Townes-men that God has blessed with the light
of his word, that do daily endeavor themselves to give good example, seeking
no less to advance the glory of God, as the honor of their Prince, and the
good of their Country.

Me thinks these words were enough for those that were wise to number
themselves amongst those that be good, and not to find fault with the
reprehensions of those that be ill.

But here is a matter now objected against me, that in this Chapter I have
taxed the Citizens of lack of love to his Majesty, for their receiving and
harboring of the Popes vermin, which (they say) lies not in the Mayor to
redress, but it belongs to a more superior authority, I protest I am sorry
that there should be a man found in Dubline, that would take exceptions at this,
and these things were better to be buried with silence, then to be discoursed
with diligence, but if it be a fault to speak against the entertaining of
popish priests in Dubline, that are well known to be his Majesty's protested
enemies, I have committed that fault through ignorance: for I had thought, that
the Citizens of Dubline in general, that have received so many liberal
gifts, such gracious grants, and large liberties, from diverse and sundry
Princes of England, and that are so bountifully confirmed, by our most gracious
King that now is, I had thought the Citizens of Dubline, in respect of their
love and duty to so good and gracious a King should at the least have
restrained (though not punished) that brood of vipers, that does practice
nothing but treason and contempt, both against his Majesty and his
proceedinges.

And I persuaded my self again, that the Mayor of Dubline that is so great a
magistrate within his own precinct, that has the managing of all affairs
within the City and that stands upon his prerogative within his liberties,
and will have no more to meddle but himself, that may hang, that may draw, that
may punish, and has his Majesty's sword committed unto him for the same
purpose, if all this be not sufficient warrant for the Mayor of Dubline, to
hunt out of his jurisdictions, those sowers of sedition those peruerters of his
Majesty's good subjects and those malicious enemies to their king, it is pity
that he has not a new Charter, wherein these services might be better
warranted unto him: I do not speak of the Mayor that is now of the time
present, but I speak of all that are past, and of the rest that are to come:
for if every Mayor within his liberties, and every Bishop within his diocese
throughout Ireland, would do their duties, God would be more honored, the
King better obeyed, and the people united in that love and amity, that now is
dissipated, by this contrariety in Religion. In the 16. chap. speaking of some
defects in the government of Dublin, the greatest fault that is there armed at,
is the prophanatio^ of the Sabbath day, that day which God has commanded to
be kept holy, and should be dedicated to his honor, that day is most polluted
in Dublin, and every alehouse from morning till night is pestered, with
drunkards with blasphemers, I will not speak of whore-hunters, but indeed
with all kind of disordered people.

It is truth, that in England (and else where that I know in Christendom)
there are drunkards, there are blasphemers, and there are whore-hunters too
many, but the rate penal laws to restrain them, but especially on the Sabbath
day, and in England, there is not any one permitted to keep a tippling house,
but he must from year to year enter into bond, and good sureties with him,
to keep good rule and order: and I think there is no man that professes to
be a Christian, be he Protestant or Papist, that will think I have offended
in this, and therefore I shall not need to make any Reuocation in the matter,
because I hope there is no man agreiued at it. I would be sorry to reitterate
the occasion that bred offense, between the two Sheriues and my self: because
my desire is rather to qualify, then to revive matter of unkindness, but what
soever has formerly past between us, I protest I am so free from malice
toward them, that I do not know them from other men, when I meet them in
the streets, what meaning they have toward me, I know not, if it be good I
would be glad, if it be ill, I care not: the worst I do wish unto them, is,
that it would please God to inspire them with his spirit of truth, and as I
wish it from my heart, so help me God.

And although I must confess, I have ever hated Popery, yet I protest I never
hated papist for his religion, but pitted him, especially he or they that I
know to be ignorantly led, and seduced by others, for I hate not the man,
though I hate his religion.

And let me now crave pardon of the Citizens of Dubline in general, but to
lament that calamity pitiful to be spoken of, that in the City of Dubline,
where the word of God has been so plentifully preached in such continuance:
and that should give light and example to all the rest, both of cities and
towns through out all Ireland: and are not able to make a yearly choice of a
Mayor and two Sheriues, that will either go to Church, or willingly take the
oath of alleadgeance to his Majesty, and that they have no other to employ for
his Majesty's service, but such as will impugn his Majesty's laws.

But they will say a Papist may be a sound subject, I will not deny but he
may be so: but I will ask our Papists of Dubline or else where, but this
question, what they do think, whither at Rome or at Remes, or where soever
otherwise, where popopery bears sway, whither they would put a known
protestant in commission for the service of the Pope: they would sooner put out
both his eyes and carry him to a stake: but what a gracious King is this, that
seeks but an oath for his security: And of whom? marry of those that have
such cunning to equivocate and have so many dispensatio^s in a readiness, that
what they swear to day they may revoke to morrow and y^ are taught by their
priests, that when they are brought before such as they account for heretics,
they may both sophistically swear and sophistically answer

This I hope may suffice for a Reuocation of all ouersightes that I have
co^mited against the Citizens of Dublin in the 16. Chap. of my book. And now
to speak something for the credit of that city, and to deliver truly but what
I have received from some of the Citizens themselves, and not of the inferior
sort, but from some of the best Aldermen of the city of Dubline, who
foreseeing the partiality that is used by officers of all sorts (that be
papists) that do execute there places not only to the great detriment of his
Majesty's service but also when any of his Majesty's best affected subjects,
that are known to be religious, and have conformed themselves to his Majesty's
proceedings, if any of these shall light into the laps either of a Sergeant, a
constable or a Iayler that is a papist, he shall be afflicted and exacted on
with more rigor and cruelty then if he were amongst Turks or Jews, where
contrary wise, if a papist be brought in question although it be sometimes for
his disobedience toward his Prince there is scarce an officer that will do his
duty to aprehend him, or being aprehe^ded there will hardly befound a Iayler
that will scantle him with any short alowance belonging to an offender, but
will rather entertain him as a friend, And the more repugnant he shows
himself against his Majesty's proceedings, so much the more favor the Iayler
will show him. These officers that I speak of be such as are belonging to
cities and towns corporat, yea to the city of Dubline it self, amongst the
which there are some that on sunday mornings will first hear a mass, then
after that they will attend the Mayor to Christchurch, and having put him into
his pue, they convey themselves from out of the church into a tavern where
they sit til the Sermon be done, that they must wait of the Mayor back again
to his house. I do not speak this in any malicious humor, whereby to
indignifie the city of Dubline, amongst the inhabitants whereof, although
there be some few that be ill, yet I know there be a great number of most
worthy citizens that do show no less zeal and feruency in the worshipping of
God* then love and loyalty to the service of the king, who for the better
advancement of those affairs that do belong to his majesty, do wish and
desire, that not only the Mayor and Sheryues in every City and town
corporate, throughout the Realm of Ireland, should receive the oath of
allegiance, but that there should not be a Sergeant, a Constable, a Iayler, or
any other petty officer admited, but such as are tractable to his majesty's
proceedings and submissiue to take upon them, the oath of obedience.

But some perhaps will say, that the Cities in Ireland (no not Dublyne it
self) is able year after year, to make choice of a Mayor and two Sheryues,
that will willingly take the oath of obedience to his majesty, the which if it
should be true, (as God forbid it should so be) what a gracious clemency
then in a prince, that will suffer a people to enjoy so large liberties, as
every City throughout that realm is commonly infranchized, that are so
repugnant, and opposite unto him.

To come now to the 17. speaking Of the trade and traffic that is used in
Dublyne: some of them do exclaim against me, that I have wonderfully wronged
the city in speaking against their multitude of Alehouses, which they call
Tauerns; but as good luck would have it, there be others beside my self
that have found out that fault, and first a most reverent and worthy
magistrate, the Lord chief Barrone of his majesty's Exchequer in Ireland, who
in his oration to the late Mayor of Dublyne, when he came to take his oath at
the Chequer bar, gave him aduertisements, of that superabundance of
Alehouses, and of the abuses and inconveniences that did grow by the sufferance
of them.

There was a learned doctor likewise, that openly exclaimed at the abomination
that was used in those multitude of Alehouses, in a Sermon at Christ-Church,
before the Lord Deputy and the state, and before master Mayor himself, and
those few of his brethren, that do use to come to Church.

But if it be a fault in me more then in the rest to speak against these
things, let it pass for one of my ouersights, for I see he that speaks
against pride drunkenness and lechery, shall want no enemies.

There follows now a grievous quarrel, and above all the rest most bitterly
agrauated against me, and there has been inquiry made in the matter whither
I have belyed the City or no in saying, the Aldermens wives sold ale: my
words are, The best sort of women, as Aldermens wives and the rest of the able
sort, are those that do brewe.

Now let it be understood (as without dissimulation I meant it) that some
Aldermens wives did brew ale to the intent to sell it again by the dosins, by
the barrel, or by the great (as we call it) is this such an indignity to all
to say that some have done so: or what discredit to her that should so do,
any more to brew ale, then to make malte, or to endeavor any other things,
that belonges to good huswifery, that every wise womanne is to under take.

It is not the brewing of ale, but the number of idle huswiues, that under the
pretense of selling, do keep filthy houses, shameful to be spoken of, this is
it that offends.

But I can tell where this and worse matter too, was agravated against me to
some Aldermens wives, by a femall creature, and by such a one (I warrant you)
that does think her self to be in as good request as Pudding Tobacco.

But let me say for mine own excuse, for the Aldermen of Dublyne themselves,
there be many of them my good friends, whom I dearly love, there is not any
one of them that I think to be my foe, or that I do hate, and therefore to
slander them with matter of untruth, I would be ill ashamed.

Now for their wives in general, and for all the rest of the citizens wives of
Dublyne (that be of the better sort) I protest it confidently, and I speak it
from my heart, I never heard women les infamed or misse-reported, in any city
or town wheresoever I have trauayled: so that if Thucidides rule be true, that
those women are to be accounted most honest, that are least spoken of, I say
the citizens wives of Dublyne, may march in equal rank with those women that
are least steyned or misreputed.

In a few words now to express mine own meaning, first for this
construction that is made against me about the brewing of ale: I do confess
of mine own knowledge, that there be diverse Aldermens wives, and many other
women beesides that never used it: but if they hadd, it is not the brewing of
Ale that I find fault with, nor with the selling of it, by those women that are
honest, but by those that are well known to be shameful livers, it is against
them and against no other, that I do exclaim.

I do acknowledge likewise that Alehouses, and victuallyng houses be both of
them necessary, and therefore howsoever they interpret my words, those that be
wise, can conceive of my meaning: these typling houses by honest householders,
and not by these known strumpets, that under the color of selling ale, do
live in that loathsomeness of life, too shameful to be spoken of.

There is yet one other unkindness conceived against me, for speaking of the
extortion that is used by the Bakers of Dublyne, that will be sure to make
their bread after double the rate, that corn is sold for: a matter
especially looked into in every City and town. And as it appears in the
English Cronicle, the liberties of London, have been ceased into the hands
of the king for this tollerating, with the inormity of Bakers, and it has
evermore been thought a matter most behouefull to punish (and that with all
extremity) this extortion in Bakers, because it only pincheth the poorer
sort, that are worst able to bear it.

I protest I cannot revoke this as an oversight, that I have spoken against the
Bakers, but do rather enforce it, that either they should be reformed or else
that the country Bakers, that will make their bread according to a true assise
might be suffered (as they be in other well governed Cities) to serve the
market, which every man does admire, is not suffered in Dublyne: And now to
speak without dissimulation, there is nothing wherewith the city of Dublyne is
more wounded with disgrace, then in sufferyng so many filthy alehouses, and in
this bearing with the extortion of Bakers.

Thus you may see that although I have gla^ced at abuses that are used by some
that are ill, yet it is without any impeachment of those that be good, and
therefore those fault-finders have but discovered their malice, and done me no
disgrace.

The truth is, the wholl drift of my Book is against Popery, how should it
then be befrie^ded in Ireland, where those that will be afraid to read it, will
make no conscience at all to slander it.

I know not whither I may term it to be blindness or obstinacy, or blindness
and obstinacy joined both together, in a people (sencible and wise enough)
that yet are trained to neglect the holy scriptures, to reverence visions lies
and fantazies: that are led from the Church of God, to the superstitious, and
abominable Church of Idolatry: that are wrested from the obedience of the
Princes wholesome laws, that inciteth to unity and concord, to the durtie
decrees and ordinances of a superstitious priest, that leads to destruction:
that does so neglect the means of their salvation: that they will not search
for the truth, but are so maliciously blind, that they will not open their
eyes to look toward the light: that with the Jews do throw stones at Christ
and will drive him away, when he comes to preach, that with the Nazarits,
will thrust him out of their city with violent hands when he comes to offer
himself unto them.

I know not what I should say of the people of Ireland, whither it be through
the confidence they have in their priests, or in the distrust that they have
of their own judgments, or in the little credit they have in Gods promises,
that bids them seek and they shall find: but something there is that
makes them afraid for they dare not look on a book, that is either repugnant
to their religion, or that does contradict Popery.

I have not spoken these things against the Irishe, tauntingly, to vpbraide
them, but I speak it lovingly to admonish them: and as the preacher that
seeing some of his parishioners to frequent his Sermons, more for fashion sake,
and to take a little nappe of sleep in the time of his sermon, then for any
zeal or devotion to the doctrine he taught, yet he wished them still to come
to Church although but to take their accustomed nap, hoping in time to take
some of them napping, and so to awaken them with the power of Gods word, to
make them more attentive to those things that did so nearely concern their
salvation: even so say I, let those that have read over my former book, but to
the end to pick quarrels against it, and to slander it with untruths, let
the^ do so (in Gods name) with this that follows, let them read it over I
care not with what pretense, let them be angry still at mine honest meaning, it
may happen to enlighten some of their eyes that have been long blindfold, and
I care not to offend mame so I may please some.

4 A Bulwark or Defense of all truths contained in my Book.
THe matter that I have to defend is, that all that I have written against
Popery is true, and he that defends truth is armed with authority, if all
the world were against him, and has law full power to pronounce the Pope
himself with all his Cardinals to be heretics, the brood of Antichrist, and
the ministers of Hell and damnation.

In my former book, I have slightly touched the fruits of the Popes doctrine
how it stirs up subjects against their princes how it draws to
rebellions, treasons, murders, mutinies, mischiefs, and to all manner of
impieties.

Now to fortify this, and to make it more manifest, I will further approve,
how this poison of the Popes doctrine, inciteth the people, from that trust
they should have in God, to affie themselves in Saints, how it makes men to
fly from Gods mercy, to other men's merits, how it excludes Christ, and
sets up a Pope-holy righteousness of works and deseruings, and to
conclude, how it draws from God to the Devil, and from that everlasting
life, which Christ has purchased for us with the price of his blood, to the
fire of hell, and everlasting damnation.

It is Popery, that makes new relickes, that sets forth unshamefast
legendes, that deuiseth false miracles, whereby to deceive the people, that
gives them pardons for money, for many thousand thousand years, that
promises them help in their needs, and effect in all their desires, that
makes open ma^tes of the gifts and graces of God, that causes men to runn
from place to place, from Saint to Saint, from shryne to shryne to increase
their offeringes, and to deceive the people.

They are papists that brag of revelations, of visions, they walk in
wonders above their reaches, they take away Christ the mercy seat, and will
needs comprehend God in his majesty, by the judgment of their reason, and
pacific him with their works.

True Christian divinity sets not God forth unto us, neither in his
majesty, nor in any manner of similitude, but straightly forbids us from the
curious searching of his majesty, which is intolerable to the body of man,
but much more to the mind, we must not therefore, be curious to search out
the nature of God, but diligent to know his will, as it is set out to us in
Christ: there is nothing more dangerous then to wander with curious
speculation, to search out God, for as God in his own nature is unmeasurable,
incomprehensible, and infinite, so he is to man's nature intolerable.

Let him then that would be in safety and out of peril, bridle that clyming
and presumptuous spirit, and seek to know God but according as by the
scriptures, he sets himself forth to be known in his son our Savior.

Then he that has to deal in the matter of his justification, and desires
to know how God is to be found, that justifies and accepts sinners, let him
know, there is no other, but the man Jesus Christ, that has said himself: No
man comes unto the father, but by me John 14.

He that seeks any other way, does but wander, and he that searches any
other knowledge, is as far astray.

But to whom can we liken God, or what similitude can we fashion up, that
may resemble the brightness of his glory?

A most horrible Idolatry to figure out the Image of God the Father, like an
old man with a gray beard, with a tryple crown on his head like a Pope, the
holy Ghost, they figure like a dove, and the blessed trinity with three faces.

Now for the Image of Christ, there be so many similitudes, as there be
workmen to carue or to paint him, when every one uses his own fancy to
draw him into what form or ^auour he list, and therefore it was merrily spoken
by an Irishe man, who beholding an image that had been painted for Christ,
swore that it looked so like an Englishman, that he loved it the worse.

Zenophon would needs persuade that if beasts could paynt they would portray
out the image of God in the liknes of a beast, when God spoke unto the children
of Israel, they saw no similitude whereby they might fashion God into any
shape or likeness, they only heard a voice, which voice they were willed to
observe and keep: It is enough that we beeleeue Gods promises, but not to
portray him out in similitudes, nor to dispute of his will, and for those that
have been curious to search out the cause of predestination, they have bin
wrapped in intolerable doubts, the which Saint Paul concludes to be all
only the will of God, for the proof whereof he brought in the evident
example, how Jacob was chosen, and Esau reproved, both before they were borne
and before they had committed either good or evil.

The papist seeks his justification in his own works, the which being well
considered, is less then himself, for the work man is much more excellent
then his work: now if the article of justification be once subverted, then
is all christian doctrine overthrown, for who are they that do impugn this
christian righteousness, but Jews, Turks, Papists and heretics for he that
has once lost Christ, must necessarily fall into the confidence of his own
works.

To forgive sins, to make righteous, to quicken and deliver from death, and
the devil, and to give everlasting life, these are not the works of any
creature, no not of Angels, but of the sovereign majesty the creator, and
maker of all things.

Christ (says the Apostle) has given himself: but for what has he given
himself, not for our good works, not for our vows, not for our pylgrimages,
not for our mas^ing, not for our holiness, nor for our righteousness, but for
our sins, Gala. 1.

Here is now a down fall to the Popes pardons, to purgatory it self, to vows
masses and other abominations: this gunshot beats down Popery, it lays
all works, merits, and all other superstitious ceremonies flat with the
ground, for if our sins might be taken away, by our own works, merits,
and satisfaction, or whatsoever otherwise, what needed the son of God to be
given for them.

Now if we did but consider of the greatness of the price, that the son of
God must needs be given for it, and would yet think of any other
satisfaction, whereby we might redeem our selves we should be very injurious,
to the precious blood of Christ.

We might here again yet further consider, that sin is a mighty tyrant,
that is not to be vanquished by the power of any creature, but by the infinite
power of Jesus Christ the son of God that gave himself for it.

Then what do the papists, that do think to overcome sin, by their own
works and merits, but in establishing their own righteousness, do deface
and pluck down the glory of God, and most perniciously do set at naught, the
precious blood of Christ, which he so freely has given unto us.

But our Papists I think, are utterly ignorant of the grieuousnes of sin,
and do dream it to be of no great force nor power but that it may easily be
put away, by good works, by a popes bull or by a priests blessing.

Then they make certain distinctions, between sin and sin some to be
greater and some to be lesser, when there is no sin, how slightly so ever
accounted of, but is rewarded with death, and damnation, if Christ be excluded,
neither is their any other means whereby to repair it but by the sheading of
his most precious blood.

Why then thou foolish holy Pope, will thou bear me believe thou can make
me righteous, with thy Bulls, with thy pardons, with thy indulgencies, or
with thy other tra^h, that am every day, every hour, every minute and every
moment, a sinner committing sin against the almighty himself, and that in
grievous and heinous manner, as contempt of God, blaspheming his holy name,
despising his holy word, profaning the Sabbath day, with a number of other
like concerning the first table? admit that I have not committed murder,
theft, whordome, and such other sins actual against the second table, yet
in my heart what sin have I omitted, but that I am a sinner, and a continual
transgressor of all the commandments: why then if my sins be so infinite,
so horrible and detestable, who could repair them, who could satisfy for
them, but he that has paid the price with his blood?

But will you see now the subtlety of Satan, to those that beegin, to lay
hold on Christ by faith, to them he seems fearful putting them in mind of
the grieuousnesse of their sins, and of that which is a small fault, he
makes a very Hell, and dryueth them as much as he can to despair of Gods
mercies, never ceasing to accuse their consciences, and all to make them to
fly from their anchor hold: to them on the other side, that he in snareth,
to trust in their own works and merits, them he lulleth asleep in security,
they make sin no sin, they think to repair it, but in going to a Saints
shryne, in setting up a holy candle, or in forbearing to eat eggs on Friday.

There is nothing more contrary to the nature of flesh and blood then to be
reproved in those things, wherein they think themselves to deserve greatest
praise, to say they be sinners, unrighteous, wicked, the children of wrath,
when they think they have made themselves right us and holy by their good
works, by going on pilgrimage, by praying to Saints.

The wisdom and righteousness of the flesh is grown so proud and stately,
that they cannot endure to hear of the righteousness of grace and faith: but
that righteousness, which knows not the righteousness of Christ, is double
sin: and therefore these holy sins that are committed, bearing the show of
righteousness, are far more dangerous then those fleshly sins indeed,
that all the world does acknowledge to be monstrous, and the more wise,
righteous and holy, menn are without Christ, so much the more hurt they do to
the gospel.

If we should compare blasphemers, publicans and harlots, to those holy
hypocrites, we should find them the more likely to obtain grace, for they
when they offend have remorse of conscience and do not justify their wicked
doings, but the other dare affirm their idolatries, their wicked
worshippinges, and their other abominations, to be the works of
righteousness acceptable unto God, and things available to salvation.

So long therefore, as the opinion of righteousness abides in men, so long
there is also abiding incomprehensible pride, presumption, security, contempt
of the grace and mercy that is promised in Christ.

The doctrine of the gospel takes from men, all glory, wisdom,
righteousness, and gives them to God alone, to whom they belong, the gospel
is a doctrine, concerning Christ, which is neither law nor work, but our
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, That he might be made an oblation
for the sins of the whole world, that our sins might be forgiven for his
sake, and not for the works of the law, nor our own righteousness: we
acknowledge and confess that there is nothing in us that is able to deserve
grace and the forgiveness of sins: but that at we obtain it by the free
mercy of God, only for Christ's sake, whereby we do not seek to set forth
man's worthiness, but Gods mercy offered unto us in Christ.

For Christ and the Law cannot agree together in the conscience, the one must
give place: and he that cannot beeleeue that God will forgive him his sins,
for Christ's sake, how can he be leeue that his sins shall be forgiven, for
the works of the law, which no man yet was ever able to perform.

They that do mingle the law, and the gospel together, do perueit both, for
either Christ must remain and the law give place or* the law must remain,
and Christ must give place.

For he that will needs couple the law with the gospel, does not only
blemish and darken the knowledge of grace, which Paul so often speaks of, but
also he takes away Christ with all his benefits.

The law indeed was given to utter sin, death and damnation, whereby to drive
us to Christ. The Law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ says the
Apostle Gala. 3. and our Savior himself in the sixth of John: Do not think
that I will accuse you to my father, there is another that accuses you, even
Moses in whom you trust.

One place of Scripture containing some threatening of the law, beats down
all consolations besides, and so shakes all our inward powers, that it makes
us to forget justification, grace the gospel and Christ himself.

The law no doubt is holy, righteous and good, and consequently, the works of
the law are holy righteous and good, yet notwithstanding a man is not thereby
justified before God, but made the rather subject to the curse.

And although there be nothing more necessary then the law and the works
thereof, yet by the same a man may be brought to the denial of Christ, for of
the law many times comes a trust and affiance in works, and where that is,
there can be no affiance in Christ: the righteousness of the law is to
fulfill the law according to this saying of the Apostle, He that shall do
these things shall live in them, but the righteousness of says is to
beeleeue according to this saying: The righteous manne does live by faith.

Now the Papists that do so much endeavor to establish the righteousness of
works, do thereby tread down the righteousness of Christ, for although it
be true, that works must follow faith, yet in the work of our salvation,
there must be no medly, we must rely in the one or in the other: now faith
works not but believes in Christ, who is our propytion, and remission of
sins, but the effect of the law is not to make righteous and to give life,
but to show forth sin, and to destroy, and although the law says, He
that shall do these things shall live in them, yet I would but see a Papist,
that could point me out but one man, that had so performed the works of the
law, to merit eternal life by his own deseruings: who so ever seeks to
make himself holy by the law, what can he imagine, but that God being
angry, must needs be pacified with good works, and what works can he now
perform wherein he finds not some imperfections, his fasting, his praying,
his worshipping, his sacrificing he thinks still that he has omitted
somewhat, or that he ha^h not done them as he ought, they cannot therefore
quiet his conscience.

If our reward should be according to our works, there should no man be saved,
when our best deeds (compared to the law) are damnable sins, neither by it
is any flesh justified as it appears in the 3. to the Romans for the fulfilling
of the law, is only to believe in Christ: neither is it written in the
gospel, he that works, but he that believes shall be saved, and therefore
they that do seek heaven by works, are such as do not understand the
treasures that are laid up for them in Christ.

There is no man so foolish to condemn good works (as the Papist most
slanderously reports) but we condemn confidence in good works, that
should either justify or make righteous whereby the precious blood of Christ
should be made altogether unprofitable, for those that do seek their
justification by Law, or works, what is it else but a flat denial of Christ.

But here comes reason now to debate the matter, who hearing of justification
by faith, begins to storm: what says it are all my good works then
nothing worth? have I fasted, have I prayed, have I bin charitable in bestowing
my money to build chapels to build chanteryes, to give perpetuities to
massing priests, to buy Coopes, vestments, Crosses, and chalyces, and are all
these nothing worth, have I labored in vain?

In any case therefore when we come to debate of these matters away with
reason, which is an utter enemy to faith, and leans not to the
righteousness of faith, but to it own righteousness, or at the least to the
righteousness of the law: now where Law and reason are once linkt together,
there faith loses her virginity: for man's reason takes more pleasure in
measuring of God, by her own imagination, then by his word, and does those
with better will and greater zeal, that she her self has chosen, then those
that God has commanded.

And therefore if with the papist, we should go about to measure the things
appertaining to faith and salvation, but according to the rule of reason, we
should find both great absurdity and many impossibilities: for who can
believe the articles of the Christian faith, that Christ the son of God was
conceived, and borne in the womb of the virgin Mary, that he was borne and
suffered, the most reproachful death of the Cross: that the dead shall rise at
the last day? and how absurd and foolish does it seem to reason, that in
the Lords Supper, the body and blood of Christ, should spiritually be offered
unto us, or that the Sacrament of baptism should be the receiving of the holy
Ghost: or if we had no better speculation then to look with the eyes of reason
how could we see or believe the blessed trinity? but how foolish and
impossible did it seem in the judgment of reason, when God said unto Abraham
that he should have a son of the withered and barren body of his wife Sara? we
may therefore conclude and that undoubtedly, that in the searching out of
things that are divine, there is nothing more unreasonable, then that which we
call natural reason: The wisdom of the flesh (says Saint Paul) is enmity
with God: And therefore when God speaks, reason judges his words to be
heresy.

The papist does attribute the merit of grace, and the remissiof sins, to the
work wrought, for they say that a good work before grace is available to
obtain grace of congruence, because it is meet and convenient that GOD
should reward such a work, but when grace by this means is once obtained,
then the good works following do deserve everlasting life as a due debt.

For the first work before grace God is no debtor, but because he is just and
good, it therefore behooves him to approve such a work, and to give grace for
such a piece of service: but when grace is obtained, God is become a debtor,
and is constreyned of right and duty to give eternal life: for now it is a
work don in grace and therefore it makes gracious.

Now if a man, of his own ability may perform a work which is not only
acceptable in Gods sight, but is also able to deserve grace of congruence, and
get of right and duty eternal life, what need is there then of the grace of
God, of the forgiveness of sins or of Christ himself? he might well have spared
his blood and bitter passion: we are able to crave for our selves, and to
work our own salvation by our own deseruinges.

But if the Pope, with all his religious rabble were not both blind and
malicious, they could not choose but see, and would not let to confess it to
be a most horrible blasphemy, to think that there is any work whereby to
pacify God, when we see there is nothing that could appease him, but that
inestimable price, even the death of his Son: away then with these Popish
satisfactions of works, of merits, of vows, of ceremonies, both before grace
and after grace, throw them altogether with their first founders, into the
bottomeles pit of hell.

Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, says the Apostle Romans 14. and
therefore he that would deserve grace by works going before faith, goes
about to please God with sins by heaping one upon an other, and therefore
thou can not deserve grace by thy works.

The Pelagians do grant as much of grace as the papists do, for they say that
men may have a good purpose, and a love of grace, of their own natural
strength, for (say they) God has given good Laws: and a man may keep them
of his own natural strength, or else the commandments were given in vain.

And may not infidelles and misbeleeuers attain to this merit of congruence?
for the Papists do grant that it comes of natural strength, and yet it
should not follow of congruence that they shall receive grace, nor yet attain
to the remission of sins, for how should a man without a special grace
abhor his sins: for if men may do good before grace, then we may gather
grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles: we see now, that the first part of
Christianity does consist in the knowledge of our selves, and of our own
unworthiness.

The second part (if thou will be saved) thou must not seek thy salvation in
thy works, but in Christ that was crucified and dyed for thee, for God has
revealed unto us, that he will be unto us, a merciful father, and without
our deserts (seeing we are able to deserve nothing) will freely give unto us
remission of sins, righteousness and life everlasting, for his son
Christ's sake.

This is our belief touching Christian righteousness, against these horrible
and monstrous blasphemies of papists, concerning their merit of congruence,
and worthiness of works.

Christian righteousness is Christ apprehended by faith, and dwelling in the
heart, but to give a true rule of Christianity: first we are to consider
that a man must be taught by the Law to know himself, and to understand that
all have sinned, and have need of the glory of God, Romans 3 and that There is
not one righteous, no not one: Psalm. 14. when a man is thus humbled by the
law, and brought to the knowledge of himself, then follows true re entance,
and here he beeginneth to sigh and to seek out for succor, and utterly
dispayring of his own strength, he finds this comfortable consolation:
Son, thy sins are forgiven thee: believe in Jesus Christ, who has taken
thy sins upon him, whose stripes have made thee whole.

This is the beginning of health and salvation, by these means we are delivered
from sin, justified and made the inheritors of life everlasting, not for our
own works and deserts, but for our faith whereby we lay hold upon Christ.

When we have thus laid hold upon Christ by faith, through whom we are made
righteous, now follow good works; and that is, to love God above all
things, call upon him, give thanks unto him, praise his holy name, confess
his goodness and mercy toward thee, begin now to love thy neighbor as
thy self, do unto him as thou would be done unto, help the needy,
comfort the afflicted, give alms to the poor.

These be good works indeed, for this hearing of masses, this worshipping and
offering to Idols, this going on pilgrimage, to the holy Cross, to Saint
Patrickes Purgatory, this giving to lascivious priests: leave this to the
Papists, the generation of Antichrist, and the rest of that holy rabble of the
Popes Vermin, that dares take those privileges to themselves, that do
properly belong unto Christ alone, he only forgiueth sins, he only gives
righteousness and everlasting life.

Good works are outward signs of true faith, which do not justify of
themselves, but are as testimonialles to the worker, that he is already
justified, so that works are out the fruits of faith: good works are all
things that are done within the limits of the laws of God, in which God is
honored, and for which thanks are given to God.

That faith that brings forth good works does justify, but the works do
not justify, and this justifying faith is the free gift of God without our
deseruinges, for by this faith given us thus by grace, we attain the benefit
of Christ's death, which only justifies us, so that good works are the
fruits of a good faith.

Fasting is a good work, but how? not to absteyne, from the eating of flesh,
and to pamper the panch with all sorts of fish, till it be ready to surfeit,
not to refrain from the eating of an egg, and to make no conscience at the
killing of a man: not to make difference of days, and to forbear from butter,
cheese and milk, but never to absteyne (neither fasting day nor other) to live
in drunkenness in whordome, and in all manner of loath some sin and
wickedness: not to fast in the honor of a Saint, and to live with bread and
water one day, and the next day to glut our selves, and to riot and revel it
out with all excess.

And what are these prayers that are delivered in a strange tongue, that are
tallied upon a pair of Beads, that are presensented to Saints, Images and
Idols, but the works of darkness, of sin and of damnation?

All such religion where God is worshipped without his word, and commandment,
is idolatry, and the more holy it seems in outward show, so much the more
dangerous: this abstinency of the Papists in forbearing of flesh, and eating
of fish, their praying upon beads, their worshipping of Saints, their vows,
their pilgrimages are all Idolatry.

We do not reject fasting, and other good exercises as things unnecessary, but
we say that by these exercises, we do not obtain remission of Sins: and
heerevpon, the papists both ignorantly do judge, and slanderously do
report, that we speak against good works.

Whether thou eat or not eat, thou art neither better nor worse says the
Apostle, now if any man would say, if thou eat, thou sinnest or if thou
abstain, thou art righteous, he should but show his ignorance: it is a small
matter to eat or not to eat, but when a man does believe, that in abstaining,
he meriteth heaven, or is thereby the more holy, here God is denied, and
Christ is rejected, and the blessings of God thereby abused, and to think
that life or salvation, or death, and damnation, depends in the observation
hereof, is a deuillish superstition, and full of blasphemy.

It is truth the papists do fast, they pray, they watch, they do lay crosses
on them selves, but by this they think to appease the wrath of God, to deserve
grace, to work their righteousness, to make themselves holy: by this, they take
from God his Majesty, his divinity, his mercy: And do attribute the work of
their salvation, to their own merits and deseruings.

Our Savior in the 6. of Matthew, reproved those works that are not performed
by faith: but what works be those that he there rebukes? even such as are
commanded by the scriptures, and such as every true Christian must put in
practice, namely fasting, praying, and deeds of alms: for the Scriptures
themselves being once corrupted with glosses (as our papists do accustom and
as they have made manifest in their Remish Testament) is no more Gods word: so
those things that are commanded by the Scriptures, being once perverted, and
alienated from their true uses are neither to be accounted for good works or
godly deeds: now what are become of those merits of congruence, before faith
when fasting, praying, and alms giving are reproved, Christ here destroys
not fasting, praying, and alms deeds, but he preaches against the purpose
and intent, how they were perverted, by the Scribes and Pharisees, so we that
do seek our salvation in Christ only, do not seek to destroy the deeds of
good works (as the papists untruly do report) but we say that those that
do seek their justification in them (as the papist does teach) are most
injurious to the blood of Christ.

Turks and Jews do give alms as plentifully as any Christians do, yet it
is abominable, for lack of faith and knowledge of the true intent.

In the offeringes that were made by Abell and Caine, we see that though the
works that are performed by ungodly persons, do make as glorious a show, as
the deeds of the godly, yet in the sight of God which looks on the heart,
the deed is good because of the man, and not the man because of the deed.

The wrath of God consumes these holy and faithles works, as it did Nadab and
Abihu: And here if we did but turn our eyes unto the Pharisees, which before
the coming of Christ in his flesh, had laid the foundation of freewill,
whereon they built their holy works: see what followed, upon feruency and
zeal, they thrust themselves out of the holy rest of forgiveness of sins, by
faith in the blood of Christ.

Me thinks the Pharisees and our papists do draw together in one line, for
the Pharisees persecuted Christ, because he reproved their holy works, and
our papists are as angry toward us, because we renounce their superstitious
merits, and seek our justification in the blood of Christ.

Abraham believed God and it was imputed to him for righteousness then Abraham
obtained not this righteousness before God through the works of the law, for
at that time there was no law nor in four hundred and odd years after, then
if there were no law, there could be neither work nor merit, what then, but
the bare promise, which Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness.

Abell and Caine, They offered their oblations unto the Lord, but the Lord had
respect to the offering of Abell: you see now says the papist, that God has
respect to offerings, and therefore works do justify: but what blindness is
this that will not suffer them to see, that God had first respect to the person
of Abell, which pleased the Lord, because of his faith, their works were both
one, they both offered oblations: what was then the difference? Abell was
faithful, and Caine an hypocrite, presuming on his own merit, as our Papists
do.

It is truth, faith and good works are near neighbors, for they still dwell
together in a righteous man, but as touching their office, there is a great
separation, for the law can have no dominion but over the flesh, and faith
alone must dwell in the conscience, and sending Moses away with his law, there
she planteth Christ with his righteousness: for the bleeuing conscience must
know of no law.

He that has once received Christ by faith, and knows that he is his
righteousness and life, doubtless he will not be idle, but as a good tree he will
bring forth good fruit, for the believing man, has the holy Ghost, and where
the holy Ghost dwells it will not suffer a man to be idle, but stirs him
up to all exercises of piety and godliness, and of true religion, to the love of
God, to the patient suffering of afflictions, to prayer, to thanksgiving, and
to the exercise of charity toward all men: but these good works and this
charity following faith, do neither form nor adorn my faith, but my faith
both forms and adorneth them.

Faith and works therefore must be so taught, as the one he not confounded by
the other, for he that teaches works only, as the papists are accustomed,
then says is lost, if faith only be taught, then carnal men by and by begin
to dream, that works are not needful.

Faith is the believing of Gods promises, and a sure trust and confidence of
goodness and truth, and true faith is impossible to be had without the spirit of
God, for it is above all natural power, that a man in the time of affliction,
when God scourges him should then believe, that God then loves and prepares
for his good.

Faith gives glory only unto God, which is the greatest service man can do
unto him, for without faith God loses his glory, his wisdom, his
righteousness, his truth and his mercy: And to conclude, there is neither
Majesty, nor divinity remaining unto God, where faith is wanting.

The papist will say, that we must believe in Christ, and that faith is the
foundation of our salvation, but it justifies not except it be furnished with
charity and good works: but faith of it self is Gods gift, and Gods work in
our hearts, which therefore justifies because it apprehends Christ.

Man's reason can not comprehend this, but thinks of charity and of works,
what I have done, and what I have not done, but faith has no other object then
Jesus Christ, the Son of God delivered to death for the sins of the whole
world, says looks neither to charity, nor to works: it says not what have
I done, or what have I deserved, but what has Christ done, what has he
deserved: the gospel then truly answers, that he has delivered me from
eternal death and damnation, and therefore a true and a steadfast faith must
lay hold upon nothing else but upon Christ alone.

When I can feel and confess my self to be a sinner through Adams
transgression, without my deseruings, why should I not think my self to be
made righteous again, through the righteousness of Christ, without my
deseruinges?

And therefore he that apprehends Christ truly by faith, although he be
never so much pressed down with the weight of his sins, may yet take
comfort, and account himself to be righteous, by that only means, that he
possesses Christ by faith: if this faith fail, and that it must give place to
works or charity, or to another help besides, then it is but a fable that
Christ is the Savior of the world, and God also found to be but a lier, that
has not performed, what he has so confide^tly promised.

Let us now acknowledge the law to be as it is, divine and holy, and let us
learn of it, both how we ought to love God, and to demean our selves toward
our neighbor, and to ask counsel how we should be delivered from sin,
the power of the Devil, and eternal damnation: Let us have nothing to do with
the law, which in that point does rather terrify, then minister comfort,
here let us fly to the gospel which teaches us, that Jesus Christ the son
of God has paid the ransom, with his precious blood and redeemed us from our
sins, and here faith alone wills us to receive this, and to believe it: and
therefore when the law accuses and sin terrifieth, let us look upon
Christ, laying hold on him by faith, we have then present with us the
conqueror of the law, sin, death and the devil himself.

Whosoever will diligently consider of the whole argument of that book called
the Acts of the Apostles, shall find that it teaches nothing else, but that
the holy Ghost is not given by the Law, but by the hearing of the gospel: for
when Peter preached, the holy Ghost forthwith fell upon all that heard him:
and in one day three thousand that were present at the preaching of Peter,
believed and received the holy Ghost: Cornelius received the holy Ghost, but
not by his alms giving, but Peter preaching the gospel of Christ the holy
Ghost fell upon him, and of all the rest that were present with him, so that
the whole sum and argument of that Book is, that we are justified by faith
only in Christ, without our works, and that the holy Ghost is given, by the
only hearing of faith at the preaching of the gospel, and not at the
preaching or work of the Law.

Well says the papist, if the holy Ghost may be obtained, but by hearing of
faith and the gospel preached, and that there is nothing else required of us:
alas this is but an easy matter soon performed, but the giving of the holy
Ghost, the forgiveness of sins, the deliverance from death, are matters of
greater moment then to be so easily attained unto: And therefore if thou will
obtain these inestimable benefits, there belongs more to it, then either
hearing or believing.

Thus argues the papist, and this seems conformable to a man's own reason,
and this opinion is well liked, and the Pope, and the devil himself will
approve it.

Thus the inestimable greatness of the gift, is the cause that we cannot
believe it, and because this incomparable treasure is freely offered, therefore
we despise it: but let Christians learn, that the forgiveness of sins,
Christ and the holy Ghost are freely given us by hearing of faith, and the
gospel preached. And that we must not so much think of the greatness of the
thing that is given, nor of our unworthiness that are to receive it, as of the
greatness and gratiousnes of the giver: we must think that it pleases God
freely to give unto us, that unspeakable gift as Christ has said Luke 12.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give unto you a
kingdom* Let foolish reason now be offended, let the papist never spare to
rage and rail against us, let them say we teach men to do nothing at all for
the obtaininge of so inestimable a gift but to hear the gospel preached, let
them therefore refrain themselves from going to church, that they might not
partake with us of this heavenly treasure but for those that will exercise
themselves in righteousness indeed, let them first exercise themselves in the
hearing of the gospel and having once received that, let them give thanks
unto God: and afterward, let them exercise themselves in those good works
which are commanded in the law, so that the law and works, may follow the
hearing of faith: but to seek any justification by the law or by works we
leave the one to the Jews, the other to papists: the papist teaches that no
man can have any certain knowledge whither he be the child of God or no, but
he that doubts of Gods good will toward him, that man cannot believe that
he has forgiveness of sins, but imagines the tenth article of the Christian
faith, and makes doubt of his own salvation, the papist indeed, has not this
feeling, for it belongs to none but to him that has the spirit of God: Know
ye not your selves, that Christ is in you except ye be reprobate persons, says
Saint Paul 2. Corin. 13. And in the sixth to the Romans He that has not the
spirit of God is none of his.

Now the spirit of God is the only mark that is given to those that are
elect, now the Papist that has not this feeling, if Saint Paul's words be
true, is a reprobate, for he has not the mark.

If any man feel in himself a love toward the word of God and willingly
hears, talks, and thinks of Christ, let that man know that it is not
the work of man's will or reason, but the gift of the holy Ghost.

So again where the love of the word and gospel, is comtemned despised, and
utterly set at naught, as we see at this day (but especially here in Ireland)
let them assure themselves that it is the work of the devil, that so blinds
their eyes and hardens their hearts.

Then what are the Papists but the destroyers of the kingdom of Christ, and
the builders up of the kingdom of the Devil: And as witchcraft couenanteth
with the Devil, so Idolatry couenanteth with God: for thus many prayers, for
thus many Paternosters, for thus many creedes, for thus many Aues, for thus
many days of fasting, for thus many masses, for these and many other matters
the works of the flesh, superstitious follies, and that Idolatryes.

The Papists do imagine of GOD, to be but a merchant to sell them his
heavenly graces, for their stinking merits.

If the doctrine of the Papists be true, God now receives no more to his
mercy, but he receives us to penance, which commonly they link together with
holy works, but what holy works? such as feed them fat, and pampers them in
idleness, and yet they would seem to feign that idol their Pope to be so
merciful that for a little money, there is neither penance, nor pain of
purgatory, nor fasting, nor absteyning from any filthy sin, either of whordome,
treason, or murder, but he forgiueth all, and sends them to heaven and that
with a trice: And as they deal with God himself, so they deal with the
Saints, whom they would make as malicious and vengible, as the Poets feign
their furies that torments the souls in Hell, if their eues be not fasted,
their Images visited and worshipped with a Candle, or some other offeringes,
which must be performed in those places, that they themselves have chosen to
hear petitioners, and to receive their supplications: so that there is no
mercy remaining in God, nor in his Saints, but all rests in the Pope alone.

And the Pope is not only more merciful then God, but if a man may beeleeue
our papists, he is more powerful then God: for God (say they) if a man
commit a sin, upon due repentance, he forgiueth the offense only, but
not the pain that is due to the offense, saving that he turns an
everlasting pain, but to a temporal pain, and appoynteth seven years
plunging in purgatory for every deadly sin, but the Pope absolueth all, both
a paena and Culpa, as well from the pain that is due to the fault, as from the
fault it self.

And whereas God forgiueth no sin but upon due repentance the Pope never
looks after that, money is the matter that he stands upon, he that has
money shall have a plenary remission for as many horrible sins as any man is
able to commit, let him choose whether he will repent or no, he shall be
forgiven, and for a need if a man be disposed to commit a horrible murder
the Pope will give him absolution before hand.

The whole doctrine of the Pope tends to covetousness to rob the simple
and ignorant people, look into their purgatory, that only serves but to
purge men's purses, and wherefore serves pardons but for the same purpose,
their offeringes to Saints but to fill their bellies, their treatales and all
other trash, what are they but mere cosenages and flat robberies?

The infinite number of Popish priests that be in Ireland does make a great
commodity amongst the silly people, of this only conceit, that for a little
money bestowed upon them, they will not only undertake to do good works for
them, but will also undertake to stand between God and them, and to take all
their sins upon themselves.

Thus powerful is the Pope if our papists say true, that he can forgive more
then any can offend, but as for God, they make him but an hypocrite, to forgive
us the fault, but not the pain that is due to the fault: but Pau^ says he
gave himself for our sins, if he gave himself to death for our sins,
without doubt he is no tyrant, as the papists would make him: he that will
give himself to death for us, will neither condemn us, nor take pleasure in
our torment.

What unkindness in our papists that without any authority of scripture,
will yet seek to dispoyle God of his honor, imagining that he has not
delivered us as well from the pain as from the sin: and what blasphemy to
think that Christ's blood, was not sufficient, to give full remission to his
faithful, as well for the one as for the other: or for what intent should the
pain be reserved to satisfy toward God, when all the pains of Hell are not
able to purge one sin or to satisfy for it, which if it were, in continuance
of time, the damned souls should be delivered from Hell.

For our better understanding let us here consider the sins which we do
commit, if they should be measured by our selves that do commit them, they
could be but finite: for of men that are of themselves but finite, how should
come that which is infinite? but transgression is increased according to the
proportion of him against whom it is committed: the sins which we commit
then, are against the infinite Majesty of God, in regard of whom our sins
are truly infinite: to an infinite offense, then does belong an infinite
punishment, which could never be borne nor remitted, but of that which was
likewise infinite: God by his infinite grace has given us his son infinite
as himself to bear it: our Savior by his infinite power, has borne and
swallowed vpour infinite pain, and that further by his infinite obedience
purchased for us Gods infinite grace: he does then forgive us that debt which
another has paid him, he does furthermore forgive us that punishment, which
another has borne for us: thus as in the sins which we committ, God had
regard unto himself against whom it was committed, so in the satisfaction for
the sin, he had the like respect to that which was done, by our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and thus against an infinite punishment he has opposed
an infinite grace: the punishment was infinite in respect of God, grace was
infinite for his sake that suffered, who was likewise God and man, but if
Christ has redeemed us from the sin and not from the pain, as the papist
would persuade, then grace should loose his grace, and we should still remain
in the state of damnation.

Me thinks our papists should now be ashamed of their Pope that dates thus
presume to eclips the glory of Gods mercy, and the worthiness of Christ's
satisfaction: but alas what should I speak of shame unto them that have
forgotten to blush? Christ has chosen us before the beginning of the world,
that we might be holy and without spot in his sight. Ephe. 1.

If through his chosing and election we be without spot in his sight, what
buzzardly blindness to suppose, that he will yet have us to be tormented in
Purgatory, as these popelings do believe.

But it will be said, why who is so righteous but that he may say his Pater
noster of the which one part is Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us? And it is truth, there lives no man upon earth
without sin: notwithstanding, all those that were chosen in Christ before the
foundation of the world was laid, are without spot of sin in the sight of
God: so that they are both sinners and righteous: if we consider our
rebellious members, which as Saint Paul says, are sold under sin Romans 7.
then we are greiuous sinners, but contrary, if we believe that by the
merciful favor of God, he has freely given us his Christ, and with him all
things, so that we be destitute of no gift, as Paul does testify Romans 8. then
are we righteous in his sight, and our conscience at peace with God: and what
have we then to do with Purgatory?

But leaving a number of testimonies, that might be cited out of the holy
scriptures witnessing the promises: let this suffice that is avouched by the
Prophet David, whom his 32 Psalm says Blessed is he whose iniquity as
forgiven, And making exposition of his own words, he proceeds, Blessed he
whose sins are covered.

Now who can cover his sins from the sight of God, who sets the most
secret sinners that are, in the light of his countinance, that looks into the
very imginations of men, that are nothing else but evil continually? or
wherewith may a man so cover his sins, but that they will break out? for
what can be hid from that peircing sight that sees in man, that he discerns
not in himself, that did first know him before he was created, and has
justly calculated and cast up all his sins, all his abominations before they
were ever acted or done?

But wherewith shall we seek to cover them, what with good works, as Adam
did with fig leaves? it is hypocrisy, and the holy hypocrit, and the proud
Pharisee, is more odible in the sight of God, then the Publican or harlot.

How then shall we cover our sins, for covered they must be, and we must
appear holy and without spot in his sight: how are they then to be covered
they are then covered from God, when they be covered by God, then are they
covered from his wrath, when they be covered by his mercy, and they shall be
covered by his mercy, when they be covered by the precious blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who is our propitiation and righteousness: he that
seeks any other couerture then this, seeks but with Adam to hide himself
in the thicket of a bush, where the justice of God will find him out.

It follows in the next verse, Blessed is the man, to whom God imputes not
his sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile: but why is it not said
here, blessed is he that has not sinned at all, or blessed is he that has
not offended or transgressed the law? because it is said else where that all
men are sinners, and the Apostle says If any man say he has no sin, he is a
lier, etc.

Or why is it not said blessed is he that can so conform himself from a
sinner, to become no sinner, that by his own works and merits, can make
himself holy.

Because the most righteous man sins seven times a day, yea that great
Apostle Paul himself was left with a prick in his flesh wherewith to exercise
him, the which when he prayed unto God to have it taken from him, he was
answered: My grace is sufficient for thee.

He therefore can not be blessed that stands of his own righteousness: but
Blessed is he to whom God imputes not his sin, in whose spirit there is no
guile.

But who is now this blessed one, or where is he to be found, for if there be
none blessed, but he that has a pure and a clean spirit, where shall we seek
him?

But let us compare the words as they stand, in the first verse it is said,
Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven, Blessed is he whose sins are
covered: it follows in the second verse, Blessed is he to whom the Lord
imputes not his sin, in whose spirit there is no guile.

Why then to him whose iniquity is forgiven, to him the Lord imputes not his
sin: And to him again whose sin it has pleased God to cover, that man is
reputed to be of an upright heart: so that the words are expounded the one by
the other: those then are not blessed that think to cover their sins
themselves, but those whose sins are covered by the mercy of God: And who are
those whose sins it pleases God so to cover? even those that do discover
themselves freely unto him: the man in whose heart there is found no guile.

Not him that does make show to be honest, and yet is full of deceit, as our
Merit-mongers, and Iustitiaries, that will acknowledge no sin, but do
justify themselves by their own deseruinges: but blessed are those that will
confess their sins, and righteous by consequence, are those whom God has
justified in forgiving their sins, imputing unto them the righteousness, of
his son: for seeing we have lost our original righteousness, we have not in
us any righteousness greater, then to confess our unrighteousness, neither can
we recover any other righteousness to help us, then that the Father has
imputed unto us in his Son.

I have hitherto prosecuted the impieties of popery, how it secludeth Christ,
and burieth all the benefitts of his precious death and passion: I might yet
speak of many other abominations that are hatched up in the Romish Chruch, as
their adoring of Images, their public service in an unknown tongue, not
understood by the people, their sacrificing of the son of God to his Father
for the sins of the world, their adoring the eliments of bread and wine, with
divine honor in stead of Christ, their shrift, their releasing of souls out
of Purgatory by prayers and pardons, their inioyning of Priests to single life,
whereby they do live in whoredom, and in loathsome and filthy uncleanness.

These, with many other superstitions, and errors in doctrine, might yet be
spoken of, the which for the present time I omit: now what account God will
exact, for his name blasphemed, his Son refused, his sacraments profaned,
and his word thus despised, is much to be feared, in the mean time, let us
beseech the Father of glory, to give us the spirit of wisdom, knowledge and
understanding, and so to inlighten the eyes of our mind, that we may know
his ways, and be led through faith unto the knowledge of him that is all
verity.

FINIS.

