THE COMPOVND OF ALCHYMY. OR The ancient hidden Art of Archemie: Containing the
right and perfectest means to make the PHILOSOPHERS STONE, Aurum potabile,
with other excellent Experiments. Divided into twelve Gates. First written by
the learned and rare Philosopher of our Nation GEORGE RIPLEY, sometime Chanon
of Bridlington in Yorkeshyre: and Dedicated to K. EDWARD the 4. Whereunto is
adjoined his Epistle to the King, his Vision, his Wheel, and other his Works,
never before published: with certain brief Additions of other notable Writers
concerning the same. Set forth by Raph Rabbards Gentleman, studious and expert
in Archemicall Arts.

Pulchrum pro Patria pati. LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Orwin. 1591.

TO THE MOST HIGH and Mighty PRINCESS, ELIZABETH by the grace of GOD QVEENE
of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc.
EXcellent, most gracious, and sacred SOVEREIGN: calling often to
remembrance, how miraculously it plesed the Almighty many ways to preserve
and defind your MAJESTY, in the time of late domestical persecution, from the
merciless hands of those butcherly murderers, who not only sought all
occasions by spilling your HIGHNESS innocent blood, to bereave this Kingdom,
and us all, (that since have lived under your royal, prosperous, and happy
Government) of so rare and precious a Jewel, as Nature has not at any time
to any Nation else where, affoorded the like; but also prosecuted with sword,
fire, banishment, or (at the least) straight imprisonment, all such as were in
any respect favored by your HIGHNESS, or in any sort cast their eyes once
toward the Orient, where the bright splendent beams of your incomparable
MAJESTY, lightneth our Horizon, to the comfort and consolation of many
thousands afflicted, and the singular joy of the whole Realm, very few
persons excepted, whose bleared eyes being dazeled therewith, sought palbable
darkness, to avoid the clear light then arising with the rare Comet or
incomparable day star of your most excellent MAJESTY unto us: whose piercing
rays has since like the Sun beams both dispersed all grossemists and
fogges of ignorance, error, and blind superstition, and withal so comforted
and nourished the plant of infallible truth of the Gospel, (first taking root
in this Land in the short Reign of the peerless Prince EDWARD the sixth your
MAJESTY'S Brother, of most rare expectation and famous memory) as the same
being now sprung up to a perfect tree of such full groath, that the branches
thereof have spread themselves long and wide many ways over other Empires,
Kingdoms and States, mauger the Devil, the Pope, and the King of Spain, with
all their fraternity, consorts, leaguers, and adherents, or other their
Ministers, spreaders and maintainers of lies; under the shelter and covert of
which flourishing Palm, all true Christians have been, are, and (I hope) long
shall be (by the continuance of your MAJESTY'S most bountifuull and gracious
especial favor) protected and shrouded, from the burning heat of the sharp
persecutions of all malicious Enemies thereof: the which GOD of his great
mercy grant. Pondering I say (most high and mighty PRINCESS) the manifold
imminent dangers, your sacred MAJESTY by the omnipotent wonderful providence,
of Almighty GOD, with more than humane virtue, and feminine patience
sustained; and in the end (contrary to all expectation) escaping the rage,
fury, tyrannical attempts, and secret devilish practices of your HIGHNESS
mortal Enemies, (utter professed unreconcilable adversaries) to the eternal
truth: whereof my self was an eye witness, and so far privy of some of the
most mischievous intended conspiracies, as for my faithful endeavors by such
rare secret services as were by me effected to prevent the same; I tasted
(amongst the rest of such as then honored, reverenced, and of bounden duty
loved your MAJESTY'S rare virtues) so great extremity of imprisonment, and
other hard usage many ways, as scaping with life, (by timely and happy
alteration of the state) I felt long after the pains of those torments,
whereby my health in xx. years after was extremely empayred: But when J
consider on the other side withal, the strange and miraculous Heroical
Actions both martial and politic which have been (since in the time past of
your HIGHNESS most prosperous reign) beyond all expectation performed with
singular government and incomparable magnanimity, far passing all humane
wisdom and man's force (whereof posterity shall want no due records of
worthy Registers) I can not but forget all sorrow, and exceedingly rejoice,
assuring and persuading my self GOD has ordained your MAJESTY to accomplish
yet far greater matters for his glory and your own eternal memory, than
time has yet revealed: for the better accomplishment whereof, every dutiful
subject and good Patriott ought in time of tranquillity to prepare and furnish
themselves according to their several gifts, abilities, and different
faculties: to further and set forth a work so great as is likely to fall out
by all consequence of reason in this your MAJESTY'S most happy raygne, vz. the
Nobility with learning, judgment, and experience, for counsel and advice, as
well for warlike discipline as for civil government; for that the one cannot
long continue without the other: Gentlemen with ingenious devises and
stratagems of war both for sea and land, and the whole Souldiorie of all
sorts with actiuitie, and the practice of such sorts of weapons as they shall
addict themselves unto, or be found fit to serve withal, whereby every man of
what degree or quality soever professing the wars, may in time of cessations of
Arms, some in one sort, some in an other, enable themselves for the defense
of their Country, against they shall be employed; for without appointment and
calling, no man ought to intrude or offer himself, in such sort as is now too
commonly used; which is the cause that so many audatious insufficient blind
bayardes are set a work: whilst the modest, skillful, and experienced live
retired, attending their vocation by the Magistrate: of which number I profess
my self in my faculty to be one, who having these forty years amongst many
other most commendable exercises and inventions of so warlike Engines, found
out diverse devises of rare service, both for Sea and land, some whereof (whose
charge exceeded not my small ability) I have performed and made the use
thereof known unto many my honorable, skillful and experienced good friends
at home, and to some Princes beyond the Seas, whereof ignorant persons having
by chance light on some Modules or Patterns of small importance imperfect,
have vainly arrogated the invention unto themselves; not knowing in any sort
the use and force thereof in service, making thereby great advantage to
themselves by abusing superior Authority with these imperfect first Elements
of my preparations to greater matters; supplying the lamenes and effects
thereof, by their formality, and mellicious frivolous discourses, wherein there
is no substance to any purpose: seeking to reap thereby the fruits of my
chargeable and painful labors; and my name in the mean time never once
brought in question: Such is and has been the insolent, and shameless boldness
of ignorant persons in all times fit to be restrained, least greater mischiefs
and inconveniences ensue thereby, when occasion requires due trial to be made
of their sufficiency, and the right use of these rare Experiments. But to
leave (most gracious SOVEREIGN) the consideration of these important causes
unto the deep wisdom and discreet providence of your HIGHNESS own careful
foresight, and the ordering and reformation thereof to such as are in
authority: And to return to my purpose; among many studious inventions,
whereunto I have bent my mind as well for the service of my country, when
time shall serve, as for mine own satisfaction; Looking withal into some
part of the rare inscrutable secrets of natural Phlosophie, and falling
sometimes to the chargeable, paynefull, and fruiteles practice thereof* by
distillation, and other transmutation of Plants, Herbs, Stones and Mineralls
of all sorts: aiming at that mark, which many learned and greater Clearks
than my self have shot at, and yet missed; J have notwithstanding by the way
light (to my singular co^tentment) on infinite rare conclusions, both
profitable, pleasant, and serviceable; so that although my simple skill could
not attain to such perfection, as J desired, yet have I no cause to repent me
any way of my trauells therein employed but rather great occasion to lament me
of my long discontinuance from the same, by loss of many years spent
unprofitably in a laborinth of law suites, and private contention with men of
very great ability, and better friended than my self, wherein now utterly
wearyed, and worn out of heart, through the greatness of my adversaries purse
and friends, J am now forced for want of ability, after ten years chargeable
suite, to relinquish the same, and to return to those my delectable studies
and serviceable exercises again, as well to digest melancholic conceits, as
to keep old age from such extreme wants, as the iniquity of times, the
tedious greeuance by delays, the striving against strong arms will bring; the
least able to weary afar welthier man than my self, hoping yet to recover some
part of my lost time, and (if ability altogether fail me not before I die,)
to make unto your MAJESTY some rare Present by experiments Chimicall or
Martial, such as hitherto has not been performed by any other. Wherefore
(most gracious SOVEREIGN) desiring henceforth to employ the rest of my short
course, in more serious sort, to the service of GOD, your MAJESTY, and my
Country, and by all means I can possible to profit some ways this Royal
kingdom and State, (wherein I have lived these threescore years and more) I
am bold to publish this rare work of learned Ripley under your MAJESTY'S
protection for the instruction and direction of all students, and lovers of
the secreat Mysteryes of natural Philosoophie; delivering most compendiously
the hidden Art and high Mystery of making the Philosophers Stone, (sought for
by many thousands in all ages, but found of very few, and they such as rapte
with the excellency thereof, have in contempt of the world, retired themselves
from common society, keeping the same most secret to themselves, esteeming the
world not worthy of so precious a Jewel. For the certainty and probability
whereof, if any shall be doubtful let them advisedly read thoroughly this
work, and afterward peruse the doings of such other our worthy country men as
have written most learnedly thereof, as Friar Baco^, John Pauper, Sir Thomas
Norton knight, John Garland, and especially M. Doctor Dee in his Monas
Hyerogliphica, and many others most plainly teaching the same, whose depth of
learning Theoricall if it were yet executed by any experienced practitioner, I
doubt not but your MAJESTY should shortly see that which the world thinks
(...) to be (...): and if I had bin so fortunate as to have spent these seven
years past in one of your MAJESTY'S manifold fruitless still-houses: J durst
before this time have presumed to promise more of my self than J will speak
of, which disability through my foresaid troubles, now suffer me not to
perform in such sort as I desire, and have best leisure to do in my old age,
but I hope (the premises considered, my dutiful good will, and affection to my
country in giving encouragement and means unto others by publicatio^ of this
most learned Author) will be taken in good part, the rather being patronized
by your sacred MAJESTY, against all venymous darts of the envious and
malicious tungs, of such who being ignorant themselves of all good sciences,
would otherwise malign the perfections and virtuous endeavors of the well
deserving. Thus hoping your MAJESTY will of your accustomed clemency, accept
of this my present as a pledge of my fidelity and dutiful zeal to your
MAJESTY, humbly craving pardon for my boldness; I cease to be further
troublesome, daily praying to the Almighty long to continue your MAJESTY'S
most prosperous Reign over us, with great increase of honor, and felicity,
to hi^ glory, until double Nestors years.

Your MAJESTY'S most loyal subject, RAPH RABBARDES.

To the right Honorable, Worshipful, and worthy Gentlemen of England, and
other learned and industrious Students in the secrets of Philosophy.
Having reserved the Copy hereof (Right Honorable, and gentle Readers) these
forty years for many secret uses, corrected by the most learned of our time,
and feeling my self, now through age declining, and otherwise hyndred with
troublesome suites in law, which constrained me to discontinew these and such
other commendable practices, for the benefit and defense of my Prince and
Country: I have thought good to publish the same, the rather for that there
are but a few copies left, and those for the most part corrupted by
negligence, or mistaking of ignorant writers thereof: Being partly encouraged
hereunto by the learned Philosopher Seneca, who accompteth it an Act
meritorious to preserve or revive Science from the Cinders, and to eternize
virtuous acts with perpetual memory: Finding it strange, that so excellent a
Monument as this most rare and learned work of George Ripley, should so long
lie hidden in obscurity, and pass from hand to hand a hundredth and fifty
years without utter defacing; seeing that many notable works published, have
in far shorter time perished. He lived in the time of king Edward the 4. and
Richard the usurper, in great fame and estimation, for his rare knowledge in
these secrets: And to utter his further co^mendatio^ in a word; if this his
work be perused with the eye of judgment, and practiced by those that are
experienced, I shall not need to fear the loss of my labor, when some of my
Countriemen which cannot attain unto the highest hidden mystery, shall yet
find many things both pleasant and profitable, diverse ways serviceable to
Kingdoms, States, and Commonweals: And if one among ten thousand can hitt
the mark, (whereat the whole world has aimed) we shall not hereafter need
to seek out the Sands of Ganges, for that which lies hid in the secrets of
Ripley: which I offer here to the view of the learned, and have presumed the
publishing hereof, chiefly for the benefit of my Country men; and especially
to satisfy the often and importunate request of many my learned good friends,
not doubting but that the skillful will yield me my due* howsoever the ignorant
shall esteem thereof: which if I shall find to be accepted according to my good
meaning, I shall thereby be further encouraged to imparte some other rare
experiments of Distillations and Fire-workes of great service, not hitherto
committed in writing or put in practice by any of our nation; although of late
some mere toies have been highly admired, and extraordinarily rewarded: The
charge whereof will be found utterly lost, when perfect trial shall be made of
their slender use and force. To conclude, If this my good intent shall be
answerable to your expectations, I have obtained the fulness of my desires.

Yours in the furtherance of Science, Raph Rabbards.

Thomas Newtonus Cestreshyrius.
ALchymicae indagaus arcana Georgius artis
Chremata Riplaeus, rari miranda reliquit
Ingenij monumenta sui, quae nulla vetustas
Exedet, aut putri poterit sepelire veterno.
Illotis nemo manibus mysteria tanta
Tractet, at Hermeticam veneretur (...).
Hanc Plato diuinus foedus vocat, aurea Naso
Vellera, and a vigili mala aurea septa dracone.
Laudibus hanc multis celebrant Mirandula, Lullus,
Geber, Auicenna, Hippocrates, Morienus, Aquinas,
Duns Scotus, Arnaldus, Vincentius, Oldradus, Hermes,
Plinius, Albertus, Ficinus, Cuba, Valescus,
Eustathius, Suidas, Maro, Zosimus, Haly, Baconus,
Rhasis, Aristoteles, Rosinus, Petrus ipse Aponensis,
Compluresque alij: cuncti almae huic grata Sophiae
Munera persoluant, linguisque animisque benigni.
Thomas Newton.

J.D. gent: in praise of the Author, and his Work.
Lo here a Work, containing rare effects,
Repleate with ripest fruits of Ripleys toil,
Whose mellowed savor studious minds directs
T'attaine the skill that may enrich their soil:
And though his Book be carped at by Zoile,
Yet does the same comprize such depth of Art,
As makes his fame eternizd by desert.
The learned will (no doubt) delight therein,
And their delight will draw them on to skill:
Admit the simple force it not a pin,
So much the more the wise embrace it will.
Who seeks by Art to clymbe up Honors hill,
To such perteynes this precious Stone divine,
For pease are fitter far, than Pearl for Swine.
Tam Art, quam Mart.
P. Bales Gent. in commendation of the Author, and his twelve gates: Orderly
set down in the 12. last verses.
Grant to me Muses nine, and thou most sacred Apollo,
That in a vain of a lofty verse, I may be reporter
Of the renowned skill to ye world by Ripley revealed:
Which in a Book tituled by the name of Alchymie compou^d
He to the King Edward of England fourth fro the conquest,
Writ in a verse pithily, with his hand very worthily pe^ned.
Twelve chapiters did he write, by the first to Calcine he teaches,
And by the next readily privy Dissolution handles:
To Separate Eliments very plain by the third he declares,
And by the fourth (as in marriage) Conjunction ordreth:
To Putrify most kindly the seed by the 5. he pronounces:
And by the sixth chapter true Congelation utters.
The^ follows by the seaue^th, how must be Cibation used,
But by the next chapter, duly Sublimation offered,
Ninthly the way measured, for Fermentation aptly,
And by the tenth rightly, there is Exaltation holden,
Infinite in number shown how to Multiply leauenthly:
Lastly, the work very fitly by cleanly Proiection ends.
Statuto bono, statuto.
The Sum of this Work, learnedly reduced into these few Verses, by the
divine Poet Palingenius.
HVnc iuuenem Archadium, infidum, nimiumque fugacem,
Prendite, and immersum Stygijs occidite Lymphis
Post Hyales gremio impositum Deus excipiat, quem
Lemnia terrae colit, sublatumque in cruce figat:
Tunc sepelite vtero in calido, and dissoluite putrem:
Cuius stillantes artus de corpore nostro
Spiritus egrediens penetrabit: and ordine miro,
Paulatim extinctum nigris reuocabit ab vmbris,
Aurata indutum clamyde, argentoque nitentem:
Proijcite hunc demum in prunas, renouabitur alter
Vt Phoenix: and quae tanget, perfecta relinquet
Corpora, naturae ^eges and foedera vincens:
Mutabit specijs: paupertatemque fugabit.
S.E.K. concerning the Philosophers Stone, written to his especial good
friend, G.S. Gent.
THe heavenly Cope has in him natures four,
Two hidden, but the rest to sight appear:
Wherein the Spermes of all the bodies lower
Most secret are, yet spring forth once a year:
And as the earth with water Authors are,
So of his part is drines end of care.
No flood so great, as that which flows still:
No thing more fixed, than Earth digested thrice:
No wind so fresh, as when it serves will:
No profit more, then keep in, and be wise:
No better hap, than dry up air to dust,
For then thou may leave of, and sleep thy lust.
Yet will I warn thee, least thou chance to fail,
Sublime thine earth with stinking water erst:
Then in a place where Phoebus only tail,
Is seen at midday, see thou mingle best:
For nothing shines that does want his light,
Nor doubleth beams, unless it first be bright.
Let no man lead, unless he know the way,
That wise men teach, or Adro^ leads in,
Whereof the first is large, and easiest pray,
The other hard, and mean but to begin,
For surely these, and no one more is found,
Wherein Apollo will his harp strings sound.
Example learn of GOD, that plaste the Skies,
Reflecting virtues from and t'euerie point,
In which the moouer wherein all things lies,
Does hold the virtues all of every joint:
And therefore Essence fifth may well be said,
Containing all, and yet himself a maid.
Remember also how the Gods began,
And by descent who was to each the Sire:
Then learn their lives and kingdoms if thou can,
Their manners eke, with all their whole attire?
Which if thou do, and know to what effect,
The learned Sophies will thee not reject.
If this my Doctrine bend not with thy brain,
Then say I nothing, though I said too much:
Of truth it is good, will moved me, not gain,
To write these lines: yet write I not to such
As catch at crabs, when better fruits appear,
And want to choose at fittest time of year.
Thou may (my friend) say, What is this for lore?
I answer, Such as ancient Physic taught:
And though thou red a thousand books before,
Yet in respect of this, they teach thee naught:
Thou may likewise be blind, and call me fool,
Yet shall these Rules for ever praise their School.
Sr. E.K.

The Vision of Sir George Ripley, Chanon of Bridlington.
WHen busy at my book I was upon a certain night,
This Vision here expressed appeared unto my dimmed sight,
A toade full rudde I saw did drink the juice of grapes so fast,
Till ouercharged with the broth, his bowels all to brast,
And after that from poisoned bulk, he cast his venom fell,
For grief and pain whereof his members all began to swell;
With drops of poisoned sweat approaching thus his secret den,
His cave with blasts of fumous air, he all bewhited then:
And from the which in space a golden humor did ensue,
Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil with ruddy hew,
And when his corpse, the force of vital breath began to lack,
This dying toade became forthwith like coal for color black:
Thus drowned in his proper Veins of poisoned flood,
For tear me of eighty days and four he rotting stood:
By trial then this venom to expel I did desire,
For which J did commit his carkase to a gentle fire:
Which done, a wonder to the sight, but more to be rehearst,
The toade with colors rare through every side was pearst:
And white appeared when all the sundry hewes were past:
Which after being tincted, rudde for evermore did last:
Then of the venom handled thus a medicine I did make,
Which venom kills, and saves such as venom chance to take,
Glory be to him the graunter of such secret ways,
Dominion, and Honor, both with worship and with praise.
AMEN.
Titulus operis.
HEre begins the compound of Alchymie,
Made by a Chanon of Bridlington,
After his learning in Italy,
At Ixninge for time he there did won:
In which he declared openly
The secrets both of Moon and Son,
How they their kind to multiply
In one body together must woonne.
Which Chanon Sir George Ripley hight,
Exempt from Claustrall observance,
For whom ye pray both day and night,
Since he did labor you to advance,
He turned darkness into light,
Intending to help you to happy chance,
Giving counsel that you live right,
Doing unto God no displeasaunce.
A brief note to the Readers.
THe Wheel that is placed (Gentlemen) last, as the period of this secret Work
may of some be challenged (through the diversity of Copies) to differ from the
first. But herein I assure you I have observed no less care than counsel,
and that of known Practisers, whose censures (made more certain by
experience) have determined all doubts, and made me bold to publish what
follows for the most ancient. If any literal fault be past, amend it with
your pens: if any carper inueigh against me, defend me with your courtesies:
and let them (if they can) condemn by cunning. Farewell.

R. Rabbardes.

The Compound of Alchymie. A most excellent, learned, and worthy work,
written to king Edward tht fourth, by Sir George Ripley, Chanon of Bridlington
in Yorkshire, containing twelve gates. The Prologue.
Child of this discipline incline to me thine ear
And harke^ to my doctrine with all thy diligence
These words of wisdom in mind do thou bear,
Which of old fathers be true in sentence:
Live clean in soul, to God do no offense.
Exalt thee not but rather keep thee low,
Else will thy God in thee no wisdom sow.
From sinful doctrine and wicked thought,
The holy spirit does him withdraw,
Nilling to dwell where sin is wrought:
Dread God therefore and obey his law:
A righteous man forsook I never saw:
Neither his seed beg bread for need:
In holy scripture this do I reed.
Make wisdom therefore thy mother to be,
And call on Prudence to be thy friend,
By paths of truth they will guide thee,
With love and honesty wheresoever thou wend:
Both virtuous to be, courteous and hend:
Pray God therefore that thou may find,
Wisdom and Prudence with mouth and mind.
All manner good come with them shall,
And honesty by their hands innumerable,
Then into cumbrance shall thou not fall,
So be they in riches incomparable:
To worship and profit they will thee able,
To cunning and all manner of grace,
Both here and after thy lives space.
For these benefits which they do bring,
I mean these virtues of prudence and sapience,
To whom I can compare nothing,
No riches, nor spices of redolence,
Above all treasure such is their excellence,
That whatsoever earthly precious is,
To them is compared as clay I wis.
Infinite treasure to man they be,
Who uses them shall friendship have
With God in heaven and there him see,
After them therefore busily crave,
For body and soul they will both save,
And here in goods thee multiply;
And before princes thee dignifie.
Think how Adam lost his wisdom,
Sampson his might which was so strong:
King Saul also lost his kingdom,
And David was punished for his wrong:
In the Oak by the hair fair Absolon hong,
King Ezechias by sickness had punishment,
And many one more for sin was shent.
But see how other which lived we will,
And to their God did no offense,
Such chastisement did never feel;
But God shows ever to them benevolence,
Enoch and Hely were carried hence,
To Paradise, and orher good livers were
Of God rewarded in diverse mannere.
Some had great Fortune, some great cunning,
Some had great peace, some great riches,
Some conquered lands to their great wynning*
Some were exalted for their great meeknes,
Some other were saved from the cruelnes
Of Tyrants, Lions, and of the hot furnace,
As Daniel and others in many a place.
Thus to good livers God sent great grace,
And unto sinners great and sore punishment,
Some to amend in this life had space,
Some suddenly with fire from heaven were brent,
Sinful Sodomites for ever were shent,
With Dathan and Abiron with many more,
Which sunk for sin to endless woe.
Thus ever since this world was wrought,
God has rewarded both evil and good:
Thus if it may rest in thy thought,
From sinful living to change thy mood.
If sinful people this understood,
They ought to be afraid God to offend,
And soon their sinful lives to amend.
Therefore with God look thou begin,
That he by grace may dwell with thee,
So shall thou best to wisdom win;
And knowledge of our great priuitie:
Nourish virtues, and from vices flee,
And trusting thou will thee well dispose,
Our secrets to thee I will disclose.
Keep thou them secreate and for me pray,
Look that thou use them to Gods pleasure,
Do good with them what ever thou may;
For time thou shall this life endure,
That after thy end thou may be sure
In heaven for to rewarded be,
Which God grant both to me and thee.
FINIS
The Preface.
O High incomprehensible and glorious Majesty,
Whose luminous beams obtundeth our speculation,
O trinehood in persons o onehood in deity, t
Of Iherarchiall Iubilists gratulant glorification,
O piteous purifier of souls and pure perpetuation,
O deuiant from danger, o drawer most debonayre,
From this troublesome vale of vanity, o our Exalter.
O power, o wisdom, o goodness inexplicable,
Supporte me, teach me, and be my governor,
That never my living to thee be displicable,
But that I acquit me to thee as true professor,
At this beginning good Lord hear my prayer,
Be nigh with grace for to enforce my will,
Grant wit that I may mine intent fulfill.
Most curious Cofer and copious of all treasure,
Thou art he from whom all goodness does descend,
To man and also to every creature,
Thine handiwork therefore vouchsafe to defend,
That we no time in living here mispend,
With troth here grant us our living so to win,
That into no danger of sinfulnes we rinne.
And forasumch as we have for thy sake
Renounced our wills, the world and fleshly lust,
As thine own professors us to thee take,
Since in thee only depends all our trust;
We can no further; to thee incline we must:
Thy secret treasure vouchsafe unto us,
Show us thy secrets and to us be bounteous.
And amongst others which be professed to thee,
I me present as one with humble submission,
Thy servant beseeching that I may be,
And true in living according to my profession,
In order Chanon Reguler of Bridlington;
Beseeching thee Lord thou will me spare,
To thy true servants thy secrets to declare.
In the beginning when thou made all of naught,
A globous matter and dark under confusion,
By him the beginning marueilously was wrought,
Containing naturally all things without division:
Of which in six days he made clear distinction:
As Genesis apertly does record.
Then heaven and earth were perfected by his word.
So through his will and power, out of one mas
Confused; was made each thing that being is,
But before in glory as maker he was,
Now is and shall be without end I wis,
And purified souls up to his blis
Shall come a principle this may be one,
For the declaring of our precious stone.
For as of one mass was made all thing,
Right so in our practice must it be,
All our secreats of one Image must spring,
As in Philosophers books whosoever list to see,
Our stone is called the less world, one and three;
Magnesa also of sulphur and Mercury,
Proportionate by nature most perfectly.
But many one marueileth and marvel may,
And museth on such a marvelous thing,
What is our stone; since Philosophers say
To such as ever be it in seeking.
For fowls and fisshes to us does it bring,
Every man it has, and it is in every place,
In thee in me, and in each thing, time and space?
To this I answer that Mercury it is I wis,
But not the common called quicksiluer by name,
But Mercury without which nothing being is,
All Philosophers record and truly saine the same,
But simple searchers puts them in blame,
Saying they hid it but they be blame worthy,
Which be no Clearkes and meddle with Philosophy.
But though it Mercury be, yet wisely understand,
Wherein it is, and where thou shall it seech,
Else I counsel thee take not this work in hand,
For Philosophers flatter fools with fair speech:
But listen to me, for truly I will thee teach,
Which is this Mercury most profitable,
Being to thee nothing deceivable.
It is more near in some things than in some;
Therefore take heed what I to thee write
For if knowledge to thee never come,
Therefore yet shall thou me not twite,
For I will truly now thee excite
To understand well Mercuries three,
The keys which of this science be.
Raymond his menstrues does them call,
Without which truly no truth is done:
But two of them be superficial,
The third essential of Sun and Moon,
Their properties I will declare right soon,
And Mercury of mettalls essential,
Is the principle of our stone material.
In Sun and Moon our Menstrue is not seen,
It appears not but by effect to sight,
That is the stone of which we meene,
Who so our writings conceiueth aright,
It is a soul, a substance bright.
Of Sun and Moon a subtle influence,
Whereby the earth receives resplendence.
For what is Sun and Moon says Auicen,
But earth which is pure white and red:
Take from it the said cleerenes, and then
That earth will stand but in little stead;
The whole compound is called our lead:
The quality of clearenes from Sun and Moon does come,
These are our menstrues both all and some.
Bodies with the first we calcine naturally
Perfect, but none which been vncleene,
Except one which is usually
Named by Philosophers the Lion green:
He is the mean the Sun and Moon between
Of winning tincture with perfectnes,
As Geber thereunto bears witness.
With the second which is an humiditie
Vegitable, reviving that erst was dead,
Both principles materials must loosed be
And formalls, else stand they little in stead:
These menstrews therefore know I thee reed,
Without the which neither true calcination
Done may be, not true dissolution.
With the third humiditie most permanent,
Incombustible and unctuous in his nature,
Hermes tree unto ashes is brent,
It is our natural fire most sure,
Our Mercury, our Sulphur, our tincture pure,
Our soul, our stone borne up with wind
In the earth engendered, bear this in mind.
This stone also tell thee I dare,
Is the vapor of mettalls potentiall,
How thou shall get it, thou must beware,
For invisible truly is this menstruall,
Howbeit with the second water philosophical,
By separation of Elements it may appear
To sight, in form of water clear.
If this menstrue by labor exuberate
With it may be made Sulphur of nature,
If it be well and kindly acuate
And circulate into a spirit pure,
Then to dissolve thou must be sure,
Thy base with it in diverse wise,
As thou shall know by thy practice.
That point therefore in his due place,
I will declare with other more,
If God will grant me grace and space,
And me preserve in life from woe,
As I thee teach look thou do so:
And for the first ground principal,
Understand thy waters menstruall.
And when thou have made Calcination,
Increasing not wasting moisture radical,
Until thy base by often subtilation,
Will lightly flow as wax upon metal,
Then loose it with thy vegetable menstruall,
Till thou have oil thereof in color bright,
Then is that menstrue visible to sight.
And oil is drawn out in color of gold,
Or like thereto out of fine red lead,
Which Raymond said when he was old,
Much more than gold would stand in stead:
For when he was for age nigh dead,
He made thereof Aurum potabile,
Which him revived as men might see.
For so together may they be circulate,
That is the base oil and the vegetable menstruall,
So that it be by labor exuberate,
And made by craft a stone celestial,
Of nature so fiery that we it call,
Our Bazeliske or our Cockatrice,
Our great Elixer most of price.
Which as the sight of Bazeliske his object
Kills, so sleyeth it crude Mercury,
When thereupon he is project,
In twinckle of an eye most suddenly,
That Mercury then teineth permanently,
All bodies to Sun and Moon perfect,
Thus guide thy base both red and white.
Aurum potabile thus is made,
Of gold not commonly calcinate,
But of our tincture that will not fade,
Out of our base drawn with the menstrue circulate*
But natural calcination must algate
Be made, ere thy gold dissolved may be,
That principle first therefore I will teach thee.
But into chapters this Treatise I will divide,
In number twelve with due recapitulation;
Superfluous rehearsalls I Will lay aside,
Intending only to give true information,
Both of theorick and practick operation:
That by my writing whosoever guided will be,
Of his intent perfectly speed shall he.
The first chapter shall be of natural Calcination,
The second of Dissolution secreat and Philosophical,
The third of our elementall Separation,
The fourth of Conjunction matrimonial,
The fifth of Putrefaction follow shall,
Of Congelation albificate shall be the sixth,
Then of Cibation the seventh shall follow next.
The secret of Sublimation the eight shall show;
The ninth shall be of firmentation;
The tenth of our exaltation I trow;
The eleventh of our marvelous multiplication;
The twelfth of proiection, then recapitulation:
And so this treatize shall take an end,
By the help of God as I intend.
Of Calcination. The first Gate.
CAlcination is the purgation of our stone,
Restoring also of his natural heat,
Of radical humiditie it loses none,
Inducing solution into our stone most meet,
After philosophy I you behight
Do, but not after the common guise,
With Sulphures or Salts preparate in diverse wise.
Neither with Corosiues nor with fire alone,
Neither with vinegar nor with water ardent,
Nor with the vapor of lead our stone
Is calcined according to our intent:
All those to calcining which so be bent,
From this hard science withdraw their hand,
Till they our calcining better understand.
For by such calcination their bodies be shent,
Which minisheth the moisture of our stone:
Therefore when bodies to powder be brent,
Dry as ashes of tree or bone,
Of such calxes then will we none;
For moisture we multiply radical,
In calcining minishing none at all.
And for a sure ground of our true calcination,
Work wittely only kind with kind:
For kind unto kind has appetitiue inclination,
Who knows not this in knowledge is blind,
He may forth wander as mist in the wind,
Wotting never with profit where to light,
Because he conceaues not our words aright.
Join kind to kind therefore as reason is,
For every burgeon answers his own seed,
Man gets man, a beast a beast I wis,
Further to treat of this it is no need.
But understand this point if thou will speed,
Each thing is first calcined in his own kind;
This well conceived fruit therein shall thou find.
And we make Calx unctuous both white and red
Of three degrees or our base be perfect,
Fluxible as wax, else stand they in no sted.
By right long process as Philosophers do write,
A year we take or more to our respite:
For in less space our Calxes will not be made,
Able to teyne with color that will not fade.
And for thy proportion thou must beware,
For therein may thou be beguiled,
Therefore thy work that thou not mare,
Let thy body be subtly fyl'de
With Mercury as much then so subtil'd,
One of the Sun, two of the Moon,
Till altogether like papp be done.
Then make the Mercury four to the Sun*
Two to the Moon as it should be,
And thus thy work must be begun,
In figure of the Trinitee,
Three of the body and of the spirit three,
And for the unity of the substance spiritual
One more than of the substance corporal.
By Raymonds reportory this is true,
Proportion there who list to look,
The same my Doctor to me did show,
But three of the spirit Bacon took,
To one of the body for which I a wooke,
Many a night ere I it wist.
And both be true take which you list.
If the water also be equal in proportion
To the earth, with heat in due measure,
Of them shall spring a new burgeon,
Both white and red in pure tincture,
Which in the fire shall ever endure,
Kill thou the quick the dead revive;
Make trinity unity without any strive.
This is the surest and best proportion,
For there is least of the part spiritual,
The better therefore shall be solution,
Than if thou did it with water swall,
Thine earth over glutting which loses all
Take heed therefore to potters loame,
And make thou never too neshe thy womb.
That loame behold how it tempred is,
The mean also how it is calcinate,
And ever in mind look thou bear this;
That never thine earth with water be suffocate,
Dry up thy moisture with heat most temperate,
Help Dissolution with moisture of the Moon,
And Congelation with the Sun, then have thou done.
Four Natures into the fifth so shall thou turn,
Which is a Nature most perfect and temperate,
But hard it is with thy bare foot to spurn
Against a bar of iron, or steel new acuate,
For many do so which be infatuate,
When they such high things take in hand,
Which they in no wise do understand.
In eggs, in vitriall, or in blood,
What riches wend they there to find,
If they Philosophy understood,
They would not in working be so blind;
Gold or silver to seek out of kind:
For like as fire of burning principle is,
So is the principle of gilding gould I wis.
If thou intend therefore for to make
Gold and Silver by craft of our philosophy,
Thereto neither eggs nor blood thou take
But Gold and Silver which naturally
Calcined wisely and not manually,
A new generation will forth bring,
Increasing their kind as does every thing.
And if it true were that profit might be
In things which be not mettaline,
In which be coulors pleasant to see,
As in blood, eggs, hair, urine. or wine,
Or in mean mineralls digd out of the mine,
Yet must that element be putrified and separate,
And with Elements of perfect bodies be dispousate.
But first of these elements make thou rotacion,
And into water thine earth turn first of all,
Then of thy water make air by leuigacion,
And air make fire, then Master I will thee call
Of all our secrets great and small:
The wheel of Elements then can thou turn about,
Truly conceiving our writings without doubt.
This done, go backwards turning the wheel again,
And into water turn thy fire anon,
Air into earth, else labourest thou in vain,
For so to temperment is brought our stone,
And Natures contractions four are made one,
After they have three times been circulate,
And also thy base perfectly consumate.
Thus under the moisture of the Moon,
And under the temperate heat of the Sun,
Thine Elements shall be incinerate soon,
And then thou have the maistrie won:
Thank God thy work was then so begun,
For there thou have one token true,
Which first in blacknes to thee will show.
The head of the Crow that token call we,
And some men call it the Crows bill;
Some call it the ashes of Hermes tree,
And thus they name it after their will:
Our Toade of the earth which eats his fill,
Some names it by which it is mortificate
The spirit with venom intoxicate.
But it has names I say to thee infinite,
For after each thing that blacknes is to sight,
Named it is till time it waxes white,
Then has it names of more delight,
After all things that been full white,
And the red likewise after the same,
Of all red things does take the name.
At the first gate now art thou in,
Of the Philosophers Castle where they dwell,
Proceed wisely that thou may win
In at more gates of that Castle,
Which Castle is round as any bell,
And gates it has eleven yet more,
One is conquered, now to the second go.
The end of the first gate.
Of Dissolution. The second Gate.
OF Dissolution now will I speak a word or two,
Which shows out what erst was hid from sight,
And makes intenuate things that were thick also,
By virtue of our first menstrue clear and bright,
In which our bodies eclipsed been of light,
And of their hard and dry compaction subtilate,
Into their own first matter kindly retrogradate.
One in gender they be, and in number two,
Whose Father is the Sun, the Moon the Mother,
The Mouer is Mercury, these and no more
Be our Magnesia, our Adropp, and none other
Things here be, but only sister and brother,
That is to mean agent and patient,
Sulphur and Mercury coessentiall to our intent.
Betwixt these two equality contrarious,
Engendered is a mean most marueilously,
Which is our Mercury and menstrue unctuous,
Our secreat Sulphur working inuisibly,
More fiercely than fire burning the body,
Dissoluing the body into water mineral,
Which night for darkness in the North we do call.
But yet I trow thou vndestandst not utterly,
The very secreat of the Philosophers Dissolution,
Therefore conceive me I counsel thee wittily,
For the truth I will tell thee without delusion:
Our solution is cause of our Congelation;
For Dissolution on the one side corporal,
Causes Congelation on the other side spiritual.
And we dissolve into water which wetteth no hand,
For when the earth is integrately incinerate,
Then is the water congealed; this understand
For the elements be so together concatenate,
That when the body is from his first form alterate,
A new form is induced immediately,
For nothing being without all form is utterly.
And here a secret to thee I will disclose,
Which is the ground unto our secrets all,
And it not known thou shall but lose
Thy labor and costs both great and small,
Take heed therefore in error that thou not fall,
The more thine earth, and the less thy water be,
The rather and better solucion shall thou see.
Behold how ice to water does relent,
And so it must for water it was before,
Right so again to water our earth is went,
And water thereby congeald for evermore,
For after all Philosophers that ever were bore,
Each metal was once water mynerall,
Therefore with water they turn to water all.
In which water of kind occasionate,
Of qualities been repugnant and diversity,
Things into things must therefore be rotate,
Until diversity be brought to perfect unity:
For Scripture records when the earth shall be
Troubled, and into the deep Sea shall be cast,
Mountains and bodies likewise at the last.
Our bodies be likened conveniently
To mountains, which after high Planets we name,
Into the deepnes therefore of Mercury
Turn them, and keep thee out of blame,
For then shall thou see a noble game,
How all shall become powder as soft as silk,
So does our rennit kindly kurd up our milk.
Then has the bodies their first form lost,
And others been induced immediately,
Then have thou well bestowed thy cost:
Whereas others uncunning must go by,
Not knowing the secrets of our philosohie:
Yet one point more I must tell thee,
How each body has dimensions three.
Altitude, Latitude, and also profunditie,
By which all gates turn we must our wheel,
Knowing that thine entrance in the West shall be,
Thy passages forth to the North if thou do we will,
And there thy lights lose their lights each deele;
For there thou must abide by ninety nights
In darkness of purgatory withouten lights.
Then take thy course up to the East anon,
By colors passing variable in manifold wise,
And then be winter and vere nigh ouergone,
To the East therefore thine ascending devise,
For there the Sun with daylight does vprise
In summer, and there disport thee with delight,
For there thy work shall become perfect white.
Forth from the East into the South ascend,
And set thee down there in the chair of fire,
For there is harvest, that is to say an end
Of all this work after thine own desire,
There shines the Sun up in his Hemisphere,
After the Eclipses in rednes with glory,
As king to reign upon all metals and Mercury.
And in one glass must be done all this thing,
Like to an Egg in shape and closed we will,
Then must thou know the measure of firing,
The which unknown thy work is lost each deele:
Let never thy glass be hotter than thou may feel
And suffer still in thy bare hand to hold,
For fear of losing, as Philosophers have told.
Yet to my doctrine furthermore attend,
Beware thy glass thou never open ne meue
From the beginning till thou have made an end;
If thou do contrary, thy work may never cheue.
Thus in this Chapter which is but brief,
I have thee taught thy true solution:
Now to the third gate go, for this is won.
The end of the second gate.
Of Separation. The third gate.
Separation does each part from other divide,
The subtle from the gross, the thick from the thinn
But Separation manual look thou set a side,
For that pertaines to fools that little good does winn,
But in our Separation Nature does not blinn,
Making division of qualities elementall,
Into a fifth degree till they be turned all.
Earth is turned into water under black and bloe,
And water after into air under very white,
Then Air into fire, elements there be no more,
Of these is made our stone of great delight,
But of this Separation much more must we write,
And Separation is called by Philosophers definition,
Of the said four elements terraptatiue dispersion.
Of this Separation I find a like figure,
Thus spoken by the Prophet in the Psalmodie,
God brought out of a stone a flood of water pure,
And out of the hardest rock oil abundantly,
So out of our stone precious if thou be witty,
Oil incombustable, and water thou shall draw,
And there abouts at the coal thou needst not to blow.
Do this with heat easy and nourishing,
First with moist fire and after that with dry,
The phlegm with patience out drawing,
And after that the other Natures wittely
Dry up thine earth until it be thirsty,
By Calcination else labourest thou in vain,
And then make it drink up the moisture again.
Separation thus must thou oftetimes make,
Thy waters dividing into parts two,
So that the subtle from the gross thou take,
Till earth remain beneath in colors bloe,
That earth is fixed to abide all woe,
The other part is spiritual and flying,
But thou must turn them all into one thing.
Then oil and water with water shall distill,
And through her help receive moving,
Keep well these two that thou not spill
Thy work for lack of due closing,
And make thy stopple of glass melting,
The topp of thy vessel together with it,
Then Philosopher-like it is up shit.
The water wherewith thou may revive the stone,
Look thou distill before thou work with it,
Oftentimes by it self alone,
And by this sight thou shall wit,
From feculent feces when it is quit:
For some men can with Saturn it multiply,
And other substance which we defy.
Distill it therefore till it be clean
And thin like water as it should be,
As heaven in color bright and shene,
Keeping both figure and ponderositee,
Therewith did Hermes moysten his tree:
Within his glass he made it grow upright,
With flowers discolored beautiful to sight.
This water is like to the venymous Tire,
Wherewith the mighty triacle is wrought,
For it is poison most strong of Ire,
A stronger poison cannot be thought,
At Pothecaries often therefore it is sought,
But no man by it shall be intoxicate,
From the time it is into medicine elixerate.
For then as is the Triacle true,
It is of poison most expulsive,
And in his working does marueiles show,
Preserving many from death to life,
But look thou meddle it with no corosiue,
But choose it pure and quick rinning,
If thou thereby wilt have winning.
It is a marvelous thing in kind,
And without it can nothing be done,
Therefore Hermes called it his wind,
For it is up flying from Sun and Moon,
And makes our stone fly with it soon,
Reviving the dead and giving life,
To Sun and Moon, husband and wife.
Which if they were not by craft made quick,
And their fatnes with water drawn out,
And so the thin disseuered from the thick,
Thou should never bring this work about:
If thou will therefore speed without doubt,
Raise up the birds out of their neast,
And after again bring them to rest.
Water with water accord will and ascend,
And spirit with spirit, for they be of one kind,
Which after they be exalted make to descend,
So shall thou divide that, which Nature erst did bind,
Mercury essential turning into wind,
Without which natural and subtle Separation,
May never be complete profitable generation.
Now to help thee in at this gate,
The last secreat I will declare to thee,
Thy water must be seven times sublimate,
Else shall no kindly Dissolution be,
Nor putrefying shall thou none see;
Like liquid pitch, nor colors appearing
For lack of fire within the glass working.
Four fires there be which thou must understand,
Natural, innaturall, against Nature also,
And elementall which does burn the brand:
These four fires use we and no more,
Fire against nature must do thy body woe,
This is our Dragon as I thee tell,
Fiercely burning as the fire of hell.
Fire of nature is the third menstruall,
That fire is natural in each thing;
But fire occasionate, we call unnatural,
As heat of ashes, and balnes for putrefying:
Without these fires thou may naught bring
To Putrefaction, for to be separate,
Thy matters together proportionate.
Therefore make fire thy glass within,
Which burns the body much more than fire
Elementall, if thou will win
Our secrets according to thy desire:
Then shall thy seeds both rot and spire
By help of fire occasionate,
That kindly after they may be separate.
Of Separation the Gate must thus be won,
That furthermore yet thou may proceed
Toward the Gate of secret Conjunction,
Into the Castle which will thee inner leed:
Do after my counsel if thou will speed,
With two strong locks this Gate is shir,
As consequently thou shall well wit.
The end of the third Gate.
Of Conjunction. The fourth Gate.
AFter the Chapter of natural Separation,
By which the elements of our stone disseuered be,
The chapter here follows of secret Conjunction,
Which Natures repugnant joins to perfect unity,
And so them knitteth that none from others may fly,
When they by fire shall be examinate,
They be togethers so surely coniungate.
And therefore Philosophers give this definition
Saying this Conjunction is nothing else
But of disseuered qualities a copulation,
Or of principles a coequation as others tells:
But some men with Mercury that Pothecaries sells
Medleth bodies, which cannot divide
Their matter, and therefore they slip aside.
For until the time the soul be separate
And cleansed from his original sin
With the water, and thoroughly spiritualizate,
The true Conjunction may thou never begin:
Therefore the soul first from the body twyne,
Then of the corporal part and of the spiritual.
The soul shall cause conjunction perpetual.
Of two Conjunctions Philosophers mention make,
Gross when the body with Mercury is reincrudate*
But let this pass, and to the second heed take,
Which as I said is after Separation celebrate,
In which the parties be left with least to colligate,
And so promoted unto most perfect temperance,
That never after amongst them may be repugnance.
Thus causes Separation true Conjunction to be had,
Of water and air, with earth and fire,
But that each element into other may be lad,
And so abide for ever to thy desire,
Do as do dawbers with clay or mire,
Temper them thick and make them not too thin,
So do vpdrying, thou shall the rather win.
But manners there be of our Conjunction three,
The first is called by Philosophers Diptatiue,
The which betwixt the agent and patient must be,
Male and female, Mercury, and Sulphur viue,
Matter, and form, thin, and thick to thrine,
This lesson will help thee without any doubt,
And our Conjunction truly to bring about.
The second manner is called Triptatiue,
Which is Conjunction, made of things three,
Of body, soul and spirit, that they not strive,
Which trinity thou must bring to unity,
For as the soul to the spirit the bond must be;
Right so the body the soul to him must knit,
Out of thy mind let not this lesson flit.
The third manner and also the last of all,
Four Elements together which join to abide,
Tetraptatiue certainly Philosophers do it call,
And specially Guido de Montano whose fame goes wide,
And therefore in most laudable manner this tide,
In our Conjunction four Elements must aggregate
In due proportion, which first a sunder were separate.
Therefore like as the woman has veins fifteen,
And the man but five to the act of their secunditie,
Required in our Conjunction first I meene,
So must the man our Sun have of his water three,
And nine his wife, which three to him must be:
Then like with like will joy have for to dwell,
More of Conjunction me needs not to tell.
This chapter I will conclude right soon therefore,
Gross Conjunction charging thee to make but one,
For seldom have strumpets children of them ybore,
And so thou shall never come by our stone,
Without thou let the woman lig alone,
That after she once have conceived of the man,
Her Matrix be shut up from all other than.
For such as add ever more crude to crude,
Opening their vessel letting their matters keele,
The sparme conceived they nourish not but delude
Themselves, and sp^ll their work each deele,
If thou therefore have lift to do we will,
Close up thy Matrix and nourish the seed,
With heat continual and temperate if thou will speed.
And when thy vessel has stood by months five,
And clouds and Eclipses be passed each one,
The light appearing, increase thy heat then beliue,
Until bright and shining in whitenes be thy Stone*
Then may thou open thy glass anon,
And feed thy child which is ybore,
With milk and meat ay more and more.
For now both moist and dry is so contemperate,
That of the water earth has received impression,
Which never (after that) asunder may be separate;
And right so water to earth has given ingression,
That both together to dwell have made profession,
And water of earth has purchased a retentiue,
They four made one never more to strive.
Thus in two things all our intent does hing,
In dry and moist, which be contraries two*
In dry, that it the moist to flixing bring,
In moist, that it give liquefaction to the earth also:
Then of them thus a temperment may forth go,
A temperment not so thick as the body is,
Neither so thin as water withouten mis.
Loosing and knitting thereof be principles two
Of this hard science, and poles most principal;
Howbeit that other principles be many more,
As shining fanes, which show I shall:
Proceed therefore unto another wall
Of this strong Castle of our wisdom,
That in at the fifth Gate thou may come.
The end of the fourth Gate.
Of Putrefaction. The fifth Gate.
NOw we begin the chapter of Putrefaction,
Without which pole no seed may multiply,
Which must be done only by continual action
Of heat in the body, moist not manually:
For bodies else may not be altered naturally,
Since Christ does witness, without the grain of wheat
Dye in the ground, increase may thou none get.
And in likewise without the matter putrify,
It may in no wise truly be alterate,
Neither thy Elements may be divided kindly,
Nor the conjunction of them perfectly celebrate:
That thy labor therefore be not frustrate,
The priuitie of our putrefying well understand,
Or ever thou take this work in hand.
And Putrefaction may thus defined be
After Philosophers sayings, to be of bodies the sleying;
And in our Compound a division of things three,
The killed bodies into corruption forth leading,
And after unto regeneration them abling,
For things being in the earth, without doubt
Be engendered of rotation of the heavens about.
And therefore like as I have said before,
Thine Elements commixt and wisely coequate,
Thou keep in temperate heat eschewing evermore,
That they by violent heat be not incinerate
To powder dry unprofitably Rubificate,
But into powder black as a crows bill,
With heat of Balne or else of our dunghill.
Until the time that nights be passed ninety,
In moist heat keep them for any thing.
Soon after by blacknes thou shall epsy
That they draw fast to putrefying,
Which thou shall after many colors bring
To perfect whitenes by patience easily,
And so thy seed in his nature shall multiply.
Make each the other then to half and kiss,
And like as children to play them up and down*
And when their shirts are filed with piss,
Then let the woman to wash be bowne,
Which often for faintnes will fall in a swowne,
And dye at the last with her children all,
And go to purgatory to purge their filth original.
When they be there, by little and little increase
Their pains, by heat, aye more and more,
The fire from them let never cease.
And so that thy furnace be surely apt therefore,
Which wise men call an Athenore,
Conseruing heat required most temperatelie,
By which thy matter does kindly putrify.
Of this principle speaks sapient Guido,
And says by rotting dies the compound corporal,
And then after Morien and other more,
Vpriseth again regenerate simple and spiritual,
And were not heat and moisture continual,
Sparme in the womb might have none abiding,
And so there should no fruit thereof vpspring.
Therefore at the beginning our stone thou take,
And bury each one in other within their grave,
Then equally betwixt them a marriage make,
To ligge together six weeks let them have,
Their seed conceived, kindly to nourish and save,
From the ground of their grave not rising that while,
Which secreat point does many a one beguile.
This time of conception with easy heat abide,
The blacknes showing shall tell thee when they dye,
For they together like liquid pitch that tide,
Shall swell and burble, settle and putrify,
Shining colors therein thou shall epsy,
Like to the rainebow marvelous to sight,
The Water then begins to dry upright.
For in moist bodies heat working temperate,
Ingendreth blacknes, first of all which is,
Of kindly Conjunction the token assignate,
And of true putrefying: remember this,
For then perfectly to alter thou can not miss,
And thus by the gate of blacknes thou must come in,
The light of Paradise in whitenes if thou will win.
For first the Sun in his vprising obscurate
Shall Be, and pass the waters of Noes flood,
On earth which was an hundredth days continuate
And fifty, away ere all these waters yood;
Right so our waters (as wisemen understood)
Shall pass, that thou with David may say,
Abierunt in sicco flumina: bear this away.
Soon after that Noah planted his vineyard,
Which royally flourished, and brought forth grapes anon,
After which space thou shall not be afeard,
For in likewise shall follow the flourishing of our stone:
And soon after that xxx. days be gone,
Thou shall have grapes right as Rubie read,
Which is our Adropp, our Vcifer, and our red lead.
For like as souls after pains transitory
Be brought to Paradise, where ever is joyful life;
So shall our Stone (after his darkness in Purgatory)
Be purged, and joined in Elements withouten strife,
Rejoice the whitenes and beauty of his wife,
And pass from darkness of purgatory to light
Of Paradise, in whitenes Elixer of great might.
And that thou may the rather to Putrefaction win,
This example thou take to thee for a true conclusion,
For all the secret of Putrefaction rests therein;
The heart of oak that has of water continual infusion
Will not soon putrify, I tell thee without delusion:
For though it in water lay 100. years and more.
Yet should thou find it sound as ere it was before.
But and thou keep it sometime wet and sometime dry,
As thou may see in timber by usual experiment,
By process of time that oak shall putrify;
And so even likewise according to our intent,
Sometime our tree must with the Sun be brent,
And then with water we must it keele,
That by this means to rotting we may bring it we will.
For now in wet, and now again in dry,
And now in heat, and now again in cold
To be, shall cause it soon to putrify,
And so shall thou bring to rotting thy gold:
Entreat thy bodies as I have thee told,
And in thy putrefying, with heat be not too swift,
Least in the ashes thou seek after thy thrift.
Therefore thy water out of the earth thou draw,
And make the soul therewith for to ascend;
Then down again into the earth it throw,
That they often times so ascend and descend:
From violent heat and sudden cold defend
Thy glass, and make thy fire so temperate,
That by the sides the matter be not vitrificate.
And be thou wise in choosing of the matter,
Meddle with no salts, sulphurs, nor mean mineralls:
For whatsoever any worker to thee does clatter,
Our Sulphur and our Mercury been only in metttalls,
Which oils and waters some men them calls,
Fowls and birds, with other names many one,
Because that fools should never know our stone.
For of this world our stone is called the sement
Which moved by craft as nature does require,
In his increase shall be full opulent,
And multiply his kind after thine own desire,
Therefore if God vouchsafe thee to inspire,
To know the truth, and fancies to eschew
Like unto thee in riches shall be but few.
But many men be moved to work after their fantasy,
In many subjects in which be tinctures gay:
Both white and red divided manually
To sight, but in the fire they flyeaway:
Such break pottes and glasses day by day,
Enpoysoning themselves and loosing their sights,
With odours, smoakes, and watching up by nights.
Their clothes be baudy and worn thread bare,
Men may them smell for multipliers where they go,
To file their fingers with corosiues they do not spare,
Their eyes be bleard, their cheeks lean and blow,
And thus for had I wist they suffer loss and woe:
And such when they have lost that was in their purse,
Then do they chide, and Philosophers sore do curse.
To see their houses it is a noble sport,
What furnaces, what glasses there be of diverse shapes,
What salts, what powders, what oils, waters fort,
How eloquently de Materia prima their tungs do clap,
And yet to find the truth they have no hap;
Of our Mercury they meddle and of our sulphur viue,
Wherein they dote, and more and more vnthriue.
For all the while they have Philosophers been,
Yet could they never know what was our Stone,
Some sought it in dung, in urine, some in wine,
Some in star slyme (for thing it is but one),
In blood, in eggs: some till their thrift was gone,
Dividing Elements, and breaking many a pot,
Sheards multiplying, but yet they hit it not.
They talk of the red man and of his white wife,
That is a special thing, and of the Elixers two,
Of the Quintessence, and of the Elixer of life,
Of honey, Celidonie, and of Secondines also,
These they divide into Elements, with others more;
No multipliers, but Philosophers called will they be,
Which natural Philosophy did never read nor see.
This fellowship knows our Stone right we will,
They think them richer than is the King,
They will him help, he shall not fail
France for to win a wondrous thing,
The holy Cross home will they bring,
And if the King were prisoner ytake,
Right soon his ransom would they make.
A marvel it is that Westminster Kerke,
To the which these Philosophers do much haunt,
Since they can so much riches work
As they make boast of and auaunt,
Drinking daily at the wine a due taunt,
Is not made up perfectly at once;
For truly it lacks yet many stones.
Fools do follow them at the tail,
Promoted to riches weening to be;
But will you hear, what worship and avail
They win in London that noble City?
With silver maces (as you may see)
Sergeants awaiteth on them each bower,
So been they men of great honor.
Sergeants seek them from street to street,
Merchants and Goldsmiths lay after them watch,
That well is him that with them may meet,
For the great advantage that they do catch,
They hunt about as does a bratch,
Weening to win so great treasure,
That ever in riches they shall endure.
Some would catch their goods again,
And some more good would adventure,
Some for to have would be full feign
Of ten pounds one, I you ensure,
Some which have lent without measure
Their goods, and be with poverty clad,
To catch a noble, would be full glad.
But when the Sergeants does them arrest,
Their pautners be stuffed with Paris balls,
Or with signets of Saint Martins at the least;
But as for money it is pist against the walls:
Then be they led (as well for them befalls)
To Newgate or Ludgate as I you tell,
Because they shall in safeguard dwell.
Where is my money become, says one?
And where is mine, says he and he?
But will you hear how subtle they be anon
In answering, that they excused be?
Saying, of our Elixers robbed be we,
Else might we have paid you all your gold,
Though it had been more by ten fold.
And then their Creditors they flatter so,
Promising to work for them again
In right short space the Elixers two,
Doting the Merchants that they be feign
To let them go, but ever in vain;
They work so long, till at the last,
They be again in prison cast.
If any them ask, why they be not rich?
They say they can make fine gold of tin,
But he (say they) may surely swim the ditch,
Which is vpholden by the chinne;
We have no stock, therefore may we not win,
Which if we had, we would soon werck
Enough to finish up Westminster Kerck.
And some of them be so devout,
They will not dwell out of that place;
For there they may withouten doubt
Do what them list to their solace,
The Archdeacon is so full of grace,
That if they bless him with their cross,
He forces little of other men's loss.
And when they there sit at the wine,
These Monks they say have many a pound,
Would God (says one) that some were mine.
Yet care away, let the cup go round;
Drink on says another, the mean is found,
I am a master of that Art,
I warrant us we shall have part.
Such causes Monks evil to done,
To waste their wages through their dotage,
Some brings a mazer, and some a spoone,
Their Philosophers gives them such comage,
Behighting them winning with damage,
A pound for a penie at the least again;
And so fair promises make fools feign.
A royal medicine one upon twelve,
They promise them thereof to have,
Which they could never for them-selue
Yet bring about, so God me save:
Beware such Philosophers no man deprave,
Which help these Monks to riches so,
In thread bare coats that they must go.
The Abbot ought well to cherish this company,
For they can teach his Monks to live in poverty,
And to go clothed and moneyed religiously,
As did Saint Bennet, eschuing superfluity,
Easing them also of the ponderositie
Of their purses, with pounds so aggrauate,
Which by Philosophy be now alleuiate.
Lo who so medleth with this rich company,
Great boast of their winning they may make:
For they shall reap as much by their Philosophy,
As they of the tail of an ape, can take:
Beware therefore for Jesus sake,
And meddle with nothing of great cost,
For if thou do, it is but lost.
These Philosophers (of which I spoke before)
Meddle and blunder with many a thing,
Running in errors ever more and more,
For lack of true understanding:
But like must like always forth bring,
So has God ordained in every kind;
Would Jesus they would bear this in mind.
Ween they of a Nettle to have a Rose,
Or of an Elder to have an apple sweet:
Alas, that wisemen their goods should lose,
Trusting such lorrells when they them meet,
Which say our Stone is trodden under feet,
And makes them vile things to distill,
Till all their howses with stench they fill.
Some of them never learned a word in Schools,
Should such by reason understand Philosophy?
Be they Philosophers? Nay, they be fools:
For their works prove them vnwittie,
Meddle not with them, if thou be happy;
Least with their flattery they so thee till,
That thou agree unto their will.
Spend not thy money away in waste,
Give not to every spirit credence,
But first examine, groape, and taste;
And as thou proouest, so put thy confidence,
But ever beware of great expense:
And if the Philosopher do live virtuously,
The better thou may trust his Philosophy.
Prove him first, and him appose
Of all the secrets of our Stone;
Which if he know not, thou need not to lose,
Meddle thou no further, but let him gone,
Make he never so piteous a moan;
For then the Fox can fagge and feign,
When he would to his pray attain.
If he can answer as a Clarke,
Howbeit he has not proved it indeed,
And thou then help him to his warke;
If he be virtuous I hold it meed,
For he will thee quite if ever he speed,
And thou shall know by a little anon,
If he have knowledge of our Stone.
One thing, one glass, one furnace, and no more,
Behold this principle if he do take,
And if he do not, then let him go,
For he shall never thee rich man make;
Timely it is better thou him forsake,
Than after with loss and variance,
And other manner of displeasance.
But if God fortune thee to have
This Science by doctrine which I have told,
Discover it not whosoever it crave,
For favor, fear, silver, or gold;
Be no oppressor, letcher nor boaster bold:
Serve thy God, and help the poor among,
If thou this life lift to continue long.
Unto thy self thy secrets ever keep
From sinners, which have not God in dread,
But will thee cast in prison deep,
Till thou them teach to do it indeed,
Then slander on thee shall spring and spread,
That thou do coin then will they say,
And so undo thee for ever and aye.
And if thou teach them this cunning,
Their sinful living for to maintain,
In hell therefore shall be thy woonning,
For God of thee and them will take disdain:
As thou naught could therefore thee feign,
That body and soul thou may both save,
And here in peace thy living to have.
Now in this Chapter I have thee taught,
How thou thy bodies must putrify,
And so to guide thee that thou be not caught,
And put to durance loss or villainy
My doctrine therefore remember wittely,
And pass forth toward the sixth Gate,
For thus the fifth is triumphate.
The end of the fifth Gate.
Of Congelation. The sixth Gate.
OF Congelation I need not much to write:
But what it is, I will to thee declare;
It is of soft things induration of color white,
And confixation of spirits which flying are;
How to congeale, he needs not much to care,
For Elements will knit together soon,
So that Putrefaction be kindly done.
But Congelations be made in diverse wise,
Of spirits and bodies dissolved to water clear,
Of salts also dissolved twice or thrice,
And then congeald into a fluxible matter;
Of such congealing, fools fast do clatter,
And some dissolueth dividing manuallie
Elements them after congealing to powder dry.
But such congealing is not to our desire,
For unto ours it is contrarious,
Our congelation dreadeth not the fire:
For it must ever stand in it unctuous,
And it is also a tincture so bounteous,
Which in the air congealed will not relent
To water, for then our work were shent.
Moreover congeale not into so hard a stone
As glass or crystal, which melts by fusion,
But so that it like wax will melt anon
Withouten blast: and beware of delusion,
For such congealing accords not to our conclusion
As will not flow, but run to water again
Like salt congealed, then labourest thou in vain.
Which congelation avails us not a deal,
It longs to multipliers, congealing vulgarly:
If thou therefore list to do we will
(Since the medicine shall never flow kindly,
Neither congeale, without thou first it putrify)
First purge, and then fix the elements of our stone,
Till they together congeale and flow anon.
For when thy matter is made perfectly white,
Then will the spirit with the body congealed be:
But of that time thou may have long respite
Or it congeale like pearls in sight to thee,
Such congel^^^^n be thou glad to see,
And after lik^ grains red as blood,
Richer than any worldly good.
The earthly grosenes therefore first mortified,
In moisture blacknes engendered is;
This principle may not be denied,
For natural Philosophers so said ywis:
Which had, of whitenes thou may not mis;
And into whitenes if thou congeale it once,
Then have thou a stone most precious of all stones.
And by the dry like as the moist did putrify,
Which caused in color blacknes to appear,
Right so the moist congealed by the dry,
Ingendreth whitenes shining by night full clear,
And drines proceeds as whiteth the matter,
Like as in blacknes moisture does him show
By colors variant always new and new.
The cause of all this is heat most temperate,
Working and moving the matter continually,
And thereby also the matter is alterate,
Both inward and outward substantially,
Not as do fools to sight sophistically:
But in every part all fire to endure,
Fluxible, fixed, and stable in tincture.
As Physic determines of each digestion,
First done in the stomach in which is drines,
Causing whitenes without question,
Like as the second digestion causes rednes,
Complete in the liver by heat in temperatenes,
Right so our Stone by drines and by heat
Digested is to white and red complete.
But here thou must another secret know,
How the Philosophers child in the air is borne,
Busy thee not too fast at the coal to blow,
And take this neither for mock nor scorn,
But trust me truly, else is all thy work forlorn,
Without thine earth with water revived be,
Our true congealing shall thou never see.
A soul it is betwixt heaven and earth being,
Arising from the earth as air with water pure,
And causing life in every lively thing,
Incessable running upon our four fold nature,
Enforcing to better him with all his cure,
Which air is the fire of our Philosophy,
Named now oil, now water mystically.
And this mean air which oil or water we call,
Our fire, our ointment, our spirit, and our Stone,
In which one thing we ground our wisdoms all,
Goes neither in nor out alone,
Nor the fire but the water anon:
First it out leads, and after it brings it in,
As water with water which will not lightly twin.
And so may water only our water meeue,
Which moving causes both death and life
And water to water does kindly cleeue
Without repugnance or any strife,
Which water to fools is nothing rife,
Being of the kind withouten doubt
Of the spirit, called water and leader out.
And water is the secret and life of every thing,
That is of substance in this world yfound,
For of water each thing has his beginning,
As shows in women when they shall be unbound
By water, which passes before if all be sound,
Called Albien, first from them running,
With grievous throws before their childing.
And truly that is the cause most principal
Why Philosophers charge us to be patient,
Till time the water be dried to powder all
With nourishing heat, continual, not violent:
For qualities be contrarious of every element,
Till after black in white be made an union
Of them for ever, congeald without division.
And furthermore, the preparation of this conversion:
From thing to thing, from one state to another,
Is done only by kindly and discreet operation
Of Nature, as is of sperme within the mother;
For sperme and heat, are as sister and brother,
Which be converted in themselves as nature can,
By action and passion at last to perfect man:
For as the bodily part by nature was combyn^te
Into man, is such as the beginner was*
Which though it thus from thing to thing was alterate
Not out of kind, to mix with other kind did pass,
And so our matter spermaticall within our glass,
Within it self must turn from thing to thing*
By heat most temperate only it nourishing.
An other example natural I may thee tell,
How the substance of an egg by nature is wrought
Into a Chicken not passing out of the shell,
A plainer example could I not have thought,
And their conuersions be made till forth be brought
From state to state, the like by like in kind,
With nourishing heat: only bear this in mind.
Another example here also thou may read
Of vegetable things, taking consideration,
How every thing grows of his own seed
Through heat and moisture, by natural operation;
And therefore myneralls be nourished by ministration
Of moisture radical, which there beginning was,
Not passing their kind within one glass.
There we them turn from thing to thing again,
Into their mother the water when they go:
Which principle unknown, thou labourest in vain.
Then all is sperme; and things there be no more
But kind with kind in number two,
Male and female, agent and patient,
Within the matrix of the earth most orient.
And these be turned by heat from thing to thing
Within one glass, and so from state to state,
Until the time that nature does them bring
Into one substance of the water regenerate:
And so the sperme with his kind is alterate,
Able in likeness his kind to multiply,
As does in kind all other things naturally.
In the time of this said process natural,
While that the sperme conceived is growing,
The substance is nourished with his own menstruall,
Which water only out of the earth did spring,
Whose color is green in the first showing:
And from that time the Sun hid^th his light,
Taking his course throughout the North by night.
The said menstruall is (I say to thee in counsel)
The blood of our green Lion and not of vitriall*
Dame Venus can the troth of this thee tell,
At the beginning, to counsel if thou her call,
This secret is hid by Philosophers great and small,
Which blood drawn out of the green Lion,
For lack of heat had not perfect digestion.
But this blood called our secreat menstruall,
Wherewith our sperme is nourished temperately,
When it is turned into the feces corporal,
And so become white perfectly and very dry,
Congeald and fixed into his own body,
Then biscoct blood to sight it may well seem,
Of this work named the milk white Dyademe.
Understand now that our fiery water thus acuate,
Is called our menstruall water, wherein
Our earth is loosed and naturally calcinate,
By Congelation that they may never twinne,
But yet to congeale more water thou may not linne:
Into three parts of the acuate water said before,
With the fourth part of the earth congealed and no more.
Unto that substance therefore so congelate,
The fourth part put of water christaline,
And make them then together to be dispousate,
By Congelation into a miner metaline,
Which like a sword new slipped will shine,
After the blacknes which first will show,
The fourth part then give it of water new.
Imbibitions many it must have yet,
Give it the second, and after the third also.
The said proportion keeping in thy wit,
Then to another the fourth time look thou go,
The fifth time and the sixth pass not therefore,
But put two parts at each time of them three,
And at the seventh time five parts must there be.
When thou have made seven times Imbibition,
Again then must thou turn about thy wheel,
And putrify all that matter without addition,
First blacknes abiding if thou will do we will,
Then into whitenes congeale it up each deele,
And after by rednes into the south ascend,
Then have thou brought thy base unto an end.
Thus is thy water then divided into parts two,
With the first part the bodies be putrificate,
And to thine Imbibitions the second part must go,
With which thy matter is afterward demigrate,
And soon upon easy decoction albificate,
Then is it named by Philosophers out starry stone,
Bring that to rednes then is the sixth gate won.
The end of the sixth gate.
Of Cibation. The seventh Gate.
NOw of Cibation I turn my pen to write,
Since it must here the seventh place occupy:
But in few words it will be expedite,
Take heed therefore, and understand me wittelie;
Cibation is called a feeding of our matter dry,
With milk and meat, which moderately thou do,
Until it be brought the third order unto.
But give it never so much, that thou it glut;
Beware of dropsey, and also of Noah's flood:
By little and little therefore thou to it put
Of meat and drink, as seems to do it good,
That watery humors not ouergrow the blood,
To drink therefore let it be measured so,
That kindly appetite thou never quench it fro.
For if it drink too much, then must it have
A vomit or else it will be sick too long,
From the dropsy therefore thy womb thou save,
And from the fl^x, or else it will be wrong,
But rather let it thirst for drink among,
Than thou should give it overmuch at once.
Which must in youth be dieted for the nonce.
And if thou diet it (as nature does require)
Moderately, till time that it be grown to age,
From cold it keeping, and nourishing with moist fire,
Then shall it grow, and wexe full of courage,
And do to thee both pleasure and advantage:
For he shall make dark bodies whole and bright,
Clensing their leprosies through his might.
Three times must thou turn about thy wheel,
Still keeping the rule of the said Cibation,
And then as soon as it the fire does feel,
Like wax it will be ready unto liquation:
This chapter needs no longer protestation,
For I have told thee the dietorie most convenient,
After thine Elements be made equipolent.
And also how to whitenes thou shall bring thy gold,
Most like in figure to leaves of hawthorne tree
Called Magnesia, before as I have told,
And our white Sulphur without combustibilitie,
Which from the fire away will never fly.
And thus the seventh Gate (as you desired)
In the vprising of the Sun is conquered.
The end of the seventh Gate.
Of Sublimation. The eight Gate.
HEre of our Sublimation a word or two
I have to speak, which the eight Gate is.
Fools do sublime, but sublime thou not so,
For we sublime not as they do ywis:
To sublime truly therefore thou shall not mis,
If thou can make thy bodies first spiritual,
And then thy spirits (as I have taught thee) corporal.
Some do Mercury from vitrioll and salt sublime,
And other spirits from scales of iron and steel,
From egg-shels calcined, and from quick lime,
And in their manner yet sublime they right we will:
But such subliming accords never a deele
To our intents, for we sublime not so,
To true subliming therefore, now will I go.
In Sublimation first beware of one thing,
That thou sublime to the top of the vessel:
For without violence thou shall it not down bring
Again, but there it will abide and dwell,
So it rejoices with refrigeration I thee tell,
Keep it therefore with temperate heat adowne
Full forty days, till it wexe black and brown.
For then the soul begins to come out
From his own veins, for all that subtle is
Will with the spirit ascend withouten doubt,
Bear in thy mind therefore, and think on this,
How here eclipsed been thy bodies,
As they do putrify subliming more and more
Into water, until they be all up ybore.
And thus their venom when they have spued out
Into the water then black it does appear,
Becoming spiritual each deal without doubt,
Subliming easily in our manner,
Into the water, which does him bear:
For in the air our child must thus be bore
Of the water again, as I have said before.
But when these two by Sublimation continual
Be labored so with heat both moist and temperate,
That all is white and purely made spiritual,
Then heaven upon earth must be reiterate
Until the soul with the body be incorporate
That earth become all that before was heaven,
Which will be done in Sublimations seven.
And Sublimations we make for causes three,
The first cause is, to make the body spiritual;
The second is, that the spirit may corpora^l be,
And become fixed with it, and consubstantiall;
The third cause is, that from his filthy original
He may be cleansed, and his saltnes sulphurious
May be minished in him, which is infectious.
Then when they thus together depured be,
They will sublime up whiter than the snow*
That sight will greatly comfort thee:
For then anon perfectly thou shall know
The spirits shall so adowne ythrowe,
That this eight Gate shall be to thee unlocked,
Out of the which many be shut and mocked.
The end of the eight Gate.
Of Firmentation. The ninth Gate.
TRue Firmentation few Workers understand,
That secret therefore I will expound to thee,
I travailed truly through many a Land,
Ere ever I might find any that would tell it me:
Yet as God would, evermore blessed be he,
At the last I came to the knowledge thereof perfect,
Take heed therefore what I thereof do write.
Firmentations in diverse manners be done,
By which our medicine must be perpetuate
Into clear water: some loses Sun and Moon,
And with their medicines make them to be congelate;
Which in the fire when they be examinate
May not abide, nor alter with complement:
For such Firmenting is not to our intent.
But yet more kindly some other men done,
Fermenting their medicines in this wise,
In Mercury dissoluing both Sun and Moon,
Till time with the spirit they will arise,
Subliming them together twice or thrice;
Then Fermentation therewith they make:
That is a way, but yet we it forsake.
Some other there be which have more hap,
To touch the troth in part of fermenting,
They amalgame their bodies with Mercury like pap,
Then thereupon their medicines relenting:
These of our secrets have some henting.
But not the truth with perfect complement,
Because they neither putrify, nor alter their Ferment.
That point therefore I will disclose unto thee,
Look how thou did with thine imperfect body,
Do so with thy perfect bodies in each degree,
That is to say, first thou them putrify,
Their former qualities destroying utterly,
For this is wholly to our intent,
That first thou alter before thou ferment.
To thy compound make firment the fourth part,
Which ferments been only of Sun and Moon;
If thou therefore be master of this Art,
Thy Fermentation let thus be done,
Fix water and earth together soon,
And when thy medicine as wax does flow,
Then upon malgames look thou it throw.
And when all that together is mixed,
Above the glass well closed make thy fire,
And so continue it till all be fixed,
And well fermented to thy defire,
Then make Proiection after thy pleasure,
For that is medicine each deal perfect,
Thus must thou ferment both red and white.
For like as flower of wheat made into paste
Requires ferment, which leaven we call
Of bread, that it may have the kindly taste,
And become food to man and woman cordial:
Right so thy medicine ferment thou shall,
That it may taste of the Ferment pure,
At all assayes for ever to endure.
And understand that there be Ferments three,
Two be of bodies in nature cleene,
Which must be altered as I have told thee;
The third most secret of which I meene,
Is the first earth of his water green:
And therefore when the Lion does thurst,
Make him to drink till his belly burst.
Of this a Question if I should move,
And ask of workers, what is this thing?
Anon thereby I should them prove,
If they had knowledge of our fermenting:
For many a man speaks with wondering,
Of Robin hood and of his bow,
Which never shot therein I trow.
For Fermentation true as I thee tell,
Is of the soul with the bodies incorporation,
Restoring to it the kindly smell,
With taste and color by natural conspissation,
Of things disseuered, a due reintegration,
Whereby the body of the spirit takes impression,
That either the other may help to have ingression.
For like as bodies in their compaction corporal,
May not show out their qualities effectually,
Until the time that they become spiritual,
No more may spirits abide with bodies steadfastly,
Till they with them be confixate proportionally,
For then the body teaches the spirit to suffer fire,
And the spirit the body to enter to thy defire.
Therefore thy gold with gold thou must ferment,
With his own water thy earth cleansed I meene,
Naught else to say but element with element,
The spirit of life only going between,
For like as an adamant as thou have seen
Draws iron to him, so does our earth by kind,
Draw down to him his soul borne up with wind.
With wind therefore the soul lead out and in,
Mingle gold with gold, that is for to say,
Make Element with Element togetherrin
Till time all fire they suffer may,
For earth is Ferment withouten nay
To water, and water the earth unto,
Our Fermentatio^ in this wise must be do.
Earth is gold, and so is the soul also
Not common, but ours thus Elementate,
And yet thereto the Sun must go,
That by our wheel it may be alterate:
For so to ferment it must be preparate,
That it profoundly may joined be,
With other natures as I said to thee.
And whatsoever I have here said of gold,
The same of silver I will thou understand,
That thou them putrify and alter (as I have told)
Ere thou thy medicine to firment take in hand:
Forsooth I could never find him in England
Which in this wise to firment could me teach
Withouten error, by practice or by speech.
Now of this chapter needs to treat no more,
Since I intend prolixitie to eschew;
Remember well my words therefore,
Which thou shall prove by practice true,
And Sun and Moon look thou renew,
That they may hold of the fifth nature,
Then shall their tincture evermore endure.
And yet a way there is most excellent,
Belonging unto another working,
A water we make most redolent,
All bodies to oil wherewith we bring,
With which our medicine we make flowing,
A quintessence this water we call,
In man which heals diseases all.
But with thy base, after my doctrine preperate
Which is our calx this must be done,
For when our bodies be so calcinate,
That water will to oil dissolve them soon,
Make thou therefore oil both of Sun and Moon,
Which is ferment most fragrant for to smell.
And so the ninth gate is conquered of this Castle.
The end of the ninth Gate.
Of Exaltation. The tenth Gate.
Proceed we now to the chapter of Exaltation,
Of which truly thou must have knowledge pure,
But little it is different from Sublimation,
If thou conceive it right I you ensure,
Hereto accords the holy scripture,
Christ saying thus, if I exalted be,
Then shall I draw all things unto me.
Our medicine if we exalt right so,
It shall be thereby nobilitate,
That must be done in manners two,
From time the parties be dispousate,
Which must be crucified and examinate,
And then contumulate both man and wife,
And after revived by the spirit of life.
Then up to heaven they must exalted be,
There to be in body and soul glorificate,
For thou must bring them to such subtlety,
that they ascend together to be intronizate,
In clouds of clearenes to Angels consociate,
Then shall they draw as thou shall see,
Al other bodies to their own dignitee.
If thou therefore the bodies wilt exalt,
First with the spirit of life thou them augment,
till time the earth be well subtilizate,
By natural rectifying of every Element,
Them up exalting into the firmament,
Then much more precious shall they be than gold,
Because of the quintessence which they do hold.
For when the cold has overcome the heat,
Then into water the Air shall turned be,
And so two contraries together shall meet,
Till either with orher right well agree,
So into Air the water as I tell thee,
When heat of cold has got domination,
Shall be converted by craft of our circulation.
And of the Air then fire have thou shall,
By loosing putrefying and subliming,
And fire thou have of the earth material,
Thine Elements thus by craft disseuering,
Most especially thine earth well calcining,
And when they be each one made pure,
Then do they hold all of the first nature.
On this wise therefore make them be circulate,
Each into other exalting by and by,
And all in this one glass surely sigillate,
Not with thine hands, but as I teach thee naturally,
Fire into water then turn first hardly,
For fire is in Air, which is in water existent,
And this conversion accords to our intent.
Then furthermore turn on thy wheel,
That into earth the air converted be,
Which will be done also right well,
For Air is in water being in earth trust me,
The water into fire contrarious in her quality,
Soon turn thou may for water in earth is,
Which is in fire, conversion true is this.
The wheel is now near turned about,
Into air turn earrh which is the proper nest,
Of other Elements there is no doubt,
For earth in fire is, which in air takes rest,
This circulation begin thou in the west,
Then into the south, till they exalted be,
Proceed duly, as in thy figure I have taught thee.
In which process clearly thou may see,
From one extreme how to another thou may not go,
But by a mean, since they in qualities contrarious be,
And reason will forsooth that it be so,
As heat into cold, with other contraries ^o,
Without their means as moist to heat and cold,
Examples sufficient before this I have told.
Thus have I taught thee how to make
Of all thine Elements a perfect circulation,
And at thy figure example to take,
How thou shall make this foresaid Exaltation,
And of thy medicine in the Elements true graduation,
Till it be brought to a gueneritie temperate,
And then thou have conquered the tenth gate.
The end of the tenth Gate.
Of Multiplication. The eleventh Gate.
MVltiplication now to declare I proceed,
Which is by Philosophers in this wise defined
Augmentation it is of the Elixer indeed,
In goodness and quantity both for white and red,
Multiplication is therefore as they do write,
That thing that does augme^t medicines in each degree,
In color, in odor, in virtue and also in quantitee.
And why thou may this medicine multiply,
Infinitely forsooth the cause is this,
For it is fire, which kindled will never die,
Dwelling with thee, as fire does in houses,
Of which one spark may make more fire ywis,
As musk in pigments and other spices mo,
In virtue multiplied, and our medicine right so.
So he is rich which fire has less or more,
Because he may so hugely it multiply,
And right so rich is he which any part has in store,
Of our Elixers which be augmentable infinitely,
One way if thou dissolve our pouders dry,
And make often times of them Congelation,
Thereof in goodness then make thou Augmentation.
The second way both in goodness and quantity,
It multiplyeth by iterate Fermentation,
As in that chapter I showed plainly to thee,
By diverse manners of natural operation,
And also in the chapter of our Cibation,
Where thou may know how thou shall multiply,
Thy medicine with Mercury infinitely.
But and thou will both loose and eke ferment,
Both more in quantity and better will it be:
And in such wise thou may it soon augment,
That in thy glass it will grow like a tree,
The tree of Hermes named seemly to see,
Of which one pippin a thousand will multiply,
If thou can make thy proiection wittely.
And like as Saffron when it is puluerizate,
By little and little if it with liquor be
Tempred, and then with much more liquor dilate,
Teyneth much more of liquor in quantity,
Tha^ being whole in his gross nature: so shall thou see,
That our Elixer, the more it is made thin,
The further in tincture it fastly will rinne.
Keep in thy fire therefore both even and morrow,
From house to house that thou need not to rinne,
Among thy neighbors thy fire to seek or borrow,
The more thou keep, the more good shall thou win
Multiplying it always more and more thy glass within,
By feeding with Mercury unto thy lives end,
So shall thou have more than thou need to spend.
This matter is plain I will no more
Write thereof, let reason thee guide,
Be never the bolder to sin therefore,
But serve thy God the better in each tide:
And while that thou shall in this life abide,
Bear this in mind, forget not I thee pray,
As thou shall appear before God at domes day.
His own great gifts therefore and his treasure,
Dispose thou virtuously, helping the poor at need,
That in this world thou may to thee procure,
Mercy and grace with heavenly bliss to meede,
And pray to God devoutly that he thee lead,
In at the twelfth gate, as he can best,
Soon after then thou shall end thy conquest.
The end of the eleventh gate.
Of Proiection. The twelfth Gate.
IN Proiection it shall be proved if our practice be profitable,
Of which it behooves me the secrets here to move,
Therefore if thy tincture be sure and not variable,
By a little of thy medicine thus may thou prove,
With mettle, or with Mercury as pitch it will cleave,
And teyne in Proiection all fires to abide,
And soon it will enter and spread him full wide.
But many by ignorance do mar that they made,
When on metals vnclensed Proiection they make,
For because of corruption their tinctures must fade,
Which they would not away first from the body take,
Which after Proiection be brittle blew and black,
That thy tincture therefore may evermore last,
First upon ferment thy medicine see thou cast.
Then brittle as glass will thy ferment be,
Upon bodies cleansed and made very pure,
Cast that brittle substance and soon shall thou see,
That they shall be curiously colored with tincture,
With all assayes for ever shall endure,
But profitable Proiection perfectly to make,
At the Psalms of the Psalter example thou take.
On Fundamenta cast first this psalm Nunc di^^ittis,
Upon verba mea, then cast Fundamenta beliue,
Then Verba upon diligam, conceive me with thy wits.
And diligam upon attendite, if thou list to thrive,
Thus make thou Proiections, three, four, or five,
Till the tincture of the medicine begin to decrease,
And then it is time of Proiection to cease.
By this mistie talking I mean nothing else,
But that thou must cast first the less on the more,
Increasing aye the number as wisemen thee tells,
And keep thou this secreat unto thy self in store,
Be covetous of cunning it is no burden sore,
For he that joins not the Elixer with bodies made clean,
He wotteth not surely what Proiection does mean
Ten if thou multiply first into ten,
One hundredth that number makes sickerly,
If one hundredth into an hundredth be multiplied, then
Ten thousand is that number if thou count it wittely,
Then into as much more ten thousand to multiply,
It is a thousand thousand; which multiplied ywis,
Into as much more a hundredth millions is.
That hundredth millions being multiplied likewise
Into ten thousand millions, as I to thee do say,
Makes so great a number I wot not what it is,
Thy number in Proiection thus multiplye always:
Now child of thy courtesy for me that thou pray,
Since I have told thee our secrets all and some,
To the which I beseech GOD by grace thou may come.
Now have thou conquered these gates twelve,
And all the Castle thou hold at thy will,
Keep thy secreats in store to thy self,
And the commandments of God look thou fulfill,
In fire see thou continue thy glasses still,
And multiply thy medicines aye more and more,
For wise men do say, that store is no sore.
The end of the twelve Gates, entitled Ripleys Compound of Alchymie.
Recapitulatio totius operis praedicti.
FOr to bring this Treatise to a final end,
And briefly here to conclude these secrets all,
Diligently look thou, and to thy figure attend,
Which does in it contain these secrets great and small,
And if thou it conceive, both theoricall and practical,
By figures and colors, by scripture plain,
It wittily conceived, thou may not work in vain.
Consider first the latitude of this precious Stone,
Beginning in the first side noted in the West,
Where the red man and the white woman be made one,
Spoused with the spirit of life to live in rest,
Earth and water equally proportionate, that is best,
And one of the earth is good, and of the spirit three,
Which twelve to four also of the earth may be.
Three of the wife, and one of the man thou take,
And the less of the spirit in this dispousation,
The rather thy Calcination for certain shall thou make:
Then forth into the North proceed by obscuration
Of the red man and his white wife, called Eclipsation,
Loosing them and altring them betwixt winter and vere,
Into water turning earth, dark and nothing clear.
From thence by colors many one into the East ascend,
Then shall the Moon be full appearing by daylight,
Then is she passed purgatory, and her course at an end,
There is the vprising of the Sun appearing bright.
There is Summer after Vere, and day after night:
The^ earth and water which were black, be turned to air,
And clouds of darkness ouerblown, and all apeareth fair.
And as in the west was the beginning of thy practice.
And the North the perfect mean of profou^d alteration:
So in the East after them the beginning of speculatio^ is:
But of this course up in the south the sun makes co^su^matio^.
There bin the elements turned into fire by circulatio^:
Then to win to thy desire thou needst not be in doubt,
For the wheel of our philosophy thou have turned about
But yet about again two times turn thy wheel,
In which bin co^prehe^ded all the secrets of our philosophy.
In chapiters 12. made plain to thee, if thou conceive the^ well,
And all the secrets by and by of our lower Astronomy,
How thou shall calcine bodies, perfect, dissolve divide and putrify,
With perfect knowledge of all the poles which in our heaven been,
Shining with colors inexplicable, never were gayer seen.
And thus our secret conclusion know withouten fail,
Our red man teineth not, nor his wife, til they teined be,
Therefore if thou list thy self by this craft to avail,
The altitude of the bodies hide, and show out their profunditie,
In every of thy materials destroying the first quality,
And secondary qualities more glorious in them repair anon,
And in one glass, and with one rule, four natures turn to one.
Pale and black with false citrine, imperfect white and red,
The Peacocks feathers in colors gay, the Rainebowe which shall ouergoe,
The spotted pa^ther, the lyo^ green, the crows bil blue as lead,
These shall apeare before thee perfect white, and many other more,
And after the perfect white, gray, false citrine also,
And after these, the^ shall apeare the body red inuariable,
Then have thou a medicine of the third order of his own kind multiplicable.
Thou must divide thy white Elixer into parts two
Before thou rubifie, and into glasses two let the^ be done.
If thou will have for Su^ and moon thy elixer both do so;
And into mercury the^ multiply to great quantity soon,
And if thou had not at the beginning to fill a spoone,
Yet may thou them so multiply both white and red.
That if thou live a 1000. years, they shall stand thee in sted.
Have thou recourse to thy wheel therefore I counsel thee,
And study him well to know in each chapter truly,
Meddle with no fantastical multipliers, but let the^ be,
Which will thee flatter feining them cunning in Philosophy,
Do as I bid thee, the^ dissolve these foresaid bases wittily,
And turn them into perfect oils with our true water ardent,
By circulation that must be done according to our intent.
These oils will fix crude Mercury and convert bodies all
Into perfect Sun and Moon, when thou shall make Proiection;
That oily substance pure and fixed Raimond Lully did call
His Basiliske, of which he never made so plain detectio^:
Pray for me to God, that I may be one of his election,
And that he will for one of his, at doomesday me ken*
And grant me his bliss to reign with him for ever. Amen.
Finis Recapitulationis.
An Admonition, wherein the Author declares his erroneous Experiments.
AFter all this, I will thou understand
For thy sauegard, what I have done,
Many experiments have I taken in hand
As I found written for Sun and Moon:
The which I will tell thee, rehearsing soon,
Beginning at the vermilion, which proved naught,
And Mercury sublimed, which I dearly bought.
I made solutions full many a one
Of spirits, ferments, salts, iron, and steel,
Weening so to make the Philosophers Stone:
But finally I lost every deele,
After my books yet wrought I we will,
Which evermore untrue I preeued,
Which made me often full sore agreeued.
Waters corsiue and waters ardent,
With which I wrought in diverse wise,
Many one I made, but all were shent,
Egg-shells I calcined twice or thrice,
Oils from Calxes I made up to rise,
And every Element I did from other twin,
But profit found I none therein.
Also I wrought in sulphur and vitriall,
Which fools do call the green Lion,
In Arsinike, in orpiment, foul them befall,
In debili principio was my inception,
Therefore in fine, was fraud my conclusion:
And thus I blew my thrift at the cole,
My clothes were bawdie, my stomach never whole.
Sal Armoniacke, and Sandiuere,
Sal Alcalie, Sal allembroke, and Sal attinckarre,
Sal tartar, salt common, Sal gem most clear,
Salt Peter, salt sod, of these beware,
And from the odor of quicksiluer keep thee far,
Meddle not with Mercury precipitate,
Neither with imperfect bodies rubificate.
I proved urine, eggs, hair and blood,
The soul of Saturn, and also of markazite,
Aes vst, and Crokefeere, which did me never good,
And the scales of iron which Smithes of smite,
Litarge and Antimonie, not worth a mite;
Of the which gay tinctures did I show,
Both red and white, which were untrue.
Oil of lyme, and water with labor great
I made, calcining it with salt preperate,
And by it self with violent heat,
Grinding with vinegar till I was fatigate,
And also with aqua vitae, with spices acuate
Upon a marble Stone, which stood me in cost,
And oils with corosiues I made; but all was lost.
Many a Malgame did I make,
Weening to fix them to great avail,
And thereto Sulphur did I take,
Tartar, eggs, whites, and oil of the snayle,
But ever of my purpose did I fail,
For what for the more, and what for the las,
Evermore something wanting there was.
Wine and milk, oils and rennyt,
The slyme of stars that fall on ground,
Celedonie with Secundines and many mo yet;
In these I practiced as I in books found,
I wan right naught, but lost many a pound,
Of Mercury and mettalls I made crystal stones,
Weening it had been a work for the nones.
Thus I roasted and broyled, as one of Gebers cooks,
Often times in the ashes my winning I sought,
For I was deceived by many false books,
Whereby untruth truly I wrought,
But all such experiments auailed me right naught,
But brought me in danger and encumbrance,
By loss of my goods and other greeuance.
For the love of our Lady such lewdnes eschew,
And meddle with no falsehood, that never proved we will,
Assay when thee likes, and thou shall find it true,
Win shall thou right naught, but lose every deele,
Pence in thy purse pawtner few shall thou feel,
In smokes and in smells thou shall have much woe,
That uneath for sickness on earth thou shall go.
I saw never true work truly but one,
Of which in this Treatise the truth I have told:
Study only therefore how to make our Stone,
For thereby may thou win both silver and gold,
Upon my writing therefore, to ground thee be bold:
So shall thou loose naught if God be thy guide,
Trust to my doctrine, and thereby abide.
Remember that Man is most noble creature
Of earthly composition, that ever God wrought,
In who^ is the four Elements, proportioned by nature,
A natural Mercurialitie, which costeth right naught,
One of his myner by art it is brought;
For our mettalls be naught else but our myners two,
Of Sun and Moon, wise Raymond said so.
The clearnes of the Moon, and of the Sun so bright,
Into these two myners descends secretly,
Howbeit the clearnes is hid from thy sight,
Which by craft thou shall make it to appear openly:
This hid Stone, this one thing therefore putrify,
And wash him in his own broth till white he become;
Then ferment him wittily; lo here is all and some.
Now to God Almighty I thee commend,
Who grant thee grace to know this one thing;
For now is this Treatise brought to an end:
And God for his mercy to his bliss us bring,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus where the Angels do sing,
Praising without ceasing his glorious Majesty,
Which he in his Kingdom grant us for to see.
Amen quod George Ripley.

The Epistle by the same Author written to King Edward the 4.
O Honorable Lord, and most victorious Knight,
With grace and virtue abundantly endewed,
The safeguard of England, and maintainer of right;
That God you loves, indeed he has well showed:
Wherefore I trust this land shall be renewed
With joy and riches, with charity and peace,
So that old ranckors new vnderstrewed,
Tempestuous troubles, and wretchedness shall cease.
And therefore since I see by tokens right evident,
That God you guides, and how that you be virtuous,
Hating sin, and all such as be insolent,
How that also manslaughter to you is odious,
Upon the judgment also that you be piteous:
Me seems ruthe it were but that you should live long;
For of your great fortune you are not presumptuous,
Nor vengeable of spirit to revenge you of each wrong.
These considered with others in your most noble State,
Like as God knows, and people do witness bear,
So entirely me m^oueth, that I must algate
Record the same, and therein be no flatterer:
And not that only, but also to write here
Unto your Highness, humbly to present
Great secrets, which infarre countries I did learn,
And which by grace to me most unworthy are lent.
Once to your Lordship such things I did promise,
What time you did command to send unto me,
And since that I wrote it in secret wise,
Unto your grace from the University
Of Louaine, when God fortuned me by grace to see
Greater secrets and much more perfect,
Which only to you I will disclosed to be,
That is the great Elixer both red and white.
For like it you to trust that truly I have found,
The perfect way of most secret Alchymie,
Which I will never truly for mark nor for pound
Make common but to you, and that conditionally,
That to your self you shall keep it full secretly,
And only to use it as may be to Gods pleasure,
Else in time coming to God I should abye,
For my discovering of his secret treasure.
Therefore be you well advised and with good deliberation,
For of this secret shall know no other creature,
But only you as J make faithful protestation,
For all the time that herein life J shall endure,
Whereto J will your Lordship me ensure,
To my desire in this my oath for to agree,
Least I to me the wrath of God procure,
For such revealing of his great gift and priuitie.
If God fortune you by me to win this treasure,
Serve him deuowtly with more lawde and thanking,
Praying his Godhead in life that you may so endure,
His gifts of grace, and fortune to use to his pleasing,
Most especially intending over all thing,
To your power and cunning his precepts ten
So to observe, that into no danger your self you bring,
But that you in glory may see him hereafter, Amen.
And yet moreover I will your Lordship to pardon me,
For openly with pen I will it never it write,
But whenever you list by practice you shall see,
By mouth also this precious secret, most of delight,
How may be made perfect Elixers both red and white,
Plain unto your Lordship it shall declared be,
And if it please you, with easy expenses and respite,
I will them work by grace of the Trinity.
But notwithstanding for peril that may befall,
If I dare not here plainly the knotte unbind,
Yet in my writing I will not be so mystical,
But that by study the true knowledge you may find,
How that each thing is multiplied in his kind,
And how the likeness of bodies metaline be transmutable
I will declare, that if you feel me in your mind,
My writing you shall find true and no fained fable.
As Philosophers in the m^the^rs do write,
The likeness of bodies mataline be not transmutable,
But after he added these words of more delight,
Without they be reduced to their beginning materiable,
Wherefore such bodies within nature be liquiable,
Mineral and metaline may be mercurizate,
Conceive you may this science is not opinionable,
But very true, by Raymond and others determinate,
In the said book the Philosophers speak also,
Therein if it please your Highness for to read,
Of diverse sulphures, and especially of two,
And of two mercuries joined to them indeed,
Whereby he does true understanders lead,
To the knowledge of the principle which is only true,
Both red, moist, pure, and white, as I have espied,
Which be nevertheless found but of very few.
And these two things be best, he adds anon
For him that works the Alchymie to take:
Our gold and our silver therewith to make all one,
Wherefore I say who will our pearl and Ruby make,
The said principles look he not forsake:
For at the beginning, if his principles be true,
And if so be by craft he can them also bake,
In the end truly his work he shall not rue.
But one great secret right needful to be known,
That though the Philosophers speak plurally,
All is but one thing you may me well trow,
In kind which is our base principally,
Whereof does spring both white and red naturally,
And yet the white must come first out of the red,
Which thing is not wrought manually,
But naturally, craft helping out of our lead.
For all the parts of our most precious stone,
As I can prove, be coessentiall and concrete,
Moreover there is no true principle but one,
Full long it was ere I therewith could meet,
Who can reduce him and knows his heat,
And only kind with kind can well redress,
Till filthy original be cleansed from his seat,
He likely is to find our secrets more and less.
Therefore work kind only with his own kind,
And so your Elements join that they not strive*
This point also for any bear in mind,
That passive natures you turn into active,
Of water, fire, and wind of earth make bliue,
And of the quadrangle make a figure round,
Then have thou the honey of our bee-hiue,
One ounce well worth one thousand pound.
The principal secret of secrets all,
Is true proportion which may not be behind,
Wherein I counsel thee be not superficial,
The true conclusion if you think to find,
Turn earth into water and water into wind,
Therefore make fire and beware of the flood
Of Noah, wherein many men are so blind,
That by this science they get little good.
I counsel you eat and drink temperately,
And beware well that Iposarcha come not in place,
Neshe not your womb by drinking immoderately,
Least you quench natural heat in little space,
The color will tell appearing in your face,
Drink no more therefore than you may eat,
Walk up and down after an easy pace,
Chafe not your body too sore to sweat.
With easy fire after moving when you sweat,
Warm your body and make it dry again,
By rivers and fountains walk after meat,
At morning time visit the high mountain,
That Physic so bids I read certain,
So high the mountains yet do you not ascend,
But that you may downwardes your way have plain,
And with your mantle from cold ye you defend.
Such labor is wholesome your sweat for to dry
With napkin, and after it see you take no cold,
For gross humors be purged by sweat kindly,
Use Diacameron then confect with perfect gold,
Hermidocles for watery humors good I hold,
Use Jpericon perforat with milk of tincturiall,
And sperma Caeti with red wine, and when you wax old,
And Goats milk sod with wine nourishes moisture radical.
But a good Physician who so intends to be,
Our lower Astronomy needs well to know,
And after that to learn well urine in a glass to see,
And if it need to be chafed the fire for to blow,
Then wittily it by diverse ways for to throw
After the cause to make a medicine bliue,
Truly telling the infirmities all on a row,
Who this can do by his Physic is like to thrive.
We have our heaven incorruptible of the quintessence,
Ornate with signs, Elements, and stars bright,
Which moysteth our earth by subtle influence,
And of it a secret sulphur hid from sight,
It fetches by virtue of his active might,
Like as the Be fetches honey out of the flower,
Which thing could do no other worldly wight.
Therefore to God be all glory and honor.
And like as ye to water does relent,
Where it was congealed by violence of cold,
When Phoebus it shines with his heat influent,
Even so to water mineral reduced is our gold,
As witnesses plainly, Albert, Raymond, and Arnold,
By heat and moisture and by craft occasionate,
Which congelation of the spirits, lo now J have told,
How our materials together must be proportionate.
At the dyers craft you may learn this science,
Beholding with water how decoction they make
Upon the wad or madder easily and with patience,
Till tinctures do appear which then the cloth does take,
Therein so fixed that they will never forsake
The cloth, for washing after they joined be,
Even so our tinctures with the water of our lake,
We draw by boiling with the ashes of Hermes tree.
Which tinctures when they by craft are made perfect,
So dies mettles with colors aye permanent,
After the quality of the medicine, red or white,
That never away with any fire will be brent:
To this example if you take good tent,
Unto your purpose the rather you shall win.
And let your fire be easy, and not too fervent,
Where nature did leave what time you did begin.
First calcine, and after that putrify,
Dissolve, distill, sublime, descend and fix,
With Aqua vitae often times both wash and dry,
And make a marriage the body and spirit betwixt,
Which thus together naturally if you can mix,
In loosing of the body the water congeald shall be,
Then shall the body die utterly of the flixe,
Bleeding and changing his colors, as you shall see.
The third day again to life he shall arise,
And devour birds, and beasts of the wilderness,
Crows, popingaies, pies, peacocks, and mauois,
The Phoenix, with the Eagle, and the Griffin of fearfulness,
The green Lion, with the red Dragon he shall distress,
With the white Dragon, and the Antelop, Unicorn and Panther,
With other beasts and birds both more and less,
The Basiliske also, which almost each one does fear.
Jn bus and nibus he shall arise and descend,
Up to the Moon, and since up to the Sun,
Through the Ocean sea, which round is withouten end,
Only shippen within a little glassen tun;
When he is there come, then is the mastrie won:
About which journey, great goods you shall not spend,
And yet you shall be glad that ever it was begun,
Patiently if you list to your work attend.
For then both body and spirit with oil and water,
Soul, and tincture, one thing both white and red,
After colors variable it contains, whatsouer men clatter;
Which also is called after he has once been dead
And is revived, our Markaside, our Magnet, and our lead,
Our Sulphur, our Arsinike, and our true Calx viue,
Our Sun, our Moon, our ferment and our bread,
Our toad, our Basiliske* our unknown body, our man, our wife.
Our body thus naturally by craft when he is renouate
Of the first order, is medicine called in our Philosophy;
Which oftentimes again must be propertualicate,
The round wheel turning of our Astronomy,
And so to the Elixer of spirits you must come: for why
Till the son of the fixed by the son of the fixer be ouergone,
Elixer of bodies, named it is only,
And this found secret point, deceaueth many one.
This natural process by help of craft thus consummate,
Dissolueth Elixer spiritual in our unctuous humiditie,
Then in Balneo Mare together let them be circulate,
Like new honey or oil, till perfectly they be thickened.
Then will that medicine heal all infirmity,
And turn all metals to Sun and Moon perfectly,
Thus you shall make the great Elixer, and Aurum potabile,
By the grace and will of God, to whom be all honor and glory.
Amen. quod George Ripley.

FINIS.
George Ripleys Wheel mentioned in his Work.
In the Sun he puts his tabernacle,

Sun and moon blessed be ye.

The floods went away in the drith. Coelum.

Sol converted into darkness, and Lvna into blood. ^horm.

Occidentalis, Atte^tiue, Autumn West. earth

Aquea, flegmatica, Australia, Expulsive, VVinter, North. {water}

Sanguinea, veria, Masculina etc. Orie^ntalis digestive. East. air

Ignea, Choleria Meridionalis, Attractiue, Su^mer. South. fire

The altitude of the stone, fiery in quality, shining more than perfect
quintessence, and end of the practice, speculatiue. Sol tenet ignem. South.

As Christ the Scripture making mention,
In the holy womb descended of Marie:
From his high throne for our redemption,
Working the holy Ghost to be incarnate,
So here our Stone descends from his estate,
Into the womb of our Virgin Mercuriall,
To help his brethren from filth original.
The f^rst or West latitude of the Stone, and en^ring into the practiue pole
and earthly in quality. occasionate. Saturn holds the earth. West.

As Christ his godhead hid from our sight,
When he our kind to him did take,
Even so our Sun his beams of light
As for a time has him forsake,
For under the wings of his make
The Moon, he hides in his glory,
And dies in kind that he may multiply.
The dark profunditie of the Stone in the North, Purgatory all imperfect,
wa^rie in quality, variable in color, the eclipse of the Sun. Mercurius
tenet aquam. North.

As Christ our Savior was tumulate,
After his passion and death on tree,
And after his body was glorificate.
Vprose endued with immortality*
^o here our Stone buried after penalty,
Vpriseth from darkness and colors variable
Appearing in the East with clearenes incomperable.
The East latitude of the Stone and entering into the speculatiue aier of the
full Moon. Jupiter holds the aier. East.

As Christ from earth to heaven did ascend,
In clouds of clearnes up to his throne,
And reigns there shining without end,
Right so our Sun, now made our Stone,
Unto his glory again is gone,
His fire possessing here in the South,
With power to heal leapers and renew youth
From paradise they go to heaven to won,
shinining brighter than does the Sun.


Here the red man and his white wi^^
Be spoused with the spirit of life.
Into Paradise here we go*
There to be purged of pain and woe
Here be they passed their pains all,
Exceeding in brightness the crystal
















He brought water out of the stone, and oil out of the most hard rock.

The Sun is in the eclipse, and the Moon shall not shine by night.

Our heaven this figure called is,
our table also of the lower astronomy,
Which understood thou can not mis,
to make our medicine perfectly,
on it therefore set thou thy study,
And unto God both night and day,
For grace, and for the Author pray.
To the indifferent Reader.
FOrasmuch, (Gentle reader) as nothing can be performed, with what singularity
of judgment, exquisite foresight, great care and diligence soever, in any
action of importance, but that some fault or error must of necessity be
committed, it being an inseparable property of nature accident unto men to
err; for that it is impossible for the most curious, quickest, and piercing
eye to see all things: I hope therefore thou will not find it strange, if any
thing have bin mistaken by me in deciphering of this work, by conference of
many old rude and ill written Copies, out of which the same with great travel
and industry has been gathered, as the Rose from among the Briers and Thorns,
or the sweet Violet out of the Nettles: for that every man carried with a
several opinion and sense, thinks best of his judgment, Copy and
correction: whereupon it was not possible for me to ground any certainty, if I
had not happened on a most ancient record thereof, and used the assistance of
a most notable and experienced decipherer of old and imperfect writing, and
after conferred with many skillful persons in this high Art: praying thee if
in reading hereof thou shall note any fault in matter or form* that thou will
courteously note the same and send it unto me, or the house of Peter Bales in
the Old Bailey, to be corrected vppn the next general impression, there being
but a small number of these Books imprinted, remaining at this time in his
hands to be privately delivered to the learned and desirous thereof. Vale.


