A Brief and Compendious exposition upon the Psalm called Deprofundis which
have been. And presentelye is horrible and detestable. Abused in the Church of
God.

And now translated to the true sens: to Gods glory and to the Edification and
confort of his Church. By M. Roberte Richardson Batchelere of diuinetie And
Minister in Londen.

A BREVE AND compe^dious exposition upon the Psalm called Deprofundis.
DAuide the great King of Jerusalem, and Prince of Prophets declares unto
us the psalms to be of an excellent virtue by this his sayings. 2. reg. 23
Spiritus domini loquutus est per me and sermo eius per lingua^ mea^. And 10.
parala. 28 Omnia veneru^t mihi scripta manu Domini. By this his sayings he
confesses the holy Ghost to be the Authore of the psalms, and him self to
be the Instrumente by who^ the holy Ghost opens them unto us and to all godly
by Dauides tou^ge, and how they come unto him written by the hand of the Lord,
to the end that we should use the^ as the prologue of this Psalm declares
brieflye shortelye and learnedlye for it proffire nothing to read and know
many things and to misknowe God and his word by whom be is only known, and
the true meaking and sense of the same for Christ said him self. luc. 10.
Porro vnu^ est necessariu^. That is to say verily one thing is necessary
which is the knowledge of his word, this he said when he gave the Judgment
betwixt ye two sisters Marie and Martha, for marie sat at his feet and hard
the word, wherefore he said. Mary has chosen ye best part which shall never be
taken from her. Mat 10.
Ergo beati qui audiunt verbu^ Dei. Blessed are those, yt hear the word of
god, and believes it, and keeps it to the end, for thy be sure of eternal
life world without end. And hear not without the knowledge of Gods word god
was never known nor is not known, therefore says s. Iero. Creature no^ habe
us noticia^ creatoris picus est. Ieronim. Sapie^. 15
That is to say The creature not having knowledge of the creatore is but a
beast, and the wise man says. Vanus est omnis homo in quo no^ inest scie^tia
Dei. that is to say. Every man is but vain in who^ is not ye knowledge of god.
wherefore I do think it necessary, first to declare what is God, and where we
should worship and Iuuocate himself. Humana ratio Deu^ non cognoscit.
wherefore I knowledge it were but presumptuouse to gather such things upon my
head or to gather it upon other men's brain, I could never read yet him that
could comprehe^de by his learning wit or senses the essence of God, nor yet
understood yt same, nor yet fully understood the substance of the son and the
moon. Ergo much less the Divine substance of God for. Imme^sum definire non
potest. That is to say god is vnmiserable Incomprehensible and can not be by us
defyned, but it suffisethe us to know god, to be such one as he has reueyled
unto us by his word. Now I go to declare where he should, be Inuocated and
worshipped. Prophetae nouerunt illum esse Deum cuius verbum promisionis and
cultu^ habueru^t. That is to say ye prothets knew him to be god, whose holy
word promises and worshippinge yt they had by his word, the Jews, Turckes
and papists seeks to know and come to God by their cogitacio^s speculations
and Imaginatio^s without his holy word or else translating his word from his
germayne sense and true right understanding. Sed Prophetae nouerunt Deu^ esse.
Impropiciatoriu^ ei qui si allegaret verbo and loquebatur qualis fuerit in
verbo and in culto suo nec ali ter loqui ac cogitare debemus nos qua^ qualis
est in nostro propiciatorio christo. yt is to say ye prophets did know god to
be in his propiciatory which I understand to be ye coffer that was set above
the Arc to the which he bound him self and spoke out of it how he was in
his word, and worshippinge such like we should not speak nor think
other wise, then he is in our propiciatory Christ, so testifies Paul
saying. Deus erat in Christo mundu^ reconcillians sibi. God was in christ
reconcilyng ye world to him self: so says Christ him self to Philip his
Apostell. Qui me vidit, and patrem meu^ vidit. who sees me sees my father. Et
nemo venit ad patrem nisi per me. That is no man can come to my Father, but
only by me. Hear we may note a general rule in all the psalms and in the
holy scripture to be kept that in the old Testament all prayers was to God in
Sion: now yt temple destroyed God raised up a another temple which is Christ
in this temple he would be only sought, found, and worshipped. Nec extra
illum vllu^ Deum inuenies. And besides him, thou shalt find no god but only
Idolatry therefore let us behold him and thou shalt se the Father. The holy
Jews that dwelte in Syon, which neglected that place, all be it that they had
the same sacrifices and prayinge the same words nevertheless they committed
Idolatry for because they did against the precepte and commandment of God,
which he declared, that he would be worshipped in Jerusalem but now in the
temple which is Christ, and besides that temple there is no God worshipped but
the Devil, and because the Jews Turckes and Papists praise much and many
psalms with pleasant titles, and do say: Our Father which art in heaven.
etc. But because they contenue his holy and infallable word and by violence
do persecute the same, as now do our Papists they obtain no fruit nor
commodity at the hands of God thereof, but mere Idolatry, Nota.
Hypocrisy and loss of time, and note, where Christ is God is, there is the
hole deuinitie found in him, and this is the God that said. The seed of the
woman shall bruise thy head. Genesis.
Hear to this sayings Christ is promised and declared to be ye only sacrifice
for the sins of the world and the triumphante victory, Hell the Devil and
sin. Therefore let us all say with Paul. Deo gratias qui dedit nobis
victoriam per Christum. Thanks be to god that has given us the victory by
Christ for there is no God but he that was borne of the Virgins bosom both
God and man as is aforesaid and further more he him self says believe ye not
yt the Father is in me and I in my father he that sees me sees yt father and
he yt knows me knowethe my Father let this therefore be the final conclusion
that God will not be sought found nor here our Prayers whithoute dure
propiciatory Christ let us therefore call to remembrance our great and
deep ignorance that have sought him at stock and stone and in many places
beyond home. etc. God grant us his grace to acknowledge and repent this,
and to be ashamed of the same ignorance. Amen.

The Prologue.
we read of David that he gave the same psalms to the priests and levites to
be prayde song and said and plaide upon the Cimballes Psalteres, Harpes, with
many other pleasant instruments praising god, worshipping God, and geuinge
thanks to God, and an example to us to do the same with gladness and mind of
heart, spirit, and soul and strong faith with our spiritual instruments and
so Saint Paul exhortethe us. Ephesians. 5. Loquentes vobis metipsis in Psalmis
and Imnis cantantes and melodiam facientes in cordibus vestris Domino Gratias
agentes Jesus Christo Redemptori nostro. etc. that is to say speakinge and
prayinge to your selves in psalms, in singing and rejoicing in your hearts
geninge thanks to Jesus Christ our Savior, etc. So Solomon which builded the
temple after the discriptio^ of the holy ghost geuynge to his Father Dauide so
Solomon builded the temple as David commanded, in Monte Morea, with assense of
fiftene degres after the example that was given, and in every degree was
sounge and playde by the Ascendentes one of this psalms which is called
the.xv. Psalines knoweledging and confessyng the manyfolde benefices of God and
their own filthy sinfulnes goinge up these degrees into the temple synginge
and praying with gladness of heart and knowledginge at the remission of sins
is freelye granted and given to us of God by Jesus Christ and so it profit
the and is fruitful unto us to acknowledge the same in the beginnynge of all
our prayers going to the remple or else all our doings is lost for so
much as they are not of strong faith without all doubtinge and disparynge
of Gods hopinge hearing and free mercy granting which God grant all
Christians to have. Amen.

De Profundis.
This is the Psalm of the which I entende briefelye to write upon and is
the most comfortable and Heavenly amongst all the psalms and this is
the.C.xxxi. and in some books.xxix. among the number of psalms and the.xi.
psalm that was song upon the Grees by the priests and lenites and the.vj.
psalm of the penitential psalms called the.vij. psalms commenlye joined in
confession by ignoraunte priests and Friars in satisfaction for sin and this
psalm the Popish did bury and keep from the knowledge of the people the true
sense and meaning confessinge and defendinge that it was only a prayer for
the dead and for the souls of Purgatory and so buryinge it, committed
sacrilege and yet presently do. Albeit the holy ghost the authore of this
psalm did institute and ordained it to be a prayer of penitent sinners being
of life which do knowledge their sins and repenting the same from the bottom
of their hearts. If any learned man please to read this little psalm to the
end, he shall not find one iott nor one word in it for the dead but as is
aforesaid for the penitents on life, and so the poor people alas for pitye was
for couetonsnes kept in Ignerance and blindness and yet still is in many
countries and places, so perished from the use of the quick penitents an
incomparable treasure and a most godly knowledge of our justification I have
seen my self in Rome one Cardinal dead and brought into a church and laid
on a fair tomb covered with velvet bare faced his berde new shaven, a fair
miter on his head, with costlye precious stones and costlye new gloves upon
his hands full of ringes hose of sylke and Sandalles on his feet with stones,
and one great gentleman on every side of him bare headed with velvet gowns and
white rods in their hands and a yard of taffetie bound fast at the end
of the rods keeping away the flies from his face, continuallye as the custom
is in Italy when ye dine at the table among servant or in your lodginges or
houses. And at that time I saw come in such a number of Friars monckes and
Nones smyling at with my self remembering a common saying in Scotlaude Friars
a new a new and a new redd and white, white and black blonkat and blewe and
they went about the dead Cardinales tomb but once about, for lack of time or
else every order could not have their course, I say they went about the
tomb with costlye odoriferous sensors sensing and synging the dead Cardinal,
some with the first verse of Deprofundis, for briefenes some with Libera me
Domine, some with Qui lazarum Resuscitasti, some with Requiem aeternam, some
with Peccante me quotidie and non penitente Timor mortis co^turbat me. And with
many such like many responsories contained in the dirigie very brief. The
number of religious, Rome.
superstitious men and women was so great that they could not have time but
once to go about the tomb, herein you may mark how great Cities and notable
men have been drowned and myred with this great ignorance. in so much as
though that this godly Psalm served nothing but for the dead in purgatory
and nothing at all for the penitentes of life as ye shall hear hereafter. if
there be any suthe purgatories or no and how many countres and cites are
deceived by this false doctrine I speak only of those yt I have known and
seen as at Rome, Paris, London. Bononia Dei Gratia, flore^tia, Bella Pauia,
where many learned men be and now thanks be to god daily increased but alas
many blind doctors, as doctors dandiprates doctors duesase and doctors
sophisters promoted by the Pope Cardinals, Bishopes, and Abbottes and other
great men of their leuine by whom perish the true use of this godly and
divine psalm and prayer.

Paris.
I have known and seen in Paris.vij. thousands poor students and poor men
yt could read or say the Deprofundis hired before all souls day to sit all
that night with Lanternes and Candells upon their husbands, wifes,
kynsfolkes, and friends graves praying not a few Deprofundis.

France.
In France I have seen and the custom is that in every mass said by hired
priests through all France such a number of Deprofundis, as passes my
reckning that was every day used in every Mass when the priest washed his
hands after the Gospel with holly water sprinkled on the grave.

London.
I have seen my Lord Mayre in London ride to Powles Church with great
triumph accompanied with his brethren the Aldermen and there said or tarried
and hard say the Deprofundis upon a Bysshopes of London sepulcher as said
was bound yearly thereunto but now changed thanks be to god and to our
learned bishop changed I say into more godliness.

I have Preached my self at diverse halles of notable companyes which declared
to me that they were bound to say all together De profundis for all Christian
souls after the service and banquette, and desired me to begine the De
profundis, which I denied, but yet I granted to open, declare and Interpret
the true sense of it to them if they would give purifyed cares thereunto which
thing they did, and after that did like the De profundis better then ever they
did before as now many in England do at this present time thanks be to God,
which now do say the Popes De profundis is dear of his De profundis but now
thanckes be to god it is known to be a godly prayer for the penitentes on
life and also for because it does Entreat specially of our Justification
which is most necessary to be known. etc. Wherefore I thought it good to
Entreat of this most godly Psalm after my poor power and learning to keep
in the light of Justification in the true Church of God. etc.

Note hear before we begin the text that there is no salvation, grace nor
justification, but only in God that would not impute our sins, nor look
upon them as David said. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back o
Lord, thou haste rent the decree of my Damnacio^ and also have frelye
forgeuen all for Christ's sake, therefore ye penitent supplicante must
knowledge trust and surely hope in the same, or else he will ever be in
doubt and despair of hearing hope and obtayninge by the temptations of Satan
he must knowledge him self free from Hell, Death and from the ire of God. And
so shall he pray with a joyful and quiet conscience and sure hope of Gods
mercy through Jesus Christ our Savior to whom with the Father, and the
holy ghost be all honor and glory. Amen.

The Penitente Supplicante does hear ye wise man sounding in his ears these
words. Fili pecasti ne aditias iterum sed pro prestinis peccatis precare Deum.
That is to say, My sone thou haste sinned do no more so, but pray unto god
for thy former sins repentinge them depelye while thou haste time defferinge
not the same from day to day, nor from year to year as many do, which never
do repent before they se the panges of death upon them, Note well.
and so they do then repent for fear, and not for love. Which is dangerous.

This Psalm is a profunde prayer of a penitent sinner, that is afraid of the
Judgment of God agayuste his sins and from the deepnesse of his heart and
out of the profunde Prison of all sinfullnesse prayethe to God with a sure
Confidence not only for him self, but for the adversities and tribulations of
Christ's hole Church and for all the posterity of Adam being in the Captiuitye
of Satan and sin, knowledginge that he is ever prompte and more ready to
give, the^ we are to ask, which the Prophet said in his person. Esaias.
Antequam clamat exaudiam. That is or ever they cry I hear them and do help
them as in example of the wydowe, which brought her Sone to be buried
without the Ports of the City of Naham, where Christ did come unlooked for
or called upon and so restored him to life again, with one word. As he did
Lazarus and many mo.

Deprofundis.
Out of the Deep have I called unto the Lord, Lord hear my voice.
The Prayer of David for his sins and for the deliverance of the Captiuitye
of Babilone and for the adversities and afflictions of those people, and all
Godly people without ceasinge he prayed and cried from the Deepenesse of his
heart as he said. Clamaui non tacui non desperaui. That is to say I cried, I
kept not my peace I desparied not, and as S. Paul says to us all Being in
trouble. Sine intermissione orate aut been agite. That is to say, Pray ye with
out ceasinge or else do the thing that good is, with perseueraunce, taking
an example of the woman of Cananee which for her perseueraunce and faith was
hard. So Dauide cried out of the Deepenesse of his heart and out of the deep
prysons of sin, drowned and myred in Deep waters, that is to say, into
heavy afflictions as those that suddenly fall in the Deep waters from the
Deepenesse of their heart do cry for help, so this Psalm and Godly Prayer
is set forth by the Holy Ghost, for those that be afflicted and in
tribulation and do acknowledge their Sins, and seek for mercy from the
bottom of their hearts and from the Deep Prison of manyfolde and evil
concupistences with great shame and repentance of their sins so says S.
Iero. Ieromie.
Hoc quod homo agnoscit Deus Ignoscit. That is to say the sins yt men do know
God shall misknow and bless the^ as the Propher says. Beatus vir cui Dominus
no^ imputat peccatu^. Psalm.
man is saved but only by his mercy, and not by merits deseruinges, nor
works for as Saint Paul says. Non sunt condigni. They be neither clean,
nor worthy of his kingdom and glory, for as S. Paul says, the eyes cannot
se, nor ye heart can not think the things that god has provided for his
people, that do love him, and if we stomble or fall in any kind of sin, he
has appointed us a reamedye, and that is to pray for ye scripture says. Cu^
Ignoremus quid agere debeamus hoc solu^ habemus remedium vt oculos nostros
dirigamus ad te. That is to say: when we be troubled, or when we know not what
we should do, he has left us this Kemedy to lift up our eyes unto him, and
so David says, our forefathers did by these words. Cum tribularentur
clamauerunt ad Dominum. When they were in trouble thy cried unto the Lord, and
David him self says. Cum tribularer ad Dominu^ clamaui and exaudiuit me. That
is to say, when I was in trouble I cried to the lord and he hard me, and so
will he here all faithful penitents.

When this began to be taught in England, there was not a litell grudge of
murmur amongst the people, saying: that they would do as their forefathers
did, for then it was a good world as they said why would they not follow their
forefathers in this to call upon the Lord in their trouble as they did, but
they did follow blind teachers and guides of whom Christ does speak, when
he says. Quando caecus caecum ducit ambo in foueam cadunt. That is to say,
when the blind leadethe the blind, they do both fall in the pit of
dampnation, if they so persevere to follow the Pope, and his proud blind
Shauelinges which was, and is the Authors and mayntainers of this foresaid
blindness, and this is only the Reward, and fruit that they shall have of
him. Let us return to our text, which is. Apud Dominum Misericordia. To the
faithful and penitentes that do believe in the same and call for it, thy
mercy and grace is above all things and thou art the Fountain out of the
which it springethe continually and Frelye thou offerest us the same, but not
to him that is contumaxe and proterue and make them selfs unworthy of the
same.

Et copiosa apud eum Redemptio.
And before him a plenteouse Redemption.
But alas the greatest number of men do shute their eyes at this, and at their
own vices and so they sleep in their sins and extreme Ignorance in so
much that no man does acknoweledge God to be merciful and so they take no
pains to Invoke or call for mercy, but the godly man must determinate with
him self yt god is merciful and gives us freely for it is only in his hands
and power to give it and in none other. And mercy is ever before his eyes.
Misericordia and non Ira. That is to say, Mercy and not Ire and the
plenteouse redemption, of his sone and our Savior Jesus Christ. Non parua sed
copiosa redemptio. That is not a litell redemption, but a copiouse and
plenteouse Redemption and besides him there is no Rede^ptio^. Paul declares
briesly saying. Iustificamur Gratis gratia ipsius per redemptione^ qui est in
Christo Jesus. that is to say, we are Justified and made righteous by the
Redemption that is in Christ Jesus freelye. pro nihilo saluos facies eos, and
hoc non ex nobis. And yt not by our selfs. Sed Dei donum est. But it is a
gefte of God. Et non ex operibus ne quis glorietur. And not of works yt no man
should glory of him self and so yt scripture says. No^ ex operibus Iustitiae
quo nos fecimus sed secundu^ sua^ misericordia^ saluos nos fecit, that is to
say not of the works that we do but through his mercy he has saved us
for if it were of works then it were not by grace, Per memetipsum iuraui
dicit Dominus nolo mortem Peccatoris sed magis vt Peniteat and co^uertatur and
viuat. that is to say I have sworn by my self says the Lord I will not
the death of a sinner but rather thae he should repent and convert and be
saved, Nota.
O beatos and felices homines in quorum causa Deus jurat, O blessed and happy
are those men in whose cause God does swear. Et O miseros qui Deo iurante non
credunt, that is to say that miserable and wretched are those which do not
believe god when he does swear that cannot say the thing that is not true
but verity it self, hear he will that all the hope of the godly sort
should be in his mercy out of the which hope spryngethe a copious
Redemption because in the hands of God there is an infynite number to us and
Incredible ways that God has to save us for his mercy is above all his
works and he does never forget to pour out mercy Ergo he needs no
intercessors nor medyatours al be it against the Scripture they make many. But
the holy ghost says Vnus est mediator noster Ergo non sunt plures, therefore
there be not many ergo they yt do make many, do sin against the holy ghost.
The seeing and the feeling of Gods judgment in our hearts and consciences does
engender hatred, and fleyng from god without the hope of his mercy and that is
very apostasye and rebellion and so we shall never be pertakers of this
plenteous redemption for one drop of that immaculate blood has been
sufficient to redeem the hole world and yet he cries upon us by his holy word
and Prophets saying as testifies S. John Sanguis Jesus Christi Immundat nos ab
omni peccato, that is to say the blood of Jesus Christ does wash us from all
our sins and as the scripture says, Mundi estis Iustificati estis, sanguine
eius, that is to say, you are made clean and washed, Venite and haurite de
fontibus saluatoris. by his blood and not by gold silver nor precious stones,
for the kingdom of god is not bought for money. Which runs copiousty at
hands, feet, and heart, and never is dry, therefore it may be well called a
copious redemption as he commands them yt every godly should come and taste
of those fountains and not so contemptuouslye as do the ungodly and cast
awayes, the which swear so often by the lords blood, Venite and haurite de
fontibus saluatoris, that is to say to the unlearned come and taste of the
fountains of your redemer and savior receiving the virtue of the same for if
he redeem not Israel from all their iniquities and sins he should cease
from his office therefore let us give vigilant labors that our sins may be
put away and that we may return to obraine his grace and favor. etc. As
David did which dispayred not nor withdrew himself from god for the multitude
of his sins but for the anger of God he sought for his mercy and from God
that wonded to God that healed the wounds of his heart which neither man nor
Angel could heal.

Et propter legem tuam sustinui te Domine.
For thy law, sake I have tarried and looked for thy mercy, and trusted in the
same how gilty that ever my soul is.
For in all thy law new and old, thou have promised mercy to true penitentes
and beleuers in the Lord, for thy promises sake grant me the same for I
embrace thy words and promises and do believe the same, and in so doing I
promise my self salvation, for because thy promyses cannot lie, nor thy

Quamdiu Viuet Israel speret in Christo. That is as long as a true christian
do live let him trust in the lord both in prosperity and in adversity by
night and day. O how happy is he that oftentimes remembers his sins with
hope of mercy, and seeks the same at the hands of the Lord, and hear let
us say with S. Peter. Verbum Vite habes, yt is to say thou have the word of
life, and the keys of David for thou do shut and no man can open, and thou
do open and no man can shut. Hear I might speak of watches kept both in the
old and new law but for prolixnesse I will not be tedious but I will remember
to put my trust in the lord and to no other, keeping his precepts and rules
with thanks giving to his majesty for the same, and not saying with the
Friars and the monckes, that do regard more the precepts and the keeping of
S. Fraunces and S. Dominickes and do give greter thanks for that as I have
hard with mine ears.

Et ipse redimet Israel ex omnibus Iniquitatibus eius.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.
De says not only of one sin or one iniquity but of all but contrary to
him did the Pope that would give pardons for some and reserved other some to
the coming to himself, Sed ip se redimet Israel and, non alius for he himself
has redeemed Israel and no body else but he, and that is to understand all
Christian and faithful people as the angel testifyethe to Zachary saying,
Ipse saluum faciet Populum suum a peccatis eoru^, that is to say he shall save
all his people from their sins his people is the faithefull congregation and
no other, mat 10.
nor yet shall be partakers of this redemption, which is to the godly a great
comfort and consolation that he has redeemed Israel from all their
iniquities what soever, and what kind of iniquities so ever they were or
sins and that freelye. It is great folishenes to think that god will not
forgive sins until the time that he be pleased with our good works.

JMPRINTED at London by Thomas Purfoote for William Norton. (*)


